Due to a savvy marketing campaign, The Blair Witch Project was among the most anticipated of the summer, particularly among fans of independent film.
It is a small budget film which demonstrates that an extravagant Hollywood production is not necessary to make a good film, as long as originality and creativity are employed.
The prologue to the film claims that the filmmakers disappeared over a year ago, and that the film was constructed from the remains of their footage which was eventually found.
In a clever stroke of marketing, the film's website goes into great detail about the disappearance and it constructs a detailed background legend that the filmmakers were investigating.
Official websites for films are often merely an advertising mechanism that provide an overview of the story, a description of the cast, and a few stills from the film itself.
It is noteworthy that the website for this film actually enhances the film by acting as an extension to the story.
Although portrayed as reality, the events in this story are all fiction.
In an age when every mundane new event (like a 45 mile per hour car chase on a crowded highway) is given national prominence by the network news organizations, it is unlikely that the bizarre events purported by this film could have escaped notice.
As confirmation, there is the usual "all characters and events in this film are fictitious" disclaimer displayed at the end of the credits.
However, knowing that the film is fictitious does not detract from the viewing experience.
It actually enhances it because the viewer is allowed to enjoy the story fully rather than be distracted by implausibilities.
The footage begins as the three main characters are embarking on their project.
They are college students putting together a film investigating the legend of the Blair Witch.
Heather (Heather Donahue) is the director of the film and the project leader.
Joshua (Joshua Leonard) is the camera operator and Michael (Michael Williams) is handling the sound.
The footage begins as they interviewing current residents of Burkittesville, Maryland, which was previously a colonial town called Blair.
The interviewees relate vague stories of the legendary witch who lived in the nearby woods, and also the story of serial child killer who murdered several of the town's children about fifty years earlier.
It seems the killer was a hermit living in the woods who claimed to be possessed by the witch when he perpetrated the horrific crimes.
Eventually the trio enters the woods in their search for particular historical landmarks related to the legend.
From the premise it is known that they will meet with misfortune, and the tension builds as they proceed deeper into their journey.
As they become lost and encounter strange occurrences, the suspense noticeably tightens as the audience wonders what their final fate will be.
The genre of mock documentary (mockumentary) has been well established, and primarily used for comic effect (such as in the hilarious Man Bites Dog and This is Spinal Tap).
While the comic mockumentary creates satire by portraying lampoons and exaggerations as reality, this film is unique in that it tries to build suspense and fear by attempting to keep all events believable.
The fictitiousness of the stories is never belied by the acting as all three actors give outstanding, credible performances.
The characters gradually transform from enthusiastic adventurers to terrified, edgy, and confused waifs.
The main flaw is the uneven, and sometimes lingering pacing.
The production is obviously amateur, but the genius is that it tries to portray a fictitious amateur production, so it succeeds perfectly in that aspect.
Highly recommended.
This film was subjected to a large amount of hype both before and after its release.
For people who are expecting too much, or are expecting a tradition horror slaughterfest, it may be a disappointment.
It is not the scariest movie, and is not intended to be.
However, it carefully draws its boundaries and successfully executes within them.
Although it is not perfect, it is a marvel of simplicity, originality, and creativity.. . 
