THE BLAIR WITCH PROJECT Rating: ***1/2 (out of four) R, 1999 Directors/Screenplay: Daniel Myrick and Eduardo Sanchez Starring Cast: Heather Donahue, Joshua Leonard, Michael Williams. Almost everyone predicted that cinema in 1999 would be the year of  Lucas and Kubrick, but few would have guessed ahead of time that one  of the most talked-about films of the year after THE PHANTOM MENACE  and EYES WIDE SHUT would be a micro-budget horror film called THE  BLAIR WITCH PROJECT.
The film was made (do I even need to repeat this  story?
) on a budget of $37,000 and boasts an intriguing premise: it  claims to be the footage, only recently discovered, shot by three  film students who disappeared in the woods near a small town called  Burkittsville while making a documentary about the local legend of  the "Blair Witch.
" This is, of course, a piece of fiction, though  reportedly much of what we see was improvised on the spot by the  three actors (Heather Donahue, Joshua Leonard, and Michael Williams,  all using their real names), who really did shoot the footage  themselves and who were given only a broad outline by co-writers and  directors Daniel Myrick and Eduardo Sanchez.
Since the scenes were filmed by the actors, with the directors  waiting off-camera and out of sight, there are no special effects or  scenes of gruesome murder in THE BLAIR WITCH PROJECT, and the witch  herself never actually appears on-screen.
The "horror" rests instead  on slowly escalating psychological tension, as the students become  lost in the woods, their map disappears, and unseen menaces seem to  draw nearer.
They seem to be surrounded by strange noises at night  whose origins they cannot determine, and in the morning,  ominous-looking stick figures made of twigs and leaves are found  outside their tent.
One night, children's voices are heard outside  and their tent suddenly collapses on them, but when they run outside,  there is no one in sight.
As their situation grows more desperate,  they start to turn against each other and lay blame for their  predicament, mostly on Heather, who had conceived of the project and  who insisted beyond all reason that they were not lost.
John Carpenter said once that horror revolves around the loss of  control, and Myrick and Sanchez seem to understand that.
Until the  last five minutes, the overall effect of THE BLAIR WITCH PROJECT is  more disturbing than it is "scary" in the way the word is typically  understood.
Since none of the apparent supernatural elements are ever  witnessed on screen, there are very few moments that are likely to  make the audience jump out of their seats in fright.
Instead, we come  to empathize with the three characters as they endure day after day  that is dominated by fear and confusion; what the film lacks in  visceral thrills is compensated for by the human tragedy that plays  itself out.
Towards the end, Heather records a tearful apology to  Josh's and Mike's families as well as her own and accepts  responsibility for the untimely end which she knows they will soon  meet.
This scene is matched in power perhaps only by the final five  minutes, which will truly scare many viewers witless and which end  with an ambiguous but unsettling visual that will not easily be  forgotten.
All three performers pull off their roles almost flawlessly.
Heather  is perhaps the most interesting of the trio, as her later need to put  some sort of emotional distance between herself and the increasingly  grim situation accounts partly for the fact that the entire ordeal is  caught on camera.
Even when they are hopelessly lost and running out  of food, she insists that they keep filming, and Josh, who had  earlier screamed at her to turn the camera off, later takes a look  through the lens and tells her he understands, because watching  through the camera rather than through one's own eyes is "not quite  reality.
" She is also the most flawed of the three, as it was her  initial overconfidence that led indirectly to their predicament.
Both  Josh and Mike are also quite believable and sympathetic, though the  way in which one of them is revealed as being responsible for the map  disappearing doesn't really work: it strikes me as an amazingly  boneheaded stunt, however frustrated the guilty party may have been.
I don't know if there's really much of a theme or a point to THE  BLAIR WITCH PROJECT aside from some fairly routine "humankind's  arrogance in overstepping its boundaries" implications.
It's a story  that exists mostly for its own sake, as an experiment in blending two  cinematic approaches that are usually incompatible, i.e.
the  supernatural thriller and the verisimilitude of a pseudo-documentary.
On this level, however, it does definitely succeed.
There is never  the sense that we are watching actors perform a scene, and the  supernatural elements are necessarily implied rather than shown (an  appearance by a CGI-rendered Blair Witch would have turned the whole  thing into a long joke with a bad punchline).
The key to the film's  success is the realization that, for the most part, stories sink or  swim with their characters.
By giving the protagonists center stage  and keeping the spooks off-screen, Myrick and Sanchez have made THE  BLAIR WITCH PROJECT into a film that is not only disturbing and  occasionally downright chilling, but tragic and empathetic as well.
It's a bold debut, and I would be surprised if I see a better horror  film any time soon.
Send comments to ktpattersn@aol.com.
http://members.aol.com/ReviewsKTP/reviews.html. . 
