"Eyes Wide Shut" also has a wonderful cast.
Tom Cruise eschews his trademark boyish smile (except for the opening scenes) for long stares usually at a low angle (A Kubrick motif).
His slow descent into anger is thrilling to watch, and one of his most quixotic moments of his career is when he confronts his friend Ziegler and discovers the true nature behind his own adventurous and nocturnal activities.
Nicole Kidman has become a first-rate actress, and her mood swings are something to behold.
I also liked her laughing fit at Bill's remarks that he would not sleep with his patients - when was the last time that a character laughed at Tom Cruise?
Her final moment of realization about their marriage is stunning - this woman should be nominated for an Oscar.
Also worth mentioning is Sydney Pollack's quietly decadent millionaire character Ziegler - he is more fierce and yet just as restrained as he was in "Tootsie" or "Husbands and Wives.
" Vinessa Shaw displays a sweetness and sexiness not often seen on the silver screen, and she plays a prostitute!
Rade Serbedzija ("Before the Rain") has one of the sole moments of comic relief as the owner of the Rainbow, a costume shop, who asks the good doctor for advice about his balding spot.
Todd Field is also engaging as the piano player Nick Nightingale who plays blindfolded at some musical events.
If I have one or two gripes about Kubrick's long, difficult and splendid film, it is the abrupt ending and the inclusion of a character that would have been better omitted or replaced by a different actor.
The ending is optimistic (a rarity in any of his films) but somehow feels rushed.
Still, this is among the late master's finest films, preferable to the pretensions of "The Shining" or "Full Metal Jacket.
" "Eyes Wide Shut" easily stands among such giants as "A Clockwork Orange," "Paths of Glory" or "2001.
" It is a bizarre, strangely moving and enlightening film guaranteed to provoke as much controversy as anything he's ever done.
Stanley, you may be gone, but we are glad you came back with one of the best films of your career.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/. E-mail me with questions, comments, concerns or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or jerry@movieluver.com. . 
