"On October 21, 1994, Heather Donahue, Joshua Leonard, and Michael  Williams hiked into the Black Hills Forest to shoot a documentary film  on a local legend called 'The Blair Witch,' and were never seen again.
One year later, their footage was found.
" These are the opening lines of  The Blair Witch Project.
There are no credits, there is no flashback  sequence, and there is no friendly narrator to guide you through this.
The next 87 minutes is the three filmmakers' footage in chronological  order - or so the audience is made to believe.
In reality those 87  minutes are occupied with unique filmmaking and a beautiful script which  amalgamates for one of the scariest and most intense films since Alfred  Hitchcock gave us a reason to not shower in 1960.
But the film is not  without its flaws either.
A simple reality check can lead to some  questionable aspects.
And the production doesn't have the ability that  Hitchcock had to make the film stick with you.
The urban legend that is the Blair Witch is like most urban legends, in  that it is confusing and unclear.
Different people have different  stories, and almost nothing is documented.
The little that is known  tells us that the Blair Witch has taken victims in the past, and is  favorable to torturous, dismembering techniques.
One person describes  the creature as "an old woman, who's feet never touch the ground.
"  Another description says "she was hairy from head to toe.
" That is, if  there is a Blair Witch in the first place, something a respectably sized  faction questions.
The unknowingly doomed group heads off into the Maryland woods after  doing some brief interview work in Burkittsville, Maryland, where the  town of Blair used to stand.
The group of three gradually see their  documentary evolve into a creepy and frustrating experience that tears  at the very fabric of their relationships in a very similar manner to  which MTV presents their popular show "The Real World.
". At the core of the tumultuous relationship is Heather's authoritarian  directing work.
She demands nearly every moment be caught on film,  including the behind-the-scenes aspects which she insists the group will  someday look back on laugh.
The footage is intentionally shaky,  co-directors Daniel Myrick and Eduardo Sanches' attempt to give the film  the ultimate realistic feel.
But after a while you are led to question  why the footage taken for the film would be of such a poor nature if  Heather really is the great perfectionist that she is made out to be.
You also can't help but notice than not more than once is any mention of  reloading film made; despite the movie's claim of 21 roles being  discovered.
In The Blair Witch Project, there are no ghosts, no goblins, no  monsters, there isn't even a witch shown on screen.
There is no  background music to gradually lead the audience into fear.
There is only  one isolated incident of blood and gore, a very mild one at that.
Instead of using these traditional aspects to bring the crowd into  horror and fear, the production simply plays with your nerves.
By  telling you the fate of the three protagonists before the film opens, a  permanent dramatic irony is created.
However, this aspect also brings a  major downside as well.
About one hour into the film, things have  already gotten creepy and the group is already at odds with each other.
This creates a sort of "Just die already!
" sense, that makes the meager  87 minutes seem perhaps a few too many.
The Blair Witch Project is definitely a clever film.
Although Artisan  Entertainment declined my request for a budget figure, it can be assumed  that the movie was made at a fraction of what most independent films  cost,  and couldn't even be fairly measured against the budget of  Hollywood blockbusters.
During the movie I was scared, but towards the  end a feeling came over me where I just wanted the darn thing to end.
And when it did, there was a queasy feeling in my stomach, but I think  it came from eating too much popcorn.. . 
