Title
Review for Training Day (2001)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Dennis Schwartz
  TRAINING DAY (director: Antoine Fuqua; screenwriter: David Ayer;
cinematographer: Mauro Fiore; editor: Conrad Buff; cast: Denzel Washington
(Alonzo Harris), Ethan Hawke (Jake Hoyt), Scott Glenn (Roger), Macy Gray
(Sandman's Wife), Tom Berenger (Stan), Cliff Curtis (Smiley), Dr. Dre (Paul),
Snoop Dogg (Sammy), Eva Mendes (Sara), Charlotte Ayanna (Lisa Hoyt); Runtime:
120; Warner  Brothers Pictures; 2001) 
Another obvious crime film with black and white partner cops. This one is set in
modern LA and filled with pointless violence, and with nothing relevant to say
about its dirty cop subject matter. It would have been just another entertaining
film that was eye-catching, amusing, and filled with non-stop action but for the
last fifteen minutes, when the film fell apart and came up with a very unsound
ending and ruined any chance for it to be appreciated in an artistic sense--even
for Denzel Washington's fine performance. The way it ended made no sense, as
this smorgasbord in violence had gangs of blacks, Mexicans, and even Russians,
interact with corrupt city law enforcers. The filmmaker chooses the craziest and
most unbelievable way for the dirty cop to get his comeuppance. 
The white cop is an ambitious rookie on the force only 19 months, Jake Hoyt
(Ethan Hawke), who dreams of being a detective. He doesn't want to blow his
chances on his training day to get permanently assigned to an elite undercover
narc unit that busts the big-time drug dealers and will give him a chance to be
the good guy collaring the bad drug dealers, so he kisses up to his superior.
The job promises action and many arrests, things the young athletic cop
relishes. Alonzo Harris (Denzel Washington) is the leader of five other police
officers, and he will determine if Jake is trustworthy after this one day of
training. 
Denzel has the role of the dirty cop who has all the smart answers for why he's
so set on his vigilante ways. In his bogus philosophy, he tells Jake "It takes a
wolf to catch a wolf."  He goes on to say that in this business "You've got to
decide, Are you a wolf or a sheep." He's the mentor of the innocent,
incorruptible, straight-laced cop, who wants to save his city from drug dealers
and bring home an honest paycheck to pay for a suburban lifestyle for his wife
and kid. Denzel gives an over the top performance, taking his slimy character
down a rotten path of greed, corruption, and murder. For Denzel, this is a
chance for him to show off how he could be cast against type as the heavy and
still be charismatic. If anything, this pic shows that he's up to being a
baddie. He's dressed for the part wearing a gang-style black leather jacket and
having draped around his neck enough jewelry, including a diamond crucifix, to
please any hip-hop enthusiast. He's also up to the physical nature of the role
as he gives a muscular performance, and he is able to talk the street-talk with
the best of them. 
To start their training unorthodox day, there is no police roll call to answer
to as Alonzo meets him in a coffee shop. It becomes apparent that Alonzo doesn't
follow the book, as he plays mind games with Jake and plants the seeds that you
either do things my way or it's back to hum-drum police work with no promotions
in sight. Jake is too tempted by the action to leave but, when he watches Alonzo
steal drugs that some college kids just bought from a snitch dealer, he begins
to have second thoughts. The slick Alonzo, using his vintage souped-up black
Monte Carlo as an office - forcefully induces the trainee to smoke pot laced
with PCP by threatening to not accept him into his unit if he doesn't and by
taunting him into believing that if he doesn't know what pot tastes like how
could he be a narc. That would endanger his life in the street. "Training Day"
has now tainted its hero and made its statement of what it thinks of undercover
work, and now the kid must fight his ambitions and see if he can remain
steadfast in what he believes. 
The action-packed day continues with a social call to a jaded top drug dealer
who was a former colleague of Alonzo', Roger (Scott Glenn), who wishfully talks
about retiring to an island as the drugged-out Jake tries to tune into what's
going on; there's a visit to a bad black ghetto that the thugs run, where Alonzo
has underhanded deals with the gang leaders who secretly hate him because he's
abusive. He lives here with his secret family--a sexy ho from El Salvador (Eva
Mendes). They also encounter an attempted street rape on a young Mexican girl
that Alonzo wishes to ignore but Jake can't--which leads to Alonzo working the
two attackers over instead of arresting them; there's a funny scene of the cops
searching a drug house after faking a warrant in order to steal the drug money;
there's a restaurant business meeting with corrupt city officials, and all the
while Jake is being bullied and forced to react in shock and dismay at what he
sees going on. It was just too much slime to take in for one day, as somewhere
after the first half of the film the shock scenes simply wore off and the film
lost any dramatic effect; it just looked cartoonish. By the time Jake is asked
to cover-up a murder, the film has lost itself in its excesses. 
But the twists in plot kept coming, and it took us down a seedier and more
improbable path. It seemed likely that Jake would have gotten off this crooked
job offer faster, if this film had wanted to achieve anything resembling
reality. The aim was obviously not realism, but to take the story into its own
interpretation of the corruption in the LAPD which was recently in the news.
This it does do successfully, showing all kinds of widespread violence and
corruption, including black-on-black crime, police frames, and the ugliness on
the streets. But the film's major failure is to go anywhere with this material
and say anything that was revealing. All the shootouts seemed glossy but the
final one seemed totally out of place, of the Russian Mafia going into action.
They looked like they belonged in a James Bond film and wandered accidently onto
the set. It left the film to be hung out to dry as just another forgettable
exploitation film, even though it was well-acted. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Laura Clifford
Jake Hoyt (Ethan Hawke, "Snow Falling on Cedars") has one day to prove to
new senior partner Alonzo Harris (Denzel Washington) that he has what it
takes to be a NARC in his quest to advance to police detective.  In 24
hours, Jake will experience the ultimate corruption of a cop who's lost 
his soul to the environment he originally served and protected in "Training
Day."
Director Antoine Fuqua ("The Replacement Killers") takes to the streets of
South Central, Watts, Inglewood, and the Imperial Courts housing project
to give his film authenticity, but screenwriter David Ayer ("The Fast and the 
Furious") trots out too much evil to believably comprehend within his
dawn to dead-of-night structure.  Given that limitation, Denzel Washington
gives a performance that glints like steel while Ethan Hawke meets him
head-on.
Jake's day begins when Alonzo calls him at home, instructs him to skip 
roll call and meet him at an inner city breakfast joint.  Jake's attempts
at small talk are rebuffed as Alonzo immediately challenges the young man
to show his mettle.  College kids hitting the bad part of town to score
pot are shaken down at gun point, relieved of their weed and let go, then
Jake's told to smoke the stuff, as a true NARC needs to understand drugs
first hand.  Jake allows himself to be convinced before he's told that 
the pot was laced with PCP.
In a move that will prove fortuitous later, Jake single handedly saves 
a young Latina from rape at the hands of two junkies.  Once again, Alonzo
delivers street justice, beating the men senseless, but not arresting them.
When Alonzo's methods with a wheelchair bound pusher (Snoop Dog) prove 
effective, Jake begins to come around, but it's short lived.  Jake learns
that Alonzo's in trouble, having pushed the Russian mob too far by killing
one of their own in Las Vegas, and Alonzo's willing to go to any length
to pay his debt and remain the street czar of the inner city.
Washington proves here that he's as fine an actor playing compromised evil
as he is at the noble, heroic roles he usually takes on.  He initially seduces
the audience along with Jake, soothingly smoothing over his radical actions
with rhetoric like his signature line, 'to protect the sheep you gotta kill
the wolf and it takes a wolf to kill the wolf.'  But Washington always keeps
us unbalanced as well, punctuating his words with an underhanded snicker.
Hawke is the real surprise, going toe to toe with Washington while providing
our point of view.  Hawke makes Jake an idealized young man who toughens up
first for the wrong, then the right, reasons as he realizes he must trust
his own instinct and principles.
Support is terrific in many small roles too numerous to mention.  Macy Gray
is a standout as a dragon lady of a dealer's wife reacting to a falsified
warrant.  Cliff Curtis ("Blow") is the only creditted member of a Latino
threesome Alonzo leaves Jake with - ironically the four actors provide the
best scene in the film without Washington, although ultimately Ayer leaves
them to end the bit on a note that plays too much like a fairy tale.
Director of Photography Mauro Fiore ("Driven") smoothly captures the action,
from both within Alonzo's menacing black 1978 Monte Carlo low rider and
outside as it glides over the orange-hued, rain slicked streets of sunset.  
He maintains the tension in the interiors of South Central and the hidden
domains of the LAPD's underground.  Production designer Naomi Shohan 
("American Beauty") maintains a shadow world (even when brightly lit) rooted 
in reality, which Mark Mancina's ("Speed") score reflects by placing
shivery highlights over the ethnic music of the neighborhoods.  Fuqua's
direction is confident, delivering not just the style seen in his "The
Replacement Killers," but the substance of full characterizations as well.
"Training Day" is a good film held back from greatness by the excesses of
its script.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Warner Bros./Village Roadshow 
 Director: Antoine Fuqua
 Writer:  David Ayer
 Cast: Denzel Washington, Ethan Hawke, Eva Mendes, Charlotte
Ayanna, Tom Berenger, Harris Yulin, Raymond J. Barry, Cliff
Curtis, Emilio Rivera
 Screened at: Kips Bay Thea., NYC 10/7/01
   Watching "Training Day," which as the title illustrates takes
place during a single 24-hour period, reminded me of my first day
of teaching in a New York City high school.  Antoine Fuqua
("Bait," "The Replacement Killers") gives us one 
intense police dramas with the marvelous Denzel
Washington's going increasingly over the top in the role of rogue
detective Alonzo Harris.  Though everything appears to hit the
fan about a half hour into the picture, Fuqua calibrates the
potent story of David Ayer ("The Fast and the Furious") so that
we can overlook the lurid and contrivance-soaked conclusion and
leave the theater with the feeling that maybe the cops who are
good guys can really defeat the forces of iniquity.  
   The story starts off with a patient exposition showing us that
perhaps Jake Hoyt (Ethan Hawke) is not choir-boy idealistic
despite his conviction that drug pushers are the scum of L.A. and
that he has a calling to rid his city of them.  His wife had recently
given birth, they're living in a cramped apartment, and he wants
to be promoted to detective in order to move his family to a more
capacious house.  You can see Hoyt's opening-day tensions as
he reluctantly drags himself out of bed, talks to his prospective
mentor Alonzo on the phone peppering his answers with "sir,"
and sits dumfounded in the morning coffee-shop rendezvous with
his new boss as Alonzo focuses on the newspaper and dresses
down his new acolyte for speaking and ruining his concentration.
   Yet Jake is in awe of the big man, all the more as he watches
Alonzo traipse around his broad geographical precinct like a
warlord ruling over his serfs.   The expression "what a difference
a day makes" hits home for young, ambitious and naive Jake as
the song title has probably not quite succeeded in doing to
anyone else with such furor.  As Jake follows his boss' lead to
some extent, using a choke hold on one of two pond scum
people in an L.A. back alley who are in the processing of raping a
fourteen-year-old girl, Alonzo himself ups the ante in dealing with
some of the higher-ups in the drug trade, with corrupt
apparatchiks in local government including a fierce,
cigar-smoking D.A. (Harris Yulin), and in scaring the
hell out of some college kids slumming by driving through
the ghetto to buy marijuana.
   As Alonzo hones in the worst of L.A. citizenry, I'd be curious to
know what various denizens of the America theater audience. 
Would they cheer this direct, extra-legal action, a kind of the-end-
justifies-the-means philosophy as they did while Charles
Bronson's character in Michael Wiener's "Death Wish" did in
offing muggers on the subway rather than bothering to arrest
them and take his chances on justice before a jury?  After all
Denzel Washington is awfully persuasive as one of our finest
actors, perfectly able to play the good guy as he did in as a
coach in "Remember the Titans,"  as a South African activist,
Steven Biko, in "Cry Freedom" and once more in a fiery
supporting performance in "Glory."  Though his role this time
does not call for the complexity he demonstrated while the
incarnation of Malcolm X in the film of that name, he does a
smashing job in his most villainous role.  Ethan Hawke, recently
performing in the title role of the indecisive prince in Michael
Almereyda's "Hamlet,"  pulls off a role not entirely dissimilar.
Rather than refuse illegal orders of his new boss, such as the
command that he smoke a crack pipe loaded with PCP and wash
away the illusions with a few beers, he hesitates, then, thinking of
the new house he will get down the road, he follows the
directives.
   There's an unfortunate tendency to end action-adventure
pictures with extreme, Bonnie-and-Clyde violence.  In Jonathan
Mostow's "Breakdown," Red Barr (J.T. Walsh) is done in by
having a truck thrown on him by Jeff Taylor (Kurt Russell) and
more recently a bad guy is buried alive in "Don't Say a Word."  A
similar concluding scene threatens to destroy the quality of what
went on before.  But thanks to a stellar, riveting performance by
Denzel Washington in a villainous role that so many actors would
kill for and a remarkable show by Ethan Hawke as his bland foil,
"Training Day" is an action police drama which is as good as a
Hollywood genre pic can get.
Rated R.  Running time: 122 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Jonathan F. Richards
It's a mean, bad world out there, and the guys with the responsibility to
protect and serve sometimes have to be meaner and badder than the rest.  That's
the lesson veteran narcotics cop Alonzo Harris (Denzel Washington) devotes the
training day of his rookie partner Jake Hoyt (Ethan Hawke) to preaching.  But
just how mean and how bad?  And who gets protected, and what gets served?
There's an operatic sweep to "Training Day", a score of foulness and
violence that starts with small discords and swells up, up, and away into
bombast, super-bombast, and finally oozes over the top into absurdity and
cliché.  To want to see this movie, you have to be willing to accept the kind of
relentless, pounding violence that leaves faces a dripping pulp.  A calloused
ear for language is a help too.  This is a movie that prides itself on not
pulling any punches, verbal or physical.
Detective Alonzo Harris is a medieval warlord, running his fiefdom by laws
of his own devising, ruling by power, terror, and the scattering of favors. 
Washington plays him with a charismatic swagger, charm wrapped thinly around a
wrecking ball.  It is hard to think of another star who could have elevated this
character to a level that would justify the two hours this script demands of us.
 It's a performance that is likely to earn him another Oscar nomination, not
because it's such a well-written role, but because Washington's huge talent
riddles it with fascinating dramatic contradictions, and his scenery-chewing
magnetism inflates it to proportions that demand attention.  
It's a tough performance to have to share the screen with, and while Ethan
Hawke battles gamely and sometimes effectively for his camera time, he often
seems to be struggling just to breathe the depleted oxygen Washington has sucked
away.  His Jake is our eyes and ears on the inferno of Alonzo's
through-the-looking-glass underworld, a good guy trying to conceal his naiveté
and run with the big dogs, while at the same time trying to draw a line beyond
which he will not betray his sense of ethics.  "You remind me of myself," Alonzo
is fond of saying when Jake erupts with principled resistance to his methods. 
But "in this world you gotta have a little dirt on you for people to trust
you."
At first, the misery Alonzo puts Jake through seems like rough-hewn but
good-natured hazing, but it gradually descends into the sadistic and the
satanic.  Jake sometimes seems unnecessarily naďve: "What if that guy makes a
complaint?" he asks querulously after Alonzo has worked over a street lowlife. 
And yet even when Alonzo's actions seem unambiguously evil, he manages to pull
another reversal and cast them as tough but necessary tactics in the battle
against the bad guys.  "You've got to decide whether you're a wolf or a sheep,"
he tells Jake, and in this impenetrable world of lawlessness it's hard to get a
grasp of what's bad and what's worse.  
There is an establishment, and Alonzo is a different and diffident man when
he comes up against it.  There's a nice scene in a coffee shop with three old
pros, Harris Yulin, Raymond J. Barry, and lapsed leading man Tom Berenger as
suits from the D.A.'s office waxing cynical about the legal system and warning
Harris about the danger he faces from the Russian Mafia.
The movie's worst sins, if you discount its gargantuan appetite for
violence and villainy, come in the form of desperate plot turns in the last
twenty minutes or so.  Most unforgivable is a deus ex machina reprieve that Jake
gets when things look so grim that there should be no escape.  It's like one of
those cartoons in boys' magazines of yesteryear where the hero is dangling from
a cliff with crocodiles snapping at his legs from below and lions closing in
from above, and the challenge is to send in the winning suggestion for saving
the poor guy.  And after that it only gets worse, with scenes pilfered from old
westerns and action-adventures and "Bonnie and Clyde".  Director Antoine Fuqua
("Replacement Killers") has done a strong job up until then of measuring out the
tension and tightening the net, but in the end he screws up badly, throwing in
the directorial sponge as if he's succeeded in scaring himself and just wants
out.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Training Day (2001)
Denzel Washington, Ethan Hawke, Scott Glenn, Tom Berenger, Harris Yulin,
Raymond J. Barry, Cliff Curtis, Dr. Dre, Snoop Dogg, Macy Gray.
Screenplay by David Ayer. Directed by Anthony Fuqua. 120 minutes.
Rated R, 3.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.net
Archive reviews at
http://reviews.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
A few years ago, while reviewing a Denzel Washington film where his
character falls on hard times, I expressed doubt whether he could ever
credibly play a bad guy. The charismatic actor is such a natural Boy
Scout, I speculated, that portraying true evil might simply be beyond
him. Was I ever wrong. In "Training Day," Washington pulls out all the
stops and delivers a hell of a performance. And when you see the film,
you'll understand why "hell" is such a fitting word. Written by David
Ayer and directed by Anthony Fuqua, "Training Day" grabs you by the nape
of the neck and hauls you through a contemporary nightmare. While the
ending suffers from an overload of coincidences and contrivances, the
movie still packs a wallop as it asks the question: Can honorable men
deal with the worst of humanity on a daily basis without being
corrupted?
Ethan Hawke (or as I've always thought of him, the wince-meister) plays
Jake Hoyt, a Los Angeles cop out to become detective. To that end, he
tries to join an elite squad led by Alonzo Harris (Washington), an
undercover officer legendary for his effectiveness. The hitch is that
Jake has only one day to prove his worthiness to Alonzo.
The 13-year veteran narc tears into the kid immediately, challenging his
straight-arrow training. "This is street justice," he declares. "It
takes a wolf to catch a wolf... It's ugly, but it's like that." Within
minutes, Alonzo bullies Jake into smoking a joint laced with a variety
of chemicals. Stoned out of his mind, Jake tries to keep his bearings as
Alonzo tours the grimmest parts of the city, introducing him to one
incredibly dangerous character after another.
Even within his drug haze, the boy soon realizes that Alonzo is not
merely an officer that plays fast and loose with the rules - he's a
full-fledged rogue cop willing to do anything to get what he wants.
Some of the most harrowing moments take place in a neighborhood
completely under the control of thugs. Alonzo lives there, convinced he
is respected by his brutal neighbors due to his ability to work the
system. In fact, they loathe the man and put up with him solely because
of his badge and gun.
Taking place over the course of a single day, "Training Day" builds
momentum and never backs off. The film creates and maintains a sense of
genuine danger. As the proceedings grow ever more dark, you begin to
wonder if the key players can possibly survive the day. Until the last
15 minutes, that is, when the story wraps up too quickly and in far too
pat a fashion.
Regardless, "Training Day" is one of the stronger action/character
studies to be released by a major studio in quite a while. Those able to
withstand the intensity and violence will be rewarded with solid acting
by Ethan Hawke and a towering performance from Denzel Washington, an
artist who still has the capability to surprise.

Author
Blake French
How will the tragic events of September 11, 2001 influence violent
movies?  The box office results of Training Day should answer that
question.  Warner Bros. did postpone the film's release date for two
weeks, but is that enough time for audiences to be ready for such a
brutally violent movie?
I think so, although this is a time where audiences may seek romantic
comedies over disturbing, awakening dramas.  I screened two movies
today, this and the juvenile Max Keeble's Big Adventure.  The theater
was twice as full for Max than Training Day, which proves that people
want uplifting comedies right now.  If you're one of those people,
Training Day is definitely not for you.
Unquestionably convincing, disturbingly realistic, and unflinchingly
honest, Training Day details the events of one day in which a young,
rookie narcotics cop named Jake Hoyt (Ethan Hawke) must show his stuff
to veteran detective Alonzo Harris (Denzel Washington) in order to land
the job he wants.
Jake has a loving wife and a beautiful little baby, both safe and sound
at home.  By the time Jake returns to them that night, he will be a
different person.  He will see things he has never wanted to see, learn
things he does not want to know, and look evil straight in the eye. 
Although the myth states when you dance with the devil, you don't change
the devil, the devil changes you, this experience might actually make
Jake a stronger individual, or it might morally change his standards
forever.
Jake will never forget his training day, and this is a day I won't soon
forget, either.  The film explores a world uncompromisingly barbarous, a
world I never want to see again.  But it does exist in the vast majority
of cities.  Training Day reminds us of that, and sometimes the justice
department is no better than the villainous thugs it patrols.
The film, brilliantly directed by Antoine Fuqua, is fueled with
powerhouse performances.  Denzel Washington displays a side of himself
we have never seen before; I feel he has earned an Oscar nomination for
his sincere, vicious portrayal of a man who was not strong enough to
withstand his dance.  Ethan Hawke invites the audience to stand inside
his cringing shoes.  We're as startled as Jake because we experience the
day through his eyes.
It's a scary world out there.  Training Day shows us the brooding terror
that could exist just blocks away.  It's altogether one of the year's
most thought-provoking films.
Director: Antoine Fuqua 
Producer: Robert F. Newmyer, Jeffrey Silver
Screenwriter: David Ayer
Stars: Denzel Washington, Ethan Hawke, Scott Glenn, Eva Mendes, Tom
Berenger, Snoop Doggy Dogg, Raymond J. Barry, Cliff Curtis, Dr. Dre,
Macy Gray
MPAA Rating: R
http://trainingday.warnerbros.com/cmp/popup.html
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
JoBlo
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
This movie takes place over one day. It's a rookie cop's narcotics training
alongside a seasoned police veteran. The rookie doesn't know much about "street
justice", so the older cop teaches him about the way things work in the "real
world". How even cops like themselves have to "bend the rules" and "break the
law" every now and then, in order to catch the really bad guys.
CRITIQUE:
A pretty intense little movie with solid acting across the board, some ups, some
downs and a thrilling ending, despite a couple of small flaws. I really enjoyed
this movie because it followed two extreme characters and put them in situations
which had me wondering about what I would do if I were in their place. The film
gets right into the "dirty" side of, well...the dirt on the streets, and
proceeds to teach the rookie cop (and us, the audience) how things really work
down there. Of course, we're receiving this lesson from a man who has put away a
lot of scum in his time, but the things he seems to be doing aren't exactly on
the up-and-up either. And therein, lies the fun of the film. Do you agree that
you yourself would need to break a few small laws in order to put away the
people who break the really big ones? Well, as the film moves along, we're given
two points of view in respect to this predicament, and to me, both sides made
sense at some point or another. And you gotta give a lot of credit to the
screenplay for that, the director, who builds the film up wonderfully (with the
darkness of the day leading to the darkness in the script) and the two actors
who deliver their parts in spades. Hawke, first off, because he rarely plays
these "commercial" roles but does so perfectly here, with a vulnerable side
which has you feeling for the bastard right off the top.
And Denzel, well, what can you say about Mr. Washington that hasn't already been
said before? He comes through as per his usual high-level style here, and gives
the audience a completely different side to his talent, of which, I personally
would like to see more. He's nice, he's not so nice, he's smart, he's not so
smart, he's caring and he's a dog all the way. The few problems that I did have
with this film included the redundant nature of the whole thing at some point
(okay, we get it...you have to be nasty in order to deal with these nasty
people...move on) and this one really major "coincidence" which involved a
bathtub, that saved the day for one character, but seemed a little too
"convenient" for my taste. I also never really understood how Washington's
character got out of a certain dire predicament, only to be seen driving his car
in the very next scene. But obviously these small flaws didn't taint my overall
enjoyment of this tense drama, a film that gets you right into the streets, into
the nooks and the crannies, and into the moral dilemma which lies between the
justice system and the day-to-day drug busts. See it if you want to wrestle with
some of these issues yourself, see it if you want to see Denzel and Ethan strike
up a palpable chemistry on-screen, and see it if you like holding on to your
seat-handles real tight during a movie. In fact, see it for the scene in which
Ethan Hawke plays cards with a host of gang-bangers alone...dang, now that's
intense!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
The Corruptor (7/10) - Crimson Tide (9/10) - L.A. Confidential (/10) - Lethal
Weapon (8/10) - Requiem for a Dream (8/10) - Seven (10/10) - Shaft (7/10) -
Traffic (8/10)

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved. 
The only reason anyone should want to see Training Day is to catch an 
extremely rare glimpse of Denzel Washington playing a bad guy.  The actor 
has made a career of portraying characters who are decent, hard-working and 
constantly struggling against some force that tries to keep them down (it's 
usually Whitey von Crackermeister), so it's a real treat to see him tackle 
something new for a change (not unlike Harrison Ford - Washington's white 
counterpart - in last summer's What Lies Beneath). 
Washington (Remember the Titans) really chews the scenery in this role, in 
which he plays LAPD Detective Alonzo Harris, the head of an ultra-elite 
undercover narcotics squad.  Day, just as the title suggests, covers one day 
in the life of Alonzo and his troop's latest recruit, 
still-wet-behind-the-ears Jake Hoyt (Ethan Hawke, Hamlet).  So, with that 
one-sentence description, Day has already covered the two biggest cop-flick 
clichés: the black guy/white guy thing (popularized by Lethal Weapon) and 
the rookie/veteran thing (which strives to be as good as Colors, but comes 
off closer to Osmosis Jones). 
Day is told through the eyes of Jake, who has only been on the job for 19 
months and wants to catch the fast track to running his own department as 
soon as possible so he can move his hot wife (Charlotte Ayanna) and their 
baby out of the cramped apartment in which they currently live.  The titular 
day is his first in a temporary assignment that could potentially land him 
in Alonzo's rogue bunch on a permanent basis.  He's an eager beaver, but 
Jake knows he's in for a bumpy ride with Alonzo from their first meeting. 
Within 30 minutes, Alonzo has him jaywalking, drinking beer and smoking 
laced marijuana with a cocked gun jammed into his temple.  And you thought 
your office orientation was bad. 
As Day progresses, the clearly out-of-control Alonzo requires Jake to do 
crazier and crazier things in an attempt to both prove his worth to the unit 
and make the film more interesting. In a speech similar to that of Woody 
Allen's character in The Curse of the Jade Scorpion, Alonzo explains you've 
got to be a wolf to catch the wolves, while poor stoned Jake is left to 
mutter things like "I should've been a fireman."  Not only does Alonzo 
forbid Jake from filling out reports and making radio contact back to base, 
he get pissed off when his trainee jumps out of the car to stop an attempted 
rape. 
Their adventure includes trips to see Alonzo's mentor (Scott Glenn, Vertical 
Limit), Alonzo's ho (Eva Mendes, Urban Legends: Final Cut) and a trio of 
popular musical artists (Snoop Dogg, Macy Gray and Dr. Dre), but the trouble 
with Day is you know how it's going to end before the lights go down, and it 
takes forever to get there.  That's not to say, however, that it's not 
occasionally stylish and fun (thanks to director Antoine Fuqua, Bait). 
The film's first half begins promisingly but the second is laughably 
far-fetched, and the ending is kind of a letdown.  The fact that all of this 
stuff happens in under 24 hours makes Day slightly less believable than 
Legally Blonde.  But screenwriter David Ayer (The Fast and the Furious) 
isn't exactly well-known for creating plausible ideas, either.  I couldn't 
help thinking about how Day would have been received if its roles were 
reversed racially, with a corrupt white LAPD detective schooling a naďve 
black rookie (actually, that kind of sounds more interesting, doesn't it?). 
As it is, the film could still potentially rile some who are convinced 
police corruption is rampant and widespread (possible new LAPD motto: "We 
break more laws before you wake up than you'll break all day"), which is 
probably why Day's release was pushed back two weeks after pro-police 
sentiment swept the country in the wake of the World Trade Center attack. 
As far as Washington goes, it's fun to see him cast against type, but his 
performance is way too far over the top.  Sure, he's a bad guy, but he's a 
really likeable bad guy.  Hawke does well but doesn't really have too much 
to work with here and seems fairly content in letting Washington do 
everything but look directly into the camera and scream, "Look at me!  I'm 
playing a bad guy!  Can you believe it?  Me!  Denzel!  Notice me!" 
2:02 - R for brutal violence, pervasive language, drug content and brief 
nudity 

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "TRAINING DAY" (Warner Bros.)
   It's obvious why perennial good-guy Denzel Washington was intrigued
by the malevolent role of veteran L.A.P.D. Detective Sergeant Alonzo Harris, who
heads an elite, undercover narcotics squad. He's a dedicated rogue cop who's
glib that "you gotta have a little dirt on you for anyone to trust you." His
"street justice" ethics and morality are outside the norm but he has his own
ambiguous integrity. So when Jake Hoyt, an idealistic rookie, played by Ethan
Hawke, wants to join his unit, Harris gives him 24 hours to prove himself
saying, "You've got today and today only to show me what you're made
of....You've got to decide if you're a sheep or a wolf." Their day begins with
drugs and alcohol, part of "getting to know the streets," and includes
extortion, execution, and a $4 million seizure, which quickly decreases to $3
million as the corrupt cops take their cut. "It's ugly but it's necessary,"
rationalizes Harris. "Play the game, grow wise and then you can change things."
Both Washington and Hawke deliver, supported by Scott Glenn, Tom Berenger, Snoop
Dogg, Macy Gray and Dr. Dre. But David Ayer's implausible, cliché-filled
screenplay veers off in several directions with too many far-fetched
coincidences. Certainly a subplot involving the Russian Mafia is irrelevant and,
right now, after the World Trade Center, the timing seems inappropriate for
gratuitous police corruption and brutality. Director Antoine Fuqua brings a
cinematic restlessness, street smarts and a touch of slick senationalism to this
police thriller which all-too-soon becomes pedestrian, even sadistic, with an
unsatisfying conclusion. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Training Day"
is a gritty, foul-mouthed 6, questioning whether law enforcement comes at the
expense of justice and public safety.

Author
Steve Rhodes
In TRAINING DAY, veteran narcotics officer Alonzo Harris has long since crossed
the line and not by just a little bit.  He's not just a dirty cop.  He's
downright filthy.  Played wonderfully against type by Denzel Washington, Alonzo
is the role that could win Washington (THE HURRICANE and MALCOLM X) his long
deserved best actor Oscar to go along with his supporting actor Oscar for GLORY.
 It's also clear that Washington loves the freedom that playing a bad guy
affords him.  You may find yourself feeling almost uneasy given how much you
enjoy watching his character.  You want to loathe him, and you do, but
Washington gives Alonzo a disturbingly appealing side.
This strongly violent film never pulls its punches.  Alonzo may have a magnetic
and sometimes humorous personality, but he's as evil as the devil himself.  If
he was once a great cop, as he claims, he is no longer.
The movie takes place during a single day in which rookie Jake Hoyt (Ethan
Hawke) has his baptism by fire under Alonzo's tutelage.  Hoyt enters the day
nervous that he won't be found worthy of being a narc and ends it nervous that
he won't see the sunrise.  In between is one terrific motion picture, albeit a
depressingly engrossing one.
Hoyt doesn't know quite what to make of Alonzo and constantly seems confused as
to what is happening.  Even the basic goals and techniques that they taught him
in the police academy are completely out the window.  In this world turned
upside down, he is required by Alonzo to smoke PCP-laced marijuana during his
first hour on the street.  Alonzo makes it almost plausible that smoking dope is
important training.  Alonzo likes to taunt Hoyt by calling him a virgin, which
is an apt metaphor.  Another is the wolf vs. sheep analogy that Alonzo loves. 
"You've got to decide," Alonzo tells Hoyt.  "Are you a wolf or a sheep." 
Wolves, apparently, will do anything to accomplish their mission.  But Alonzo
isn't just any wolf.  He's the leader of the pack.
Director Antoine Fuqua (THE REPLACEMENT KILLERS) uses facial close-ups that give
Alonzo and Hoyt Mount Rushmore-sized faces.  It's all very disorienting. 
Interlaced with these close-ups are slow-motion shots that give the audience a
constant feeling of dread.  
TRAINING DAY never flags until it gets to the end.  Although the conclusion is
satisfying, it's too over the top and too long.  If the last act were up to the
quality of the rest of the movie, we might legitimately hear this film being
talked about in the same breath as L.A. CONFIDENTIAL and hear Oscar buzz for it.
 Instead, expect to see just Washington's name in the Oscar lineup.  
TRAINING DAY runs 2:02.  It is rated R for "brutal violence, pervasive language,
drug content and brief nudity" and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, October 5, 2001.  In
the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Bob Bloom
TRAINING  DAY (2001) 2 stars out of 4. Starring Denzel Washington, Ethan Hawke,
Scott Glen, Cliff Curtis, Dr. Dre, Snoop Dog, Macy Gray and Tom Berenger.
Written by David Ayer. Directed by Antoine Fuqua. Rated R. 
 It's usually exciting to see an actor with a good-guy reputation putting on the
black hat and trying to portray the villain. 
 That is the main reason I was interested in Training Day, in which Denzel
Washington shucks his Boy Scout image to play Alonzo Harris, a veteran narcotics
officer, a rogue cop who crosses the line until there is not much difference
between himself and those he has sworn to put away. 
 But Washington's larger-than-life image is so burned into our psyches, that it
hard to accept him as a corrupt narc. The question arises, "Who's problem is
that  the audience's or the actor's? 
 In this case, it's a little of both. Washington cannot totally commit to the
dark side. His Harris is a deadly, charismatic, unpredictable charmer, always
ready with a laugh or a smile. He also can strike with the suddenness of a
rattler. 
 Good actor that he is, Washington tries to present a complex persona, not
allowing his Harris to plunge totally to the depths. His Harris, though
dangerous and deadly, is too flamboyant. Washington has not been able - or not
allowed himself - to totally immerse himself into his character's rank nature.
 Training Day is a violent outing about the first day on the job for a new
narcotics officer, Jake Hoyt (Ethan Hawke). One of the movie's biggest problems
is that Hawke is a cipher. He is too wooden, too overwhelmed by Washington's
personality to find a voice as strong as that of his partner's. 
 Hawke spends most of the movie in Washington's shadow. His character lacks
vigor and verve. His Hoyt is emotionally light and his physical presence is too
slight to be considered an on-screen equal. He is too unworldly, too naive to be
a counterpoint to Washington's illicit dynamo. 
 The story, though, is interesting to follow, as hints to the main plot are
dropped here and there and in rather oblique ways. 
 The film begins unraveling during a scene featuring one of the most lame
coincidences ever put on screen. This sequence  which started out so promising 
drags the rest of the film down with it. 
 Still, the movie is a star turn for Washington. As Harris, he swaggers, struts
and parades around like a one-man band. He is a conniving con artist, ostensibly
trying to teach a rookie officer the way of the street, while continuing to plot
his secret agenda. 
 Nothing rings true here. The film has the feel of playing-acting cops, not
life-on-the-street police. Plus, it features one of those down-and-dirty fights
that would land lesser mortals such as us in the hospital for a month or two,
but from which both antagonists merely stumble away with the usual phony film
limp. 
 Training Day is a glorified lesser feature that does nothing for the careers of
either of its stars. Motivation is questionable, the script needed some more
polish and some of the action is cartoonish. 
 It may satisfy Washington's legions of fans, but that is as far as it goes. 
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN. He
can be reached by e-mail at 
bloom@journal-courier.com or at bobbloom@iquest.net. Other reviews by Bloom can
be found by going to 
www.jconline.com and clicking on golafayette. 
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie Database: 
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Antoine Fuqua. Screenplay by David Ayer. Starring Denzel
Washington, Ethan Hawke, Scott Glenn. Running time: 122 minutes. Rated R
by the MFCB. Reviewed on October 15th, 2001.
Synopsis: Young policeman Jake Hoyt (Hawke) wants to join an elite 
narcotics task force run by Alonzo Harris (Washington). As a trial run, 
Hoyt accompanies Harris for a day, only to discover that Harris' tactics 
are scarcely better than those of the crooks themselves. As Hoyt descends 
farther into Harris' world, it soon appears that he will have to give 
himself over to his mentor's point of view -- or face the consequences.
Review: Despite its topical nature, "Training Day" is a movie likely to be 
remembered less for its storyline than for the performances which enrich 
it. Washington and Hawke are incredible to watch, crafting rich characters 
with little obvious effort. As Harris, Washington treads just close enough 
to outlandishness to be memorable, without losing his gritty real-world 
roots. He is a villain, but one borne of all the corrupt bureaucrats and 
civil servants which darken our places of power. Hawke, on the other hand, 
is comparatively naive, but not to the point of ludicrousness. Hoyt is 
appalled by Harris' actions, but is worldly enough to accept them and try 
to deal with them; the concept of a man like Harris is not completely 
beyond the bounds of his reality. To these proceedings, Fuqua brings a 
raw, snappy directorial style, favouring minimality over excess. When Hoyt 
is high on pot, Fuqua reflects this with little more than a sickly yellow 
haze onscreen, eschewing more flamboyant effects. Unfortunately, while 
Ayer's script is riveting at first, it goes somewhat off the rails in the 
final reel, burdened with a dubious chain of coincidences and an overblown 
Hollywood climax. Nonetheless, as a character drama and as a stark 
reminder that life on the urban streets -- be it as denizen or as cop -- 
is never black and white, "Training Day" is compelling.
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html
  |     Shannon Patrick Sullivan    |         shannon@mun.ca          |       
  +---------------------------------+---------------------------------+
/  Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)   go.to/drwho-history  \
\__ We are all in the gutter but some of us are looking at the stars __/

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
TRAINING DAY (2001)
Rated R; running time 122 minutes
Genre: drama/action
Seen at: Lowes Star Southfield (Detroit, Michigan)
Official site: http://trainingday.warnerbros.com/
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0139654
Written by: David Ayer
Directed by: Antoine Fuqua
Cast: Denzel Washington, Ethan Hawke, Scott Glenn, Eva Mendes,
Snoop Dogg, Dr. Dre, Harris Yulin, Raymond J. Barry, Cliff Curtis,
Emilio Rivera, Tom Berenger, Charlotte Ayanna, Macy Gray
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2001
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamstrainingday.html
Pardon my tangent, but I like watching Stanley Kubrick's FULL METAL
JACKET a lot, especially the home video version.  Through the magic of
video, I can watch, transfixed, as actors R. Lee Ermey and Vincent
D'Onofrio (along with the rest of the gang) teach a masters-level film
seminar as a Marine Corps Drill Instructor and his Instructee gone
terribly wrong.  And, as the emphasis moves from Boot Camp to Vietnam,
home video also allows me to turn the TV off and move on to Something
Else - since, for me, most everything past FMJ's Boot Camp just doesn't
compare to that brilliant first act.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**)
LAPD cop Jake Hoyt (Ethan Hawke) is excited about his new gig, as an
undercover narcotics officer; still naive, Hoyt believes he can Make A
Difference in the War On [Some] Drugs, and he's eager to prove himself
to his new boss.  Said boss - one Alonzo Harris (Denzel Washington),
wants Hoyt to prove himself, alright; but not in the way Hoyt thinks.
Hoyt quickly discovers that Harris is, at best, a rogue cop playing by
his own rules, seemingly only answering to his code of street conduct.
And at worse, Harris is a completely corrupt cop, taking advantage of
the power his badge and shield affords him.  Not to mention the dirty
money he comes by.  Hoyt has to decide, and decide quickly, just how far
into the dirt he'll let Harris drag him.
The Upshot (WARNING: **more spoilers contained below**):
Sure, there were other actors populating this movie - Scott Glenn,
Harris Yulin, Tom Berenger, Emilio Rivera, and Cliff Curtis, just to
name a few (Snoop Dogg counts too, I reckon; my jury's still out on
including Macy Grey and Dr. Dre in the "actor" category) .  But make no
mistake: this picture belonged to Denzel Washington and Ethan Hawke.
For better or for worse.
For me, it's the second half to two-thirds of this picture, that make up
the "for worse".  Like  FULL METAL JACKET before it, the "training" bits
of TRAINING DAY were a riveting portrait of Denzel Washington at his
over-the-top thug life finest; even when he was obviously trying too
hard to be Down [did someone buy Denzel a copy of 'GhettoSpeak 101'?],
Washington's wolfish narcotics cop was fascinating to watch - and cringe
at - in all his raw power.  Ethan Hawke as rookie undercover cop Jake
Hoyt, in training mode, complimented Washington nicely; even as Alonzo
Harris became progressively nastier, and Hoyt settled into wary pupil
status, the lessons on surviving in this big bad world, were great to
watch.  The first few pages of my notepad were riddled with reactions to
Professa' Alonzo's whip as it connected with Student Jake's tender butt.
Everything changed suddenly, when class was apparently dismissed, and
Harris' earth-bound motivations became clear; once Alonzo was revealed
to be indeed smaller-than-life, the thrill was gone for me as a viewer.
The longer this film went on, the less I liked it, and the more the
sheer mass of my suspended disbelief weighed me down.  Scene after scene
after endless boggling scene had me silently screaming over how
incredibly doofus Hoyt had to be to let himself be caught up in Harris'
madness to such an extent.
If I disliked the corrupt Alonzo, I could not stand his idiot rookie
trainee; and adding more of the corrupt cops to the mix, did nothing to
improve my mood.  I knew I was Through when the repeated cacophony of
"my nigga" failed to invoke the gag response in me.  By the time the
overwrought, ObCrimeDoesn'tPay anticlimactic mishmash of BONNIE AND
CLYDE and the "tollbooth" scene from THE GODFATHER went down, I was
anxious to Exit, Stage Right.
Don't get me wrong: my gripe isn't so much with the actors (though
Washington's bad mix of Scarface and Nino Brown, got on my last nerve),
as it is with the story itself.  Even if every frame was an accurate
representation of Life On The Mean Streets (and believe me, my eyes
rolled so much, the on-screen 'bangers used them for dice), I simply
failed to believe, or care anymore.  Whup my ass and call me Silly, but
I don't think that's the reaction Antoine Fuqua & Company were going for.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
As with SERENDIPITY, it looks like I'm swimming upstream again; while
most reviewers are apparently giving TRAINING DAY their seal of
approval, I can't manage much more than a indifferent yellowlight rating
for Washington and Hawke's efforts.  And like I said before, Say La Vee.
TRAINING DAY (rating: yellowlight):
As a Rilly Bad Guy, Denzel Washington is still a wet-behind-the-ears
rookie.  But he does look good behind those ears.

Author
Michael Dequina
        _Training_Day_ could not be more aptly titled, and not simply because
those two words offer the most accurate and succinct summation possible of the
film's story and structure.  The title also gives a clear idea of how star
Denzel Washington schools the viewer in how electrifying screen acting can be.
        Director Antoine Fuqua wisely trades in the glossy flash of his previous
two films, _The_Replacement_Killers_ and _Bait_, for more a more realistic,
down-and-dirty approach befitting this dark and gritty story.  _Training_Day_
slavishly sticks to the 24-hour time period of its title, a day in which rookie
LAPD cop Jake Hoyt (Ethan Hawke) is to be shown the ropes of the narcotics
investigation beat by 13-year vet Alonzo Harris (Washington).  The training that
Jake receives goes beyond the expected by-the-book procedures, however.  As the
long day wears on, it becomes an increasingly charged clash of personalities and
ideologies, with the naive Jake learning about the code of street justice in the
hardest possible way from the many difficult situations into which Alonzo places
him--not to mention from the morally ambiguous Alonzo himself.
        The press and advertising for _Training_Day_ have made it clear that
Alonzo is perhaps just as bad, if not worse, than the types he busts every day,
but Washington makes the gradual unpeeling of his character's layers absolutely
riveting.  Washington's natural magnetism as well as any other baggage he brings
with him from previous films actually works wonders for this role.  Much like
how Alonzo's behavior constantly subverts any idealistic notions about law
enforcement officers, Washington's fearless performance continually challenges
any preconceptions of "nobility" one may have associated with the actor; the
viewer is never allowed any comfort as one is made increasingly uncertain of
just how far the character will go.  Alonzo's test of Jake's mettle is
paralleled by the implicit acting challenge Washington's formidable work
presents to Hawke, and like his character, the well-cast Hawke proves up to the
demanding task, at times rather surprisingly so.
        Disappointing it is, then, that David Ayer's script fails to keep up
with the pace of the actors; the story gets too reliant on contrivance and
coincidence to drive its final third.  Effectively summing up _Training_Day_ is
one of the film's more awkward moments, a scene where Alonzo gives a charged
speech in the middle of the night, in the middle of a residential street.  It's
hard not to see the scene as the bit of melodramatic grandstanding that it is,
but that point--and any other issues with the material, for that matter--is made
irrelevant by Washington's volcanic energy and fierce conviction.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
The Movie Report/Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  www.mrbrownmovies.com
www.filmthreat.com  |  www.cinemareview.com  |  www.digitalwidescreen.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

Author
Robin Clifford
Idealistic, rookie cop Jake Hoyt (Ethan Hawke) is about to face the most
important day in his life. He has 24-hours to prove himself worthy of a
detective's shield under the watchful eye and guidance of Detective
Sergeant Alonzo Harris (Denzel Washington), a 13-year veteran who lives and
breathes the streets. Jakes sense of honor and justice is about to be
challenged by the experience drug enforcement officer who has developed his
own sense of honor and justice in "Training Day."
Alonzo establishes his authority as the big dog right from the start when
he phones Jake in the wee hours of the rookie's test day, ordering the
younger man to meet him at a certain diner and hanging up as Hoyt begins to
thank him for his chance to make detective. From here, Alonzo maintains the
upper hand with Jake and forces him to do things that Hoyt knows are
downright wrong. Harris continues to challenge the newcomer, showing Jake
the real underbelly of the streets as he brings him through places where no
white guy, especially an eager young cop, has gone before. Almost from the
start of their relationship, Alonzo unabashedly declares that Jake will be
his "nigger" if he wants to get ahead.
Denzel Washington is being touted, in some circles as a contender for
awards come year's end. The actor gives a good, not a great, performance in
a solid role that is counter to his usual noble, kind persona he normally
takes one. His Alonzo Harris is a studied performance with the actor
getting down and dirty as a cop whose sense of justice has evolved away
from enforcing the written law to honoring what he calls "street justice."
When the naďve Jake makes him pull over to stop the rape of a 14-year-old
Catholic schoolgirl, Alonzo kicks the bejeezus out of the perps, steals
their money and sets them free, much to the rookie cop's amazement and
chagrin. King Kong, he tells us near the end, ain't got nothin' on him as
the veteran detective walks a dangerous line. A side story, important in
the finale, has Alonzo in deep with the Russian Mafia, further establishing
the vet's walking the dark edges of illegality, though this sidebar seems
unnecessary.
Ethan Hawke gives a convincing performance as Jake Hoyt. Jake kissed his
wife and baby in the morning and left home a fresh-faced idealist. He
returns, a day later, as a battered and bruised cynic, but, for all that, a
man transformed into an enlightened, better cop. Alonzo shook Jake's
concepts of "justice" and the younger man comes away with a more intense,
realistic understanding of right and wrong. Hawke gives an effective
character study to his perf and stands toe-to-toe with the much more
flamboyant Washington, whose Alonzo Harris is an unpredictable loose canon
who has been, unbeknownst to himself, completely changed, morally, by his
constant dealings in the mean streets of LA.
While few members (actually none) of the supporting are given a great deal
of screen time, there is a wealth of fine acting in what are,
unfortunately, very small rolls. Most notable is Macy Gray as the wife of a
drug dealer whose home Alonzo invades on the pretext of looking for drugs
but his real agenda is to rip off the merchant of his ill-gotten cash. The
newcomer makes a splash as the street-savvy housewife who sees Alonzo for
what he is. Snoop Dog is depravedly solid as a wheelchair bound crack
peddler that Alonzo forces information from. There are many more tight
little perfs given by mostly unknown thesps. For name actors we have Scott
Glenn as one of Harris's victim/criminals and Tom Berenger as one of
Alonzo's equally corrupt colleagues.
The screenplay, by David Ayer ("U-571" and "The Fast and the Furious"),
packs an awful lot of gritty activity into what is supposed to be a single
day. This throws the pace of the film off as it takes a suspension of
disbelief to accept that so much tension, angst, confrontation and violence
would happen in just 24-hours. After a day like this, Jake should be ready
to retire as Alonzo first coerces him into smoking PCP (jeopardizing Jake's
professional status as a cop), involves him in an unsavory bust that
results in cold-blooded murder, drags the rookie into an illegal shakedown
and strands him in a life-threatening situation in a place where no
inexperienced, young, white cop should ever find himself. I understand the
single-day story, but question the amount of action and narrative that is
compressed into the limited timeframe. By the end of Jake's first day at
school I felt like I needed a vacation.
Director Antoine Fuqua ("The Replacement Killer") keeps things tight and
moving along at a brisk pace, even when much of the action consists of the
two cops driving around with Alonzo pontificating to his latest disciple
about the rules of survival on the streets of Los Angeles. Relatively
unknown director of photography, Mauro Fiore, provides an active, fluid,
moving camera that helps get across the street flavor and danger. He
manipulates the normal color palette when Jake smokes PCP for the first
time and sees the world in screwed up colors and distorted images. The
night shoots are crisp and clear as Jake confronts his demon, Alonzo, to
stop his superior's personal, corrupt plans. Costuming, by Michele Michel,
maintains the look of the streets with Alonzo dressed all in black, like an
avenger descended upon the city, with his shield hung around his neck like
an over-gold gangsta.
The hype preceding "Training Day" makes expectations for the film high. It
is, like Washington's performance, good not great. Hawke gives one of his
best perfs to date. I only wish the wonderful supporting cast were given
more to do. I give it a B-.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
