Title
Review for Mr. & Mrs. Bridge (1990)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Frank Maloney
     MR. & MRS. BRIDGE is adapted by Ruth Prawer Jhabvala from two
novels by Evan S. Connell, MRS. BRIDGE (1959) and MR. BRIDGE (1969); the
film is produced and directed by the team of Merchant-Ivory that earlier
brought us ROOM WITH A VIEW, MAURICE, and others.
     The artistic goal and challenge is to find what is interesting,
dramatic, and human in the smug, comfortable country-club lives (in this
case, Kansas City-Mission Hills, 1930's and early 1940's).
     The movie consists of a series episodes, almost vignettes, not
quite but nearly free-standing.  We move from the rigid, glacial walls
the characters present us to see them as real people with their own
pains and tragedies.  There is much comedy here and some sadness.  If we
watch them and only say, "what's the problem? they have everything they
need" we are being very much like some of the characters themselves.
Part of their tragedy is often an inability to sympathize, to see beyond
their own narrow lives.  In slowly opening up the characters to us, the
movie is entirely successful.
     Much of the success is probably Ruth Prawer Jhabvala's script,
which moves by easy degrees like a new friendship.  The opening
introductions, the growing knowledge of the other person's personality
and quirks and faults, the acceptance, the caring, the concern and
involvement.
     Much of the success has to go to Paul Newman and Joanne Woodward,
who have been making movies together off and on for 35 years more or
less.  Honestly, I have never seen them act better.  It will be the
subject of some discussion over who does the better job.  Woodward's
performance is a little easier to appreciate, her character is more
lovable and emotional; she does wonderful things communicating strength
and fragility, confusion and wisdom.  Newman's character is
inarticulate, superficially unloving, under control, unemotional, and
underneath as seething and emotional as any of us; making that
characterization live is a major achievement for an actor and Newman
delivers.
     Of course, the title characters are not the only ones.  The
supporting performances were uniformly excellent.  I especially liked
the juicy job of the very "advanced" psychiatrist, who lives in a
moderniste house with African sculpture, wears loud waistcoats and a
beard, and seems always to be enjoying enormously a cigar and a private
joke.  He is played by the same actor who played the country vicar in
ROOM WITH A VIEW and who romped so enthusiastically in the nude bathing
scene, Simon Callow.  I can also mention with pleasure the performance
of Blythe Danner, Mrs. Bridge's best and unhappy friend.
     Like all of Merchant-Ivory's period pieces, the look of this movie
is wonderful, rich, convincing, and detailed.
     I wholeheartedly recommend MR. & MRS. BRIDGE to all adults.

Author
Carolyn Ford
     The following musings are not really a review of the movie Mr. AND
MRS. BRIDGE, but are, well, musings.  I have not included any
spoiler warnings, because the movie does not really have any surprises.
     MR. AND MRS. BRIDGE is one of the most depressing movies I've seen
in a long time.  Why, you ask?  Because it's about my family.  And I'll
bet it's about a lot of your families, too.  Granted, my family was
not nearly as wealthy as the Bridges (I'd classify us as comfortably
middle-class), but my mom suffered from the same slow nullification
of her personhood as Mrs. Bridge.  How many of us had mom's who were
raised to believe that the most noble aspiration a woman could have
was to dedicate her life to her husband and kids?  How many of our
moms ended up lost and completely insecure when we became teenagers
and didn't want her around all the time anymore, and dad was too busy
with his career to give her a sense of importance?  
     MR. AND MRS. BRIDGE is a most damning view of the "traditional"
family unit and the devastation it has on the women who have given up
all their dreams and talents to serve a family that, after a while,
doesn't even seem to need them anymore.  Are they supposed to get
fulfillment from silly painting classes and endless games of bridge
(hmmm ...  hadn't noticed that connection to the movie before)?  By
keeping their wives completely buffered and protected from everything
outside the home, the husbands functionally and emotionally disable
their wives to the point where they don't even have their own opinions.
     As depressing at it was, I liked MR. AND MRS. BRIDGE precisely
because I hated PEGGY SUE GOT MARRIED.  Were we really supposed to
believe that Peggy Sue could give up all her hopes and dreams and get
fulfillment solely from her kids and husband?  I think not!  I think MR.
AND MRS. BRIDGE is a sequel to PEGGY SUE GOT MARRIED showing us what
really happened to Peggy Sue several years later.
     I applaud MR. AND MRS. BRIDGE for challenging our comfortable
image of how "right" the traditional family unit is, and for pointing
out how many people (women) have given up their entire lives for a myth.
