Title
Review for Svengali (1931)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Seth Bookey
Early sound movies were plagued with a variety of problems. The new
technology caused many creative setbacks for the film industry. One was
where to place the camera so the actors' voices could be recorded
properly. This resulted in many awkward scenes with everyone talking into
telephones, or even vases. Imagine everyone in the shot gathered around
the vase to discuss the matters at hand.
Seeing Svengali shows a mastering of the new technology after four years.
The story of the hypnotic maestro Svengali (John Barrymore) who loves the
much-younger Trilby  (Marian Marsh) is well suited to constant close-ups.
The story itself is rather silly--the only way Svengali can get this woman
into his life is by constantly hypnotizing her and stealing her away from
her true love, the poor painter Billy.
Marian Marsh, as Trilby, is dreadful. Meryl Streep she ain't. Sound movies
had produced a new problem: Actors have to memorize and perform the spoken
word credibly. Luckily, John Barrymore more than makes up for this. His
performance is wonderful, and it looks like most of the lines are written
for him. When a theater owner complains of all the broken engagements, and
says the crowd will kill him, Barrymore responds, "I will give you a
military funeral."
The true star of Svengali is its style. The sets are in the same vein as
The Cabinet of Doctor Caligari and other German Expressionists. Evocative,
soundless longshots alternate superbly with the intense light-and-shadow
close-ups. All this was before high-tech, and how they get Svengali's eyes
to glow when he casts his spell is amazing. What the story lacks in plot
and action is more than made up in the little touches, like the pan to the
cat catching the mouse after Svengali has called Trilby to his rooms from
across town in the middle of the night. The use of models will seem
unsophisticated by the standards of special effects today, but they lend
tremendously.
Note: This film was refilmed several times. One hilarious noteworthy one
starred Peter O'Toole and Jodie Foster,  in which he declares, upon
hearing her sing, "She has a voice like raw meat!"
Copyright (c) 1997 Seth J. Bookey, New York, NY, 10021, sethbook@panix.com
More movie reviews by Seth Bookey are available at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html
