Title
Review for Hitcher, The (1986)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mark R. Leeper
[Editor's note: Sites running 2.10 netnews will munge headers of articles in
moderated  groups *not* named mod.something.  If you get my name instead of
Mark Leeper's in the "From:" line, please encourage your S.A. and your feed's
S.A. to upgrade to 2.11.  Thank you.  And now, on to our review... -ecl]
          Capsule review:  Boring actioner about a psychotic
     hitchhiker whom the scriptwriter makes unkillable.
     Contrived, unbelievable, and ultimately dull thriller is one
     more film to waste Rutger Hauer.
     You want a thriller with lots of mindless action, no logic, and a bunch
of fractional-dimensional characters.  Cable this month is running what
passes for entertainment in some quarters.  The film is THE HITCHER and as a
friend of mine would say, it sucks pond water.  Actually I think this one
could turn back a raging river.
     Our main character--I don't think we ever get his name so I will call
him Poor Schnook--is a teenager driving a car from Chicago to San Diego by
way of nearly empty Texas roads.  Schnook picks up a psychotic killer played
by Rutger Hauer, who adds one more implacable killer to his list of roles.
Hauer had better start being more selective in his roles or he will lose the
aura he had from SOLDIER OF ORANGE and BLADERUNNER.  From the point he gets
picked up, Hauer does everything right.  He is always in just the right
place at the right instant.  It is not long before the police think Poor
Schnook is the killer and these are not your ordinary police.  They have
intelligence roughly equivalent to protozoa.  In a scene we see only the
aftermath of, Hauer has wiped out an entire police station with apparently
no more than a knife.  In one carefully choreographed scene, with one bullet
Hauer knocks out one police helicopter and two police cars whose occupants
somehow missed seeing the slowly dropping helicopter fall.  The more
destruction there is, the more the police want to kill Poor Schnook and the
less interested they are in hearing his claims that someone else is
responsible.
     The plot of the innocent bystander who gets in over his head is
standard thriller stuff and can be well done.  The innocent bystander
against the villain who does everything right is an old one.  In a sense THE
HITCHER has the same basic (very basic) plot as NORTH BY NORTHWEST but
instead of the characters and the wit, THE HITCHER gives us just more
mindless action scenes.  Perhaps part of the reason audiences are getting
more unruly is that in a film like NORTH BY NORTHWEST you want to hear what
the characters are saying, while in a film like THE HITCHER it is much less
important.  And one car engine sounds a lot like another.  Rate this one a
-2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Philipp Lenssen
An HTML version of this review is part of the movie section of Culture 
Club Central, a website which will hopefully be online some day. If you 
have comments on this I might include them at the site. Please excuse 
bad english, it's not my mother tongue.
The Hitcher 
(Review by Philipp Lenssen/ Jester@T-Online.de, Jan. 1998)
"Out on the desert highway, the rule of thumb has a different meaning..." 
The story here is basically good man against evil man. Jim Halsey 
(C. Thomas Howell) is driving a car through Texas and takes up hitcher 
John Ryder with the words "My mother told me never to do this", 
foreshadowing the tragedy ahead. The man sitting in his car, played by 
Rutger Hauer (seen in Blade Runner), turns out to be a psychopath. 
Little does Jim Halsey know when he bravely throws the hitcher out of 
the car that by escaping death he just qualified himself for his worst 
nightmare. The hitcher found someone to play a deadly game with...
The nice twist here is the Hitchcock-like innocent hunted as murder
theme... when he cannot even turn to the police, the hero is
suddenly very alone. The other interesting thing is the neverending
nightmare, when you're never sure when it's over, and you never
quite get behind the hitchers mask and now what it's all about
anyway. The Hitcher's brilliant play (Robert Townsend writes "C.
Thomas Howell declared later that he was actually frightened of
Hauer throughout the filming, and not just acting") and shooting
makes this for an atmospheric, unforgettable experience. 
During the course of the movie we see that the hitcher John Ryder focusses
on Jim Halsey. Other peolpe surrounding Halsey are massacred, but he
himself is even getting help, and Ryder tells him how to do things.
Ryder's not making it easy for Halsey but he's also making sure there's a
fair chance for Halsey to always escape. Nash, a waitress Halsey gets too
know, will cry out: "Why didn't he kill us?" 
Roger Ebert states in his 1986 review of The Hitcher that "there is
something sadomasochistic going on between the two men". He also writes
"this movie is diseased and corrupt. I would have admired it more if it
had found the courage to acknowledge the real relationship it was
portraying". Ryder might be sadistically enjoying his actions, but I don't
see Halsey getting into this situation deliberately, or enjoying it, or not
wanting to get out of it. 
"'The Hitcher' begins and ends with the same sound: a match being struck,
flaring into flame. At the beginning of the film, the sound is made by the
villain, a hitchhiker who is a mass murderer. At the end of the film, the
sound is made by the hero, a young man whose life has been spared so that
he can become the special victim of the hitchhiker." 
What Ebert describes here is wrong. The person striking a match at the
beginning and at the end is both times the hero Halsey. I don't want to
analyze this symmetry (we'll see many cigarettes lit during the movie,
which is not too absurd when the characters smoke), but it shows
Ebert uses false proof. Still, "there is something strange going on 
between the two of [them]", as a police man tells us near the end. 
Keith Myles quotes "Derek Winnert's assertion that the relationship of the
protagonists is dominated by latent homosexuality". There is a subtle
sexual undertone in the way Rutger Hauer plays the character, and it
emphasizes Ryder's evil ironic humor. But not only do we see him touching
Halsey, we see him kiss the little girl in the car and the same tender
scheme towards Nash. A cat's playing with the mouse before striking, 
showing a certain elegance which might arouse sympathy in us... it makes the
movie even more ambigue and intriguing.
The hitcher chooses a male counterpart because he is looking for both a
contrast and reflection. The contrast is that Halsey is the good man (you
can't play a game without conflict), and the reflection is Halsey's
youthful male energy. It'll become a teacher - pupil/ master - apprentice
relationship. Halsey's survival skill is trained. The pupil chosen has to
be good enough to be able to understand the scope of evilness he sees and
to challenge his master. 
When Jim Halsey's girl Nash is being is tied between the two trucks, Ryder 
makes Halsey put the gun against his face, he wants Halsey to pull the 
trigger and kill him. It's again very clear who's making up the rules
of this game. When Halsey can't do it, Ryder is disappointed and suddenly 
stops to smile: "You're useless waste." He punishes him by killing off Nash
(the importance of Nash to Ryder is only in her relation towards Halsey: 
For Ryder she is functioning as hostage and "price to pay" for Halsey here).
Ryder's disappointment expresses that he thought Halsey to be a worthy opponent 
so far, expecting him to be an equally good judge now. When he steps on the gas
it becomes, though not graphically violent, a truly horrible scene. We're put 
back and shocked by the reminder that the hitcher is not following any 
convention - Ebert thinks this is "so grotesquely out of proportion [...] 
that it suggests a deep sickness at the screenplay stage", which I would 
rephrase by saying it suggests a deep sickness of the hitcher, and suggesting 
anything else would be glorifying mass murder. 
When Nash is killed, the screen fades to black and this event will result
in a turning point in Halsey's character. Halsey knows that the killer
will not stop until he's put to death by him; he understands the perverted
game and the fact that he has to play it (he's clearly forced to act).
When the police is questioning the hitcher, Halsey enters. He touches
Ryder and spits him in the face, and in that scene Ryder knows that Halsey
has understood the game and hates Ryder for it. 
Later when Halsey is sitting in a police car, he tells the police man:
"You'll never hold him."
"There's something I gotta do."
When we look back on Halsey's character we see this is his second turning
point in the movie. The first crucial moment was Halsey resisting the urge
to commit suicide when he put the gun up his head earlier on: by choosing
to live on he accepted to be the hitcher's contrahent and play his game.
Now, when Halsey takes over the police car and turns around, for the first
time Ryder is the one who's being followed: Halsey accepts to be the
hitcher's judge and kill him. 
After what happened Jim Halsey does indeed feel relieved when he gets his
revenge. It's true that a bond is created during the move, the unyfing
element of hunter and prey. The hero ends this game - he had to switch the
roles and became the hunter for this purpose. 
At the police station Ryder says he feels tired. His suicidal rampage
makes clear he's tired of life. Shane R. Burridge writes about the
possible salvation and succession motif: "Has [Ryder] found a way to end
his curse--or worse, pass it on--by goading [Halsey] to end his life?
(When he places coins on [Halsey]'s eyes, he is suggesting that he is
damned). Significantly, during their final confrontation, [Ryder] drops a
chain to the ground and smiles: he is free at last." 
When John Ryder laughs as he knows he's going to be killed now, this final
satisfaction is triggered by Halsey's proof of a learned lesson (the
relevance is not in eventual masochism): The teaching was a success,
because Halsey accepted the god-like responsibility of playing judge over
Ryder's life. The hitcher's game of survival, and his archaic view of an
amoral world which seperates the strong and the weak, has been absorbed by
his apprentice. He didn't want to kill Halsey, he wanted to make him "gaze
into the abyss", so that his ego projects itself onto Halsey.

Author
Shane Burridge
     Hitch-hikers have always been good material for horror stories,
but this effort is classier than most.  That's not to say it is
entirely without its B-movie elements.  Story is at once simple and
complex.  Jim Halsey (C. Thomas Howell) picks up a hitch-hiker (Rutger
Hauer) on a Texas road in the middle of nowhere.  Within the next
quarter-hour of screen time, this hitcher has pulled a knife on him,
forced him off the road, narrowly missed running him down, and almost
blown him up.  This is familiar territory for most psycho-killer
stalk-and-slash fare, and audiences usually don't give the killer's
motives a second thought.  He's a psycho, ergo he's crazy and kills
people.  Enough said.  But THE HITCHER goes beyond this convenient
movie mindset and after a while it becomes clear that Hauer is not
trying to kill Howell (though he comes awfully close) as much as scare
the hell out of him.  It's almost as if he is a psycho 'playing the
part' of a movie psycho, and Howell is his audience.  In the creepy
opening sequence, in which Hauer evades all of Howell's questions, we
are given only one indication of the stranger's intent.  "Stop me,"  he
tells Howell.  From that point on Howell is plunged into a waking
nightmare, realizing that the hitcher is on a killing rampage,  and one
that he has unwillingly become a part of.
     It's the hitcher's motives that provide the puzzle in this film.
One possible explanation for his behavior is that he has totally
divorced himself from his conscience, and by externalizing it in the
form of Howell (who he may suspect is too weak to stop him), has passed
on all responsibilities for his actions so that he can commit his
violent acts with abandon.  As he realizes that Howell is too soft a
touch, he toughens up his campaign.  Which turns out to be bad news for
anyone Howell comes into contact with.  But a more intriguing idea
behind Hauer's motives is that he is a latter-day Flying Dutchman,
doomed to wander the hellish desert roads from one end to the other.
When investigated by the police he is found to have no past record,
driver's license, or any means of identification whatsoever.  He has
seemingly come from nowhere.  The name he gives Howell upon their first
meeting is the obviously pseudonymous "John Ryder".  Has he found a way
to end his curse--or worse, pass it on--by goading Howell to end his
life?  (When he places coins on Howell's eyes, he is suggesting that he
is damned).  Significantly, during their final confrontation, Hauer
drops a chain to the ground and smiles: he is free at last.
     The film has moments that are alternately nail-biting and exciting.
Top-notch cinematographer John Seale makes this one worth seeing on a
long screen, if only for the wonderfully-framed shot of two police cars
spinning end over end along the road.  Focused script and direction by
Eric Red and Robert Harmon respectively.  And Hauer makes a great
villain--we can't really hate him even though the things he does are
horrifying.  Also with:  Jennifer Jason Leigh (who'd already been at
odds with the villainous Hauer the previous year in FLESH + BLOOD).
