Title
Review for My Best Friend's Wedding (1997)
Number of Reviews
25

Author
David Rind
There have been too many negative reviews in ramr of this movie.
MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING is a wonderful film.  It opens with a sweetly
choreographed lipsynch number under the opening credits and has several
more magical scenes over the course of the movie.  Although the plot and
dialog are a bit thin, this is more than made up for by these scenes and
at least one superb performance.
The plot centers around a woman (Julianne -- Julia Roberts) learning
that her long-time best friend (Michael -- Dermot Mulroney) has decided
to marry another woman (Kimmy -- Cameron Diaz).  Suddenly jealous, she
decides that she will do what it takes to break them up, but is unsure
how to go about it.
The movie is fair to its plot line and its characters.  Julianne
concocts one over-the-top devious plot to try to anger Michael about
Kimmy, but for the most part she simply plays on the fears and concerns
of the engaged couple.  Kimmy and Julianne are both legitimately
believable love interests for Michael.
Singing and music are used as centerpieces of several scenes, including
the opening credits, a scene in a Karaoke bar, and two scenes with
Julianne's editor (George -- Rupert Everett), a gay man who is played
without any of the usual Hollywood humor/stereotypes.  There is a scene
where George leads a room in singing "I Say a Little Prayer for you"
that is funny, touching, charming, and fun.  I have not seen Rupert
Everett in other roles, but he is great here.
There is also one touching scene without music that speaks to all the
brief romantic moments that can sometimes slip away.  This is a movie
that while being basically a comedy at its heart, has a lot of true
things to say about relationships and romance, just as WHEN HARRY MET
SALLY did.  See this movie.  (Rating 4 out of 5)

Author
Luke Buckmaster
REVIEW:  My Best Friends Wedding
By Luke Buckmaster (bucky@alphalink.com.au)
Cast: Julia Roberts, Dermot Mulroney, Cameron Diaz, Rupert Everett,
Philip Bosco, M. Emmet Walsh, Carrie Preston, Rachel Griffiths
Director: P.J. Hogan
Producers: Ronald Bass and Jerry Zucker
Screenplay: Ronald Bass
Cinematography: Laszlo Kovacs
Music: James Newton Howard
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece): 4
stars
Weddings, one of the most treasured events in human life, have proven to
be immensely popular on the silver screen.  Just look at the record of
unbridled (get it, un-bridled) successes throughout the last decade -
Father of the Bride I and II, Muriels Wedding, Four Weddings and a
Funeral, the list goes on
However, My Best Friends Wedding skillfully departs the tedious track
record of two people falling in love and getting married in love-a-dove
feel good films.  Instead the movie takes an entirely different angle of
holy matrimony, show casing not only two peoples love for each other but
also for another who regrets having lost her one true love.
It's a story of jealousy.  The charming and charismatic Julianne (Julia
Roberts) is a restaurant critic with a short attention span for most
things in life - whether that is lovers, food or friendship.
Determined, wearisome and courageous, she is the modern working class
woman with an attitude.
Not long into the film we are exposed to Julianne's almost selfish but
adorable character, and in no time she finds herself caught in an
intriguing situation of mixed emotions and life long secrets.  It seems
that Michael, her best friend since early high school years, has just
decided to get married.  Julianne is not in any way pleased for him, as
she suddenly realizes that she has loved the man for 20 years - and has
"four days to break up a wedding and win her man.".  But the cocky
Julianne has some lessons to learn.
Michael's fiancé Kimmy Wallace (Cameron Diaz) is quickly realized by
Julianne as being "irritatingly perfect", and with good cause - she's
beautiful, polite, understanding and entirely lovable.  And to further
Julianne's problems, Kimmy asks her to be the bride's maid minutes after
meeting her.  Whilst this may be nice and rosy, Julianne still has a
mission to achieve - and she's not about to give up.
Until this point (as you may have noticed), the film doesn't take itself
too seriously, but the best jokes are still to be seen as the plot takes
its most interesting turn upon the arrival of Julianne's gay friend
George (played by the appealing Rupert Everett).  Advising her in
moments of need, George confronts Julianne with the most important
question yet: "Do you really love him, or is this just about winning?"
The scenes to follow are lovely, clever slabs of comedy and romance
including a sing-a-long restaurant scene bound to put anyone in
stitches.
When watching this film, I couldn't help but keep my eyes glued to the
screen in the hope for more quality gags; something that it does with
class and poignancy.  But before too long, a familiar critical factor
put my mind into fearful overdrive.  This was, of course, the
all-important ending.  After all, the entire movie was of such a high
standard that a disappointing ending would have been disastrous to the
film; and Australian director P.J Hogan (Muriels Wedding) was faced with
a do or die situation.  Fortunately, he was able to conquer up a
skillful and very beneficial (and very unexpected) ending, without a
bias towards the film's protagonist.
If most Hollywood pictures turned out as rock solid and well rounded off
as this one, us critics wouldn't have nearly as much to say, and if we
would the chances are it would be something pleasing.  For Jerry Maguire
fans, you'll love this film, and for those put off by the feminine
sounding title rest assured - there's definitely something special in
the air.
Witty, charming and funny, My Best Friends Wedding is a definite winner.
However, one over riding question still remains: do I have the
confidence to recommend this film to my friends and family through
sickness and health, till death do us part?  I do.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com for any
inquiries or feedback

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Julia Roberts made the world love her back in 1990 with 
PRETTY WOMAN, but since then she's been in eight consecutive 
bad movies. DYING YOUNG, MARY REILLY and I LOVE 
TROUBLE hardly rank in the annals of filmed entertainment. It was 
only at the end of 1996 in Woody Allen's EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE 
YOU that she seemed like America's sweetheart once again. But no 
one besides me watches Woody Allen movies anymore; it's going to 
take a far inferior, watered-down romantic comedy to return her to 
public graces again.
        My guess is, MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING will be 
Julia's big comeback vehicle. She's got her big permed hair and lips 
fuller than ever, but even more important, she looks happy again. 
No mad Doctor Jekyll to deal with this time, just a wedding to break 
up. She's on a romantic mission that involves chicanery and 
deception, and the breaking up of a happy couple, but because she's 
Julia Roberts with her gracious beauty and awkward charm, we love 
her character anyway.
        Julia plays a food critic for a newspaper, probably the only 
anorexic food critic ever (although she can recommend the best 
lettuce leaf and Tic Tac in the city), who has been as of yet 
unsuccessful in her quest for a man. The two most important men in 
her life are her Stallone-faced best friend and her gay editor. It's an 
implausible movie -- I mean, how could any man spend time around 
Julia Roberts and still be gay? -- but still a mildly appealing 
diversion with cast of beautiful people on both sides of the fence.
        The best friend is played by not-so-young gun Dermot 
Mulroney, who was once involved with Julia but now plans to marry 
Cameron Diaz. Good choice. Diaz plays an eternally-perky college 
student who immediately tries to make Julia into her best friend as 
well. Julia instantly hates her, of course, which provides the 
interesting scene where Julia makes Cameron sing in a karaoke bar 
and she's so off-key that everyone loves her. Off-key isn't always 
bad; Alanis sold 12 million albums.
        Yes, the marriage setup is an excuse for Julia to be rude, 
manipulative, sneaky and just plain mean once she realizes she's in 
love with Mulroney herself. Like I said, we love every second of it, 
because seeing Julia in the not-so-innocent roles brings the most 
comedic reward. She's got that innocent yet worldwise quality that 
made her a charming hooker in PRETTY WOMAN, and it still works 
here. It would have been better to stick with the premise and break 
convention, but the ending is completely sappy and predictable.
        It's the sap and predictability that keeps MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING from being more than pretty good. The 
writing follows the track we'd expect, giving us a handful of truly 
funny jokes and only a couple memorable scenes like the "Say a 
Prayer" sing-along sequence in the restaurant. The rest of the time it 
relies too heavily on Roberts to fall off the bed, accidentally rip her 
dress, knock things over, and so on. We love you, Julia, but your 
name isn't Lucy.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Nearly 1/25th of a Century!

Author
Mike Borzumate

For details of my reviewing style, please see the note at the end of
the review.
    Never before have I seen stereotypes so perfectly played as in this
horridly worthless drivel of a film.  I bet you can see where this review
is going.
    You've got the naive girl falling in love with the handsome,
dominating man.  But look out, the chicken "friend" who wouldn't fess up
to being in love with the hunky stud for years is out to get him!  And, of
course, she's an independent and lonely career woman.  But who's the
chicken's *real* friend?  A studly and witty gay man, of course!  But she
feels no attraction to him at all, because...  he's gay!  How convenient! 
And everyone has perfect teeth and perfect hair, even when bolted out of a
sound sleep.  Ladies and gentlemen, the stereotypes of yuppiedom!
    Frankly, I didn't care WHO ended up with the guy in the end.  I kept
hoping that meteorites would fall from the sky and squash and smolder each
of them individually.  Except maybe Cameron Diaz's character; I kept
hoping she'd find a man as equally naive and blindingly faithful as her,
and that they'd run off into another movie together.  Maybe I'd actually
watch that movie and enjoy it for its honest romance.  The only thing that
kept me watching this one for the second agonizing half was the cat
sleeping on my chest, firmly pinning me down out of reach of my VCR.
    The only reasons this movie would be worth seeing at all are for the
stereotypically funny gay man (played by Rupert Everett), Cameron Diaz's
incredible smile, and M. Emmet Walsh (the proctologist from _Fletch_) as
the singing, dancing, pigging out Uncle Joe.

I give two ratings: An arbitrary scale of enjoyability (1 to 10) and
a maximum price I would pay to see the movie.

Author
Alex Fung
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
The teaser trailers for MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING scarsely
gave reason for hope - it looked like the sort of goofy,
light-hearted comedy than might put Julia Roberts back in the
limelight, but little more; I'd frankly rarely seen a trailer
place such an emphasis on people falling over for laughs so
often.  It was then to both my surprise and my delight to
find that MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING was such a success - a
strong, bouyant romantic-comedy with some decidedly
unconventionally quirky comic aspects, featuring a triumphant
performance from Ms. Roberts. 
The heroine of MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING is Julianne Potter
(Julia Roberts), a successful New York restaurant critic, and
we open the film with a whimsical revelation to her editor
George Downes (Rupert Everett) that years ago, she had made a
pact with her dear best friend and ex-lover Michael O'Neal
(Dermot Mulroney), a sports writer, that if they both hadn't
married by the time they reached 28, they had promised to
marry each other.  Both Julianne and Michael are both single,
of course, and when George inquires about Michael's age,
Julianne realizes that he's mere weeks away from his 28th
birthday, and is quite distressed when she receives a phone
call from Michael later that day.  However, she finds herself
even more distraught when Michael's call is in regards to his
impending marriage to heiress Kimmy Wallace (Cameron Diaz),
and when he asks Julianne to fly down to Chicago for the
wedding, Julianne suddenly realizes that she loves Michael,
and resolves to break up the wedding and steal the groom by
any means necessary. 
The setup for MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING, then, is a fairly
conventional one, and in many ways the film's storyline is
formulaic - but only to a certain extent: the film was
directed by P.J. Hogan, whose first feature, MURIEL'S
WEDDING, had quite an offbeat tone for a traditional
uplifting ugly-duckling story, and the same holds true for MY
BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING, which confidently combines traditional
romantic-comedy elements with a really eccentric sense of
humour.  The film is innundated with sly mischievousness
which seems clearly the influence of Mr. Hogan.  For example,
there's a heartfelt, emotional exchange between Julianne and
Michael late in the film - with a trio of teenagers, inhaling
helium and sounding every bit like Alvin and the Chipmunks,
harmonizing in the background.  MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING
opens with an inspired opening credit sequence which sets the
tone for the film, and there are scenes where actors
spontaneously burst into song to good comic effect - it could
almost be argued that this film is nearly as much of a
musical as Woody Allen's EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU; I'd even
assert it's a more successful one. 
MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING keeps breaking conventionality with
its characters as well.  In a typical romantic-comedy, Kimmy
would be portrayed as a snooty, conniving ice queen, and the
audience would be cheering for Julianne to rescue Michael
from her grasps; this film is smarter than that - here, Kimmy
is sweet, sincere, and innocent; Julianne even admits at one
point that had she not resolved to utterly destroy Kimmy's
life, she'd actually like her too.  The George character is
almost a staple of recent film - the homosexual male friend
of the heroine who acts as a confidant and provides the
guiding voice of reason - but in MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING, he
gets to have a playful, mischievous and charming personality.
Throughout the film, the formulaisms one often sees is
romantic-comedy are given little twists, and the result is a
film which is compelling all the way to its somewhat
unorthodox conclusion.  There is a lot of smart writing in
the well-paced screenplay by Ronald Bass; we're given four
interesting, vivid, and likeable characters, with some good
dialogue and some genuinely charming and touching moments.
MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING marks a strong career rebound for
Julia Roberts, who turns in a top-notch, confident and
reassured performance as Julianne.  This isn't the sort of
role one usually associates with Ms. Roberts - the Julianne
character's neurotic, fumbling characteristics are more in
line with a Meg Ryan role - but Ms. Roberts works wonderfully
in the film and demonstrates her aptitude at comedy here,
remaining compelling and empathetic to the audience, if not
entirely sympathetic, even when her deeds done to destroy the
wedding plans of her best friend are less than honourable. 
Even better than Ms. Roberts though is Cameron Diaz, who
turns in a shining performance in MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDDING.
With a smile which lights up the screen, she effectively
conveys Kimmy's insecurity and utter sweetness in an
endearing manner, and never hits a false note in the film.
She even sings - I won't soon forget her charming serenade of
"I Just Don't Know What To Do With Myself". 
Rupert Everett is given a very juicy role as George, and he
makes the most of it with a hilarious turn which makes his
character perhaps the most vivid and most memorable in the
film.  His George is a bit of a devilish rogue, entirely
affable, and Mr. Everett's performance is a delight to watch;
he's clearly having fun, and his joy is infectuous. 
Dermot Mulroney is adequate in a thankless role - unlike the
other characters in the film, he's not given a lot to do, but
there is a genuine onscreen chemistry between Ms. Roberts and
Mr. Mulroney, and consequently the longstanding friendship
between his Michael character and the Julianne character
always seemed completely authentic. 
When Julia Roberts' lustre began to fade, and she was usurped
from her title as "America's Sweetheart" by Sandra Bullock, I
thought it was a canny career move on her part to take
supporting roles in prestige projects like MICHAEL COLLINS
and EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU to raise her profile.  While that
didn't quite work out, it's near-certain that her successful
return to the genre which made her a big star back in 1990,
the romantic-comedy, will once again raise her ante in the
Hollywood game.  MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING marks a return to
form for Ms. Roberts, and cements P.J. Hogan's reputation as a
skilled director of comedy. 

Author
George McAdams
If you are a student of THE BIBLE, you know that every seven years or so a
plague, famine, drought or other disaster is guaranteed to come along to
break-up the monotony of early biblical bliss.  While those who have
watched from a distance the often winding career of Julia Roberts may have
often wondered just when she was going to return from wandering through the
wilderness, "My Best Friend's Wedding" is proof that she has the ability to
act, if not the ability to choose the best vehicles for showing off her
talents.
In this case, it is director P.J. Hogan, "Muriel's Wedding," who is
delivering the message from the mount.  As in "Muriel," he has chosen a
focal point of many wandering soul's lives, a wedding, to cause the
characters to examine whether their own happiness is dependent on another.
Let me make no false prophesy here, this is Julia Roberts' movie, and while
other disaster turns in her career the past seven years could have been
explained away on dubious personal choices, with this film she reminds us
that she still is the actress that made the audience cry in "Steel
Magnolias" and half of an audience dream of a Prince Charming in "Pretty
Woman."  
In "My Best Friend's Wedding, Julia, playing food critic Julianne, hears
from her best friend, an ex-lover played unremarkably by Demot Mulroney as
Michael O'Neal, that he is getting married in four days and wants her at
his wedding. Complicating this simple story line is Julianne's realization
that she has grown to love Michael over the nine years since they broke-up.
While the choice of Mulroney as Robert's love interest may cause several
movie viewers to scratch their heads, he neither makes, nor does he break,
the movie, as he underplays his role.  But, isn't that the point of this
movie?  After all, it's Julia acting happy and delightful that will fill
the theaters.
Further complications arise when Julianne meets his fiance, played by
Cameron Diaz, and finds her to be sweet, lovely, open and honest:  the four
qualities that Julianne has decided to avoid as she tries to put a wedge
between the happy couple. Not since the openhanded conniving attempts by
Katherine Hepburn in "Bringing up Baby," has there been such welcomed
chicanery.
Topping-off the performance by Ms. Roberts is the scene-stealing
performance by Rupert Everett as George, her gay editor, who masquerades as
Julianne's fianc. The Ronald Bass screenplay correctly adds George to the
mix every so often, like a hot tea drinker who continues to dunk the tea
bag in the hot water: you aren't quite sure if the tea is getting much out
of your effort, but it sure looks darker, and everyone knows that darker
tea is never weak.
"My Best Friend's Wedding" receives three stars as a welcome picture amidst
all of the action grabbing super hero flicks out there. I would see it
again and recommend it to everyone. 
The Web site for this picture is rated 3 out of four, nothing fancy, and
can be found at:
http://www.spe.sony.com/Pictures/SonyMovies/features/bestfriend.html. 
Additional insight into the background of the movie can be found at
http://www.spe.cony.com/Pictures/SonyMovies/movies/Bestfriend/plannercontent
s2.html.
Be Sure to Check-out Movies-in-the-Net at:
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Lot/7862

Author
Marty Mapes
**** (out of 4) MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING is not what I expected. The
previews made it look like a fluffy romantic comedy that follows formula
exactly. After the opening title sequence, I was certain the movie would
be trite and airheaded. 
In fact, the movie is NOT shallow and it breaks from formula in
interesting ways. It was surprising to see that the movie had a soul. 
Julianne (Julia Roberts) gets a call from her long-time bachelor friend
Michael (Dermot Mulroney), three weeks before her 28th birthday. They
had agreed to marry each other if they were both still single by 28, so
Julianne is expecting "the question." If you've seen the previews, you
know that Michael has called to tell her that he's engaged to someone
else, and that Julianne decides that SHE wants to marry Michael, and she
wants to do it now. Meanwhile Kimmy (Cameron Diaz), Michael's fiance,
wants to make Julianne her new best friend, both from Michael's
flattering descriptions and as an alternative to jealousy. 
It's easy to picture such a plot degenerating into a cheesy sitcom:
Julia Roberts concocting zany schemes to break up the wedding, creating
truckloads of wacky hilarity. P.J. Hogan's direction, Ronald Bass's
insightful script and the performances of all the main characters never
allowed that to be a real possibility. The movie is imbued with human
qualities - honesty, kindness, humanity - that most sitcoms - most
MOVIES - never even consider. 
The movie treats all of its characters well. Nobody is evil. Nobody is
"the bad guy" in the disposable villain sort of way. When Julianne
springs a trap on Kimmy, we don't cheer the cruelty because Kimmy is not
a 2-dimensional punching doll. Even the pair of man-hungry sisters
(Rachel Griffiths and Carrie Preston), who are in the movie mainly as
comic relief, are given self-awareness and self-respect. Other family
members may put them down, but the movie itself never condescends. 
MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING is effective - some might say manipulative --at
winning you over to its side. For example, Julianne claims to be cynical
about big traditional weddings. But when she sees that her best friend
is going to have one without her, it turns out to be exactly what she -
and we, by our association with her as the hero - wants. Kimmy confides
to Julianne that she is just as sentimental as all the flighty nitwits
she's always pitied at weddings. Her heartfelt confession puts her on
our level and makes it okay for us to open our sentimental sides to the
movie. Even the trailers are effective(/manipulative) by making the
movie look much more simple than it is. I went to the movie "knowing"
exactly how it would play out based on the previews. As I said above, I
was pleasantly surprised by its depth and complexity (though perhaps
only relative to what I expected). 
There is one scene, however, that really won me over and made me love
this movie as much as I did. One of Julianne's schemes is to make
Michael jealous by claiming her handsome gay friend George (charmingly
played by Rupert Everett) is her fiance. 
There is a scene where George spontaneously starts singing shamelessly
in a restaurant. One by one, the other people at the table shed their
inhibitions and join in. Soon the whole big extended family is singing
boldly (and not too badly). After one chorus, the restaurant gives them
a round of applause. Not wanting the moment to end, someone from the
restaurant jumps on the piano and introduces another chorus, and now the
whole restaurant joins in. Everyone in the restaurant becomes one huge
family joined together to sing a love song for the young "couple," (and
each to remember their OWN first love). 
The scene is a modern parallel of a whole tribe joining together at a
feast to celebrate a marriage. What makes it even better is that
everyone in the room wants to join in, but modern barriers of politeness
among strangers keep them from doing so. One by one, the people join in
anyway until the whole room is included. They collectively agree, for a
wonderful moment, to be family, not strangers. 
Not only is this a great moment, but it also adds to the whole of the
movie. During this scene, the only person not singing is Julianne. Her
guilty conscience is starting to haunt her and she can't really
participate in the sincere expression of joy that everyone else in the
restaurant feels. 
Twice I thought the movie's heart was in the wrong place. During the
credit sequence, the movie appears to be about how to win a man. The
notion of treating men as marriage objects seems as shallow and wrong as
treating women as sex objects. Later, Julianne insists that her motives
in chasing Michael are 100% pure love (and not jealousy or "winning").
Both times I winced with disappointment at the movie's vapidity. Both
times, the movie came back to show that the characters themselves, and
not the movie, were wrong. 
Hogan's only other notable experience is his direction of MURIEL'S
WEDDING, which is another great movie that takes the romantic comedy and
adds a difficult twist. One wonders if he will be as good in another
genre, or if it's necessary that he even try. For the meantime, though,
he has found his niche: directing comedies with "Wedding" in the title.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Nigel Bridgeman
Starring: Julia Roberts, Dermot Mulroney, Cameron Diaz, Rupert Everett
Written by Ronald Bass
Directed by P.J. Hogan
It only seems like yesterday when a small romantic comedy was released,
reviving the career of its male star and launching the career proper of
it's female one. Pretty Woman was the sleeper hit of the year and managed
to land Julia Roberts her second consecutive Oscar nomination, as well as
putting Richard Gere into the hearts of women everywhere (for a year or
two, at least).
Roberts started to make a career for herself playing beautiful women either
in love or in peril, but after a supporting role in Steven Spielberg's Hook
she took a break, only taking a cameo in Robert Altman's The Player before
returning in Alan J. Pakula's The Pelican Brief, which lead to a string of
relatively unsuccessful roles in such films as Something to Talk About and
I Love Trouble. Roberts' honeymoon with American audiences, it seemed, was
over, and moviegoers had a new sweetheart, in the sickening guise of Sandra
Bullock (critics even raved that her hit romantic comedy, While You Were
Sleeping, was "The Pretty Woman of the Nineties!" - conveniently forgetting
that the latter was, indeed, released in 1990). Roberts started putting
quality before salary by appearing in less commercial fare such as Everyone
Says I Love You and Michael Collins, but that didn't seem to be enough.
My Best Friend's Wedding is a complete success for Roberts, who plays
Julianne, a restaurant critic who's life is thrown into turmoil when her
ex-lover/best friend Michael (the comatose Dermot Mulroney) announces his
engagement to his brand new love, Kimmy (future star Cameron Diaz), who in
turn recruits Julianne to be her maid of honour. Julianne becomes insanely
jealous and plots to break the relationship by any means necessary to win
Michael, for whom she suddenly realises her true feelings.
Lending a helping hand is the disapproving George (Rupert Everett) who,
while sympathetic to Julianne's cause, decides to run things his own way,
much to Julianne's dismay.
The film was directed by Muriel's Wedding's writer-director P.J. Hogan and
so there are, predictably, some terrific set pieces, most notably Kimmy's
brave attempt at karaoke and George's scene in the restaurant, where he and
the other patrons break into song. There are also numourous little touches
that are far funnier than you'd fine in a romantic comedy directed by a
Hollywood filmmaker; the opening title sequence, for example, as well as
scenes involving, among other things, helium and Michelangelo's David
(don't ask).
Roberts gives her best performance yet. After seeing this, I realised
something I had never thought would happen - I was becoming a Julia Roberts
fan, a statement which would have appalled me six months ago. On the
strength of her work here she has easily wrestled Sandra Bullock off her
perch and should be able to rest comfortably for a couple of years yet,
although she should definately look out for her co-star, Cameron Diaz, who
has the charisma and personality to be a major screen presence in the near
future.
Someone with a distinct lack of charisma, however, is Dermot Mulroney. His
casting is puzzling; although he does turn in an adequate performance, he
just doesn't fit the role. Why would anyone even care about this man? Why
would someone as dull as Michael have two women such as Julianne and Kimmy
fighting for him?
At the other end of the spectrum is Rupert Everett. He is perfect as
George, Julianne's editor who just happens to be gay. Every single scene he
appears in is a delight, and if he doesn't turn his role here into at least
an Oscar nomination then the performances that are given nods will have to
be extraordinary.
This is the film that should redefine the American romantic comedy. While
mildly predictable, the screenplay is fine, and Hogan's direction is
flawless. Mulroney is the only real flaw, but with such fine actors as
Roberts, Diaz and especially Everett, it is a flaw that can be easily
overlooked.

Author
Christopher Null
An out-and-out blatant chick flick from the first frame on, MY BEST
FRIEND'S WEDDING will be as enjoyable to its female patrons as it is
frustrating to its male ones.  Yes, Julia Roberts is back, and in fine
form -- playing Julianne, the bad girl, against Cameron Diaz's
squeaky-clean bride-to-be (Kim).  The best friend in question is Michael
(Dermot Mulroney), Roberts's long-time confidant.  When Michael reveals
his imminent marriage, Julianne develops a jealousy to be reckoned with,
and makes it her life's work to break up the couple.
In addition to its problems with alienating male viewers, the real flaw
in WEDDING is the lack of chemistry between the Mulroney and Roberts. 
While I'd probably be a little shy smooching on Julia, hey, that's no
excuse for a seasoned pro.  Then there's also the minor detail that the
trailer tells the story better than the film -- leaving some gaping plot
holes -- but who's quibbling?  Roberts is the one to watch here, along
with Rupert Everett as her gay editor and co-conspirator in this mess.
It's really these two that make this picture fun -- and funny.  And it's
in WEDDING's fall-down funny moments that the picture really shines.
Maybe the most annoying piece of the film is Diaz and her penchant for
bawling in every scene.  But then again, who's watching her?  I always
liked the redheads best, anyway.
-Christopher Null  /  null@poboxes.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Larry McGillicuddy
Former lovers Julianne and Michael once made a pact that    
when they turned 28, if neither had found someone else, then
they would marry each other. Three weeks before the deadline
he calls Julianne and tells her he's getting married, to    
someone else. She is obviously upset by this, but agrees to 
attend the 4 day wedding party in Chicago so she can have a 
chance at fouling up the wedding.                           
Cameron Diaz plays Kimmy, Michael's fiance who immediately  
asks Julianne to be her maid of honor. As it turns out,     
Kimmy is more resourceful than Julianne imagined. An attempt
early in the movie to embarass her in a karaoke bar         
completely backfires, as Kimmy ends up singing to a cheering
audience. This is more than just an extraneous third        
haracter that you get in most love triangle romantic        
comedies. Diaz invests her character with so much energy,   
cheerfulness, and innocence that you just want to leap      
through the screen and give her a hug.                      

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen at the UA Criterion for $4.50 on 28 July 1997
*My Best Friend's Wedding* is the film that finally proves that a woman's
best friend is not diamonds--he's a gay man.  I had resisted this movie,
because frankly, who can forget *Mary Reilly*? Did anyone even see *Mary
Reilly*? Case closed...
*My Best Friend's Wedding* is the best Julia Roberts movie since *I Love
Trouble.* Let's face it, Dermot Mulroney (as Michael) and RRRRRRupert
Everett (as George; a gay actor playing a gay character) are a lot more
appealing than Nick Nolte--whom I love, even though he refuses to return
my many, many phone calls.
Julianne (Julia Roberts) has a best friend in Michael (Dermot Mulroney) 
with whom she once had a brief romance, nine years ago. But when she
discovers that he is marrying superwealthy Kimmy (Cameron Diaz--who's
inexplicably hated by many women I know), she suddenly realizes that she's
in love with him, and she has four days to stop the nuptials. 
What ensues is improbable but comic. Julie flies into Chicago and is
immediately swept into the wedding plans. Kimmy, the bride, fawns all over
Julie and after a while, it seems that Kimmy really is perfect. She
thwarts Julie's attempts to discredit or embarrass her--whether she's
being forced to sing off-key karaoke or admitting wrongdoing to Michael.
This frustrates Julianne. So she has to call in the big guns--her gay
friend George. He actually has more of a life than she does. George shows
up in Chicago and poses as her fiance. 
Her machinations fail and it is hard to root for her. What make the movie
enjoyable is that it is a traditional romantic comedy, except this time
the Rock Hudson type is openly gay. Even the opening credits give a nod to
tradition. Julia Robertsactually has good comic timing. She falls down
with the best of them--John Ritter, Dudley Moore. Personally, watching
people fall down is a cheap laugh unless it's done well (which is why I do
not really like too many Blake Edwards movies). 
As for the romantice, the soundtrack amplifies the throwback ambiance with
ballads like "The Way You Look Tonight" or the entire cast exuberantly
singing "I Say a Little Prayer" at a crab house (the best scene in the
movie--the reason I would sit through the movie again). No Depeche Mode or
Smith dirges here. 
Dermot Mulroney turns in a good performance as the "straight man" and we
will probably be seeing him in bigger-budget movies from now on; but the
real scene-stealer is Everett, who is more than just the typical gay
character dying to be a woman's best friend. He is a good friend, and he
counters her mad schemes with comeuppance rather than compliance. 
The supporting cast is also very good. Rather memorable are Rachel
Griffiths and Carrie Preston as the loudly dressed sisters and friends of
the bride, Samantha and Amanda; Susan Sullivan shows up as the upper crust
mother of the bride and plays the part well. 
JD Department: I could have very easily snuck into Speed 2 at the
Criterion, but decided against it; if the building collapsed, it would be
worse than being found dead with dirty underwear. 
Copyright (c) 1997 Seth J. Bookey, New York, NY 10021, sethbook@panix.com.
Other film reviews by Seth Bookey are available at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/mission.html

Author
Walter Frith
     Anyone who has ever been deeply involved in a wedding party knows that
sometimes a wedding is not always so wonderful and romantic as some
sentimentals make it out to be. Julia Roberts has a first hand experience at
this in 'My Best Friend's Wedding'.  Roberts plays a food critic in NYC who
gets a phone call from her best (male) friend (Dermot Mulroney) and he
informs her that he's getting married.  It comes as a shock since its
Wednesday and the wedding is in four days.  Roberts tells her gay editor
(Rupert Everett in the film's best performance in a sly supporting role that
will grow on you) that she has four days to 'break up the wedding' because
she feels the woman marrying Mulroney (Cameron Diaz) is all wrong for him and
that she has secretly been in love with him all these years but somehow
didn't tell him. 
     As I was watching this movie I loved part of it and hated part of it.
 That is really strange.  I don't consider myself a romantic and I've only
been to one wedding in the last ten years.  Don't get me wrong, I believe in
marriage; heck, my parents just celebrated their 49th wedding anniversary on
July 1st.  What I really found odd was the mixture of characters being in
this situation and at times appearing very unattractive in their qualities
and at other times I wanted to give each of them a hug.  It was like I was
watching two different people (especially in Roberts and Diaz) with split
personalities.  Julia Roberts is somewhat inept in this film and I didn't
believe it could have taken her so long to confess her love to the man of her
dreams especially when she does it on the day of his wedding.
     'My Best Friend's Wedding' is a fantastic date movie even though it
falls victim to the trappings of old fasioned Hollywood movie making in the
most sentimental of ways and in many ways this in uncharacteristic of the
film's writer (Ronald Bass who won an Oscar for co-writing 1988's 'Rain
Man').  The film's director (P.J. Hogan) must have been responsible for this.
 There is a just ending to this film but it doesn't conclude the way you
might think it will and I wish I could believe that someone as attractive as
Julia Roberts could stay single until she was three weeks away from her 28th
birthday (her age in the film) but women this gorgeous are usually taken long
before that.  At least the movie is honest enough to relay the fact that in
most cases men and women can't have a close platonic relationship without
taking things further because as Billy Crystal said in 'When Harry Met Sally'
-----> "the sex part always gets in the way".  

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: P.J. Hogan
Writer: Ronald Bass
Starring: Julia Roberts, Dermot Mulroney, Cameron Diaz, Rupert Everett, 
M. Emmet Walsh, Paul Giamatti
With "Batman and Robin" opening the same weekend of this, you'd think 
this "Julia Roberts comeback for good film" wouldn't stand a chance.  
Wrong.  When people go see it and see it sucks unbelievably much, 
they'll race to see this comic gem.  That's what it is.  And I'm not 
saying that 'cause I saw both of them the same weekend...I saw this one 
first, man.
Julia's big ice-breaker into the world of mega-celebrity-hood was 
"Pretty Woman" which was cool at first but kinda lost its glamour and 
just became a good old three-star film that you can recite.  This one 
may not be recitable, but it's far better.
Julia plays restaurant food critic, Julianne Potter, a highly neurotic, 
insecure girl who has a nervous breakdown when she realizes that pact 
she made with her male best friend, Michael (Dermot Mulroney), to get 
married at 28 if they aren't already, might come up, for her 28th is 
soon and she just got a message from him saying he NEEDS to talk to her. 
 But it's worse than that - he's getting married in 4 days (why he 
didn't tell her...).  She falls off the bed and decides to go down there 
and sabotage the marriage and marry Michael since she now realizes she's 
been in love with him all along.
But her target of sabotage is tough - she's little Miss Perfect with 
sympathy, a "Kimmy" Wallace (the wonderful Cameron Diaz), who is madly 
in love with Michael, despite the fact he loves the following: action 
movies, karaoke bars, etc.  Every time she tries to make Michael hate 
Kimmy, he ends up loving her more.  She drags them to a karaoke bar and 
forces Kimmy (who claims to not be able to carry a tune) to sing.  She 
sucks embarrassingly but soon gets into it and Michael and her make out 
there in front of Julianne.
The funniest section of the film is when Julianne calls her new best 
friend, her gay editor, George (the oscar-nomination worthy Rupert 
Everett), to help her out.  She tries to make Michael jealous by saying 
he's her fiance, but George gets her back by playing it up 
embarrassingly for her, but later adds to the depth of the film towards 
the end.
The films is great because it's an evil comedy and it knows it.  It asks 
us to question whether or not we should root for Julianne by making 
Kimmy a sympathetic person.  She's apt to cry and when she does, we hope 
Julianne doesn't do anything further to destroy their union.  But Julia 
is so likable that this becomes a huge conflict.  It's resolved nicely, 
I think, in an anti-Hollywood way.  This film gleefully toys with us by 
walking right up to the hokey Hollywood line, then making a U-Turn.  
All the performances are magnificent.  The four leads are all great in 
their own way and it's tough to say who runs away with the film.  It's 
definitely not Dermot, who's great and all, but not as much as the 
others.  But is it Cameron Diaz, who's perfect in making her perfect yet 
with flaws and sympathy?  Is it Rupert Everett, who's so funny and such 
a good scene-stealer AND makes the "gay best friend" so much NOT like 
the typical "gay best friend?"  Or is it the top-billed Julia Roberts, 
who makes neuroticism seem fashionable?  
I don't know.  Really I don't.  It may as well be a three-way tie.  But 
the film as a whole works great.  The direction by Aussie director P.J. 
Harvey ("Muriel's Wedding") is wonderfully clever and even adds some 
good old Aussie campiness - i.e. the opening credits and the Dionne 
Warwick sing-along at a lunch scene (led by Rupert).  
Overall, this is the thinking man's romantic comedy and a contender for 
the best of that genre for the decade, along with "Four Weddings and a 
Funeral" and "Sleepless in Seatle."  So if you saw "Batman and Robin" or 
don't even want to (it's worth a viewing at least, even if it bites), go 
see this fantastically wonderful film.

Author
David N. Butterworth
Julianne is on a mission.  To wreck the upcoming wedding of her best
friend, Michael.  And in the process, just maybe, win his heart.
If this sounds like a recipe for prenuptial hilarity, then you're certainly
on the same page as the filmmakers.  Director P.J. Hogan's previous outing
was the hysterical ugly-duckling tale "Muriel's Wedding," with which he
demonstrated his deft skill at comedy.  "Muriel" was also moving, sad, and
a little bit tragic.  The sadness in my "My Best Friend's Wedding,"
however, is not part of Ronald Bass' script.  It's the uneasy feeling you
get from watching these characters play out their passions and their petty
jealousies, realizing that, unless polygamy suddenly becomes an option,
someone's going to be left crying at the altar.
Hogan's new film is, disappointingly, a little more mainstream than
"Muriel."  This means, for example, that Julia Roberts, who plays Julianne,
plays off America's recent fascination with the spectacle of beautiful
women falling down, popularized by Brooke Shields and Tia Leoni on prime
time television.  In "My Best Friend's Wedding," Roberts hits the deck
close to half a dozen times.  The first, when she tumbles off the bed when
Michael (Dermot Mulroney) tells her he's popped the question...to someone
else!...is funny.  After that, the pratfalls seem overdone and unnecessary,
and while Roberts is still as appealing as ever, she's no Chevy Chase.
Aiding and abetting Julianne in her wrench-throwing activities is her gay
friend George (the stiff upper lipped Rupert Everett), who flies in to the
Windy City and temporarily poses as her fiance.  "It's amazing the clarity
that comes with psychotic jealously," George observes, once Julianne
realizes she really does love Michael, suddenly the man of her dreams.
Everett exudes charisma all over the place; it's a broad but charming
supporting performance.  The object of Michael's affections is Kimmy,
played by Cameron Diaz.  Diaz is bubbly and believable as the "bright eyed
and dreamy" rival who threatens Julianne's sense of ownership.
In fact, Julianne, George and Kimmy are all likable, well-developed
characters.  The Michael character looks good on the surface, but does
little else to deserve the attention he gets.
In keeping with Hogan's love for musical interludes ("Muriel's Wedding" was
punctuated by Abba songs), "My Best Friend's Wedding" drums up a few of its
own, from the irresistibly cute opening title number, to a painful Karaoke
sequence, to a scene in a fish restaurant where everyone at the table joins
in a rendition of "Say a Little Prayer for You."  The only problem with
most of these moments is that they go on way too long.
While Julia Roberts and her co-stars sparkle, "My Best Friend's Wedding" is
an uneasy mix of well-realized humor and unrealized sadness.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Julia Roberts, Dermot Mulroney, Cameron Diaz, Rupert Everett,
Philip Bosco, M. Emmet Walsh, Carrie Preston, Rachel Griffiths Director:
P.J. Hogan Screenplay: Ronald Bass
If I'm not married by twenty-eight, I'm NOT going to marry my best
friend cause I don't think it's legal. If Julianne (Julia Roberts) isn't
married by twenty eight she IS going to marry her best friend Michael
(Dermot Mulroney). Legally possible, personality compatible, wonderful,
except .... he's met somebody else.
Julianne was the centre of Michael's life 9 years ago. After splitting
with him, they have remained friends with the vague memory of a promise
of marriage, if still single by 28. Jules doesn't realise that she is
still in love with Michael until 3 weeks before her 28th birthday; when
he calls to tell her that he's getting married, and asks if she would
come to give him emotional support before the big day. Suddenly,
feelings of jealousy are awoken in her, as she sets out to win Michael
back in every underhanded way possible.
Yes, Julia Roberts is the BAD GUY. The fly in the Chardonet, the rain on
a wedding day, the good advice that you shouldn't take - isn't it
ironic? If cupid had a quiver full of arrows, they would probably all be
sticking in his little butt right now if Julianne had anything to do
with it. Which is the reason why I like this movie. It's a great
learning experience for those wishing to sabotage weddings, and failed.
Away with the simple 'I object' and in with karaoke aptitude tests, gay
fiancees, falsified E-mail and wicked lies. I would also have
recommended laxatives, but that's too cruel even for me, not on a
wedding day.
So these are the tests that true love faces, when a very jealous best
friend does not get her way. In this subtle competition for the groom,
the bride Kimmy (Cameron Diaz) carries with her the girdle of bright
eyed sincere innocence, whilst her rival maid of honour wields the magic
of brains and beauty. So with whom shall I side? They both love him
soooo much. How can one win without the other getting hurt. If I had to
take sides, I can only let my conscience guide me. I have always
believed that the motive behind every action, is the most important
reason behind a  good relationship. Sorry Jules you lose. But if I had
my way with the plot - Kimmy gets Michael, and Jules ends up with Rupert
- who makes an exception to his rule, and changes his sexual orientation
the last minute. Not likely, but an interesting idea - cause we'd have
something of a 'Chasing Amy' - Oh dear! Now if Shakespeare had his way
with this tale of jealousy, it would probably have ended up with four
dead bodies - now that would have been funny.
Director Hogan has once again decided to fill his 'wedding' movies with
catchy tunes, making the marital experience a joyful ride. Julia is back
in sparkling form, with an effervescent smile and long curly red hair.
She has once again left mankind panting for more. Her every look carries
with it an easy charm reminiscent of Rita Hayworth in her hey day. Yes,
beauty and humour makes this particular lady prettier still. Cameron
Diaz carries herself well against the stiff competition, whose
performance at a karaoke bar will be painfully remembered. Dermot
Mulroney is the ever likeable object of desire for both women, whose
bland personality makes him the ideal reliable husband that every woman
looks for; but it is Rupert Everett who steals the movie's funniest
moments with his wry wit, humorous tale telling and spontaneous singing
- making this wedding party a curious gem of rare sorts.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING  ** maximum.  Directed by P.J. Hogan. Written by
Ronald Bass. Produced by Jerry Zucker and Bass. Photography, Laszlo
Kovacs.Editing, Garth Craven & Lisa Fruchtman. Production design, Richard
Sylbert. Music,James Newton Howard.  Cast: Julia Roberts (Julianne Potter),
Dermot Mulroney (Michael O'Neal), Cameron Diaz (Kimmy Wallace), Rupert
Everett (George Downes), Philip Bosco (Walter Wallace), M.Emmet Walsh (Joe
O'Neal), Rachel Griffiths (Samantha Newhouse), Carrie Preston (Amanda
Newhouse), Chris Masterson (Scott O'Neal), et al. A  Sony Tri-Star release.
112 minutes. PG-13.
My Best Friend's Wedding is another marriage picture by Australian P.J.
Hogan whose warm, funny, original Muriel's Wedding was a hit, starting at
the 1994 Cannes Festival. This time Hogan is not so lucky.
I saw this film on Friday. As the end credits rolled by, I thought :"TGIF"
-- Thank God It's Finished. MBFW seems to be an attempt at a 90s screwball
romantic comedy, vaguely along the lines of much earlier ones.  But instead
of a crazy, outlandish structure, minutely plotted, diversified and with
strong  ensemble playing (think of Cary  Grant  gems such as His Girl
Friday and My Favorite Wife, both of 1940), this picture is made to
showcase Julia Roberts  at the expense of everything and everyone else.
Almost, that is.
The film's fourth banana, English actor Rupert Everett, salvages the show,
steals every scene he's in, even those in which he speaks to Roberts on
long-distance calls. Roberts plays Julianne, a New York food critic who
refers to "creme brulee" as "kraym broolay." Everett is George, her editor
and confidant. He is handsome, sexy, smart. He is also gay,which you
certainly wouldn't know if you hadn't been told from the start.
Nine years ago Julianne had a torrid but short affair with college-mate
Michael.  Julianne is no long-distance runner when it comes to
relationships, but the reasons why the twosome stopped are still not clear.
They switched to being best friends and such perfect soulmates that they
made a pact: if by the time they reached age 28 they had found no true
love, they would marry each other.
The time has come. Michael, now a sportswriter in Chicago, calls Julianne,
but instead of popping the question he announces feverishly that in four
days he will marry young college girl Kimmy, the daughter of Chicago
tycoon. He has such prenuptual jitters that Julianne simply must come and
lend support.
For Julianne this comes as an IRA bomb throw. It triggers in her the
absolute notion that Michael is the man of her life. She flies in,
ostensibly to help him, but in reality to get him away from Kimmy.
The film, always focused on Roberts, is the string of Julianne's
machiavellian machinations. She charms the eager fiancee ("You're my new
best friend" says naive Kimmy), worms her way into and works on everybody,
systematically diminishes Kimmy in Michael's eyes. A few of her strategies
are amusing, most are too cruel to be entertaining, as when she manoeuvers
tin-eared Kimmy into singing karaoke in a truly atrocious voice.The story
becomes increasingly phony, nonsensical and often verges on hysteria.
So-feminine Julianne is called Jules by her friends. It is a significant
detail. I am sure that the scriptwriter had His Girl Friday (1940) in mind.
That movie was a remake of The Front Page (1931), where two battling
Chicago newsmen were named respectively Walter Burns and Hildy Johnson. In
His Girl Friday Cary Grant plays editor Walter Burns and reporter Hildy
Johnson now becomes a woman (Rosalind Russell) and Walter's ex-wife. She's
currently engaged to Ralph Bellamy, whom Grant undermines and ridicules so
as to get Russell back, both as a star reporter and as his wife. There are
other parallels between MBFD and His Girl.
Julia Roberts is considered blessed by the tooth-fairy by many, and no
doubt beloved by dentists. She throws herself into her role body and soul,
but the script is incomplete about her character, and makes  her barefaced
tactics for the reconquest of Michael unappealing --even nasty.
Michael is namby-pamby, Kimmy is painfully immature, both lack personality,
both are credulous dim-bulbs and lambs too easily led to slaughter. Script
and performers seem to grope as to what might come next. There are hardly
any sparkling lines of dialogue, except for Rupert Everett's. Even then,
when he shows up in Chicago and tells a group that Jules went with so many
men "that she couldn't sit down for seven years," this indelicacy is out of
character for George. Still, far and away, the best part is when he poses
dashingly, convincingly and funnily as the fiance of Jules, and enchants
one and all.
The film becomes exponentially cynical, confused and incredible, including
many psychological as well as time-and-space impossibilities in the last
reel. The finale is a non-closure cop-out. The only touching scene is in a
corridor of the Drake Hotel, a quiet hiatus in which a passing bellman
called Richard gently tries to boost the morale of a despondent Julianne. I
think that the actor is Paul Giamatti.
That old movie subject --love-stricken people using strategies that will
lead to marriage-- is not very applicable today. In 1997 such romanticism
does not jibe with the rate of 54.8%  marriages ending in divorce. You
don't need statistics either to know how increasingly short-lived so many
marriages are. Julia Roberts and Lyle  Lovett were not an isolated case.
Sad but true,"'til death do us part" in movies has become a hard sell.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     In 1990, at the ripe old age of 22, Julia Roberts became a Movie
Star.  She didn't plan it that way -- you _can't_ plan it that way -- but
PRETTY WOMAN placed her in that rarefied stratum of film performers
audiences will come to see on the strength of their names.  The trade-off,
of course, was that they would want to see her in very specific
circumstances:  beautiful and in love (PRETTY WOMAN, SOMETHING TO TALK
ABOUT) or beautiful and in danger (SLEEPING WITH THE ENEMY, THE PELICAN
BRIEF).  For a couple of years, Roberts tried to fight for her right to be
a Serious Actress, taking less glamorous roles (MARY REILLY) or supporting
roles (MICHAEL COLLINS, EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU) for A-list directors,
but the audience made its voice heard:  "We want our Pretty Woman back."
     In MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING, Roberts concedes to being a Movie Star
once again.  With her hair long and curly and her smile out in full force,  
she plays Julianne Potter, a food critic as choosy about her men as she is
about her creme brulee.  One of her former lovers, Michael O'Neal (Dermot
Mulroney), is also her best friend and confidante, the closest thing
Julianne has to "one that got away."  And indeed he may be getting away
for good after calling to inform Julianne that he is getting married in
four days.  The impending nuptials spark Julianne to the realization that
she really wants Michael for herself, and that she's ready to break up the
happy couple to do it.  She isn't expecting to find that Michael's fiancee
Kimmy (Cameron Diaz) is "annoyingly perfect," making the task of snaring
Michael a genuine challenge.
     That premise sets the stage for some potentially outrageous comedy of
the "all's fair in love and war" variety, but Roberts never looks entirely
comfortable with being outrageous.  The interpretation of Movie Star-dom
adopted by Roberts, screenwriter Ronald Bass and director P. J. Hogan
(MURIEL'S WEDDING) involves never being anything less than likeable, never
doing anything which risks turning the audience against you.  They don't
understand that one of the perqs of being a Movie Star is that the
audience is always ready to be on your side.  It's no great revelation
that there are only two possible outcomes in MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING --
either Julianne will triumph over an out-classed opponent, or she'll learn
in important lesson and make a sacrifice.  In either case, we're ready to
be amused by her machinations before we get to that outcome; we greet
Julianne's announcement that Kimmy is "toast" with a chuckle of
anticipation, not a sigh of disapproval.
     The reason MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING isn't a better comedy, the reason
it meanders but rarely soars, is that Julianne's feeble efforts are about
as likely to toast Kimmy as a hot water bottle is to toast bread.  Bass's
script is guided by the idea that Julianne's hands should never get too
dirty.  She types up a phony email from Kimmy's father, but it is left to
someone else to send it (quite accidentally); she announces that her gay
friend George (Rupert Everett) is her fiancee to make Michael jealous,
then sits back while George plays the role to the hilt.  Roberts has some
wonderful reaction shots in MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING, but she reacts far
more than she acts.  In one of the film's most ironic lines, Julianne
apologizes to Michael for all the "awful and not even terribly imaginative
things" she has done.  Bass might have been better served coming up with
more imaginative things rather than apologizing for the ones he came up
with.
     Surprisingly, MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING is still fairly entertaining,
thanks to a few unexpected bursts of irreverence.  Director Hogan, who is
turning into a prime candidate to direct a musical some day, continues his
fascination with lip-synching to pop chestnuts, setting a slick opening
credits sequence to "Wishin' and Hopin'" and turning a rehearsal dinner
into an impromptu sing-along to "I Say a Little Prayer."  The latter scene
is a showcase for Rupert Everett, whose hilarious supporting work as 
George eliminates all fears of yet another "gay friend" character.  His
every moment on screen gives the film a jolt of comic energy, and proves
that it is possible to be both devilish and thoroughly appealing.  Julia
Roberts could have learned a few things by studying his performance.  If
this is what she feared about Movie Star roles -- that they would require
her merely to show up, smile and toss her hair -- she may have had good
reason to be concerned.  While MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING is pretty amusing,
Roberts' return to being a Pretty Woman is pretty ordinary.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     More gratuitous garbage-- ah, the joys of summer-- this one a re-
lentlessly cheery romantic comedy that entertains with as much reckless
abandon any of those bloated boy toys, such as SPEED 2 or CON AIR, only
with broader laughs and big, goofy grins in place of the bombs, bullets,
and other things that go boom in the night.  Julia Roberts-- remember
her?-- plays a neurotic restaurant critic who, for no apparent reason,
decides to sabotage the wedding of her best friend (Dermot Mulroney).
See, they made a pact, years ago, to marry if each was still single at
age 28.  So, on the very day that she recalls this fact, just like that,
out the blue, he calls, not to propose, but, rather, to tell of his
*own*, few-days-away wedding.  This drives her nuts and for reasons that
the film never bothers to explain.  Worse, the bride-to-be (Cameron
Diaz, playing a prep princess) just up and starts loving her on the
spot, putting Roberts' character in an increasingly uncomfortable,
increasingly jealous, and, heh, increasingly *advantageous* position.
(There's even a cat fight.  And in a ballpark restroom, no less!)
     With Ms. Roberts beaming brighter than she's been in any number of
years, a frothy supporting cast that doesn't frown much, either, a huge,
high-dollar wedding ceremony at the end, and enough overall sunshine to
blind any Batpatron unlucky enough to stumble into the wrong theater, MY
BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING is the perfect summer movie to laugh, coo, and get
all warm and fuzzy with.  Needless to say, I didn't buy a minute of it,
mostly because there's no core character motivation for Roberts' char-
acter.  Bam, she's racing to the airport, cigarette in hand and mayhem
on her mind.  (Do I recall a scene from the trailer, where Roberts is
rehearsing the reasons she can't get married, thinking that her friend
is calling to cash in on their pact?) Sure, she's funny, falling off
beds and knocking over dinner trays.  Sure, we feel her pain-of-the-
moment, though, really, what kind of best friend sabotages the other
one's wedding?  And then she pauses to flash that mega-watt smile and
everything is forgotten, except for how sore your bottom might be.  (Or,
as I noticed, how much her voice, over an answering machine, sounds like
Mary Tyler Moore's.)
     Director P.J. Hogan (MURIEL'S WEDDING), unafraid to try anything,
includes several musical numbers, ranging from the insipid (doo-wop
girls in wedding gowns over the opening credits) to the excruciatingly
insipid (an everybody-sings rendition of "I Say A Little Prayer," com-
plete with M. Emmet Walsh singing bass, if you can believe it.)  What
else helps pass the time?  Oh, there's the occasional oddball moment--
Roberts entering a plain-English Internet e-mail address, the actress
behind the wheel of a "borrowed" bread van, and her quiet moment with
PRIVATE PART's Pig Vomit, actor Paul Giamatti as a bellboy.  Let's
see... Cameron Diaz croaking karoke is a confirmed comic high point, as
is a fifteen-minute excursion into farce, when Roberts' character's
drop-dead dashing gay editor (Pierce Brosnan lookalike Rupert Everett)
pretends to be her fiance.  His attempt at public affection may well be
worth the price of admission.  Sorry about the hand.

Author
Steve Kong
My Best Friend's Wedding is the second romantic comedy that I've seen this
summer.  The other was Jennifer Aniston's Picture Perfect.  The difference
between these two summer of 1997 romantic comedies?  My Best Friend's
Wedding is a funny, witty, and touching film.
Julia Roberts, who also stars in this summer's Conspiracy Theory, is
Julianne Potter.  Julianne Potter is a food critic.  She is three weeks
away from her 28th birthday, and she remembers a crazy promise that she
made with her best friend (who was her previous boyfriend nine years ago).
If either of them did not get married by the time that they turned 28, they
would marry each other.  And that day Julianne gets a call from, whom else
but, her best friend, Michael O'Neal (Dermot Mulroney).  The call is not a
proposal, as she was expecting, but an invitation to his wedding.  It turns
out that Michael, the only love of her life for the last nine years, is
getting married to a 20 year old junior in college, Kimmy Wallace (the
stunning Cameron Diaz).  Kimmy is the daughter of the owner of the White
Sox and a cable network.  Now, Julianne has four days to sabotage the
wedding and win Michael back.
It's not too easy to guess how the movie is going to end, and this is
because of the well-written script by Ronald Bass (Dangerous Minds, Joy
Luck Club).  And although, it is sometimes hard to agree with what Julianne
is doing, we are always with her.  Director P.J. Hogan took every effort to
put Julia Roberts in every scene, and this is a really good thing because
Roberts is just luminous.
Julia Roberts gives a great performance as the crazed and desperate
Julianne.  She has great comic timing, and like always, lights up a scene
with her smile and her big eyes.  Cameron Diaz also gives a great
performance as Kimmy, the wonderfully perfect wife-to-be for Michael.  Her
look is different from The Mask or Feeling Minnesota, this time around it
is soft and innocent.  Dermot Mulroney, who was in CopyCat and The Trigger
Effect, gives a bland but good performance as the love interest of Julianne
and Kimmy.  But the show stealer, next to Roberts, would be Rupert Everett
as George, Julianne's gay editor.  Everett, who could have been a great
cast as Michael, gives a grand performance.  And it is his character that
seems to be the only sane character in the whole movie.
The opening credits were strange, to say the least, but they give a hint as
to some of the silliness that comes during the movie, and they work well in
that respect.  The movie score (James Newton Howard) is good, but somewhat
forgettable.  But, the music that is used during the film fits in very
well, and works to make the mood.
My Best Friend's Wedding is well deserved as this summer's sleeper hit.  It
is a funny, witty, and touching film that entertains throughout its two
hours.  Julia Roberts is wonderful as the crazed woman, and gives a much
better performance here than she did in Conspiracy Theory.  My Best
Friend's Wedding is definitely the date-movie of this summer.  Don't miss
this one in the theatres.

Author
Cat Stanton
P.J. Hogan, the director of MURIEL'S WEDDING, gives us yet another
forced and somewhat embarrassing flick, but this time it has some big
names behind it.  MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING is definitely a top
contender for the Puff Pastry award of summer movies.
This movie would have been much more enjoyable without all of the
bad, painfully staged singing numbers the audience is forced to
endure from the opening credits to the ending scene.  I've never
almost walked out on a movie before the opening credits stopped 
rolling, but because of a strong aversion to Pepto Bismol pink
sets and bad lip-synching, I nearly did in this movie.  I'm glad I
stayed. Well, sort of.
>From the nonsensical opening number, the movie jarringly cuts to
the chase, setting up the premise for the entire story with only
a dozen sentences.  Don't get in line for popcorn early, lest you
miss the whole background story.  But don't be fooled by the quick
setup, the movie comes to a standstill... right about the time you
get to the karaoke bar scene.
The premise is simple.  Julianne (Julia Roberts) is the slim
size 6 food critic.  How does she stay size six?  Well apparently
she does so by taking a single bite of her meal, reciting two words
to the server about what she's going to say about it in her write
up, and then recounting her neuroses to her editor instead of eating
the rest of her dinner.  Her career is merely a convenient set up
and isn't very believable.  Switch her creme brulee/jell-o metaphor
towards the end of the movie for Fifi the pedigreed poodle and
Benji the lovable mutt, and she could have been a dog trainer.
But I digress.  Julianne the food critic has spent the last nine
years in troublesome relationships after breaking up with Michael
(Dermot Mulroney), who has become her best friend since their
romance.  Long ago in Arizona they made a pact that they would
marry each other if they were still alone at 28.  When Michael
calls her, she's certain he wants to marry her finally, right up
until she finds out he's going to marry another woman in four days.
Julianne drops everything, flies to Chicago, and hilarity ensues.
Well, that's what we'd hoped for.  More accurately, a mild undercurrent
of amusement peppered with some painfully embarrassing scenes
ensues.
In Chicago, we meet Michael's fiancee Kimmy (Cameron Diaz).  Kimmy
is "annoyingly perfect" (as Julianne often says in the film).  In
short, Kimmy is an astonishingly beautiful, although sometimes
slightly psychotic looking, rich doormat with bad driving habits.
>From the start, Julianne sets out to destroy the relationship.  In
doing so, however, I found her character became confused and muddled.
She wasn't exactly likeable, yet she wasn't the woman you'd love
to hate either.  She was the most ineffectual protagonist I've seen
in a long time. She didn't seem to have any chemistry with Michael
either, so I wasn't really rooting for her cause.
In one telltale scene, she tries to convince Kimmy that Michael's
job isn't what's best for the marriage, since it requires he move
around constantly and Kimmy will have to give up a college degree and
a stable career to follow him.  She was all but telling Kimmy flat
out, "Hey you shouldn't cater to his every whim, have him think of
your life once in awhile" but when Kimmy politely brought up having
him work for her father, his outburst was immediate and hurtful.
Michael's character was lukewarm and Mulroney's scenes consisted
mostly of dumb stares with his mouth half open.  Admittedly, these
were usually during the singing portions of the movie, where most of us
were staring dumbfounded at the screen waiting for the plot to
start back up.  But how can you care who gets the guy when in fact,
you're hoping neither of them ends up with a loser like him?  A
love triangle does not work when the crux of the triangle is dull
and unlikeable.
There were some bright spots in this film, believe it or not.
First and foremost, we got to see another side to Julia Roberts.
She does an excellent job inserting physical humor into the story
as the slightly klutzy Julianne.  Her timing really hit the mark
and her best chemistry was with the gay character in the film, her
"local" best friend and editor, George (Rupert Everett).
George was my favorite character, by far.  It's a shame he shows
up all too rarely in the film.  Sympathetic, classy and honest, he
actually upstaged most of the top-billed actors.  His friendship
with Julianne is evident and the only believable relationship in
the movie.  Everett did an excellent job with his script and
mannerisms.
MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING has a lot more misses than hits, and while
it was labelled a "chick flick" by my boyfriend, I found it quite
painful and dull to watch myself.
**   - Rent just in case you get bored doing housework.

Author
Dan Kim
This being my first ever written movie review, I thought it would be
appropriate that I start of with a review that gave me the greatest
theatrical enjoyment in my favorite genre of films this year. Please
feel free to comment on my style of critique; whether or not you think
Siskel and Ebert should be sacrificed in my honor or if you feel that
you should get a new phone cord for ever letting such a vile piece of
literature flow through your modem. Enjoy ;)
This movie caught my attention from the first time I saw the trailer.
Why? Anyone who's ever seen a few romantic comedies will at one point
or another talk about a point in a movie that either touched them
deeply, could really relate to, or have been through a similar
experience and was the cause for loving or hating the movie. On an
admittedly personal note, "My Best Friend's Wedding" did the exactly
that for me; and that was just the trailer. Having seen the trailer a
few more times, plus viewing some commercial, and seeing Julia Roberts
back in the type of part that made her famous, plus seeing who was in
the cast, I had high expectations for the movie.
The opening credit features a silly-but-cute-so-therefore-enjoyable
choreograph of dancing a bride and bridesmaids. They're dressed in the
picture- wedding attire but dance around with a rather mischievous look
on each of their faces. The movie itself starts off with the Julianne
Potter (played by a glowing Julia Roberts) doing what she does for a
living, reviewing restaurants. It is there she tells her friend George
(lovable lug Rupert Everett) about her best friend Michael, who has
left a phone call sounding "desperate" telling Jules "we have to talk".
Apparently they shared a brief but heated relationship which ended with
him making Julianne commit to a pact that should they still be unwed by
the time they reach 28, they'll marry each other. And they've been the
best of friends ever since. George points out to Julianne, whom
everyone calls "Jules", that she'll be turning 28 in 3 weeks.
Apparently Jules has a problem with dating in that her view of
relationships is akin to that of an attention-deficient child during a
math lecture. She has better luck keeping guys around as just friends,
and as her claims with Michael, even best friends. She doesn't realize
until he's unavailable that she granted her belief that Michael had
always have a romantic interest in her. Jules finds out about his
engagement after finally talking to him on the phone and while the
whole time assuming he wants to propose, he drops a revelation that
literally knocks her off her feet. Now she has four days to "break up
the wedding, steal the groom", and she has no idea how. By the books
this movie is not.
The focus of Jules' obsession is sportswriter/best friend Michael
O'Neal (expertly played by the handsome Dermont Mulrony). The fiancee
is the sweet, young Kimmy Wallace play by Cameron Diaz who
incidentally, improves her acting abilities with every role and is
hereleaps-and- bounds beyond anything she's done before. More on that
later.
Though Julia Roberts is the star of the movie, her co-stars are
affectively an integral part of the movie. Scene stealer Rupert Everett
is at his best when he flies to Chicago to comfort the self-pitying
Jules and unwillingly becomes her new fiancee. His attempts at being a
gay man who embarrasses Jules by playing her testosterony-yet-loveable
fiancee flying over for a "pre-conjugal" visit are both effective and
hilarious. Comic mayhem ensues during a meal at a seafood restaurant
where he turns the movie into a mini-musical by leading the family and
eventually the entire restaurant in a lively rendition of "I Say a
Little Prayer".
Credit also goes to Rachel Griffiths and Carrie Preston who play
Samantha and Amanda, Kimmy's two perky, nymphomaniacal bridesmaids.
Their parts are brief but the screen time they share are funny. the
funniest being a scene of an ice sculpture shown in a manner not quite
scene before.
Hats off to Aussie P.J. hogan who does an effective job of keeping the
film lively and entertaining even at parts where it starts to run a
little thin. His willingness to try the unconventional and an uncanny
ability to filter out needless sentiment keeps the movie gleeful and
enjoyably lacking in pretense.
Mulroney is effective if boring as the nice but confused groom to be.
Diaz throws her body and soul into her role as the rich but unspoiled
and highly energetic bride. Keep an eye on her face, not because it's
nice to look at (well, ok that too), but her newfound acting skills
allows her to act in some parts without saying a word. The perfect
example is where Jules takes Michael and Kimmy to a karaoke club, know
quite well that Kimmy is frightened to death of karaoke. Diaz's
expressions of fear is evident from the moment she first walks in and
you can't help but feel sorry for her while at the same time think Jules
as incredibly mean for putting her up to this. I found myself almost
singing along as if trying to help her get through the song and though
most people won't get drawn quite this way, most will be rooting for her
to do well. Diaz is here head and shoulders above her lacking
performance in "She's the One" and anything else she's done.
One thing lacking where you'd except to find is chemistry between the
two main stars. Mulroney and Roberts is believable as best friends, but
the chemistry between him and Diaz is lukewarm at best. Here again
Everett steals the movie by meshing well with Roberts as the friend
trying to help a friend in need and also a sane voice of reason to
Robert's mild "psychotic jealousy". Even the scenes where the two of
them converse over the phone involve lively and meaningful dialogue.
I've heard critics say the movie isn't worth watching due to their
inability to believe that a boy and a girl can still be best friends
after a breakup or that the pact in itself was preposterous. As the
voice of experience, I can say with confidence that it can happen. This
isn't the first movie involving a pact between two friends. "If Lucy
Fell" if you remember (you probably won't) involved a couple saying that
if both of them were still single when they turned 30, they'd jump off
the Brooklyn Bridge. "My Best Friend's Wedding" succeeds where "Lucy"
fell (pun intended), least of which the terms of the pact is not nearly
as morbid. "Wedding" has a lot going for it with Hogan's expert
directing, Robert's bright smile returning to form in what his probably
her best type of role, and the believable and entertaining performance
of her costars. At the end of the movie, Jules won't be the 
only with an ear-to-ear grin.

Author
Homer Yen
Julia Roberts plays a confident and driven woman named Julianne.  As a   
food critic, she is very busy, independent, and too rapt up in her   
ambitions for love.  At dinner with another friend, George (Rupert   
Everett), she reminisces about her best friend, Michael (Dermot   
Mulroney).  He is someone who she had loved but dumped in college.  Now,   
she and Michael are best friends.  They've shared the most intimate   
stories, they've trekked through life's worst woes, and they've even made   
a blood pact.  When Julianne turns 28, if neither of them has gotten   
married, then they will marry each other.
Of course, it is just a few weeks before her 28th birthday, and Michael   
has left a message on her answering machine for her to call him.  Could   
this be the moment when she faces the consequences of her pact?  She   
doesn't know what to think, but when she finally calls him back,   
partially expecting a proposal, he gives her some news that literally   
floors her.  He's calling to explain he's engaged to be married in three   
days.  Her heart has been squashed.  She now realizes that Michael is no   
longer her best friend, but the man that she truly loves.
She flies to Chicago to meet up with Michael.  But secretly, she will try   
to do whatever she can to separate the two and take him back.  Her task   
is formidable.  His fiancee is Kim Wallace (Cameron Diaz).  She is sweet   
as pie, smooth as vanilla and her father is a tycoon.  What we get is a   
sequence of episodes where Roberts craftily tries to create a rift, but   
somehow the plan always backfires.  But, she deserves to be with   
Michaelor does she?
As a whole, this is a semi-sweet movie about friendships and hidden   
feelings and trying to cross that boundary when it may be too late.  And   
it was nice to take a break from all those   
smash-em-up/crash-em-up/shoot-em-up films.  However, the movie seems to   
be undecided as to its dedication towards Julianne's quest for her man or   
Michael's love for Kim. There wasn't too much romantic tension among any   
of the three.  Also, when our sympathies begin to shift, the movie loses   
its direction.  Further, Michael doesn't seem to have an ounce of   
chemistry with either woman, so the story tends to drag as it looks for   
some kind of burst of energy.  Fortunately, we get an antidote of playful   
wisdom from George, who is Julianne's boss.  He is gay and steals his   
scenes with deft comic charm.  More than just a co-conspirator for   
Julianne, he provides moments of levity and good transition as the movie   
tries to navigate through this three-day story.  But when he's not there,   
the movie begins to drift.
Yet, it's nice to welcome back Julia Roberts who recently endured roles   
for which no one cared (Michael Collins and Mary Reilly).  Romantic   
vehicles are where she excels, and she delivers a charismatically   
luminescent performance in MBFW.  Rupert Everett is also a joy to watch   
and adds an unexpected comical dimension as Julianne's boss and soul   
mate.  This movie would have been a lot stronger if it focused more on   
these two.  The interplay between Michael and Kim is quite dull.  The   
interplay between Michael and Julianne was only mildly interesting (and   
just between you and me, I would have preferred one of the cast of   
FRIENDS - maybe Chandler or Joey - play Michael.  At least, the   
relationship would have been more interesting if not funnier).   
 Fortunately, Julianne and George are instrumental in the film's closing   
scenes, and thus helps to lift MBFW from a boring wedding to one with a   
couple of moments worth savoring.  Still, there are better affairs of   
which to be a part.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "I've got 4 days to break up a wedding, steal a bridegroom, and I
have no idea how to do it," laments the gorgeous protagonist, Julianne
Potter.
     Nine years ago she and her "best friend" Michael O'Neal made a
pact that, if they were not married by the age of 28, they would marry
each other.  It is three weeks until bachelor Michael's 28th birthday
when he calls Julianne to invite her to his wedding.  In just four
days, he and Kimmy Wallace will be hitched.  This starts Julianne
planning diabolical schemes to come between Michael and Kimmy.
     I have not met anyone who has seen Australian director P. J.
Hogan's MURIEL'S WEDDING who did not fall in love with the quirky story
of the dateless girl from Porpoise Spit.  For his second theatrical
film, Hogan has been bankrolled by Hollywood and given a big name,
Julia Roberts, for the leading part of Julianne.  The resulting film,
MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING, becomes more of a star vehicle for Roberts
than the second film of a talented director.  Although there are many
laughs, this frustrating movie has more missed opportunities than
realized ones.
     Ronald Bass's script has promise, but not with Julia Roberts as
the lead.  Her ever sweet persona covers over what should be a
character with some hard edges.  Her actions are never credible, and
the script seems to be trying to gloss over any evil intentions on her
part.  Even the chemistry between herself and her putative boyfriend
has little oomph.
     Julianne's would-be husband Michael is played by Dermot Mulroney
(KANSAS CITY).  Mulroney's failing is that he is an extremely bland
actor.  In MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING, he plays a bland character, and
the result is, well, bland, which does not make for particularly
exciting viewing.
     The actress with the most promise is Cameron Diaz as the
"annoyingly perfect" Kimmy, the innocent, blond and blue-eyed,
twenty-year-old daughter of a billionaire.  Diaz is sadly miscast.  As
her brilliant and biting work in THE LAST SUPPER shows, she would have
made a perfect Julianne.  Granted, this would have decreased box office
revenue, but it would have also decreased cost so the profit might be
the same.  On the other hand, Roberts could not have played Kimmy, but
I suspect Hollywood could have found a truly brainless blonde for the
role.
     In the story, Kimmy embraces Julianne immediately.  As soon as
Kimmy sees her, she calls her "sister" and tells her, "I have 4 days to
make you my new best friend."
     To counteract Michael's white bread personality, his two would-be
wives talk about his alleged faults.  Besides smoking cigars in bed,
"he sips soup through his teeth, but he sure can kiss," claims Kimmy.
     Typical of the horrific terrors that Julianne inflicts on Kimmy is
tricking her to sing at Michael's favorite karoake bar.  Kimmy sings so
badly that she is an instant hit with the karoake audience.  Most of
Julianne's other tricks similarly go awry.
     The best performance is turned in by Rupert Everett (CEMETERY MAN)
as Julianne's editor and friend George Downes.  When I tell you that
George is gay but will fake being Julianne's fiancee, you will probably
shrug your shoulders and say that you've seen that too many time
lately.  Everett takes this potentially cliched part and turns it into
one both strong and funny.  The relationship between Julianne and
George as good friends is the best and only genuine one in the picture.
("The misery, the exquisite Rita Hayworth tragedy of it all," is how
George describes poor Julianne's predicament.)
     The best parts of the show are the musical numbers.  The opening
credits have one and another occurs during a big pre-wedding banquet.
Both are simply hilarious and reminiscent of MURIEL'S WEDDING.
     MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING works best when Roberts is not on center
stage.  Small characters like the "sluts," Samantha (Rachel Griffiths)
and Amanda (Carrie Preston), provide the biggest laughs.  If Diaz had
just been given the lead, this could have been an excellent second
release for the director.  But she wasn't.
     MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING runs 1:45.  It is rated PG-13 for one use
of the F-word.  The "nudity" is basically confined to Julia Roberts
showing off her belly button in almost every outfit.  The film would be
fine for kids around ten and up.  In a very close call, I am giving the
film thumbs up and ** 1/2 for everyone but Roberts and Mulroney, whom I
wish were never cast for their parts.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ben Hoffman
The story, an original screenplay by Ronald Bass, is plausible
enough;  the acting by the principals in this romantic farce is so
good the film does not appear to be contrived.   Julianne (Julia
Roberts at her best) split with her lover Michael (Dermot Mulroney,
handsome and sincere) some nine years ago but remained "best
friends" . . . something I have never been able to believe likely in
relationships.  Once you are lovers, you cannot go back to being
just "friends."   At least in my non-professional opinion.
That is not the point, though, is it?   In this film, that is what
happened, at least in the beginning.   Now, Julia hears that Michael
has found himself someone he loves, Kimmy (Cameron Diaz) and that he
is about to get married. Julia,  very disturbed by that news because suddenly in danger of losing him she realizes she is still in love with him.    What is a girl to do but fly to Chicago,    a few days before the wedding,  to the scheduled nuptials and
UNschedule it. No doubt in Julia's mind that turning on some of her
seductiveness which never before has failed her will make Michael
realize what he will be missing if he were to marry this new person.
Arriving in the city she gets in touch with Michael, ready to turn
on all her charm.  He introduces her to Kimmy . . . and Julia is
quickly made aware that this will not be as easy as she thought.
Kimmy is very pretty, very warm and friendly, and educated.  Only
some dirty work by Julia can possibly derail the impending marriage.
It is at this point the film begins to lose some of its impetus and
believability.    it also becomes pretty obvious whom Michael will
end up marrying.
Supporting actors include Rupert Everett, Philip Bosco, Rachel
Griffiths, M Emmet Walsh, Carrie Preston and Susan Sullivan.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Julia Roberts, Dermot Mulroney, Cameron Diaz, Rupert Everett, 
      Philip Bosco, M. Emmet Walsh, Carrie Preston, Rachel Griffiths
Director: P.J. Hogan
Producers: Ronald Bass and Jerry Zucker
Screenplay: Ronald Bass
Cinematography: Laszlo Kovacs
Music: James Newton Howard
U.S. Distributor: TriStar Pictures
     MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING is the estrogen alternative to the vast 
quantity of testosterone being pumped out by the other major June 
releases:  CON AIR, SPEED 2, BATMAN AND ROBIN, and FACE/OFF.  As the 
summer's centerpiece romantic comedy, MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING boasts a 
pair of A-line actresses, Julia Roberts and Cameron Diaz, dueling for 
the affections of the unprepossessing Dermot Mulroney (the guy from 
COPYCAT and THE TRIGGER EFFECT, who is frequently confused with the 
equally low-key and same-initialed Dylan McDermott).  Fortunately, this 
film doesn't fall into the overcrowded category of the traditional 
frothy romance.  In fact, MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING has a bit of an edge 
and enough intelligence to keep it from drowning in the kind of mawkish 
sentimentality that often makes this sort of movie hard-to-swallow.  
     Australian director P.J. Hogan must have a thing for movies about 
weddings.  His previous feature, MURIEL'S WEDDING, was a black comedy 
about a young woman who loves ABBA songs and dreams about getting 
married.  And, although Hogan accepted a studio project as his followup 
to the international hit, he chose something in keeping with his desire 
to corrupt the formula.  While this movie isn't as offbeat or "out 
there", it defies more than a few expectations without ultimately 
dissatisfying the audience.
     As in any romantic comedy, the two most important elements are in 
place:  the couples and the complications.  Couple #1 consists of the 
soon-to-be married groom, Michael O'Neal (Mulroney) and his perky bride, 
Kimmy (Diaz).  Couple #2 comprises food critic Julianne Potter (Roberts) 
and her gay editor, George Downes (Rupert Everett).  They're not really 
together, but they pretend to be to make Michael jealous.  Because, for 
the past nine years, since they had a one-month fling in college, 
Julianne has carried a torch for Michael.  They've been best friends, 
but only now, when she's about to lose him to another woman, does 
Julianne realize that she wants to be the bride.  And, to get her man, 
she's willing to do almost anything, including play dirty.  So, when 
Kimmy opens her arms to Julianne and offers her the position of maid of 
honor, Julianne accepts, all the while plotting the best way to break up 
the happy couple. 
     Because MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING features a smart script and deft 
direction, it manages to keep alive the mystery of who will end up with 
whom.  Things aren't as clear-cut as they initially seem to be, and, 
with every passing minute, they get murkier.  The film has a high energy 
level and features a number of standout scenes, some of which are 
designed to cull laughter from the audience, others which go for the 
tearducts.  The best is arguably a restaurant episode where an impromptu 
sing-along gets everyone in the place to join in.  It's clever, 
irreverent, and fun.
     MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING starts off slowly, and it takes the better 
part of a half-hour before we first start getting a feel for the 
characters.  Mulroney's Michael is an especially difficult case -- at 
first, there doesn't seem to be much there (which begs the question of 
how he managed to get two beautiful women to fall head-over-heels in 
love with him).  The actor plays his role in a low-key fashion that's an 
asset late in the film, but not at the beginning.  Cameron Diaz turns up 
the good cheer and high spirits to an almost-unbearably lively level.  
And Julia Roberts, returning to the genre that made her a star, embraces 
the part like it's a homecoming.  Her performance as Julianne is 
competent and comfortable, but the ingenue of PRETTY WOMAN has been 
replaced a more mature performer, and this results in a better-rounded 
character.  Supporting players include a scene-stealing Rupert Everett 
(the CEMETERY MAN himself), Rachel Griffiths (who appeared as the title 
character's best friend in MURIEL'S WEDDING), and M. Emmett Walsh as 
someone who's not the least bit creepy (for once).  
     Although MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING is intended to be relatively 
light entertainment, it briefly addresses some interesting, serious 
issues regarding the nature of friendship, jealousy, and love (real and 
idealized).  There's a wonderfully evocative scene that suggests "a 
moment passing by," which will undoubtedly cause a portion of the 
audience to reflect on similar occasions in their own lives.  In the 
final analysis, MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING represents two hours of fine 
entertainment not because it offers a feel-good love story but because 
the film makers understand that it's possible for a romantic comedy to 
appeal not only to the heart, but to the mind as well.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
