Title
Review for Boys, The (1997/I)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dennis Schwartz

BOYS, THE (director: Rowan Woods; screeenwriter: Stephen Sewell/from a
play by Gordon Graham; cinematographer: Tristan Milani; editor: Nick
Meyers; cast: David Wenham (Brett Sprague), Toni Collette (Michelle),
Lynette Curran (Sandra Sprague), John Polson (Glenn Sprague), Jeanette
Cronin (Jackie), Anthony Hayes (Stevie Sprague), Anna Lise (Nola), Pete
Smith (George/Abo); Runtime: 85; 1997-Australia/UK)
A slow-motion film set in the poor working-class suburbs of Sydney,
about a white trash family and the violence among the three brothers
that takes place during one day. "The Boys," directed by Rowan Woods,
builds up in tension through the bitterness and violence manifested by
the brothers, who bait each other and mask inside them a deep resentment
for their failures, taking it out on the women they are in contact with.
It culminates in a vicious rape and murder of a young woman. This film
is all style and is non-judgmental in its observations, adding nothing
more of subtance to the story than the inertia that is depicted.
Brett Sprague (Wenham), the film's protagonist, gets an early parole
from prison after doing a year for assault with a deadly weapon. He
brings his perplexed mother (Curran) a coffee table he made in prison
and berates his family for not visiting him. His mother can only stare
at the table and can't even thank him for this gesture. Brett is an
angry young man, who bitterly tells his brothers that it is either them
or us in this world, therefore it is better to get them before they get
you. The boys indulge themselves with beer and drugs, and sit around the
house without any constructive plans to help themselves improve their
situation.
There is violence everywhere in this stupid household. It starts with
the brothers bullying each other for authority in the family, as Brett
asserts his leadership. Then the violence is carried over with their
other relationships. Michelle (Collette) is waiting anxiously for Brett
to seduce her, but he toys with her, turning her attempt at affection
into a battle. She accuses him of getting it from behind in prison and
now is not able to perform. This expectedly brings about a beating from
Brett and her total rejection of him.
Stevie (Hayes) has made a timid girl called Nola (Lise) pregnant and
treats her with utter contempt, so much so that she tells the boys'
mother she would rather move out of the house and live homeless in a bus
terminal than stay with a monster like Stevie.
Glenn (Polson) is seeing a girl with upward aspirations, Jackie
(Cronin). She encourages him to get an entry level minimum wage job,
which he gets a ribbing from his brothers when he gets such a job. But
this is not enough, as Jackie puts her foot down further and tells him
her family says that she is too good for him, that she will stay with
him only if he doesn't see his brothers anymore. He says he can't live
without his brothers. When she leaves him, he feels as if the air has
been sucked out of him.
The weak-spirited mother, who doesn't have a clue of how to handle the
boys, is living with her new live-in boyfriend, a half-Aboriginal,
George (Smith). When he comes to her aid after she is being berated by
Brett, he ends up getting bashed over the head, as the boys show the
disdain they have for him.
The film had realistic performances from its leads and had a gritty look
to it. But the story flattened out and with violence being the loudest
emotion expressed by anyone in this loser's family, the story
predictably ends on a very violent note. It is hard to explain Brett as
being anything else but a psychopath, and to blame his mother and hold
her totally responsible for the families' demise, as was implied, is not
very fair. The film makes no comments about the conditions of a society
that helped bring about such anti-social behavior and what circumstances
kept the family incapicitated.
This first feature by Woods, based on a work that was presented on
stage, had its powerful moments, making a strong case about how male
insecurity and violence are so closely linked. But the film couldn't get
further into its subjects than to expose the boys' surface wounds and
their bleak story about their frustrations to deal with life, as the
story just went nowhere but down a predictable violent path. It left the
implication that society better be prepared to build more jails or else,
implying that there is no way to help a family that won't even lift a
finger to help itself.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
David Sidwell
Producers: Robert Connolly, Douglas Cummins, John Maynard, David Wenham        
Writers: Gordon Graham  (play),  Stephen Sewell
This is a disturbing and riveting movie. It opens with Brett Sprague
(Wenham) being released from jail and is picked up by one of his brothers,
Stevie (Hayes).  It's not long before we find out that Brett  is  the
alpha-male of this little pack. 
Almost immediately we leap forward in time 18 hours. Hints abound that
something bad, very bad, has happened. Police radios crackle.  Brett and
his two brothers have been arrested.  A brief glimpse of something
unspeakable.
Then, just as quickly,  we fade back to the 'present' as Brett arrives home
to the domestic non-bliss of his mother's house. The characters are
introduced: Brett's other brother Glenn (Polson), Brett's girlfriend,
Michelle (Collette). His mum Sandra (Curren, the wonderful Betty in
"Bliss"). Stevie's little girl lost (and pregnant and unloved) 'girlfriend'
Nola. Tensions are building up inside the house.  Brett seems to have a
tranquil venom about him - calm on the surface, but the snake is in their.
What is disturbing is that we - as viewers - know from almost the opening
credits that something terrible is going to happen. We are shown the
aftermath in assorted flash-forwards: Brett burning clothes in the back
yard, Brett and brothers in jail etc. 
These hints are interleaved with the story of the day of Brett's return
home. We see a family in trouble. The brothers just laze around, drinking
beer and seeing who is the biggest loser. Nola talks about escaping this
slow motion prison. Michelle taunts Brett. Brett taunts and accuses
everybody.  And poor Mum tries to hold it all together by cooking up a nice
Welcome Home dinner.
The intensity builds up as we flip back between the 'now' and even further
forward in time (sentencing, trial). But the audience is never told -
during these future bites - who the victim was or even what the crime was.
Is it the poor, sweet mother? The moping Nola?  The defiant Michelle?  The
man who put Brett in jail in the first place?  The 'now' story leaves
enough threads open so that it could be any of them. It is inevitable, this
evil. And there is nothing we can do but sit there in the dark cinema and
wait for it.
Wenham is outstanding in the lead role. His Brett has a quiet, brewing
evilness such that he dominates nearly every scene he is in.  Most of the
film takes place inside the house, indeed the film is based upon a play.
There is virtually no music on the soundtrack. 
The performance of David Wenham alone makes this film worth seeing. Add in
very good supporting roles, direction, editing, production and scriptand
the mix is distressing and challenging. At a running time of a crisp 82
minutes, your time won't be wasted. 4.5 out of 5.
(The film seems to have had a 2nd wind here. Wenham is enjoying the lead
role in a hugely successful TV series "Sea Change", which started on TV
after "The Boys" had been released.  I first saw "The Boys" about 2 months
ago. I saw it again today and there were a lot more people in the audience
this time around.  In " Sea Change" Wenham shows his versatility by playing
 very much an anti-Brett role: the romantic lead - a gentle, kind, good
bloke. Hopefully both will hit your shores soon)
dsidwell@connexus.apana.org.au   or   dsidwell@myemail.com.au
http://connexus.apana.org.au/~dsidwell

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Stratosphere Entertainment
 Director: Rowan Woods
 Writer:   Gordon Graham (play), Stephen Sewell
 Cast: David Wenham, Toni Collette, Lynette Curran, John
Polson, Anthony Hayes, Jeanette Cronin, Anna Lise, Pete
Smith
   One of the best ways a director has of creating tension is
subtly to give the audience the uncomfortable feeling that
something is about to happen.  In horror movies, the
convention calls for creating a series of false moves, of
positioning a look at a threatening arm or the sound of a
creaking door only to resolve the tension with a harmless
gesture.  "The Boys," billed by one writer as "a thinking man's
horror film," does not display the bait and switch technique of
conventional tales of the genre.  Instead, Stephen Sewell's
script, based on a successful play written by Gordon Graham,
is a psychological study of a dysfunctional family with only a
modicum of physical violence but one which seeks to give the
audience a feeling of tautness.  We spend a good deal of
time in our seats wondering when the lead male will explode
and what effect he will have on his brothers, his mother, and
the women in this household in a working-class district of
West Sydney, Australia.
   The characters speak with heavy Australian accents, giving
the marketers a primary target in their own country but
making us wonder whether it can travel the long distance to
rivet an audience in the U.S. or most other English-speaking
countries.  The most prominent flaw is that despite some
fancy camerawork (especially considering its limited budget
and five-week screening time), its origin as a staged play is
obvious.  The stage is the best place for a largely enclosed
story, one which centers on a single household with outside
scenes filmed in more or less a contrived way to open the
narrative cinematically.  Though we see vistas of a prison, a
convenience store, and some of Sydney's less fashionable
streets, "The Boys" is not suited for the big screen.  Director
Rowan Woods has, however, assembled a fine group of
performers, with Toni Collette (from "Muriel's Wedding") the
one most likely to be recognized by an American audience.
   Essentially the picture is about Brett Sprague (David
Wenham), one of three layabout brothers, who has just
emerged from a one-year sentence in prison for assault with
a deadly weapon.  His sibs had not visited him during that
time and now he is fuming with rage and their disregard for
him. That's not all.  He is certain that his brother ripped off a
cache of drugs, is annoyed that his youngest brother Stevie
(Anthony Hayes) has moved into his bedroom with his
pregnant, waif-like girlfriend Nola (Anna Lisse), and disgusted
that his middle brother Glenn (John Polson) has married a
woman he dislikes (Jeanette Cronin).  Strangely indifferent
toward restoring his relationship with his lusty girl friend
Michelle (Toni Collette), he moves to re-establish himself as
the alpha male of the family.  How he manipulates those
around him, eventually driving away the women--including
Michelle, who in one unfortunate incident is undiplomatic
enough to challenge her man's virility--is the principal aim of
the film.
   Looking at the family from the point of view of the mother,
Sandra (Lynette Curran), could give anyone pause before
deciding to have children at all.  Contemptuous of her
husband who had given her virtually nothing during their brief
marriage, she is perpetually on edge trying to provide for a
bunch of beer-drinking slackers and the women friends who
are either living in the house or hanging about it.  As the
boys drive about the locale, they contemplate crimes while
Rowan Woods's hand-held and tripod cameras move forward
and backward in time to give the audience a non-narrative
perspective on these essentially bad boys.  
   Those moviegoers who raved about "The Blair Witch
Project" might just buy into "The Boys."  After all, the
emphasis is on the tension, not the actual displays of
violence.  We wonder what is going to happen next.  We
might feel great sympathy for a harried mother who must feel
from time to time like Medea.  Perhaps Woods should be
applauded for using techniques so box-office effective with
the "Blair" team, but "The Boys" still comes across as a static
work unsuited for a medium larger than the stage and one
requiring subtitles for all but an Australian audience.
