Title
Review for Khrustalyov, mashinu! (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Director:  Aleksei Guerman
 Writer:  Svetlana Karmalita, Aleksei Guerman
 Cast: Yuro Tsourilo, Nina Rouslanova, Yuri Yarvet, Michael
Dementiev, A. Bachirov
   Just before a press screening began for this Russian
hodgepodge, the director, Aleksei Guerman, discussed it in
Russian.  His message was translated by a woman at his
side, a translation that drew laughs from the audience of
critics precisely because of her competence in furnishing the
helmer's mood.  In a talk that could have been designed by
Woody Allen, he related the many times that the film was
shelved, adding that each time it was screened the audience
tended to walk out.  His conversation could have been taken
as cute, self-deprecatory behavior but he was so on the mark
that one suspects he was plain embarrassed by the ineptness
of the work and was seeking to distance himself from it. 
Purportedly a satire on the grim situation in the Soviet Union
during Stalin's last year in office (1953), "Khroustaliov, My
Car!" is, as New York Times critic Stephen Holden states,
"virtually indecipherable."  He's being kind: "virtually" does not
belong in that sentence.
   Guerman depicts a Russian landscape with perpetual
darkness and snow, a gulag-like nightmare so bleak that
you'd think Stalin himself ordered the weather.  In the story's
beginning a man approaches his car, is dragged away by two
men just before he opens the door, and is imprisoned in a
closet-like box in the snow.  The scene is anything but
naturalistic, and that's OK, but the absurdist vision which
follows is so incomprehensible that even a course in
advanced semiotics would not help the viewer.
   "Khroustaliov" focuses on a Red Army general, Yuri Ginshi
(Yuri Tsourilo), a bald, mustached creep who is so obnoxious
you've got to wonder how he was able to attract even his
dour, disagreeable mistress.  When he is at home with his
family, he watches as the folks run around helter skelter for
no apparent reason, all howling irrationally.  (If members of
the audience behaved like that at a screening of the film, they
could not be said to be irrational.)  While he is surrounded by
bootlickers of all stripes, Yuri is ultimately arrested and sent to
the gulag during an anti-Semitic purge, where he is attacked
by his captors and anally raped.
   While Yuri undergoes considerable torment before he is
recalled to treat the ailing Stalin, nothing about the film
succeeds in vilifying the infamous dictator who is responsible
for ordering the execution of more of his own people than
Hitler liquidated en toto.  Any member of the audience who
can sit through this 137 minute disaster should be awarded
the Order of Lenin.
