Title
Review for Nico Icon (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Lax Madapati
Cast: None credited
Director: Susanne Ofteringer
Screenplay: Susanne Ofteringer
Cinematography: Judith Kaufmann, Katarzyna Remin
Music: Jens Tukiendorf, Charles Blackwell
        Nico Icon, through a series of interviews and original footage, 
attempts to portray the story of a multi-faceted woman Nico who was a member 
of the '60s rock band 'The Velvet Underground'. A refugee from Germany born 
Christa Paffgen during World War II, Nico was also a fashion model, a reclusive
beauty, a feckless mother and a reckless junkie. Or so, the director Susanne 
Ofteringer wants us to believe, at the end of it all.
        The film, or rather documentary, starts off with Nico singing the
Velvet Underground's 'Femme Fatale' in a very lugubrious tone and alternates 
between clips of original footage and interviews with several people associated
with Nico at various stages of her life. What is surprising is the number of 
famous people Nico has associated herself with, right from her modeling days 
upto her ultimate obscure demise, veering on a path of self-destruction, self-
inflicted and substance abuse.
        In between clips of original footage, we get to hear different view 
points of the many people Nico's path in life crossed with. Most of them seem
to agree that the beauty that she is, Nico resented her own good looks and
would much rather be depressed and gloomy and be known as a musician rather
than just a beautiful woman. Jackson Browne, the rock musician and one of 
Nico's many lovers (who also contributed to her first solo album 'Chelsea 
Girl')  explains about her initiation into The Velvet Underground. Paul 
Morrisey, director of most of Andy Warhol movies and who was responsible for 
putting Nico with The Velvet Underground as a second singer and organ player 
via Andy Warhol, amid strong initial resistance from band members Lou Reed and 
company, tells how Nico deliberately spoilt her looks by dying her hair with 
strange colors and taking drugs. Danny Fields, music journalist, explains her 
association  with rock legend Jim Morrison and how she enjoyed Morrison's 
alleged attempt to kill her once during a sex ritual. 
        Most touching of all accounts on Nico is the one narrated by Edith 
Boulonge, mother of one of Nico's many lovers Alian Delon, by who Nico begot
a child Ari. Edith tells how after Alian discovered that Nico was pregnant and
disowned her child, asked Edith to choose between her son Alian and Nico's
child Ari. Edith chose to take care of the child Ari and justifies it saying,
"Alian is a grown-up and he can take care of himself but Ari is a little child
and needs a mother". She sure didn`t want the child to be with Nico as all she
would do is feed little Ari with potato chips. There is also an interesting 
narration from the grown up Ari (who is now thirty years old and lives in 
Paris) who claims that it was his own mother Nico that initiated him into 
heroin when he was eighteen and went to Manchester to live with Nico.
        No doubt the footage that Ofteringer manages to uncover is exhaustive -
ranging from French TV commercials, to performance pieces of the Velvet Under
ground's ironic debut at the American Psychiatric Convention to her debut in 
films in the legendary film maker Federico Fellini's classic 'La Dolce Vita'
(1960) as a blonde model to her heydays of association with Andy Warhol and 
her final days of drugs, decadence and eventual but eventless demise. With 
clever and snappy editing, all this footage is intertwined with the interviews
and juxtaposed with music and dialogue to create a fast paced pop collage. For
the most part, the film does take an unbiased and disinterested stance but 
sometimes strays into irritating `show-me-some-sympathy' portrayals with words
like 'she is alone' flying across images of Nico.
        Much like the ambiguous title of the film 'Nico Icon', Ofteringer 
portrays Nico in an ambiguous manner - as a person whose life was mostly 
filled with sadness and despair but who actually derived pleasure from it all.
Rating: On the SuperNova Scale ***1/2 / *****
        This rock and roll band was formed in 1965 with the initial line-up of
Lou Reed, Maureen Tucker on drums, John Cale and Sterling Morrison on guitars.
Later on, Doug and Billy Yule replaced John Cale and Maureen Tucker respective
ly and Andy Warhol, who produced VU's early records, added on Nico as a second
singer and organ player. VU released their first self titled record in 1967 
and made another three studio albums in the next three years, none of which
cracked the Top 100 charts. Two members John Cale and Lou Reed went on to be
popular and the other two remained in total obscurity. Four managers are in
litigation about Nico's royalties and her son Ari is also trying to get his 
share. 
        But during those five hard-fought and hard-luck years, VU had an un-
deniable influence on a whole generation of youngsters. It`s true that hardly
anyone bought any records of VU. But ironically, those who did, went on to form
their own bands - David Bowie, Patti Smith, Talking Heads, Iggy Pop, R.E.M.,
U2, Henry Rollins, Sonic Youth... The list is endless and filled with the super
stars of today's rock. Recently, the record label Polydor released remastered
editions of many of VU's albums.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     NICO - ICON is a documentary by director Susanne Ofteringer of the
life of that "famous" personage from the 60s, Nico.  Although I was a
teenager in the 60s, I do not remember her at all.  Nevertheless, the
documentary describes her as a famous model, actress, and singer.  She
was an underground singer who played with the band, The Velvet
Underground.  Guess they must have been way underground in the 60s.  I
thought I knew of all the rock groups from that period, and I do not
recall them or her. Oh well, memory fads.
     Now, knowing nothing about a subject is actually the preferable
state for viewing a documentary.  Late last year I saw a great
documentary called THEREMIN: AN ELECTRONIC ODYSSEY.  Before seeing it,
I had never heard of a crazy little musical device called a Theremin.
Nevertheless, I loved the documentary while hating the screechy sounds
that bizarre gadget produces.
     NICO - ICON tells the story of the woman named Christa Paffgen who
became the idol known as Nico.  Talking about her early career, Billy
Name said, "Everyone was fascinated with her.  She was a marble
sculpture, a goddess, something from Valhalla."  The narrator tells us
however that "she went from being so beautiful to being some kind of
freak show."  She performed with arms full of holes from her massive
heroin habit.  Toward the end of her career she looked terrible.  Her
teeth were bad, and she basically looked wasted.  She would fit right
in with your typical group of street people.  After years of drug
abuse, she died in the late 80s.
     On the good side, the film is an honest depiction of a person
devoid of humanity, and it teaches us what can happen in such
circumstances.  As one of her friends said, "No one loved Nico, and
Nico loved no one."  She is said to have had numerous lovers, but hated
sex.  Based on the older interviews with her, she seemed terminally
unhappy.  In one she proclaimed, "I don't have to be outside to be
outside.  I like being confined.  I like being locked in a closet."
She sang one of the morose songs she wrote which went, "Make me fly,
let me die, make me fly."
     Her body of work is a paragon of blandness.  Her songs have little
feeling or musical interest.  Although she appeared in such films as LA
DOLCE VITA and CHELSEA GIRLS, I would not go so far as to say she acted
in any of them based on the clips shown.  Only as a model, did she seem
to have any real talent, but then again, her talent was as a goddess,
and goddesses just are, they do not need to actually do anything.  The
documentary is effective at illustrating loneliness and what it can do
to a person's spirit.
     On the bad side, as a documentary, this picture is a mess.  It
never presents a compelling case of why we should care about Nico.
Moreover, the filmmaker has a leaden approach.  She unnecessarily
italicizes everything.  When she has someone talking about Nico, she
picks out key phrases from the speaker and prints them on the screen
lest we miss the essential points she wants us to take away from the
interview.  Sometimes loud music (Mark Mothersbaugh) overlays the
interview for emphasis.  Other times, the editors (Elfe Brandenburger
and Guido Krajewski) will overlap videos and still images in a failed
attempt to pump energy into a film that glorifies lifelessness.
     Nico's life is a reverse Cinderella story, and ultimately the
documentary is as cold and inanimate as Nico herself.  I did learn a
lot about someone I had never known, and although it is sad, I wish
Ofteringer had made a much better case as to the point of the film.
     NICO - ICON runs just 1:15.  It is not rated, but I would guess it
would get an R for all of the drug references.  There is brief nudity,
but no sex or violence, and I the language is pretty clean.  It would
be fine for any teenager.  Although I found parts interesting, the
documentary is so poorly developed that I can not quite bring myself to
recommend it.  If you are one of those people who remember her, you
will probably like the film more than I did.  I give the movie ** for
the insights I did gain.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
