Title
Review for Sleuth (1972)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Joseph L. Mankiewicz
Writer: Anthony Shaffer (based on his play)
Starring: Laurence Olivier, Michael Caine, Alec Cawthorne
The beginning of "Sleuth" sums up the entire feel of the film: Milo Tindle
(Caine) arrives in a convertible to see famed mystery writer Andrew Wyke
(Olivier) but hears him talking into a recorder in the middle of a massive
garden maze.  Milo attempts to follow Andrew's voice through the numerous
passages in the garden, but cannot find access to where he is.  The only
way in is a secret that only Andrew knows, and for anyone looking for him
to perhaps stumble upon.  But it's not bloody likely.
Milo has come to see Andrew because he is having an affair with his wife,
and wants to talk to him about marrying her.  Instead of acting like an
asswhole about it, Andrew greets him nicely, offers him a drink, and almost
seems to agree with what Milo is saying.  However, he begins to lead him
off of the subject and gets him unknowingly into a game of wits all done by
conversation and convincing.  See, Andrew loves to play games that work on
the mind.  He has graduated from chess to more complex games, and has all
sorts of games throughout his mansion, including dolls that pop out of
nowhere on the cue of a button, and even a hidden safe that is only
accessible if you're coordinated.
He also loves to play with people.  The man is a mystery writer, and so we
know that he loves to manipulate his readers a bit.  If he didn't, he
probably wouldn't be as successful as he is.  And as the film goes on, we
see him convincing Milo to do something which seems silly, but because
Andrew is so convincing, he goes along with it.
So goes the rest of the film: a series of mind fucks not only on both the
characters on the other, but also on the audience.  One of the greatest
enjoyments in watching a play or a film or reading  a book is being
completely fooled only to find out that everything actually works out in
the end, it was just the way you were interpreting it.  Most people feel
cheated when they discover that things were manipulated so that the entire
dupe doesn't even work out in the end, but are amazed when facts are
miscontrued so that you just don't see everything that's going on.  When
games logically work out in the end, you'll find that people respect what
you've done to them and would love to go through it again.
This is what watching "Sleuth" is like.  It's basically a filmed stage
play, and it's better that way.  The entire film lives in the moment of its
language, the way that everything being said may have a double meaning, and
that you may be falling for something without knowing it.  And for two
great actors like Olivier and Caine, it's a chance to show off their acting
talents, and fascinate people with dialogue, not action.
The film runs about 2 hours and 20 minutes, but because the film is almost
entirely filled with dialogue, the film flies by, almost seeming too short.
 The action is only interupted once, by another actor named Alec Cawthorne,
a veteran of the British stage, who plays an inspector invesitgating
something which may or may not have occurred in the first hour.  And when
he interupts, you almost want him to go away so that the action can get
back to Caine and Olivier, who share an amazing amount of chemistry
together, much more than one would have thought.
Olivier and Caine are two great actors and they run wild with the dialogue,
penned by Anthony Shaffer, who adapted it from his play (which has to be a
blast to watch).  Both play their roles with lots of energy, taking lots of
liberties with the dialogue.  Olivier especially goes mad with his role,
tossing in all sorts of great asides and what-not.  It's not suprising that
both received Oscar nominations back in '73.
The film was directed Joseph L. Mankiewicz, a veteran Hollywood director
who has made such films as "All About Eve," "Guys and Dolls," and even the
mondo-budgeted "Cleopatra" with Elizabeth Taylor.  Here, he seems to be
just trying to make an entertaining film, not worrying much about the
grandness of the look, more worried about the dialogue.  He finds the right
note for the film, not interupting the film with many directorial traits,
but merely letting the film's characters tell the story.
But there's more: the film has a surprising amount of depth to it, depth
which doesn't insult our intelligence or become too overbearing that it
causes the film to collapse under itself.  The film is relentless in
showing the effects of man-made isolation, the need to be "above" everyone
else, and the wonderment of playing God with people, primarily because
you're more intelligent than most people.  Underneath all the fun is a
tragedy about a man who is exactly like this, but none of this becomes too
blatant or annoying, which would take away from the film vastly.
"Sleuth" is a film that most people have not heard of today, but anyone who
sees it is guaranteed a film that is so vastly entertaining that it's
almost a pity when the 140 minutes are over.  Every second of this film is
worth watching, and every twist and turn is a shock but not an insult. 
Part of the fun of watching a stage play is living in the moment.  I have
never seen a film that lives more in the moment than "Slueth."
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
James Berardinelli
     SLEUTH, a 1972 "thinking person's thriller," is a rich, engaging 
motion picture with surprises lurking in the shadows behind every 
narrative corner.  The film opens with a shot of Michael Caine making 
his way through a hedge labyrinth in search of Laurence Olivier, who, 
like a spider, waits at the center.  It's a perfect metaphor for all 
that is to come, as the two men square off in a series of increasingly-
desperate games.  This is the kind of movie where the payoff isn't about 
getting to the end, but in savoring every moment on the long, winding 
trip that takes us there.
     The main reason SLEUTH stands up well on repeated viewings, while 
many serpentine thrillers fall apart, is the amazing performances turned 
in by the two leads.  This is essentially a two-man stage show 
transformed into a movie.  With the exception of a brief showing by 
British thespian Alec Cawthorne, the only actors on screen are Olivier 
and Caine.  Both are so good that there's not a moment when we wish for 
someone else to interrupt their duel.  Never has such seemingly limited 
one-on-one interaction been so arresting.  The running time, which 
exceeds two hours, flies by.
     Olivier is universally recognized as one of the best actors ever to 
grace the screen (big or small).  Whether as Heathcliffe in WUTHERING 
HEIGHTS, Darcy in PRIDE AND PREJUDICE, the lead in HAMLET, Moriarty in 
THE SEVEN PER CENT SOLUTION, or Lord Marchmain in "Brideshead 
Revisited," Olivier never disappointed.  SLEUTH is easily one of 
his meatiest roles -- a chance to let go and act with relish.  Andrew 
Wyke is a petty snob, but Olivier makes him into a figure of both great 
humor and great tragedy.  While we never sympathize with Andrew, we do 
something far more important -- we understand him.  Olivier received one 
of his ten career acting Oscar nominations for his work in this film, 
and, while it would be hyperbole to call this his most impressive 
outing, it's certainly one of his most memorable.
     Michael Caine's career has been somewhat more checkered than 
Olivier's.  While it's true that the older actor did appear in some 
questionable films towards the end of his life (CLASH OF THE TITANS, THE 
BETSY), Caine's entire career has been a series of wild ups and downs, 
with notable low points coming in BLAME IT ON RIO and ON DEADLY GROUND.  
Nevertheless, while one might question the man's motives for appearing 
in certain films, there's no doubting his talent, and it's all on 
display in SLEUTH.  Caine's character is Milo Tindle, a low-class 
British hairdresser who has the audacity to carry on an affair with the 
wife of one of his betters, Andrew Wyke.  When we first meet Milo, he 
cuts a rather pathetic figure as someone desperately trying to fit in 
where he doesn't feel comfortable.  But, as a result of Andrew's 
cruelty, we soon recognize there's steel beneath Milo's mild-mannered 
exterior.  When Andrew's unconscionable actions give Milo the excuse, he 
sees an opportunity to use this one man as a focal point for all of the 
rage he feels at the class-based injustices he has been subjected to 
throughout his entire life.  The brilliance of Caine's portrayal is that 
we accept and believe every small transformation of personality that 
Milo undergoes. 
     At this point, I want to insert a warning into this review:  
because it's virtually impossible to discuss SLEUTH in any detail 
without giving away some of the surprises, I'm cautioning readers who 
want a "virgin" experience to stop reading now (and come back once 
you've seen the movie).  While my intention is not to reveal everything 
(the ending, for example, will go unmentioned), certain plot elements 
will be exposed.  And, while SLEUTH can easily be enjoyed by those who 
know the story inside out, why spoil some of the fun if you haven't 
already seen it?
     Andrew and Milo are both expert gamesmen, but their views about 
playing are radically different.  Milo is a hard worker who has 
struggled for every gain in life.  He has known pain, hardship, and 
humiliation.  For him, games are a form of recreation.  His primary goal 
is to settle down peacefully with the woman he loves (who happens to be 
Andrew's wife).  Andrew, on the other hand, is an upper-class elitist 
who has never endured misfortune.  He's a staunch conservative who holds 
that class isn't just a circumstance of birth; it's an indicator of 
character.  To a successful mystery novelist like him, everything is a 
game:  sex, life, death.  And, when it comes to crime, the police are 
minor obstacles – plodding idiots who couldn't solve a case even with 
all the clues laid out neatly for them.  
     The first phase in the game has Andrew luring Milo to his house 
under the pretense of discussing the terms by which Andrew will grant 
his wife, Marguerite, a divorce so she can marry Milo.  Much to the 
younger man's surprise, Andrew seems delighted to be rid of his spouse.  
"Sex is the game," Andrew laments.  "Marriage is the penalty."  Since he 
has a mistress to take care of the former, the wife has become 
expendable.  Using his personal experience as a guideline, Andrew 
advises that for Milo to keep Marguerite happy, he will need a source of 
significant income. To that end, the wily mystery writer has a 
proposition:  Milo will steal a cache of Andrew's jewelry, then Andrew 
will report them stolen.  As a result, Andrew will get the insurance 
money and Milo can fence the property for a significant amount of cash.  
To Milo, it sounds like the perfect plan.  There's only one problem – 
Andrew isn't serious.  The whole plot is a setup designed so that Andrew 
can humiliate the man who has stolen one of his baubles (his wife).  
Once Milo is in the process of committing the crime, Andrew pulls out a 
revolver and calmly informs Milo that he is going to shoot him, a 
burglar interrupted in the crime.  He isn't serious, but Milo believes 
him and, when Andrew pulls the trigger, he faints dead away.
     Round two is Milo's revenge.  Andrew thinks the game is over, but 
Milo, wounded to the quick, has other ideas.  The vicious scheme he 
hatches to get back at Andrews comprises the second half of the film, 
and is even more devious than the one used against him.  Milo proves 
that not only is he a player of Andrew's caliber, but he's faster, less 
principled, and more shrewd.  By the time the end credits roll, it's 
clear who has had the final laugh.  The viewer sits enraptured through 
the entire match between these two players, watching a series of 
unexpected plot twists unravel on-screen.  The labyrinth at the 
beginning is indeed an apt metaphor.
     It's easy enough to guess that SLEUTH began life on the stage – the 
narrative, with its limited setting (most of the action takes place 
within a few rooms in Andrew's house) and focus on dialogue and 
character interaction is the kind of approach one would expect from a 
play.  But it's hard to imagine that any live version could have been as 
riveting without Olivier and Caine, who elevate SLEUTH from the level of 
a rollicking good story to a masterpiece.  Here, the acting is the key, 
and it is never found lacking.
     Of course, I don't mean to downplay the contribution of director 
Joseph Mankiewicz or playwright/screenwriter Andrew Shaffer, both of 
whom share credit with the actors for SLEUTH's success.  Shaffer's 
script is delicious – witty, intelligent, and full of the unexpected.  
And, while Olivier certainly has all the best lines, Caine has the most 
glorious non-dialogue moments, such as the scene in which he dresses up 
as a clown in preparation for breaking into Andrew's house.
     Those who enjoyed the convolutions in David Fincher's THE GAME will 
find that SLEUTH offers many of the same pleasures without the most 
obvious drawback (blatant manipulation of the audience). This 
tremendously entertaining motion picture is as effective today, more 
than a quarter of a century after its release, as it was in 1972.  It's 
not the easiest movie to find on videotape (although it has just been 
released in the new DVD format), and many of the existing copies are in 
poor condition, but it's more than worth the effort to seek out.  SLEUTH 
is a hidden treasure.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."
