Title
Review for Pumpkinhead (1988)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Lance Henriksen; Jeff East; Cynthia Bain; John D'Aquino & Kimberly
Ross
Lance Henriksen plays a country bumpkin living out in the middle of nowhere.
Some reckless city teenagers who are staying in the area kill his son. He
vows revenge, and seeks out a very sinister old lady who lives in the nearby
woods. He has her summon the demon Pumpkinhead -- who got his name because
his body rests in an old graveyard which doubles as a pumpkin patch. When
Pumpkinhead awakens, he sets out to get the man's revenge in blood. When
Henriksen's character realizes just how horrible the demon is, he has second
thoughts, and tries in vain to help Pumpkinhead's targets get away with
their lives. Pumpkinhead has other plans.
This movie is your typical b-grade horror flick. Just about everything about
it says cheese.
The performances are substandard -- including Lance Henriksen. And the young
teens are mostly there just to fulfill the victims-in-waiting quota that is
so crucial to a movie such as this. The writing doesn't add too much to the
movie to take your mind off the bloody awful (no pun intended) acting. The
monster, while looking pretty good, isn't particularly scary. This is due as
much to the writing as anything else. It's hard to be real scared when you
know who is going to get it next. No suspense whatsoever. The only surprise
was method of death. Perhaps the only thing that saved the creature from
being completely laughable was the fact that the fog was quite thick in
woods where the creature appears, so it makes the creature look slightly
more ominous.
This is a movie that actually appears to have tried, just not succeeded all
that well. Pumpkinhead had a good premise with a lot of potential; it just
wasn't executed properly. It's the typical horror film that you will find
collecting dust in the dark recesses of your local video stores' horror
section. Or populating late night cable TV on some b-movie horror marathon.
It's not unwatchable, just nowhere near the top of my list for horror (even
cheesy horror) flicks. It doesn't even have the virtue of the old "It's so
bad, it's good" phenomenon. There just isn't much to it. It's better than a
late night infomercial on TV though.
