Title
Review for White Sands (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Frank Maloney
     WHITE SANDS is a film directed by Roger Donaldson, from a script by
Daniel Pyne.  It stars Willem Dafoe, Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, Mickey
Rourke, Samuel L.  Jackson, and Mimi Rogers.  Rated R for profanity,
violence, mature themes.
     WHITE SANDS is part conspiracy-paranoia thriller, part whodunit.
It features two excellent performers in the persons of Willem Dafoe and
Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, along with the less satisfying and smirking
Mickey Rourke (who is still my idea of a bargain-basement Bruce Willis),
a slightly unlikely Samuel L. Jackson as a too-street-wise FBI agent,
and the too-truncated presence of Mimi Rogers.  It features the
directorial skills of Roger Donaldson (NO WAY OUT), who confronts a
largely unbelievable story with a keen visual sense and a tight
story-telling skill that keeps us largely guessing.  It also features a
script by Daniel Pryne (PACIFIC HEIGHTS, DOC HOLLYWOOD), a script that
locks onto our willingness to believe in corruption and the pursuit of
power for its sake.  Unfortunately, Pryne cannot do so in a wholly
credible way, and the stretches the audience has to make to keep the
story alive are asking a bit much in the end.
     The film wants to be provocative and timely; it wants to speak to
our mistrust of government; and it wants to entertain us.  It is a game
effort, even if a little short of its goals.  Dafoe and Mastrantonio are
each excellent in their efforts.  He's a sheriff's deputy, but he's a
little too smart as well as a little too unsupervised to be totally
acceptable.  Dafoe has an interesting face and an interesting way about
him.  It's a pleasure to watch him work his way deeper and deeper into
the mystery he first uncovers in the New Mexico desert.  Mastrantonio is
a particular favorite of mine and here she is well used to create an
interesting character, a rich stylish woman with some distinctly
unstylish connections, a woman who is lonely and who faces her
loneliness with humor and a hunger for adventure.
     This is a handsome movie with some fine moments.  I can give it a
limited recommendation, especially for bargain ticket buyers.  Or wait
for the video; it will work pretty well on the small screen; its best
qualities are intimate ones.

Author
Carolyn Ford
     WHITE SANDS is about an Estancia, New Mexico sheriff (Willem Dafoe)
who is trying to discover who killed a man found near the town.  Also
found with the dead man is a briefcase containing half a million
dollars.  Along the way, he gets entangled with the FBI, goes
undercover, and gets involved with Mickey Rourke and Mary Elizabeth
Mastrantonio.  I went to see  this because I grew up in northern New
Mexico, and heard it had a lot of good New Mexico scenery.  It does have
good scenery, but that's about it.  From the commercials, it looks like
it's going to be an action-packed adventure, which I think it was
supposed to be.  I'm having a hard time putting my finger on what didn't
work with this movie.  It seemed more like an outline or idea for a
movie.  There was plenty of blood and guts, killings, and  nasty people,
but somehow it just didn't involve me.  Thinking back through the plot,
it seems like it should have been exciting, but when it was over, I was
surprised, because I was still expecting the climax.
     The scenery, as I said, was beautiful, if you like New Mexico,
which I do.  However, they did play fast and loose with the size of the
state.  New Mexico is a huge state (even though many people don't even
realize it *is* a state), and you just don't bop down to White Sands
from Santa Fe for the afternoon.   Albuquerque is a long way from Taos,
etc., etc., and they seemed to make these trips back and forth with no
time delay at all.
     Another one of my big complaints is that Hollywood seems to think
that New Mexico is beautiful desert and mountain scenery populated by a
bunch of Texans.  Dafoe's character didn't suffer from this, but
incidental characters (Santa Fe locals and such) always seemed to talk
with Texas accents.  And they had country music playing in the lobby of
La Fonda hotel!  Give me a break!  They play more jazz and new-age type
music there, and Santa Fe is not real big on country music.  Hollywood
seems to think of "Southwest" as "Texas Cowboys."  Not that I'm slamming
Texas (after all, I live here now) but New Mexico is *completely
different*!
     Anyway, I can't recommend this movie based on plot, but it's a
pretty picture, and Mastrantonio's character has an absolutely gorgeous
house.
