Title
Review for Die xue shuang xiong (1989)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Luke Buckmaster
Cast: Yun-Fat Chow (known in Hollywood as Chow Yun-Fat), Jeffery Chow,
Danny Lee, Sally Yeh, Chu Kong, Kenneth Tsang
Director: John Woo
Screenplay: John Woo
-- available in the cult/nostalgia section of your local video store --
After viewing The Killer, it's hard to think about anything else.  John
Woo, now one of the worlds most revered action directors, reaches the
audience on so many different levels that it's easy to be overwhelmed in
the process.  He wrote and directed the film with the precision and
craftsmanship of a true mastermind, and uses a remarkable way of
filmmaking to convey his story and stimulate the senses.  It's an action
film, really, but it's not centered around the action scenes themselves.
It has a romantic subplot, without being about a love-struck romance.
It gives lessons on revenge, without making clear whether vengeance is
right or wrong.  Finally, and most impressively, it tells a story of
humanity - of honoring friends in the worst of all scenarios - and
generates pure-bred emotion amongst blazing guns and dripping blood.
The Killer is similar in story to Woo's 1997 masterpiece Face/Off.
Certainly the same amount of dynamic chemistry between the two main
protagonists is evident, perhaps even a little more so.  Jeffery (Chow
Yun-Fat) is a slick professional killer who, during a mission,
accidentally partially blinds a young woman singer, Jennie (Sally Yeh).
Six months later, Jennie is almost totally blind, and needs an expensive
operation to correct her eyesight.  Jeffery takes on a last job for $1.5
million, planning to retire from his hard-hearted profession after the
mission is completed.
Meanwhile, ace cop Inspector Li (Danny Lee) learns about Jeff's expert
ways and tracks him down - his only connection being the obvious Jennie.
The assured showdowns between these two characters results in a unlikely
friendship; at one of the many unprecedented moments, they dub each
other as "Mickey Mouse" and "Dumbo."
The Killer oozes class and imperative timing, as Woo brings traditional
action scenes onto the screen with an originality and flair that few
directors can match.  Brilliant scene maker Brian De Palma pieces
together action scenes with the smart sort of skills; both giving a
striking visual sincerity to their material.  De Palma's best moments
include the infamous train station stairs scene in The Untouchables, and
the intense minutes of Tom Cruise descending into a high security room
in Mission: Impossible.  Woo completed The Killer before his entrance
into Hollywood, and The Killer's thrilling climax in a church ties with
John Travolta and Nicholas Cage's "mirror" showdown in Face/Off as some
of the best this director has to offer.  The difference between Woo and
De Palma, though, is that Woo generally maintains the level of quality
all throughout; consequently making terrific films, not just terrific
scenes.
Most people will be pleased to know that the film - which was originally
in Chinese (it's real name being Die xue shuang xiong) - does not have
subtitles, but rather has been dubbed into less than convincing English.
Disappointingly, much of the dialogue is ridiculously simplistic, and it
seems a little silly that all characters are speaking with healthy
American accents in Hong Kong (whilst listening to Chinese music, I
might add).  This is the most obvious flaw in the film, and will
frustrate viewers who want rich, illustrious dialogue to suit the rich,
illustrious film.  Still, it must be said that no-one goes to see a John
Woo film for the dialogue (although Face/Off's dialogue plays a large
part of what makes it so great to watch).
Chow Yun-Fat, who made his Hollywood debut in 1997 with The Replacement
Killers, is on cue every time in the film's most likeable part.
However, someone's character seems a little too inexperienced and
erratic to be completely convincible as an ace cop.  But somehow the
chemistry between these two works beautifully - emotionally and
physically.
>From the mind of a truly dynamic director comes this wonderfully thought
out and executed film.  Woo has made sure that The Killer is as
attractive emotionally as it is visually; combining all elements of what
makes a great film great.  But more than that, he invents scenarios that
reassure viewers of what a true cinematic experience should be like.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com.for any
inquiries or feedback

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
A professional killer accidentally blinds a young woman in a shootout.
Driven by guilt and financial need, he accepts a last job; to kill the
head of a large drug syndicate!  Further complications: the last job is
a double-cross, and his employers try to have him killed.  A
psychological view of the killer and the policeman who stalks him,
interspersed with outrageously violent shootouts and black humor.
     The film centers on Jeffrey, a skilled hit man or professional
killer.  During a wild shootout in a bar, a beautiful young woman (a
singer in the bar), is blinded by powder burns from his gun.  He
befriends her, and falls in love with her.  She needs a cornea
transplant, and cannot afford one.  So, driven by guilt and the need to
finance her operation, he accepts what he plans to be his last job: to
kill the head of an international drug syndicate!
     The last job is completed, then he is double-crossed.  The people
who hired him try to kill him (in further wild shootouts).  Meanwhile, a
police inspector is closing in on Jeffrey.  The story continues as
Jeffrey sets out to kill the man who double-crossed him....
     The Director, John Woo, is perhaps best known for the film series A
BETTER TOMORROW.  The current film is a very stylish "gangster film,"
but it is not like most other gangster films.  Instead, due to the wild
shootouts, it might be compared to a Western, particularly the very
violent Italian Westerns of the 1970's (e.g., Sergio Leone's films).
     The film centers on emotions: Jeffrey's guilt and love for Jenny,
the woman he blinded; the police inspector's obsession and hatred for
Jeffrey which turns to admiration and respect as the film progresses;
Jeffrey's friendship with another killer, and the "gangster code of
ethics" they follow.  However, all the psychological intricacies of the
very complex characters in the film are overwhelmed by the violence in
the film, which is a virtual bloodbath.
     The shootouts in this film are so wild, so outrageous, that it is
reasonable to describe them as a "ballet of violence."  They are pure
violence elevated to the level of an art form!  They also reflect real
technical brilliance in special effects and (fight) choreography.
Initially, you might marvel at the artistic and technical skill they
reflect.  However, they are so overdone (and there are so many shootouts
in the film), that you soon become numb to it all.
     The relationship between Jeffrey and the police inspector chasing
him is quite complex.  There is a hilarious scene where the inspector
confronts Jeffrey in Jenny's apartment; Jeffrey and the police inspector
stand face to face, at arm's length, pointing pistols at each other's
face!  Jenny, being blind, is unaware of the confrontation and makes tea
and exchanges social pleasantries with the men, as they maneuver in a
deadly game.  However, as the film progresses, they become friends, as
the policeman admires Jeffrey's devotion to Jenny.
     Because of the extreme violence of the film, I would not recommend
it to a general audience.  However, fans of gangster films and violent
Westerns may find its wild shootouts and black humor to their liking.
Distribution: in limited theatrical release; currently showing (4/27)
in San Francisco.
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: John Woo
Starring: Chow Yun-Fat, Danny Lee, Sally Yeh, Chu Kong
What is it about action director John Woo which makes him more
critically acclaimed than any other action director in the world?  Why
do critics actually like the guy if all he does is action films?  And
how come he's only made one American film that's on par with his other
ones?  Well, put simply, John Woo just knows how to make an action
sequence.
John Woo is different from other action directors because his action
sequences are beautifully staged, viscerally shot, and filled with lots
of graphic violence, people being brutally murdered in slow motion (like
Peckinpah), and a original ways to creat an action sequence.  His
stories, seen as being corny over in the States, but are well-plotted,
featuring spaghetti western-like melodrama, filled with characterization
and opposition, and told with great style that is not matched by any
other action director in the world.
"The Killer," which is around the middle of his career, is the best film
by him I've seen.  Not only an intensely crafted action film, but also a
little character study centering on an unlikely target, "The Killer"
moves at a quick pace, and is motivated by the characters, not the
plot.  Thus, the film twists in weird ways in respect to the action
genre.
The killer in "The Killer" is Jeff (played by Chow Yun-Fat), an unusual
hitman in that he has a kind of sense of alienation and compassion for
others.  He sees his work as a job, but never likes to hurt the
innocent.  In the first scene, he sits in a quaint church, awaiting his
boss/pal to show up with his orders for his next job.  Then he goes to a
restaurant where his target is, pulls out two guns, and takes everyone
out in a brilliantly choreographed scene of mayhem and carnage.  But
towards the end of the bloodbath, he accidentally blinds a singer from
the restuarant (Sally Yeh) while shooting at one of the bad guys. 
Instead of shrugging it off and walking off cooly, Jeff damn near cries,
wraps a bandage around her eyes, and helps her out before taking off.
Turns out the singer isn't totally blind, but needs an operation to
restore her sight, but can't really pay for it, I suppose.  In steps
Jeff, who has been obsessed with the fact that he's wounded her,
probably for life.  He decides he wants out of the business, but wants
to do one last job to finance her operation.  So, off he goes on a
typical, easy job, which requires him to put on a fake moustache, get on
a speed boat, and shoot a well-known figure in public.  No problem
there.  But then he's set up by the guys who hired him, and he finds
himself alienated, being followed by both his employers and the cops,
but still selflessly obsessed with getting his money and helping the
singer.
This is a pretty unusual concept for a tense action film, and it's
handled wonderfully.  The relationship between the singer and Jeff is
handled nicely, never really giving into a lot of romance or anything
cliched like that.  And there's a lot of opposition between Jeff and the
main cop (Danny Lee) who's obsessed with taking him in (or out), but
finds himself identifying with him, thus creating a complex opposition
with him, instead of some cliched one.
But besides the inner depth of the film, there is a great sense of
action craftsmanship in this film, making not only Woo's best, but one
of the greatest action films of all time.  I'm talking top 5 or 10
here.  It's a frenetic, intense, visceral, and adrenaline-rushing film,
filled with dizzying action sequences that thrill the viewer, leaving
them giddy.  Woo, reportedly, abhors violence, and his is cartoonish,
and, in retrospect, exhausting.  Every action seuqence is a ballet of
bloodbath, with characters being shot to a grisly death in slow motion,
then going back to the regular frenetic speed of the scene.
"The Killer" represents the right way to create an action film - level
it with depth, give us characters we care about, then pour on the
action.  This shows a true filmmaker at the height of his craft, and
luckily he has never really come down from that high pinnacle, except
for his first two American outings.  If you've seen "Face/Off," you know
that when you're talking about action films, John Woo is, as Howie Long
called Travolta in "Broken Arrow, "the man."
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
