Title
Review for Titan A.E. (2000)
Number of Reviews
19

Author
Bob Bloom
 Titan A.E. (2000) 2 stars out of 4. Featuring vocal talents of Matt
Damon, Bill Pullman, Drew Barrymore, Nathan Lane, John Leguizamo and
Janeane Garofalo. Story by Hans Bauer and Randall McCormick. Screenplay
by Ben Edlund and John August and Joss Whedon. Original score composed
by Graeme Revell. Directed by Don Bluth and Gary Goldman.
 Decent concept, uneven presentation.
 That about sums up "Titan A.E.," a new animated science fiction feature
from Don Bluth.
 After the technological advances displayed in such recent animated and
computer-generated movies as "Tarzan," "Toy Story 2" and "Dinosaur,"
"Titan A.E." looks relatively quaint - a rough meld of Saturday morning
cartoon and computer effects.
 And while the story is interesting and has possibilities, its execution
is flawed.
 The moviemakers appear to be hedging their bets, trying to create a
product that will attract both a younger audience as well as a more
sophisticated older youth demographic.
 "Titan A.E. "follows the model of an epic quest: A young man on a
journey to find his Holy Grail, in this case a super-advanced spacecraft
created by his father. Dad disappeared years earlier in an effort to
save the ship from the dreaded Drej, an energy-force life form out to
destroy mankind.
 The story also is a classical search for home.
 Earth has been destroyed by the Drej, and the remnants of humanity have
been scattered across the galaxy.
 Only one force can reunite mankind, the mythical ship, Titan A.E. And
only one person holds the secret to its whereabouts, Cale, the son of
its creator.
 But Cale is a reluctant hero, bitter over being abandoned by his
scientist father. He does not want to get involved, and only does so
when the Drej set out to kill him.
 The screenplay by Ben Edlund, John August and Joss Whedon, based on a
story by Hans Bauer and Randall McCormick, borrows a bit from "Star
Wars" and a smidgen from "Star Trek."
 Some of the alien characters are in that cute childish Jar Jar Binks
mode, while others appear more adult and believable.
 At times, you feel like you are watching scenes from two different
movies.
 Directors Bluth and Gary Goldman maintain a nice pace, diverting from
the story to show off some opulence with scenes of hydrogen trees and
space angels.
 The vocal talent, unfortunately, is rather bland. Matt Damon lacks the
charisma needed to voice mankind's new messiah. He is rather flat and
rarely conveys any real emotion.
 Drew Barrymore is more fiery as Akima, the young woman who believes in
Cale (of course) and aids him in his journey.
 Others lending their vocal talents include Bill Pullman as Korso, a Han
Solo-like rogue; John Leguizamo as Gune, the cute, cuddly alien who is
sure to be a favorite at whichever fast-food joint has a tie-in contract
with the film; Nathan Lane as Preed, the sarcastic, immoral alien
co-pilot; and Janeane Garofalo as Stith, the sharp-shooting weapons
master.
 Overall, "Titan A.E." is a letdown. It is cold and has that
by-the-numbers, been-there-seen-that effect.
 It's not a bad film, some of the sequences are colorful and exciting.
But it has a rather worn, dated feel. "Titan A.E." is merely OK, but it
could have been much more if some more originality and effort had been
put into the story as well as the direction of the characters.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN . He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net
Reviews by Bloom can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie Database
at: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Frankie Paiva
Cale is a young man with muscles to spare. His father invented the Titan, a 
machine that would create an entirely new planet where humans could live. An 
evil alien race called the Drej destroyed earth, afraid of what might happen 
if the Titan worked. Even though they speak in subtitles, it is obvious the 
Drej mean business. Many years later, Korso, a spaceship captain, has found 
Cale, for whom he has been searching the galaxy. It turns out Cale's father 
left a map to the secret location of the Titan in a ring his dad gave him as 
a young child. So he joins the Korso and his crew, which also includes an 
attractive woman named Akima. The two strike up a relationship during the 
search for the Titan. The Drej are never close behind, especially since 
someone on the ship is a Drej spy. It is a classic race against time with 
limited resources as humanity's last hope attempts to foil bad guys and 
create a new planet for mankind.
Titan A.E. (A.E. stands for After Earth) never fails at being visually 
appealing. All characters were hand drawn, but are put into computer 
generated backgrounds. The result does look a bit awkward, yet it works 
surprisingly well. The movie would not have been as fantastic with hand drawn 
backgrounds. Likewise, computer created characters would have seemed strange. 
The finale, which takes place in a large belt of floating ice orbs, looks 
incredible. The script sets up many chances for interesting alien species 
too. Each seems to come from an animal of the earth. A space professor looks 
strangely like a turtle on two legs, and Stith (voiced by Janeane Garofalo) 
is a strange kangaroo mutation with large grasshopper legs. Yes, you read 
that correctly. Janeane Garofalo voices an alien. That's the first problem 
with the movie. It is painfully apparent who the voices are. Normally this 
would not be a problem, but the voices fit clumsily with the characters. 
Rather than watching Cale and seeing him as a distinct person, Matt Damon's 
face keeps coming up. The same goes for Drew Barrymore's Asian Akima. Even if 
the directors were casting against type, it feels strange. I said to myself, 
"Wow! That alien sounds just like Nathan Lane!" This is not a good thing.
The script may be the reason so much attention goes to the voices. The 
derivative text is an accumulation of patches from different science fiction 
films. Even so, it never fails to be entertaining. It has the same quality of 
a bad Nickelodeon cartoon. You know what is going to happen, but you enjoy it 
anyway. A few twists seem forcefully added into the string of events. These 
plot turns are never very exciting though. With three minds coming together 
for the screenplay, it should have been better. Especially since Joss Whedon, 
creator and writer of the smart television program Buffy The Vampire Slayer, 
was on the team. The story always seems focused on the big picture, and never 
stops to add in a joke or two. The soundtrack is also a blunder. Rock songs 
like Creed's overplayed "Higher" accompany most action and non-action scenes. 
Random tracks seem added just to get a good list of artists on the 
soundtrack.  
This movie is stupid and cheesy in ways only a sci-fi movie can be. It tries 
to mix traditional stuff of the genre with supposed new material, and will 
probably succeed with young males, the main audience for science fiction. The 
images presented are of high quality, generic screenplay aside. Titan A.E. 
always seems rushed to reach its conclusion, but the trip there is fun and 
exciting.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The year I got frustrated with animation was 1973.  That was
the year that two events coincided.  One was the release of the
French film FANTASTIC PLANET.  The other was NBC running an animated
Star Trek series in its Saturday morning line-up.  The former had
some fascinating images of strange animals and plants in an imagined
world, but the script was obscure, static, and emotionally cold.
Ultimately it was very disappointing.  At the same time the animated
STAR TREK TV series used limited animation and even more limited
imagination in the artwork.  As I told friends that in animation you
have to put up 24 frames a second, but it is not like live action.
You have complete freedom as to what you put in those frames.
Somebody somewhere was making the decision that the images in those
frames would be unimaginative and boring, that the alien world where
Kirk was standing would be represented by a horizontal line at the
bottom of the screen.  Even with an example like FANTASTIC PLANET to
show what could be done to show some imagination, nobody did.
     When Japanese anime came along I thought that film was finally
starting to use the potential of animated film.  And it was a step
closer to what I was looking for but in spite of its many advocates,
I think anime cinema has turned into a colossal disappointment.  The
films are full of under-developed characters and over-extended
chases and fights.  If you do not care about the characters, you do
not care who wins the fights.  That brings seeing the film down to
the level of watching professional wrestling.  And in spite of
claims to the contrary Japanese animation is not good.  Generally in
anime that animation is crude and jerky.  What people are responding
to is the occasional quality of the artwork.
     TITAN A.E. much closer to what I had in mind.  The is solid
space opera in the classic tradition of writers like Gordon Dickson
and Alan Dean Foster.  In addition the animation is good and the
artwork extremely imaginative.  With the artwork, the humor, and the
animation, there are no dead spots in the film.  This is a film that
you turn away from at your own risk.  Do not go out for popcorn.
     In the early days of the 31st century a discovery is made that
could change the future for everybody on the planet Earth.  Whatever
that discovery was (and we never find out precisely) it threatens an
alien race called the Drej.  The Drej respond to the threat by
destroying Earth in 3028 A.D.  Only handfuls of people make it off
the planet before it is destroyed.  Scientist Sam Tucker arranges
for his five-year-old son Cale to be taken to safety and then pilots
the huge spherical starship Titan into space just in time to escape
the dying Earth.  Fifteen years later Cale (voiced by Matt Damon) is
a piece of space flotsam.  He is working in an interplanetary space
dump with the dregs of several alien races.  The shadowy human Korso
(Bill Pullman) tags Cale for a mysterious mission to go and find the
Titan.
     So far it seems like a space opera primarily aimed at a teen
audience.  That is exactly what it remains, but then so was STAR
WARS.  The point is that it is space opera well done.  The
screenwriters are an eclectic bunch with Ben Edlund creator of the
satire "The Tick," John August who wrote the surprisingly Generation
X film GO, and Joss Whedon creator of "Buffy the Vampire Slayer."
Three screenwriters is generally a bad sign, but three so different
talents can make for synergy and one very rich screenplay.  Here
they have written a screenplay that has some depth.  It has
unexpected twists (August's forte), some good humor (likely from
Edlund), and a good deal of fantasy imagination (which may have come
from Whedon).  They have bound in strong mythic elements (the quest,
the son avenging the father) that, though familiar, should resonate
with the audience.  The film does owe a debt to anime, but the
characters are much more developed and three-dimensional.
     Where the writing has weaknesses it is in an emotionally weak
ending which also rather stretches the credulity.  There are loose
ends left unresolved, an over-emphasis on fighting, and the Drej
make a very flat and uninteresting villain.  The other questionable
command decision is to use a raft of name actors for voices where
they are not needed.  There are so many good but barely-known actors
they could have used.  And speaking for myself only, I come to a
film like this not even knowing whose voices I will be hearing.  I
would rather not even recognize the voice and be saddled with
connections to the actors' roles in other films.
     Speaking of what is flat and what is three-dimensional, the
animation is an uneasy mixture of the two.  Most of the character
animation is flat, but the hardware uses three-dimensional animation
techniques.  This occasionally means you have a flat face in a
three-dimensional space suit.  But more important than how it is
animated is what is being animated.  Perhaps George Lucas has
finally been beaten in creating worlds and scenery rich in
imagination.  Even the artwork is full of novel ideas in the center
stage and in the details.  And making these spacescapes seem real
may well be the best use to date of 3D animation techniques.
     TITAN A.E. was produced and directed by the team of Don Bluth
and Gary Goldman, graduates of Disney animation studios.  The two
left because they saw different potentials for animation than did
Disney's other people.  They missed out on what is probably Disney's
golden age of animation and frequently their films, while some were
quite decent, seemed a step or two behind Disney Studios.  Films
like AN AMERICAN TAIL and THE LAND BEFORE TIME seemed to be only
Disney-esque.  The real creativity was from places like Disney's
Pixar in the TOY STORY films and in film's like BEAUTY AND THE
BEAST, THE LION KING, and this season's DINOSAUR.  And for animation
technique, perhaps they are still a step behind.  But in TITAN A.E.
Bluth and Goldman have given us much more imaginative images and
probably a better story.  In a season when in short order we have
DINOSAUR, TITAN A.E., CHICKEN RUN, and FANTASIA 2000 released, Bluth
and Goldman have given us what may well deserve to be the STAR WARS
of animated films.
     TITAN A.E. is a film of images and imagination, perhaps the
best space opera to come to the screen since the original STAR WARS.
Weighing heavily the novelty of this film I give it a 9 on the 0 to
10 scale and a +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.  I am hoping this film is a
bellwether of things to come.

Author
Susan Granger
  Apparently, Bill Mechanic, chairman of 20th Century Fox,
wanted an animated movie for 13-14 year-old boys, a group that hasn't
shown much interest in cartoons other than comic books. So this is the
result. Set in the year 3028, the Earth has been blown apart by a
vicious alien race made of pure energy called the Drej.  The hero,
predictably, is a cynical teenager (voiced by Matt Damon), a
rebellious drifter who works on a grungy salvage station. His life is
changed when he finds his father, a brilliant scientist who built the
Titan (a mysterious spaceship that has the power to create a planet),
has left him a genetically encoded ring with a map. With "I happen to
be humanity's last hope," he's off on an adventure on the Valkyrie
with its captain Korso (Bill Pullman), who once worked with his
father, along with fighter pilot Akima (Drew Barrymore), plus the
sarcastic First Mate Preed (Nathan Lane) and Gune (John Leguizamo),
the Peter Lorre-like navigator - with the ruthless, villainous Drej in
hot pursuit. There are plot-holes enormous enough to fly a space craft
through, perhaps because so many writers were involved - and the
formulaic concept reminded me of the old TV series "Battlestar
Galactica" with a touch of "Wing Commander" thrown in. And what's with
Stith (Janeane Garofalo), a kangaroo-like weapons expert? Animator Don
Bluth combines 3-D and 2-D which is visually disconcerting - except
for two sequences. One involves the Ice Rings of Tigrin where one
spaceship chases another through giant, reflective crystals and the
other with vibrating, brightly colored hydrogen trees. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Titan A.E." is a weird, action-packed 4 -
unless you're a teenager. Then, perhaps, it might just be a cool
sci-fi trip set to edgy, electronic rock music.

Author
Shay Casey
Year: 2000. Starring the voices of Matt Damon, Drew Barrymore, Bill
Pullman, Nathan Lane, Janeane Garofalo, John Leguizamo, Tone Loc, Jim
Breuer, Alex D. Linz, Ron Perlman. Story by Hans Bauer and Randall
McCormick. Screenplay by Ben Edlund, John August, and Joss Whedon.
Directed by Don Bluth and Gary Goldman. Rated PG.
"Titan A.E." is a frustrating movie. You watch it, and you get the idea
that it's trying really, really hard to be a great film, a modern
classic. But then you come up with an unshakable feeling that the movie
just isn't working, and no matter how many stops it pulls out, you
just can't shake that feeling. That's what happened to me
while watching "Titan A.E." It's an ambitious film, but it's
nowhere close to greatness. And the more I think about it, the more its
failures stand out.
The film takes place roughly a thousand years in the future, where an
evil race made of pure energy called the Drej has destroyed Earth. Humans
now exist as an "orphan" species, drifting from outpost to outpost
without finding any real home. Cale (voice of Alex D. Linz) was a young
boy when Earth was destroyed, and his father was one of the principal
officials in charge of evacuating the planet. But Cale's father
disappeared after Earth's destruction, never to be heard from
again. Now a cynical survivor (and now voiced by Matt Damon), Cale
stumbles upon a ship with a partially human crew at a space dock.
He's startled to find that the captain of the ship, gruff Commander
Korso (Bill Pullman), has actually been looking for him. Korso, a friend
of Cale's father, reveals that Cale actually holds the key to the
humans' last hope at finding a new home: His father left him a
genetically-encoded map pinpointing the whereabouts of the Titan, a
planet-sized space station hidden somewhere in outer space.
Unfortunately, the Drej are interested in finding the Titan as well, and
they are hunting Cale down in order to pry the information from him. Not
allowed much of a choice after the Drej attack his current residence,
Cale agrees to go with Korso.
The story sounds fine, like a pretty good opportunity for an exciting
space adventure. It's derivative, sure, but most movies of this
kind are, and "Titan A.E." can hardly be faulted for cribbing ideas when
the films it's cribbing from ("Star Wars," "Star Trek") would have
to plead guilty to the same charge. But that doesn't let it off the
hook for getting its premise all wrong. "Star Wars" took place in a
consistent, expansive universe you always felt that what made it to the
screen was only a small fraction of what was floating around inside
George Lucas' head. "Titan A.E." presents no such depth, because
the writers haven't paid much attention to the details of their own
plot. For example, it's established that the Drej want to destroy
the human race, but we never find out why they want to do that. What
threat do the humans pose to them? Who knows? Supporting characters are
introduced without any reason given for them to be there. How did
Commander Korso put together such a diverse crew? Who knows? Korso
remarks that he's been looking for Cale "for many years," so he can
find the Titan, for which he's also been searching "for many
years." A single person is easier to find in the vast expanse of space
than a planet-sized spaceship? Why not just look for the Titan itself?
Who knows?
The script fails at proper characterization, too. The heroes in a space
opera don't have to be deep, but they should at least be likeable.
"Titan A.E." fails on both counts. The apparent good guys are only good
in the sense that they don't wish anyone else any specific harm.
Cale may be blond and fresh-faced, but he's so bland, and so
self-pitying, it's hard to really root for him. Japanese space-punk
Akima (Drew Barrymore) serves as Cale's love interest, and
she's not very interesting either. Nor is her character consistent:
Sometimes she's tough, sometimes she's helpless, depending on
what the rote story demands. Korso comes off as equally subject to the
whims of the script. His motivations change back and forth without much
conviction by the end, you're wondering if this guy believes in
anything at all. It doesn't help that the big-name cast turns in
mostly uninspiring voice performances. Damon, Barrymore, Pullman, and
Janeane Garofalo sound bored. Nathan Lane and John Leguizamo (as the
ostensibly "colorful" sidekicks) are at least enthusiastic, but still
unfocused. Most of the actors' dialogue is horribly concocted: The
"funny" lines induce cringing, the serious ones occasional giggling.
"Titan A.E." does contain some breathtaking imagery. Visuals, not
surprisingly, are the film's saving grace. Two action set-pieces,
one during the Earth's destruction and another in a field of ice
crystals, are about as exciting as anything you're going to see
this year. But they're oases in a desert, because "Titan A.E."
doesn't make these or any other scenes feel necessary. A
plot-driven film's narrative ought to be a fast-paced, naturally
flowing progression to a satisfying climax, but "Titan A.E." feels more
like a series of individual scenes slammed together in chronological
order. It doesn't move.
What "Titan A.E." forgets about making a fun space adventure is that the
adventure is supposed to be *fun*. Almost every plot point is treated
with such grim portentousness that any and all vitality is sucked right
out of the production. Obviously, a film of this nature can't goof
its way through the story, and some things need to be treated seriously
(like the Force, for example). But there also needs to be a sense of
giddy enthusiasm, an indication that the filmmakers were having as much
fun making their movie as they expect the audience to have watching it.
This film gives no such indication. Instead of being a "Star Wars"-like
joyous romp, "Titan A.E." is a somber march towards a predictable
conclusion. This is not the stuff of a modern classic.
For more reviews, go to http://www.geocities.com/sycasey/movies.html

Author
John Beachem
Directed by: Don Bluth, Gary Goldman
Written by: Randall McCormick, Hans Bauer
It's the 31st century, and mankind has no home. The aliens, known as the 
Drej, destroyed the earth because they believed mankind was becoming a 
massive threat to their existence. Before the earth was destroyed, some of 
the population managed to escape and form colonies on ships out in space. 
Cale (Matt Damon) is one such person, working out a miserable existence and 
wandering about the stars without a home. The difference is that Cale's 
father created a device called the Titan, which is said to be mankind's last 
hope. He hid it from the Drej before they destroyed the earth and implanted 
a map showing where to find it in Cale's hand. Captain Korso (Bill Pullman) 
has been searching for Cale for 15 years so he could find the Titan and give 
humans a fighting chance. Cale joins with Korso's crew, which includes the 
lovely Akima (Drew Barrymore), the bizarre but intelligent Gune (John 
Leguizamo), the wise cracking Preed (Nathan Lane), and the kangaroo like 
weapons officer, Stith (Janeane Garofalo). The six search desperately for 
the Titan, but the Drej are right on their tails.
Back in 1981 there was an unusual animated film called "Heavy Metal", based 
on a series of semi-adult magazines. "Heavy Metal" was actually 
groundbreaking at the time because of two factors: One, it was clearly made 
for adults due to the graphic violence and sexual content; and two, it 
didn't follow one specific storyline, but contained several short stories 
which were interconnected. If "Titan A.E." had been released back in 1981, 
it might have been hailed as groundbreaking and developed a cult following. 
The animation style is very similar to "Heavy Metal", and the story is 
complex enough that only teens and adults are going to understand exactly 
what's going on. Unfortunately, being released in 2000 has guaranteed the 
movie a short run in theaters. The animation in "Titan A.E." is nice, but 
nothing spectacular; the storyline may be complicated, but it's loaded with 
every cliche in the book; and the 3-D animation is nothing we haven't seen 
before. So why the three and a half stars, you ask? Because despite all 
these faults the film is just so darn enjoyable and amusing that you can't 
help but have a good time watching it.
Most of the voice casting in "Titan A.E." is rather unusual. The character 
of Cale seems to have been made with Matt Damon ("Good Will Hunting") in 
mind, so he can't help but do a fairly good job. Drew Barrymore, as the 
obviously Asian Akima, is one of the most unusual choices, but she actually 
does a decent enough job. The weak links are Bill Pullman ("Lake Placid") 
and Janeane Garofalo ("Mystery Men"). Pullman has always seemed too whiny 
and annoying to me, and he's playing the rough world weary Captain Korso 
here? I don't think so. Janeane Garofalo, usually a talented comic actress, 
doesn't add anything to the character of Stith, but I'm not sure this is 
entirely her fault since the character is so underdeveloped. The other two 
casting bits are a bit more interesting. Nathan Lane ("Mouse Hunt") and John 
Leguizamo ("Spawn") are given the two most unusual characters in the movie, 
and they handle them in very different ways. Preed looks like a hairy 
version of Jar Jar Binks, a stuttering goof who can't do anything right. 
Lane plays him in exact opposite fashion, as a conniving, sneaky character 
who thinks he's a lot smarter than he actually is. Leguizamo's character of 
Gune is not the kind of character you would expect in a movie aimed at kids. 
His insane ramblings will only confuse youngsters, but they sure made me 
laugh out loud. Here's an example of one of his best lines: "I made this 
last night in my sleep. I'm not sure just what it does, but it has a button 
on it which I'm eager to press, but I'm afraid of what might happen if I 
do."
Obviously if you're going to see "Titan A.E." it's because you like either 
animated movies, sci-fi movies, or the rare combination of the two. The sad 
fact is that this movie fails at being any of these. If you want really nice 
animation you'd be best off going to see a Disney movie. If you want sci-fi, 
you'll want something original like "The Matrix" rather than something 
saddled with this cliche ridden mess of a plot. "Titan A.E." actually 
succeeds when it throws things at us which we'd never expect. An example of 
a great scene was one where the group tries to sneak past a guard at a door 
by pretending to be slave traders. The guard pretends to be fooled and then 
laughs and points out that Korso doesn't walk like a slave, Preed should 
have threatened him rather than bribed him, and they're all obviously 
wearing bed sheets as disguises. Preed gives the film's best line here: "An 
intelligent guard, that was unexpected." If the movie had been full of more 
scenes like that one it may have been something great. Instead we get every 
cliche from reluctant hero has change of heart when seeing the plight of his 
people, to turncoat is saved by hero and subsequently changes sides again. 
Still, "Titan A.E." is fun, with an interesting if out of place '80s 
soundtrack and a hysterical ending. I give it three and a half out of five 
stars and a recommendation to wait for video since it won't take long to get 
there.
Any past movies you want me to review? Send to: 
johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at: http://www.dependentfilms.net,
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad?public=yes or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Scott Renshaw
TITAN A.E.
(20th Century Fox)
Voices:  Matt Damon, Bill Pullman, Drew Barrymore, Nathan Lane, John
Leguizamo, Janeane Garofolo.
Screenplay:  Ben Edlund and John August and Joss Whedon.
Producers:  David Kirschner, Don Bluth and Gary Goldman.
Directors:  Don Bluth and Gary Goldman.
MPAA Rating:  PG (adult themes, violence)
Running Time:  93 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Early in the animated science fiction/adventure TITAN A.E., in a
scene that takes place in the year 3028, the earth is obliterated by an
alien race called the Drej. Apparently, the Drej fear humanity, and want
it stamped out forever. Why exactly do the Drej fear humanity? Who cares? 
     Flash forward 15 years, where a human survivor named Cale (Matt
Damon) is living among aliens and other scattered humans as a laborer. 
Cale is the orphaned son of a scientist who created a near-mythological
ship called Titan, hidden somewhere out in space. He is supposed to be
deeply embittered by feelings of abandonment, but why are we supposed to
understand that when Damon's vocal performance never suggests anything
more than mild annoyance? Who cares?
     A spacecraft captain named Korso (Bill Pullman) arrives, and informs
Cale that the location of Titan is locked into his DNA. Cale accompanies
Korso and his crew on a mission to find Titan, and along the way becomes
smitten with Korso's pilot Akima (Drew Barrymore). Why exactly does Cale
fall for her, except for the fact that she appears to be the only human
female he's ever met? Who cares?
     TITAN A.E. is a stunningly crafted piece of film animation. It is
also inexcusably lazy and dramatically inept, and there is no earthly or
after-earthly reason why that had to be the case. Director Don Bluth has
made fine animated films like AN AMERICAN TAIL, THE LAND BEFORE TIME and
ANASTASIA, which would be reason enough to hope for the best. But look at
the talent credited with this script: Ben Edlund created the wonderfully
satirical comic book "The Tick;" John August wrote the propulsively clever
GO; Joss Whedon co-scripted TOY STORY, and created "Buffy the Vampire
Slayer." Put those three writers together, and the law of averages would
almost demand something smart, unconventional and utterly original.
     Instead, they pasted together a story so blatantly cribbed from so
many different sources that it would be an endless and thankless task to
list them all (STAR WARS, STAR TREK 2 and BATTLESTAR GALACTICA are only
the most obvious). That's not an uncommon problem with films of this
genre; after all, there are certain buttons one is expected to push, and
certain hero-on-a-quest motifs one is obliged to include. That doesn't
excuse creating a thoroughly unappealing protagonist, introducing an evil
alien race whose motivations never make any sense, or filling the script
with dialogue that could have come from a Random Cliche Generator. Not a
single line stuck in my head within minutes of leaving the theater; not a
single character relationship was explored with any care.
     Of course, it doesn't help that virtually every voice performance in
TITAN A.E. feels as though it were completed while the actor involved was
preoccupied with some other mundane task, like making dinner reservations,
or trying to get out of traffic. Damon's lackluster work is most evident,
but Pullman and Barrymore certainly give him a run for his money; even
Janeane Garofalo and Nathan Lane are wasted. Only John Leguizamo, as a
high-strung scientist/navigator on Korso's ship, seems at all interested
in creating a character, and he does so primarily by talking really fast
in a squeaky voice. There isn't a single moment in TITAN A.E. when a
performance feels directed. Bluth and co-director Gary Goldman appear to
have felt the actors had done their job if they read their lines without
stuttering.
     There's no question that TITAN A.E. is visually striking, and that
the action sequences are well-paced. There are two stunning flights of
fantasy in particular that briefly give the film a vivid sense of place: a
planet with a sea covered in plants that bloom as hovering balls of
hydrogen, and a nebula filled with massive reflective ice crystals. Both
effects are computer generated, and the mix of conventional animation and
CGI elements continues to push the boundaries of the form. But TITAN A.E. 
can't survive on its dazzle; it's too grim and mirthless to hold anyone's
interest as pure fantasy. This is one long, long 90 minute wait for us to
see whether Cale and his cohorts can save humanity. Do they save humanity? 
Who cares?

Author
Brian Matherly
Cast: Matt Damon, Drew Barrymore, Bill Pullman, Nathan Lane, Tone-Loc,
Jim Breuer, Jim Cummings, Janeane Garofalo, David L. Lander, John
Leguizamo, Ron Perlman, Charles Rocket, Alex D. Linz 
Written by: Ben Edlund, John August, and Joss Whedon 
Directed by: Don Bluth, Gary Goldman, and Art Vitello 
Running Time: 97 minutes 
In the year 3028, an evil race of aliens made up entirely of energy
known as the Drej fear that humanity has become too technologically
advanced, upon learning that the humans have recently finished
construction on a device known only as the Titan Project.  Young Cale
(Alex D. Linz), a boy whose father designed the Titan, is whisked away
by a few of his father's friends as the Drej begin a harrowing attack on
the planet.  All of humanity boards various spacecraft in the hopes of
getting away from the chaos before the Drej wipe them out.  Before he
departs alone on the Titan, Cale's father gives him a ring and tells him
that the future of humanity will depend on him.  They go their separate
ways and Cale is able to see his father escape just as the Drej
completely obliterate Earth.  
Fifteen years later, Cale (Matt Damon) is working in the salvage
business, cutting up large derelict spacecraft that clutter space. 
During a break he runs into Korso (Bill Pullman), an old friend of his
father's who has been sent to find Cale, because the ring his father
gave him contains a map that reacts with a device in his hand that will
track down the whereabouts' of Cale's father and the Titan.  Cale is
reluctant to go until the Drej show up and try to kill him, forcing him
to join Korso's ragtag team consisting of Preed (Nathan Lane), Gune
(John Leguizamo), Stith (Janeane Garofalo), and much to Cale's pleasure,
the lovely Akima (Drew Barrymore).  With Korso and his team's help (and
the assistance of some bizarre alien races they meet along the way),
Cale must beat the Drej to the final resting place of the Titan so the
human race may once again thrive.  
Titan A.E. springs from an amazing pedigree.  All of the writers and
directors on the film have come from an excellent background of
animated, sci-fi, and action genre projects, so why doesn't it seem like
the film worked as well as it should?  It's hard to blame the writers
considering where they come from: Ben Edlund is the creator of the
wonderful Tick comic and animated series; John August is the
screenwriter of the incredibly fun mini-Pulp Fiction homage Go! and the
big screen update of Charlie's Angels; and Joss Whedon is the
uber-writer behind Buffy the Vampire Slayer (both the film and the TV
series), Toy Story, Alien:Resurrection, and the X-Men movie (plus he
also did uncredited work on Speed, Waterworld, and Twister).  The same
applies for the directors: Don Bluth and Gary Goldman have worked
together on many decent animated films such as The Secret of NIMH, An
American Tail, All Dogs go to Heaven, and Anastasia (and a few not so
good like Thumbelina, The Pebble and the Penguin, and the absurd
Rock-a-Doodle) and Bluth alone created two of the most important video
games in my life as a child, Dragon's Lair and Space Ace; while Art
Vitello has been the story editor on "The Tick", key animator for ILM on
Poltergeist, director of the animated series' "The Tick", "Tiny Toon
Adventures", "The Real Ghostbusters", and "Disney's Gummi Bears", plus
he also produced the "G.I. Joe" animated series that I used to rush home
to watch everyday after school.  
NOTE: Could part of my problem with the film be attributed to the two
men who get the "Story By" credit?  Randall (Speed 2: Cruise Control)
McCormick and Hans (Anaconda) Bauer are the men behind the original
story and I'm glad that it was handed off to the other writers,
especially after seeing the mess that Speed 2 was.  Both men have only
written three films apiece and Titan A.E. is one (while the other
unmentioned films by both men are virtually unheard of).  
The visuals in the film are amazing and it even plays like it could be
the tamer younger brother to the Heavy Metal series, but ultimately it
feels a little empty.  I never really felt like I was given much of a
chance to sympathize with the characters (although the characters in
Titan A.E. are far more three-dimensional, both emotionally and
physically, than the ones in Lucas' droll "epic" The Phantom Menace). 
The film basically moves from set piece to set piece without much
thought to fleshing out the characters' relationships better.  As a
result, too many things seem rushed into and forced (particularly Cale
and Akima's relationship, which only gets a chance to truly strengthen
towards the end of the film).  Like Disney's recent Dinosaur, Titan A.E.
seems more concerned with showing flashy animation than presenting a
decent story (although Titan A.E. is the better of the two films by a
large margin). 
A big complaint I have about the film is Cale's father giving him the
ring.  By all accounts, there is no need for him to pass the ring along
considering that he now has nothing to do while hiding out in the Titan
except to wait for fifteen years for someone to track down Cale (who
could have been dead for all he knew) and bring him and the ring.  I
could understand if two rings had been made, one with the map and one to
activate the ship's ultimate function, but that is sadly not the case. 
Instead, the father gives away the key to unlock the secrets of the ship
to his son as an excuse for some Star Wars-like "immature young boy must
grow up and save a universe" type story.  If any element of the story
seemed forced it was certainly this one. 
I was impressed by the dark subject matter that was presented in this
film.  Considering its PG rating and animated style, it naturally leans
more towards being a children's film than an adult action film, but
there are some very strong elements in it.  Characters bleed profusely
when shot, necks are broken, and, in the ultimate example, the planet we
call home is completely destroyed within ten minutes of the Fox studio
logo's appearance on screen.  If a better story had been thrown into the
mix, I would have proclaimed this one of the best films of the year. 
Thankfully, the film does keep the annoying sidekicks down to a minimum
(are you listening, Mr. Lucas?) and there are no annoying breaks where
the cast progresses the story in song.  Luckily Bluth and gang, in
another parallel to Heavy Metal, decided to go with modern rock as their
soundtrack.  Unfortunately, the Creed song "Higher" featured in the
trailer is nowhere to be found in this film, but there are some other
fine songs by Lit, Powerman 5000, and others.  A soundtrack is available
for the film and some CD stores are even giving away a free Titan A.E.
comic with the purchase of it. 
Overall, Titan A.E. should have had a little more work put into it. 
Although individual sequences stand out (particularly the scene
featuring the chase through the ring of ice chunks), the bulk of the
movie collapses under its own weight.  At just a little over 90 minutes
though, the film is never dull nor does it wear out its welcome.  I was
just hoping for something with a little more substance.  
If you're just looking for something to kill time, Titan A.E. is a
decent bet whether you're young or old.  If you're looking for a thought
provoking study on how the human race will evolve and move on from where
we currently are, then you may want to look elsewhere.  This film is
pure summer fluff with some decent talent behind it... and who can argue
with that?  [PG]
Reviewed by Brian Matherly - bmath2000@hotmail.com
AOL Instant Messenger: Widescreen25
The Jacksonville Film Journal - http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/

Author
Steve Rhodes
Don Bluth's TITAN A.E. is an expensive Saturday morning cartoon
masquerading as a motion picture.  Although the film contains some
impressive special effects and awesome sound effects, they serve mainly
to call attention to how flat and unappealing most of the remaining
animation is.
But the real problem with TITAN A.E. is the lifeless script by Ben
Edlund, Randall McCormick and Joss Whedon.  Unable to fashion characters
with any depth or interest and unable to come up with any meaningful or
humorous dialog (the movie has exactly one funny scene), the writers
create a script so weak that it is almost non-existent, as if the
characters just tried to ad lib their lines.  Maybe if the studio had
brought in a fourth or fifth writer to work on the screenplay, someone
would have finally found something to say worth hearing.
The story concerns life after earth, hence "A.E."  An evil alien race,
the Drej, have blown our poor planet to smithereens.  As "humanity's
last great hope," Matt Damon plays the initially reluctant hero known as
Cale.  Drew Barrymore plays Cale's sidekick, a tough pilot named Akima.
Bill Pullman is the mysterious Captain Korso, and John Leguizamo is his
navigator, Gune.  None of the voice talent is used properly.  The only
reason to have them onboard is to add the marquee value of their names
to the production.  For an infinitely better animated adventure film see
last year's PRINCESS MONONOKE.
There are a few nice moments in TITAN A.E.  The best sequence calls to
mind the sub chase from THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER.  As the ships chase
each other through the tight confines of large floating ice crystals,
the effect is that of a hall of mirrors at an amusement park.
"My scanners are picking up a veritable cornucopia of nothing," Gune
tells Korso, which is exactly how I felt watching the movie.  More than
anything, TITAN A.E. is like an expensive video game as the characters
shoot at each other.  Maybe it would be fun to play with a joy stick,
but observing it passively provides little enjoyment.
TITAN A.E. runs a very long 1:30.  It is rated PG for action violence,
mild sensuality and brief language and would be acceptable for kids
around 10 and up.  This is an animated film with blood, which may scare
younger viewers.
My son Jeffrey, age 11, gave the film ****, praising particularly the
film's computer graphic sequences.  There with 8 other buddies of his
(all in the prime demographic range for movie, age 11-12), they all
agreed that the graphics were impressive.  About half of them, however,
complained about the weakness of the storyline, but the all of boys'
ratings were pretty high, ranging from *** to ****.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
 
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com ">http://www.InternetReviews.com> 

Author
Mac VerStandig
--- A copy of this capsule review can be found at 
http://www.moviereviews.org/titan_ae.htm ---
A post-apocalyptic look at endangered bands of humans roaming an 
alien-dominated universe, "Titan AE" would be perhaps better suited for its 
Generation-X audience as a video game where attention spans can dictate 
length rather than the already overlong 90 minute production it currently is. 
Yet, America's youth would likely discard such a game if for no reason other 
than the extraordinarily inconsistent and oftentimes poor graphics. While the 
galactic images are quasi-mouth-watering, the species portrayed are more 
crude than those pictured in the recent "Pokemon: The First Movie," hardly a 
testament to the abilities of 21st century computer animators. The plot has 
many holes - not the least of which is a scene where the protagonist seems to 
be able to read the subtitles the film's editors have inserted to aid the 
audience in understanding a gibberish language. Indeed, so little is original 
with all the key concepts being recycled from previous works that a grand 
finale of "I am your father,. . ." would come as little surprise. 

Author
Christopher Null
     Good Will Hunting goes to space in Titan A.E., an ill-conceived and
overambitious animation blowout (courtesy of 20th Century Fox) that
makes recent Disney fare look like thinking men's movies.
     Matt Damon's voice stars as Cale, an eager-beaver twentysomething
in the year 3028 who would be just like any other next-millennium Gen
made of pure energy, natch -- have blown up the earth.
     Talk about a bummer!  Cale's scientist father has vanished along
with his mysterious "Titan" spaceship project, and Cale seems doomed to
life on a crummy salvage station.  But in walks renegade space dude
Korso (Bill Pullman) to rescue Cale from his life of welding, convincing
the lad to go on a quest to find the Titan before the Drej do... and
thus save all of humanity!
     A bit of Independence Day and a lot of Star Trek 2: The Wrath of
Khan, Titan A.E. owes so much of its plot to other movies that I'll be
surprised if a copyright infringement lawsuit isn't slapped down any day
now.  Not that an "homage" can't be fun, even good from time to time,
but unfortunately, Titan is so unoriginal and lackluster in its script
and plotting that it really drags you down.
     With animated fare, really crack visuals tend to outweigh asinine
plots (though they didn't in Disney's recent Dinosaur nor in Fox's last
big animation attempt, Anastasia).  While Titan's spacescapes are often
out of this world (no pun intended), the character animation slapped on
top of them is wretched; an old-style, Scooby Doo-looking bunch of
people slapped atop the background of a dystopian future is just not a
good idea.
     But while the animated people are only so-so, it's the cast of
animated creatures that really look pathetic.  As this is a Don Bluth
production, one expects there to be a talking menagerie.  In Titan, this
means talking space hyenas, talking space turtles, and a horribly
ill-conceived talking space kangaroo/vulture inexplicably and
embarrassingly voiced by Janeane Garofalo.  Altogether, precious few of
the other voices in this movie match their characters.  While Damon and
Cale are clearly doppelgangers, the whiny Pullman as the
rough-and-tumble Korso is laughable, and Drew Barrymore as the vaguely
Asian Akima is simply perplexing.
     In fact, everything about Titan is just plain strange, from the
80s-ish hard rock/power ballad soundtrack that thumps through the whole
movie to the fact that the characters can move around in zero-gravity by
"swimming" through the air.  Rock on, Will.
Director: Don Bluth, Gary Goldman
Producer: Don Bluth, Gary Goldman, David Kirschner
Writer: Ben Edlund, Randall McCormick, Joss Whedon
Starring: Matt Damon, Drew Barrymore, Bill Pullman, Nathan Lane, Tone
Loc, Jim Breuer, Janeane Garofalo, John Leguizamo, Ron Perlman, Alex D.
Linz
http://www.afterearth.com/home.html
">http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html">
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
To unsubscribe from filmcritic.com's Breaking Reviews mailing list,
reply to this e-mail with UNSUBSCRIBE as the subject.  E-mail address
changes via reply with both old and new addresses.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Don Bluth and Gary Goldman.
Voices: Matt Damon, Drew Barrymore, Bill Pullman, John Leguizamo, Nathan Lane,
Janeane Garofalo.
2000 - 95 minutes
Rated PG (for violence).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, June 17, 2000.
Don Bluth's and Gary Goldman's "Titan A.E." is an unusual and decidedly 
uneasy hybrid of animation and live-action intentions. A sci-fi picture that 
heavily borrows from "Star Wars," and its countless other clones, the film 
offers intermittent excitement during some of its action sequences, but the 
weak characters and tiresome screenplay ruin whatever chance it has to be a 
worthwhile endeavor. 
Littered with violence and even a little bloodshed, as well as a quirky (for 
animated
standards) rock soundtrack, an attempt has clearly been made to attract 
preteen and
younger teenage boys between the ages of 9-15. While it may very well do just 
that, and is certainly a nice change of pace to have an animated movie 
targeting others outside of the Disney crowd, "Titan A.E." is basically a 
stillborn production, and amidst all of its splashy special effects is a 
story that is painfully behind the times. 
Set in the year 3033, fifteen years after the Earth has been destroyed by a 
powerful alien race known as the Drej, the remaining humans have been 
drifting about space, setting up home at various nearby space stations. 
19-year-old Cale (voiced by Matt Damon) is a lonely young man who was torn 
apart from his father as a child when Earth was being evacuated, but has kept 
up hope of seeing him again based on his father's promise. Working at a 
salvage space station, Cale meets Korso (Bill Pullman), who tells him that 
the Titan Project, his father's invention that has the power to create an 
entirely new planet, can be found far way on Planet Ice, with the ring Cale's 
father gave him long ago having the power to act as a map to the humans' 
savior. Joined by the parentless Akima (Drew Barrymore), Cale sets off in a 
race to find the infamous Titan before the Drej do.
The one thing "Titan A.E." has going for it is its live-action feel. At 
certain key moments, I found myself imagining how effortless much of it could 
be with real actors, and how well-directed it was, in that respect. With no 
singing characters and an action-oriented storyline, the film is reminiscent 
in many ways of anime movies. Many of the action scenes are, indeed, rousing, 
particularly a spaceship chase through a mass of broken ice that turns the 
surroundings into a sort of Maze of Mirrors carnival attraction. 
The animation, like the film itself, is wildly uneven, with the settings and 
backdrops at times awe-inspiringly real. The characters, however, are a 
different matter entirely, looking like pure television kiddie fare. Poorly 
structured and drawn, their lack of any real life, along with the utterly 
forgettable voice-over work from all involved, renders the picture, as a 
whole, cold and distant.
Try as Don Bluth and Gary Goldberg might, "Titan A.E." is an ambitious 
animated film that at least attempts to aim for something different, but is 
impaired by its hackneyed plot, much the same way the inferior "Dinosaur" 
was. Without any well-developed characters or a satisfying arc, but with 
several qualities of its own, "Titan A.E." falls into the trap of many movies 
of its ilk--it knows the dance, but has forgotten the tune.

Author
Mark O'Hara
For my money  and cinemas are taking more of it all the time  Fox's new 
animated release TITAN AE is the best animated film in a couple of years, at 
least since Dreamworks' THE PRINCE OF EGYPT.
The plot has its derivative elements.  It's a story about an orphaned male 
hero named Cale Tucker (voice of Matt Damon).  We watch as Cale's brilliant 
father gives custody of his young son to an alien friend named Tech, and 
then takes off in his master creation  the ship of the title, a vessel that 
could insure the survival of Homo sapiens.  The marauding aliens (the Drej, 
pronounced phonetically) quickly dipatch Earth, blowing it into chunks that 
destroy many ships full of escaping humans, as well as the Moon.  After the 
instant lapse of fifteen years, we see the grown Cale doing menial labor; he 
also experiences the discrimination that several aliens heap upon species 
that do not have a native planet.
The main thrust of the plot involves a renegade captain drafting Cale into 
the attempt to revivify humanity.  The captain (Bill Pullman) shows Cale a 
glowing map genetically imprinted upon Cale's hand.  The map displays the 
location of Titan, stowed years ago before it could be deployed by Cale's 
now-dead father.  How Cale will salvage Titan and cope with various 
complications along the voyage is the stuff of the plot.
The plot is certainly not stodgy.  Although some scenes are reminiscent of 
other science fiction flicks, the film's pace is fast.  But the real star is 
the animation.
As any film buff could predict, chase scenes take up several minutes of the 
story's run.  In one scene we are given a sort of poetically beautiful 
release, in which beings known as wake angels pursue the ship piloted by 
Cale.  It's pure computer-engineered action, the ship and angels weaving 
their way through reddish clouds and formations.  In the chases involving 
real danger, the animation is even sharper.  Drej ships dive and fire, as 
Cale and his fellow adventurers continue to elude almost all attempts at 
capture.  The whole deal's been done before  just not in this precise, 
engaging manner.
Matt Damon does a solid job voicing  Cale Tucker. He brings to the role no 
distracting verbal mannerisms, only a straight and very efficient character.
Drew Barrymore as the female hero Akima does carry along her distinctive 
slow and smooth voice.  This is not a problem except that it is easy to 
recognize her, and hard to match the voice with the Asian features the 
directors (Don Bluth and Gary Goldman) have chosen to give Akima.
Bill Pullman does perhaps the strongest work in giving a dynamic character 
to the captain that risks his life to save Cale from the eerie blue aliens, 
the Drej.  Pullman's voice conveys a nice edge, a savviness that we find 
memorable, especially after the character undergoes swift and drastic 
changes.
Now that most schoolchildren are out for the summer, a good movie is often a 
desirable way to spend an afternoon.  I'd recommend taking children as young 
as seven to see TITAN AE.  There are some violent scenes, and some horrid 
examples of betrayal , but nothing graphic enough to inspire nightmares 
(unless they involve the faceless, evil Drej!).  Best of all, the film 
reaches into the adult range because of its quick pace, its intelligence 
(there's even a scene that parodies sci-fi conventions), and its outstanding 
animation.


Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Set in the year 3028, many years after the planet Earth has been blown to
bits by an alien race named the Drej, a young boy is discovered to hold the
secret map of the Titan machine inside of his hand. The machine holds the
power to unleash another planet for the few surviving humans still roaming
around in space, and the opportunity to re-ignite their evolution.
CRITIQUE:
A visual parade of colors, animation and the darkest corners of the
universe, set the pace for an okay story featuring some not so interesting
characters and some really cool-looking aliens. One of the things that I
like best about movies is how they can so easily transport you into another
realm of life, taking you away from your daily problems, making you forget
where you are, and showing you things you'd never dreamt of ever seeing
before. Like many other sci-fi films before it, this movie manages to take
us beyond our own constricted little world and show us the supposed beauty
and darkness of the galaxy floating above around us. But unlike many of its
live-action predecessors, this film manages to truly create a vision of
another place that I've honestly never experienced before. The beautiful
orange-colored balls floating above the waters of one planet, the wondrous
lights, sounds and waves caressing the infinite space of another, and the
awesome spectacle of the Ice Rings of Tigrin. Wow. Just beautiful to see.
I would watch this movie all over again, even without sound for that matter.
In fact, one of the main problems that I did have with this movie was its
characters, all of whom just seemed a little too bland for my taste. Not
sure if it was the voices of Damon and Barrymore that just didn't click for
me, or if it was the way that the characters were written, very dry and
lifeless, but none of the featured players managed to capture my imagination
as much as the visuals did. I was also taken aback by the juxtaposition of
the amazing "outside" visuals of space, the planets, the ships, the
wonderful colors, and the cartoon looking TV character animation of the
"inside" visuals. Seemed like an odd and somewhat distracting combination.
The story was serviceable enough, with a little bit of action sprayed
throughout, and I definitely loved the soundtrack...an animation movie with
a rock 'n roll touch? Give me more, dammit! Overall, I would recommend this
film to anyone who loves their visuals, who wants to see a different kind of
animation movie, and certainly to all the pot smokers out there, who should
have no problem trippin' all over this film's massive colorful sponge of
delight. Of course, if a tantalizing tale, complete originality or strength
of characters are what you look for in a film, then this puppy might not be
the best thing for you.

Author
Jon Popick
Toward the end of Fox's new animated feature Titan AE, one of its
characters shouts `Let's not do that again,' after flying a spaceship
through a tough-to-navigate ice field.  One has to wonder when Fox is
going to come to the same conclusion about their animated film division.
They continue to shell out top dollar to produce expensive toons that
are panned by critics and go widely unseen by the public (like 1997's
Anastasia).
Titan lifts its story from  oh, I don't know  every successful
science-fiction film that I've ever seen in my life.  The only thing
that keeps Titan from being an extremely unwatchable film is the
animation, which is astonishingly well-done here.  But like other highly
touted animated films of late, Titan's vividly realistic backgrounds and
inanimate objects are ruined by dull sketches of people and other
assorted creatures.  Why does the technology used to animate humans seem
like it hasn't been updated since Pearl Harbor?  I've seen
better-looking people in after school cartoons and video games, not to
mention Toy Story and its sequel.
Titan is set some 1,000 years from now and kicks off with a spectacular
opening sequence, where an alien race called The Dredge hover over Earth
with the intention of destroying our planet.  The Dredge don't mess
around like those pesky creatures from ID4.  They blow Earth up in all
of five seconds, sending chunks of it scattering around the solar system
like the lumps of loose stool in my toilet after a night of hearty
Mexican food and beer (hence the AE  for `After Earth').  Some of
Earth's humans manage to escape before The Dredge do their dirty work,
including a blond scamp named Cale (Alex D. Linz, Home Alone 3).  Cale's
father gives him a pat on the head and a gold ring, and tells him that
he'll see him in a few years.
Flash to fifteen years later, where an adult Cale (Matt Damon, The
Talented Mr. Ripley) is working as a space welder on a salvage station.
With most of Earth's inhabitants destroyed by The Dredge, humans are now
looked down on and bullied like members of a middle-school chess club.
One day, the Luke Skywalker-like Cale is approached by the Han Solo-like
Korso (Bill Pullman, Brokedown Palace), who tells him that he is the
only person in the galaxy that can determine the location of something
called the Titan Project, which is supposed to be humanity's only chance
at defeating The Dredge.
It turns out that Cale's ring, which he wears every day despite hating
his father for leaving him, is genetically encrypted and produces a map
revealing the location of the Titan (of course the magic ring appears on
his hand only when it's integral to the plot, and Cale never noticed the
little buttons on the inside that Korso presses to activate the stupid
thing).  Cale is reluctant at first, but eventually relents and joins
Korso in his search for the Titan.  Korso has a bunch of sidekicks,
including a super-genius turtle that sounds like Peter Lorre (John
Leguizamo, Summer of Sam), a gun-toting bad-ass (Nathan Lane, Isn't She
Great), something called Stith (Janeane Garofalo, 200 Cigarettes) and a
gorgeous brunette named Akima (Drew Barrymore, Never Been Kissed).
There are no surprises in Titan's script.  In fact, the only thing
remotely unexpected is how little the characters look like their
real-life counterparts.  I always thought that animators tried to make
their characters appear somewhat similar to the actors that provide
their voices.  Damon is the only one who comes close, but his Cale is a
dead-ringer for James Van Der Beek (I kept waiting for the Paula Cole
song to sneak up on me).  Pullman isn't close at all, and Barrymore's
character looks Asian, and even has an Asian-sounding name.  Lane would
probably burst into tears just from seeing a photograph of a gun, so the
idea of him playing his role is laughable.
I expected a lot more from Titan, especially considering the talent that
produced the script.  Three gifted writers (Joss Whedon, Buffy the
Vampire Slayer), John August (Go) and Ben Edlund (The Tick) churned out
a paint-by-numbers story with a really silly ending.  Their script was
based on a story by Randall McCormick (Speed 2: Cruise Control) and Hans
Bauer (Anaconda), which could explain a lot about the film's
crapulence.  I was looking forward to snappy dialogue and witty banter,
like from Buffy and Go, but there was precious little to enjoy.  I did
laugh out loud at the cheesy A-Teamesque montage of Cale and friends
repairing a dilapidated spaceship, but I don't think that's what
overrated directors Don Bluth and Gary Goldman (Anastasia) were going
for.
So who exactly is supposed to want to see Titan?  The question is a
no-brainer, judging from the people that showed up for the advanced
screening.  The film is targeted to prepubescent boys and nerdy men that
still haven't seen a real live naked woman yet.  This is probably why
the plot features a jaded guy with floppy hair that doesn't fit in
socially and still manages to land an impossibly curvy girlfriend.  It's
also chock-full of songs from Powerman 5000, Lit, Luscious Jackson and a
plethora of other hot modern rock ballads.
1:34 - PG for action violence, brief language, an animated bare ass and
the implication that Cale has a boner in one scene

Author
Chad Polenz
It's a good thing most animated sci-fi movies come from Japan, because "Titan 
A.E." is proof that
Hollywood doesn't have a clue how to do it. 
I don't know what this film is supposed to be about. From what I can tell 
it's about a young man named
Kale who's one of the last survivors of Earth in the early 31st Century who 
unknowingly possesses the key
to saving and re-generating what is left of the human race. That's a fine 
premise for an action-packed sci-fi
animated movie, but there's no payoff. 
The story takes the main characters all over the galaxy in their search for a 
legendary ship that the evil
"Dredge" aliens want to destroy for no apparent reason. So in the process we 
get a lot of spaceship fights,
fistfights, blaster fights and more double-crosses than you can shake a stick 
at. There's so much pointless
sci-fi banter it's too much to take. The galaxy here is a total rip-off of 
the "Star Wars" universe the creators
don't bother filling in the basic details which makes the story confusing, 
the characters unmotivated and
superficial and the plot just plain boring. 
Despite the fantastic animation and special effects, it's just not an 
interesting movie. 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
TITAN A.E. (2000)
Rated PG; running time 95 minutes
Genre: Animated/SciFi
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0120913
Official site: http://www.afterearth.com/
Written by: Ben Edlund, Randall McCormick
Directed by: Don Bluth, Gary Goldman
Cast: Voices of: Matt Damon, Drew Barrymore, Bill Pullman, Nathan Lane,
Janeane Garofalo, John Leguizamo, Tone Loc, Ron Perlman
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamstitan.html
Of all the Chicks in 3BC, I'm the one voted Most Likely To Review A
Cartoon.  It should come as no surprise, then, that I chose to review
TITAN A.E. this week--as opposed to The Diva, whose words on the subject
sounded something like "I sure didn't wanna review that mess".  Mebbe I
shoulda oughta listened to her words of wisdom.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
In the year 3028, a Bad, Bad bunch of aliens known as the Drej [Bad
aliens! Bad, Bad aliens!] inexplicably blast the planet Earth, and its
inhabitants, away like so many buzzing flies.  That would be
that--except for the fact that a group of secret...uh, whatever they
were...knew the Drej were coming and evacuated a bunch of Earthlings
just before the Drej arrived.
One of the secret...whatever they were's, Tucker (Ron Perlman), asks his
good buddy Tek (Tone Loc) to take Tucker's young son, Cale (Matt Damon)
with him in one of the evacuating ships so that Tucker could go do some
Secret Stuff with the Secret Spaceship known as the Titan--knowing he
may never see Cale again.  Feeling abandoned, Cale grows up with a chip
on his shoulder about dear old dad and humans--the few that are left,
anyway--in general.  Jaded, he feels all the more cynical when another
human, Joe Korso (Bill Pullman) shows up with alien shipmates Preed
(Nathan Lane), Stith (Janeane Garofalo), Jar-Ja...uh, Gune (John
Leguizamo), and the human female slash potential love interest (slash
[Luke]Warm Place To Put It), Akima (Drew Barrymore)--with the message
that Cale may hold the future of humanity in his hand.
The Upshot:
I found this flick pretty hard to wrap my reviewing braincells around,
mostly because it never found its legs enough for me to invest any care
in what was going on on the screen.  It was clearly derivative of many
movies, both animated and traditional; in various places, I was reminded
of STAR WARS, HEAVY METAL (though HM had a much better musical backbeat;
"Titan's" music seemed much more cheesy by comparison), the "Star Trek"
movies, and even a Bruce Lee flick or two.  But in its lack of developed
backstory (in spite of the storyline presented, the viewer is left
wondering why much of the action takes place), it put me in mind of the
most disasterous collection of moving images of the century: none other
than SUPERNOVA  [OW!  Uh, Sorry about that.  I had told my fingers to
never type that dreaded name again...]
That's not a very fair comparison, to be sure.  Even in its worst
moments, "Titan" was nowhere near as galling as "Stupornova".  But as
with that piece of sh...um, detritus, "Titan" certainly bit off way more
than it could chew, story-wise.  With this movie's enormous leaps of
logic [Uh, how did Cale so easily pilot every spacecraft he encountered?
*How long* does it take to rebuild an old, dilapidated ship, again?  And
why bother putting the Drej speech in subtitles, when obviously Cale
Magically understood every word as if Big Poppa Drej spoke perfect
English, huh, why? WHY?], I felt my eyes rolling faster than a bowling
ball down the gutter lane.
Like their voice counterparts in DINOSAUR, the actors don't add much
character to their characters--and unlike DINOSAUR, the actor's voices
aren't readily distinguishable (though Nathan Lane, bless his sarcastic
lil' heart, gave it ye olde college try).  This, I think, was to
"Titan's" deficit.  After all, Matt Damon and company had to have been
paid a pretty penny for their, in essence, voice-overs; if one couldn't
tell these highly-paid actors from Joe Schmoe From Kokomo, one would
think the producers didn't get their money's worth, eh?
All those things could be forgiven, had the animation been top-notch.
With a name like Don Bluth (THE SECRET OF NIMH, AN AMERICAN TAIL, ALL
DOGS GO TO HEAVEN) behind it, good animation should've been a given,
right?  It should've.  It wasn't.  Worse, it seemed schizophrenic, with
the human and alien characters drawn by Bluth in traditional (for him)
cartoon style, but the ships, planets, and various backgrounds,
obviously computer animated.  This gave the movie a disjointed feeling,
with the computer animated sections overpowering the traditional
drawings (note, for example, how stiff the characters look in the
windows of the computer animated spaceships, as if they were stills of
dolls sitting in their seats).  Anytime the viewer is
taken-out-of-the-moment by such jarring revelations, that's most def A
Bad Thing.
In spite of everything I've written above, I don't want you, gentle
reader, to go away thinking that TITAN A.E. was bad.  Spirit-less,
lacking in humor, and poorly-thought-out, sure.  But not bad.  Anything
that (ObQuickieBlackFactor) includes even a brief movie moment
confirming that Minorities Are Part Of The Future, can't be *that* bad,
can it?
Bammer's Bottom Line:
It's just too bad TITAN A.E. couldn't make up its mind and go either
full-out as traditional animation, or hi-tech CGI sci-fi.  Not that it'd
make much difference either way, I reckon; it never impressed me as
being much more than a half-hearted attempt at wrapping a movie around a
soundtrack that'll no doubt sell millions.
TITAN A.E. (rating: yellowlight):
On a "Star Trek" comparison scale, this one felt more like the STAR
TREK: THE MOTION PICTURE dud than the much-better STAR TREK 2: THE WRATH
OF KHAN.

Author
Ron Small
Director: Don Bluth, Gary Goldman, Art Vitello
Screenplay: Hans Bauer, Randall McCormick, Ben Edlund, John 
August, Joss Whedon
Starring (Voices): Matt Damon, Drew Barrymore, Bill Pullman, Nathan Lane, 
Tone Loc, Jim Breuer, John Leguizamo, Janeane Garofalo, Ron Perlman, Alex D. 
Linz
TITAN A.E is like a Saturday Morning Cartoon version of STAR WARS. I didn't 
really care for it, but then I didn't like STAR WARS either. That film, for 
all its ingenious crossover marketing coups, is one helluva hollow space 
opera, a movie that managed to single handedly turn one of the most 
fascinating film genre's into bargain matinee trash all while audiences and 
critics cheered on. The effects of STAR WARS are still felt today, seen in 
lame brained space westerns of recent years like BATTLEFIELD EARTH, LOST IN 
SPACE, WING COMMANDER and SUPERNOVA. I loathe STAR WARS for what it did to 
science fiction. And TITAN A.E proudly carries on its tradition. Twenty years 
later, after the cinematic death of intelligent science fiction, TITAN A.E 
comes at us with everything that made STAR WARS crap (lame comic relief, 
horrible dialogue, non-existent characters) and its few strengths (terrific 
visuals) as well.
Don Bluth's (THE SECRET OF NIMH, AN AMERICAN TAIL) production replaces the 
typical gee-whiz Mark Hamil kid-hero with a more modern, cynical Luke 
Skywalker figure, Cale, voiced with wry Will Hunting sarcasm by Matt Damon 
whose affect rarely reveals anything beyond vague annoyance. He's as equally 
bland as Skywalker but in a wry self-aware DAWSON'S CREEK sort of way. He's 
the wiseacre hero for the late 90's\early millennium, all those "gosh, golly 
geeisms" replaced with "Whatevers".
As the film opens we meet Cale as a young mop topped child who's forced to 
flee the earth with his well-built father (who might have walked in from a GI 
JOE cartoon). It's actually quite a scene- a near classic moment as the peace 
of a barren earth is rapidly interrupted by monstrous, bug-like space ships 
blasting away at everything in sight. Cale and his father are divided, the 
mop topped one escaping in a separate ship that flys past earth just as our 
beloved planet explodes into a glitter of galvanic rock. It's exciting and a 
bit unsettling. For just a moment I was ten years old again, re-living the 
thrills of EMPIRE STRIKES BACK (the only truly great film in the STAR WARS 
quartet, one that melds substance with excitement in a way the original 
didn't even attempt) and creating massive space operas of my own with GI JOE 
and TRANSFORMER action figures. This could be it, I thought. This could 
finally be that summer movie I'd been pinning for. I smiled ear to ear, laid 
back, then to my extreme dismay, some annoying Jar-Jar esque comic relief 
figures arrive, which served to immediately shake me from my state of child 
like wonder back into the state of nitpicky movie critic.
It's years after the prologue and Cale is now drawn to look like a BACKSTREET 
BOY. He's a laborer drilling away at space rocks as the camera hyperbolically 
spins to and fro while rock music blares. Yes this is one of those. Our hero 
is approached by a gruff soldier (voiced by Bill Pullman, doing his best 
Tommy Lee Jones), who informs him that the location of the TITAN, a spaceship 
that his father engineered, is etched in Cale's DNA. Cale is interested 
enough to join the captain's ship crew and aid in the search of this mythical 
craft. Aboard the ship we meet the R2D2 and C3PO stand ins; a Kangaroo like 
creature with a pig-like snout voiced with added cynicism by sarcasm 
personified, Janeane Garofalo, and a tortoise-like creature, Gune (voiced by 
John Leguizamo), who like Jar-Jar has the temerity to refer to himself in 
third person. Meanwhile Cale falls for the only other human shipmate (what, 
you got somethin' against inter species dating, Cale?), Akima (an Aeon Flux 
look-alike voiced with valley girlish apathy by Drew Barrymore), who 
immediately dislikes Cale which cues us to believe that by the end, they'll 
be smooching arm in arm.
The story is largely irrelevant, as the movie seems to spend the brunt of its 
energy on creating eye-popping visuals, nearly all of which are suitably 
enthralling. The most effective being a blood-pumping chase through the Ice 
Rings of Tigran, a locale made up entirely of large, reflective ice crystals 
that shatter with the slightest tap.
For science fiction purists (the kind who read L. Ron Hubbard like it's the 
bible or something) TITAN A.E may be a bit too unrelenting in its anime meets 
Playstation visuals set to constant Alterna rock; it's almost like an 
advanced, scripted version of those psychedelic 60's film reels that 
counterculture rebels goggled at while passing joints. The various directors' 
certainly go the distance visually; their attempts to mix 3-D computer 
animation effects with the traditional 2-D animated drawings is near-seamless.
Despite the inventive eye candy, I began to desire a bit more substance with 
my FX demo, but really, what did I expect from a cartoon? TITAN A.E is about 
on par with Don Bluth's other workmanlike animated attempts to usurp Disney. 
It has some unexpected moments like a bit wherein our heroes attempt to foil 
a big, dumb looking guard who actually turns out to be quite intelligent. But 
then it has far too many scenes like the one where Cale and Akima fix a 
gigantic run down space craft during a montage that makes it look about as 
easy as jump starting a Mustang. Or the one where the lead baddie yells to 
his minions (while in the midst of battle),"Destroy the ice shield that 
protects the Titan". Oh, that ice shield. To paraphrase former NEW YORK 
magazine film critic John Simon, "TITAN A.E will do very nicely for those 
lucky enough to be childish or unlucky enough never to have grown up". I'm 
sure Mr.Lucas is very pleased.
http://www.geocities.com/incongruity98   Reeling  (Ron Small)

Author
Shay Casey
Year: 2000. Starring the voices of Matt Damon, Drew Barrymore, Bill 
Pullman, Nathan Lane, Janeane Garofalo, John Leguizamo, Tone Loc, Jim 
Breuer, Alex D. Linz, Ron Perlman. Story by Hans Bauer and Randall 
McCormick. Screenplay by Ben Edlund, John August, and Joss Whedon. 
Directed by Don Bluth and Gary Goldman. Rated PG.
"Titan A.E." is a frustrating movie. You watch it, and you get the idea 
that it's trying really, really hard to be a great film, a modern 
classic. But then you come up with an unshakable feeling that the movie 
just isn't working, and no matter how many stops it pulls out, you just 
can't shake that feeling. That's what happened to me while watching 
"Titan A.E." It's an ambitious film, but it's nowhere close to 
greatness. And the more I think about it, the more its failures stand 
out.
The film takes place roughly a thousand years in the future, where an 
evil race made of pure energy called the Drej has destroyed Earth. 
Humans now exist as an "orphan" species, drifting from outpost to 
outpost without finding any real home. Cale (voice of Alex D. Linz) was 
a young boy when Earth was destroyed, and his father was one of the 
principal officials in charge of evacuating the planet. But Cale's 
father disappeared after Earth's destruction, never to be heard from 
again. Now a cynical survivor (and now voiced by Matt Damon), Cale 
stumbles upon a ship with a partially human crew at a space dock. He's 
startled to find that the captain of the ship, gruff Commander Korso 
(Bill Pullman), has actually been looking for him. Korso, a friend of 
Cale's father, reveals that Cale actually holds the key to the humans' 
last hope at finding a new home: His father left him a 
genetically-encoded map pinpointing the whereabouts of the Titan, a 
planet-sized space station hidden somewhere in outer space. 
Unfortunately, the Drej are interested in finding the Titan as well, and 
they are hunting Cale down in order to pry the information from him. Not 
allowed much of a choice after the Drej attack his current residence, 
Cale agrees to go with Korso.
The story sounds fine, like a pretty good opportunity for an exciting 
space adventure. It's derivative, sure, but most movies of this kind 
are, and "Titan A.E." can hardly be faulted for cribbing ideas when the 
films it's cribbing from ("Star Wars," "Star Trek") would have to plead 
guilty to the same charge. But that doesn't let it off the hook for 
getting its premise all wrong. "Star Wars" took place in a consistent, 
expansive universe; you always felt that what made it to the screen was 
only a small fraction of what was floating around inside George Lucas' 
head. "Titan A.E." presents no such depth, because the writers haven't 
paid much attention to the details of their own plot. For example, it's 
established that the Drej want to destroy the human race, but we never 
find out why they want to do that. What threat do the humans pose to 
them? Who knows? Supporting characters are introduced without any reason 
given for them to be there. How did Commander Korso put together such a 
diverse crew? Who knows? Korso remarks that he's been looking for Cale 
"for many years," so he can find the Titan, for which he's also been 
searching "for many years." A single person is easier to find in the 
vast expanse of space than a planet-sized spaceship? Why not just look 
for the Titan itself? Who knows?
The script fails at proper characterization, too. The heroes in a space 
opera don't have to be deep, but they should at least be likeable. 
"Titan A.E." fails on both counts. The apparent good guys are only good 
in the sense that they don't wish anyone else any specific harm. Cale 
may be blond and fresh-faced, but he's so bland, and so self-pitying, 
it's hard to really root for him. Japanese space-punk Akima (Drew 
Barrymore) serves as Cale's love interest, and she's not very 
interesting either. Nor is her character consistent: Sometimes she's 
tough, sometimes she's helpless, depending on what the rote story 
demands. Korso comes off as equally subject to the whims of the script. 
His motivations change back and forth without much conviction; by the 
end, you're wondering if this guy believes in anything at all. It 
doesn't help that the big-name cast turns in mostly uninspiring voice 
performances. Damon, Barrymore, Pullman, and Janeane Garofalo sound 
bored. Nathan Lane and John Leguizamo (as the ostensibly "colorful" 
sidekicks) are at least enthusiastic, but still unfocused. Most of the 
actors' dialogue is horribly concocted: The "funny" lines induce 
cringing, the serious ones occasional giggling.
"Titan A.E." does contain some breathtaking imagery. Visuals, not 
surprisingly, are the film's saving grace. Two action set-pieces, one 
during the Earth's destruction and another in a field of ice crystals, 
are about as exciting as anything you're going to see this year. But 
they're oases in a desert, because "Titan A.E." doesn't make these or 
any other scenes feel necessary. A plot-driven film's narrative ought to 
be a fast-paced, naturally flowing progression to a satisfying climax, 
but "Titan A.E." feels more like a series of individual scenes slammed 
together in chronological order. It doesn't move.
What "Titan A.E." forgets about making a fun space adventure is that the 
adventure is supposed to be *fun*. Almost every plot point is treated 
with such grim portentousness that any and all vitality is sucked right 
out of the production. Obviously, a film of this nature can't goof its 
way through the story, and some things need to be treated seriously 
(like the Force, for example). But there also needs to be a sense of 
giddy enthusiasm, an indication that the filmmakers were having as much 
fun making their movie as they expect the audience to have watching it. 
This film gives no such indication. Instead of being a "Star Wars"-like 
joyous romp, "Titan A.E." is a somber march towards a predictable 
conclusion. This is not the stuff of a modern classic.
For more reviews, go to http://www.geocities.com/sycasey/movies.html
