Title
Review for Once Upon a Time in America (1984)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Sergio Leone
Writers: Sergio Leone, Leonardo Benvenuti, Piero De Bernardi, Enrico
Medioli, Franco Arcalli, and Franco Ferrini (based on the novel "The
Hoods" by Harry Grey)
Starring: Robert DeNiro, James Woods, Elizabeth McGovern, Tuesday Weld,
Treat Williams, William Forsythe, Danny Aiello, Joe Pesci, Burt Young,
James Hayden, Larry Rapp, Darlanne Fluegel, Richard Bright, Scott Tiler,
Rutsy Jacobs, Jennifer Connelly
In his long career, spanning from the mid-60s to the mid-80s, italian
director Sergio Leone made a total of seven (7) big films, most epic
westerns, like "Fistful of Dollars" and "The Good, the Bad, and the
Ugly."  "Once Upon a Time in America," his final film before his death,
is the culmination of everything he's ever done, so obviously it would
be a tad anti-climactic.  Featuring the same style, but a more
experimental narrative, the film seems to be too ambiguous for its own
good.  But somehow it holds together, and becomes a masterpiece, and a
wonderful little exit piece for the genius Mr. Leone.
"Once Upon a Time in America" is a gangster pic, but hardly the
traditional kind.  Sure, it embraces all kinds of cliches, like the
gangsters looking absolutely fabulous all the time, substituting style
for characterization, and featuring paradise discovered and then
tragically lost.  But Leone turns these cliches into pure brilliance,
putting an interesting twist on the almost overdone genre.  All of
Leone's films steer clear of deep characterization, and instead focus on
more grandiose themes, like amorality, betrayal, trust, and greed.
The film takes place in three time settings - 1921, 1933, and 1968 -
each placed in non-linear bizarro order.  In fact, the first twenty
minutes of the film are a series of bizarre little vignettes, seeming to
have absolutely no connection other than the fact that they all have
gangsters in them.  With no narration, we are left to guess what is
going on, but we should actually remember exactly what occurs in this
introduction, as we will be forced to revisit it in order to figure out
this movie, which is structured like a puzzle.
The film takes place in three different time settings: 1921, 1933, and
1968, each visited in bizarro order.  There is no underlying plot, but
deals with a group of people who live in these times, and are either
involved directly or indirectly with the world of organized crime.  The
film's protagonist is Noodles (Robert DeNiro as an adult, Scott Tiler as
a kid), who starts his life of crime back in the days of prohibition.
Noodles grew up in the Lower East Side of Manhattan, which is the jewish
section, and was friends with some other kid gangsters, such as Patsy,
Cockeye, and Max (Rutsy Jacobs as a kid, but James Woods as an adult). 
Although being tempted by an attractive young girl named Deborah
(Jennifer Connelly - *swoon* - at 13 - *non-swoon* - as a kid, and
Elizabeth McGovern as an adult), he still prefers the company of young
gangsters, and they are soon part of the whole world of organized crime.
The film also visits the 30s, where Noodles is released from prison
after 12 years (he did some nasty stuff as a kid), and starts right up
again with the grown-up Patsy, Cockeye, and Max.  And throughout the
film, we return to the late 60s, where Noodles is an old man, painfully
remembering his past, and looking more ravaged and lonely than other
older people.  DeNiro is at his best in this film when he's old; he
nails the look and feel of a man who regrets his entire life, but cannot
turn time back.
The film is constructed in a wonderful fashion, unearthing facts as the
film moves on.  In all his films, the plot unfolds wonderfully,
introducing us to things on a need to know basis.  We don't know exactly
why Noodles is so depressed at his old age until towards the ending, and
somehow it's not anti-climactic.  Leone is a master story-teller, always
carefully plotting his films.  The ending of "For a Few Dollars More,"
for instance, when we find out the true motivation for the Colonel's
actions, is interesting, but not a let-down.
But unlike his other films, this has a much different feel.  Sure, we
get the same kind of style Leone is famous for, which several minutes of
no dialogue but pure montage which are engrossing and hypnotic.  And
most of his characters are amoral, mainly because they can't be anything
else.  But for the first time, we get some true emotion from a Leone
film.  We feel sorry for Noodles since he spoils any chance he has to
turn his life around.  And instead of a simple plot, the story unfolds
in an episodic fashion.  But luckily, we still get Leone's knack for
close-ups, cool shots, and making anyone look cool (even William
Forsythe's face is as memorable as that of Henry Fonda in "Once Upon a
Time in the West").
Also, Leone adds a lot of depth to the story, as well as some really
analytical things.  For instance, the film opens and ends in an opium
shop, where the 1933 Noodles is getting high, and remembering parts of
his life.  Perhaps the whole 1968 part is just what he thinks will
happen, a reminder that his life is going to be full of misery since he
was chosen to live on the opposite side of the law.  It makes for a more
rewarding film experience.
The music by Leone regular Ennio Morricone is amazing as well.  He
creates a sad score, filled with beauty and depth.  He occasionally
adapts some traditional tunes throughout the film, including the
Beatles' "Yesterday."  Morricone has made one of his best scores for
this film.
The acting is also very good.  DeNiro, as I said, just looks and feels
like a man regretful of what he is.  And James Woods is awesome,
especially in some of his later scenes.  Elizabeth McGovern is actually
pretty good, although her younger self played by Jennfier Connelly is
better.  The big scene stealer award goes to Tuesday Weld, who plays a
girl who is raped by Noodles and eventually becomes Max's girlfriend. 
There are lots of smaller parts for semi-famous and future famous
people, like Joe Pesci, "Rocky"'s Burt Young, Treat Williams, William
Forsythe, and Danny Aiello.
Leone has always been a fan of long epic films ("The Good, the Bad, and
the Ugly" and "Once Upon a Time in the West" are both two hours and
forty-five minutes long), and this one is barely an exception.  Running
at a lenghty three hours and forty-five minutes, the film still never
drags.  Leone always keeps things moving, and is a master of montage. 
Sure, it's almost four hours long, but you'll never be bored, and you'll
be reluctant to turn it off because it is so positively hypnotic (if you
still want to see it but don't want to see a four hour gangster film,
there is a two hour and fifteen minute theatrical cut, but I have no
idea what they cut from it.  this film is so elegantly structured that
if you took thirty seconds away, the film would fall apart).
"Once Upon a Time in America" is a film which is amazingly narcotic:
it's hard to stop.  Leone has always had this kind of power over his
viewers, and this film, the culmination of his career, is one of this
best examples of this.  While I still think "The Good, the Bad, and the
Ugly" is a better film, "Once Upon a Time in America" is definitely one
of his best, and one hell of a way to go out.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Brian Koller
There are people who believe that most movies should be
ninety minutes or less in length.  Anything more, and the
storyline and tension becomes diluted.
Perhaps that is the case for most directors, but definitely
not for Sergio Leone, who was a master at making films that
challenged the audience's kidneys.  His best movies:
"The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly", "Once Upon a Time in
the West", and "Once Upon a Time in America", all take
their time, with the focus on cinematography rather than
script.
"Once Upon a Time in America" was his last direction, and it
could be his best.  It tells the story of the rise and
fall of New York Jewish mobsters, covering a time period
from the early 1920s to the late 1960s.  Robert De Niro
and James Woods have the leading roles, with Elizabeth McGovern
and Tuesday Weld playing their girlfriends.
The film goes on and on for nearly four hours.  This led to
heavy cuts by the studio that damaged the continuity, but
most of the film's length has since been restored.  There
are some scenes that are drawn out. For example, De Niro spends
a few minutes stirring the coffee while his fellow gangsters
impatiently wait for him to speak his mind.  But mostly
the length is due to the depth of the story, which is really
three films in one: the mobsters as adolescents, young adults,
and middle aged men.
De Niro and Woods are the leaders of their gang.  They may
be lifetime friends, but they are also rivals, with differing
ambitions.  Woods is looking for the big score at any cost,
while De Niro is content with a local fiefdom that plays
by his rules, valuing friendship and avoiding giving control
to strangers.  This leads to inevitable conflicts between
Woods and De Niro, and it doesn't help that Woods is unstable
while De Niro is prone to depression.
For an Italian director, Leone had a great interest in
American mythology, especially the West.  His attempt at
capturing the Prohibition era results in an outstanding film.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
