Title
Review for Stranger Among Us, A (1992)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
A.J.S. Nusbacher
     Perhaps Melanie Griffith was once a good actress.  I certainly saw
WORKING GIRL without finding her annoying.  But when I went to see A
STRANGER AMONG US this week, I went with the expectation that her
abysmal performance in SHINING THROUGH had been a bad moment.  I hoped
that with good script and a top gun like Sidney Lumet directing she
would be believable.  I was disappointed.
     A STRANGER AMONG US puts Melanie Griffith, playing a police
detective, in a Hasidic community in Brooklyn to investigate the
disappearance of a young member of the community.   Emily, the
detective, prefers to shoot it out with "scumbags" rather than call for
backup.  After this habit gets her partner and lover stabbed, she is
given a bit of light duty.  She is supposed to be a "ba'al teshuvah," a
penitent, which excuses the fact that she is obviously not a life-long
Hasid.  Unlike WITNESS, the obvious comparison, the premise does not
justify the plot.  Surprisingly, it's still not a bad movie.
     If one can believe that the New York Police will infiltrate a
detective into any ethnic community that has had a member disappear; and
if one can believe that any rational police commander would send a woman
rather than a man to infiltrate a patriarchal community, then one can
swallow the premise.  The plot is supposed to trace our detective's
development as a person from the mini-skirted, foul-mouthed woman who
sleeps with her co-worker and doesn't call for help when she needs it;
to a modest, thoughtful cop who acts as a team player and doesn't put
the milk carton into the meat refrigerator.  The fact that the plot is
based on Griffith's abysmal acting makes it irrelevant to the movie.
Seeing it is like going to an opera, and being fascinated by the opera
house's architecture instead of the action on stage.   Fortunately, the
movie provides some pretty architecture.
     The romantic tension in the movie is between Griffith's Emily and
the heir-apparent to the Hasidic dynasty, Ariel.  The romance survives
Griffith's complete unattractiveness (her voice would be a useful
abrasive in the diamond district) because to the general viewer any
fully-grown man who is a virgin will likely go after anything in a
skirt.  Even to the Orthodox Jewish viewer (many of whom are kept away
from the movie by it's opening during a traditional three week season of
mourning) it is believable -- Emily, even with a long skirt and a wig
that looks like a wig, is the Eternal Shiksa, the constant temptation to
Jewish men.
     The Jewish aspects of the film are complicated and occasionally
amusing.  The film opens with alternating views of the Hasidic world and
the police world.  The brightly-lit life of a New York cop is made to
seem familiar, if not from the viewer's own experience then from the
viewer's experience with police movies.  The sepia-tone world of the
Hasidim, lit with 40 watt incandescent bulbs, is made to seem quite
separate, though the designer is careful not to allow it to seem
completely alien.  To the Jewish-educated viewer, the movie is starkly
showing a familiar dichotomy made clearer by the distinctively accented
Hebrew of children singing the Grace after Meals, and the striped woolen
tsitsit of the Hasidim.  In between the two worlds is the diamond shop
that Ariel, his sister Leah, and their friend Mara work in.  With the
broad counter acting as a barrier between the worlds, this place has
neither the stark fluorescent lighting of the police station nor the
bright light of the city streets.
     The effect of the mistakes in representing the Hasidim are not
jarring in this film (remember the guffaws in WITNESS at the idea of a
Hasid reading the "Jerusalem Post").  Ariel's name and Hebrew accent are
more Modern Orthodox than Hasidic, but that only makes him seem less
alien to the Jewish viewer.  In fact, the Jewish-educated viewer feels
like a secret partner of the faceless consultant who helped with this
local colour, smiling at the occasional lapse and appreciating the fine
points, such as the representation of a house in mourning.
     It is never made clear just which sect the Hasidim in the movie are
supposed to represent.  When one is in the diamond-cutting workshop of
the missing Hasid, there is an Israeli tourism poster clearly displayed
to let us know that these are not the Satmar.  At the Rebbe's shabbat
table, he is flanked by men colourfully dressed to represent Yemenite
and Ethiopian Jews, making it clear that the Rebbe is not an insular
leader.  The Rebbe, a survivor of Auschwitz, an accomplished linguist, a
sensitive parent, is an ideal generic picture of the Hasidic Rebbe's
appearance to the outsider.  Care is taken not to allow the Hasidim to
seem otherworldly -- a word processor is prominently displayed in the
Rebbe's outer office, and the characteristic large station wagon with no
hubcaps is prominently displayed.
     The Kaballah plays an important part in this film.  Ariel hides a
small book inside his talmudic tractate, illicitly exploring the depths
of mysticism (warned by his friend that he is too young).  The Kaballah
acts as an emblem of enlightenment, providing Ariel with the erotic
vocabulary necessary to make him a credible love interest; and giving
him a way to be a maverick without compromising his devotion to his
faith.  The rolling up of the Kaballah into a single pocket-sized volume
can be forgiven, since neither the ordinary viewer nor the ordinary
police detective needs a lecture on the difference between the "Zohar"
and the "Kuzari."
     Mia Sara, who played the leading lady in FERRIS BUELLER'S DAY
OFF, plays the Rebbe's daughter, Emily's guide in the Hasidic world.
She is an unfortunate sidekick for Griffith's detective, because while
the contrast between the modest Hasidic girl and the brash cop is
salutary; the contrast between the excellent actress playing a complex
part and the Box Office Star trying to act is pathetic.  Sara brings a
matter-of-fact attitude to her role, making the Hasidic world seem
rational and ordinary; and her dignity and modesty are such that when
she is humourous she is not laughable.
     The music by Jerry Bock will delight klezmer aficionadoes, though
there are some scenes in which the Hasidim do not lip-synch terribly
well to the studio choir.  One place in which the consultant must have
cringed was when a cheerful shabbat celebration continues to the sound
of a lone female voice -- beautiful, and familiar to modern klezmer
listeners, but anathema to the turbo-Orthodox.  The costuming, which
does not seem like a difficult task, seem overly stiff; as though the
entire Hasidic community has just picked up all their clothes from the
dry-cleaner's, without the well-worn look that one sees in real
people's clothing.
     On the Jewish Movie scale, in which THE CHOSEN is five stars and
THE MAD ADVENTURES OF RABBI JACOB is one star, I give this one three
stars.

Author
Dragan Antulov
Sydney Lumet is the director whose work happens to be of
varied quality. He is praised for some of the most important
films of the previous decades, like TWELVE ANGRY MEN,
SERPICO or THE VERDICT. But, in the same time, almost any of
such pearls is followed by stinkers that hamper Lumet's
reputation. A STRANGER AMONG US, 1992 rip-off of Peter
Weir's WITNESS, belongs to the latter category.
The heroine of this movie is Emily Eden (Melanie Griffith),
tough lady cop who sometimes shows too much enthusiasm in
battling bad guys on the streets of New York. During one of
such actions, her partner Nick (Jamey Sheridan) got hurt and
as a result, she becomes depressed. In order to help her
recover, bosses give her rather easy task of locating
missing jeweller who belonged to Hassidic Jew community.
Emily starts investigation and soon realises that the case
involves murder. Concluding that the perpetrator belongs to
community, she decides to go undercover. That isn't easy,
because her modern manners are colliding with traditionalist
ways. Things get even more complicated when she develops
feelings for young cabalistic scholar Ariel (Eric Thal).
Using Peter Weir's formula isn't the greatest flaw of this
film. Even the lame and unispiring crime mystery subplot
works to the certain extent. But the worst insult to
viewer's audience is terrible miscasting of Melanie
Griffith. The author of this review never liked this actress
very much, but she was at least tolerable in some of her
roles. Role of Emily Eden, unfortunately, isn't one of them.
First of all, she can't pass for tough NYPD street fighter,
and her attempt to pass for Orthodox Jewish woman isn't much
better. Screenplay by Robert J. Avrech makes things even
worse with some formulaic red herring subplots (scene
involving two Italian gangsters was almost too painful to
watch). But, on the other hand, other actors are more
convincing (Lee Richardson as an old rabbi, Thal as Ariel
and charming Mia Sara as his intended bride), and the
photography by Andrzej Bartkowiak very effectively creates
atmosphere of warmth when the scenes take place in Hassidic
community. Also, the film might educate viewers about
Hassidic culture. That is the only thing that prevents it
from turning into total waste of time.

Author
Frank Maloney
     A STRANGER AMONG US is a film directed by Sydney Lumet.  It stars
Melanie Griffith, Eric Thal, Mia Sara, Lee Richardson, and Tracy Pollan.
Rated R for violence.
     A STRANGER AMONG US is a cop show that would have been better to
have eschewed the shoot-up and chases, the Irish cop and Italian thugs,
and to have found another excuse for letting a liberated shiksa find
family and friendship and her own soul amongst the Hasidim of New York.
The crime that gives the cop her entree into this island of 19th
century, mystical Judaism is largely pro forma and uninteresting, and
for most of the film, and especially its best parts, is strictly on the
back burner.  The interest of the film comes in the cop's growing
involvement with her Hasidic "family," her growth as a complete human
being, and especially her relationship with the rebbe's son.
     Of course, for us who are outsiders, there is the interest and
attraction of seeing and learning something of this fascinating world.
This isn't a travelogue ("as the sun sets on the happy natives of
Hasid-land"), and it never pretends to being anything but friendly to
Hasidism.  Every Hasidic interior is bathed in the golden light of
spirituality.  These Hasidim are uniformly cheerful, friendly, and
entirely free of sectarian rivalries.  They are a community.  The film
makes you regret you are not part of that community.  But the film does
a creditable job as an introduction, even though its purpose is not
promoting Hasidism, but a spiritual life within a family of your
choosing in whatever context is appropriate for you.
     Sidney Lumet, the son of a Yiddish theater star and director of
TWELVE ANGRY MEN, SERPICO, NETWORK, and DOG DAY AFTERNOONS, has given us
an interesting film about spirituality, as personified by an idealized
portrait of the New York Hasidic community and as disguised as a police
drama.  In the process, he has coaxed an energetic and intriguing
performance from Melanie Griffith as Emily Eden the cynical detective
who is afraid of commitment and he has discovered an attractive and
promising actor, Eric Thal, as the Talmudic scholar and Kaballistic
mystic who becomes Emily's contact point with the closed and hermetic
world of the Hasidim.  (Thal originally was cast for a lesser role, but
showed so much promise that he was promoted to the pivotal role of
Ariel, the rebbe's heir apparent.)
     Griffith has always seemed an interesting performer to me.  I
remember with no small pleasure her performance in WORKING GIRL, in
which she easily held her own against Harrison Ford and especially a
powerful satire by Sigourney Weaver.  STRANGER only adds to my
impression of her as a slightly unappreciated, underused resource of no
small power.  She contrives to tough, callous, fragile, and in pain, at
the same time; Emily is the victim of her Irish-cop father, who cannot
express anything as unmanly as love for his cop daughter, she is the
victim of her own fear of life who refuses to love the man she sleeps
with.  She starts off in the rebbe's office with the grace and
sensitivity of a water buffalo and ends whole, healed, and
self-accepting.
     But it is Emily's relationship with Ariel that is the moral
epicenter, the heart, the justification of this film.  Ariel gets to do
a little growing himself, thanks in part to the temptations that Emily
offers him and which he finally decides to reject.  It has been
suggested that some Jews may be offended by the idea that the brilliant
and committed Ariel could ever be attracted to the rather vulgar and
concupiscent Emily.  Not being Jewish myself, I don't know, but it seems
realistically possible that Emily is so different from the traditional
and retiring Hasidic women that he would intrigued by the novelty she
represents.  His father, the great rebbe, played by Lee Richardson, is
himself caught up somewhat in Emily's verve and purpose; he tells her
tells her he has seen her soul, that they are alike, death-camp survivor
and cowboy cop, in their mutual knowledge of evil.  Once Emily tones
down her brassy clothes and hair to fit into the conversative community,
she still attracts a lot of attention, even a suitor, by virtue of her
dynamism.  Curiously, both Emily and Ariel find a deeper friendship and
their own strengths as they work through their mutual and forbidden
attractions.
     Eric Thal as Ariel is a wonderful discovery.  He's handsome, sexy,
intelligent, sensitive, confident, dynamic in his own way, and
irresistible.  Thal brings strength and mysticism to his role.  He is
emotional and completely manly.  His Ariel, as the otherwordly Hasidic
anachronism, is the paradoxically perfect 90s man.  I look forward to
seeing Thal in his next movie.
     There are two death scenes in this movie that represent departures
from the Hollywood norm.  In one criminals and cop are united for a
moment by the fear of death and the pity and tenderness the survivors
feel in the presence of death.  There is an extraordinary moment of
profound grief at the killing of the killer, something you will almost
never see in a Hollywood shoot-'em-up.
     I can recommend A STRANGER AMONG US, even with its largely
superfluous crime theme and its stereotypes, as a movie with a strong
moral center, with an intelligent friendship of a man and a woman, with
some interesting things to say about how we can live to be happy.  It is
a film worthy of its director and it is worth seeing, even at full
ticket price.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Yes, it's pretty much what the
     television ads make it look like.  Melanie Griffith stars in
     a plot not unlike that of WITNESS, but with Hasidic Jews.  Of
     course, it is not often we see the Hasidic community in film.
     And Sidney Lumet keeps the film consistently intriguing and
     often on a philosophical level.  Rating: high +1 (-4 to +4).
     At first look A STRANGER AMONG US looks a trifle too formulaic to be a
Sydney Lumet film.  Lumet's films are usually hard-hitting and very
original.  Just a few of his films are TWELVE ANGRY MEN; FAIL SAFE; the
superb, intense film THE PAWNBROKER; THE ANDERSON TAPES; MURDER ON THE
ORIENT EXPRESS; DOG DAY AFTERNOON; and NETWORK.  This does not sound like
the kind of director who would make a retread of WITNESS.  But that is
certainly how the television ads make this film look.  It looks like WITNESS
retold, but set among the Hasidic Jews of New York City.  Is that what A
STRANGER AMONG US is?  Well, yes and no.  Yes to the extent that it
certainly is a murder mystery that will take a police detective into a
totally alien culture from what she--in this case she--has known.  And she
does learn to respect that culture.  It even has many of the faults of
WITNESS.  It is about a lot of things, like violence and sex, that members
of the community would try to avoid.  And at the same time it idealizes that
community (and doing both at the same time *could* be viewed as hypocrisy).
On the other hand, Orthodox Jews are a major and important of the culture of
New York City, like Chinese and Blacks and many others, but how often do
they show up in major films?  How many films take the audience into this
community?  The only other film that comes to mind is Jeremy Kagan's THE
CHOSEN.
     Police Detective Emily Eden (played by Melanie Griffith) is having
second thoughts about her life.  By being too much of a "cowboy" and not
following proper procedures, she just got her partner and current lover
stabbed and nearly killed.  She feels guilt about that and at the same time
she is dissatisfied with her life in general.  She is given a light
assignment.  She is to investigate the disappearance of an Hasidic diamond
cutter who may have run off with some diamonds.  Visiting the family of the
missing man at first gives her the discomfort of sticking out with her short
sleeves, her short skirt, and her profanity.  However, the investigation
becomes a murder case that she must move into the Hasidic community to
investigate.
     At this point in the plot it becomes clear that the real story is about
how Eden sees and interfaces with the community.  The actual mystery plot
may account for about half an hour and is not the main thrust of the film.
Instead we see conflicts of values and Eden's growing understanding of and
respect for the Hasidim.  Her lifestyle as seen by the Hasidim has been the
victory of freedom over values.  She sees theirs as the victory of values
over freedom.  She also will have a close relationship with Ariel (played by
Eric Thal), a young scholar destined to be the leader of the community.
     In some ways this film could have been handled much better.  There is
some spectacular photography of New York City.  But once inside the Jewish
community every indoor scene is shot in annoying sepia tones.  At times the
sepia filter frustratingly obscures detail in the sets.  It gives an
artificial and uncomfortable feel to the film.  Perhaps the Hasidic life is
over-idealized.  Everyone seems to be friendly and gets along with each
other.  It is possible that in a lifestyle this rigid there is less
possibility for conflict, but whether that reflects reality or not I do not
know.  The mystery aspect of the story is just not given much time in the
script.  It is a little too simple and perhaps written a little sloppily.
     Still, A STRANGER AMONG US offers a view into a culture rarely shown in
films.  The background is the whole show.  I give it a high +1 on the -4 to
+4 scale.

Author
Pedro Sena
This film was one of the nominees for the Oscar's FOREIGN FILM Award this
year.  And it is a worthy candidate, that stands out as a special film as it
does very quietly, and slowly, what only the likes of David Lean have been
able to do.  Tell a story where the country itself is the story.  Few film
makers have been able to get the setting to come alive, a veritable desert
full of mirages and thoughts
that keep one coming and going.
Using all Mongolian actors, it is the story of a family that farms in the
middle of nowhere land, and they have their habits and ways of doing things.
Their style of lovemaking, or at least of chasing for
lovemaking, is literally the old Mongolian way.... a real chase on
horseback, which unfortunately for Gombo, is in violation of the new Chinese
laws that limit the number of children.  But Gombo, as
old fashioned as he is, and unable to come to terms with the present
commodities of childbirth control ( he is a country boy and she is a city
girl.... ) at least maintains himself long enough until he is ready
to burst out.  He can't find the answers he is trying to find on his way to
town, to trade for what he has to offer, but the town's ways with religion
and drinking also have nothing to help him with.  He returns empty handed
ready for another chase, his only real love being the woman he has married
and the wild country.
The acting in this film is either total, or it is a dedicated job to
showcase some very strong people that live in incredible at odds with nature
itself.  It is smooth, moody when it has to, and well designed
by a director that knows the difference between the use of space and camera
to display to us, their dilemmas... very much theatre style, only alive
instead of staged.  The distancing between people
is a measure of their ability to understand or communicate.
While the film stops short of saying anything about this way of life, it
does suggest that modernization is about to destroy the myths and the
legends of this once proud and great people that were systematically
dismantled by both the Chinese and the Japanese in this century.  But if the
new life of modern creatures is coming, it has no hint of the wild life that
these peoples had lived.  The town is structured in such a way as to make
things difficult to get done, the priest is too busy praying, the doctor is
too busy dating, and the Russian visitor  is too busy drinking, all a
statement on the frustration of life these people have and suffer in their
everyday existence.  Gombo is not about to let this get in the way of his
feelings.
He returns, and while he does not bring from the town what he was asked to
bring, he does bring with him a certain vivacity and explosive desire, which
the wife, at first upset, but then defiant immediately
takes on to.  It doesn't matter that the Chinese have rules.... these are
the Mongolians....... and the ending is very nice and leaves us rather
excited and happy.  The modernization did not stop those
two from creating another child, and it neither did stop their desire for
each other.
Wonderful film.  Long shots, trying to remind us of the beauty of a pristine
country, the once proud culture of the Mongols.
