Title
Review for Unmarried Woman, An (1978)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
Erica (Jill Clayburgh) and Martin (Michael Murphy) are a 
long-married couple in their late thirties.  They have
a teenage daughter Patti.  Martin is a stockbroker, while
Erica works part time at an art gallery.
There is some stress in their relationship.  Martin is
sexually demanding, and Martin seems distracted.  She asks
him about this, but he won't give her an answer.
Erica is a bit smug about her marriage.  When she hangs with
the girls, she can listen to their romantic tales with
a subtle smile that comes from never needing to be in
their position.  When the artist Charlie hits on her while
working at the art gallery, she can fend off his passes
and retain her sense of humor.
One day, out of nowhere, Martin bursts out sobbing.  He tells
Erica that he is having an affair with a much younger woman,
and is going to leave Erica for her.  This is so devastating
to Erica that she staggers down the sidewalk for awhile, then
throws up.  After Martin leaves, she exterminates the house
of his presence, throwing out all his possessions and taking
off her wedding ring.
One of Erica's friends arranges a lunch date for her.  Erica
does not have the best attitude towards men now, and freaks
when he makes a pass at her.  He is kicked out of the cab,
and left stranded on a New York freeway.
Erica begins seeing a psychiatrist, with the sessions paid
for by her ex-husband.  She tells Erica to begin dating men.
Erica has a quickie with Charlie, then begins a relationship
with another painter, Saul Kaplan (Alan Bates).
I can't say much for Saul's paintings.  He is shown dumping
buckets of paint on a huge canvas, tilting the canvas to
make blurry rainbows of color.  I guess actually drawing
something is not to his liking.
At a party, we learn that Erica's shrink is a lesbian,
and Saul, with Erica, meets Charlie.  Charlie makes amusing
boorish comments, infuriating Saul, and both end up wrestling 
on the table.  Erica seems secretely pleased that men are
fighting over her.
Saul becomes part of Erica's life.  He begins trying to talk
her into staying with him at his country home for the summer.
Erica does not want to give up her new-found independence.  
Saul meets daughter Patti, who asks impertinent questions 
designed to test him.  He passes.
Martin and Erica occasionally meet each other while jogging.
Now that she is in a relationship, the former hostility she
showed towards him has vanished.  She gets to triumph over
him when he admits to her that his affair has ended, and
asks to move back in with her.  When she says sorry, one
can hear the voice inside her saying, "HA!"
Saul has to go to his summer cottage without Erica.  As
a parting gift, he gives her one of his enormous paintings,
but since she is at his apartment she has to find a way
to carry it down the streets to her place.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
