Title
Review for Eye of the Beholder (1999)
Number of Reviews
20

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 It's strictly surrealistic style over substance in this
weird, wannabe psychological thriller about a man's journey into
obsession. Ewan McGregor (Star Wars: The Phantom Menace) plays a
lonely British intelligence agent, known as The Eye, whose wife has
left him, taking their daughter, whom he adored. His current mission
is to track a woman - that's Ashley Judd (Double Jeopardy) - who is
suspected of blackmailing the son of a prominent official in
Washington D.C.. He locates her, plants the kind of sophisticated,
high-tech surveillance equipment that would make James Bond drool with
envy, and starts his spy mission - only to observe her brutally stab
the young man in question to death. Instead of apprehending her,
however, The Eye follows her as she subsequently lures more men to
their gruesome deaths. He becomes totally obsessed with her, even
protecting her from arrest on several occasions. His ludicrous,
deranged, stalking behavior is inexplicable and writer/director
Stephan Elliott (The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert)
doesn't give us many clues - except astrology and numerology
symbols. Yeah, The Eye's haunted by his little daughter whose
apparition appears often during the first half of the film, pleading
"Let her go, Daddy." But then, even the child-ghost disappears -
without an explanation. And The Eye's only human contact seems to be
with a telephone supervisor named Hilary (k.d. lang - also heard on
the soundtrack, along with Chrissie Hynde) and a psychiatrist
(Genevieve Bujold), who knew Judd 'way-back-when. And Ashley Judd's
sexy, slashing serial killer is desperately looking for the "Daddy"
she never had. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, The Eye of the
Beholder is a moody, murky 4. Incoherent is an operative word. So's
bizarre.

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
Eye Of The Beholder (2000) 
Rated R; running time 107 minutes
Genre: Thriller
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0120662 
Official site: http://www.eyeofthebeholder-movie.com/  
Written by: Stephan Elliott
Directed by: Stephan Elliott
Starring: Ewan McGregor, Ashley Judd, Patrick Bergin, k.d. lang, 
Jason Priestley, Genevieve Bujold, Cara Reynolds
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsplayit.html
Move over, Supernova: I've already found my choice for second-worst 
flick of 2000. 
The Story (WARNING: **there's nothing to spoil here**)
Let's see...Eye (Ewan McGregor) is this super secret agent on His 
Majesty's Service (we know this, see, because we see him at the 
beginning of the movie taking pictures of his target with a rifle.  That 
wasn't a typo. A rifle.) who lives a hermetic life behind his computer 
screen, speaking to no one but his not-really-there daughter Lucy (Cara 
Reynolds) and his agency contact Hilary (k.d. lang).  Eye is losing 
touch with reality because his wife and daughter disappeared; he deals 
with it, see, by talking to his not-really-there daughter.  Hookay.
But wait, there's more!  Eye sees a Mysterious Stranger who he later 
learns is a criminal named Joanna Eris (Ashley Judd), and because his 
not-really-there daughter Lucy whispered "Rosebud"...uh, "don't leave 
her, daddy" to him, Eye stalks Joanna, making up in his mind that Joanna 
(who looks way older than him) is actually his daughter.  Hey, it gets 
worse: when Eye watches her kill some unknown guy for some unknown 
reason, he comes to the Brilliant Conclusion that, hey, she's the one 
for me!
The Upshot:
Not-really-there daughter Lucy might as well have whispered "Rosebud" to 
Eye.  It would've made about as much sense as anything else in this 
wanna-be-Deep-but-just-plain-dumb, mess.
I pay "Eye" a compliment when I say "at least it was stylish".  But I'll 
let you in on a little secret: style without substance makes for a 
lonnnng 107 minutes.  I know that Earth Men Are Easy, but let me get 
this straight: boy stalks girl...boy sees girl kill other boy...weird 
boy falls for murderous girl?  Hookay.
It felt like I walked in on the second part of a two-part movie: the 
part I obviously didn't see was the one that explained what the heck 
this movie was about.   Whatever Stephan Elliot was smokin' when he came 
up with this one, I sure as hell don't want any of it. 
Almost every single character's story made it seem like the whole damn 
cast and crew were on hallucinogens.  Joanna kills a guy she was about 
to screw for...what?  Hellifi know.  Joanna meets wastoid Gary (Jason 
Priestly), who proceeds to kick her butt for...what?  Hellifi know.  Dr. 
Brault (Genevieve Bujold), caretaker of a girl's detention center, was 
introducted for...what?  Helli...well actually, I know this one: we 
needed something, after all, that would Explain Joanna.  Of course, by 
the time Brault was introduced, it was too late; "Eye" had already 
crossed the stoopidity threshold, and there was no going back.
It's weird; the only part of this movie that actually seemed 
believable--when Joanna fell for rich but blind Alex Leonard (Patrick 
Bergin)--made the movie feel really unbalanced.  You see, believability 
and stoopidity are like oil and water; they just don't mix. 
Anyone would want to see this movie for...what?
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]
We are represented here by way of a couple of big Black female beggars, 
and a dirty cop.  Not that that really mattered; the story itself, as 
well as all the characters in this flick (save Alex Leonard) were as 
unreal as not-really-there daughter Lucy. 
Bammer's Bottom Line 
I *knew* there was a reason it took me so long to see this movie.
"Eye Of The Beholder" (rating: redlight)
Man, if only I believed in an eye for an Eye...

Author
Steve Rhodes
Atmospherics trump story in EYE OF THE BEHOLDER, starring Ashley Judd in
a hodgepodge of silly wigs.  Writer/director Stephan Elliott (THE
ADVENTURES OF PRISCILLA, QUEEN OF THE DESERT), who appears to have
studied at the Oliver Stone School of Theatrics, devotes all of his
energy to the picture's look, leaving no time for storytelling.  The
resulting mess is a muddled and befuddled film that makes Judd's last
picture, the critically derided DOUBLE JEOPARDY, look like a cinematic
masterpiece in comparison.
Pulling out all of the tired, old clichés and trying to invent a few new
ones, Elliott gives us an ant's-eye view of walking feet in one scene
and lots of flashing lightning in another.  His staging choices never
consider issues of plausibility.  Would-be undercover cops keep going in
tandem to a crowded diner but never remove their sunglasses indoors.
And big plate glass windows attract naked fornicators like flies to
honey.
As the boyish snoop known as The Eye, Ewan McGregor (THE PHANTOM MENACE)
gives a dense and impenetrable performance.  Actually none of the cast
manage anything approaching a decent performance.  Given Elliott's
bizarre direction, maybe the actors shouldn't be criticized too harshly.
Still, if you are one of their fans, you'll be grimacing a lot.
Joanna (Judd) is a serial killer.  The Eye, who works for a secretive --
is there any other? -- government agency, is trailing her using a
variety of technical gadgets.  His weapon of choice is a rifle with a
hunting scope and a super-sensitive listening device.  It also fires
bullets when necessary.  The Eye is accompanied by his missing daughter,
who may or may not be dead.  They have long conversations, not that
you'll care.
The illogical and choppy script reminds one of a story told by a
rambling first-grade student.   Sometimes The Eye seems to be trying to
stop Joanna, sometimes he seems to be falling in love with her and at
other times he acts likes a compulsive voyeur who just can't stop
staring.
Some movies are frustrating because you can't figure out where they are
heading.  EYE OF THE BEHOLDER is even more infuriating because you
realize that, not only do you have no idea where it's going, you don't
even care.
Are there any interesting parts to this putative thriller?  I counted
two.  Once, when I closed my eyes, which I should have done more often,
I realized how nice the music was when the ridiculousness of the visuals
didn't intrude.  The other, a bit of eye candy, occurs during a bath
scene at a hotel.  As Joanna lies naked in a bubble bath, The Eye
fondles the smooth tile on the other side of the wall in his room.  For
Judd's many adoring male fans, the scene provides an apt metaphor for
their perpetually unrequited love.
EYE OF THE BEHOLDER runs 1:47.  It is rated R for some strong violence,
sexuality, language and brief drug content.  The picture would be
acceptable only for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Destination Films
 Director: Stephan Elliott
 Writer: Marc Behm (Novel), Stephan Elliott
 Cast: Ewan McGregor, Ashley Judd, Patrick Bergin, k.d.
lang, Jason Priestley, Genevieve Bujold
   Here's why we need lots and lots of critics.  One guy says
this about "Eye of the Beholder"..."As it slithers under the
skin and behind the brain, 'Eye of the Beholder' works a
brand of guileful magic rarely seen in movies
today--courageously blurring the line between its characters'
inner conflicts and outer lives to create a disturbingly hypnotic
odyssey not unlike Alfred Hitchcock's 'Vertigo' or Brian
De Palma's 'Obsession.'"  Another fellow says this: "I was
absolutely dumbfounded.  I thought this movie was totally
incomprehensible, and the ending seemed arbitrary and
pointless.  It's shocking how poorly pieced together it is." 
Other reviews have come through in various shades between
these two extremes.  
   The diversity of opinion could be explained as a conflict
between those who want a story to be clear almost from the
start and those who prefer movies to be more challenging. 
Granted: "Eye of the Beholder," based on Marc Behm's 1980
noir novel, is the sort of tale that starts off in a manner so
baffling that you'd be tempted to wonder whether two or three
movies were spliced together.  In fact, if you go into this film
realizing that its director, Stephan Elliot, is known principally
for two far-out comedies, "Welcome to Woop Woop" and
"Priscilla: Queen of the Desert," you can't be blamed for
concluding that the man is putting one over on us.
   Ah but wait.  As we get into the story, the truth begins to
unfold.  "Eye of the Beholder" is a psychological thriller not
unlike Brian De Palma's most intriguing creation,
"Obsession," which is itself a rehash of Alfred Hitchcock's
"Vertigo" (with elements of "Rear Window").  This time the
Cliff Robertson role is taken by the strikingly handsome Ewan
McGregor, who exhibits the same personal traits as did
Robertson's character, with a fine side role by Genevieve
Bujold--who was the object of the man's obsession in the De
Palma movie but now takes on the role of an ultra-liberal,
bleeding-heart parole officer.
   McGregor performs in the role of The Eye, a surveillance
man with the British Secret Service who has been assigned
to spy on the son of his employer and who communicates
regularly by modem with a sharply cynical woman named
Hilary (k.d. lang).  A loner, depressed since his wife walked
out on him eight years earlier taking their daughter with her,
The Eye has lost it.  He's still good at his job, still maintaining
the preoccupation with work that led to the breakup of his
family.  That he frequently hallucinates his daughter's
presence--skipping rope, making noise, asking questions,
getting in the way of his spying--does not greatly interfere
with his tasks.  But when he inadvertently witnesses the cold-
blooded murder of a man in the midst of a tryst with the
beautiful Joanna (Ashley Judd), he becomes strangely
captivated by the killer and determined to protect her at all
costs.  Stalking Joanna in New York, Boston, Chicago, San
Francisco and even Alaska, he seems to recognize that
despite her affinity for serial killing, the two are somehow
made for each other.  And in a way--considering how both of
these tormented individuals went nuts for similar reasons--
they are.  Writer/director Elliot appears to invite us to
consider why we each choose the person we do, suggesting
that some extrasensory insight makes us see into our
partner's deepest recesses.  It's no wonder that much of the
conversation between Joanna and her unlucky male friends
turns upon astrology and numerology.
   Rarely has anyone in the cinema so successfully stalked
another through so many cities--The Eye's accomplishment
particularly odd considering the bright red jacket he wears
and the smashing good looks that he displays.  McGregor
turns in a performance that is exceptional for the very reason
that he is able to hide his outer feelings from the audience so
well.  He is a tabula rasa, a poker-faced isolate who lives
almost entirely within his own mind, dedicating himself to the
protection of this criminally insane woman even at the cost of
his own job.  Ashley Judd looks equally smashing through
most of her disguises, not so hot when she wears a page-boy
wig but devastating in a succession of long-hair rugs, both
blond and brunette, which she acquires with the money she
lifts from her victims. Judd and McGregor are rarely together
on screen, giving their one extended dialogue a climactic
impact.
  If Cliff Robertson and Genevieve's Bujold's connection in
"Obsession" never left your mind--and you prayed for a
chance to see a rekindling of the subject with equally
matched performers--"Eye of the Beholder" is the movie
you're looking for. This one might turn off the MTV generation
eager for a succession of slam-bang episodes, but will fulfill
the hopes of those who believe that vigorous inner action is
of more dramatic note than plot-driven, exterior movement.
Rated R.  Running Time: 102 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Sean Townsend
STARRING:  Ewen MacGregor, Ashley Judd, Patrick Bergin, k.d. lang, Jason
Priestley, Genevieve Bujold
DIRECTOR:  Stephan Elliott
WRITTEN BY:  Stephan Elliott (based on the novel by Mark Behm)
An early candidate for "Worst Film of 2000," Eye of the Beholder is a
soporific ordeal that completely ruins a mildly interesting beginning,
gropes blindly through some very hard-to-swallow plot points in the
middle, then takes far too much time lurching to its conclusion.
The story unfolds almost entirely from the point of view of a British
surveillance expert named "The Eye" (MacGregor).  He's a troubled
fellow; his wife has left him and taken their young daughter, and he
can't find them despite all his expertise, so he carries on imaginary
conversations with his child.  Assigned to track the son of a British
official in order to catch a blackmailer, he witnesses the poor fellow's
brutal murder by a beautiful but obviously disturbed woman (Judd, who
must really want to be pigeonholed in these third-rate thrillers).
Improbably, he recognizes a kindred spirit and quickly becomes obsessed
with her.  Soon, thanks to the thoroughly risible script, he quits his
job with Her Majesty's Secret Service and doggedly trails her on a
whirlwind tour of much of the United States (mostly filmed in Montreal,
presumably so the filmmakers can show the world how sophisticated
Quebecers are with their Gitanes and Cognac.)  She's a chameleon who
changes identities as often as she changes outfits-- which is a lot.  Of
course, Our Hero knows this is merely the result of her being abandoned
as a young girl by her father, and he fantasizes that he can save her,
just as he knows she will fill the void in his life.
That we are expected to accept such lip-service characterization and
porous plot structure is only the least of the film's flaws.  Even the
spy gadgetry, which can often be fun in movies like this, is
unconvincing.  To be fair, the movie starts out rather promisingly with
the eavesdropped murder, but very quickly degenerates into a steaming
pile of what they call merde in Montreal.  What it doesn't do very
quickly is end; it drags on interminably through scene after pointless
scene, including a stupid interlude between Judd's character and a
heroin-addicted loser played by Jason Priestley.
Director Elliott seems to run out of ideas about halfway through this
clunker, so he resorts to the road-movie plot device he used to far
better effect in 1994's The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the
Desert.  Needless to say, it doesn't help.  The film's pacing is simply
too slow and the main characters too inaccessible to elicit much in the
way of interest.  Suspense, so important to any thriller, is rarely
generated after the first murder scene.  In the eye of this beholder, at
least, the movie is a waste of about two hours.

Author
Robert Marley
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Marley.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/ed829efa1f9df8c88825687700233434?OpenDocument
Eye of the Beholder
A film review by Robert Marley - Copyright Š 2000 filmcritic.com
Apparently it's not all tuxedos and vodka martinis, shaken not stirred,
in the alleged real-world of the British intelligence. Ewan McGregor
plays `The Eye' a high-tech voyeur who is about as charismatic as a
piece of lawn furniture. But it's not about that. The Eye's job, as the
name implies, is about surveillance: A responsibility that requires him
to detach himself from the rest of the world and watch it through an
electronic eye. Yet it is this very act that has caused his greatest
grief and most regrets in life. He blames himself for the loss of his
wife and daughter. Now they appear to him in hallucinations.
The Eye's current assignment is to follow Joanna Eris (Ashley Judd), a
woman accused of blackmailing a British official.  But she is far more
than a simple blackmailer.  She is a crafty, seductive spider woman,
capable of killing as quickly as she can seduce.  As The Eye continues
to watch Eris, he becomes entranced by her disguises and cunning charm.
Soon he begins to feel that they are kindred spirits.
Director Stephan Elliott, whose directing credits include The Adventures
of Priscilla: Queen of the Desert, attempts to be very artistic with
this film.  There are lots of interesting angles, lots of symbolism, and
some tricky sequences which segue from a television image of a scene
into the scene itself, but it's not enough to compensate for a script
that literally goes all over the map, slowly.  Slowly is the key to all
of this.  The film is so drawn-out that you will probably be checking
your watch.  A lot.
Ashley Judd turns in an average performance as the seductive mistress of
disguises but there really isn't much to the character. Yes she has a
background, yes she emotes her psychological setbacks, but there really
isn't much groundbreaking to the character or to her performance.
Likewise, Jason Priestley is just a joke  a comic relief in the middle
of a boring, go nowhere flick.  K.D. Lang comes up with an equally
uninteresting performance.  McGregor does a good job with his
obsessive-compulsive character but again, it's not anything to write
home about.
In fact, when the credits rolled, the entire theater replied with a
resoundingly quizzical, `Huh?'  I was left wondering just what Elliott
and screenwriter Marc Behm were attempting with this nonsensical
rambling mess.  They tried to be psychological, it came across as
confusing.  They tried to be mysterious, it came across as random.  It's
like watching a movie in a different language without subtitles.  You
can sort of figure out what is going on, but for the most part, you're
lost.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Lars Lindahl
Review by Lars Lindahl (larsattacks@mail.com)
"Eye of the Beholder" (2000) ** (out of four)
Written and Directed by Stephan Elliot
Starring Ewan McGregor, Ashley Judd, k.d. Lang,
Patrick Bergin, Genevieve Bujold, and Jason Priestley.
With a better ending it might have worked. Eye of the
Beholder grabbed me with its perfectly unattractive
images and held me tightly for quite a long time but
ultimately took no advantage of its overpowering
control. About three quarters of the way through I
suddenly lost all interest. I can even pinpoint the
exact moment this voyeuristic cat-and-mouse obsession
film self-destructed: the unfashionably late entrance
by Jason Priestley. In possibly the worst acting
performance of the year, Priestley ruins this movie.
His overacting is intolerable, his physical appearance
is repulsive, his portrayal of a drug- addicted abuser
is inexcusable. Thankfully, he only has a brief cameo
role or else Eye of the Beholder would have been
torture to watch. Priestley doesn't deserve all of the
blame though. Writer/Director Stephan Elliot never
takes his story to the next level. He skillfully
throws you into the movie as quickly as possible, but
he does little after that. 
Elliot stretches the simple outline of the plot (man
chases woman) farther than it should be stretched and
because of this, the movie really goes nowhere during
its one hour and forty minute running time. After a
while I stopped caring about the characters in the
movie because Elliot gave me no reason to. Every
person in this movie is bland and one- dimensional --
the dreaded combination that makes a movie almost
impossible to enjoy. 
Should I have cheered for Ashley Judd's Joanna or
booed her? This woman is a cold-blooded serial killer
but to me Elliot wants us to root for her anyway.
There are zero moments where I could have related to
her, zero moments where she did something humane. 
Then there is Ewan McGregor's spy character known as
"The Eye." Is he the guy I should have admired?
Following Joanna around, "The Eye" becomes obsessed
with her and her killing habits. There are three
reasons why I despised "The Eye." First off, he
predictably falls in love with Joanna, a horrible
person who only attracts him because of her beautiful
looks. Second, he's not the brightest "hero" around.
Customarily, you'd think that a spy would wear all
black or disguises to hide their presence, but our
friend "The Eye" walks around with a brightest red
jacket you'll ever see. This seemingly minor annoyance
is actually incredibly irritating. The third problem
with the miserable "The Eye" is that we learn
throughout the movie that his wife and child left him
because he spends so much time on his computer. So
you'd think the solution to that problem would be to
stay away from the computer. Does "The Eye" do this?
Of course not. In fact, he spends even more time on
the computer and whines even more about his loss.
Arrggh. 
An appropriate ending could have made these characters
more interesting. Perhaps if we learned more about why
they did what they did, they would be more realistic
and believable. But Eye of the Beholder abruptly
finished as if the camera ran out of film. 
What I did like was the constant eye/blind/sight
imagery Elliot uses. The Australian filmmaker who
brought you the colorful Prescilla: Queen of the
Desert seems to be a more talented director than
writer. The visuals prevent Eye of the Beholder from
getting the lowest grade possible, but little else is
recommended. This possible cult film should have gone
straight to cable or video. 
Lars Attacks has moved!
A teenager attacks past and present cinema
http://www.geocities.com/larsattacks00/

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Stephan Elliott.
Cast: Ewan McGregor, Ashley Judd, Patrick Bergin, k.d. Lang, Genevieve 
Bujold, Jason Priestley.
2000 - 110 minutes
Rated R (for violence, profanity, sexual situations, and brief nudity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, January 29, 2000.
Picture this: It's the last weekend of January 2000, and every film I have 
seen in theaters that was released this month has been bad (i.e. "Next 
Friday," "Supernova," "Down to You"). They say that the first month of the 
year is a motion picture dead zone for quality, but I am still understandably 
growing worried. But then I stumble upon a rather peculiar film, one that may 
be uneven on certain levels and, by no means, not imperfect, but that is 
simply too audacious and original to ignore, and leaves me thinking about it 
for the remainder of the evening and the next day. The name of that movie is 
"Eye of the Beholder," directed by Stephan Elliott (1994's "Priscilla, Queen 
of the Desert"), and when a wealth of movies in the genre are so disposable, 
as you can just forget all about them once they are over, this one actually 
has a mind to go along with its mysterious storyline, and could easily be one 
of the most thought-provoking thrillers in a long while. 
"Eye of the Beholder" takes a lot of risks, particularly for a film that is 
being released wide on opening weekend. Because it doesn't take the road you 
would always expect from a thriller; because Ashley Judd is not playing the 
completely virtuous heroine; because the film is relatively deliberate in its 
pacing and there isn't very much action, per se; and because Elliott relies 
on stylish camera techniques and the visual aspect of the story, as opposed 
to buildings blowing up and dialogue spelling out the plot developments for 
you, the picture is in danger of isolating many mainstream audiences 
expecting another "Double Jeopardy." That's too bad, for those interested in 
a more unconventional film that doesn't always play by the rules will find 
themselves rewarded with a deeper, more texturally layered thriller than they 
are usually accustomed to.  
The ball gets rolling when a British intelligence agent in Washington, D.C., 
known by his code name, Eye (Ewan McGregor), is assigned to track down the 
22-year-old son of a government official, who is suspected of being 
blackmailed by an inscrutably alluring woman (Ashley Judd). Spying on them at 
the son's home, Eye becomes the only witness to his murder, as the woman 
repeatedly stabs him to death and then disposes of his body in a nearby lake. 
Eye, whose wife and child were allegedly "lost," still envisions his young 
daughter around him, and thus, feels inexplicably drawn to this woman who, 
herself, is clearly lost, and begins to follow her everywhere she goes, from 
NYC to San Francisco, to Death Valley, to Philadelphia, to Chicago, to 
Alaska, all the while leaving death in her wake. Wanting to know more about 
her, Eye learns from an unusual therapist (Genevieve Bujold), who used to 
care for her, that her real name is Joanna Eris, and it was she who taught 
Joanna how to constantly disguise her true self, both physically and 
emotionally. But Joanna is a confused, almost tragic figure, even while 
being, more or less, a serial killer, and there are hints throughout that her 
relationship with her own father as a child was relatively unstable.   
Although a thriller, "Eye of the Beholder" also offers an utterly odd, yet 
effective romance, as Eye realizes Joanna is a murderer, but somehow deeply 
sympathizes with her. Since Eye is missing a child, and Joanna is a lost 
soul, there is an instant connection on his part, and Joanna strangely feels 
it too, even when she doesn't even know he is following her, and has never 
met him. Basically, both Eye and Joanna are little more than enigmas at the 
beginning, but the more that is learned about their unfortunate pasts and 
their beings, the more easily understood both of their actions are. And 
without giving anything away, when Eye and Joanna inevitably do meet, there 
is an unmistakable poignancy that charms us, all the while making us nervous 
since we know Joanna is capable of doing many bad things, even when she 
doesn't want to.
Kudos to writer-director Stephan Elliott and director of photography Guy 
Dufaux for making a motion picture that is such an invigorating treat for the 
eyes, and a testament to their imaginations. When the setting changes from 
one place to the next, for example, the camera zooms in on that particularly 
city's snow globe and enters right into it, until what is in the globe 
transforms effortlessly to the real place. Eye voyeuristically spies on 
Joanna with his advanced audio and video equipment, and occasionally the 
camera will be centered on the grainy television of Joanna's hotel room, 
until it goes right into the T.V. and ends up literally in her room. "Eye of 
the Beholder" is a stylistically brilliant film, never ceasing to impress 
with its gorgeous, energetic visuals.
While Eye and Joanna are satisfactorily developed throughout, some of their 
motivations remain a little sketchy, leaving it up to the viewer to decide 
the "why's" for themselves, which sometimes works but here just feels like 
minor plot holes. Joanna, who occasionally breaks down crying after doing 
away with another innocent victim, is a severely unhinged woman, but why is 
that? And what does her killing spree substitute that is missing in her life? 
When Eye keeps seeing his daughter and carrying on conversations with her, it 
works well because of its eerie supernatural implications, but doesn't give 
us enough of a reason for why he can see her. Does he imagine it because of 
his otherwise solitary existence? Or is he delusional? These questions and 
others are unavoidably brought up because we never learn the answers, but 
better to be left pondering a film after it is over, rather than forgetting 
it altogether, which is what the majority of today's thrillers do.
Ashley Judd is a class act in every film she appears in, and she is even able 
to turn mediocrity into something slightly more successful than it has any 
right to be ("Double Jeopardy"). Since her stunning debut performance in 
1993's "Ruby in Paradise," Judd has been on an unbroken road to stardom, and 
does not disappoint here. Joanna is a flawed woman (after all, she does kill 
people), but she desperately wants to change and lead a normal life, and Judd 
turns her into a likable character, or at least one that we care about. 
Midway through, Joanna has a run-in with a kind, older blind man (Patrick 
Bergin) at the airport, and because he cares about her without having to see 
her, she falls in love with him. There is a touching scene in which Joanna 
explains to him that he may be older, but she loves him no matter what 
because her physical appearance doesn't matter to him. In other words, he 
will never be able to see the "monster" she has let herself become in life.
Ewan McGregor has a less showy role, since he is voyeur to his subject, which 
is Joanna, but McGregor is worlds above his misguided, underwritten turn in 
"The Phantom Menace." He believably is able to project the loss of his loved 
ones, and while the idea of him falling in love with this killer he has 
followed but never even met is, perhaps, difficult to swallow, it 
surprisingly makes sense. Gazing warmly at Joanna from afar, Eye longs to be 
with her, to comfort her sort of as a father figure, and McGregor creditably 
helps to make this plot development work. 
In supporting roles, Genevieve Bujold is excellent, even while only given two 
scenes, as she turns her character into more than just a one-dimensional 
figure. Pop singer k.d. Lang shows up as Eye's friend and embassy contact, 
and proves to hold a real screen presence. And Jason Priestley is 
appropriately slimy and intense as a drug addict who picks Joanna's up in the 
desert when her car breaks down.
The final scene in "Eye of the Beholder" is one I haven't quite figured out 
my feelings on yet. It is certainly not an upbeat, mainstream conclusion, and 
will turn off many viewers, but in its own way is just the right way to end 
the film. Both Joanna and Eye have very little to live for, except for each 
other, which makes the proceedings all the more lamentable. They are at the 
end of their ropes, desperately attempting to cling to one another even when 
they don't have the means to do such a thing. "Eye of the Beholder" is a 
sleek, impressively well-made movie, a lyrical flower in a bed of January 
thorns, if you will. It is simply too admirable a film on too many levels to 
be thrown to the wayside.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Who is The Eye?  We learn from the opening scene that he's some kind of
stealthy spy with enough hi-tech gadgetry to make Q drive off the road.
He totes a cool digital camera that can not only capture sound and
images from great distances, but also serves as a rifle.  As the film
opens, The Eye snaps some photographs of a guy putting the stones to the
company floozy in his office located across the street.  Before the guy
can even pull his pants up, The Eye has sent the pictures to every
computer and fax machine in his workplace.
After this initial episode, we learn a little more about The Eye.  He
checks in with his headquarters via a bossy liaison named Hilary (k.d.
lang), who fills in a few more blanks  The Eye is a loner that prefers
video conferencing to actual human contact.  Presumably he's like this
because of some tragedy that happened to his wife and daughter, the
latter of whom haunts The Eye's days and nights.  Hilary tells him that
his next assignment is to tail the boss' son, who is pilfering funds
from his trust fund.
As The Eye begins to work the case, he becomes infatuated with a
mysterious woman (Ashley Judd, Double Jeopardy) and abandons his work to
peep at her every move.  He's drawn further into her peculiar world
after witnessing her murder a gentleman caller and washing the blood off
of her naked body in the middle of a rainstorm.  Instead of making him
back off, The Eye proceeds to follow her around the country and watch as
she bumps other men off.  He trails her to Pittsburgh, New York, San
Francisco and all points boring and, at one point, stops to fondle the
wall of his hotel room bath while the mystery girl washes up on the
other side (yes, you get to see both of her Judds and the crack of her
Ashley).  And just when it seems like things can't get any dumber, in
marches Jason Priestley, who does a bottle-blond impression of James
Gandolfini in True Romance.
Oh, yeah, The Eye is played by Ewan McGregor (Phantom Menace), who
successfully makes his character seem creepy, tortured and
sleep-deprived in each scene.  It's the second McGregor film in a row
where the Scotsman doesn't show `little Ewan,' and, ironically, these
are his only two films that have opened number one at the box office.
Moral:  Keep it in your pants.    It's too bad he doesn't have a better
story to show off his talent (I mean big Ewan).
The script was written by Aussie director Stephan Elliott (The
Adventures of Priscilla: Queen of the Desert), who adapted it from Marc
Behm's novel of the same name.  And, brother, it's a mess.  You never
get a clear idea of what The Eye is trying to accomplish by stalking
this girl.  Is he trying to be her guardian angel?  Is he trying to
catch her?  Is he focusing his attention on her to make up for not
paying enough attention to his kid?  Or is he just a dirty Peeping Tom?
Don't ask me  I have no idea.  In the book, The Eye actually follows
his dream girl for ten years.  Here, it seems like two weeks.  Tops.
There are some pretty cool things in the film.  There are decent
visuals, especially when Elliott uses snow domes to blend into reality.
The score (Marius de Vries, William Shakespeare's Romeo + Juliet) is
moody and atmospheric, and the cinematography (Guy Dufaux, Jesus of
Montreal) is pleasantly bleak.  There are some things that don't work,
either, like the fact that The Eye tries to remain inconspicuous in
public while wearing a bright red coat.  But the main problem is with
the story, which seems oddly foreign.  Eye was filmed in Quebec with a
French-Canadian crew and has actually already been made into a film 
1993's Mortelle randonnée (Deadly Run), with Michel Serrault and
Isabelle Adjani.
1:47 - R for some strong violence, nudity, adult situations, language
and brief drug content

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
A woman serial killer thriller? Sure sounds interesting on paper, doesn't
it? Ashley Judd as the sexy, noir lead, prancing around in all her goodies,
with "nice guy" detective Ewan McGregor fast on her tail. Toss in ex-90210
staple Jason Priestley in a role which was given to my good friend "The
Arrow" before the Priest got the gig, playing a smelly psycho with a bad
attitude, and it seems as though all systems were ready to go. But then
again, I guess quality is all in the eye of the beholder, isn't it?
Hehehe...
PLOT:
A sultry woman with a dark past is tailed by a British Intelligence agent
who can't get over the loss of his daughter, and suddenly finds himself
obsessed with his investigative subject. And while the path of her murders
begins to cover several cities, the man's obsession with the mysterious lady
starts to take over his entire life.
CRITIQUE:
Ashley Judd is one purty lady with some significant talent as an actress and
sexy seductress, but this movie bites as a whole. Few thrills, even less
action, a loud soundtrack and over-the-top symbolism don't make up for the
fact that the script has very little substance or anything interesting and
new to say. Thankfully, I am a fan of style and this film has got plenty to
spare. It's also got a pretentious air which prevents it from becoming
anything more than a second-rate surreal "thriller" with some solid
performances from the leads, decent locale shots and a bogus ending. Did I
believe or buy into any of the simplistic motivations that the characters
expressed as their raison-d'etre in this film? Absolutely not! And having
Ewan's lost daughter float in and out of scenes as a reminder of why he is
the way he is, wasn't exactly subtle or entertaining. Now does Ashley Judd
"work" as a jet-setting femme fatale with a propensity for the ol'
knife-in-the-back scenario? Absolutely, in fact, she's one of the strongest
points in this muddled movie, which expects you to tag along with some guy
who becomes obsessed with a serial killer, and then care about what happens
to either one of them!
Problem with films like this is that despite their many bad points,
including plot holes which just seemed to make matters worse, they do
sometimes contain serviceable qualities. Which is why I never tend to favor
the inclusion of many 0/10's in my reviews. Much like the philosophy in my
real life, I like to judge all films according to the merits of its final
product, but not without acknowledging the separate parts that go into
creating that compilation. In other words, I try to see some good in
everything, and despite not enjoying this movie as a whole, I liked some of
the camera-work, truly enjoyed Jason Priestley's spirited cameo, was never
really bored and definitely toss kudos the way of Judd and McGregor. Does
the ending suck? Yes. Does the movie try too hard to be cool, dark, sexy and
deep without having much to say? You bet. All in all, I would say that this
cinematic mess is a nice try, but no cigar. See it for Judd, her sexy
character, McGregor playing the shy guy, the shot of Judd's boobies, or K.D.
Land trying to act. But don't see it if you're looking for a deep character
study or thrills, cause the only reason you'd find yourself at the edge of
your seat in this flick, is to beat a hasty retreat to the exits.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Eye of the Beholder (2000)
Ewan McGregor, Ashley Judd, k.d. lang, Jason Priestley, Genvieve Bujold,
Patrick Bergen. Screenplay by Stephan Elliot, based on the novel by Marc
Behm. Directed by Stephan Elliot. 110 minutes.
Rated R, 1.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
After scanning a rave review of "Eye of the Beholder," I went to a press
screening of the psychological thriller with high hopes. An hour and 50
minutes later, while the closing credits rolled, I sat shaking my head
as a fellow critic turned to me and said, "What in the hell was all that
about?!?" Following an intriguing start, "Eye of the Beholder" soon
deteriorates into an incomprehensible mess, and a pretentious one to
boot. "The Sixth Sense" featured a somber child who chilled audiences by
saying, "I see dead people." There's a somber child in this movie as
well, one who was probably thinking, "I see a dead script."
The film, which stars Ashley Judd as a serial killer and Ewan McGregor
as an obsessed surveillance expert, was shot well before the two actors
achieved mainstream success in, respectively, "Double Jeopardy" and
"Star Wars: The Phantom Menace." Released now to exploit their fame,
word of mouth will likely insure a quick fade for the noir flick,
despite the inclusion of a nude scene from the extremely attractive
Judd. At least the producers were thoughtful enough to place that
segment at the beginning of the film, so when it hits cable, those who
want to see Ashley naked can do so without having to suffer through much
of the story.
Based on the acclaimed 1980 novel by Marc Behm, "Eye of the Beholder"
follows a British Secret Service agent called The Eye (McGregor) as he
investigates the possible blackmail of his employer's son. While spying
on the young man, he watches in horror as Joanna Eris (Judd) hacks up
the guy with a butcher knife. Instead of calling the cops, he follows
her from city to city like a lovestruck puppy as she turns more
unsuspecting men into sushi.
Why? Well, apparently it's some sort of Jerry Springer deal where one
incredibly fucked-up person finds another incredibly fucked-up person
irresistible. You see, after each slaughter, Joanna screams about her
daddy, who deserted her when she was a child. The Eye can relate; years
ago, his wife took their young daughter and left, frustrated over his
obsession with work. In fact, The Eye often sees visions of his
daughter, occasionally two at once. Interestingly enough, while he does
chat with the hallucinations from time to time, he remains preoccupied
with business. So much for learning from your mistakes.
He is able, however, to devote his full attention to Joanna. After all,
what inexpressive guy who lost his family wouldn't get the hots for a
man-slashing nut case? It's a love connection!
Things were different in the book. The Eye was a middle-aged man who
followed Joanna because he believed she might actually be his long lost
daughter. But writer/director Stephan Elliot ("The Adventures of
Priscilla: Queen of the Desert") didn't want to waste his time with
something as pedestrian as a faithful adaptation of the source material.
Instead, he takes out his Crayola and creates the kind of weird-ass
trifle David Lynch might have done in grammar school. For scene
transitions, he zooms in on snow globes depicting the next locale. The
effect is engaging at first, but he repeats it for the entire film.
After the sixth or seventh snow globe, I was ready to take an ax to the
nearest souvenir stand.
Elliot desperately wants to be Alfred Hitchcock, but he can't even pull
off a decent Brian De Palma. From the ham-handed visual underscoring of
his "guardian angel" theme to a "Look! I saw 'Vertigo!'" scene in a bell
tower, Elliot directs with the finesse of Homer Simpson at an
all-you-can-eat pork chop dinner.
Somehow, Ashley Judd comes through it all relatively unscathed. Despite
being forced to sport a variety of bad wigs and shriek her motivations
with each new murder, she still imbues Joanna with a degree of depth
beyond anything in Elliot's murky screenplay. And, although the insular
nature of his character gives him little room to move, Ewan McGregor
deserves credit just for keeping a straight face through this nonsense,
especially when his character must play super sleuth while wearing an
attention-getting bright red jacket.
After the "Eye of the Beholder" screening, I expressed relief to my
colleague that I would have a few days to process what I'd seen. After
considerable reflection, I've come to the conclusion that there is
little to process. "Eye of the Beholder" wants to be an art film and a
thriller. It fails at both aspirations. If you'll pardon the expression,
there is far less here than meets the eye.

Author
James Sanford
         If you took five different jigsaw puzzles, threw the pieces
together on a table top and spent two hours trying to make a cohesive
picture out of the various bits, you might end up with something along
the lines of "Eye of the Beholder." Made in 1998, this maddening mess
features a pre-"Double Jeopardy" Ashley Judd and a pre-"Phantom Menace"
Ewan McGregor alongside a peroxide-dipped Jason Priestley, an
unflatteringly photographed Genevieve Bujold and, for reasons known only
to her agent and God, songstress k.d. lang. All concerned have seen
better days -- and been in much better movies -- than this one.
 McGregor plays Stephen Wilson, a.k.a. "The Eye," a surveillance
expert who bolts from his job at the British Consulate to follow mystery
woman Joanna Eris (Judd) all over North America. Ostensibly a wig-maker
(and she does seem to have enough fake hairpieces at hand to shame even
Cher), Joanna is also deeply disturbed and has a habit of slaying every
man who tries to get close to her. For most guys, this would not be a
turn-on, but Stephen is prodded into pursuing Joanna by visions of his
long-lost daughter, who tells him Joanna is really "just a little girl."
        A little girl who likes to blindfold her lovers shortly before
she stabs them to death perhaps, but a little girl nevertheless. Aside
from having been abandoned by her own daddy one memorably miserable
Christmas night, Joanna also received counseling from a probation
officer (Bujold) who may or may not have helped to make her what she is
today.
 In its first half-hour, "Eye" is baffling but weirdly absorbing
as well. The rest of the film, however, is just plain weird, jumping
from Pittsburgh to San Francisco to Chicago to "The Cafe at the End of
the World," a flapjack shack located somewhere on the Alaskan tundra
where Joanna becomes the world's most unlikely waitress and Stephen her
most devoted customer.
 How Stephen and Joanna have the money for all this traveling
and where Joanna comes up with all the disposable disguises she sports
are questions left unanswered. This is not a story in which logic ever
intrudes on the action. As in a dream, things seem to happen simply
because the characters want them to happen. Or perhaps, given Joanna's
obsession with astrology, because it was written in the stars.
 Director Stephan Elliott labors long and hard to make this
nonsense look as slick as possible and manages to come up with a handful
of effective scenes, such as a split-screen image of Joanna in a bubble
bath and Stephen looking longingly at the wall that separates him from
her. But after nearly two hours of portentous close-ups of French
cigarettes and glasses of cognac, voyeurism, ghosts, sight-seeing and
chases, Elliott untidily wraps everything up with an extremely abrupt
finale, leaving "Eye" just like that mass of scattered jigsaw puzzle
pieces: Sure, there might possibly be a picture there, but who wants to
waste their time trying to put it all together? James Sanford

Author
Michael Dequina
        Beauty may be in the _Eye_of_the_Beholder_, but a dud is a dud,
regardless of the perspective.  And this long-delayed thriller (it bears
a telling 1998 copyright) is unmistakably such a failure, rendered even
more disappointing by the level of talent aboard and the amount of
promise evident in its earliest stages.
        A wan Ewan McGregor portrays the nameless "Eye," a British intelligence
agent who becomes dangerously attracted to an alluring young woman named
Joanna Eris (Ashley Judd, looking great and dong nothing more) who also
happens to be a vicious serial killer of men.  Make that "obsessed," for
soon the Eye leaves behind genuine surveillance missions in favor of
watching the fetching femme fatale 24-7, shadowing her every move.  He
does not so much want to have Joanna as he wants to "keep" her--he not
only watches her, he looks after her, in a sense protecting her as a
perverse type of guardian angel.
        Writer-director Stephan Elliott, working from the basis of Marc Behm's
novel of the same name, has a hypnotic visual style that serves the dark
atmosphere of obsession well, particularly in the opening stages.  The
tricks, such slow motion and complex dissolves, have a sensual quality
that give the film an enticing erotic kick.  One scene where the Eye
caresses a wall that separates him and a bathing Joanna has a subdued but
no less electric sexuality.
        What ultimately fails Elliott is his writing.  After establishing the
voyeuristic premise, the film gradually unravels and makes less and less
sense.  Much of this has to do with Elliott's need to make Joanna more
than a chic murderess; he wants to make her a wounded soul with
deep-seated psychological reasons for her psychosis.  Not a bad idea, but
when the reasons are so murky as to make very little sense, it makes for
a source of needless confusion.  Elliott is a little more successful on
the Eye's end; suffering from the loss of his wife and especially his
daughter, he has a recurring hallucination of his daughter (played by
twins Ann-Marie and Kaitlin Brown), but this conceit is dropped without
explanation somewhere along the line.
        The supporting characters get even worse treatment.  Genevičve Bujold
plays Joanna's former mentor, who figures into the muddled explanation of
Joanna's behavior, meaning her character doesn't make that much sense,
either.  Patrick Bergin is dull as a wealthy blind vintner to whom Joanna
attaches herself; I'm not so sure if we're meant to think that she truly
falls for him or not, for there is little in the way of writing or
chemistry to shed any added light.  A dirty and bleached-blond Jason
Priestley wanders in from a different movie as a violent drifter; and the
no-frills role of Hilary, the Eye's sole contact to the outside world, is
done in by an awkward performance by k.d. lang.
        But nothing in _Eye_of_the_Beholder_ is so awkward as the film becomes
as the Eye follows Joanna all across the country, collecting snow globes
in each city and watching, watching, and watching.  Although very little,
if any, tension and suspense is built, all the waiting and watching makes
one anticipate some type of a payoff, but there isn't one; there isn't
really an ending, per se, so much as a stoppage.  Perhaps Elliott was
trying to make a point about the futility of voyeurism, and if that's the
case, it backfires, for it brings to light how much of a waste watching
_Eye_of_the_Beholder_ is.
        For some real voyeuristic thrills, one cannot do better than Universal's
sparkling remaster of Alfred Hitchcock's timeless (that is, aside from
the dated, soundstagey production design) 1954 classic _Rear_Window_. 
The sharp Technicolor hues really place the audience behind the eyes of
wheelchair-bound L.B. "Jeff" Jefferies (James Stewart), whose interest in
watching his neighbors becomes dangerous when he suspects one of murder. 
The enhanced colors also make Grace Kelly, who plays Jeff's jet-setting
girlfriend, even more stunning.  But even if the print were as muddy as
it had been before the painstaking restoration, this would still be a
first-rate thriller, suspenseful, creepy, and wittily written (by John
Michael Hayes), featuring fine performances by the entire cast.  That the
film looks as spectacular as it does (though, I must say, not quite as
spectacular as the 1996 restoration of Hitchcock's _Vertigo_, which, in
addition to a visual refurbish, was given a crystalline DTS soundtrack)
is just an added treat.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Dennis Schwartz

EYE OF THE BEHOLDER (director/writer: Stephan Elliott; screenwriter:
Marc Behm  (novel); cinematographer: Guy Dufaux; editor: Sue Blainey;
cast: Ewan McGregor
(Eye), Ashley Judd (Joanna Eris), Ann-Marie Brown (Lucy), Patrick Bergin
(Alex), K.D. Lang (Hilary), Jason Priestley (Gary), Genevieve Bujold
(Dr. Brault); Runtime: 101; Destination Films; 1999)
A beautiful piece of junk, amounting to a spectacle for the eyes only,
as the film itself couldn't justify the violence and human depravity
shown. This surreal thriller amounts to a beautifully photographed and
stylish film. It is seen mostly as a travelogue of American cities,
involving a beautiful serial killer of men Joanna (Ashley Judd) and a
mentally unbalanced Washington-based British secret service surveillance
agent known as Eye (Ewan McGregor), who follows her to various locations
around the country and catches her on computer video taking off her
clothes and as a murderer, but loses track of reality and begins to
think that she's connected to the daughter that he hasn't seen for
years, as he has been mentally unbalanced ever since his wife left him
and took his daughter with her about seven years ago. There is no
rational payoff to explain what is happening except this is some pretty
sick stuff we are seeing. The only meeting the two have, is at the
film's end, in an Alaskan diner.
It's a vile film, that tries to take the film down the same road as
Coppola's "The Conversation" and where a number of other morally blurred
films about voyeurism had gone, aiming mostly, perhaps, along the lines
of Brian De Palma's suspenseful works. It works into its story devices
from a multitude of other films, except this one just didn't add up and
seemed to dwell on the grisly violence the woman psychopathic killer
commits and offered no valid critical reason to justify all the gore in
this beautiful looking but pointless film. It is based on the noir novel
by Marc Behm and directed and written with flair by Australian Stephan
Elliott (The Adventures of Priscilla/ Queen of the Desert).
Eye is assigned to spy on the son of a British government official. We
see him by his laptop as he watches the room the man and woman are in,
which conveniently has the shades up. She repeatedly stabs the
blindfolded male victim while they are involved in some kinky sex while
Eye watches it on the computer screen -- acting surpised and aghast at
what he sees, but nevertheless he falls in love with her. He doesn't
have her arrested because he's as nutty as a fruit cake himself, having
visions and imaginary conversations with his missing daughter which he
transfers onto the serial killer. So, he decides to tail her and track
down her identity, and do everything he can to protect her so that he
doesn't lose her like he lost his daughter.
With this insanity in mind, it becomes cold to watch these unappealing
characters go through a number of other killings and with him becoming a
cross-country voyeur. The other murders take place as she changes
aliases and wigs at each murder stop, taking time to spout her interest
in astrology and numerology. One of the murders takes place off camera,
of a man drowned by her in a railroad car bathtub. The pregnant woman
then goes to San Francisco and is about to marry a wealthy blind
winemaker (Patrick Bergin) she just met, but this time the jealous Eye
doesn't wait for her to murder, he does it himself by firing at his auto
with a high-powered telescopic rifle from a bell tower, which causes a
fatal traffic accident.
Genevieve Bujold shows up as a liberal-minded but misguided reform
school psychologist from Boston, who treated Joanna in an experimental
program and taught her to never reveal herself to any man. To always
wear a wig, and how it is only the fittest who always survive. She
brings up a link to the psychological problems of the agent and the
serial killer, as both had fathers who abandoned them as children.
Folksinger k.d. lang flatly plays a sympathetic agent in Eye's workplace
who always appears on a laptop screen. Her role consists of telling Eye
that she can get fired if she runs the computer check that he wants her
to run, which she does anyway after grousing about it. Since nothing in
this film made sense, why should one expect her role to!
Jason Priestley plays a bleach-haired crack using drifter in Death
Valley, who viciously beats Joanna before she is rescued by the ever
watchful Eye.
After sight-seeing tours including New York, Chicago, and San Francisco,
the two simpaticos find themselves together in the perfect place for
them, the Arctic cold of Alaska, and what could you say, the film has
gotten so far off the beam, that it is not possible to wind it up and
make sense out of it at this point. So the film ends as clumsily and
distantly as it was throughout. As all we get from this film are some
cheap exploitive thrills and a tease that there is some intellectual
message hidden in all the mental gymnastics, but what we really have, is
a film that failed to get untracked.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Sanford
         If you took five different jigsaw puzzles, threw the pieces
together on a table top and spent two hours trying to make a cohesive
picture out of the various bits, you might end up with something along
the lines of "Eye of the Beholder." Made in 1998, this maddening mess
features a pre-"Double Jeopardy" Ashley Judd and a pre-"Phantom Menace"
Ewan McGregor alongside a peroxide-dipped Jason Priestley, an
unflatteringly photographed Genevieve Bujold and, for reasons known only
to her agent and God, songstress k.d. lang. All concerned have seen
better days -- and been in much better movies -- than this one.
 McGregor plays Stephen Wilson, a.k.a. "The Eye," a surveillance
expert who bolts from his job at the British Consulate to follow mystery
woman Joanna Eris (Judd) all over North America. Ostensibly a wig-maker
(and she does seem to have enough fake hairpieces at hand to shame even
Cher), Joanna is also deeply disturbed and has a habit of slaying every
man who tries to get close to her.
 For most guys, this would not be a turn-on, but Stephen is
prodded into pursuing Joanna by visions of his long-lost daughter, who
tells him Joanna is really "just a little girl." A little girl who likes
to blindfold her lovers shortly before she stabs them to death perhaps,
but a little girl nevertheless. Aside from having been abandoned by her
own daddy one memorably miserable Christmas night, Joanna also received
counseling from a probation officer (Bujold) who may or may not have
helped to make her what she is today.
 In its first half-hour, "Eye" is baffling but weirdly absorbing
as well. The rest of the film, however, is just plain weird, jumping
from Pittsburgh to San Francisco to Chicago to "The Cafe at the End of
the World," a flapjack shack located somewhere on the Alaskan tundra,
where Joanna becomes the world's least-likely waitress and Stephen her
most devoted customer.
 How Stephen and Joanna have the money for all this traveling
and where Joanna comes up with all the disposable disguises she sports
are questions left unanswered. This is not a story in which logic ever
intrudes on the action. As in a dream, things seem to happen simply
because the characters want them to happen. Or perhaps, given Joanna's
obsession with astrology, because it was written in the stars.
 Director Stephan Elliott labors long and hard to make this
nonsense look as slick as possible and manages to come up with a handful
of effective scenes, such as a split-screen image of Joanna in a bubble
bath and Stephen looking longingly at the wall that separates him from
her. But after nearly two hours of voyeurism, ghosts, sight-seeing and
chases, untidily wrapped with an extremely abrupt finale, "Eye" is just
like that mass of scattered jigsaw puzzle pieces: There might possibly
be a picture there, but who wants to waste their time trying to put it
all together? James Sanford

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
A Review by Akiva Gottlieb
A couple weeks ago I had the pleasure of viewing the
restored version of Alfred Hitchcock's classic `Rear
Window'. That masterpiece about voyeurism influenced
all later films on the subject, many of which became
classics as well. `Eye Of The Beholder', the latest
film to tackle voyeuristic themes, fails miserably,
but not because of its subject's familiarity.
Australian filmmaker Stephan Elliott began his career
with the art-house hit `The Adventures Of Priscilla,
Queen Of The Desert' and then proceeded to make
`Welcome To Woop Woop', one of the worst films to
manage a theatrical release in recent years. His
latest film is a silly, contrived noir and the second
release from Destination Films.
Ewan McGregor stars as Eye (I kept waiting for the
inevitable `Eye did it!' line, but it wasn't there), a
private investigator who does his peeping with
computer technology. For inconsequential reasons, his
wife left him, and his daughter only exists as a
computerized image.
His task is to follow Joanna (Ashley Judd), a woman
who kills men for their money and takes many baths.
Eye follows her across the country and develops an
infatuation for her. Eye is a father who has lost his
daughter, while Joanna is a daughter who has lost her
father. Isn't that interesting?
If nothing else, Stephan Elliott does give `Eye Of The
Beholder' an interesting look. Most of the cars and
clothes have a 50's noirish style. It's too bad that
Elliott doesn't give us a clue as to what it all
means.
By the film's final third, most of the plot does not
make sense either. Many characters change
personalities without any explanation. There are also
numerous heavy-handed astrological references which
merely add to the silliness of the production.
The reason why `Eye Of The Beholder' stays watchable
is because of a fine, restrained performance by Ewan
McGregor. Singlehandedly, he gives the film its tiny
sense of mystery. Speaking of mysteries, what is
Ashley Judd's appeal? In this film especially, she
does little more than show some skin and speak lines
without emotion.
However, the two worst performances come from two
unlikely faces. The first, from pop vocalist k.d.
lang, is so unbelievably bad that laughter is
inevitable. `Beverly Hills, 90210' alumnus Jason
Priestley also has five awful minutes of screen time
as a small-town junkie.
`Eye Of The Beholder' is a strange film that leaves
too many questions unanswered. Thankfully, the
filmmakers know that by the end the audience will no
longer care. Destination Films didn't make a mistake
by dumping this film into the cinematic pit known as
January. Hell, it'll probably even make some cash.
I can't recommend this film to any audience, other
than to those obsessed with Ewan McGregor. Because
aside from him, there isn't much beauty in the eye of
this `Beholder'.

Author
John Beachem
Directed by: Stephan Elliott
Written by: Marc Behm (novel), Stephan Elliott
"Beauty is in the eye of the beholder." It may be a hackneyed old saying, but
it's used several times in "Eye of the Beholder", the new movie from
writer/director Stephan Elliott (The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the
Desert). It also seems to describe this film fairly well. While the vast
majority of critics couldn't stand the film, calling it muddled, incoherent,
and inprobable, I found it quite interesting. The problem is, that while it is
beautifully filmed and involving, it is significantly marred by a horrible
ending and a lack of any likeable characters.
The film opens by introducing us to a nameless investigator (Ewan McGregor),
who works for a branch of the british government which seems similar to the
CIA. The investigator is known only as The Eye in the credits. His latest
assignment is to find out why the bosses son is ripping off the trust fund. He
finds the son with a lady (Ashley Judd) whom he has apparently been giving the
funds. For reasons unknown to us, she hacks him up with a butcher's knife and
then flees to the United States. The Eye follows her, first as part of his job,
and then slowly out of obsession over this woman.
I could write a whole lot more, but I don't want to give away too much of the
twisty plot. Alright, when I hear someone call a movie unrealistic or
improbable, I must admit to being a bit shocked. I could have sworn that one of
the main reasons people went to the movies was to escape reality and dull,
everday experiences. Okay, I'm done with my rant. "Eye of the Beholder" starts
off with a very amusing little intro, in which we're shown several useful
little gadgets which would make James Bond envious. Part of the fun with this
film is that all the high tech devices The Eye uses are realistic. They're not
overly sci-fi like, and they're not present to be used in only one situation,
like those in the Bond films.
I've always felt that one of the most important things in a movie is the
soundtrack. While a great soundtrack can't always save a movie, it can
certainly help one to forgive some of the film's shortcomings. On the other
hand, an awful soundtrack can completely derail a good film. "Eye of the
Beholder" has a wonderful soundtrack. It is rousing and fierce when needed,
subdued and moving when required. For example, there is a scene in which Ashley
Judd races over an Alaskan highway, images blurring through her mind. The score
which plays during this perfectly highlights the frenzy and frustration she is
feeling at that moment. Another point worth mentioning, is the interesting
transitions that Elliott uses throughout the film. They involve a snowglobe of
whatever town is being travelled to, slowly changing into the actual location.
You'll have to see the film to understand why snowglobes hold significance.
As I said, there are two major flaws at work in this film. One, is that nearly
every character we run into is completely despicable. Even Jason Priestley
shows up briefly as a druggie/rapist. Ashley Judd's character is a murderer, so
no redeeming qualities there. All the men she kills deserve it, and Genevieve
Bujold ("The House of Yes") shows up as a contemptable therapist. The Eye
himself is rather a sympathetic character at first, but then he does something
so horribly, horribly wrong that we can't feel any sympathy for him whatsoever.
The second flaw is the film's so called ending. It simply leaves the audience
completely befuddled. The film literally stops in mid-scene without resolving
anything. "Eye of the Beholder" runs a long 109 minutes, and I would recommend
catching a matinee if you can. I give it three and a half out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
For old reviews, movie news, and other fun stuff, visit www.dependentfilms.net
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick. Try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad. See it if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever. See it only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Stephen Jones
Eye of the Beholder: the monitor and the monitored
Eye of the Beholder is a movie in which many secrets are kept. Most
importantly, we never get a clear idea why the Eye's (Ewan McGregor) wife
and kid might be estranged, and we never get a good handle on the clinical
aspects of Joanna's sociopathic compulsions. And these are the two main
characters, the ones we're supposed to understand. With most movies, lapses
like this would be enough to bring them down. But most movies aren't like
Eye of the Beholder, which is able to get way with such indiscretion simply
because the fairy-tale structure is so complete and so powerful.
On the one hand, you have this Eye, for whom privacy is a laughing matter
(if he ever laughed, or had reason to laugh). Like all good British agents,
he has enough hi-tech surveillance equipment that he could pawn it and buy
small island somewhere. Like all good private eye-types, too, he's in over
his head with Joanna, has proven once again that private eyes in the movies
are always a bargain: pay them a few hundred dollars, and--when they set up
their stake-out--they'll invariably see much more than they were paid to
see. The Eye does, and--this is telling--he doesn't blink. Instead he does
the old assassin-in-the-movies shuffle, and falls for his 'target,' goes
AWOL from his employer, then spends the rest of the movie protecting her
from harm--the harm he used to stand for. It's a neat little dynamic.
On the other hand--talking fairy-tale structuring--there's Joanna, playing
more or less a talented Ms. Ripley: time and again, she's surprised at the
violence she's been psychologically programmed to carry out. But then too,
she's cold enough to turn off the guilt, which means she's pretty much the
perfect killer, which is to say she's the only 'target' really worth viewing
by this Eye. His talent is wasted one everyone else, as is established early
on. And that's the fairy-tale part, the Insider part: ideal characters
coming together.
The pairing structure goes deeper, too, though. Not only are these two
people destined to meet by dint of their respective abilities/lifestyles,
but they're also both injured enough emotionally that no one else would
do--they're made for each other. All the same, though, it's a long-distance,
telescoped relationship, with the Eye playing guardian angel to Joanna by
appealing again and again to his guardian angel (KD Lang, at British HQ; and
yes, 'guardian' and 'Gordian' is perhaps an intentional homonym, here). No,
you never do understand a lot of things, but at the same time everything
that happens feels so inevitable that your unanswered questions don't matter
so much as whether these two starcrossed lovebirds will ever get on screen
together, in the closing frames, for however long. It's a romance; you get
caught up in it. And yes, Eye of the Beholder is something of an art-film
trying to go mainstream with starpower (per Magnolia, Being John Malkovich),
but still, not everyone will appreciate the End of the World-ish (Wem
Wenders) pacing, the psychological personifications, the long moments with
soft music. Eye of the Beholder is an acquired taste, isn't simply Enemy of
the State gone noir. It's something in it's own right, something much more
powerful, a muted psychological thriller which attempts to pass the
microscope over the human condition, and then linger for a while.
(c) 2000 Stephen Graham Jones, http://www.cinemuck.com

Author
Sean P. Molloy
I should have known, damn it, I should have known. Ewan McGregor -
Codename: "Eye" - is pointing a high-tech rifle-ly gadget at a fat,
bald business-oriented American engaging in illicit sexual activities
in a window across the street. We get the requisite electro-green
through-the-sight view. We the audience, seeing a high tech rifle-ly
gadget, of course think that Eye is going to assassinate the target,
but instead, he pulls the trigger and the rifle takes twenty or so
hazy, low-quality photographs, which Eye then proceeds to fax and
e-mail to everyone in his target's office. All right, so thirty
seconds in, I was slightly befuddled by this seemingly pointless
rifle/camera, but I was still open minded... maybe there's a really
good reason for it. I've got reason to believe, you see - I admire a
lot of Ewan McGregor's previous work... and he's Obi Wan Ke-
friggin-nobi for God's sake. And director Stephan Elliot's last movie
Priscilla, Queen of the Desert was a quirky little delight. There's
some genuine talent involved here.
I think at the twenty minute mark, there was still a spark of hope in
my heart.  Eye has been assigned to investigate the leader of his
organization's son (I still have no idea what this organization was -
British intelligence?  National Spy Ring? Private investigation?), who
is apparently stealing from his trust fund. He has received his
assignment from k.d. lang, through an elaborate and expensive
teleconferencing briefcase. When Eye tracks his target to an
expensive- looking secluded house, he witnesses a mysterious and
beautiful woman (Ashley Judd) take a knife out and proceed to stab the
poor bastard. OK, that's odd, I think to myself, this could be
interesting. Then she starts to cry, and through her tears exclaims
"Merry Christmas, dad!" for the first time.
So begins our tale of obsession... or... something.
The rest of the movie involves Ewan McGregor's Eye character following
Ashley Judd around to every corner of the United States, totally and
completely obsessed by this woman from afar. Throughout his entire
professional life, he has been a voyeur; so when he falls for someone,
the only way he can handle it is to watch and drool through telescopes
and cameras. Fine, that's a lovely premise, I suppose. But gosh darn
it, if you're going to go there, you better have some sort of
explanation. And that's precisely where this film fails.
This is the kind of movie that pisses me off. It's an abortion, a
collection of half-formed and wasted ideas that amounts to absolutely
nothing in the end.  It pretends it is something that it is not - a
surreal and deep psychological character study wrapped in a high-tech
thriller. Here, the filmmakers have confused "surreal" and "deep" with
"vaguely unclear" and "crammed full of insultingly obvious metaphors."
I never, even for an instant, had the foggiest idea why Eye would fall
so in "love" with this woman who changes wigs and kills people. The
movie offers only two explanations, neither of which make a lick of
sense. Explanation Number One: The obnoxious presence of Eye's
imaginary daughter, who was taken away from him by his wife some time
ago, tells him he shouldn't leave Ms. Judd.  Explanation Two, which by
the end of the film has been beaten into our heads through imagery and
dialog and even the title of the movie: "Beauty is in the eye of the
beholder." Whoo hoo, that helps, thanks a bunch, case closed. That's
as deep as it gets, folks. There is an attempt at an explanation in
the final minutes, which, instead of tying everything together, ends
up being as profound as a clever sixth-grade Mad Lib.
There are secondary characters that move in and out of the picture and
serve little or no purpose except to make the audience wonder what the
hell the point was. My personal favorites include: the prison-matron
modeled after Austin Powers' Frau Farbissina, who apparently taught
Ms. Judd everything she knows about wearing wigs; Jason Priestley's
awfully played Dirty Desert Vagrant #1, who tries to emulate Dennis
Hopper a la Blue Velvet, but fails miserably; and the
cop-who-sees-Ashley-fleeing-an-accident-scene-and-
then-wants-to-pay-for-sex- but-is-shot. Each one in this sad little
parade is a little more pointless than the last.
The script pays no attention to the laws of time and space. Any time
one of the frequent location changes occurs, the camera zooms in on a
souvenir snow globe, and minutes, weeks, or years could have
passed. Bewilderingly inane stylistic decisions plague the whole
affair - one character passes a glass of cognac to another in a
slow-motion close-up awash in a lot of bass. Ewan McGregor at one
point takes up residence in a bell tower just so he could be
repeatedly awakened and deafened by the giant bell. Jason Priestly
starts philosophizing about sharks, then laughs maniacally... cut to
random guy with eye patch... iguana out of focus... iguana comes into
focus. Wow, man.
When I found out afterward that this film was based on a novel, it
came as no surprise to me. There are plenty of elements here that, if
extended and fleshed out more, would have made for a decent story. And
I wouldn't be surprised if I found out there was an hour and a half of
footage cut from this movie lying in a landfill somewhere, or waiting
in the wings for the DVD Special Director's Cut... Not that anything
would ever possess me to purchase such a thing to find out what I was
missing.
The last ten or so minutes featured a conversation between the Eye and
the Judd that was supposed to be some sort of revealing
exposition. Some guy in the back of the theater was talking on his
cell phone, and this time I didn't particularly care all that much
because what was happening on the screen was a steaming pile of unholy
crap; the audience around me chuckled and whispered sentiments similar
to what I was thinking. Someone near cell-phone-guy did eventually
yell, "Shut the hell up!", but it was a lot funnier when we thought he
was talking to the screen.
_____________
Media Junkies - Movie reviews, music, books, games, and more.
http://www.mediajunkies.com
Contact: media@mediajunkies.com

Author
Homer Yen
Have you ever been in an automobile accident where
you've miraculously walked away with only a few
scratches, yet the car has been obliterated into an
unrecognizable, mangled wreck?  Well, that has never
actually happened to me and I hope that none of us
will ever experience this situation.  But after
watching this inane exercise of a movie, I certainly
feel that I've miraculously walked away unscathed
after a two-hour ride that mercilessly careens back
and forth before finally plummeting into an icy pond.
Oddly, `Eye of the Beholder,' which is a
psychological-romance-thriller, starts off promisingly
enough when the opening sequence introduces us to a
British Intelligence agent, called The Eye (Ewan
McGregor), working in Washington DC.  In the humorous
opening scene, he eyes a top lawyer across the street
in his office with his pants down.  Using an array of
high-tech surveillance and communications equipment,
he proceeds to transmit pictures of the bared lawyer
to PC screens and fax machines in his office.  The law
firm's employees get a good chuckle.  The audience
gets a good chuckle. 
The Eye is later given an assignment where he
encounters a beautiful woman (Ashley Judd).  There is
something compelling about this mysterious woman. 
Despite her glamorous looks, however, we learn that
she is a psychopath with a propensity to kill men that
get too close to her.  After the murders, she sobs
while singing the Christmas tune `Little Bluebirds'
and laments about being abandoned by her father long
ago.  After each killing, she puts on a different wig,
assumes a new name, and then makes her way to another
state.  
The Eye has witnessed all her murderous
transgressions.  But he does not alert the
authorities.  He somehow empathizes with her sense of
loss.  The Eye, it turns out, also is haunted by his
past.  His daughter was taken away from him and he
anguishes this loss every day of his life.  His
tormented psyche creates a ghost-like image of his
daughter with which he engages in conversation.  She
becomes a sort of spectral adviser, and one thing that
the ghostly daughter says is that he must help the
woman.  He now diverts his energies into trying to
help her find some kind of salvation.  It doesn't
matter that he has witnessed all of her murders.  And
it doesn't matter that The Eye is abnormally reticent,
hiding his entire life behind computer screens.  He
follows her to a dozen different locales and shadows
her every move to keep her out of trouble.  When a
crazed druggie (Jason Priestley) attacks her, he shows
up for some quick butt kicking.  When the police are
closing in to arrest her, he provides a distraction so
that she can escape.  All the while, the woman has no
idea who her guardian angel is and The Eye stays just
out of sight.  Peculiar.
How bad is this movie?  I refer you to my `Review
Quote Source' litmus test.  Just take a look at the
full-page ad in the newspaper and see where they are
pulling quotes.   For this movie, they are from
magazines called `Flaunt' and `Mirabella.'  No doubt,
they were impressed with Judd's series of catwalks and
disguise changes.  The major problem with `Eye of the
Beholder' is that the film jerks forward, always
unsure of its ultimate destination.   If it was a
thriller, there was little to keep us entranced.  If
it was a love story, there was absolutely no emotional
pull.  Completely disjointed in structure, it's only
saving grace was its stylish look which reminded me of
my favorite car commercial (the one where the `6' on
the tachometer dissolves into a winding road and a
passenger rail car dissolves into a small miniature on
a child's train set).  I am also still hopeful that
Ashley Judd will find a serious role to showcase her
potential talents.  Beyond that, the film is
hopelessly out-of-control and is in need of seriously
better traction and handling.
