Title
Review for Glitter (2001)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "GLITTER" (20th Century-Fox)
    There's less here than meets the eye. Or, put it this way, if you
thought Madonna was awful in "Shanghai Surprise," Mariah Carey's worse in this
reworking of "A Star is Born."  She plays Billie Frank who, despite being
abandoned by her singer/alcoholic mother (Valerie Pettiford), believes she's
destined for greatness because everyone tells her she is. "You've got this
amazing gift, and you gotta use it," her roommate says. "Your voice - it's
incredible," says another singer. "I ain't never met anyone like you," proclaims
Julian "Dice" Black (Max Beesley), the hot New York DJ who becomes her
Svengali-like producer/lover. Problem is: her signature song, "I Didn't Mean to
Turn You On" is wretched. And when she fumes out of filming her first music
video because the director wants to "exploit" her by having her wear a bikini,
the audience bursts into laughter. Exploit Mariah Carey, who chooses to wear as
little as the law will allow? Come on! Writer Kate Lanier's script is fatuous
and director Vondie Curtis-Hall doesn't have a clue how to handle the glitzy pop
diva and, as a result of their incompetence, whispery-voice'd Ms. Carey seems to
be embarrassed on-screen. She almost cringes when the camera comes in for a
close-up, pursing her lips and averting her glassy eyes. Talented British
musician Max Beesley appears equally inept, and as cinematographer Geoffrey
Simpson pans around the Manhattan skyline, there's an audible audience groan
when the Twin Towers of the World Trade Center come into view. Perhaps one of
the reasons Ms. Carey suffered her highly-publicized nervous breakdown this
summer is because she saw a preview of this clunker. On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, "Glitter" is a pathetic 1. Right now, it's tops on my list of the
Worst of 2001.

Author
Steve Rhodes
GLITTER, directed by Vondie Curtis-Hall (GRIDLOCK'D) and written by Kate Lanier,
who is "credited" with the abysmal THE MOD SQUAD remake, comes DOA to your
theaters today.  Curtis-Hall does a huge disservice to his star, Mariah Carey,
who plays singer Billie Franklin, by quickly cutting away whenever she begins to
sing.  You can see her singing more in her music videos.  Only in an ending
number is she allowed to finish a song on stage.  Not surprisingly, it is the
only even mildly successful scene in the entire movie.
Billie, the daughter of a struggling black singer, is disowned and abandoned by
her white father.  Once she grows up, she is discovered singing backup by a
famous New York DJ who goes by the name of Dice.  The overly protective Dice is
played by the numbers by Max Beesley, who looks more like Mark Wahlberg's
younger brother than does his real brother, actor Donnie Wahlberg.  Almost
overnight, Billie rocks to the top of the charts, thanks to Dice's promotion.
Carey's exceedingly modest acting talents will likely have her fans advising her
to keep her day job.  She can't come close to carrying the movie, which is what
the weak script and the haphazard directing requires if the movie is to have any
chance of succeeding.  Hers isn't just a bad performance.  It's embarrassing.
Because of the ridiculous clothing choices and silly hairdos -- the film is set
in the 1980s, but still -- Billie is a laughable character.  It's hard to
believe that she achieves stardom.  Based on the dive of an apartment she lives
in, one wonders where her money goes.
Billie is uncomfortable with what it takes to sell her music.  She is shocked
when her first music video director boldly proclaims that "sex sells."  He wants
her to dance around in a skimpy underwear-like outfit while singing.  This is a
woman who loves showing off her cleavage, so this false modesty isn't
convincing.  The worst part of the film, however, comes in a manipulative
tear-jerker ending that contains a completely unbelievable coincidence.  About
the only thing that saves the film from being a complete disaster is the
aforementioned, concluding song number, but it's certainly not worth waiting
for, nor is it worth the price of admission.  Skip the movie and catch the
inevitable music video of the movie's music.
GLITTER runs a long 1:40.  It is rated PG-13 for "some sensuality, language and
brief violence" and would be acceptable for kids about 9 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, liked the music but hated the movie, giving it just 1/2
of a star.  Among his many negative comments were that the characters weren't
worth caring about, the movie flipped around too much and the story wasn't
interesting.
The film opens nationwide in the United States today, Friday, September 21,
2001.   In the Silicon Valley, it is showing at the AMC and the Century
theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Annette Cardwell
After enduring Mariah Carey's film debut, Glitter, I'm reminded of a bit
from Chris Rock's Bigger and Blacker.  In response to women saying that
they can raise a child without a man, Rock says, "You can drive a car
with your feet, but that don't mean it should be done."  To that I say,
you can give Mariah Carey a movie, but that certainly don't mean it
should be done.
Sure, there are plenty of pop star film vehicles out there -- from The
Beatles' A Hard Day's Night to the Spice Girls' Spice World -- but none
have been so vapidly pointless or laughable as Glitter.  Everything
about this complete tripe is ludicrous.
Start off with the story, which -- as gruesomely predictable as it is --
is the least offensive part of the movie. The film is inexplicably set
in the 80s, a period piece that really shows no sign of its period
except for a few chicks in leg warmers.  Worse yet, everyone's speaking
late 90s hip-hop slang in what should be 1983.  Meant to be partially
autobiographical, Carey plays Billie Frank, a young singer in New York
who struggles to overcome a rough childhood and abandonment by her
alcoholic mother.  Influential club DJ Julian Dice, a.k.a. "Lucky 7"
(Max Beesley playing a bad mix of Puff Daddy and Robert De Niro), hears
her sing on a track, and decides to make her a star.  In predictably
rapid succession, Billie and Dice fall for each other, she starts
hitting it big, Dice gets jealous and starts acting like an ass, and
suddenly Billie's on "the roller coaster of superstardom."  In the
meantime, Billie is on an emotional hunt for her missing mom.  I won't
give away the ending, but -- honestly -- just think of unicorns and
rainbows... you'll figure it out.
The movie screams to be made with camp, and that could've been fun.  But
the filmmakers thought making the bulk of Glitter weepy and dramatic
would be better.  What a mistake.  The brief attempts at comic relief --
as in a scene where an effeminate Russian-sounding director gets wacky
with filming Billie's first music video -- go over like lead balloons. 
Instead, the audience at my screening tended to laugh loudest during
Mariah's most dramatic scenes.
Which brings us to the performances, of which there's nothing good that
can be said.  Mariah is primarily seen with a wide-eyed
deer-in-the-headlights look frozen on her face.  She actually looks
scared during her one love scene.
But you have to wonder if the writing isn't even worse.  So much of the
dialogue is so hackneyed and watered down for Carey's virginal target
audience that it's probably impossible for any actor to pull it off with
aplomb.  Even the characters couldn't have been written more absurdly. 
They're all members of a Barbie playset: the important film director who
swoons, "Billie, I'd love to put you in a movie I'm making," and the
big-time record executive who takes Billie's demo tape and says, "Oh,
I'll make sure the whole team listens to it in the morning."  Everyone
in the film is a device, and it's painful to keep watching just to see
another one appear.
To say more would be a waste.  There's so much wrong with this film. 
And, it pains me that Mariah Carey -- with her ego and sanity in such
fragile condition these days, as evidenced by her multiple hospital
stays -- will have to suffer through all the negative reviews she's
likely to get.
But, then again, I had to suffer through her movie.
Director: Vondie Curtis Hall
Producer: Laurence Mark
Writer: Kate Lanier
Starring: Mariah Carey, Max Beesley, Da Brat, Tia Texada, Valarie
Pettiford, Ann Magnuson, Terrence Howard
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten 
 Twentieth Century Fox/Columbia Pictures 
 Director:  Vondie Curtis-Hall 
 Writer:  Cheryl L. West (story), Kate Lanier 
 Cast: Mariah Carey, Max Beesley, Valarie Pettiford, Terrence 
Howard, Ann Magnuson 
 Screened at: AMC, NYC, 9/19/01 
   If the Bard is watching the screen from high above the clouds, 
he'd probably say "I told you so!"  "Glitter," which yields more 
unintentional humor than any other movie since Paul 
Verhoeven's "Showgirls," is a sappy, soapy, songfest which, if 
the film were a debut for Mariah Carey might have ended her 
career before it ever started.  Her large public would have been 
thwarted,  missing the mellifluous tones of the person whom 
Billboard Magazine in 1999 called The Artist of the Decade. 
Cheryl L. West's story is subverted by some of scripter Kate 
Lanier's dialogue, a sample of which comes from Ms. Carey's 
character's introduction to a large audience at Madison Square 
Garden, "Do not take your friend for granted: you'll never know 
when you'll lose him."  Featuring scenes borrowed from the naive 
romances of the 1950's, Vondie Curtis-Hall's film is a fictionalized 
homage to Mariah Carey, one of pop song's most celebrated 
vocalists of the nineties who was responsible for selling 140 
million albums and singles, earning 84 gold, platinum and multi- 
platinum certifications.  
   Mariah Carey, who is physically as endowed as is her voice, 
fills the screen in virtually every scene in the role of Billie Frank, 
who at the age of eleven or so is abandoned by her mother Lillian 
(Valarie Pettiford), a traumatic event which causes Billie to be 
mistrustful of the kindness of strangers.  Director Curtis-Hall 
introduces young Billie (Isabel Gomes) observing her mom's 
performance in a night club, shyly joining her in a song before a 
respectful but small audience.  When her mother is fired and 
financial problems loom, Billie is turned over to a social services 
agency, later attracting the attention of a second-rate producer, 
Timothy Walker (Terrence Howard). Walker is pushed aside by 
popular DJ Julian Dice (Max Beesley),  who persuades her to 
turn her production contract over to him.  Little does Dice realize 
that his own coup will be topped by some major talent in the 
industry, forcing this handsome young man--who has become 
her lover--to surrender his find to the big guys. 
    Filmed by Geoffrey Simpson in Toronto and New York, with 
some stunning footage from (sigh) the World Trade Center, the 
chic Soho neighborhood and Madison Square Garden, "Glitter" is 
awash with Terence Blanchard's score, featuring so many songs 
(performed by talent including Mariah Carey's own "All my Life," 
"I Didn't Mean to Turn You On," and "Loverboy" plus an 
assortment of pop favorites by Stevie Wonder, The Strikers, 
Zapp, Whodini and others) that we in the audience are virtually 
MTV'd rather than able to enjoy whole pieces sung  passionately 
by Ms. Carey.  "Glitter" is not unlike George Cuckor's 1954 
semimusical "A Star is Born,"about a doomed Hollywood star 
couple featuring Judy Garland as a performer on the way up 
while James Mason is on his way down.  While Mariah Carey's 
songs simply cannot compel like the classics of Harold Arlen and 
Ira Gershwin and the script bears none of the quality of Moss 
Hart's for the Cuckor classic, the fatal flaw is the series of 
borrowed and banal interplays between Billie and her first real 
boyfriend, Dice.  Watch especially for the poorly directed scene 
featuring Billie's walking out on Dice after the former has gone 
through a jealous tantrum and particularly for an unintentionally 
laughable juxtaposition of their getting together, as Dice and 
Billie, now living apart, seem to be communicating by ESP, the 
estranged couple separately composing a song as though they 
were in the same room. 
   Max Beesley is the one standout performer, working 
courageously with a fatuous script while Mariah Carey--who 
insists that her rendition of Billie Frank is only marginally 
autobiographical--acts throughout like a wide-eyed tourist who 
has just arrived from Kansas for a week in the Big Apple rather 
than a world-class singer who climaxes her career as the star 
performer at Madison Square Garden. 
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 98 minutes.  (C) 2001 by 
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Michael Dequina
_Glitter_ (PG-13) no stars (out of ****)
        Now that _Glitter_, her feature starring debut, has finally arrived in
theatres, the reason for pop/R&B diva Mariah Carey's much-publicized breakdowns
(at last count: two) is abundantly clear: the film itself.  While the local
press screening for "Glitter" played to only a half-capacity crowd, this
downsized audience's peals of laughter were loud enough to fill every corner the
auditorium--not exactly the hoped-for reaction to an inspirational tearjerker,
which is what _Glitter_ so disastrously, laughably strives to be.
        _Glitter_ doesn't waste any time exploiting Carey's most frequently
showcased assets--and no, I'm not talking about her Grammy-winning pipes.  After
a brief intro that shows how single (and singing) mother Lillian Frank (Valarie
Pettiford) was forced to give up daughter Billie at an early age, Carey's adult
Billie is first seen all decked out in fishnet stockings and black lingerie with
leopard print trim, shaking her groove thing as a not-quite-exotic dancer at an
NYC club, circa 1983.  After she and her friends/roommates/dance partners (Da
Brat and Tia Texada) are soon offered a gig as back-up singers to a shockingly
untalented dance artist, Billie's soaring voice draws the attention of DJ Julian
"Dice" Black (British actor Max Beesley, called on to bark his lines in a bad
New Yawk accent and flash as much flesh as Carey), who offers her his services
as producer.  Not long after Billie and her friends start making the club rounds
as a Mary Jane Girls-ish trio of trilling trollops, Billie and Dice are offering
each other more than just their musical abilities, and Billie's rapid ascent in
showbiz is offset by the increasing turbulence in her relationship with Dice.
        Carey has stressed that her _Glitter_ role of Billie Frank is far from
autobiographical, but the similarities to her true story are staggering. 
Billie, who is biracial (a fact that the film makes a point of emphasizing), has
a big voice to match her big dreams, but she starts off distinctly small-time as
a back-up singer for another pop act.  Her talents are discovered by someone
established in the music business, and they become romantically involved.  The
pair's relationship turns stormy when he expresses the svengali-like (or should
I say "Mottola-like"?) desire to steer both her career and her life, including
controlling her mode of dress.  And so on. 
        But the blatant parallels to Carey's own story are the only aspects to
_Glitter_ that bear any resemblance to real life.  The film may be a wish
fulfillment fantasy aimed at teen and pre-teen girls, but director Vondie Curtis
Hall (who previously directed the very entertaining--in the right
way--_Gridlock'd_) and screenwriter Kate Lanier's similarly naive depiction of
the music business is laughable.  Billie gets a record deal literally overnight
and without ever signing on a single dotted line.  Billie becomes a major star
without a single significant concert date nor television appearance, and MTV was
two years old at the time the film is set and already an influential force. 
Come to think of it, there's no reason why this film is set in the
1980s--everyone looks like they could be from the '90s or 2001, for that
matter--except to give Carey a chance to cover and/or sample the R&B hits of the
era (most prominently, Cherrelle's "I Didn't Mean to Turn You On"), which, in
the film's storyline, are original hits by Billie--hence giving Miss Mariah a
history-rewriting ego boost.
        Then again, the film is designed as one huge ego boost for its star. 
Instead, however, it comes off as one huge embarrassment, and much of the blame
goes to Miss Mariah herself.  She spends the whole film in a state of vacant,
wide-eyed, smiley catatonia--that is, whenever she's not passing off a
constipated look as one of "sadness" or lipsynching to her own prerecorded vocal
tracks (and quite horribly at that; one would think that a decade's worth of
music video experience would've given her that one ace-in-the-hole).  As in all
of her recent videos, Carey also shows a lot of skin (though this being a
PG-13-rated film, she still leaves some threads on), but her ample cleavage--and
the inexplicable streak of silver paint that shows up on various areas of her
body--can't distract from her awful attempts at acting, not to mention the
already laughable situations in which she finds herself.  In fact, one of the
most hilarious scenes is one of gratuitous body baring: Billie films her first
music video wearing a translucent wrap over a silver string bikini, but the wind
machine is too strong, and--whoops!--there goes the wrap!
        Yet that is just one of the many unintentional moments of high comedy in
the howlerfest that is _Glitter_.  Just when you think it could not get more
ridiculous, Hall, Lanier, and Miss Mariah go that extra mile.  A scene where
Billie, all decked out in a sequined gown and spike heels, struggles to
walk--make that "wobble"--across a lawn and one where a split-up Billie and Dice
engage in seemingly telepathic songwriting (if only I were kidding) are instant
entries into the Bad Movie Hall of Fame.  But even more jaw-dropping is the
one-two punch finale that is a pathetically desperate bid to make viewers cry. 
If anyone does shed any tears at _Glitter_, it's undoubtedly from busting a gut
laughing.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
The Movie Report/Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  www.mrbrownmovies.com
www.filmthreat.com  |  www.cinemareview.com  |  www.digitalwidescreen.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23
