Title
Review for Wo de fu qin mu qin (1999)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Laura Clifford
THE ROAD HOME (Wo de fu qin mu qin)
-----------------------------------
Luo Yusheng (Honglie Sun) is called home from the city by the mayor of his
hometown when his father dies.  The mayor (Guifa Chang, present day)
has a problem honoring his mother's wish to have her husband's casket carried 
back to their rural village, as all the able bodied men have moved into the 
city.  His grief stricken mother (Yuelin Zhao, present day) makes
Yusheng recall her and his father's locally legendary courtship and he
becomes determined to enact the old custom designed to keep his deceased
father from forgetting "The Road Home."
Director Zhang Yimou ("Ju Dou," "Raise the Red Lantern") ends a trilogy of
sorts with "The Road Home," his third based-on-fact tale revolving around a
determined young woman after "The Story of Qui Ju" and "Not One Less."
While the first two films were shot in a grittier style than his previous
work, "The Road Home" is a lush, widescreen film with images recalling
his earlier work "Ju Dou."
Zhao Di (Ziyi Zhang, "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon," past) is a non-educated
country girl who lives alone with her blind mother (Bin Li).  When a new
schoolteacher arrives, the entire town turns out to see him and Di is
immediately smitten with the young man.  Luo Changyu (Hao Zheng) makes
eye contact with the pigtailed girl in the bright red jacket.
Di goes out of her way to cross Changyu's path, even travelling to the 
farther well behind the schoolhouse for her water (a comical scene shows a 
local foil Changyu's attempt to also get water while Di is at the well).  
Eventually, it's the Zhaos' turn to host dinner for Changyu and he presents 
Di with a barrette to match her jacket.  A dramatic separation is followed
by a
harsher one as Changyu is called back to the city (Mao's reversal on his
educational program), and then again after he defies city officials and
sneaks 
back to see Di.
This moving tale is adapted from his novel "Remembrance" by Bao San.
Very little dialogue is used in the central flashback, where images speak
and non-obtrusive narration fills in the story.  The themes of everlasting
love and home are referred to often in simple, almost offhand ways.  Memory
keeps love alive with the imagined sound of a loved one's voice.
Zhang Ziyi, who went on to international acclaim after "Crouching Tiger," is 
luminous as the young Di - after a look from the handsome Changyu, her face 
brightens even more - this is star wattage.  Zhang Yimou, who first discovered
Gong Li, has an eye for talented and photogenic actresses.
Present day scenes are filmed in a bluish black and white and set in
a snowy winter, while the central flashback is in glorious color.  The
past is dreamlike perfection, somewhat like "The Wizard of
Oz," where home was also the desired end.  The film will also recall
"Witness" as men build a new school while women prepare their lunch
or Majid Majidi's "Children of Heaven," where the beauty of a craftman
at work is celebrated.  Zhang's current heroine chases after the mayor's
vehicle down a dirt road just as his last did in "Not One Less."
Cinematographer Yong Hou ("Not One Less") frames Di in a doorway surrounded 
by bright orange pumpkins as the son recalls his father saying that sight 
of his mother was like a portrait.  His black and white images are also
artful,
as when a funeral procession trudges through the snow on foot, backlit by
the headlights of the cars snaking behind.  Editor Ru Zhai ("Not One Less") 
dissolves shots of Di both coming and going on her daily trek to find a 
lost hairpiece. (That barrette makes one wonder if Zhang will be typecast 
receiving and losing hair ornaments to men!)  The one unfortunate note in
this symphony of filmmaking is Bao San's score, which borders on plagarizing
the theme from "Braveheart."
Yusheng honors his parents at film's end by teaching one class in his father's
old school.  'Know the past, know the present' chant the students.  "The
Road Home" poignantly shows us both through the eyes of a son just coming
to understand his father's lesson.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Robin Clifford
Businessman Luo Yusheng (Sun Honglei) is going home. His father recently
died and his mother  (Zhao Yuelin) insists that, following tradition, the
body be walked home from the hospital morgue many miles away. Luo balks at
the idea, but when he sees an old photo from his parents' youth, his
reminiscences of their locally historic courtship cause him to change his
mind and fulfill his mother's wish to walk with his father, one last time,
on "The Road Home."
Chinese filmmaker Zhang Yimou has been responsible for some of the world's
most beautifully rendered films since the start of his career. "Red
Sorghum," "Ju Dou" and "Raise the Red Lantern" dealt with such issues as
sex, political repression and male misogyny in lightly veiled personal
statements against the Chinese government's humanitarian policies. His
latest films, though, like "Not One Less" and the now-showing "The Road
Home," take on a more personal, gentle air.
"The Road Home" begins, in present day China, with Luo Yusheng making the
long, cold winter's journey home to Sanhetun, the tiny village of his
birth, to attend his father's funeral. The old man was a schoolteacher who
came to the town 40 years ago, fell in love and stayed, teaching the
children, until his recent death. Now, the man's mother insists that there
be a traditional funeral and her husband's body be carried back on the
shoulders of the village men. Luo thinks the demand unreasonable and tries
to persuade his mother to change her mind. But, as he gazes at an old
photograph of mom and dad when the were first married, he recalls the local
stories of their unique courtship and it's his mind that changes.
We are taken away from the stark black and white of the modern day story to
a lush and colorful time, 40 years before. The pretty, young Zhao Di, the
comeliest maiden in the village, learns that a new schoolteacher has been
assigned to their tiny hamlet and is pleasantly surprised to find Luo
Changyu (Hao Zheng) to be a darned handsome young man. Di unabashedly sets
her cap for the young man, against the advice of her elderly, blind
grandmother (Bin Li). The subsequent tale is a sweet remembrance of two
people falling in love.
Zhang Yimou has always created striking images on the screen, but has, in
recent years, taken on simpler stories that deal with the day-to-day
mechanics of life and living. Daily incidents like cooking food or
repairing a bowl are shown in great detail with a love of image that makes
you drink in every moment of such simple tasks. There is also a hint of
rebelliousness as the determined Di goes against the tradition of arranged
marriage. The pairing of Di and Luo because of love, not arrangement, makes
the courtship and subsequent nuptials a local legend, remembered by all,
even today.
Zhang Zi-Yi lights up the screen with her smile and, in one scene where Luo
first notices her, it is almost blinding. Her dazzling smile and animate
features are a plus since there is little dialogue and the story is
conveyed primarily with visual images. There is Di's painstaking
preparations of meals she hopes Luo will select during the lunch breaks as
the men of the village build the new schoolhouse. She spends days and weeks
trying to arrange a chance encounter with the teacher, even travelling
across the village to get water from the well near the school, but farther
from her home. (The well is used for subtle humor in one scene where
teacher Luo, noticing Di, tries to rush up and get water for himself. But,
a well-intentioned villager insists that the scholar is too important for
such menial tasks and struggles to wrest the buckets away from the eager
Luo. It's a funny, believable little scene.)
The bookends of the film, the man going home, is a movie unto itself as the
wash of emotions and remembrances help to change Luo Yusheng and honor his
mother's wish. Once his mind is changed, he seeks the help of the town's
mayor (Guifa Chang) to hire men from another village to help carry his
father's coffin home. When the day finally comes and the procession makes
its way on the long journey, the mayor gives back all the money, explaining
that over 100 of the old teacher's students have volunteered to help. The
others, who were hired for pay, refuse the money in honor of the deceased.
"The Road Home" is a world-class film that shows influences from other
countries. The distinctly western-sounding score by Bao San uses soaring
violins and a lone flute that sounds much like the music to "Braveheart."
Cinematography, by Yong Hou, is striking, especially his color work used in
the flashbacks. Zhang Yimou has always used colors prominently in his films
and Yong Hou utilizes them to stunning affect, especially for the
exteriors. Costume design, by Huamiao Tong, is terrific, particularly the
attention to Zhang Zi-Yi's outfits of bright pink and vivid red. Art
direction, by Juiping Cao, is nicely rendered and spans the decades
properly as what was once young is now old.
The true story, by Shi Bao from his novel "Remembrance," is a simple,
loving tale that wears its sentimentality like a badge of honor. It is
homage to our parents and an affirmation of love and loyalty that easily
spans cultures. It isn't a Chinese story, but a universal and human one. I
give "The Road Home" an A.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
You don't see too many gorgeous, heartwarming romances with a G-rating
slapped on them, but that's exactly what Zhang Yimou's The Road Home is.  No
spotted puppies or animated Rugrats here; just the story of love blossoming
in the hearts of two young people in a bleak mountain village in North
China.
Home is narrated by Luo Yusheng (Sun Honglei), who, as the film opens, has
just been called back to his hometown of Sanhetun because of the sudden
death of his father, who was the town's schoolteacher.  Yusheng explains
that he, like most of the village's other young men, have left the rustic
hamlet for work in larger cities, and this is the first time he has returned
in years.
When he arrives in Sanhetun, Yusheng is approached by the town's Mayor
(Chang Guifa), who delicately explains the unusual situation.  Yusheng's
father, Changyu, is still in the hospital, which is located miles and miles
away through the mountains.  His mother, Zhao Di (Yuelin Zhao), who has been
grieving in front of the schoolhouse since her husband's passing, insists
the town follow an ancient funeral custom in which the casket is carried, by
hand, into town by the village's men (presumably so he never forgets his way
home).
Yusheng unsuccessfully tries to get his mother to change her mind, and as
she begins to weave a traditional funeral cloth on her rickety loom, he
thinks about the stories he's heard throughout his life about the atypical
courtship at a time when arranged marriages were the standard.  Home then
flashes back to 1958 for the following hour, where we see the young,
beautiful Zhao Di (Zhang Ziyi, Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon) pursue
Sanhetun's handsome new schoolteacher, who, of course, is Changyu (Zheng
Hao).  The shift from present to past is done nicely, as the latter shows Di
at the loom preparing a special red banner than will adorn the village's new
school.
As Changyu and the locals build the school, Di carefully prepares delicious
dishes to take to the work site, with hopes her dreamboat will be the one to
devour her eats.  She even begins to use a long abandoned well just because
it brings her closer to the school and Changyu.  Initially, most of Di's
actions go unnoticed, but he eventually comes around when it's her turn to
host Changyu for dinner.  There's the potential for some tragedy and
heartbreak, but we already know they end up together, so the concern is
fairly minimal.
Yimou breaks the formula typically found in flashback films by having the
15-minute, present-day bookends shot in black and white, while the "meat" of
the film is in color.  This works nicely in the transition toward the end of
the film that shows the bright red banner in the brand-new schoolhouse
becoming a dingy gray banner in the decrepit schoolhouse.  It's also
interesting to see the complete lack of change between 1958 and present-day
Sanhetun (the only noticeable upgrades are the two Titanic posters on the
wall of Yusheng's old house).
Home won an Audience Award at this year's Sundance Film Festival, as well as
a Silver Bear at the recent Berlin fest.  Yimou keeps things moving at a
nice pace (the film barely cracks the 90-minute mark), even though there are
decently sized stretches with no dialogue.  The film is beautifully
photographed (by Yimou's Not One Less' Hou Yong) and gorgeously lit, which
you'd expect from a director who used to be a cinematographer.  Like Less,
Yimou uses a cast made up largely of non-actors (Ziyi actually filmed this
before Crouching Tiger).  The only major complaint is Home's constantly
swelling score, which becomes increasingly annoying throughout the picture.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE ROAD HOME (Wo de fu qin mu qin) (China, 1999) *** to ***1/2. Directed 
by Zhang Yimou. Written by Bao Shi from his novel "Remembrance." 
Photography, Hou Yong. Editing,  Zhai Ru. Music, San Bao. Art direction, 
Cao Jiuping. Produced by Zhao Yu. Cast : Zhang Ziyi, Sun Honglei, Zheng 
Hao, Zhao Yuelin, Li Bin, et al. A Sony Pictures Classics release. In 
Mandarin, subtitled. 100 minutes. Rated G. At the New Art Theater.
Not too many years ago, the heavily propagandistic Chinese cinema was 
unknown in most countries. But that changed with the "fifth generation" of 
imaginative, creative filmmakers among which Zhang Yimou was and is a star 
director who commands international admiration. He began with "Red Sorghum" 
(1988), went on to such jewels as "Ju Dou," "Raise the Red Lantern," "The 
Story of Qiu Ju," To Live," "Not One Less," and others.
Fabled director Joseph von Sternberg (1894-1969) discovered Marlene 
Dietrich, created her screen persona, also had an affair with the lady. 
Most importantly, the two made a series of great movies. Zhang Yimou did 
the same with actress Gong Li. When their association came to a 
professional and personal end, Zhang-ites were concerned. Not to worry. The 
director changed styles with "Not One Less" and with 'The Road Home," 
opting for marvelous simplicity and human interest. He has said that  his 
motivation was "a reaction against the current tendencies in Chinese 
cinema, against the logic of the market. I wanted [my last two films] to be 
simple, immediate and anchored in reality." The reaction was in opposition 
to the market economy, lack of cultural life and the "vulgar films [that] 
dominate our screens." Sounds like an anti-Hollywood summary.
"The Road Home" is set in our day in a small North China village. On rutted 
snow-covered roads, 30-plus Zhao Di is driven in an SUV from the 
unspecified city where he works (in an unidentified business that seems to 
make good money) to his native village from which he has been long absent. 
His father has died. He was the much-loved local schoolteacher who ages ago 
had come there, built a school and taught generations of children.
The deceased's widow insists on a traditional, old-fashioned burial. This 
means that several men must carry the coffin, on foot, to the resting place 
in/by the village. The problem is that the place is not even a village by 
western standards. (At some point I counted the near-totality of the 
gathered adults: 20 to 30 at most!) And since the late teacher had died in 
a neighboring city (distance unspecified) unavailable money is needed to 
pay the pall-bearers and provide food, drinks and cigarettes for them. It 
is not a practical idea, but the widow is adamant, since that's the way her 
late husband will find "his road home." The son does not hesitate to 
provide the funds.
This introduction is in black-and-white film, black with a blueish cast, as 
though the film stock had been tinted --or else color film was developed as 
black-and-white. Soon however come flashbacks, as the son reminisces about 
his father. These are in gorgeous color. The story  proceeds in flashbacks 
and flashforwards. What is unusual is that it reverses the usual procedure 
of showing the present in color and the past in black and white.
The past goes back to the distant days when, to the locals' delight, 
20-year old teacher Luo Changyu (played by Zheng Hao) came to the village 
from a (we suppose) Teachers College in a city (he was breaking some 
unspecified rules). He was an instant hit--especially with 18-year old Zhao 
Di (Zhang Ziyi) for whom it was love at first sight.
(This was the actress's first feature. Her second, as the miraculously 
energetic young woman in Ang Lee's "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon" made 
her an international star.)  Miss Zhang has a radiant, delicious beauty 
that is used in irresistible ways. There is no question about the outcome 
of the girl-teacher relationship, but it is lovely to follow in a set of 
steps which I cannot reveal. Both young people are well matched, lovable, 
caring and sincere.
Back to the teacher's first day in school. The village population gathers 
outside to hear him address his pupils: "Learn mathematics, learn the 
present, learn the past, keep a journal." Then "spring, summer, fall, 
winter. In everything there is a purpose," and so on. It's lovely. Our own 
college kids could do worse than follow those urgings, especially as so 
much of today's generation is sadly uninformed about both present and past.
The events or non-events of the past, always in color, are lovingly 
depicted, in all seasons. The latter aresplendid sights splendidly 
photographed in wide-screen. There are good times and less good times, but 
nothing really irreparable happens. Even a broken dish that has sentimental 
value is fixed by an itinerant fellow who makes clear that for what he 
charges they could buy a new plate. What nice symbolism here! Attachment to 
things and to people, respect of the best in traditions or old values. And 
the love story goes on with a freshness and a "familiar unfamiliarity" that 
cannot but touch.
There's humor too. It comes naturally. Early on, when the girl is at the 
well, she sees the teacher holding a bucket. As he  starts for the same 
well he is delayed by an eager fellow. She empties the water in her 
containers so as to still be there when the man arrives. (He does not.)
As for the business of carrying the deceased, there are some very 
interesting developments. "Goodbye Mr. Chips" comes to mind.
The movie is nearly flawless. A number of people mentioned to me that its 
music (most melodious) is like a rip-off of the score in "Titanic." Does 
not bother me. What does is a lack of, shall we say, 
journalistic  information: who, where, when, why, what, how...  This may 
not disturb many a viewer, but for those of us who are interested in 
history, politics and such, there's a bit of frustration in store. After 
all, this is not a fantasy, not a fairy-tale, but a movie that no matter 
how perennial and universal in many ways, still is anchored in its 
cultural/historical background.

Author
Steve Rhodes
THE ROAD HOME (WO DE FU QIN MU QIN), by acclaimed director Zhang Yimou 
(TO LIVE and SHANGHAI TRIAD), is an exceedingly modest love story that 
is saved by its gorgeous filming, haunting scoring and heartfelt acting.  
Although your mind may wander since so little happens, your eyes may 
tear up during some of the striking visuals.  The result is a 
disappointing film that's still worth seeing.
As the story begins, Yusheng Luo (Sun Honglei) has returned to his 
hometown, the small, remote village of Sanhetun in Northern China.  His 
father has died in another town, so his mother insists that, following 
an ancient tradition, they carry the body back to Sanhetun on foot 
rather than by car or tractor.  The snowy landscape of the present is 
filmed in stark black and white.  Most of the movie takes place in the 
past when Yusheng's father and mother first met.  This part is shot in 
radiant colors, which perfectly capture the rich yellows and golds of an 
autumn forest.
Yusheng's mother, Di Zhao, a petite young beauty, is played with a 
bright eyed spark by Zhang Ziyi.  You'll remember her from CROUCHING 
TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON.  Di's husband, Changyu Luo (Zheng Hao), is a tall 
man with a big smile who has come from "the city," where he was 
unemployed, to be Sanhetun's only teacher.  
As soon as Di lays eyes on Changyu, she knows she has found her Mr. 
Right.  She is the certified "most beautiful maiden" in the village, 
since the woman so designated is chosen to make the red banner that will 
be placed on the ceiling in the new school house that the men will 
build.  The story explains how it was considered bad luck back then for 
women to take part in constructing buildings.  She tries to win his 
heart by making the most scrumptious of all of the dishes that the women 
prepare daily for the men raising the new school house.
The film's pervasive theme music, which repeats every few minutes, could 
become a sort of Chinese water torture if you didn't like it.  
Personally,  I didn't care how many dozen times it played, I couldn't 
get enough of it.  A week from now, I suspect that this tune will be the 
only part of the production that will prove memorable.
THE ROAD HOME runs 1:29.  The film is in Mandarin with English 
subtitles.  It is rated G since there is nothing to offend anyone of any 
age.  Kids less than 13, however, are not likely to find much to hold 
their interest.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, June 8, 2001.  
In the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the Camera theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
