Title
Review for Spellbound (1945)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Brian Koller
"Spellbound" is a slightly disappointing entry from the production
and direction team of Selznick and Hitchcock.  There's romance,
psycho-babble and an entertaining dream sequence, but character
motivation and plot development are not convincing.
The plot has an eminent young doctor (Gregory Peck) arriving to a
pyschiatric institute as its new director.  He promptly has a 
romance with lovely doctor Ingrid Bergman.  Peck begins acting 
strangely, and is revealed to be an amnesiac impostor, and murder 
suspect. Peck and Bergman flee to old timer psychiatrist 
(Michael Chekhov), who studies Peck's dreams.  Peck is cured, 
but there is still the matter of the murder.
Peck does as well as he can given his character.  Sometimes he
acts normal, then suddenly freaks out when he sees black lines 
on a white background.  He can also be threatening, testy,
or catatonic, and has amnesia and a "guilt complex" to boot.
It is frustrating to find some consistency to his character,
or the motivation for frigid Bergman to fall suddenly for him
to the extent of ruining her career.
More quibbles: one scene has the pychiatric doctors performing 
surgery.  I am no medical expert, but aren't these separate 
fields?  Another scene has Peck able to recall a dream with 
considerable detail, with Bergman and Chekhov instantly able to
surmise the significance of each detail.  Later, Peck is suddenly 
able to determine the cause of his guilt complex and recovers
completely from his amnesia at the same moment.  Peck is
jailed and tried for murder, but this is depicted as a
few Bergman speeches.
I am no psychiatrist, but it seems simplistic to me that a
disturbed person is just a supressed memory away from being
normal.  Most people who have psychological problems (eating,
drinking, smoking, gambling, spending, relationships, whatever)
are aware of their problems but simply lack the willpower or
discipline to change their behavior.  Whoops, time to get
off the soapbox!
Hitchcock movies often have terrific music, but this one seems
to borrow from both "Gone With the Wind" and "The Lost Weekend"
The latter is understandable since Miklos Rozsa did that score 
as well.  He also did the score for "A Song to Remember",
and was nominated for 1945 Academy Awards for Best Score for
all three films!
Looking for the positive, Bergman is lovely and capable,
Chekhov is well cast, and the script and story moves things along
nicely.  But the dubious pychiatry, and problems with Peck's 
character and plot resolution keep the film from being
particularly good.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Alfred Hitchcock
Writers: Ben Hecht and Angus MacPhail (based on the book by Francis
Beeding)
Starring: Ingrid Bergman, Gregory Peck, Michael Chekhov, Leo G. Carroll,
Rhonda Fleming, John Ermery, Norman Lloyd, Bill Goodwin
Psychoanalysis has played a big part in the realm of suspense/thrillers
since the 40s, creating films that would use an analysis to make up for
the typical investigating.  Recent films like "Final Analysis" and "Kiss
the Girls" has relied on a therapist to become the protagonist, and for
his work to play as the detective work in the film.  Well here's the
first one to ever do this: Hitchcock's "Spellbound."  And while not many
thrillers have used this idea as well as this original film, it's still
not the greatest film, especially for a director as amazing as
Hitchcock.
"Spellbound" is nevertheless an intriguing film from start to finish. 
It deals with a female protagonist (not a big thing in thrillers of the
40s): Dr. Constance Petersen (the amaing Ingrid Bergman), who works at
an institute as their only female doctor.  One day, the place is
introduced to a new head of the institute: Dr. Edwards (a very young
Gregrory Peck), who begins to show strange signs of some kind of
psychological intemperment, reacting bizarrely to things as simple as
rubbing a fork against table cloth, or the black stripes on a sweater.
Soon enough, though, Constance and Edwards are hitting it off, and
finding out they love eachother.  But as soon as this happens, it turns
out that Dr. Edwards is not whom he seems.  He is really a man named
John Ballantine, and the real Edwards is dead.  But Constance finds out
quickly that John is not a cold-blooded killer, but really a deep
amnesiac.
Constance risks her entire career to find out about this man since she
loves him, and flees with him into hiding to an old professor of hers,
the eccentric Dr. Brulov (Michael Chekhov - no relation to the Star Trek
guy - sorry, had to be said), where she is sure that she can cure him by
analysis, and discover whether or not he actually did kill Edwards.  The
film unfolds beautifully, holding our interest throughout, but the
ending is somewhat anti-climactic, but works, and even spurns one of the
most tense sequences at the end, even if it is pretty contrived.
There are several flaws with the film, such as: why does Constance risk
her entire life and career for some guy she just knew for a couple days,
even if she does swear she loves him?  There's a great dream sequence
designed by the dream-meister himself, Salvador Dali (Hitch must be a
big fan of "Un Chien Andalou"), and it's great and all, but how does
John, who dreamt it, remember every single detial so clearly?  I know
that when I've had a dream that weird that I can only remember instances
of it.
However, what makes the film rise high above the flaws of the film is
the way that this film is absolutely spellbinding.  The film, as I said,
unfolds wonderfully, and this is so; I was guessing the entire time. 
The film doesn't know a whole lot about psychology, but it at least
knows the basics, and uses these to suspenseful heights, which are
steady throughout the film as you can seldomly see what direction it
will be going in.
The acting from everyone is pretty great, with Bergman showing that
she's a strong woman, although not too strong as she risks her entire
career over an amnesiac man whom she apparently loves (the film could
have backed this up a little bit more).  Peck is great, although his
look of confusion and hypnotism gets so redundant that I started
snickering as the film goes on.  And Michael Chekhov as the wily old man
steals every scene he's in.
There are, of course, the great Hitchcockian moments throughout the
film, some which were pretty innovative for the time.  There is a really
nifty chase scene which is done intelligently as Constance and John are
trying to flee from the police while not making any noticable riffs. 
There's a scene where John is under a trance and it is very forseeable
that he may kill someone (with a brilliant follow-up scene).  The dream
sequence, as I said, is trippy and cool as hell, although too unvague
(and makes too much sense).  And the finale is, as I said, forced, but
with a great POV shot, is done so tensely that yes, I cringed.
Although most of the time, it is, as the title says, spellbinding, it's
still not the greatest film.  Maybe it's the fact that psychology and
suspense are tough bedfellows, but I still can't remember a film that
blended these two ideas together in a neat coherent whole.  It's a minor
disappointment when held up to a lot of Hitchcock's other flicks, but
measured on its own, is a rather satisfying film to watch.  Fun, albeit
not the most intelligent fun it could be, but is still the best suspense
film dealing with psychoanalysis that I can remember.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Dragan Antulov
As I had said in one of my previous reviews, from time to
time I'm faced with interesting movie watching phenomenon,
quite opposite from "guilty pleasures". There are film
authors who are great and who are supposed to be worshipped,
but sometimes I just can't help it - I don't like their work
and later I feel guilty about it. The movies are technically
all right, they have all the necessary ingredients, but they
simply don't look the way a true masterpiece should. I often
encounter such phenomenon when I watch films by John Ford,
but there are other cases. Among those cases are also
classic thrillers by Alfred Hitchcock, the great master of
suspense. More often than not, those alleged masterpieces
failed to meet expectations created by the established
critics and film scholars. Of course, that doesn't mean that
they are bad or substandard; actually, many of them are very
good, but their flaws are often overlooked, mostly out of
irrational respect towards great Hitchcock. One of the
illustrations of such phenomenon is SPELLBOUND, his 1945
thriller, often hailed as the first major Hollywood film to
deal with psychoanalysis.
The plot of the film begins in Green Manors, psychiatric
institution dedicated to the treatment of mental disorders
via psychoanalysis. Among the staff is Dr. Constance
Petersen (played by Ingrid Bergman), beautiful but emotional
cold psychiatrist. Her barren love life is going to improve
thanks to Dr. Edwards (played by Gregory Peck), young
psychiatrist who is going to become new head of the
institution. Two of them fall madly in love with each other,
but Constance and her colleagues soon discover some oddities
in Dr. Edwards' behaviour. Constance confronts him and
discovers that her lover is actually impostor, mentally
disturbed amnesiac who used to be Dr. Edwards' patient and
later took his identity after being involved in some
mysterious and traumatic incident which, presumably, left
real Dr. Edwards dead. Against her better and professional
judgement, guided only by the feelings towards stranger who
has initials "J.B." as the only trace of identity, Constance
decides not to report him to police. Instead, she tries to
treat his condition by helping him to remember his true
identity and what really happened.
Hitchcock, sometimes accused of creating films solely around
single scene, had a very good script here, written by Ben
Hecht and based on the novel by Francis Beeding. The plot of
SPELLBOUND revolved about genuine and very intriguing crime
mystery, and its originality was due to the use of someone's
mental condition as the main element of the plot. Hitchcock
also used that mental condition in order to create some
really effective and suspenseful scenes. On the other hand,
scenes that were most remembered from this movie - dream
sequence by Salvador Dali and the showdown at the end - had
nothing to do with such mental condition. The bravery with
which Hitchcock had used psychoanalysis for the first time
in Hollywood was compromised with rather simplistic approach
towards such subject. According to Hitchcock, psychological
problems that require professional help could be cured
simply if person acknowledges their existence. Of course, we
know that this is not the case, and even Hitchcock in his
later films used much more complex approach when he dealt
with psychoanalysis.
The acting in this film is good. Ingrid Bergman is very
believable, both as emotionally detached professional and as
woman blinded by love. Unfortunately, her character is done
great disservice with the script that failed to properly
explain her transformation from former into latter;
Hitchcock as director didn't help either, since he didn't
make that change gradual. Also, many feminists would
probably be up in arms because this film implicitly treats
professional women as inherently unstable and therefore
inferior to their male colleagues. Gregory Peck as her
partner has somewhat better role that inspired many similar
characters in psychological thrillers - good looking guys
who hide sinister secrets behind their attractive surface.
But, those who played supporting roles did the most
impressive acting job in SPELLBOUND. Michael Checkov was
excellent as Dr. Brulov, old mentor and friend of Constance.
Leo G. Carroll was also very good as Dr. Murchison, and Bill
Goodwin had a brief but very good appearance as sympathetic
house detective.
All in all, SPELLBOUND is more than solid, although still
overrated psychological thriller. Its true importance lies
not in its quality, but in the roads Hitchcock paved for
future filmmakers in it.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
  SPELLBOUND (director: Alfred Hitchcock; screenwriters: Ben Hecht/from the
story "The House of Dr. Edwardes" by Francis Beeding; cinematographer: George
Barnes; editor: William Ziegler; cast: Ingrid Bergman (Dr. Constance Peterson),
Gregory Peck (John Ballantine), Leo G. Carroll (Dr. Murchison), John Emery (Dr.
Fleurot), Wallace Ford (Hotel Stranger), Bill Goodwin (Hotel Detective),  Rhonda
Fleming (Mary Carmichael), Michael Chekhov (Dr. Alex Brulov), Alfred Hitchcock
(Man Carrying Violin); Runtime: 111; United Artists; 1945) 
A syrupy serving of Freudian analysis that looks tempting but tastes of too much
superego, id, and subconsious jive to be taken seriously. It's Hollywood's
version about what psychoanalysis is all about, which is making the analyst a
combination of a savior and parental figure who can magically unlock the secrets
of the mentally ill by offering them love and concern on a couch. This is the
first major film about that subject, and its sincere presentation to show it in
its best light is often awkward and seems quite outdated when viewed today.
Hitchcock throws in a murder mystery that works a little better than all the
mumbo jumbo Psych 1 lingo the viewer must sit through. 
Dr. Constance Peterson (Ingrid Bergman) is a brilliant but dogmatic and
unfeeling, over-analytical psychoanalyst, in a mental institution located in
rural Rutland, Vermont, who upsets her male colleagues by not returning their
sexual advances. Her new boss, Dr. Edwardes (Peck), immediately attracts her and
they fall in love to the consternation of her former pursuers who thought she
was frigid. 
It turns out that Dr. Edwardes is an impostor and an amnesiac, who has taken the
place of  the missing doctor. Just before he's discovered he slips a note under
her door and flees to a NYC hotel to try and figure out the cause of his dizzy
spells and who he is, and how he got to become Dr. Edwardes-- the shrink who was
scheduled to replace the hospital's twenty year veteran, Dr. Murchison (Leo G.
Carroll). 
Constance runs after the possibly dangerous man, whose sanity is under question,
in NYC and takes him to Rochester to meet her elderly mentor, the wise
psychoanalyst, Dr. Alex Brulov (Chekhov). He gets the amnesiac to relate to him
a dream, one that was artfully designed by Salvador Dali (the highlight of the
film). It then becomes a murder mystery tale as the amnesiac through Constance's
loving help unlocks her lover's past secret and enables him to visualize where
Dr. Edwardes is buried in the snow and how they met for lunch in the presence of
Dr. Murchison. But when the police find him, they discover he's been killed by a
bullet and charge the Gregory Peck character with murder. To the rescue comes
Constance, who does her analyst thing and figures out who the real murderer is.
As she told Brulov, she could never love a murderer and therefore the way is
clear for her to marry Peck. 
It's a very heavy-handed film that is earnestly played by the stars, but has no
resonance. 
It was one of the master's weaker films, yet it's still worth seeing because
there are many imaginative Hitchcock touches throughout. 
The script was written by Ben Hecht, who obviously didn't have much of a feel
for the subject-matter. His knowledge of psychiatry is limited to having the
practitioner sweet talking the patient to spill his guts out and miraculously
coming up with the cure to all his problems. Ingrid and Peck do their best to
work through the stale lines they are forced to say, though they never make
their characters believable despite their best thespian efforts. This film is
really Spellbound. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
