Title
Review for Sleeping with the Enemy (1991)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Roger Snappy Rubio
     Thanks to 20th Century Fox, I had the chance to see SLEEPING WITH
THE ENEMY before its release.  It stars Julia Roberts as a young
housewife who is married to a man who both physically and emotionally
abuses her.  In order to escape, during a small trip out to sail, she
fakes her own drowning, and then proceeds to change her entire
appearance and identity.  She then moves to Iowa, where she becomes
involved with another man, who is not totally oblivious to the
mysterious manner about her.  Her husband eventually gets indications
that she is still alive, and proceeds to track her down.
     This film is expertly executed, with all the necessary
doom-impending camera angles and dim lights, and if one has seen a lot
of thrillers, SLEEPING WITH THE ENEMY could be considered
run-of-the-mill.  One recent thriller this film may be compared to is
PACIFIC HEIGHTS which, although having a different plot outline, has the
same basic thrills.  My attempt here is not to belittle this film; in my
opinion, in most respects it is better than PACIFIC HEIGHTS (one
respect, for example, is the thriller-lover's favorite: how they get rid
of the baddie at the end).  It is a well-planned and an altogether
convincing film that one should not miss if on likes a good thriller.
Julia Roberts delivers a admirable performance as the tortured wife of
this man she so desperately wants to get away from.  Joseph Ruben as a
director effectively manages to contribute something if not the same
type of thrills over again to the thriller genre, although in my opinion
this was not a great contribution.
     Don't get me wrong--all in all, as far as thrillers go, this one is
good.  If there is anyone out there who goes to the movies to latch on
to some character to hate, then this movie is definitely for them.  It
manages to show how the good intentions of some people manages to
further the bad intentions of other people.  In layman's terms, I would
consider this movie to be a popcorn-crunching movies; if you buy a bag
before the show, I assure you it will be gone by the end.

Author
Gerald Hawkins
     Let's face it--I saw this film just to see Julia Roberts.  With
that out of the way, the film can be criticized.  SLEEPING WITH THE
ENEMY can only be called "derivative."  I can't think of any other word
that so accurately describes it.  After the first twenty minutes--which
I found tense and intense--the film became highly predictable.  There
were some moments of nice camera use--not enough to help.  The dialog
was very spotty, ranging down to the absurd in a couple of scenes.  In
one scene, Roberts sits down to a meal and has a conversation with "the
enemy" that almost makes the film laughable.
     There are some Hitchcock-like elements in the film, but it covers
only one bit of territory Alfred didn't (domestic violence); actually at
times it seems as though the production is ripping off Brian DePalma,
who ripped off Hitchcock.  I found myself thinking back to STRANGERS ON
A TRAIN at one point, VERTIGO at another, and in each thinking how I
would've rather seen those fine films again than this one the first
time.  (Actually, I knew once I heard Robert's name in the
film--Laura--what was in store).
     My rating would be an even 0 on the +4 to -4 scale.  Immediately
after watching it, my rating would have been a generous 1, but with
reflection this movie can't even carry that rating.

Author
Frank Maloney
     SLEEPING WITH THE ENEMY stars Julia Roberts as an abused wife who
runs away to start a new life.  Although I always enjoy Roberts'
presence on the screen, I have to say that this is far from being her
best film.  Roberts, herself, turns in an energetic performance, but I
failed to detect any depth in her characterization of a potentially
interesting and complex woman.  Neither did I detect anything in the
story that added anything to my understanding of, or gave me an insight
into, spousal abuse.
     (Roberts' best film, IMHO, if you want to know, was MYSTIC PIZZA; 
everything that I can recall at this moment since then, including STEEL
MAGNOLIAS, has been tainted with melodrama.  FLATLINERS is probably a
reasonable contender for her second most interesting role.)
     Melodrama and a lack of originality are the problems with SLEEPING
WITH THE ENEMY.  Certainly the actors are attractive and competent.
Patrick Bergin, who plays the husband, gives the most interesting
performance of the three principals, but then the devil does always get
the best lines.  The actor who plays the new boyfriend suffers, perhaps,
from being too much a cute teddy bear and a too perfect would-be lover;
a trifle less understanding, forbearance, and patience might have added
some depth to his character.  Perfection is not good drama, how ever
much we might desire it in real life.
     In other words, once again the writer falls back on symmetry: the
bad husband, the good boyfriend, the hapless but not helpless woman in
between.  Symmetry gives control and predictability to a design, a
certain formal elegance.  But some little touch of asymmetry adds
interest and texture.
     The story is only slightly interesting in places and too
predictable throughout.  And the ending, which recapitulates one of the
movies' weakest and cheapest "surprise" endings, is a major let-down.
It was a pretty good schtick thirty years ago for Simone Signoret in
DIABOLIQUE; it was campy fun in CARRIE; it was the crowning touch of
sleaziness in the very sleazy FATAL ATTRACTION.  And here it is
inevitable.
     I can recommend SLEEPING WITH THE ENEMY to two groups only: devoted
fans of Julia Roberts and people who have to see everything, despite
their own instincts and others' warnings.
