Title
Review for Amadeus (1984)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Chad Polenz
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1984, PG, 158 minutes [2 hours, 38 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Tom Hulce (Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart), F. Murray Abraham (Salieri),
Elizabeth Berridge (Constanze Mozart), Jeffrey Jones (Emperor Joseph II),
written by Peter Shaffer (based on his play), produced by Saul Zaentz,
directed by Milos Forman.
At first glance, "Amadeus" seems like a filmed version of a classic story,
but it quickly throws in modern elements to lighten the mood and make
everything more relatable. I liked what I saw at first, but in a way I felt
as if I was being talked down to. And just as I started to catch on, the film
lost me.
The opening scenes quickly establish and foreshadow the mood and settings
for the rest of the film. We meet Antonio Salieri (Abraham), an old man in an
asylum in early 19th century Europe. He is a bitter old man and when he is
visited by a Catholic priest he is very spiteful, almost hostile towards him
and what he stands for. He then proceeds to tell his tale of his personal
vendetta against "The Great" Mozart. 
Tom Hulce stars as Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, who seems like a college frat
boy stuck in the body of this period character. I really didn't have a
problem with this because this is supposedly true and it does keep with the
rest of the lighthearted, almost satirical mood. Salieri is the court
composer to Emperor Joseph II (Jones), and when Mozart is invited into the
royal manner and astounds everyone, Salieri is quietly enraged with
jealously. He seems to be the most serious character and aspect to the film
throughout the first half. 
There isn't really a definite plot to this film, and it doesn't make a
difference for the most part. The story is somewhat of a biography of Mozart
and his rebellious lifestyle as he constantly writes operas that shock the
royals and the higher-ups, but always seem to accomplish his goals in the
end. It is also a philosophical and spiritual allegory as we learn how
Salieri forms a hatred against God. Why should this "punk" be blessed with
such talent when he has worked so much harder and is not recognized as the
genius he is?
Like most people, I don't understand opera and the first half seemed to
recognize this and worked around it well. The movie had been an interesting
biographical drama up until the very middle and then seemed to take a nose
dive. We had been following Salieri's subtle plans of sabotage, but this
element seems to be forgotten and all that we get is a confusing story of
Mozart's later works and his complicated relationship with his wife Constanze
(Berridge) and the generic love/hate relationship with his overbearing
father. 
The music itself also plays a very important role in the film, and I'd have
to applaud the filmmakers for being able to synchronize it as well as they
did. The only problem is there's too much of it here. Just scene after scene
of operas that are probably symbolic of the conflict between Mozart and
Salieri, his father, and his wife. But it's not nearly as easy to follow as
the beginning of the film had been and I felt stupid for not being able to
follow it.
There is a scene in the first act that perfectly symbolizes my view of
"Amadeus." After Emperor Joseph II has watched his first Mozart opera, he
says he liked it, but there were "too many notes." I'd have to say the same
to Shaffer, Zaentz, and Forman: "Your movie is good but it's just too much. I
don't understand what the point was, but you did a fair job in making it."
(4/3/97) (5/21/97) [also by Forman: "One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest," "The
People Vs. Larry Flynt"]
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
Pedro Sena
Of all the films about the arts that have ever been made, I can think of
only three that stand out, for its sheer ability to display the art of its
creator, so well, and with such vigor.  AMADEUS was the first, that I can
remember, and much later, and only in 1993, films like TOUS LES MATINS DU
MONDE and LA BELLE NOISEUSSE.  These films are more about the art of
visualization, than they are about anything else.  And through their work,
we get an idea how a person sees what they see, and they describe what they
see, in notes, or paints.  TOUS LES MATINS, is a painstakingly beautiful
course in music appreciation.  NOISEUSSE, is an outstanding expose of what
the hands of an artist actually see in a model, from the first line to a
finished product.
In between, there is a little of the artist wondering what his own work is
worth, and how it is meaningful to him.  On occasion, it helps for us to see
these images.  And at times, the images are events which are locked up
inside the creative person, and our seeing them is not very helpful at all.
But somehow the work survives, because people see other things in them.
And this we have learned to love and appreciate through much of these
artist's works.
AMADEUS, is one of those films that stands out, not because of its
outstanding cast, and excellent interplay of very well thought out and
written dialogue by the playwright himself ( what a difference a playwright
makes... ) but also because the story of the young man who became a genius,
also had his moments of self doubt, and several personal failures amidst the
great successes he enjoyed.
Wofgang Amadeus Mozart, is a wiz with a piano (it wasn't called that then,
but it's close enough for us today) under his fingertips, and he set many
parties on fire in his younger days of much carousing and womanizing by
practicing what was then considered a healthy disrespect for music.  But
while he had the talent for creating pop events with his dexterity, he also
developed several petty jealousies which nearly destroyed him.  One of them,
was a composer called Salieri, who had the ability to write good music, but
his talent was not as free as Mozart's was wild. And the film sets about to
show us how Mozart managed to stay away from the vultures that chased him in
the world of music, until his body finally gave out.  Salieri, had enough
ability to recognize the good music, and becomes a good friend by making
sure the young man composes, before he destroys himself, which he predicts.
And to this effect, he undertakes several charades to make sure the
frightened young man is doing the work instead of drinking and carousing.
The film is told in retrospect through the older Salieri, who really misses
the music of the young prodigy, and the wonderful moments it created for him
as well.
At times, the film takes on the tongue in cheek approach, to make fun of the
stodgy music lovers in the court, whom Mozart does not dislike, but the
competitive for the king's favorite does make the young man stay on the
outside.  Instead the young man creates fun stuff for the street audiences,
and accomplishes some success, though he is not gaining financially.  But
still it impresses the older Salieri.
With a superb cast, and lovingly directed to explain, and appreciate the
mind of a genius and its destruction, this film stands out as one of  the
best, and very special ones at that...
Peter Shaeffer, is known for his quality of theatre, and his presence in
this work of his, is really one of the few times when a play actually fits
the screen better than it could a stage.

Author
Aaron Michaels
Directed by Milos Forman. Written by Peter Shaffer (based on his play).
Running time: 158 minutes. Rated PG (for language and sexual
references).
Amadeus is considered one of the best films of the 1980s. That decade
mostly developed Brat Pack films so there's no doubt that the epic film
would be one of the best. It made the American Film Institute's Top 100
List in the summer of 1998. Although it is not as good as some of the
films near the bottom or off the list it still deserves it's place in
cinema.
Antonio Salieri (F. Murray Abraham) is a struggling composer who has
worked hard to become great. Throughout his childhood he has seen a
little boy named Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. The young boy performed for
royalty. When Mozart grows up he is a giddy, over excited brat (played
now by Tom Hulce) who makes obscene comments to women and curses.
Salieri can't understand why God has chosen such a delinquent to pass
his music through. Salieri swears hatred on Mozart and the God who
raised him to his status.
The highlight of this movie is, of course, the music. John Strauss did
much of it but also included music by Mozart, Salieri, and Giovanni
Battista Pergolesi. The music is used beautifully in the many operas
that take place during the movie. Hulce and Abraham do a great job
acting during their many
scenes of conducting and piano playing.
Abraham and Hulce each were awarded Academy Award recognition which they
deserve. Abraham won Best Actor over Hulce, which isn't wrong because
two people can't win. Abraham plays Salieri with all the hatred he can
without becoming an evil character. He has no heart and just wants the
life that he thinks was taken from him as a brilliant composer.
Hulce does an excellent job as well as the eccentric Mozart. He is able
to act extremely serious during his compositions but then chase a woman
around a house. This was easily his best role to date. He is very well
cast with his young looking face and acting talent.
Director Milos Forman along with Cinematographer Miroslav Ondrícek and
the Art and Production Designers have created one beautiful movie. The
opera theater scenes, along with wonderful wigs, costumes, and makeup,
are a delight to watch. The use of scope is also very good.
Now to why I believe Amadeus to be less a film then the AFI makes it to
be. While I do really like many things about this movie I still have
some complaints. The movie is quite long at 158 minutes. The movie isn't
boring and is much shorter than other epics but it is still quite a long
time. A couple
of scenes could have been shortened and not have hurt the movie much.
With my complaint aside, I can still say that Amadeus was definitely one
of the better movies to come out in the 80s. I don't know if it's one of
100 best of all time but it is a very good movie.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Tom Hulce, F. Murray Abraham, Elizabeth Berridge, Jeffrey Jones,
written by Peter Shaffer, directed by Milos Forman.
'ha Ha HA HA Ha ha' What a laugh. Who would have guessed that Mozart
alias 'Wolfy' would be as jovial, irreverent and light hearted as this
movie has made him out to be. I mean being German and a composer, and
creating such operatic masterpieces as 'Don Giavanni' and 'Le  nozze di
Figaro' one would have thought perhaps a more serious and conservative
man was behind the work; but if you listen carefully to Mozart's lighter
and more playful compositions ie 'Der Holle Rache kocht in meinem Herzen
from Act II Die Zauberflote' one can perhaps hear the laughter and joy
that must have filled this musician's heart as he composed.
It must be a wonderful gift to be able to hear the structures of melody
and harmony, chords and progressions swimming with the same fluidity as
daily thought, and greater talent to be able to string together the
chorus of sounds without having to place a single note down on paper.
When the sound of music comes as easily as eating, sleeping and
breathing we have arguably the greatest composer that mankind has known.
Tom Hulce is wonderfully petulant as the rude, arrogant talented
Amadeus. His unique interpretation of the man is commendable, with the
added signature of that laugh making this particular characterisation
distinctive to say the least. F. Murray Abraham, is Antonio Salieri a
rival composer of the time. He excels at giving scathing looks of
jealousy; whose own tepid mediocrity pits him to blame God for bestowing
the greater gift of music on another man. His resulting actions brings
both raging revenge and regretful remorse. Also of note are the creative
white wigs of that period, unfashionable now, but perhaps a foreseeable
revival in the 21st century?
So perhaps we will never know the true 'Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart', but we
still have his music to remind us of the man. Although he was
extraordinary in terms of musical talent, it is evident in the movie,
that he also carries the yearnings of a common man; and it is the
miraculous transformation of these ordinary feelings of joy and despair,
sorrow and laughter into the heartbeat of thoughtful notes, which sets
him far above the rest.

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
There is an excruciatingly fine line between madman and genius. Wolfgang
Amadeus Mozart seemed to dance along that line like a tightrope walker at a
three ring circus. AMADEUS thrills it's audience with an excellent
interpretation of both sides of one of the greatest composers the world has
ever known.
After a suicide attempt, Antonio Salieri (F. Murray Abraham in an Academy
Award winning role), winds up in a mental institution. Once the court
composer for Emperor Joseph II (Jeffrey Jones), it is in this institution
that the story of AMADEUS is related by Salieri to a priest. He tells how his
jealousy for Mozart (Tom Hulce) led to a disdain for God, the God who put the
passion but not the talent inside of him. He tells how his own cravings for
what Mozart possessed led to his, and Mozart's, demise.
AMADEUS is a look at Salieri and the insane jealousy he held for Mozart. From
the time he was a little boy, music consumed Salieri's soul. He wanted
nothing more than to be a legacy in the musical world; a genius whose name
would live on forever, synonymous with "great music". Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart
seemed to ruin all that for him. Mozart's musical masterpieces tortured
Salieri's own shortcomings. Salieri watched in silent rage as Mozart went on
to do all the things he dreamed to do. He watched as his own work was mocked
by the irreverent Mozart. Eventually it would be the passion that these two
shared that would bring the downfall of each.
There isn't much more of a plot than that. It's simply a biographical film
that's just as much about Salieri as it is about Mozart. What makes this film
so great isn't the story line so much as the perfection in it's presentation.
Abraham and Hulce are both brilliant, the costumes are fantastic, and the
emotional involvement is surprisingly rich. Never would you suspect that
Mozart was such a comical, improper, yet intellectual being. This is also a
wonderful lesson in classical music as we get a hefty does of Mozart's work.
Then there is one of the final scenes: On his deathbed, Mozart dictates the
music in his head to Salieri. Words can not describe how perfect this scene
is. The way it portrays Mozart's genius *is* ingenious! It is so well done
that I would sit through this movie over and over again just to see it. It's
truly one of the most brilliant, most moving, and well done pieces of film I
have ever seen!
Sometimes it is just as hard to say why a film should get four stars as it is
to say why it shouldn't. A lot of times, it's just a matter of the way it
makes you feel. While AMADEUS, at times, moved at a slow but hectic pace, it
is still such a well done film that it needs four stars for there to be any
justice. It isn't for everyone, and, like any biography, whether it be a
movie or a book, it can be technical and "boring" to the right (or wrong)
people. While it is hard to pinpoint exactly *why* this film is great, it
simply is. It's probably not something you'll want to sit through again and
again, but it is a brilliant piece of work. Even if you only see it once,
AMADEUS deserves to be seen.

Author
Adam Godfre
Amadeus
1984 Rated PG
Starring: Tom Hulce, F. Murray Abraham, Elizabeth Berridge, Jeffrey Jones
Director: Milos Forman
8 Time Oscar Winner: Picture, Actor F. Murray Abraham, Director Milos Forman,
Screenplay Adaptation, Art Direction, Costume Design, Makeup, Sound
Grade: A
  Like the great musical pieces of Mozart himself, Amadeus is a true work of
art. It is one of those few movies of the 80's that will be known for its
class, its style, and its intelligence.  
  Why is this such a good film? There are almost too many reasons to explain. 
  The story: Court Composer Salieri (F. Murray Abraham) feels waves of
different emotions going through his head as Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart (Tom
Hulce) comes into his life as the young genius composer. Salieri feels envy,
and jealousy, but at the same time is fascinated with Mozart's brilliance and
ingenious. We travel through Mozart's life as a composer, through his
struggles, his triumphs, and ultimately, his demise.
   The acting: Abraham is magnificient as Salieri; his acting range enables him
to focus on each individual emotion and express it through his speech and body
language. This performance earned him a well deserved Oscar. Tom Hulce is
interesting as well as Mozart, a quirky, annoying bratty kid with an annoying
laugh. He's strong, but weak at the same time, and must be aided by his wife
(Elizabeth Berridge), who is good in her role, but lacks dramatic depth.
Jeffrey Jones, in a smaller, more dignified role than such roles in Stay Tuned
and Mom and Dad Save the World, is cast perfectly because of his noble charm. 
   The Movie: Every element of this movie works. The costumes and makeup are
very memorable, as well as its stunning art direction, and unforgettable scores
(adapted from Mozart's original music). 
   While Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart was a genius at music, Milos Forman proves
with his film that he is a genius of filmmaking. This movie is a classic that
will be remembered for years to come. Grade: A
Ad2am 
"I almost lost my nose...and I like it. I like breathing through it."
-Jack Nicholson, Chinatown
