Title
Review for Better Than Sex (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   "Better Than Sex."  Hmmmm.  There's one of the more
intriguing titles this year.  "What's it about?" asked one member
of the prospective audience 15 minutes before show time.  "Fly
fishing," replied the other, only half jokingly because as it turns
out, that guy uses his rod in the chilly waters of the Atlantic, and
when he throws a line he means that literally.  "There's lots of
good fish in the sea," he adds.  I don't think we're risking much in
the way of spoilers to say that what's better than sex in the mind
of writer-director Jonathan Teplitzky is not "more sex" but "sex
when you like (or love) the person with whom you're having it. 
Josh (David Wenham) and Cin (Susie Porter) look so much alike-
-both blonde-haired and green-eyed, she just slightly shorter than
he--that you know that when they have their one-night stand, the
fun will be extended for another, and then another, and then, who
knows where this will all end?
   The movie is really a theater piece that would be more at home
on, say, the off-Broadway stage if it were presented in New York
or in a modest theater in Sydney, Australia, where the action is
located.  Josh, an Aussie who's a wildlife photographer stationed
in London, takes some time off to go back to his native land
where he meets Cindy, a dressmaker who has a capacious flat in
a residential neighborhood of Australia's most sophisticated city;
the sort of place in which the bathtub, toilet, bed and living room
are all in one area.  What Teplitzky is doing is not much different
from what pop psychologists achieve in their books and what the
great American playwright Eugene O'Neill attempted in his then
experimental play, "Strange Interlude." He shows us what the
characters are doing, what they're saying, and contrasts that with
what they're thinking; but happily he does not overextend his
welcome in that regard.  He does throw in one other theatrical
device, that of a Greek-style chorus.  Taking a whole bunch of
quick intermissions while the two attractive performers are, well,
performing, Teplitzsky flashes to a series of men and women,
Cindy's friends, and has them talk to one another on the phone--
mostly catty stuff, gossip, proving that people in their 20s and
30s nowadays are just as nosy and meddling as they were in my
own time.
   Photographer Garry Phillips begins his lensing on the morning
after, in Cin's flat, as  the young people tell the film audience how
they met at a party the night before, how Cin almost let Josh get
away before inviting him in for "coffee."  They find that they have
much in common and, happily, much that is different as we see in
a few samples of nudity: some partial front for the women and full
back images of the man.  There isn't much to see in the
neighborhood, or at least we're not about to spend much time
visiting one of Sydney's more ordinary residential environs, so
the couple spend the rest of the day in bed while off screen they
continue to tell us what they're thinking.  (In one cute situation,
Cin is thinking that Josh shouldn't stop "oh don't stop" while Josh,
as if aware of her thoughts, thinks of a recipe for cake--a
technique which does not work as the cake falls.)
   A cab driver (Kris McQuade), serves as Josh's protector,
encouraging him in a way that is most unusual for hustling taxi
drivers to get out of the vehicle and go back to Cin's flat, where
the ride is bumpier but more fun.  
   While 20-somethings are more open than they were in my day
and women more honest about their desires, the same youthful
immaturity is at work as when Cin's best friend, Sam (Catherine
McClements) makes her presence felt to see for herself what's
going on with Cin and flirts openly with Josh in front of her pal. 
Here's a picture that will be (and has in fact been)
enthusiastically received by the right demographics, the folks in
their 20s and 30s, because the one-thing-on-the-mind mentality
of these two is something that other young people can readily
identify with.  David Wenham is a particularly appealing guy,
known more for his role in a TV series, "SeaChange" than in
other indie movies like "Russian Doll."  An American can easily
leave the auditorium thinking about how nice it might be to live in
Australia where nobody in foreign lands bothers you or even
knows that downunder exists,  prosperity abounds, and sex is
honest and open.
Rated R.  Running time: 81 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
