Title
Review for Cold Heaven (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
I like Nicholas Roeg and Theresa Russell.  Despite what could be considered
overacting on
the part of Theresa, in a very difficult script to act up to, this film is a
bit unusual in that one is not sure what is actually happening.
The character that died, is still alive.  The connection to the religious
event and the nuns and priest is a bit beyond me, except that Marie
 Theresa Russell ) somehow is the enzyme which makes the vision happen and
thereby change and affect the lives of the priest, his superior, and the
'crazy' nun, who is indeed capable of seeing visions, and bring people to
see them.  And Marie, who considers herself an agnostic, and doesn't  like
the church is forced to come to grips with her own hypocrisy and lies in
order to save her marriage, and most likely herself, which is the real hint
the priest offers her, when one lies to him/herself.
It is a typical Nicholas Roeg film, in that it is trying to make sense of
the visionary space, not an easy thing to do specially when the church does
not accredit anyone who has them for fear of lessening the meaning in their
own dogma.  And Marie has to figure out what is going on, while at the same
time attempt to reconcile her need for physical contact, since her husband
is too ill to help her.  And to make things more difficult, his healing has
more to do with her honesty and ability to communicate.  When she is lying,
or being evasive, he gets worse.  When she is clearer in her ways, he is
better.   And much like the ending of the film BAD TIMING, A  SENSUAL
OBSESSION, this time the woman reconciles her lies, whereas in the former
the man does not for whatever his reason might be.  Marie chooses wisely and
properly, thus allowing the ending to be positive, while also helping the
local religious authorities come to grips with their dogma ( and build a new
mission ) and vision.
And unlike many of the Roeg films ( Performance, Walkabout, Man who Fell To
Earth, Insignificance, Bad Timing, and Track 29 ) this time the main
character is capable of resolving the situation into a positive, one with a
bit of a future, and a chance to redeem herself.
As usual, this is a visual film, that relies on what we see and don't see to
offer us any clues, and it succeeds as a bit of a suspenseful story until
the husband re-appears.
GOOD FILM.
NOT FOR EVERYBODY, BECAUSE IT DOES NOT COMPROMISE ITS GOAL.
MARK HARMON AND THERESA RUSSELL ARE VERY GOOD.
