Title
Review for How the Grinch Stole Christmas! (1966) (TV)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jamey Hughton
`How the Grinch Stole Christmas!' is a Holiday tradition for many
families, in the same regard as the Christmas turkey or decorations on
the tree. I, myself, can hardly think of a more rewarding manner to
spend a snowy evening in December than curling up and watching this
Holiday gem. It's 26 minutes of warmth, humor and moralizing that clicks
perfectly upon every viewing.
Everybody knows the Grinch. He is a pudgy, reprehensible green creature
with spindly fingers and a wicked heart that is two sizes too small. He
looks down from his desolate mountain cave toward the citizens of
Whoville, furrowing his brow and frowning the most hateful of frowns.
The Grinch is completely fed up with the Christmas celebrations of the
Who's: their annual singing at Town Square, the pretty decorations they
put up, and all of the aggravating noise that results from the Who girls
and boys playing with their new toys. The Grinch devises a plan - an
evil plan - to put a stop to all of this warmth and jubilation in
Whoville. He will disguise himself as Santa Claus, ride down the
mountainside in a sleigh, and steal all of the presents and decorations
in the happy little town.
`How the Grinch Stole Christmas!' is full of delightful Seussian humor,
which makes sense, because it was originally written by the incomparable
Dr. Seuss (aka Theodor Geisel, the King of rhyme). Some of the toy names
are particularly inventive in all of their exuberant, tongue-twisting
glory. And the musical numbers are absolutely wonderful, with everything
from the more traditional `Trim up the Tree' to my personal favorite,
the low-octave charmer `You're a Mean One, Mr. Grinch'. The film is
narrated by the legendary Boris Karloff to sheer perfection, and the
three central characters are each memorable in their own separate way.
The Grinch himself is a villain to be remembered, his dog (or unwilling
reindeer) is cute and affectionate in his shy attempts to please his
master, and Cindy Loo Who (a tiny girl who stumbles upon `Santa' in the
act) is adorable. With all of this fun and imagination at work, how
could you not love this movie?
`The Grinch' originally aired on television in 1966, but it has grew in
popularity with every passing year. The animation is certainly nothing
special, but for the demands of a children's story, it is perfectly
rendered. Most importantly, `How the Grinch Stole Christmas!' strives
for a moral that everyone in the family can learn from. This Christmas,
dedicate a mere 26 minutes to this Holiday classic. `The Grinch' is one
Yuletide selection that will always be welcome in my book.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     So what are the Christmas traditions at your home?  At ours, for
as long as I can remember, we have curled up on the sofa and watched
DR. SEUSS'S HOW THE GRINCH STOLE CHRISTMAS (1966).
     In the middle of a frantic Christmas season, there is no better
respite from the buy-me commercialism of the holidays than this short,
but poignant story by Dr. Seuss.  And there are few children's authors
as literate and imaginative as the great Dr. Seuss.  It is a shame that
more of his works have not been made into movies or at least televised
shorts.  His only full length movie is THE 5,000 FINGERS OF DR. T. for
which he wrote the screenplay.  (And the only published review I have
ever seen of it is mine in the Internet Movie Data Base.)
     Dr. Seuss has always been my favorite author to read to my son,
and Dr. Seuss was one of my favorites which I was a child.  His stories
usually rhyme.  ("The 500 Hats of Bartholomew Cubbins" is one of the
major exceptions.)  He takes a liberal view of the English language and
revels in inventing words.  He even has a book, "On Beyond Zebra!,"
where he devises new letters as well.  His arguments are convincing
ones.  No one who has read "On Beyond Zebra!" will ever again be
satisfied with the twenty-six puny little letters we have in English.
As he so amply demonstrates, there are so many words that just can not
be spelled with them.
     The GRINCH is narrated by the great Boris Karloff.  His rich and
powerful voice dominates the film.  His villain is mean enough to be
real without being too scary, thus giving us a film which can be
enjoyed by three year olds as well as eighty-three year olds.  Although
he speaks his lines, his voice is so melodious that it is singing to my
ears.
     The animation is minimalist, but heartwarming.  It has all the
looks of an inexpensive production for television, which it was, but do
not be fooled by its low cost exterior.  This is a film with a big
heart that manages never to be sappy no matter how familiar the story
may sound.  Few writers can teach the value of creativity as can Dr.
Seuss, and few have his love of life.
     In the GRINCH, our protagonist is a scrooge who lives high on a
mountain and detests the happy villagers in the valley below.  Called
Whoville, it is populated with Normal Rockwell style cartoon figures.
Typical is little Cindy Lou Who, "who is no more than two," and who has
a smile that would melt butter.
     The Grinch hates the happy noises of the children on Christmas,
and, most of all, he finds their singing an abomination.  He concocts a
simple scheme.  All he needs to do is dress up like Santa Claus.  He
can then steal all of their Christmas presents, trees, and roast beast.
That will certainly prevent Christmas from coming and will provide him
his desired gloomy silence.
     The morose Grinch has a sweet little dog.  One look at the dog,
and it is love at first sight for the audience.  The Grinch forces him
to put on heavy fake antlers and pull an overloaded sled, but the dog
smiles and tries hard to please his master.
     The songs by Albert Hague are as hokey as can be, but still
lovable.  This is an old children's show, so you have to give it a
little leeway.
     The absolutely predictable ending is none the less effective.
When the children start singing even without the trappings of the
Christmas season, the Grinch's heart "grows three sizes that day."  And
Boris Karloff says, "Maybe Christmas, he thought, doesn't come from a
store.  Maybe Christmas, he thought, means a little bit more."  As the
show concludes, the families in Whoville join hands and sing, "Welcome
Christmas while we stand, heart to heart, and hand to hand."
     DR. SEUSS'S HOW THE GRINCH STOLE CHRISTMAS runs just 26 minutes.
It is not rated but would get a G.  There is nothing offensive or scary
in it.  It is an ideal show for all ages at Christmas.  My son Jeffrey,
age 7 1/2, my wife, and I all recommend it to you strongly.  The world
would be a better place if everyone would ponder its clear message.  I
give the GRINCH *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
