Title
Review for School Ties (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     In 1955 St. Matthews is an extremely elite private prep school in New
England.  Graduate from St. Matthews and you are practically assured that
you will make it into an Ivy League college and go on to a distinguished or
at least comfortable career.  One of the students sums up the philosophy of
life at St. Matthews: "We do the things they tell us to and they give us the
good life."  But there is something that St. Matthews finds most
distressing.  For three years straight they have lost the big football game
to their rival school and the alumni are tired of it.  So the school has
broken the code.  They have let the coach recruit a ringer, a great high
school quarterback as well as an excellent scholar even if the boy is,
unfortunately, a Jew.  But David Greene (played by Brendan Fraser) has been
cautioned by his father and his new coach to let his religion remain his
little secret.
     Where DEAD POETS SOCIETY is about the pressures of posh prep schools
and the wondrous joy of learning English literature, SCHOOL TIES is about
the pressures and the dark underside of blooming bigotry and the old boy
system for preserving class barriers.  It is dark in tone, dark in
photography, and a much more real film than is DEAD POETS SOCIETY.  Greene
has been given mixed signals by his father (played by Ed Lauter, cast very
counter to type).  His father has told him to fit in, but also to maintain
his religious traditions.  At first, there is little anti-Semitism: a
comment here, a joke there.  Greene turns out to be a great student and a
superb athlete and just the kind of guy that everyone wants to be friends
with, including the visiting girls.  It is, in fact, a fault of  Dick Wolf's
or Darryl Ponicsan's script that Greene is just a little too good to be
believed.  But when tensions do arise through no fault of Greene's and the
secret of his religion is revealed, his classmates show their cliquishness
and religious bigotry.
     Music was provided by Maurice Jarre (and, yes, there is a brief scene
of a train).  Jarre's score is a bit more somber than his DEAD POETS SOCIETY
score.  Similarly, the camerawork is also somber and casts a grayish tinge
through the film.  Photography is by Freddie Francis--perhaps the greatest
cinemagraphic stylist alive.  His style lets him down only during the
football scenes where he uses cliched slow motion  and repeated motion.  The
film is directed by Robert Mandel.
     Minor flaws in the script--including the Jewish boy being just a bit
too perfect and also an unsatisfying climactic scene--rob what could have
been a great film, but still leave a very good film.  I rate SCHOOL TIES a
low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
SCHOOL TIES (1992)  ***  [Credits follow text]
You know it is 1955 or a bit later because of the cars and a
theater marquee in a grungy part of Scranton, Pennsylvania,
with "Rebel Without A Cause" on it. But David Greene (Brendan
Fraser), a big, nice and nice-looking Jewish boy from a nice
working-class family, is no rebel. Even so, when a biker
provokes with a slur, he beats the daylights out of him.
Nothing special here. Or so it seems. But the sub-text is.
It's a counter-cliche: the Jew not as a victim of brute,
physical force but as retaliator and winner. A good start.
David is an ace high school quarterback whom the nice coach of 
a posh New England prep school has recruited on a scholarship 
to bolster the chances of the St. Matthew's team. In turn this 
bolsters David's chances to attain the unattainable, a 
scholarship to Harvard, since, for the regular WASP preppies 
-- scions of the power elite and often scions of scions of 
scions -- the 200-year old school is the gateway to Harvard, 
Princeton or Yale.  
Some students may be socially and psychologically immature and 
shielded from the common people, but in academic matters, St. 
Matthew's is a place of seriousness and quality. 
The young men do share in their milieu's snobbishness and vast 
array of prejudices. Overall, however, likable, mature 
proletarian David is accepted as a person and soon is doubly 
appreciated as a winning player. 
Even so, false pretenses are at work here. David, advised by 
his father to "fit in" and by the friendly coach not to give 
out more information than necessary, hides his Mogen David 
pendant and does not volunteer the fact he is a Jew. 
Eventually though, this will out and, for reasons of 
prejudice, jealousy and sexual rivalry (David wins over his 
pal's non-girlfriend) anti-Semitism explodes in sundry, sneaky 
and dishonorable ways. The outcome is more of a holding action 
than an epiphany. 
David's concealment-by-omission of his Jewishness is more sad 
than reprehensible, with the kind of distress that you find in 
films like "Pinky" or "Imitation of Life" where black girls 
try to pass for white.  Depressing too are the status-seeking  
pressures on the WASP students who, willy-nilly are obsessed 
with "living up to someone else's expectations." Yet they are 
not Strasbourg geese, force-fed for slaughter and "foie gras." 
Sooner or later, pass or fail, they will take their place 
among the privileged, the old boys elite, and send their own 
boys to St. Matthew's. Shed no tears for them. 
"School Ties"is, in many ways, an old-fashioned movie on a 
major theme that Hollywood, with all its Jewish presence, has 
cautiously and self-consciously played down. Movies on 
anti-Semitism as persecution by the Nazis or as one element 
among others, have been fairly common. But ask anyone about 
films that treat anti-Semitism in America per se, as the 
kernel and not merely in passing, and you get only the 1947 
"Gentleman's Agreement"in which Gregory Peck playing another 
Green (without an "e"), a goy (gentile) reporter who pretends 
he is a Jew to expose the ills of prejudice. Or else that 
other 1947 opus, "Crossfire." 
"School Ties" works its way through with a solid accumulation 
of scenes, sequences and details.  School life is 
realistically shown with, especially, the upperclassmen going 
through hi-jinx and revels, sexual stirrings or classroom 
problems. Some events are predictable (boy meets girl, 
she-WASP rejects him-Jew, a last-minute touchdown, etc. ) but 
these do not invalidate their truth or their filmic interest. 
Cleverly handled too are scenes of school assembly with 
religious overtones that puzzle David, or an encounter between 
David and the Principal (in the know) who seems entirely free 
of prejudice but still comes out with the notorious "You, 
people," something that, in the early 1990s lost to Ross Perot 
many a black supporter.  
Effective too is the portrayal of Mr. Cleary (Zeljko Ivanek), 
the fussy, martinet teacher of French, who is something of a 
sadist (shades of Emil Jannings in "The Blue Angel"). He has 
the right non-native accent of many a school-teacher of 
foreign languages, becomes the butt of some dumb, unfunny 
(hence believable) practical jokes and drives a student to 
despair. Mr. Cleary is at the same time caricatural and 
realistic.  But though an overbearing perfectionist, he makes 
an egregious error on his first day of class by declaring that 
the students will learn "francais" (French) instead of "*le* 
francais." Hollywood moviemakers are terribly sloppy about 
linguistic details, (among other cultural ones), and seldom 
check with native speakers.
Though certainly not destined for classic status, the movie 
has top-drawer production values and good acting. Fraser is 
something of a hunk, but with much over-hunkiness replaced by 
brains and sensitivity. Some of the seniors may look a tad too 
old, but that's a minor point when compared to the old college 
pictures where freshmen were in their later thirties! 
More importantly, the film makes its points with coherence and 
skill. Still, its taking place some 37 years ago is like a 
safety net and perhaps implies that "That was then, this is 
now." But have things changed radically or, as Professor 
Cleary might put it, is it a case of "plus ca change..." "the 
more things change, the more they stay the same?" A frank 
update to the 1990s might make an interesting and more 
relevant movie. 
CREDITS: SCHOOL TIES (1992)  *** Directed by Robert Mandel. 
Written by Dick Wolf, Darryl Ponicsan. Produced by Stanley R. 
Jaffe. Cinematography, Freddie Francis. Editing, Jerry 
Greenberg, Jacqueline Cambas. Production design, Janine 
Claudia Oppewall. Music, Maurice Jarre. Cast: Brendan Fraser, 
Chris O'Donnell, Andrew Lowery, Matt Damon et al. A Paramount 
release. 107 minutes. Rated PG-13 (language). 
