Title
Review for Mecánicas celestes (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz
CELESTIAL CLOCKWORK (Mecanicas Celestes) (director/writer: Fina Torres;
screenwriters: Telsche Boorman/ Chantal Pelletier; cinematographer:
Ricardo Aronovich; cast: Ariadna Gil (Ana), Arielle Dombasle (Celeste),
Evelyn Didi (Alcanie), Frederic Longbois (Armand), Lluis Homas (Italo),
Chantal Aimee (Tina), 1996-Fr.)
If you like nonsense musicals with plenty of singing, beautiful set
designs, fantastic colors, sex, witchcraft, and a fairy tale charm to
it, then you will probably like this film, which is in many ways like
FLYING DOWN TO RIO. Though, I was hoping it could be more like those
Jacques Demy or Jacques Rivette musicals, exhibiting a little more
substance. But if you are in a mood for some light entertainment, this
zany musical has plenty of oomph and should satisfy your Latino appetite
for something that is easy and sexy to look at.
The little known director of this film, hails from Venezuela, which
gives this French film a very natural Latin twist to its story and
music.The film opens in a Venezuelan church, where Ana (Ariadna) is
about to get married at the altar, but for some inexplicable reason
changes her mind and runs out of the church, grabs a taxi, packs her
Maria Callas poster, and is on a plane for Paris still in her wedding
dress. In Paris, she rooms with four other countrywomen, finds a job as
a housekeeper and another one in a bakery store, and decides to follow
through on her dream of being a professional opera singer by taking
lessons with a voice coach.
Her ambition is to get the great impresario, Italo (Lluis), to listen to
her sing. She wants very much to be in his next production of
Cinderella. Meanwhile she has problems with her visa, as her stay in
Paris is about to legally end. The police are trying to keep close tabs
on her, wanting her to leave the country. Armand (Frederic) is the gay
waiter who befriends her and offers to marry her in a "phony marriage,"
if she marries him in church. He wants this to please his mother; and,
she agrees to do this in order to stay in Paris.
In between the songs, that can break out at any moment, like in
Rivette's UP DOWN FRAGILE, the ever-smiling Ana, (after awhile her smile
begins to grate on you), will meet a nervous psychoanalyst, Alcanie
(Didi), whom she moves in-with after drinking a love potion concocted by
a witch doctor.
This is all done as harmless and silly fun, much in the vein of a long
list of Hollywood and French musicals, films that I was never partial
to. For what it's worth, this film is an entertaining and colorful
spectacle, and with enough verve in it to make it seem inventive.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Berardinelli
France/Venezuela/Spain/Belgium, 1995
Running Length: 1:26
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Sexual themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.66:1
Shown at the Philadelphia Festival of World Cinema, 5/2/96 and 5/4/96
Cast: Ariadna Gil, Arielle Dombasle, Evelyne Didi, Frederic Longbois
Director: Fina Torres
Producer: Gerard Costa
Screenplay: Catherine Touzet
Cinematography: Ricardo Aronovich
U.S. Distributor: October Films
In French and Spanish with subtitles
     It has been ten years since Venezuela-born Fina Torres blasted onto 
the international film making scene with ORIANA, the Camera d'Or winner 
at the 1985 Cannes Film Festival.  Now, after a decade of relative 
motion picture inactivity, Torres has released her second feature, 
CELESTIAL CLOCKWORK, which is currently playing at film festivals and 
will soon be released nationally by October Films.  Unfortunately, 
although CELESTIAL CLOCKWORK boasts amazingly off-beat visuals and 
quirky plot twists, the basic narrative is stale.
     Fans of the film laud it as a modern-day, feminist ALICE IN 
WONDERLAND meets THE WIZARD OF OZ.  And, while there's no denying that 
elements of both stories permeate Torres' movie, the basic story isn't 
all that interesting.  The appealing performance of lead actress Ariadna 
Gil, the bizarre imagery, and the air of lunacy are the elements that 
keep this film moving forward.  Delve beneath the singing Maria Callas 
poster, the glowing love potions, and the roiling clouds, and you'll 
discover that CELESTIAL CLOCKWORK's basic framework is threadbare.
     The movie focuses on a beautiful young woman who finds liberation 
by rejecting her old, restricted life for a new existence in the City of 
Lights.  Ana (Gil) reaches the altar before realizing that marriage is a 
mistake.  Before saying "I do", however, she jilts her would-be 
bridegroom, hops on a plane, and soars to Paris.  There, she moves in 
with four Latina women and coaxes an eccentric Russian singing teacher 
to accept her as a pupil.  Soon, one of Ana's roommates, Celeste 
(Arielle Dombasle), becomes jealous of her vocal talents, and Ana is 
forced to move out.  She next shares an apartment with an unconventional 
psychologist (Evelyne Didi) who falls in love with her.  Meanwhile, 
French immigration officials are after Ana to deport her, and, in order 
to remain in the country and pursue a coveted film role, she agrees to 
marry a gay astrologist who wants to have a big church wedding to please 
his parents.
     CELESTIAL CLOCKWORK boasts a gaggle of unusual characters, only a 
few of whom are developed beyond the "quirky" level.  The villainous 
Celeste, for example, is defined largely by eyes that glow evilly and an 
affinity for singing songs like "Sometimes I Eat Spiders".  Ana is 
really the only three-dimensional character, and even her personality 
has some obvious holes.  None of these deficiencies, however, detract 
from the movie's basic message of self-discovery through the repudiation 
of conventions and others' expectations.  
     As intriguing as some of the color-supersaturated visuals are, this 
film is as much a treat for the ears as for the eyes.  Boasting a rich 
and varied soundtrack predominated by classical opera, there's hardly a 
moment when someone isn't singing.  CELESTIAL CLOCKWORK is a cacophony 
of hue, light, and sound -- at times it doesn't seem important how well 
the plot holds together.  As a series of ethereal moments strung 
together by cobwebs, CELESTIAL CLOCKWORK makes for fine, feather-light 
entertainment, but, beneath all the delightful distractions, there's a 
discouraging lack of substance. 
