Title
Review for Split Images (1992) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
The author of this review must admit somewhat embarrassing
fact that he used to be (and sometimes still is) biased
towards certain national cinematographies. For example, in
1980s I used to consider Australian movies superior to
Hollywood. In this decade, I feel almost the same towards
Canada and its booming cinematography, both Anglophone and
Francophone. I like Canadian movies, because they almost
always look different from Hollywood - and it doesn't matter
whether they are made as an ambitious art films, or
commercial genre products. But, every now and then, I'm
reminded that non-Hollywood origin of a English- speaking
film should never be the indicator of a movie's quality.
Such was the case with SPLIT IMAGES, 1992 television
thriller made in Canada. The screenplay by Pete Hamill and
Vera Appleyard is based on the novel by Elmore Leonard,
whose fiction is often used by different film-makers in last
few decades. The plot deals with an extremely rich man who
had developed a rather strange and not very healthy hobby -
he kills people and shoots their last moments on video. Of
course, as is the case with such movies, he seems
unstoppable in his murderous rampage until one pushy female
reporter and one tough cop join force in order to bring him
down.
Perhaps the plot by Elmore Leonard, so useful to many film
authors, was really promising. Perhaps something of that
promise remained in the script. But the execution of those
ideas was inept, with the director Sheldon Larry more eager
to demonstrate new wonders of video technology than to tell
a coherent story. The use of opera music in important scenes
look even more irritating. The actors in this movie, on the
other hand, seems generally disinterested in this project,
and they mostly sleepwalk through their roles. Presence of
such good actors like Nicholas Campbell and Maury Chaykin is
almost unnoticeable. And so should be this film, condemned
to well-deserved oblivion.
Review written on September 15th 1999
