Title
Review for Dangan ranna (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Murky and confused, the Japanese import "Non-Stop" ("Dangan Ranna")
is a pale precursor to Tom Tykwer's exhilarating "Run Lola Run" from 1998.
Both films share a central premise of a shady deal gone awry resulting in a
pivotal figure--in "Non-Stop" it's actually three protagonists--run, run,
running for their life/lives.  And there's also the intriguing plot device
of learning more about our leading player(s) as time elapses, through
flashbacks and fast forwards.
        "Non-Stop" was actually made in 1996 but is only now seeing a US
release thanks--but not many--to those indie promoters over at Shooting
Gallery.  So it's more likely that, if anything, Tykwer borrowed from
writer/director Hiroyuki Tanaka (typically credited as Sabu as he is here).
If Tykwer did draw his inspiration from "Non-Stop," then he improved upon
the original no end.
        Tomoro Taguchi plays a would-be bank robber who, as the film opens,
is plotting one big score.  Forgetting his mask, he ducks into a local
convenience store and ineptly shoplifts one, which is when the chase
begins.  Hurtling along, the thief's pursuer (the store clerk, played by
Daimond Yukai) clumsily collides with a local Yakuza (Shinichi Tsutsumi
plays the gangster) who subsequently takes up the pursuit.
        Much of the film's scant 82-minute running time is made up of these
three grown men dashing through the streets of downtown Tokyo, all keeping
an oddly safe and equal distance from each other.  These men share a common
bond in that they are losers: Yasuda (Taguchi) cannot hold down even the
most menial of jobs as a kitchen aide, and his planned robbery is partly an
attempt to impress his girlfriend; Aizawa (Yukai) is a would-be rock star
with a heroin habit; and Takeda (Tsutsumi) is living with the stigma of
letting his mob boss take a fatal hit.
        Whereas "Run Lola Run" was an adrenaline rush from start to finish,
"Non-Stop" is just plain silly.  Tykwer's film was smart and kinetic, its
heroine alive and ablaze, its real and imagined situations by turns
creative and absurd, pulsing with portent and unpredictability.  "Non-Stop"
is none of these.  It feels amateurish and uneven.  Even the subtitles are
often times poorly translated.
        Likewise the film is supposed to be a black comedy but there are
few laughs to be found among the shattered lives and machismo violence.
One Asian family in the audience, who perhaps detected some culturally
significant reference, was laughing uncontrollably during a sequence in
which the runners pass an attractive woman who has stooped to pick
something up.  Momentarily distracted from their ultimate fate, all three
men have similar (sexual) fantasies as they breeze on by.
        While more clever than amusing, this scene is one of the few in
which the director actually appears to be in control of his material,
taking full advantage of the inventive gimmick at the center of his film.
Otherwise, "Non-Stop" is a long haul, a never-ending marathon of good
intentions marred by missed opportunities.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
"Dangan Runner" -- the word "Dangan" means "bullet" -- is one big chase
scene played for comic revelation.  Like a lot of action movies, there's a
climax where everyone's shooting at everyone else -- but in this case, it's
played as a tongue-in-cheek piece of black comedy instead of a serious
contest of strength.
"Dangan Runner" takes three people whose lives have bottomed out and
intertwines them in bizarre ways.  Tomoroh Taguchi (the quintessential
Japanese cult actor), as Yasuda, is a schlub who can't even hold down a
short-order cook job.  He tries to rob a bank, but even that collapses when
he realizes he's left his face mask at hime -- and the only mask he can find
at the corner convenience store (in a hilarious piece of montage) is a
children's-sized job.  In despair, he tries robbing the place, and winds up
shooting the store clerk, Aizawa (Daimond Yukai).
Aizawa has his own problems.  He's got a band (and judging from the brief
clip we see, where Yukai himself performs, they're pretty good), but he's
got a yakuza boss squeezing him for cash, a girlfriend who he doesn't care
for, and a drug addiction.  When Yasuda shoots him (it isn't much of a
wound, actually), Aizawa takes off after him, and they collide with Takeda.
Takeda is a yakuza protector, walking around in a funk because despite his
oaths of fealty, he chickened out when someone tried to attack his boss (and
let the man get stabbed to death).  Aizawa and Yasuda collide with him, and
an innocent bystander gets shot as well -- and now Takeda is after *them*.
And they run, run, run -- for something like 80% of the running time (pardon
the pun) of "Dangan Runner", in a crazy marathon of self-determination.
Each of them has a reason to keep going, and pretty soon it becomes all
that's holding them together.  (There are moments where the "marathon"
aspect is explicitly parodied, like when each of them grab free drinks being
offered at a promotional stand.  But the joke doesn't end there.)
Astute viewers will probably no doubt find similarities between this and
"Lola Rennt [Run Lola Run]", but "Dangan Runner" is its own animal, funny
and fast-moving.  There is a kind of a nod to the parallel-reality jaunting
of "Lola" -- in one screamingly funny scene, the three runners jog past a
pretty young woman, and each of them entertains varied pornographic
fantasies about her.  They're not alone in their dreaming, either: the cops
and the yakuza have their own hilariously-realized fantasies about how
they'd like things to unfold as well.
"Dangan Runner" is not the greatest movie ever made, but at 82 minutes it's
tight and fresh.  I understand that director Hiroyuki Tanaka is something of
a Great White Hope for Japanese film right now, and seeing this movie it's
not hard to see why.
