Title
Review for Best Years of Our Lives, The (1946)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
There are many war movies.  However, after the Vietnam war, 
Hollywood believed that a new film genre was born with 
"Coming Home" (1978): the postwar movie.  This genre deals
with soldiers after they have returned from the war, and
sometimes find that the greater battle was not left behind.
Spouses have grown independent, children have grown up and
become strangers, and skills learned in the war may not
translate to stateside jobs.  And if you've left a part of
you behind on the battlefield, physically and/or mentally, 
you must face your inner demons, overcome handicaps, and
find a new place in society.
Of course, there's rarely such a thing as a new genre.
"The Best Years of Our Lives" had "Coming Home" beat by
more than thirty years, and what's more, it is a superior
film, with a broader story and a better script.
"The Best Years of Our Lives" concerns the return of three
World War II veterans, and their problems adjusting to
postwar society.  The oldest (Fredric March) promptly
gets a promotion and has a strong supporting family,
anchored by wife Myrna Loy and full-grown daughter 
Teresa Wright.  But he has a drinking problem, feels guilty
about his success, and bears unfathomable antipathy towards 
his obliging boss.
Dana Andrews is the second veteran, and his leading man looks
ensure the most screen time.  His readjustment is more
difficult.  His skill at dropping bombs doesn't help him
land a job, and his wife proves selfish and shallow.  Aware
of his problems, he spends much of the movie wearing a
dazed look, as if saying 'How could this have happened to
me, such a swell guy?'
Harold Russell is a sailor who lost his hands in battle.  
He now has metal hooks in their place, that allow him to open 
doors and light matches, but he can't hug his fiancee with them.
Russell has strong family support and a devoted fiancee,
but struggles with depression and inadequacy.  Russell won the
Best Supporting Actor Oscar for his performance, but did not
appear in another movie until a minor role 34 years later.
I guess the studios wouldn't lend him a hand.
"The Best Years of Our Lives" takes its time, and the
slow pace is very agreeable, allowing commonplace dialogue
to make characters and events appear real.  Andrews
doesn't find his wife until the film's second hour,
giving him plenty of time to estabish bonds with March,
Russell, and Wright.
Hoagy Carmichael is in this movie.  I mention this because
he is always welcome, and he sure can play a piano.
It can be argued that "The Best Years of Our Lives" is
really a lengthy soap opera.  Well, bring on the detergent,
and don't forget your hanky.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
