Title
Review for Mui du du xanh (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dennis Schwartz
 SCENT OF GREEN PAPAYA, THE (Mui du du xanh) (director/writer: Tran Anh
 Hung; cinematographer: Benoît Delhomme; editors: Nicole
 Dedieu/Jean-Pierre Roques; cast: Yęn-Khę Tran Nu (Mui Age 20), Man San
 Lu (Mui Age 10), Thi Loc Truong (The Mother), Nguyen Anh Hoa  (Old
 Servant), Hoa Hoi Vuong (Khuyen), Ngoc Trung Tran (The Father), Nguyen
 van Oanh (Mr. Thuan), Thi Hai Vo (Granny), Nhat Do (Lam), Gerard Neth
 (Tin), Keo Souvannavong (Trung); Runtime: 104; La Sept/First Look
 Pictures; 1993-France)
Transplanted Vietnamese director Tran Anh Hung, the 31-year-old now
living in France since 1975, makes his debut film a lush, lyrical story
about a peasant girl, Mui (Man San Lu-age 10). She comes from her
country village to Saigon in 1951 to be a servant in a bourgeois
household consisting of--the old servant (Nguyen Anh Hoa), grandmother
(Thi Hai Vo), three sons (Gerard Neth/Nhat Do/Keo Souvannavong), the
master of the house (Ngoc Trung Tran), and his wife (Thi Loc Truong).
"The Scent of Green Papaya" is a quiet, sensuous, apolitical, slow-paced
film which makes it a point to clearly detail the everyday existence in
the Vietnam of the rich and their servants in the 1950s, and it is also
about the changing life in Vietnam (filmed, amazingly, on a Paris indoor
set); it views the changes from the old ways to the changes incurring
due to the influences from the West that came in the 1960s. It traces in
particular the aspects of women's work and their servitude that covers a
10-year period - from 1951 to 1961. It is seen through the eyes of Mui.
She absorbs the serene music played in the rich household by the father
on the lute and his eldest son Trung on the flute and the enormously
sweet girl, with the radiant smile, shows how she optimistically finds
satisfaction with her lot in life as a poor servant.
Mui is shown her duties by the old servant, who carefully shows her how
to prepare the papaya (which is traditionally woman's work) and answers
all the child's curious questions about the household. The child will
also serve the meals, clean the house, wash the clothes, and run
errands. The mistress of the house is especially fond of her and treats
her with utmost kindness as she reminds her of the daughter she lost to
a disease, who would have been the same age as Mui. The master of the
house is guilt-ridden because his daughter died when he ran away from
home and he only returned after her death, and was sickened so much over
that incident that he promised not to take off again. He has a history
of disrupting the family by periodically disappearing with the family
savings for long periods of womanizing. He causes much pain for his hard
working wife, who earns money for the household by selling cloth.
Because of this the young child Tin, in particular, acts unruly, taking
it out mostly on Mui.
But Mui seems oblivious to the family tragedies, as she keys in on the
simple pleasures of life. She loves cooking the papaya, doing her chores
in an unobtrusive manner, and tuning in to the wonderous nature around
her.
Mui is attracted to a rich friend of Trung's, Khuyen (Hoa Hoi Vuong),
someone who is a classical pianist and frequently visits the house for
dinner. The first part of the film ends as the family suffers the loss
of the master who kept his word for seven years, since the death of his
daughter, but now has run away with another woman, taking with him the
household money.
In 1961, ten years after the master's death, the 20-year-old Mui
(Yęn-Khę Tran-the director's real-life fiancée) is still content working
for this troubled family but she is let go because of economic reasons
and will become the servant to Khuyen. She will now do her preparing of
the papaya with a more womanly intimacy and an engaging relationship
grows between her and him, as he finally notices the servant is an
alluring woman. The second part of the film pales in comparison to part
one, and that is because the innocent Mui as a child was the glue that
held the film together and made it seem so special. The older Mui
doesn't radiate the same warmth on the screen.
This is a very pleasing and subtle tale about the strength of the human
spirit and the artistic quietude one has when finding peace within one's
self. It is about a traditional culture that is no longer common, if it
exists at all, since the Vietnam War. A terrific film, one of tremendous
visual beauty, but one that steers clear of any overt political
messages. At Cannes, it was named the best film by a first-time
director. It also received a nomination for Best Foreign film at the
Oscars.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Pedro Sena
There is one very nice thing in this film, which reminds me of the care that
Akira Kurosawa has in filming his material.  It is the subtle attention to
detail, and the deliberate, and quiet, shooting style.  The camera kind of
poses in one place, and the action slowly develops in front of it, as if we
were hidden in the bushes and caught the sights.
Like many of the films out of China, the most distinctive style in these
films is the design which tends to look very meticulous, with the slow style
of camera movement.  The action in front of us has a look of a direction to
the actors that is carefully detailed and defined.  Somehow, it never hurts
these films. It, instead, enhances the characterizations.
The Scent of the Green Papaya, is the story of a young girl who is hired as
a maid in a reasonably well to do family, in the days of the French
occupation of Vietnam.  The young girl withstands the disrespectful attitude
of the young lad, who chooses every moment he can to do something
inappropriate.  She maintains her work, and does it well, while slowly
learning about the family and its reclusive members.  Grandma has been in
seclusion and prayer since the war days.  The father once in a while
grabs the money from his wife's business and runs off for weeks at a time.
The wife is accused of not being able to love her own man.  In turn, she
suggests that it wasn't her choice to marry him, or vice versa.  One of the
sons is a very good piano player, and is becoming a composer.
And several years go on.  Miu reaches into her later teen years and becomes
the family cook.  She does her work carefully, meticulously, and quietly.
But her mind already has a few hopes and ideas.  She has caught the eye of
the composer, though he is basically involved with a woman from an upper
class family, who doesn't respect the servants, or what they have and
appreciate.
And one day she is seen putting on a dress that makes her look very good,
and attractive.  And she is caught by the composer. And things change.  She
ends up being with the composer, and the story of the film is now ended as a
flashback, to a tale being told to a young one, in the form of poetry, a
reading which inspires the young man to compose more music.
The story is not complicated, and neither is anything about this film, but
the watching of it, makes one wonder in the early stages what is going to
happen.  It is never clear what will happen.  An aging man is still pursuing
the elderly woman in her loneliness.  But the maid, Miu, never loses  sight
of the things she cares about.  She still manages to take care of the
cricket she has kept in a small cage, and fed all along.  Her care is a nice
symbol for her style, and eventually she gets rewarded for it.
Really nice direction, with few wasted shots or fillers at all, this is a
film that also pays much attention to the music and how it fills the space.
At first it is heard as an
echo that runs through the house, the only symbol that this is really one of
the main themes in the story.  But the film does not give it away, and
neither does it suggest that this is one of the main parts.
With some very nice acting, and very carefully designed angles,  this is not
your average film.  It comes off as a study in movement and angle design by
what is a rather confined space for all the action to take place.  The only
changes are a  few new things added here and there as time goes by.
Worth seeing.  Very nice work.  Colorful.

Author
James Berardinelli
"The scent of green papaya is a personal childhood memory.  Everyone [in 
Vietnam] knew the gestures associated with the preparation of the papaya 
and, since the houses weren't soundproofed, you often heard it being 
prepared in the house next door.  You knew the sound because the papaya 
is hollow and when you hit it (with a knife), it makes a very 
characteristic noise.  The papaya was really a part of everyday 
Vietnamese life.  Since the green papaya was a vegetable prepared by 
women, it immediately becomes a symbol of women's work."
              - Writer/director Tran Anh Hung
     Most films rely on plot, character, and action to tell their
story, but there are rare exceptions, one of which is THE SCENT OF
GREEN PAPAYA, the deceptively simple tale of two periods in the life of
a Vietnamese girl named Mui (Lu Man San at age ten; Tran Nu Yen-Khe at
age twenty).  Relying more on tone and feel, THE SCENT OF GREEN PAPAYA
manages to engross an audience because of its scrupulous attention to
detail and its ability to effectively capture the essence of life's
subtle, individual moments.
     To say that THE SCENT OF GREEN PAPAYA has no plot would be to
grossly misrepresent it.  The movie is divided into two sections.  The
first, which takes place in 1951, details Mui's arrival as a young girl
at the house where she will spend the next ten years of her life
working as a servant.  Midway through the film, the time frame shifts
ahead a decade.  Now Mui is working for Khuyen (Vuong Hoa Hoi), a music
composer, and this portion of the story focuses on what transpires
during this portion of Mui's life.
     THE SCENT OF GREEN PAPAYA succeeds because writer/director Tran
Anh Hung has an almost-perfect sense of what is necessary to make a
simple story work.  There are no grand revelations or surprising plot
twists, but the film is compelling nevertheless, precisely because of
its sense of reality.  What other recent film has made the act of
giving a cooking lesson such a potentially-intriguing activity?
     The effectiveness of THE SCENT OF GREEN PAPAYA is surprising
considering its visual limits.  Filmed on France sound stages rather
than on-location in Vietnam, there is none of the expected lush
vegetation one has come to expect from a film set in this country.
Even the papaya trees are dead husks with real fruit and leaves glued
to them (although it's not possible to tell this from watching the
movie).  On the other hand, the use of sound effects is excellent, from
the chirping of a cricket to the roar of a plane overhead.  In a film
with so little dialogue (there is a space of thirty minutes where only
several lines are uttered), music and sound effects become critical
contributors.
     The acting is adequate--no more and no less, but because THE SCENT
OF GREEN PAPAYA focuses more on moments than characters, this isn't a
serious detriment.  Lu Man San, as Mui at ten years old, is cute and
impish, with a commendable variety of facial expressions.  Her
successor, Tran Nu Yen-Khe (the director's real-life fiancee) isn't as
impressive.  She smiles too much and possesses an almost-sinuously
graceful body language that seems inappropriate to the circumstances.
     What THE SCENT OF GREEN PAPAYA does so well is to show the
everyday life of a culture that has been bombed into history.  This is
the kind of motion picture that could easily become tedious and boring,
because so little happens.  To manage what Tran Anh Hung has by telling
his story and holding the interest of the audience, deserves notice and
credit.  THE SCENT OF GREEN PAPAYA is an enjoyable experience made all
the more enchanting by its simplicity.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
