Title
Review for Lawnmower Man 2: Beyond Cyberspace (1996)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Tim Voon
My lawnmower man is personable, friendly and always punctual. He does a
wonderful job giving the grass an even trim and serves as an alarm clock
on Friday mornings. When I hear the burrrrr of the motor I know I'm
running late for work.  He is not Lady Chatterley's Lover even though
the neighbour has suggested a sensual thing or two regarding his manly
machine and long thick rake. She was mightily disappointed last week
when he didn't make an appearance because his gardening equipment had
been stolen. Now who could have done such a criminal thing and denied
dear 81 y.o. Ms Appleby from watching the lawnmower man at work.
Apparently he had gone on a killing spree when his thrusty, I mean
trustworthy hoe was stolen.
So my story seems a bit farfetched and my last statement appears totally
false. However, my point is when your lawnmower man suddenly changes
personality from a simple, non-malevolent person to a psychotic, power
hungry murderer, more often than not someone has tampered with his
neural pathways. The prime example of this situation is nicely outlined
and documented in the original LAWNMOWER MAN movie. In this previous
venture, the scientist (Pierce Brosnan) sticks electrodes where he
shouldn't - namely on the guinea pig gardener's head. He creates Jobe
(Matt Frewer), a supremely intelligent monster who not only survives
battle within virtual reality, but has the gall to demand a rematch. The
war waged between Jobe and mankind has become a personal vendetta for
vengeance.
In this mad struggle over CPU processors, the computer generated god
attempts to conquer mankind for ensnaring, transforming and ultimately
empowering him. Peter (Austin O'brien) is the only member of the
original cast to appear in the sequel besides Jobe. This boy befriended
Jobe as a child, and has since grown into a young man surviving in the
crime riddled streets of the future. He has made it his quest to save
Jobe from himself, and his search leads him to the only scientist
(Patrick Bergin) who can prevent Jobe from achieving world dominance and
so on and so on.
Needless to say the performances by the actors are wooden, or should I
say plastic. The poor direction and badly written plot results in a lack
of genuine excitement or interest. This is not a compelling watch, and
feels like a bad case of static. The problem with the Lawnmower Man 2 is
in its conclusion. The all powerful Jobe is too easily defeated by a
magical blade which appears from thin air. The result is the
oversimplification of how to get rid of the bad guy - we'll just cut him
in half! So mankind survives to fight another day, but perhaps the next
time round a hose carrying fireman or a greasy looking construction
worker will amuse us instead of this overworked simpleton gardener.
