Title
Review for Adam's Rib (1949)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
"Adam's Rib" is a comedy starring Spencer Tracy and
Katherine Hepburn, one of many films that they made
together.  The film is well cast and well directed,
with a fairly good script.  The script does resort
to petty bickering, and some of the characters
should have been made more sympathetic.  The script
also makes unnecessary points about gender equality.
The story has Tracy and Hepburn as a married couple.
Tracy is a Prosecutor, Hepburn an attorney, and they
end up on opposite sides of an attempted murder trial.
Judy Holliday is the not-too-bright defendant, having
shot her negligent husband Tom Ewell after catching
him with floosie Jean Hagen.  Hepburn's defense
relies on the dubious assumption that a husband would
be found innocent of such a shooting, and thus
convicting Holliday would be a sexist double standard.
The Tracy/Hepburn marriage is strained by Hepburn's
zealous defense, and also by obnoxious composer
David Wayne, who has the hots for Hepburn.
This comedy has two love triangles, Holliday-Ewell-Hagen
and Tracy-Hepburn-Wayne.  One problem is that all
members of the first triangle are unsympathetic,
and that justice would be served by locking them
all indefinitely in the same jail cell.  The second
love triangle is more interesting, especially since
Hepburn subtly encourages Wayne's behavior.  Movie
audiences at the time may have taken a pool as to when
Spencer would finally punch Wayne.  He does so, at about
the ninety minute mark, and certainly no jury would
convict him of assault.
The point being made by the Ruth Gordon/Garson Kanin
script is that there is little difference between the
sexes.  During the trial, Hepburn puts three women
on the stand.  They have no relevance to the case,
except that they have all succeeded in "masculine"
fields.  Hepburn makes a circus of the trial, enraging
Tracy.  Tracy is clearly the more sympathetic of the
protagonists.
The basic story is good, and served as a premise for
an "Adam's Rib" television series in 1973.  The script
received an Oscar nomination, and the New York Film
Critics Circle awarded Judy Holliday their Best Actress
award.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Heather Picker
     Directed by George Cukor.  Written by Ruth Gordon and Garson Kanin. 
Starring Spencer Tracy and Katharine Hepburn, with Judy Holliday, Tom Ewell,
Jean Hagen and David Wayne.  1949, 101 min., Not Rated.
     Battle of the sexes films have become a comedic staple.  "Adam's Rib" is
one of the earliest examples of the best of that sub-genre.  The film opens
with a woman (Judy Holliday) following a man (Tom Ewell).  She barges into a
room to find him with the woman he is having an affair with (Jean Hagen), and,
unsteadily holding a pistol, fires repeatedly, wounding him (he survives).  Cut
to Adam and Amanda Bonner (Spencer Tracy and Katharine Hepburn), Assistant
District Attorney and attorney-at-law, respectively.  Shortly after he wakes up
she reads a newspaper article to him about a woman named Doris Attinger who
shot her two-timing husband, Warren.  They talk about it, and it is clear that
the argument over whether or not the situation would be considered different
had it been a man assaulting his cheating wife, will not be settled for quite
some time.  
     Adam goes to his office to find that he has been assigned the dreaded
case.  When Amanda hears of this she does a bit of ambulance chasing and winds
up defending Doris, who is more than a bit ditzy.  Husband and wife prepare to
go to court, unaware of just how troublesome the duration of the trial will
prove to be for them, both professionally and personally.  Assigned to the case
because the District Attorney thinks he is the only man who can get the
conviction, Adam firmly believes that no one has the right to break any laws. 
Amanda presents a different story to the jury, making the case more about
sexual politics than actual law.  The courtroom becomes a circus, and her
strategy the bone of contention in their marriage.  
     The married screenwriting duo of Ruth Gordon and Garson Kanin crafted a
witty script that provides many laughs, but also tries to focus on gender
equality issues.  Tracy and Hepburn, in their fifth film together, have
unparalleled chemistry that makes their scenes together jump off the screen
with immense believability.  They are supported by one of the greatest comedic
casts of the 1940s.  Judy Holliday is marvelous as the light-headed, sarcastic
Doris, Tom Ewell is appropriately whiney and smarmy as Warren (and very funny
as seen in a dress during Amanda's closing statements), Jean Hagen is perfect
as his mistress, Beryl Caighn, and David Wayne steals every scene he is in as
Kip Lurie, a songwriter and singer who lives in the apartment across from the
Bonners and is smitten with Amanda.  (His ode to her is provided by Cole
Porter.)  George Cukor's direction, as usual, is confident and mostly seamless.
 Many funny parts of the film take place off-screen, with dialogue and/or
background noise being our only indicator as to what is occurring, and I think
it takes a true pro to make those types of scenes work.  The only parts of
"Adam's Rib" that weren't necessary were the questioning of women that Amanda
brought into the trial in order to prove that women can do anything men can.   
     For you trivia buffs: Famous collaborations are abound in "Adam's Rib." 
Director George Cukor worked frequently with Katharine Hepburn, who in turn
made eight movies with Spencer Tracy.  Screenwriter Kanin's brother, Michael,
co-wrote "Woman of the Year," Tracy and Hepburn's first film (1942, directed by
George Stevens) together, and Kanin himself wrote the play "Born Yesterday,"
which made Judy Holliday a star.  Gordon and Kanin, three years later, wrote
another Tracy/Hepburn classic, "Pat and Mike."
     DVD Details: MGM brings another one of their classics to DVD with little
fanfare.  The only supplementary feature is the original theatrical trailer. 
The actual film is presented standard, full-frame format "preserving the aspect
ratio of its original theatrical exhibition."  The transfer is outstanding,
very sharp and with nice contrasts between the different variations of gray
tones.  The mono sound suits the movie well, as the dialogue is crisp and
clear.  English and French language tracks, English, French, and Spanish
subtitles, and English captioning for the hearing impaired, as well as scene
selections.  The main menu is very simplistic, using a design seen throughout
the movie as it's backdrop.  Snapper case.   
     The Verdict: "Adam's Rib" is a delightful, occasionally daring,
battle-of-the-sexes screwball comedy with a witty script and superlative
performances.  Recommended for screwball, classic, and/or Tracy/Hepburn
aficionados, best viewed on DVD.
mailto: Ahber16@aol.com
Review courtesy of http://www.thatmoviesite.8m.com
