Title
Review for Max Keeble's Big Move (2001)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Blake French
Good news!  Max Keeble's Big Move is the greatest movie ever made... if
you are 12 years old.  Its depiction of junior high is surprisingly
enlightening; kids from all over can identify with these simple
characters.  There's plenty of preteen gossip, wacky school staff
members, and drooling over attractive girls.  Thus it is a sure-fire hit
for its unabashed target audience.
Unfortunately, I'm not 12 years old, and I really didn't need to be
reminded of those times I spent fighting with teachers, standing up to
bullies, and getting poor grades.  So if you're not in the 11- to
13-year-old target market, this film is only remotely amusing.
Not that Max Keeble's Big Move is painful to watch -- it's actually
pretty light-hearted and, at times, quite funny.  Considering the nature
of the beast, this movie isn't half bad.  The performances give a
relevant story energy and life, and the slapstick humor often makes you
laugh.  Guiltily, but you still laugh.
Alex D. Linz from Home Alone 3 plays the title character, who, as the
movie opens, enters junior high.  He's got friends, enemies, and a major
dilemma -- his father's business is moving.  The Keebles need to be out
of town by the end of the week, and Max doesn't want to leave his
hometown.  But wait!  If he doesn't need to worry about the
consequences, he has one last chance to settle a few scores.
Sadly, the film ultimately serves up a bunch of preachy boloney, stuff
about standing up for yourself, facing bullies, saving animals, and
every other lesson you can learn as a kid in middle school. 
Screenwriters Jonathan Bernstein, Mark Blackwell, and James Greer make
this such a silly, simple story, that when it finally does try to
provide the audience with a real moral, it comes off as just another
missed target.
The soundtrack defines each scene by filling the movie with the latest
in kiddie pop music.  This isn't a terrible idea since kids don't really
look for effective mood development, anyway -- instead the film is much
more interested in its own shallow sense of humor.
http://disney.go.com/disneypictures/maxkeeble/index.html
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
August and September are a wasteland when it comes to children's films, and
October is a dumping ground for munchkin movies the studios don't want to
see slaughtered against family-oriented Thanksgiving films.  Last year, the
benevolent studio gods gave us Digimon, and this year, they bestow Max
Keeble's Big Move on delighted moviegoers across the country.  Parents will
be thrilled because they'll finally have something to drag little Austin and
Kayla to see that doesn't smell nearly as much like ass as Digimon did.
Don't get me wrong - Keeble, which is actually only a "ment" away from being
a fetish film, isn't that entertaining.  In fact, you'd be better off
waiting to blow your disposable income when the real kiddie pics (Monsters,
Inc., Harry Potter) come out next month.  But if Dubya Dubya III tells you
to go out and spend money to stimulate the economy, then you'd better do it
(because gassing up the minivan twice a week just isn't going to cut it).
We first see young Max Keeble (Alex D. Linz, Home Alone 3) as a pint-sized
superhero, delivering newspapers with the pinpoint accuracy of a David
Beckham cross, foiling the diabolical plans of the evil ice cream man (Jamie
Kennedy, Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back) and landing the neighborhood honey
(Brooke Anne Smith), who, by the way, is the hottest chick in a Disney film
since Emmanuelle Chriqui played Claire Boner in Snow Day.
The scenario is, of course, a dream.  Max is really a doofus and he wakes up
on his first day of junior high school with a pessimistic attitude, no luck
with the ladies and only two friends, both of whom can kindly be described
as social outcasts (and who were both in Snow Day) - the perpetually robed
Robe (Josh Peck) and a clarinet-playing cutie named Megan (Summer Catch's
Zena Grey), who harbors secret feelings for Max.
Things don't get any better for Max when he arrives at school.  He has to
contend with, among other things, a red-hot science teacher (Amber Valletta,
Family Man), a pair of polar-opposite bullies (Noel Fisher and Orlando
Brown), and an illiterate principal (Larry Miller, The Princess Diaries)
who's secretly diverting the school's last dime into the football program.
When Max's father (grownup Nerd Robert Carradine) unexpectedly announces the
family is moving to a new town at the end of the week, Max decides this is
the perfect time to exact revenge on everyone who pisses him off.  Whoa -
don't worry, parents.  He doesn't do it Klebold-Harris style.  It's all
pretty tame stuff, but Max ends up in hot water when Dad nixes the move,
leaving his son dangling in the wind like so many tampon strings.
Director Tim Hill (Muppets From Space) adds a few nice touches, like Max's
voiceover character introductions for the film's main characters and a
flashback scene that's pretty funny, but there isn't too much else happening
here stylewise...unless you count some farting, a little puking, and a
couple of bizarre cameos from Tony Hawk and Lil' Romeo.
1:30 - PG for some bullying and crude humor

Author
Steve Rhodes
Tim Hill's MAX KEEBLE'S BIG MOVE has no reason to be playing at your local
multiplex.  If it were an episode of a kid's television series, which is what it
feels like, it would rank a little below average.  Tune into the Disney channel
on a random afternoon, and you'll find something similar and probably better. 
The three first-time screenwriters, Jonathan Bernstein, Mark Blackwell and James
Greer, couldn't think of any fresh material.  Jokes come from food fights, a
principal who falls over backwards in his chair and a squirrel that runs down
the principal's clothes.
The shame of it all is that some of the young actors manage to show some special
sparks in a movie that's almost terminally bland.  The best are Alex D. Linz
(HOME ALONE 3) as Max Keeble and Zena Gray (the cute mascot from SUMMER CATCH)
as Megan.  They both possess a likable spunk that makes them interesting even
when their characters aren't.  Max, a short kid who picks up an extra two inches
in height with his spiked hair, is off to his first day of junior high.  (Many
of the large kids in his school look like they have been forced to repeat some
grades.)  Megan is the canonical character of the friend who deserves Max's
attention, which is captured by Jenna (Brooke Anne Smith), a miniskirted ninth
grader with a killer body.  The top of Max's head doesn't even come up to
Jenna's chin.  
The adults are uniformly awful, especially Robert Carradine as Max's doofus dad
and Larry Miller as the school's unprincipled principal.  As the "Evil Ice Cream
Man," Jamie Kennedy engages in a series of embarrassingly bad slapstick
routines.
The plot has Max rebelling.  The type of kid who regularly gets hazed by the
school's bullies, he's striking back at everyone thanks to his newly found
freedom.  After his parents tell him suddenly that they'll be moving in a few
days, Max figures that he can get away with anything.  He'll be out of there
before the bullies or the principal can exact their revenge on him.  The
dishonest principal, who is angling for a promotion to superintendent, is not
one to be messed with.  He has escalated the school's normal zero tolerance
policy to "subzero tolerance."
"I'm not having fun," confesses the teacher on cafeteria duty when Max launches
the big food fight.  And, like my dead audience, you probably won't be having
much fun either.  The surprise is that this junior high school comedy, which is
aimed more to the seven-year-old set, doesn't have much in it that's funny for
any age group, even the younger ones.
MAX KEEBLE'S BIG MOVE runs 1:25.  It is rated PG for "some bullying and crude
humor" and would be acceptable for kids of all ages.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, who had trouble thinking of anything that he liked about
the movie, gave it * 1/2.  He checked his watch frequently, something that I
suspect everyone will be doing in this short movie that feels extra long.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, October 5, 2001.  In
the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
