Title
Review for Alien: Resurrection (1997)
Number of Reviews
46

Author
Bert Gene
Tagline: "Witness the Resurrection (of another bad Alien sequel)"
Not learning much from the lesson of letting a Frenchman make a sci-fi film
after $80 million disaster THE FIFTH ELEMENT, Twentieth Century Fox once
again hires Luc Besson to destroy yet what could've been another science
fiction classic, the $70 million ALIEN RESURRECTION.  At least they saved
about $10 million this time around.   In order to payback its hefty budget,
the fourth installment of the formerly popular series attempts to resurrect
not only Sigourney but also the elements of the first two films that made
the franchise a critical and financial success. Granted, the heavy-duty
action of ALIENS and the claustrophobic terror of the original ALIEN are
present in RESURRECTION.  They even throw in an obligatory butt
scene--reminiscent of that of Sigourney's near the end ALIEN--with Kim
Flowers plump backside bulging out of a pair of g-string undies as Michael
Dudikoff massages her feet.  However, despite all of these appealing
familiarities,  it's ultimately the French element sprinkled in by Besson
that spoils the ingredient for this sequel for its American audience.  
Sigourney Weaver (most noted in GORILLA IN THE CLOUDS, THE ICE PIRATES)
once again returns to her role as Probation Officer Ellen Ripley, but this
time she's a whacked out, smartass cloned version of her former self who,
20 years previously, heroically leaped to her death in ALIEN 3.  Joining
her along for the adventure is humanitarian android named Call, played by
Winona Judd (BEETLEJUICE, HEATHERS).  Also, in minor supporting roles are
Ron Perlman as the big gorilla-type bully Johner, Dominic Pinon as the
horizontally challenged Vriess, Stephen Dorff as the mad geneticist Dr.
Guinan, Dan Hyhena as the goofball General Perez, J.E. Freeman as
untrustworthy Dr. Wren, Michael Dudikoff as toad-caught-in-this-throat
Elgyn, John Leguizamo as serious officer DiStephano, and Kim Flowers as the
"other" tough female ball buster Hillary.  This is pretty much the extent
with which the supporting characters are developed before becoming dinner
for the aliens.
As for the story, Ripley and Call soon find themselves along with rest of
the space pirates bunched up against a crowed of loose, DNA enhanced aliens
that wreck havoc onboard ship called the Algeria.  Because Ripley herself
is half-alien and missing a few human brain cells, the
pirates--particularly Call--are reluctant to form an alliance with this
alien ball buster.  Once they figure out that they have no chance to win
the "cat and mouse" game with the aliens, they all get behind Ripley as she
rips the shit out of the slimy acid beings and leads them back to their
ship that's docked inside the Algeria before they crash on Earth.
Although the concept may sound interesting, the story seems to get lost in
its confusion on exactly what type of film it's suppose to be.  Here comes
the problem of Besson who seems to want to try to impose his Frenchie artsy
style on his latest interpretation of the American series.  (Did we see
Cameron impose this Australian culture and values in the classic ALIENS?) 
Self-indulgent  Besson casts two of his stock French actors Ron Perlman and
Dominic Pinon from CHILDREN OF THE LOST CITY as two contrived weirdo
characters who are more fitting in some bizarre independent art film than a
sci-fi action flick.  Who wants to see some big asinine ogre and a crippled
midget with a speech impediment trying to resolve their sexual tensions
through petty bickering for the entire film? (And you thought the
heterosexual black gay guy was weird and annoying in THE FIFTH ELEMENT.) 
Besson figures that if he just makes his characters odd, it automatically
develops them.  With his attention focused on his odd French characters,
the director pretty much ignores the other supporting characters which end
up going to waste.  For example, with the comic ingenuity of John
Leguizamo, imagine how Besson could've made DiStephano more interesting and
funny.  But instead, we are forced to see Leguizamo suffer as he plays his
character straight... into boredom.
In addition, Besson has to incorporate his kinky French sensibility of sex
into the film.  Ripley, in one scene, is sucked into some gooey bio-matter
and does some soft porn antics with one of the aliens which the director
attempts to sexualize through fade ins and outs.  From what I can gather,
the aliens seem to prefer the traditional missionary position.  Hence, this
brings up the question: Is Ripley a Catholic?   The director never explores
this possibility and leaves yet another possible moment of character
development behind.  At this point, Besson rather subjects us with graphic
details of the alien queen giving birth to an albino mutant alien out of
her new human-like womb which is much more grotesque than those explicit
health videos that  you're forced to watch in the 10th grade.  And yes, it
does get worse when we see the new albino mutant progeny French-kiss Ripley
with its eight foot long tongue.  Did I forget to mention that these aliens
also ooze lots of bodily fluids out of their mouths onto the humans as
well?  YUCK!!!
Due to the director's incompetence, the story never grows beyond the gross
visual spectacles.  And the characters are more like mannequins, acting as
mere decorations to the film.  In particular, Call had some potential in
becoming interesting, but she ends up not doing much for the film except
looking good.  Winona Judd never seems to quite fit into the role and looks
out of place especially during the chaotic action sequences.   Her sister
Ashley Judd would've faired much better in the role, especially after
audiences got to see her as the "I'm no victim" kickboxer/doctor in last
fall's  KISS THE GIRLS with Morgan Freeman.  Maybe Winona should go back to
her former  singing career and leave the acting talents with her much
better-looking sister.
In all, ALIEN RESURRECTION gets lost is its artsy visual spectacle, leaving
us with a unexplored story with lots of unresolved holes and bodybags of
empty characters.  Hopefully by the time Alien 5 is made, the studio and
producers will understand that a good script, not an expensive budget, big
stars, and a foreign director with a keen eye, is the secret magic in
making a good sequel.
Reviewman  "I give it a clap and a couple yawns"  (Out of four claps)
Starring 
Sigourney Weaver......Ripley Clone 8
Winona Judd...............Annalee Call
Ron Perlman..............Johner
Dominic Pinon............Vriess
Stephen Dorff.............Dr. Guinan
J.E. Freeman..............Dr. Wren
Michael Dudikoff.........Elgyn 
Gary Dourdan.............Christie
Leland Orser...............Purvis
Dan Hyhena................General Perez
John Leguizamo..........DiStephano
Kim Flowers................Hillary

Author
Christopher Null
     I'm not entirely sure how to begin a review of the highly-anticipated (at
least for me) fourth installment of the ALIEN series except to say... what a letdown!
     Sigourney Weaver's Ellen Ripley died in ALIEN3, the movie that was
supposed to put the nail in the ALIEN coffin, but thanks to the miracles of
next-millennium cloning, she's back, and full of alien DNA to boot (thus
making her invincible, giving her acid for blood, and generally a pretty
creepy chick).  This new twist has great potential, as Ripley's alien side
gives her a strange kinship with the creatures... creatures that once again
are loosed by idiot scientists trying to tame them.
     But in the end, the desire to spill more Blood! Blood! Blood! (and alien
goo) wins out over plot and thematics.  Instead, the picture progresses like a
sorry rehash of the first three movies.  Two hours later, I left depressed.
     Director Jean-Pierre Jeunet, who made the masterful DELICATESSEN, has
plenty of fun with creepy set design, creatures galore, clever photography,
and propelled mucous, but other than that, ALIEN 4 has little to recommend. 
Even Winona Ryder as a reluctant comrade is a real disappointment.
D: Jean-Pierre Jeunet
W: Joss Whedon
P: Gordon Caroll, David Giler, Walter Hill
S: Sigourney Weaver, Winona Ryder, Dominique Pinon, Ron Perlman
http://www.alien-resurrection.com
-Christopher Null  /  null@sirius.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Paul-Michael Agapow
It's 200 years later and they still haven't fixed the poor lighting 
and dripping problems aboard starships.  The tireless alien-hunting 
Ripley awakes on a military research vessel to find that she's not 
dead, just cloned.  But there are some strange fish splashing about in 
her gene pool, and when the (also resurrected) aliens run amok, she 
falls in with a band of amoral pirates and escape while engaging in 
many widely framed metaphors for motherhood and birth.
A fundamental law of Hong Kong movies and Star Trek is that death is 
tragic but only a minor inconvenience.  It looks as though that rule 
will now have to be extended to the Alien franchise, with La Sigourney 
being decanted from a two centuries old blood sample.  But even given 
modern biotechnology, is there any energy in the fun loving hijinks of 
everyone's favourite polymorphic lifeform?  That's a more complex 
question, complicated by the poor reception of its predecessor 
(Alien^3) and the knives being sharpened for an expected failure.
While incompletely realised, "Resurrection" is quite good.  It 
harkens back to the flavour of the first film, a Victorian gothic 
horror novel set in space, a shifty psychological thriller.  (As an SF 
or horror film, the second installment "Aliens" was a good blockbuster 
action picture.)  The characters and story exist in a moral vacuum 
with extra stress contributed by their unknown allegiances.  The 
Ripley clone gives the impression that at any moment she may back the 
alien side, the pirates (who guiltlessly hijack cryofreezed bodies for 
experiments) are motivated by little but self-interest.
French director Jeunet (here bereft of his other half, Caro, from 
"City of Lost Children" and "Delicatessen") brings a worldly European 
air to the Alien franchise, with the occasional surreal touch.  This 
is best exemplified by the choice of actors, from the decidedly 
non-glamourous Ron Perlman as a chauvinist tough guy to the even less 
glamourous Dominique Pinon as a grungy crippled mechanic.  (Both are 
Jeunet and Caro alumni.)  Weaver is fabulous as the Ripley clone, with 
an almost wolfish quality to her.  Tired of other people's mistakes, 
almost too tired to live there's an ineffable dangerousness to her 
character.  Winona Ryder as a guilt-stricken pirate fares less well: 
as the character with the most depth after Ripley her performance is 
not as good as hoped but better than expected.  (It's back to 
generation-X dramas for you, dearie.)  The cast spark off each other 
in some snappy dialogue.  ("Must be a chick thing," sneers Perlman 
after La Sigourney goes bananas with an incinerator.)  Throw in a few 
well-framed action pieces - there's a nice underwater chase scene that 
segues into an equally nice fight on a ladder - and you've got not a 
bad little picture.  The whole motherhood analogy schtick from 
"Aliens" is here revved up to the nth degree, it not being so much a 
subtext as a supertext.  If Ripley ever gets to a shrink, I can see 
the two of them writing books and going onto talk shows for years.  
("On Ricki Lake today: My child surrogate died and then my new child 
surrogate destroyed a military base.  Now make me over!")
But "little" may be the problem.  To convince the sceptics, 
"Resurrection" has got to go the hard yards and make itself stand out.  
Although it wisely doesn't try to outdo the previous entries, it also 
doesn't try to be enough of its own thing.  The evil corporation has 
here been replaced by the evil government.  (Who, hilariously, wish to 
use the aliens for "urban pacification".  Drop one of them aliens onto 
the West Bank and let's see how long it lasts.)  For all the 
quirkiness of the characters, there really isn't enough time for each 
to develop and so several die in that uncomfortable period between 
when you can recognise them but before you know their name.  While 
there are some pleasing intelligent points to the story - "The aliens 
are loose!  Evacuate the ship!" - there are plot stupidities to match 
- "Hey, a hole in the deck made by acid!  I wonder if I stick my head 
down there if it get torn off?".
In summary, it's a pleasing addition to the series that while not 
reaching quite as high as intended, at least manages to hold itself 
with pride.  If there must be another entry, let's hope it continues 
and extends the good work.  [***/interesting] and "A Better Tomorrow 
3" on the Sid and Nancy scale.
------
paul-michael agapow (agapow@computer.org), La Trobe Uni, Infocalypse
"There is no adventure, there is no romance, there is only trouble and desire."

Author
Roger Rubio
This movie was interesting.  As far as story is concerned, it was a
hell of a lot better than Alien 3.  At the same time, it was trying to
be an amalgamation of Alien and Aliens, and the result is, well, just
interesting.
ALIEN RESURRECTION is the story of the Auriga, a military ship which is
being used for the transport, breeding, and study of the alien species. 
A band of mercenaries boards the ship and becomes trapped on it when the
aliens escape.  Notice I haven't said anything about Lt. Ellen Ripley. 
The reason for this is because Ripley doesn't do much in this movie. 
Ripley used to be the centerpiece of the Alien series; apparently, the
aliens have really taken over.  Regretfully, in this movie, she seems to
be just another one of the people trying to get off the ship.  She is
brought to life as a clone (with some residual alien characteristics),
but is not "resurrected," as the title of the movie would have you
believe.  If she was truly resurrected, she would have kicked more alien
ass, expressed herself more, led more, and not stood idly by while other
people struggle with the aliens.
Ripley, in the original ALIEN, was the first female hero, leader, and
the first to survive at the end of the movie.  This made the character
of Ripley (and consequently Sigourney Weaver) into a role model and
inspiration for several young actresses and women everywhere. After all,
the women usually did not survive a horror movie, and if they did, they
would be subject to the damsel-in-distress syndrome.  Lt. Ellen Ripley
changed all that.  The character and role model was further reinforced
in ALIENS, where Ripley got to kick some alien ass and exorcise her own
demons in the process.  Weaver portrayed a woman who could be strong,
aggressive, and not lose her femininity in the process: she was not
killing aliens just to kill them; she had a little girl to protect. 
ALIEN 3 was just a rehash of the original ALIEN with a "what's the point
anymore?" version of Ripley.  In ALIEN: RESURRECTION, Ripley is just
there, because an ALIEN movie would not be an ALIEN movie without
Ripley.  I guess there's nothing else interesting enough to explore
about her character anymore.  That's too bad.  "Greedy studio execs
resurrect Ripley for another outing" would have been the headline if
this were a newspaper article.  Ripley had to be re-invented to attract
Weaver back to the role; unfortunately, the old Ripley is more
interesting than the new one. 
What Ridley Scott (the director of ALIEN) established and James Cameron
(director of ALIENS) reinforced, David Fincher (director of ALIEN 3)
wasn't quite sure what to do with.  This criticism is not to deprecate
Fincher; its just that he was given the helm of the Titanic and was told
to keep it afloat as long as possible.  Given the story he had to deal
with, I'd say Fincher did a fabulous job.  Jean-Pierre Jeunet (director
of ALIEN RESURRECTION) looks like he didn't burden himself with any type
of ALIEN legacy.  He decided to make his movie his way. I respect that
kind of independence.  The film looks great, with stimulating color
contrasts and respectable FX.  Sigourney Weaver is a little more sedate
(with a few exceptions) in this movie.  Winona Ryder is good, although a
little out of her league amongst these people. Ron Perlman is as good as
always.
The writing demonstrates an openness to new ideas about the aliens,
although it's a little zealous about presenting them, and in the
process, the audience becomes lost as to how certain things happen. 
Ripley and the aliens seem to have a bond now; what kind of bond?  They
take the Queen out of Ripley's cloned body, and she starts to breed; how
is this possible?  I'm not a biologist, but don't you need a fertile
male to impregnate the female?  Were there any alien males on the ship?
Then the Queen (all of a sudden) sprouts a human-like womb after
squeezing out a few alien eggs; again, how?  How did the womb show up
after all that egg laying?  What impregnated her new womb?  Straight
cloning?  I don't think so.  And this newborn?  All this comes near the
end of the movie, after every familiar idea is exhausted.  It is clear
the ideas that should have been explored were neglected in favor of
things that are all too familiar: aliens, eggs, chest bursters, face
huggers, people trying to get off the ship, and, unfortunately, Ripley's
face, not her character.  This neglect means this movie is just a
rehash, and not an exploration of a new incarnation of Ripley and the
aliens.
Regardless of its flaws, this movie wasn't bad.  I just wish they would
have explored the ideas they brought up late in the film.  Apparently,
those ideas are brought up strictly for sequels (again, the studio execs
make sure they get a return on their investment, and I can't say I blame
them).  I could always describe each movie in the Alien series with one
superlative: ALIEN was suspenseful, ALIENS was exciting, and ALIEN 3 was
depressing.  The best word for Alien Resurrection would have to be
twisted.  It had potential -- maybe a second writer could have fleshed
out the loose ends better.
"You cannot escape one infinite, I told myself, by fleeing to another;
 you cannot escape the revelation of the identical by taking refuge in
 the illusion of the multiple."
          -- Umberto Eco, FOUCAULT'S PENDULUM

Author
Michael Dequina
Alien Resurrection (R) *** (out of ****)
1992's Alien3 marked not only the death (by suicide) of its popular
protagonist, Ellen Ripley (Sigourney Weaver), but, in many ways, the Alien
franchise itself--box office receipts were anemic, thanks to poor audience
word of mouth; and the critics who rallied around the first two
installments, 1979's Alien and 1986's Aliens, savaged David Fincher's slog
of a sendoff (myself included).  Hence, Weaver, director Jean-Pierre
Jeunet, and the others behind Alien Resurrection faced a two-fold
challenge--not only somehow resurrect Ripley, but also rescue this
once-profitable series from the scrap heap.  Despite the odds, they have
succeeded, even if the entertaining new installment does not measure up to
the excellent first two.
Writer Joss Whedon devises a quick, easy, and painless answer to the dead
Ripley problem--clone her, which is what shady military scientists do using
some blood left behind on Fiorina 161, the prison planet of the third film.
 That done, the _real_ challenge presents itself--what do with her.  Alien
introduced Ripley as smart and resourceful; Aliens simultaneously toughened
her up and made her more vulnerable, exploring her maternal side; Alien3
saw her undergoing the seven stages of death.  What could be next?  Whedon
comes up with a clever spin: since the original Ripley died while
impregnated with an Alien queen, the blood used for the clone is also
"infected" with Alien DNA.  So the new Ripley is, indeed, new--a
human/Alien hybrid blessed with heightened instincts and strength, a
psychic bond with the deadly species, and a more predatory attitude.
Unfortunately, that is where Alien Resurrection's clever streak in writing
stops.  The Alien series is known for having stronger stories than most
creature features.  But the story in Resurrection is more of an
afterthought.  The movie begins with a plot involving some military types
attempting to train Aliens to do their bidding, but once the creatures
break free, it is once again Ripley and a ragtag crew (this time a bunch of
interstellar smugglers, including tough waif Call, played by a game Winona
Ryder) trying to exterminate them.  And the Alien Ripley scenario is
ultimately not exploited to its full potential; I would have liked deeper
exploration into the quandary of becoming one of the species she has spent
her entire life trying to destroy. 
While the settling into tried-and-true formula is a little disconcerting,
the formula is tried-and-true for a reason, and Jeunet tackles the
proceedings with giddy abandon.  The Alien, after all these years, is still
terrifying, and a new breed that is introduced is no less so.  The violence
is appropriately grisly and extreme, and the action set pieces are
suspenseful and exciting, most notably an extended underwater sequence.
The film is absolutely mesmerizing visually, thanks to the solid work done
by production designer Nigel Phelps and cinematographer Darius Khondji.  As
technically adept as Jeunet's direction is, perhaps his (and, for that
matter, Whedon's) greatest contribution is the infusion of humor into this
notably downbeat and serious series.  A sense of humor may seem to go
against everything this horror show stands for, but the self-awareness of
the excess just adds to the fun.
No, Alien Resurrection is not the great film that Ridley Scott's Alien or
the even greater film that James Cameron's Aliens was.  But after the
dauntingly slow gloom and doom of Fincher's Alien3, Jeunet's Resurrection
is a welcome return to its roots as a wild, reckless thrill ride.  That is
what made the Alien series so popular in the first place, and that is what
will keep the series popular in any future installments.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown@michaeljordanfan.com  |  mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court:
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html
"I can accept failure.  Everyone fails at something.  But I can't accept
not trying.
It doesn't matter if you win as long as you give everything in your heart."
--Michael Jordan

Author
Anthony Baratta
13 out of 29 (Expectation: 21 out of 29)
Boy was I disappointed.  This movie should have been called Alien
Erection.  The sex angle was interesting, but did not add to the plot.
Tried to be an analgum of the first two movies.  But instead failed on
all sides. No   suspense, sloppy character development. I was sad to see
the Mercenaries get it. They were very interesting. A movie should have
been made about them instead.
Wynona Rider was thoroughly miscast in this film. Although she tried
very hard, there was some very sloppy editing and dialog that made her
look really bad.  There were numerous throw backs to the other movies,
but they felt tossed in like a bad cesear salad.  If you do want see
this, just watch Sigourney Weaver and Ron Pearlman, they carry the
movie. Ron Pearlman's character was so different from Beast that I had
to laugh. It was a great change of pace for him and I hope he gets more
work.  Sigourney was terrific with a bad script. She got a chance to
play a Ripley very much different from the previous films. The ending
was totaly horrid. Although the special effects were top notch - the
final Alien was too hokey to be even laughable. The other actor that
shined for me was Brad Dourif. He has been playing these wacked out
science fiction parts lately (on Voyager for three episodes) and other
places. He is a gem.
Lastly, I was bummed that we didn't see more of the Aliens. When we did
see them, they were pretty cool. The full computer animation of the
aliens in the  water scene was terrfic, even though it was not very
scary. The whole movie never got my heart pumping. I hope they don't
make any more.

Author
Scott Renshaw
ALIEN RESURRECTION
(20th Century Fox)
Starring:  Sigourney Weaver, Winona Ryder, Ron Perlman, Dominique Pinon,
Dan Hedaya, J. E. Freeman, Brad Dourif, Michael Wincott.
Screenplay:  Joss Whedon.
Producers:  Bill Badalato, Gordon Carroll, David Giler and Walter Hill.
Director:  Jean-Pierre Jeunet.
MPAA Rating:  R (violence, gore, profanity, brief nudity)
Running Time:  109 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I'm sure that someone could -- and will -- come up with an
explanation for all the pseudo-science involved in the premise for ALIEN
RESURRECTION.  I'm sure there is some reason to accept why the cloning of
Ellen Ripley (Sigourney Weaver), apparently dead at the end of 1992's
ALIEN3, allowed Evil Military Scientists to produce an alien queen.  I'm
sure there is some reason why that same cloning process turned Ripley into
a human/alien hybrid with memories of her previous life.  I'm sure there's
some reason why the same alien queen which had been producing eggs could
suddenly become viviparous.  I'm sure there is some reason why I should be
able to yank "willing suspension of disbelief" from the jaws of "oh,
_please_."
     The thing is, ALIEN RESURRECTION didn't give me much reason to care
about what those reasons might be.  Screenwriter Joss Whedon spends plenty
of time on the particulars of the situation -- the aforementioned Evil
Military Scientists and their unholy experiments, a close-knit band of
space pirates delivering cryogenically frozen hosts for the alien eggs, a
mysterious woman (Winona Ryder) with a secret -- without realizing that
we're really here to watch Ripley battle aliens.  And that would be the
same Ripley who became an action icon in three previous films, not the
vaguely sinister approximation served up here.  All the effort to make
Ripley's return "realistic" still adds up to a cargo hold full of question
marks and an emotional vacuum at the film's center.  Call me crazy, but if
a writer's going to push the limits of credulity, I'd prefer him to say,
"ALIEN3 was just a dream.  Now here's Ripley, here's some aliens, here's a
space ship...go!"
     And go they eventually do, in some wild and truly bizarre set pieces.
Director Jean-Pierre Jeunet (DELICATESSEN, CITY OF LOST CHILDREN) has a
genuine visual flair which inspires some sharp sequences, notably an
underwater escape for our protagonists which leads into an alien trap.
Unfortunately, he devotes most of his creative energy to coming up with
new and innovative ways for the aliens to treat the heads of their victims
like unsightly facial blemishes.  ALIEN RESURRECTION is frequently a bath
of viscera, a collection of graphic deaths rendered in glorious,
gratuitous detail.
     It all contributes to the impression that ALIEN RESURRECTION is a
"moment" film -- a bunch of neat ideas for individual scenes so
impersonally rendered that they never add up to a coherent narrative.  As
a film, it's never boring, featuring a typically whacked-out performance
by Brad Dourif as one of the scientists, a clever instance of alien
teamwork and self-sacrifice, and a potent encounter between Ripley and a
laboratory full of abominations.  It's also never compelling in a way we
should expect when a character has this much cinematic history.  By the
time its climactic confrontation rolls around -- involving a creature
resembling the evil doppleganger of the Pillsbury Doughboy -- ALIEN
RESURRECTION has become flat-out ridiculous, a big violent joke at the
expense of viewers expecting a real story about Ellen Ripley.  I can't see
most fans of the series walking away from this experience satisfied.  More
likely, the'll walk away muttering, "oh, _please_."

Author
Phil Brady
When we last saw Ellen Ripley, she was.. Dead!  And she took the alien
with her.  This was not a good business decision for a promising
franchise.  Director David Fincher (Seven, The Game) had been undercut
by the Fox studio, and his Alien3 was not up to expectations.  At that
point, wrapping it up may have seemed like a good idea to all
concerned.  But, much like the Frankenstein monster, the Alien character
was too compelling to just fade away.  Many Alien graphic novels
continued to flourish, showing that the faithful were out there,
betrayed, but waiting patiently.   Scripts with and without Ripley were
tossed around, and one story finally emerged, resurrecting the franchise
AND Ripley.  You sorta have to look the other way when they clone
Ripley, but hey, it's a small price to get our story back on track.
        The movie opens 200 years later, when the evil Weyland-Utani
corporation has turned everything over to the military.  On a special
lab-spaceship, a secret team of doctors is trying to clone Ripley. 
Using a blood sample taken back on the prison planet in Alien3, they
bring back Ellen AND the Alien, so that they can harvest the Alien. 
This is fast-and-loose Sci-Fi science, so why not let Ripley retain
memories, too?  The scientists get their alien queen specimen, and
busily start to bring about their own demise.  The Ripley clone is kept
as a curiosity, and indeed she is.  With some alien DNA in her, she has
uncommon strength, her blood is caustic acid, and she has an eerie,
alert demeanor.  It is probably formed as much by predator instincts as
by the condescending treatment from the doctors.  She maintains her
alien-fighting chops, but also displays a disturbing empathy with the
beasts.  
         A cargo of human victims is acquired from some space pirates, who sell
the cryo-tubes from a hijacked ship.  These colorful characters are
still aboard when the aliens predictably break loose and overrun the
ship.   Lots of military-types are killed and many get away in escape
pods.  This leaves Ripley, the pirates, one evil scientist, and one
impregnated victim - embarking on their own Poseidon Adventure to get
back to the pirates' ship.  Additional urgency is added by the fact that
the lab-ship is programmed to return to Earth in an emergency.  This
last detail is unnecessary to the story, but essential to the set-up for
Alien 5.
        Nigel Phelps' production design is good, retaining the grungy, lived-in
look for the spaceships.  The casting is quirky.  Winona Ryder seems out
of place, but her character deserves more attention as the story
develops.  Director Jean-Pierre Jeunet brought along his two stars from
City of Lost Children:  Ron Perlman is colorful playing an pirate bully,
and Dominique Pinon adds a lot as a resourceful paraplegic.  Dan Hedaya
does a good job as the pragmatic military commander.  He runs a tight
ship but comfortably deals with the pirates under the table.  B-movie
ghoul Brad Dourif gets an A-movie, but they saddle him with a lot of the
embarrassing scientific explanations.
        Successful sequels need to reprise signature elements, but they must
improve them to justify the effort. We get Sigourney Weaver back, but
she's not really Ripley.  The pirates are certainly more colorful than
the prisoners from Alien3.  Much of the action is obligatory and
predictable.  There's some new stuff showing a swimming alien, and the
puzzling addition of a new, mammalian alien.  Other alien appearances
are mostly head and teeth, rarely showing us the exquisitely grotesque
creature designed by H. R. Giger (who is more than a little miffed by
not being mentioned in the credits).
        Individual evaluation of these offerings will vary widely.  Those
hungry for another episode will be happy enough, especially when they
see the built-in Alien5 potential.  Skeptics worried about the mercenary
motives of the producers may be less patient.  Newcomers may be lost,
since the screenplay does not provide them enough exposition.  Alien3
has had the impact of a baseball strike.  The franchise may recover, but
Wynona Ryder is no Ken Griffey Jr.

Author
Michael Redman
"You're not Ellen Ripley. She died 200 years ago" accuses space pirate Call to
the newly cloned Ripley-8 in the fourth film of the Alien trilogy.
That's the primary defect with this movie: she's not the heroine of the first
films, but..."something else".
        A couple of centuries after the alien-fighter made her long beautiful dive
into molten metal to rid the universe of the dripping slimy killing machines,
scientists for a top secret military operation have succeeded in recreating
her from a blood sample found on the prison planet in "Aliens 3". Not only
that, but they've extracted the queen from her chest.
Working, as always, for the good of mankind, they allow the queen to hatch 12
new beasts. It's not ruining anything to reveal that the aliens escape their
prisons and destroy almost the entire crew: that's a given in any Alien movie.
The "heroes" this time around are a rag-tag group of rough space pirates who
deliver humans to the science ship to serve as hosts for the infant
monstrosities. The space-age highwaymen are a likable bunch for folks who sell
living people to be used as incubators. We grow to like them before most get snuffed.
Especially appealing in a humorously Rambo way is Johner (Ron Perlman). The
hyper-tough guy and Weaver bounce off each other admirably: "So. I hear you,
like, ran into these things before. "Yeah." "What did you do?" "I died."
Crippled Vriess (Dominique Pinon) is the realest member of the cast.
"Little girl playing pirate" Annalee Call (Winona Ryder) seems a bit too nice
to be mixed up with the rest. She and Ripley form a relationship reminiscent
of her  attachment to the little girl in "Aliens". One touch of love in an
otherwise detached film.
Due to the cloning process, Ripley (Sigourney Weaver) has a mix of Alien DNA
which gives her superhuman strength, acidic blood and a telepathic sense. She
has become something more - or less - than human. The queen mother has picked
up some Homo Sapiens DNA in the process and the creatures have become more man-like.
Easily the best scene in the film is when Ripley discovers the flawed previous
seven clones. Touching and grotesque at the same time, the moment allows her
to briefly touch her humanity and help her sisters in the only way that she can.
What constitutes humanity is a theme of the film. Our heroine is part alien.
One of the characters is unveiled as an android. Vriess is something of a
cyborg, attached to a high-tech wheelchair. The aliens have feelings. The
scientists are monsters.
There is a particularly interesting scene where the alienated Ripley is
talking to a very humanized android in the ship's chapel. The clone is aloof
and emotionless throughout almost the entire film. The android is sobbing
because it is only a machine. Which one has a soul?
The creatures are great for the most part. They have always been one of the
best-designed visuals in any film. Now that computer technology has advanced
further, they look even better, but it is disturbing that they sound and move
exactly like the raptors in "Jurassic Park". 
The new type of alien near the end of the film is disappointing and could have
been lifted out of "Seven Voyages Of Sinbad". H. R. Giger, designer of the
original film, should have been brought back for this rather than using a
rubber suit found in cinematic storage.
The transformation of Ripley ruins one of the most appealing aspects of the
previous films. As she is sniffing around for aliens (and everything seems to
be smelling everything else in the film -- there's even a breathalyzer as a
door lock) and ripping metal off the walls, she seems almost invulnerable. The
old Ripley was constantly in danger: one person against an unstoppable force.
This one is above that. There's no audience investment in her safety.
There are some intriguing aspects of director Jean-Pierre Jeunet's ("City Of
Lost Children") film. Ripley, reborn after dying for mankind's sins, relearns
of even more sacrifice. Witnessing unselfish actions by others, and although
she unplugs the high-tech Bible from the computer, the final scene is straight
from that book.
As the baby boomers age, older actresses have had the opportunity to be
leading women and with good reason.  At two years shy of 50, Weaver is an
accomplished performer and easily as sexy as anyone on "Bay Watch". Her
performance clearly overshadows the youthful Ryder's. She plays exactly who
she is supposed to be. It's just disappointing who that person is.
This is a difficult one to write. "Alien: Resurrection" was my most
anticipated film of the year and coming out of it, I was filled with very
mixed emotions. It's fun but not nearly as much as it should be. Weaver is
great in her role, but that role is disappointing. Asked numerous times, I've
responded with my three-word review: "good, not great".
Oh well. There's always the next one and trust me, there will be an "Alien 5".
Count on it.
(Michael Redman has written this column so long that this is his fourth
"Alien" review. He's overjoyed to announce that he is again one with the
electrons at redman@bvoice.com. Now if he'd only get something there.)
[This appeared in the 12/4/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com ]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Andy Wright
Grade: B (Somewhat disappointing, but worthwhile for fans of the 
franchise and goop in general)
Directed by Jean-Pierre Jeunet
Written by Joss Whedon (Buffy the Vampire Slayer)
Starring: Sigourney Weaver, Winona Ryder, Dan Hedaya (Blood Simple), 
Michael Wincott (Strange Days), Brad Dourif (Exorcist 3)
Year of Release: 199720
Rating: R
Deserves Recognition for: Actress (Weaver), Cinematography (Darius 
Khondji)20
Capsule Review:
Warrant Officer Ellen Ripley's back from the dead and fighting more of 
the most Freudian bugs in the universe in a flick that, while nowhere 
near the quality of the installments helmed by Ridley Scott and James 
Cameron, is still a pretty fun ride. By far the shortest film in the 
series, this sacrifices some potentially intriguing ideas about genetic 
responsibility in favor of sheer balls-to-the-wall speed. (I became a 
little more disappointed with the film thinking about it on the way home 
after the rush had worn off.)
Director Jean-Pierre Jeunet (Delicatessen, The City of Lost Children) 
seemed like a good choice for reviving the franchise, but his 
ultra-quirky style mingles uneasily with the one-liner intensive script 
by Joss Whedon (significantly, the two best sequences - a kickass 
underwater chase and an encounter with some eerily resonant failed 
experiments - are both virtually dialog free), resulting in a film that 
wavers between the moods established by the first two installments, but 
never quite finds an distinct identity of its own. Still, the set design 
and lighting (by the great Darius Khondji, who also did Se7en) are 
fabulous, Sigourney Weaver scores some subtle variations on her usual 
persona, and most importantly, it's a far more entertaining movie than 
the misbegotten Alien 3. Bring on part 5.
Copyright 1998 by The Critic formerly known as Andrew Wright
For more insanely biased reviews, check out http://www.seanet.com/~louk/
e-mail louk@seanet.com

Author
Vincent Archer
                Directed by: Jean-Pierre Jeunet
Starring: Sigourney Weaver, Winona Ryder, Dominique Pinon, Ron Perlman
I knew that living in France would turn out useful once in my life. Well,
this is the occasion, as we frenchmen are treated with an advance release
of the latest release in the Aliens sage.
Jean-Pierre Jeunet (without its usual complice Marc Caro) was selected by
the producers on the strength of _The City of the Lost Children_, whose
bizarre vision showed that he could create yet another different style
for _Aliens_. The fact that he didn't spoke english at all didn't faze
them, God be thanked.
For those who didn't follow the press releases, it's been 200 years
since Florina. The Company is defunct, but General Perez has acquired
the samples that were preleved on Ellen Ripley for diagnosis, and has
mounted a covert private operation to extract the Aliens' genetic
pattern and resurrect the species. Guess what? Right, they clone Ripley
and extract a Queen, whose genetic patterns were mixed with Ripley's.
Enter a band of colorful mercenaries, who hijacked a shuttle full of
frozen miners on their way to colonies, and are delivering twelve warm
bodies for incubation. Winona Ryder plays the role of a romantic
pirate wannabee who used the bed to buy into the team, while long-standing
Jeunet complice Dominique Pinon plays the crippled ship mecanic and
Ron Perlman who already starred in _The City_ is a though and gruffy
mercenary.
No one is surprised when, after a while, the Aliens, instead of being
tamed, manage to escape, and all hell breaks loose. Our heroes now have
to cross the entire starship to get back to their own, ensure that the ship
(who, of course automatically set course to Earth when any emergency arise)
is destroyed, while dodging a few aliens on their way.
The personal touch of Jeunet is evident everywhere in the movie. I doubt
that anyone would have used bad breath as an authentification method,
or have Ripley weep when she kills the last Alien. Each character exsudes
a je-ne-sais-quoi suggesting of (moral) decay, and small little details
draw smiles at odd moments. Such as the best TV channel ever (a home shopping
channel with every kind of gun and knife rotating for display, with
full schematics all around), or a real hairy general woken up by the
general emergency.
The film also has its own gross moments, which one would expect when
you start with bugs who build nests out of hardened saliva, but there are
hard moments. I don't know if all of these will survive in the U.S. release.
Judicious use of the Alien's double mandibles - preferably with a human
head just in the trajectory - is also scattered thru the entire movie. But,
if you are going to see an _Alien_ film, this is not something that would
deter you so much.
No sequel will probably ever make it to the level of the initial installment
of the series, but this one comes close. The expected cop-out of "#3 never
happened" doesn't occur, but you can forget all about that bad dream, and
enjoy seeing a much toughened Ripley tearing her way - literally - thru
the ship and a lot of human drama. When she's asked "Why do you keep on
living?", the answer "Because I don't have much choice" somehow seems
really adequate.
I don't know what Jeunet will do next, but it sure will be worth waiting
for!

Author
Luke Buckmaster
I wont even pretend that I have seen the other 3 alien films.  I saw glimpses
of Alien and Aliens and fragments of Alien 3, but I have by no means actually
sat down and watched any of them.  So take my opinion from an unbiased and
impartial perspective: Alien Resurrection is not worth the large bag of lollies
I was munching into after a hard days work.
I didnt just dislike it so much because the plot was awful; most of the acting
was very average or the special effects got tiresome after 5 minutes of painful
viewing  but also the fact that every tedious ingredient thrown in attempts to
give this pointless dribble some meaning.
Sigourney Weaver, whos role in Alien earned her an Academy Award nomination,
plays the character of Ripley, who died fighting against extraterrestrial scum
in Alien 3.  200 years later, scientists use a sample of blood found at the
site of her death to recreate Ripley - including the alien that was stuck inside
her.  In no time they remove the alien from her body and separate the two; yet
Ripley is now not completely human, possessing strange amounts of strength and
being able to withhold greater pain than a normal being.  Im sure someone can
explain exactly why this is so, but for now well just ignore it and move on.
Why, you ask, would Ripley and the alien inside her be recreated?  Well, the
smart little lab researchers believed that they would be able to discover many
advancements in science from studying the alien creature.  These were the same
people who said they could control the alien and that their was no danger in
their research.  They (yawn) were wrong.
It doesnt take a genius to figure out that the rest of the film is a continuous
cat and mouse chase between the humans who die off one by one and the aliens who
open their mouths on every possible occasion to show off their frightfully scary
un-flossed teeth.
Theres a little saying that goes something like this: If youre going to make
a bad film, do it well.  I have seen plenty of disappointing and underachieving
movies, but they are not the ones that really bother me.  Alien Resurrection, a
good example of a film that really gets up my nose, is not so much a
discouraging experience but an off putting one.
There is no way to describe why the Australian MA rating was given to this film
other than unnecessary and repulsive gore, which attempts to distract us from
the wandering-but-not-going-anywhere plot.  In one scene my stomach churned as I
witnessed a mawkish looking alien put its hand on a characters head and
literally ripped most of his face off.  Another one featured Ripley sticking a
knife through her hand just to impress someone she was talking to.  Fair enough
if it were in a horror film or even if it bared any significance to the story,
but this is unfortunately not the case, and this sort of bizarre gore is
inexcusable.
If you think Im struggling to find one good aspect about the film, then you
thought right.  One exciting scene is a credit (and the only part remotely worth
seeing) to the film, in which an alien chases two men (one a cripple) up a tall
ladder with interesting results.  But of course after that thrilling scene Alien
Resurrection had no problem in returning to its pathetically low standard, and
ends up crashing into the shores of movie dullness more often than Japanese
kamikaze jet fighters fall off their skis.
So in a film where the one liners come as bad as Earth man, what a shit hole
and the primary means for one mans strategic attack is to bounce bullets off
walls to hit an opponent, its no wonder why Alien: Resurrection turned out to be
as off putting and clumsy as it is.
Oh, and in case youre wondering about my bag of lollies  the less I enjoy a
film, the more I eat.  So all the lollies were gone in 15 minutes; but however
empty the bag turned out to be, it was still a long way ahead of the movie


Author
Matt Petras
 http://www.alien-resurrection.com
        Ellen Ripley died 200 years ago trying to wipe out a violent
species, she succeeded. Until now. Brought back to life by methods of
cloning. Brought back to life with the Queen still inside her. The
queen alien is removed from Ripley and raised for breeding. 'Special'
cargo is required for this breeding and science that is going on with
the queen and her young. But as luck would have it the aliens are a
bit on the smart side and they escape, and here begins the fun...
        Well you should now have an idea as to what this movie is
about, nothing spectacularly original on its own. But with enough
originality to be a good idea. The beginning of the movie is great,
really well thought out and really interesting. Then instead of
continuing along this line the movie degenerates into the predictable.
Its pretty well executed with some original scenes that provide some
interest. The plot itself needed a bit of work in my opinion, some
things seem to be taken for granted and somethings seem to happen for
no real reason whatsoever. I wont give examples for that might spoil
the movie for some people, but some of the scenes could be removed and
the plot furthered by other means. All in all the plot is fairly sound
and doesn't leave you wondering why things happen, but then again the
plot isn't very demanding so at least this job was accomplished with
some proficiency. The plot in this movie is by no means perfect
though, but its a good start for a movie. 
        The characters, being such an integral component of the plot
have to be proper. This is usually a given and it in most cases just
ignored.  But in the case of Alien: Resurrection I am brining it up,
because a few of the odd scenes that I found in the movie were caused
by a particular character, Call. I don't know what bothers me about
the character, but something does. I think that the character should
have been looked into with a bit more effort, maybe giving the
audience something more to grasp a hold of so to say. The character
didn't seem to fit too well, I am not too sure that Ms. Ryder was
perfect for the role either. But thinking about it I am not too sure I
could think of any actress that would have been able to do as good a
job. So I will have to concede that she was cast well for the part,
even thought the part is a bit on the odd side. The actual acting in
this movie was fairly convincing, especially Sigourney Weaver. She
plays her part with an interesting passion and wit, very good
performance from her. The rest of the cast performed well, and
convincingly in some cases much better than an action picture could
have hoped for. Although in the end the two things that I will most
remember about the acting and characters from this movie is the
character of Call, simply because something about the character
bothers me and Ripley's new found wit. 
        Having some thought about this movies there is something that
bothers me about it, I have tried putting my finger on it but with no
avail. The character of Call is one thing but that is not the only
thing that bothers me. Something seemed to be missing when I was
finished watching it, I don't get that sort of feeling from most
movies. I got the distinct impression that it was rushed and that the
director was a bit too liberal with his cut. I don't know if I would
recommend this movie to everyone, the special effects of this movie
were spectacular in some scenes and very appropriate but nothing so
revelation that everyone had to see it. SO if you are a fan of science
fiction flicks or horror flicks you should like this movie. Now those
of you who are not die hard fans of either genre, here's the question
you should ask yourself: Do you really want to see a decent action
flick that is a bit out of this world? if yes then you should like the
movie. Just don't come crying to me if you didn't like it. Its nothing
grand, its an action picture you wont get any grand revelations about
life from it. You should enjoy the ride. And If I ever figure out what
is bothering me about the movie I'll add a little PS at the end. Other
than bin a bit rushed with some oddities its an OK flick. You might
want to be able to stomach some gore though. This movie isn't for all
audiences, you should know if this movie is for you or not, please use
your discretion folks, its at most a decent action/sci-fi/horror
flick. 


Author
Chuck Dowling
Alien Resurrection (1997) *** out of ***** - Cast: Sigourney Weaver,
Winona Ryder, Ron Perlman, Dan Hedaya, Michael Wincott.  Written by: Joss
Whedon.  Directed by: Jean-Pierre Jeunet.  Running Time: 118 minutes.
*** This review contains spoilers. ***
"Alien Resurrection", the fourth film in the popular sci-fi/horror series,
is a slight improvement over the third installment, but overall is a
disappointment.
Sigourney Weaver is surprisingly back as Ellen Ripley.  I say surprisingly
since the character killed herself at the end of the third film.  This one
is set 200 years after part three, and idiotic scientists have cloned
Ripley in order to extract the alien queen she had been carrying inside
her at the time of her death.  These scientists hope to "train" the
aliens.  Amazing how after another 200 years of human evolution that
scientists are still stupid.  Well sure enough, the aliens reproduce and
break free to terrorize everyone.
None of the characters being chased by the aliens are the slightest bit
compelling.  You don't care if any of them escape or not.  You've got the
head idiot scientist, a band of space pirates (of which the only
interesting one, Michael Wincott, is killed immediately), another android
(Ryder, who's character contributes nothing to any aspect of the film),
and Ripley, who really isn't Ripley so again, who cares.
Some other minor problems I had: At one moment, the cloned Ripley doesn't
know what a fork is, yet soon after she's got a witty one-liner for any
occasion.  Another thing, too many "witty" one-liners from the cast.  Good
to know that the aliens aren't too much of a concern anymore.  Along those
same lines, Dan Hedaya's character is just too cartoonish for the film. 
Let's make a serious film here people.  I'm also curious why after all
these hundreds of years of human and scientific evolution that spacecraft
are still dirty, grimy, bulky and blocky.  It didn't take long after the
invention of the automobile to make it a nice looking, streamlined
machine, so why after so many hundreds of years are spaceships still
clunky and crappy looking?
About the film's finale and lead up to that finale, haven't we seen this
before?  Blow up the ship and blow the alien out into space?  All I kept
thinking was how much better the ending of part three was since it was
something completely different.  The ship then at the end crashes into
earth, seemingly destroying a couple of continents (!), and this is
treated as a good thing?  What gives here?
Weaver keeps voicing in interviews about how she likes the erotic aspects
of the series.  Personally, I just don't get what's erotic about monsters,
blood, and goo.  But, there's plenty of "erotica" here for you if you
happen to agree with Weaver.
"Alien Resurrection" starts out very intriguing.  Information is only
given to the audience gradually, and therefore the first third of the film
is quite compelling.  But as soon as the aliens escape, the film just
becomes a mindless bloody gorefest.  If this wasn't an "Alien" film then
I'd have to just catagorize it as a shameless "Alien" rip-off.
Since there will probably never be an "Aliens vs. Predator" film, then
there's really only two things I'd like to see if the series continues. 
Either aliens make it to Earth somehow (even though this film manages to
completely trounce that premise by constantly telling us what a hellhole
Earth has become), or we find the alien's homeworld WITH only the intent
of destroying these things for good.  Anything aside from that will most
likely be just as disappointing as this effort was.  [R]
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed at Chuck's Movie Reviews.
Web address: http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/

Author
redman@bvoice.com
"You're not Ellen Ripley. She died 200 years ago" accuses space pirate Call to
the newly cloned Ripley-8 in the fourth film of the Alien trilogy.
That's the primary defect with this movie: she's not the heroine of the first
films, but..."something else".
        A couple of centuries after the alien-fighter made her long beautiful dive
into molten metal to rid the universe of the dripping slimy killing machines,
scientists for a top secret military operation have succeeded in recreating
her from a blood sample found on the prison planet in "Aliens 3". Not only
that, but they've extracted the queen from her chest.
Working, as always, for the good of mankind, they allow the queen to hatch 12
new beasts. It's not ruining anything to reveal that the aliens escape their
prisons and destroy almost the entire crew: that's a given in any Alien movie.
The "heroes" this time around are a rag-tag group of rough space pirates who
deliver humans to the science ship to serve as hosts for the infant
monstrosities. The space-age highwaymen are a likable bunch for folks who sell
living people to be used as incubators. We grow to like them before most get snuffed.
Especially appealing in a humorously Rambo way is Johner (Ron Perlman). The
hyper-tough guy and Weaver bounce off each other admirably: "So. I hear you,
like, ran into these things before. "Yeah." "What did you do?" "I died."
Crippled Vriess (Dominique Pinon) is the realest member of the cast.
"Little girl playing pirate" Annalee Call (Winona Ryder) seems a bit too nice
to be mixed up with the rest. She and Ripley form a relationship reminiscent
of her  attachment to the little girl in "Aliens". One touch of love in an
otherwise detached film.
Due to the cloning process, Ripley (Sigourney Weaver) has a mix of Alien DNA
which gives her superhuman strength, acidic blood and a telepathic sense. She
has become something more - or less - than human. The queen mother has picked
up some Homo Sapiens DNA in the process and the creatures have become more man-like.
Easily the best scene in the film is when Ripley discovers the flawed previous
seven clones. Touching and grotesque at the same time, the moment allows her
to briefly touch her humanity and help her sisters in the only way that she can.
What constitutes humanity is a theme of the film. Our heroine is part alien.
One of the characters is unveiled as an android. Vriess is something of a
cyborg, attached to a high-tech wheelchair. The aliens have feelings. The
scientists are monsters.
There is a particularly interesting scene where the alienated Ripley is
talking to a very humanized android in the ship's chapel. The clone is aloof
and emotionless throughout almost the entire film. The android is sobbing
because it is only a machine. Which one has a soul?
The creatures are great for the most part. They have always been one of the
best-designed visuals in any film. Now that computer technology has advanced
further, they look even better, but it is disturbing that they sound and move
exactly like the raptors in "Jurassic Park". 
The new type of alien near the end of the film is disappointing and could have
been lifted out of "Seven Voyages Of Sinbad". H. R. Giger, designer of the
original film, should have been brought back for this rather than using a
rubber suit found in cinematic storage.
The transformation of Ripley ruins one of the most appealing aspects of the
previous films. As she is sniffing around for aliens (and everything seems to
be smelling everything else in the film -- there's even a breathalyzer as a
door lock) and ripping metal off the walls, she seems almost invulnerable. The
old Ripley was constantly in danger: one person against an unstoppable force.
This one is above that. There's no audience investment in her safety.
There are some intriguing aspects of director Jean-Pierre Jeunet's ("City Of
Lost Children") film. Ripley, reborn after dying for mankind's sins, relearns
of even more sacrifice. Witnessing unselfish actions by others, and although
she unplugs the high-tech Bible from the computer, the final scene is straight
from that book.
As the baby boomers age, older actresses have had the opportunity to be
leading women and with good reason.  At two years shy of 50, Weaver is an
accomplished performer and easily as sexy as anyone on "Bay Watch". Her
performance clearly overshadows the youthful Ryder's. She plays exactly who
she is supposed to be. It's just disappointing who that person is.
This is a difficult one to write. "Alien: Resurrection" was my most
anticipated film of the year and coming out of it, I was filled with very
mixed emotions. It's fun but not nearly as much as it should be. Weaver is
great in her role, but that role is disappointing. Asked numerous times, I've
responded with my three-word review: "good, not great".
Oh well. There's always the next one and trust me, there will be an "Alien 5".
Count on it.
(Michael Redman has written this column so long that this is his fourth
"Alien" review. He's overjoyed to announce that he is again one with the
electrons at redman@bvoice.com. Now if he'd only get something there.)
[This appeared in the 12/4/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com ]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Sigourney Weaver, Winona Ryder
Synopsis: 
For those of you unfamiliar with the Alien' series, every Alien' movie
is basically the same formula: in each movie a small crew of humans
including Ellen Ripley (Sigourney Weaver) is trapped on a spaceship or
planet full of drooling, big, alien insectoids. In the gloomy third film
of the series a morose Ellen Ripley gets impregnated with alien DNA and
kills herself. This fourth film, Alien: Resurrection,' picks up where
the third one left off. In Alien: Resurrection' a military/scientific
mission makes a living clone from the dead Ripley in order to extract an
alien fetus from her for DNA research. This leads to a situation where a
small multiethnic crew of humans including clone Ripley is trapped on a
spaceship chock full of predatory alien insectoids. The twist is,
because of DNA foul-ups, Ripley is now part alien (she has heightened
senses and her blood corrodes metal), and the Aliens are part human (one
skull-faced alien thinks Ripley is Mommy). Also we get to see aliens
ambush humans underwater in a flooded compartment. In a subplot, Winona
Ryder plays a waif-like smuggler wannabe who doesn't reveal her
mysterious past until the end of the movie. The humans are trying to
reach a small escape vessel on the other end of the spaceship. Can they
reach it before the aliens pick them off one by one?
Opinion: 
Prior to this film, the best movie of the entire Alien' series was
probably number two: Aliens' (1986, director James Cameron; it was
about a small multiethnic crew of humans including clone Ripley on a
planet full of predatory aliens) because of it's roller coaster thrills
and shootem up style. Next best was the original Alien' (1979, director
Ridley Scott), a decent sci fi flick. And coming in last was the
depressing Alien 3' (1992, director David Fincher). Now that I've seen
Alien: Resurrection,' I place it in second, right behind Aliens'
(1986, James Cameron). On the plus side, the special effects were fine,
and Sigourney Weaver did a good job acting. On the minus side, there's
only so much you can expect from the same formula the fourth time in a
row. And the dialogue's pretty stiff ("You have a monster in your chest.
Then you die."). This one's strictly formula, but has enough chase
scenes to be entertaining. Kinda funny, but French director Jean-Pierre
Jeunet (best known for The City of the Lost Children') likes to put in
little comic touches such as military generals that wake up with more
hair on their arms and chest than the average orangutan, and security
doors that identify by breathalyzer. 

Author
Boyd Petrie
Alien Resurrection (1997)        
Rated R for strong sci-fi violence and gore, some grotesque images, and language
----------  Out of 4 stars: ** (2 Stars)
Starring: Sigourney Weaver, Winona Ryder, Dominique Pinon, Ron Perlman, Dan Hedaya.
It was inevitable.  In ALIEN 3, Lt. Ripley (Sigourney Weaver) leaped to her death in order to kill an alien.
Most people thought this was the end of the Alien franchise, but as luck would have it, those greedy Hollywood
people wanted to make another Alien film.  Greedy isn't always a bad thing, because it can usually produce
some very good and entertaining films.  ALIEN RESURRECTION, on the other hand, is not good, and especially not
entertaining.  The Alien series was a top-notch, well-directed, and well-acted series, and I was a huge fan.
For months, I awaited the new entry into this series, as I loved every single Alien film prior to this one.
This was one of my most anticipated films of the year.
And what a disappointment it is.  ALIEN began a successful and extremely suspenseful set of films.  ALIEN was
directed by Ridley Scott, and with mounting tension, Scott released the alien upon us.  Next came ALIENS, the
most popular and most effective of all the films.  Director James Cameron changed this one into an action
film, and it took viewers on a relentless roller coaster ride, leaving many disturbed for days.  Cameron's is
my favorite.  In 1992, director David Fincher brought us ALIEN 3.  I realize I didn't like this one at first
as well, but there is something completely different from Fincher's and director Jean-Pierre Jeunet's
(director of CITY OF LOST CHILDREN).  I could give a very long list, but to shorten it, here are a few things
missing from Jeunet's that was present in all the others: mood, suspense, good dialogue, good characters, good
sets, good acting, scary music, etc.
ALIEN RESURRECTION is pretty much just a bad film.  From watching trailers and previews, I knew it was going
to be different, and I didn't mind.  ALIEN 3 was quite different, but with Fincher's strong direction, I grew
to love it.  The moralistic undertone of the film created a nice change from complete terror to gradual
build-up.  ALIEN RESURRECTION has a moral story as well, but this moral dilemma faced by Ripley this time
around is shoved into our faces, and rammed down our throats.  Nothing is very subtle in ALIEN RESURRECTION,
and we are shown pretty much everything, leaving no suspense whatsoever.  In fact, where all the Alien films
prior to this one succeeded, ALIEN RESURRECTION fails.  And the only reason Resurrection doesn't get a 1 star
rating is due to Sigourney Weaver's powerful presence and very good performance.
ALIEN RESURRECTION begins 200 years from the ALIEN 3 incident.  Opening with a short monologue by Ripley, we
see she has been reproduced (how is left to our imaginations).  However, due to the blood sample they
retrieved, the alien's DNA is still locked away, and the cloning reproduces the alien as well.  The scientists
had planned on this and remove the alien from Ripley's chest in order to let the alien procreate.  Buying
several people frozen in cryogenic tubes, they plan on training the aliens and taming them.  Ripley, who was
supposed to be killed after the alien was brought back, lives, but has alien DNA mixed in with her own.
Normally, this would be cause for a nice subplot about her dilemma on having this alien DNA in her, but ALIEN
RESURRECTION makes it so that Ripley can't remember anything from her previous encounters... or can she?
It's inevitable that the aliens escape their confinement somehow, but I was quite amazed at how well it is
done.  This scene shows how intelligent the aliens are (but then again, a snail would be smarter than the
humans in this film).  Unfortunately, there aren't enough of these scenes present, and we are left with many,
many scenes which seem extracted directly from the first three films.  The biggest difference here is the ship
on which the events take place.  In the Alien films of the past, the action took place in small corridors and
claustrophobic environments.  Here, the ship is massive with wide open rooms, and one begins to think how an
alien could hide from a crew member in that room.  But I accepted that aspect of the film quickly.  What
bothered me was the complete lack of suspense, which is what made the Alien films work.  Every Alien film had
some level of suspense (ALIENS is one of the most intense films I have ever seen), yet ALIEN RESURRECTION opts
for cool special effects and slimy alien costumes.  To be blunt, I am very angry at director Jeunet for making
us wait five years for this.  This film almost makes you wish the Alien series had ended on 3 (but hopefully 5
will be better).
ALIEN RESURRECTION does contain several well-directed scenes, and one actually gains some suspense (although
it is extremely ludicrous).  My favorite of the film occurs underwater, and quite a bit of suspense amounts
from this fact alone.  The only problem is that no one can hold their breath for that long, especially when
you are screaming underwater.  Ripley's dolphin-like swimming is effective, but only two of these crew members
could hold their breath for a long period of time.  However, if you forget this, you might find yourself
actually worrying about a couple of the characters.  Another good scene features Ripley playing basketball,
and proceeding to beat up Johner (Ron Perlman, a Jeunet regular).  It's very fun to watch, especially seeing
how much fun Weaver seems to be having.  Unfortunately, there just aren't enough scenes of this caliber to
maintain our interest.  
One of the biggest problems of ALIEN RESURRECTION is the cast.  Sigourney Weaver is the only one who seems to
be having any fun.  She relishes in playing a flawed heroine, and she shines amidst the rest of the cast.
Weaver's dialogue is very effective due to her terrific acting ability.  Weaver is still one of the best
actresses in Hollywood.  Winona Ryder is also a very good actress (she was terrific in THE CRUCIBLE), but here
she seems out of place.  Her character Call never comes to life (literally), and she gives a very poor
performance.  She never seems to find the right tone for the character.  Dominique Pinon (another Jeunet
regular) portrays Vriess, a handicapped crew member.  Pinon is among the wasted talent, though he never seems
to be right for the character in the first place.  Ron Perlman surprisingly gives a good performance.  Perlman
is usually good, but this time he seems to actually have fun.  Perlman's scenes with Weaver are some of the
best.  Kim Flowers also gives a nice performance, but her character is so underdeveloped that we really don't
care about her.  Flowers actually has one of the suspense-building moments.  Dan Hedaya is wasted in a
horrible role as General Perez.  However, he does provide a major laugh (though unintentional).
Director Jean-Pierre Jeunet has a very good visual style, which is very apparent in his CITY OF LOST CHILDREN.
Here, however, his style is completely wrong, using too many close-ups of the actors' faces.  Let's face it...
he hasn't exactly chosen an appealing-looking cast (Ryder and Weaver are the only two).  His characters are so
strange that I found myself hoping the aliens would kill everyone except Weaver.  Jeunet has single-handedly
destroyed a terrific series of suspense films.  Adding flat humor and revolting dialogue, Jeunet is reduced to
showing us extreme amounts of gore and slime, and some rather cool special effects.  But let's face it,
effects just aren't enough to carry a film these days.  Jeunet's direction shines through in the underwater
sequence, and some of his peculiar aspects (such as bad breath being an ID form) are fun.  But overall, Jeunet
removes most suspense by using too much sound too often.  ALIEN and ALIENS built suspense from moments of
extreme quietness, with the only sound being the repetitious beat of the tracking monitor.  Jeunet loves
sound, and only two scenes are quiet enough for suspense to mount.  Part of the blame should go on Joss Whedon
for writing a weak screenplay, with ridiculous dialogue and poor attempts at humor.  A few lines are actually
good ("I thought you were dead!" ... "Yeah, I get that a lot."), but for the most part, the writing is
laughably bad.
The Alien films have always had spectacular technical effects, especially set designs.  ALIEN RESURRECTION has
a very impressive design (though uneffective for building suspense).  The sets are massive and dark, usually
lit by red and yellow lights.  The cinematography is well done, although too many tight shots of actors
somehow deteriorate the overall tone of the film.  The underwater shots are especially remarkable.  The
special effects are very good, especially considering they are done by a rather unknown company.  One effect
towards the end is quite gruesome but amazing.  The amount of gore involved in ALIEN RESURRECTION is extremely
high (think all the gore from the first three films put together and then doubled), and you get the feeling
that a good story was sacrificed for these graphic displays of violence.  I usually don't mind gore,
especially when I know it is fake, but it really irks me when the producers feel that violence is the most
important thing in an Alien film.  Another aspect I felt needed an overhaul was the music.  ALIEN and ALIENS
had award-nominated scores, and the latter film had one of the most impressive scores ever written for a
sci-fi/action film.  ALIEN RESURRECTION's music was upbeat and "happy" (something Alien films are not supposed
to be).
ALIEN RESURRECTION is rated R for strong sci-fi violence and gore, some grotesque images, and language.  After
three terrific entries into the Alien series, there had to be a limit to how good it could get.  The stories
were becoming repetitious and boring, and ALIEN RESURRECTION pushes it over the line.  It takes its story from
ALIENS, with the new idea that Ripley should be cloned.  Of course, no Alien film could work without Ripley.
Despite a strong performance by Weaver, Jeunet's Alien flick destroys the entire purpose of the Alien
franchise: to scare the hell out of viewers.
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Author
Doug Skiles
Starring: Sigourney Weaver (Lt. Ellen Ripley [Clone]), Winona Ryder
(Annalee Call)
Directed by: Jean-Pierre Jeunet, Written by: Joss Whedon
Rated R by the MPAA for blood and violence, strong language, and some
minor nudity.
I gave an A+ to THE LOST WORLD this year and one to FACE/OFF too.  Okay,
that's nice.  Those movie met my expectations.  I expected a sequel that
was more based on action scenes than the original was with THE LOST
WORLD and I expected FACE/OFF to be, well, a John Woo action film.  
Now, what do I do when a movie *exceeds* my expectations?
I guess I should consider that I can't give an A+ to every movie that
meets my expectations.  I mean, if I get crap, and I expected crap, then
crap doesn't get an A+.  I expected BATMAN & ROBIN to be crap, and I
still only gave it a D+, because, well, it *was* crap.
Still, the point is, if I expect good things out a movie, and get them
all, I can't immediately slap it with an A+.  It should get more like an
A.  A+'s should be reserved for movies that exceed my expectations. 
Maybe.  Or maybe I'll just be lazy and stick with the old way.  Well
anyway...
Why am I talking about this?  Well, because I'm not sure what grade to
give to ALIEN RESURRECTION.
This is a movie that is a sequel to a classic series.  The original
ALIEN (1979) is a classic.  ALIENS (1986), the second film, is a classic
as well.  In fact, it's probably the greatest and most intense action
film ever made.  ALIEN 3 (1992) had its problems and didn't quite
measure up to the first two films, but it definitely had its positive
points as well, not the least of which were great acting, lavishly
dismal sets, and good direction from David Fincher (who has since worked
on SEVEN [1995] and THE GAME [1997]).  
So can a *fourth* film measure up to the tradition?  Can it possibly be
better than the admittedly somewhat disappointing third installment? 
After reading the first draft of the script, and seeing just a few short
scenes from the film, I was filled with hope.  It looked like this movie
could blow people away.  The legacy could live on.
I tried not to get my hopes up too high, and yet somehow I knew that I
would be blown away.
Sure enough, when November 26 came around, I was sure as hell blown
away, and even in some ways I didn't expect.
ALIEN RESURRECTION takes place 200 years after ALIEN 3.  Ripley has been
long dead, but it seems that way back before her demise, during the
medical examinations Ripley in ALIEN 3, the medical officer Clemens (or
possibly someone else?) took some blood samples from Ripley.  Well, that
was when Ripley was inpregnated with an alien queen, and, as you may
recall learning from ALIEN 3, aliens can take on some physical
attributes of their hosts by intertwining with the host's DNA.  And the
United Systems Military (or a somewhat renegade branch thereof) realizes
that, by cloning themselves a new Ripley from these blood samples,
they'll be getting a Ripley that has a nice fresh alien queen inside of
her, due to the DNA in the blood samples being a mix of Ripley and
alien.  However, due to the slighty difficulties of the cloning process,
Ripley as become somewhat of a hybrid creature - a human with some alien
attributes.  For some examples: Ripley is now stronger than before, and
her blood has acidic properties.  By the way, since the aliens have a
hive mind and therefore have a collective memory, mixing those alien
memory cells with Ripley's own cells has given this new Ripley clone
some (rather sketchy) memories of her past.
Now the military scientists of the U.S.S. AURIGA have gotten a hold of
their very own alien queen, and they're keeping their new Ripley clone
alive as sort of a curiosity to study - their intrigued by her genetic
mix and the fact that she ("IT" corrects Dr. Wren) actually has
memories.
The crew of THE BETTY pays a visit to the AURIGA to deliver some
unorthodox cargo - sleeping people in cryotubes.  These smugglers, of
which there are six (Elgyn, the cool-headed, smooth-talking leader;
Hillard, pilot of THE BETTY and Elgyn's lover; Vriess, a mechanic who is
paralyzed from the waist down [and seems to have a thing for the
attractive young Call]; Call [played by Winona Ryder], apparently
another mechanic, who Elgyn refers to as a "little girl playin'
pirates"; Christie, a calm, cool, and collected man of action; and
Johner, the group's loose canon, a hard drinker with an attitude
problem) will do pretty much anything for money, and they don't know why
they're getting these dozing innocents for the ship's science division,
but there's good pay in it, so they're up for it.  The reason that the
scientists want these unsuspecting nappers is that they intend to use
their bodies as hosts for a new army of aliens which they then plan to
"tame" - an idea that is obviously a bad one.  
Director Jean-Pierre Jeunet has infused this film with his own style, as
have the previous ALIEN film directors (Ridley Scott on ALIEN, James
Cameron on ALIENS, and David Fincher on ALIEN 3), and, as always in this
series, the director's unique style is an impressive and highly
effective one in its own way.
The acting, another thing with consistent quality in this series, is
great.  Sigourney Weaver reprises her OSCAR nominated roll (for ALIENS)
as Ripley with a whole new angle that is creepily effective and
gradually evolves throughout the pictures in a way that works quite
well.  She is, rightfully, the highlight.  Winona Ryder plays the humane
and moral Call with all the right touches.  Ron Perlman is funny and
cool as can be in the role of Johner.  I could keep going down the
entire list, but suffice to say that all of the players are fantastic.
Sets and gorgeous and eye-popping.  Same for the effects, both
animatronic and CGI.
The entire movie is excellently written.  Dialouge is absolutely
wonderfully scripted.  The dramatic scenes *do* make you care about the
characters and keep you interested, and when the action sequences are
going on, you're glued to the screen.  Joss Whedon (creator of the
"Buffy The Vampire Slayer" TV show as well as a writer for a number of
movies including TOY STORY) deserves credit for a great script and great
revisions to boot.
Incidentally, if you're wondering, complaints about the last third of
the film being poor in comparison to the rest of it are quite unfounded
in my opinion; the entire portion of the movie is of just as high
quality as the rest of the film.
I could go on and on, but it's best to just say that this is a wonderful
film.  If you love action, sci-fi, or just the ALIEN series, go see it
and enjoy.  Even if you disagree that it's good as I say, it's hard to
say (with a straight face anyway) that it's not at least enjoyable and
entertaining.
To 20th Century Fox, I say, please, make an ALIEN 5!  Yes, I'm going to
encourage the production of a sequel.  There's certainly a lot of
possibilites that could be explored with these creatures, and I think
that we can at least try to end the series on a number less awkward than
"4".  Maybe this could become a series like STAR TREK or JAMES BOND -
one that could go on for many years, perhaps with a new character taking
over in Ripley's stead when Sigourney is ready to retire (preferrably a
character that could introduced in an episode before Sigourney steps
down).  Still, an ALIEN film without Ripley would be difficult to
imagine and would take a lot of work, Sigourney and the amount of work
and skill she brings to each story is a staple in an important staple in
these series... for now, let's just keep her around and give her new,
interesting things to do.  And make sure not to let the quality on the
series slip - don't any entries turn out like rushed crap like BATMAN &
ROBIN.  Yes, this is a challenge - keeping it fresh, keeping it fun,
keeping it high quality, and still keeping it going - but I don't think
it's necessarily impossible.  If it could be done, it could be a first. 
If it couldn't be, I still think a fifth and maybe a sixth film at least
could provide nice closure on an excellent series, and could be done in
new and interesting ways, and also, by being the final installment(s),
could stop the story from getting stale in the end by dragging on too
long.
Alright, enough with my "final thoughts", time for that
difficult-to-decide-on rating. 
RATING A+ (with extra credit?  I really need to work on my grading
scale... ) or ****+ (four [possibly more? five?] stars... and again, I
need to work on this blasted scale)

Author
Michael R. Smith

Alien: Resurrection won't revive creatively bankrupt Alien franchise
        It began as a chilling idea, stylishly realized on screen (Ridley
Scott's original "Alien") and was then transformed into a rollicking good
action premise with loads of potential energy for sequels (James Cameron's
epic and as yet unsurpassed "Aliens"). Unfortunately, the once promising
Alien franchise has rapidly degenerated into rock video
incomprehensibility (1993's "Alien III") and this latest mess, "Alien: 
Resurrection," slithering into theaters nationwide on Wednesday, 11/26. 
Sigourney Weaver, looking haggard and gaunt in the
sinewy/heroin-addict chic mode of '90s haute couture, is back as the
irrepressible Ellen Ripley: implausible survivor of countless Alien
attacks and now at least two lousy Alien movies. Having plunged cruciform
to her death at the end of "Alien III" (she should have stayed there), the
one-time space pilot turned reluctant uber-femme and Alien hunter fulfills
the titular Lazarus event by emerging, via some sort of goofy cloning
hocus-pocus that's never fully explained, into a brave new world of
corrupt military officials and nihilistic scientific researchers hell-bent
on taming the ferocious Alien warriors for their own nefarious ends.
Bad idea, as it turns out. After a baby Alien queen is gruesomely
extracted from her abdominal cavity (the first of many deliberate
gross-outs), it becomes increasingly clear that there's much more to
Ripley than meets the eye. And when a scurvy, foul-mouthed band of
contraband-carrying space pirates shows up aboard a Ripley-haunted
scientific research vessel, jammed to the bulkheads with newly-birthed
Alien hombres (and lots of nameless grunts and crew-members for cannon
fodder), can the carnage be far behind?
Suffice it to say that you've seen it all before. As with the
raptors in "Jurassic Park," the slavering nasties again break loose in
spectacular fashion, and then quickly decimate the ranks of anyone
carrying a working firearm that doesn't jam at a critical moment, leaving
our beloved principals--none of whom ever come to life as
characters--stranded in a hostile, dimly lit environment with little-to-no
hope of escape or salvation (note to spaceship designers of the far
future, in which the film is set: ventilated steel decking is a VERY bad
idea). After a briefly suspensful underwater scene quoted directly from
"The Poiseidon Adventure"--but without the benefit of a Gene Hackman or
even a Shelly Winters to sell it emotionally--all that remain to challenge
the rampaging, toothy horde are Ripley and the mysterious terrorist known
only as "Call,"  played flatly and with an overt lack of enthusiasm by
that doe-eyed paragon of wren-boned perfection, Winona Ryder, who really
needs to eat more, and often, and whose repeated use of the "f" word to
convey mock surly-ness is about as charming and convincing as the rest of
this unholy and unwholesome mess. (And messy it is, too, as viewers are
time and again treated to ghastly images drawn straight from the
morgue-and-meatwagon school of filmmaking.) Where are Irwin Allen and
Ernie Borgnine when you need them?
Squandered amidst all the grue and splatter, of which there is at
least as much as in Paul Verhoeven's recent "Starship Troopers," are the
great Dan Hedaya as the ranking military officer, who, with an
over-the-top, spit-and-polish, gung-ho performance, seems to think that
he's actually in a remake of "Dr. Strangelove"; Michael Wincott, a slickly
frightening presence as the hippie-freak heavy in "The Crow," here reduced
to scenery chewing and, in short order, to that which is chewed; and
Weaver herself, who can't seem to decide if this is serious business or a
colossal joke: When, as the hybrid Alien-shaman lady, she puts her ear to
the deck and grimly announces that "they're moving; I can smell them," she
may as well have said "heap big war party over next ridge, kemosabe." 
Puh-leese.
Wasted too are a handful of mildly diverting subplots, including
one in which Ripley demonstrates superhuman physical powers. But if this
is the case, then why don't we see her fight an Alien in xeno-a-womano
combat? Her relationship with Ryder's Call, meant to echo that between her
and the orphaned urchin-child Newt in Cameron's "Aliens," similarly never
pays off. The director, French arthouse graduate Jean-Pierre Jeunet,
clearly lacks Cameron's thematic vision and narrative craft--not to
mention his flair for action scenes that crackle with intensity, instead
of those which drip with bodily fluids. Thus, where "Aliens"--never for a
moment lacking in thrills--sparkled with a refreshing humanity and pathos
largely unknown to the sci-fi action flick crowd, "Resurrection" merely
strobes its way blindly through blood-drenched attack after alien attack
(how many of these things are there, anyway?), without ever demonstrating
why it is, precisely, that we should be paying attention. Worth ignoring,
too, is a frankly offensive plot-thread implying an incestuous, and also
unabashedly bestial, sexual attraction between Ripley, the Aliens, and
what amounts to her bastard Alien grandson, whose graphic, on-screen
birth--envisioned as some sort of "symbolic" denouement by Jeunet--is
about as much fun to watch as a haggis-eating contest. Gross.
But it's not the ample gross-outs, nor the grossly underused cast,
that ultimately makes this "Alien" installment the most alienating of the
lot, as far removed from Cameron's peak achievement in the genre as the
"Freddy" movies are from "To Kill a Mockingbird." When we don't care about
the humans or the Aliens, it's damn hard to care about much of anything at
all.

Author
Walter Frith
One thing you have to give the entire 'Alien' series credit for is the
fact that they are all vastly different.  Four different directors
have injected their vision of horror in space battling ugly creatures
of unspeakable strength.  Ridley Scott got the ball rolling in 1979
with 'Alien' and chose a very relaxed and later tension filled pace in
which the main characters get eliminated one by one.  As a visionary
piece of film making it was genuinely original but as a character
study and a film of plotting, it was shallow.  James Cameron picked
things up in 1986 with 'Aliens' and Cameron had two things to his
advantage.  First, he also wrote the script to it which gave him
latitude to invent things at anytime on the set and secondly, he
challenged the intellectual aspects of the first film by moving 180
degrees the other way and giving the audience a spectacular roller
coaster ride of soldiers creating their own demise by underestimating
their enemy.  Again, the main characters get eliminated one by one and
the few survivors that remain give the film a better ending than the
first film.  Unfortunately the third film, 'Alien 3' from 1992 had a
former music video director (David Fincher) at the helm and the film
suffered from dizzying camera work too incoherent for its own good and
a feeling of dreadful torment which instead of entertaining the
audience, it merely gave them an opportunity to see how the story of
Ellen Ripley would come to an end.  It had some good moments but for
an intended end to a classic film trilogy it was no classic itself.
Proof of its failure as an appropriate way to end things is found in a
fourth film which tries to redeem the series and end things once and
for all.
'Alien Resurrection' is directed by by Jean-Pierre Jeunet and is
written by Joss Whedon and I'm sorry to say that it is a major
disappointment.  It chooses a straight forward formula path in which
to tell its story.  A covert government operation in space is breeding
a new batch of the horrible creatures and little is known about them
by this crew who believe they can contain them in chambers for
experimental study.  The corrupt general in charge (Dan Hedaya) of the
space station operation sells out to a band of space travelers who are
criminals of a terrorist proportion.  Ron Perlman (t.v.'s 'Beauty and
the Beast') is the most slimy and potentially dangerous of the band
and Winona Ryder is portrayed as one of the gang as well and she is
badly casted in a role not suited for her talents.  Naturally, the
creatures get loose and all hell breaks loose again and a group of
people battles to survive in an unoriginal manner which we've seen
three times before.
Sigourney Weaver who played Ripley in the first three films and who
died in the third one is cloned here with some DNA from the creatures
she battles and her character of the new Ripley this time is
unattractive and robotic at best.  Her leadership is badly needed in
this film and I found her character could have been better written.
On the plus side, this film looks great and has the usual computerized
special effects which are now standard procedure for movies and the
technical aspects all around are impressive but its attempt to redeem
itself from the failure of the third film is only mildly successful
and its shallow attempt at continuing the story that should have been
laid to rest long ago is painfully obvious.
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
I really don't like to see sequels when I haven't seen the predecessors. It's
just not right. So although I hadn't seen any of the "Alien" movies at all,
thru gentle persuasion I agreed to go to ALIEN: RESURRECTION, and my friends
were kind enough to give me a rundown of the first three on the way to the
theater. With nothing but my friends' "expertise" to rely on up to this point,
I sat down hoping for two hours of fun.
I'm gonna leave it up to you to know where ALIEN 3 left off. I'm not going to
write up an essentially "word of mouth" re-cap of three movies I haven't seen.
With that in mind, try to remember that my review could greatly be affected by
a lack of "Alien" knowledge. This review is going to be from the perspective
of someone who doesn't know what's going on. Hopefully it will be of use to
someone!
As ALIEN: RESURRECTION begins, we are on a spacecraft where scientists remove
an alien baby from Sigourney Weaver's body. Then, from what I could gather, we
jump quite a few years into the future. They have cloned Ellen Ripley (Weaver)
and her "baby" is now a queen alien kept for scientific research. All within
the same scene, they try to teach Ripley's clone what a fork is, which is
pretty ironic because about ten seconds after that, she listens to a scientist
ramble on in scientific jargon and, what do you know, she understands it all.
Meanwhile a spaceship full of "no-goods" hooks up with the larger spacecraft
and in come a fresh group of alien chow. Oops! Did I give away a major
surprise? Anyway, the group of terrorists, which includes Winona Ryder as
Annalee Call, boards the craft just in time for all hell (including the oh-so-
researchable aliens) to break loose.
What happens next is obvious. Everybody, aside from the rebel group and
Ripley's clone, is soon killed off. This leaves our main characters scrambling
thru an oversized, earth-bound hunk of metal. Will they get out in time? Will
Ripley's clone, who is seemingly half-alien, be a friend or foe? Will the
audience suck this up?
The acting and dialogue is pretty hokey at times, especially in the beginning.
Weaver takes a long time to get even somewhat decent, but she's still the best
character. Ryder on the other hand, just doesn't seem right at all. Being a
horror film however, this isn't quite as important as the real goal . . .
scaring us! Yes, we jump quite a few times, but it's nothing new by any means.
If you like blood, this one is gory enough that it will hopefully satisfy you.
The special effects aren't bad, but they're nothing revolutionary. There is a
pretty good five minutes of special effects at the end, however. You'll likely
watch thru fascinated, yet cringing eyes. But the overall suspense, which is,
of course, the most important ingredient, never reaches quite high enough.
It's pretty routine, but it's worth a viewing if you can get in cheap enough.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "My mommy always said there are no monsters, no real ones, but
there are," Ellen Ripley tells the audience in the opening to ALIEN:
RESURRECTION, the latest installment in the ALIEN saga.
     ALIEN and ALIENS are the two of the scariest movies ever made.
Most horror films are horrible with the emphasis on the grossness
rather than the fright.  ALIEN and ALIENS, on the other hand, are
smartly written science fiction exercises in terror.  After the
disastrous and depressingly bleak ALIEN 3 and after the death of the
story's lead, it might appear to the casual viewer than the series was
over.  Au contraire. Movie moguls are fully empowered to revive the
dead for the sake of the bottom line.
     In ALIEN: RESURRECTION an undercover branch of the United States
military takes blood from the place where Ripley died and clones up a
new Ripley so they can harvest the alien inside her chest.  (One of the
best parts of the story is the scene in the laboratory when Ripley
comes face to face with large tubes filled with failed attempts at
cloning her DNA.)
     Sigourney Weaver, who else, appears again as the alien hunter par
excellence.  This time she smiles a lot with her in-joke that she is
now partly alien herself.  Imbued with extraterrestrial strength, she
fights both man and alien.
     Director Jean-Pierre Jeunet, whose last film was the imaginative
THE CITY OF LOST CHILDREN, and writer Joss Whedon from TOY STORY stage
ALIEN: RESURRECTION with innovation abounding.  Who would have ever
thought of having an underwater scene in space?  And the way the
meanest of the monsters is killed is effective both visually and as
part of the storyline.
     The writing starts off crisp and mockingly funny.  "It's a queen,"
Ripley explains to the crew of the now inhabited ship.  "She'll breed;
you'll die."  (In another delicious bit of humor, you'll be relieved to
know that the Home Shopping Network, this time selling weapons, is
still available in the future.)
     Joining Ripley is Winona Ryder playing Annalee Call, who is
described as a "little girl playing pirates."  Annalee wants to wipe
out the aliens, but Ripley questions her motives and generally seems to
have her own hidden agenda.  Once a valiant alien fighter, the new part
human and part alien Ripley keeps a mysterious smile on her face
throughout most of the picture.
     The military scientists violate rule number one of alien capture.
Big, ugly alien monsters do not take kindly to confinement.  When
suitably riled, they can and will break out of any enclosure.  Once
they are out all hell breaks loose and the show degenerates into the
standard man shoots at monster, monster eats man scenario you've seen
many times before.
     The whole long middle section of the film is repetitious, tiring,
and too slow.  Only in the last act does the picture finally pick its
genre.  Being sometimes grotesque but never scary, the movie gives up
and decides, correctly, that it can be a very funny space comedy.
Although not nearly as humorous or effective as STARSHIP TROOPERS,
which never tries to be anything more than a spoof, ALIEN: RESURRECTION
did have the audience at the press screening I attended in stitches
towards the end.  If only the show had made up its mind from the get-go
that humor was its salvation, it could have been much better.
     So you ask, do they lay the groundwork for an ALIEN 5?
Absolutely.  You are left knowing where the next episode will be set
and where the monster will come from.  Any other silly questions?
     ALIEN: RESURRECTION runs 1:48 .  It is rated R for nudity,
profanity, and strong science fiction violence and gore.  It would be
fine for teenagers with strong stomachs.

Author
Geir Friestad
Due to a special preview-screening in connection with a filmfestival here
in Norway, I was able to see this movie early. Here are my impressions
and highly rambling thoughts about it:
Directed by: Jean-Pierre Jeunet
Actors: Sigourney Weaver, Winona Ryder, Ron Perlman, Dominique Pinon,
        Michael Wincott, Brad Dourif, and more.
USA / 1997
Is there any point in writing an introduction of the Alien-saga? Are there
anyone here who aren't familiar with Ridley Scott's nail bitingly good scifi-
horror movie "Alien" from 1979, with unavoidable sequels by James "I can spend
more money than you" Cameron and David "Commercial? Me? Hah!" Fincher,
respectively? I thought not... The Alien-series has always been a good source
of income (perhaps with the exception of Fincher's "Alien 3"), so it comes
as no surprise that the boys at 20th Century Fox have been working overtime
to find a way to bring our-heroine-who-kicks-alien-butt Ripley back on the
big screen, so that they can earn EVEN MORE MONEY. Having been burned once
already by Fincher's attempt at being even more dark, sinister and moody
than Scott was with the original "Alien," one has now come to the conclusion
that humor may be a cool way of adding some spice to the Alien-series. One
can almost imagine the somewhat overweight producers at Fox sweating slightly
in a stuffy, smoke-filled meeting room: "Hey, this horror angle isn't working
anymore. Let's throw some weird, offbeat humor into the mix - maybe that'll
help the movie sell more tickets? What do you say about hiring that weirdo
French guy who did those freakin' twisted dark comedies? What was it they
were called again? Delicatessen and The Lost Children City or something like
that. Jean-Pierre (they're all called that over there in frogland, aren't
they?) will do the right thing, right? Get France on the horn, now!" They
did. The result is "Alien: Resurrection."
First a short summary of the story for those of you who insist on being in
the know on such stuff:
A handful of morally dead scientists (including Brad Dourif, who geeky movie-
fans will recognize as the madder-than-a-bag-of-nuts Dante from "Death Machine")
are performing genetic experiments on an old blood sample from Ripley, as well
as our old friends - the aliens. After seven failed attempts, they manage to
produce a *fairly* normal clone of Ripley, although one spawned from a blend of
human and alien DNA. Meet Ripley v8.00 - she's not nice. Or is she?
All of this is going on inside some military spaceship cruising around in our
solar system. Along comes the pirate ship Betty, with a cargo of cryogenically
frozen people on board, which the scientists need to grow aliens in. Betty's
crew consists of a selection of interesting individuals, including Michael
Wincott, Ron Perlman, Dominique Pinon and last, but DEFINITELY not least, the
incredibly cute Winona Ryder (there's no reason to debate whether or not to
see this movie now, guys!).
To the surprise of no one in particular (except the scientists - of course),
the aliens manage to break out of their cell, and all hell breaks loose. An
emergency procedure autopilots the ship back to home base - Earth - and our
pirate friends now have find a way to get off the ship and blow it up before
it reaches Earth.
No big surprises in the plot department, in other words, but who had honestly
expected that? It doesn't matter anyway - this is a wonderfully entertaining
film, saturated with Jeunet's (where's Marc Caro?) weird and wonderful sense
of humor, which is definitely helping raise the movie's entertainment value
up a couple of notches.
What makes the movie infinitely much better than its predecessor (Fincher's
"Alien 3" for those of you who flunked math in school), however, are the
much improved characters. While "Alien 3" had a bunch of identical bald brits
lining up to get shredded by the alien, this movie at least has a bunch of
highly original *personalities* lining up to get shredded by the aliens.
Granted, most of them die anyway, but we're at least able to see what character
got whacked by the alien this time, rather than constantly asking "which bald
guy croaked now?" This helps the movie a lot.
There really isn't much more to say apart from this. The movie *looks* great,
as expected. Jeunet yanked the ears of his old partner and cinematographer,
Darius Khondji, to work his magic behind the camera for him again (have a look
at "The City of Lost Children" and "Se7en" for excellent examples of what
wonderful pictures this man can conjure up). A somewhat surprising element of
"Alien: Resurrection" is the ENORMOUS amount of gore it contains. Pretty much
anything that moves is shredded in the most graphic and unappetizing ways
you can think of. One of the "highlights" is when one unfortunate soldier gets
the top of his head twisted until it shatters, spraying, uhm, "stuff" all over
the place. Another scene reminiscent of Peter Jackson's "Bad Taste" has one
of the characters peeling out part of his brain from the back of his neck
and looking at it before he perishes. The producers sure didn't save any money
on the ketchup, in other words...
However, this is not a reason not to see the movie, unless you have a weak
stomach - this is a great movie. The underwater scene alone is worth the price
of admission.
In closing, I should probably add that the movie attempts to build on the
alien-saga by introducing yet another type of alien. They fail, however, as
it's more ridiculous than scary (I would definitely like to avoid meeting it
in a dark alley if I had the choice, though ;).
Still, who cares? The movie is great anyway! Go see it!
Grade: Four and a half Ripley-clones (out of five)

Author
Matthew Brissette
I was six years old when my parents dragged me to see Aliens. Now , I
had seen the original but since I was probably still drooling back then
I really did not know what to expect from it's sequel. I think my
parent's were trying to get rid of me early by scaring me to death ,
that's the only possible explanation for making a child watch Aliens in
a dark room during the first days of surround sound. You've all heard
the expression "traumatic experience" , well to this day I cannot watch
Aliens alone or in the dark. This is not meant as a joke , I start to
breathe faster , for some reason I need to swallow every ten seconds and
I keep grabbing hold of whatever is available. 
For some people it's going into the cellar , for others it's spiders ,
for me it's James Cameron's Aliens. Imagine being immersed in a dark so
total that closing your eyes could provide the same effect , then
imagine knowing that something is in there with you , stalking you ,
circling just out of your reach. The room is chilly , the wind is more
annoying than cold but it still makes the small hairs between your
shoulders stand up in alarm. 
All the blood as left your legs , you feel like two empty paper bags are
the only things holding you up . You feel unsure where exactly to place
your arms: by your side , maybe you should cross them , you cannot even
see them. You are in desperate need of air , you've stayed too long
underwater and it is like some great weight is pressing down on your
lungs.  You try to force air in but your heart is beating too fast to
keep any precious oxygen inside you. 
The noise is terrifying , a great orchestra drum is beating between your
breasts. You clutch your heart , you feel as if your hand is the only
thing keeping your heart from bursting out of your chest. You are
affraid to look to either side of you , you are affraid to to expose the
naked flesh of your neck to the other side as you turn. You fall to your
knees , bending in half , praying for some warmth and silence. Then
everything stops , your heart beats normally , breath comes easily , you
feel safe and pure bliss overwhelms you...
....that's when a cold pair of hands grabs you by the throat from behind!
It's a bit melodramatic , I know. But it's the best I can describe what
it is like for me to watch this movie. Especially with surround sound ,
I remember I kept looking all around because I thought the monsters were
in the theater with us. When Michael Biehn lifts the grate above the
marines and swings his flashlight around I was also looking up. 
All of this just so you can better understand my disapointment at the
direction the series has taken. The problem with the Alien franchise is
that it as not followed a natural progression. Explanation: first we had
one alien and several humans with practically no weapons. It seemed only
natural to follow that up with several hundred aliens and tough marines
armed with state of the art gear. Then something went wrong , instead of
moving up we took a step back. Afer experiencing the onslaught of a
hundred aliens plus their queen it was kind of a downer to just having
one running after us.
And without weapons the possibility of maximum carnage was very limited.
Plus , for the first time in the franchise's history the supporting cast
was extremely weak. I wanted Lance Henricksen and Michael Biehn to have
survived to pod's crash. Heck , I wanted to see more of the Ripley/Newt
relationship. After having taken the fight to the ennemy in Aliens it
was sad to just being able to run away and hide in Alien 3. 
Which brings us to the latest instalment in the franchise: Alien
Resurection. Let me start off by saying the director was wrong for this
project. Why? Everything scene he shoots is too bright. Even the dark
corridors of the ship aren't dark. Part of what makes the alien lethal
is that you cannot see it coming , but now we can clearly see down the
length of every corridor which makes it hard for a surprise attack. Also
, in the three previous flicks we only caught glimpses of the creature ,
when we saw completely it was only for a few seconds.Now , the Alien is
fully exposed in most scenes and it becomes just another B movie
monster.
The first flick was about a hundred years into the future , the second
was ninety , I think , the third was a couple of decades and this latest
is , again I think , a hundred. Now , we can travel through space ,
clone entire persons and establish colonies on distant worlds but guns
still need bullets? Oh sure , they had small lasers but come on...
Now we move on to Alien Resurection's biggest fault: Ripley , the
original ( well , okay , her clone ,  but let's not split hairs ) psycho
bitch. What people want to see is Ripley tape two big ass guns together
and lob grenades at aliens and alien eggs , oh , and let's not forget
the flamethrower. 
But , unfortunately , in this movie Ripley is not pro-active she is only
re-active. Meaning she is just running away with the others instead of
doing what we want to see her do: open up a can of whup ass on them
critters. I know that she is not the original Ripley but instead of
leading the men to safety she just hangs back and offers some less than
inspiring comments once in a while. "What did you do?" he asks. "I
died." So much for morale.
Another little nitpick: the alien's acid can melt through a dozen
bulkheads but if you get a face full of the stuff you just get a not so
nasty burn? Right , as if you'd still have a head after that. While we
are bitching: the "use the airlock to get rid of the final alien" bit
got old back in Aliens. Movies are supposed to have big , explosive
endings ( again I must mention Aliens in regards to this comment ) ,
instead we get a really fake looking atmospheric re-entry. 
Rating: Half a star out of 5 for a legend in the breaking , bad CG
effects ( mostly when the Alien jumps out of the water , ugh! ) and the
half of star is for the ok but not great underwater chase.

Author
M. Webber
I had a great day at the movies today (11/26). The last time I sneaked out
mid-day was when Blade Runner was released. Today was better.
You can always tell if you are going to have a good day at the movies if
the trailers are zippy. Today I got _four_ new trailers and three out of
four where zippy.
Oh. Before we go any further - Alien Resurrection is _great_. Webbies and
reviewers who give it less than 4 stars are science fiction unfriendly. Ok,
on a generic scale you can quibble about giving it a full 4 star rating. It
isn't the English Patient (but maybe there is something good about _that_).
But, if you grew up reading science fiction and horror, relishing the
special effects in 1930's and 1940's vampires movies, literally falling in
love with the Bride of Dracula (I still fall for brunette vamps), then ya
gotta love Alien Resurrection. It has action, it has a likeable crew of
rogues, an evil but efficient crew of military and scientific types that
would be at home on the X Files (or at Roswell in ID4)  in their ability to
"do" conspiracy, and it has the most all-time dysfunctional family since
Beauty and the Beast (the real one, not Disney's cleaned up "new age light"
version) - that's right, Sigourney "I know the Company's not gonna pay
worker's comp for this" Weaver and the Alien. It also has some of the most
outlandish, and hilarious, marksmanship I have seen since those old
westerns. In short, it does homage to the prior Alien movies while carrying
the mythos - and conflict - a step further, and closer to home, and while
also being a damn good movie in terms of reviving the fun of movie
story-telling.
These were trailers I have not seen before. They were new to me but since I
refused to get Jackeled, Red Cornered or Annihilated, my last trailers were
when I got Brain Bugged and so they may be old hat to you.
The X Files trailer was great. Looks like if they can keep up the momentum
the series might make a good big screen experience. Generally I have found
the better X Files episodes on tv to be better than most theatrical
offerings anyway. The only weakness was the music from the series; they
need to keep the theme but come up with something "larger" for the screen.
The opening was priceless - just Sculley's voice calling Mulder's name.
Audience clapped after it was over.
The other trailer I liked a lot was for Zorro. Yes, Zorro. I kept wondering
why those yahoos in Hollywood were whispering that Zorro would be a big
Sumer '98 movie and all I could think about were the Three Amigos. But no,
this was one of the best trailers in a long time with great stunt work. It
is going to take a lot to make "old fashioned" Errol Flynn style swordplay
and tumbling translate well to the big screen in an era of big scale
special effects, but if any movie can do it, based on the trailer Zorro may
be it. Anthony Hopkins looked surprisingly good with scraggly long hair as
the apparent mentor of Zorro; or will he be the opponent? Anyway he had
presence in only a few seconds of trailer time.
"The name's Bond. [long droll pause]... you know the rest....!" Well, it
doesn't write down well, but Brosnan's on-screen delivery of this one-liner
in the 007 trailer played very well to my ear when he delivered it. I
thought his timing was perfect, and he was droll not Bill Murray/Mr. Bean
stupid. The rest of the trailer could have been cut from any number of
previous movies. I will go see this movie because the bungee cord jump and
tank chase through Moscow last time around were worth the price of
admission, and the rest of the movie was ok too. This series is like a ride
at Disneyland: it may not make you wet your pants like the old wood-frame
roller coasters at Pacific Ocean Park, but you can always be sure a certain
level of quality is attained and at least you won't have to wipe the vomit
off your back from an even queasier passenger.
OK. Now here's a non-action trailer. Hey, I had to read Great Expectations
in my freshman English class (Mr. Flowers where are you?). So I could tell,
with my razor-honed frequent movie goer's intuition, that this trailer had
to be for Great Expectations based on the lists of upcoming movies and the
first couple of scenes. But - no Merchant Ivory period costumes? A
modernized, updated Great Expectations? Ok, close your eyes and scroll down
fast so I don't ruin the movie for you with "spoilers" recollected from
English Lit:
>spoilers coming
>told you not to look
>serves you right!
[Spoiler: GE is about a young English boy, poor, who grows up next to a
rich spinster and her adopted daughter. The boy is given an education by
the rich spinster solely so that he can be her daughter's playmate, and the
boy falls in love with her as they grow up together. But, he isn't good
enough for her, according to the rich spinster; she must marry well.
Sideplot: the little boy during the early stages of things comes across an
Australian "convict" set for deportation down under (or something like
that) and he helps the convict with bread and water, a change of clothes,
then forgets about him. Time progesses. The boy discovers he has a secret
financial benefactor who gets him educated and "proper," and he and his
childhood sweetheart are thrown together by "chance" again. The boy is
therefore sure the benefactor is the rich spinster, who has had a change of
heart and wants the two children to grow up and get married and live
happily ever after. But HERE'S THE SPOILER it turns out that the old lady
all along just really wanted her little ward to grow up to be a man-killing
heartbreaker since she got dumped by a guy when she was in her prime. She
just wants her adopted daughter to rake revenge on the male species for
her. The little boy's _real_ benefactor is that embarrassing (in Victorian
England) social leper, the convict, who has grown rich in England,
respectable, but never had a family or true friend of his own. Guess what?
The idiot kid has no appreciation for his true benefactor, and never learns
the little girl is _really_ too much like her adopted mommy. A real Charles
Dickens' study in character and fate.]
>spoilers over - open those eyes, Dilbert! You're supposed to read the
_comments_ and skip the _spoilers,_ not vice versa!
This trailer, non-action, actually got to me - I am a sucker for kind deeds
repaid. But I can't guarantee the same for you, I guess I am just a sucker
for Shakespeare and Dickens. The two greatest living opti-pessi-mists in
the English language. Guess what: Ethan Hawke looks perfect as the boy
grown to man. Gwynneth "I-can't-have-Brad-I'll-take-Hawke" Paltrow looks
sufficiently elegantly icey, but if it were me, hey, I'd dump her, give my
silent benefactor the thanks and appreciation he richly deserves instead of
treating him like the hunchback in the attic (in the trailer Deniro looks
like Ivan Boesky) and go looking for that cigarette-smoking femme-fatale on
the Pretenders.
The last trailer is Titanic. It is starting to look good (but far, far from
"Terminator II" great), or else I haven't had enough movie fixes the past
few weeks. It isn't Waterworld, and the joke going around is that until the
Titanic, Cameron was "unsinkable." (Did they forget the underwater
ectoplasmics he did?) Still, looking like a movie I'll want to see, but not
at the 11:30 a.m. opening day show like Alien Ressurection....
SHEEEE'S BACKKKK! (Alien Resurrection)
This movie is great. A Ripley that is both more human and far, far less
human than ever before (she delivers the goods with good acting; perhaps
our only "thinking, acting" action hero). Brad Dourif in his quirkiest role
since Dune - and he really shines in his all to brief on screen moments
(best lines since Brent Spiner/Data in ID4 said "we don't get out much"). A
military commander who is no b.s., competent, and in a critical moment
proves undeniably that he doesn't have shit for brains after all. A black,
dreadlocked fast gun who really fills the part of the "gun" and doesn't
lapse into stereotype. A commander of a group of misfits (where Han Solo
would have ended up in a less kind, less gentle universe) who is mean
enough to be convincing and caring enough to be affecting. The ugliest,
meanest survivor of the group, with big facial scar, who pulls a Magnum PI
style smooch that is even funnier than the one it pays unintentional
"homage" to.
The universe is in the details. Brief hints of personalities and
divergences: one doctor asks another if they can sew Ripley back up, and
you don't know if it is out of compassion or a Frankenstein-ian curiosity.
A nurse/doctor attendant who, like a Greek chorus, acts like our conscience
when she can't bear to look at the face huggers attaching to their prey;
and acts as our terror when she realizes that things have gotten way, way
out of hand. An Alien who kills its prey with ironic finesse in a chilling
scene where death is by remote control instead of the Aliens' favored
method of one-to-one. The quirkiest sidekick-victim since Harvey Fierstein
in ID4, who after acting Woody Allen-ish, and caring, in a panicked run,
shows that when push comes to shove he can take his "hits" - even bullet
hits - with the best of them. And still beat the crap out of the bad guy.
What is my favorite scene? Well if you like hand-to-hand combat, this movie
has what I would call "ball to ball" contact. Just when you think, "over
the head, around the crowd, nothing but air" Ripley surprises us with a
move that is astonishing, predatory and - funny - at the same time. Great
for basketball fans! (But wear a cup.)
And when I left the movie theater, I felt so sad - for the Alien. Like all
little kids growing up in America, I realized when I first saw them that
the movies like King Kong and Godzilla, even in black and white on a small
screen tv and chopped for commercials, were statements of power for the
helpless (little kids in America back then _were_ pretty helpless in front
of teachers and police and IBM! not like today), the outsider being beaten
by faceless bureaucrats in white shirts and ties, a statement of standing
up and fighting back. Then Hollywood realized the same and eventually
turned all formerly terrible monsters into secret protectors, secret heros,
and all former "organization man" heroes into villains. Alien Resurrection
has by no means gone this far, but certainly the Aliens in the prior
episodes in this revitalized series were always just inhuman killing
machines with no moral entitlement to an "instinct for self preservation."
In this episode, though, there is no doubt that the humans are the true
aliens ("It was a '_human_' that placed that thing in your chest....")
while the last Alien's tortured cry - I won't give it away - at the end is
truely gut wrenching.
Ripley is as conflicted, angry and compassionate as she can possibly be -
but it never stands in the way of her action. She acts despite her caring
both for her human and for her non-human charges. The movie doesn't flinch
from the issue of her identity and human-ness when it shows Ripleys 1-7 -
she is No. 8 - if she is the most kick-ass Ripley in the series, very
predatory, she is also, finally, the most caring and motherly. The most
human of all the Ripley's after all, though it took mother love to make her
so.
That is what makes this episode great.
There weren't any throw-away characters. Human _or_ alien.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Jean-Pierre Jeunet
Writer: Joss Whedon
Starring: Sigourney Weaver, Winona Ryder, Ron Perlman, Dominique Pinon,
Michael Wincott, Dan Hedaya, J.E. Freeman,  Brad Dourif, Raymond Cruz,
Kim Flowers, Gary Dourdan, Leland Orser
I'm an avid fan of the "Alien" saga, so this review is obviously a tad
biased (at least I admitted it).  Of course, that doesn't mean that I'm
gonna be giving this a four-star review or something, because "Alien:
Resurrection," the fourth film in the cool-as-hell series is NOT an
absolutely amazing film, much like the first two were.  However, it's a
very good film which never fails to entertain, and consists of yet
another mutation in the style of the series.  In short, I had a good
time.
"Alien: Resurrection" leaves off 200 years after the last one, where our
heroine protagonist, Ellen Ripley (Sigourney Weaver), the science
fiction genre's answer to Job, had killed herself after discovering that
an alien was inside her body, waiting to pop out like it did to John
Hurt in the first one.  Of course, the last one wasn't very great or
anything (I liked it, though not as much as the first two), and more
importantly, it wasn't financially successful (a tawdry 55 million
bucks!).  So back we are, with Ripley back as a clone, which means we
get another little satirical look at cloning (not that that's a bad
thing, but it's becoming a cliche).
So she's cloned aboard an even more futuristic-looking ship called "The
Auriga" by some doctors (including the necessary bad government guy, Dr.
Wren, played by J.E. Freeman, as well as the little-seen Dr. Gediman,
played by none other than Brad Douriff), mainly because they have a
version of her with the alien still inside her.  Once you get past the
fact that you can't figure out where they got her blood (although I
think it might have been from the blood samples taken by Charles Dance
in the third one), the film's okay.
Also on board are a band of mercenary pirates, including Michael
Wincott, Ron Perlman, Kim Flowers, Raymond Cruz, Dominique Pinon (a
Jeunet sytable) and...Winona Ryder, who plays Analee Call, who turns out
to have a bit of a secret (I won't state it, but unless you've been
shacking up with Salinger for the past two years, you probably know all
about it - although it's nicely covered up).  There's a bit of a
non-sexual-yet-slightly-homoerotic relationship between her and Ripley,
but it's never really deepened enough.  Oh well.
Well, as you might have guessed, the alien and its spawn escape and run
around the ship.  And it pretty much does away with most of the people
on the ship (including some shocks - Dan Hedaya, for instance, who's
death is comical yet sad since, well, he's Dan Hedaya), and the
remaining people (about 7 or 8) are left to try and escape and stop the
aliens from doing any major harm since the ship is heading quickly
towards Earth.
Of course, the plot is all balderdash, and just an excuse for some good
old "Alien"-brand fun.  The real focus of the series seems to be on
style, not really substance (although there's always a bit of it, most
notably in "Aliens" with the relationship between Ripley and the little
girl).  What's interesting about the series is that each film is
stylistically different in its approach.  "Alien" is a claustrophobic
exercise in quiet frights.  "Aliens" is a wild, tense thriller.  "Alien
3" is a bleak, moody piece of semi-noir.  "Alien 4" is kind of like an
off-beat french film, filled with lots of humor, and cool scares.
Jean-Pierre Jeunet (without his usual directing partner, Marc Caro)
creates a ship filled with the kind of scares films like "Das Boot" has,
with echoes hinting at a possible threat.  The chills in the film are
really cool, especially with the music, which is sometimes turned down
completely for certain scenes (there's the most tense surgery scene
since "Face/Off" towards the beginning).  And not every chill turns into
a bloody mess or anything like that.  This all combined with some good
old humor makes this as interesting visually and stylistically as the
others.
There are even a couple scenes which just stick out afterwards as being
brilliantly executed.  One is the aforementioned surgery scene.  Another
one takes place between Call and Ripley, which is just awesome.  The
underwater chase scene and the ladder scene afterwards is one of the
most tense, thrilling, and jaw-dropping scenes in the entire saga (with
a small allusion to Jeunet's earlier film, "Delicatessen").  And the way
they do in the final alien is hysterically cool (with a lovely allusion
to "Goldfinger").
But the best scene in the entire film (I'm sure I'm not the first to
mention it) takes place when Ripley sees all the variations on her as
they cloned her (she has a an "8" tatooed on her arm).  It might be the
most emotionally stimulating scene in the entire saga.
The screenplay by Joss Whedon is not a great piece of work, as it never
really deapens a lot of the characters.  However, it does make us care
about most of them, so that when there's very little of them, and it
looks like one or more of them may become Alien Chow, we are pretty
scared.  And, yeah, there are some very funny lines (Ripley: "Who do I
have to fuck to get off this boat?!" Johner: "Well, I can get you off. 
But not this ship.")
The acting is good all around, with stand-out performances from Ron
Perlman as the male chauvenist pig Johner, and Leland Orser (the poor
bastad in "Se7en" who performed the "lust" sin) as an anxiety-ridden
wannabe Woody Allen who has an alien inside him.  Winona Ryder is good,
but not amazing like she usually is (although she meshes well with the
film).  Of course, and as usual, Sigourney Weaver steals the show. 
Playing a variation on the Ripley character (less emotional, and more
rude and bitter), she pulls it off while still being utterly lovable. 
She's not going to get an Oscar nomination like she did for "Aliens,"
but she's just awesome.
Overall, it's a thrilling, entertaining film which doesn't really amaze
like the first two, but is much more amazing than the third
installment.  The style is the best part of the film, which isn't really
a bad thing, but it being the best part takes away from a lot of the
depth the film occasionally tries to apply.  But it's entertaining as
hell, and it's definitely fit for the "Alien" series.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Steve Kong
Alien: Resurrection takes its roots from the second film in this 18 year
old film series. Resurrection is more of an action film than anything and
as an action film Resurrection works very well.
For those of you who don't want to know how Ripley comes back from the dead
-- those that don't remember, Ripley dove to her death in Alien 3 -- skip
this next paragraph and go to the next one. When I saw the trailers for
Alien: Resurrection I wondered how they would bring Ripley back from the
dead. But the well-written script by Joss Whedon finds a way to bring her
back that is, though not unique, so simple that it bypassed me. They cloned
Ripley with some blood samples.
To tell you how the aliens come back in this movie will spoil the movie,
but lets just say that the aliens do come back and the are better than
ever. French director Jean-Pierre Jeunet seems to have turned up the goo
level on the aliens though; the spit and the drool are just generally
gooey. Next to this though, Jeunet finds some interesting ways to show how
intelligent these creatures really are. An example to look for is how the
aliens escape.
Sigourney Weaver brings back Ripley, but this time Ripley is different.
Ripley has come back with an attitude and is going to take it out on the
aliens.  Sure, Ripley had an attitude in the last three films, but this
time, it's a huge attitude.  I liked Ripley, but I think Winona Rider's
Call is cooler.  Though Ryder looks so fragile, her Call shows that she can
take a few hits.
As for the other cast members when I first read who was going to be in the
movie I rolled my eyes and said to myself, "They're kidding right?"  But, I
was completely wrong.  The actor that I originally disagreed with most was
Dan Hedaya.  For me, Hedaya has always been a comedic actor, I wondered how
they would fit him into Resurrection.  I'm happy to say, I was all wrong.
Hedaya does well in Resurrection.  The other player that bothered me was
Michael Wincott, but he also does a great job in Resurrection.
Worth mentioning are actor Ron Perlman and the great score by John C.
Frizzell.  Perlman was a joy to watch and his character was pretty funny,
providing a lot of the comic relief in the film with sharp one-liners.
Frizzell's score, though not as good as Horner's score for Aliens, is
admirable.
And one scene that knocked me out of my seat was the underwater scene.
Please look at this scene, I loved it.  I loved how they handled the alien
in the water.  This is a great scene.
The only part that bothered me was the last 15 minutes or so of the film.
The film builds up well, but the ending is somewhat of a let down.  Don't
let this make you skip the movie.  This is a fun and exciting action film
set in the Alien universe.  See it for Weaver, Perlman and especially
Ryder.  Don't miss Alien Resurrection.
On a side note, I noticed that H.R. Giger again got no onscreen credit for
his Alien design.  And although he did not work on this film, the design is
his, and I think that he should have gotten credit for such a wonderful
design.  Please don't forget who created and designed the Alien, one of the
best sci-fi aliens around.  Cheers to H.R. Giger for such a wonderful design.

Author
Rob Perry
This fourth, and seemingly innocuous, installment in the "Alien" franchise
marks the return of Ellen Ripley, cloned by scientists apparently 200 years
after her quazi-religious death in ALIEN 3.  Why?  To revive the tiny alien
fetus living inside of her, with hopes of using its DNA to breed a new
batch of aliens.  However, the film, with all its clutching ambition
develops into just another in an endless variation on 1950's style
Horror/SF, dressed up with no place to go.  At least the first ALIEN knew
what it was and where it was headed.
But amidst the familiar rank claustrophobia that permeates the movie's
every corner there is a glimmer of an idea here, a possibility of delving
further into its inherent seductive terror:  By bringing it all back again,
mankind is essentially inviting back the devil.  It is the Frankenstein
myth reborn in the darkness of space, inspiring a range of possibilities: 
What reason would they have after such a long time to do this?  Have they
encountered the alien species in the interim?  Has humanity grown beyond
war and profit to encompass more high-reaching possibilities for alien
study?  In other more pleading words, has anything changed?
Apparently not, since the initial premise, like so much well-worn
machinery, is discarded - except for a few incongruent interludes - after
the first act.  Scientists, we learn, just like those "company" executives
in the previous films, are greedy and get what's coming to them.  As Ripley
states, once revived and told of their plans:  "They'll breed.  You'll
die."  If only Victor Frankenstein had had such sage advice he may never
have gone to Ingolstadt.
Given then that the film has no intention of furthering our knowledge of
this universe, we are left with the conventions of the universe itself
reinterpreted.  Certainly, the director, French stylist Jean-Pierre Jeunet,
is capable of this.  He was, after all, the manic visionary that gave us
the wonderfully bleak DELICATESSEN and the fantastical bizarre masterpiece
CITY OF LOST CHILDREN.  His strengths are essentially visceral, not
intellectual, and as the premise falls away to contrivance, we await his
ability to dazzle us with new visual stimulation.  Jeunet has the gift (one
shared perhaps by directors like Terry Gilliam or Tim Burton) to find
humour in the grotesque, pleasure in the sadistic nihilism of the world. 
And this is what we see emerging.  There is no doubt the "Alien" franchise
could use some of this; after Ridley Scott first turned out its lights,
James Cameron flexed its muscle, and David Fincher eroded its landscape,
what was there left to do but laugh at the whole sloppy mess?  But while
Jeunet is doing weird best, he just can't seem to think of a punch line. 
At first, you sense his pleasure in the material's visual possibilities; he
sees the entire situation, indeed the concept itself, all as a nightmarish
joke.  But he doesn't have much affection for the material to make the
horror comic.  Rather, he is left to dabble in moments, at his best when
concocting clever variations on what we know of the "Alien" universe: 
deploying acidic blood as a tool rather than a hazard; suspending test
subjects over a series of alien incubation pods, and never actually showing
the results.  
But consider, for instance, the potential in a scene where the lead
scientist Gediman (played by the always comically creepy Brad Dourif)
watches the movements of one of the many aliens he has bread in a sealed
chamber.  He and the creature mimic one another, as if reaching a cognitive
understanding; one is jailer, the other jailed, but there is a moment when
something more might be happening, an epiphany, some primal exchange of
intelligence.  The scene is both funny and frightening, partly because of
its execution, and partly because of its implications - disturbing in its
hilarity, the furthering relationship between human and alien.  But as the
scene progresses it becomes mechanically obvious that there's no such
intent behind it - it's there merely to scare.
A similar thing happens later in the picture.  Everything has invariably
gone to hell, and a mixed bag of space pirates (including a
uncharacteristically ineffectual Winona Ryder) follow Ripley through the
bowels of the space station to safety.  Conspicuously, the movie pauses for
a moment allowing the cloned Ripley to discover the seven previous attempts
at cloning her DNA.  The grotesque carnival of pickled mutants echoes the
imagery of CITY OF LOST CHILDREN - you're almost waiting for one of them to
open their eyes and say hello.  But the seen is, I assume, intended to be
serious, affecting, as Ripley shares familial agony with her aborted
sisters.  Regardless of its purpose, it is perhaps the only truly haunting
segment in the film, but like earlier scenes it promises much and delivers
nothing.  Perhaps if she'd laughed at it all, tearfully, painfully thrown
her arms in the air to her whole living purgatory, the scene might have
paid off.  Instead she destroys it in a belch of rifle-flame and the scene
closes with an impotent one-liner.  And again the whole scene is rendered
vacuous.
Weaver herself is part of the problem.  As Ripley, she seems to slither
through the film as if eager to shed any emotional skin that might be left
from the previous three pictures, enabling her to stand outside of it all,
making one venomous quip after another.  As a result, the few moments of
intimacy she allows herself - the most laughable involving a caressing
sequence between her and an alien queen - appear all the more uninvolved. 
To be sure, Weaver has a presence, but the emotional conviction she gave
the previous pictures underscores how little she seems to care about
running away from the bogeyman one more time; she seems tired.  It's
probably the best motivation to take, however, certainly the most genuine.
As the picture winds up to its second half, and the obligatory machinations
of the genre start doing the pumping, all this seems little more than an
abortive exercise.  Of the plot beyond this point there is little else to
say, except that it is retread of old material, less inventively concocted,
and self-consciously executed.  But what else can there be?  How many times
can characters slide under doors and crawl along air ducts before the whole
thing registers with little more effect than a video game?  In the end the
brief stabs at comic invention and true menace give way to the grotesque
veneer of the "alien" concept.  The climax of the film, centring on the
birth of a new alien personifies this notion.  The product of human/alien
breeding - thanks to Ripley and the greedy scientists - it assumes to be
the culmination of both, but possesses the qualities of neither.  Like some
poster-boy for "Phantasmagoria" magazine, it's simply grotesque.
Ridley Scott's original ALIEN was also gory, but suggestive, it played with
shadow and light as much as with pyrotechnics, latex, and goo.  It had a
Gothic beauty.  The designs by H.R. Giger were truly original -
symmetrical, mechanical, yet hauntingly, frighteningly organic, infused
with a horrifying sexual certainty.  ALIEN exploited this; seeing the
alien's ship for the first time you could sense there was a logic to it, an
almost invasive design.  Yet as each successive film in the series has
emerged, the design has grown increasingly sloppy.  ALIEN: RESURRECTION
takes this slovenly progression to its ultimate gooey apex; the human/alien
hybrid creature looks the antithesis of what Giger intended.  Or maybe
that's the punchline.

Author
David N. Butterworth
"Alien Resurrection" feels less like another episode in the popular Alien
series and more like a predictable, visceral walk down memory lane,
reminding us--with its almost casual approach to brainless humans being
gored by big nasty monsters--what made the first three films much more
memorable.
Fans of the series are strongly divided between two camps: whether Ridley
Scott's original was better than James Cameron's sequel (it's a debate that
seems senseless, given how different these two films are in terms of
style--Scott's played like a classic monster movie set in deep space;
Cameron's was a testosterone-laden, hardware-heavy shoot-em-up).  On the
less successful end of the scale, David Fincher's 1992 "Alien3" was
unanimously dismissed out of hand as the bleakest and weakest chapter, but
with "Alien Resurrection" there's finally new hope for Fincher's effort.
This time around we get the typical rag-tag band of heavily-armed space
derelicts who happen onboard a scientific research vessel.  Here they mess
with an equally rag-tag band of covert military operatives engaged in some
not-for-prime-time experimentation with--you guessed it--those drooling
skeletal creatures with the stainless steel teeth.  Head of the group is
General Perez, played in flamboyant fashion by Dan Hedaya, whose furry
shoulders are probably the scariest thing in the film.
Sigourney Weaver is back as Ripley, even though her character died in the
third Alien picture.  Watching Weaver in a bad Alien movie is always more
interesting than watching her in a good, non-Alien movie ("The Ice Storm,"
for example) so whenever she's on camera, there's hope.  But perhaps
because her character is a clone (like everything else in the film), Ripley
is lacking a vibrancy and passion the film badly needs.  We can't blame
Weaver, since the Ripley character has been genetically mutated, but her
new spiritual relationship with the aliens just doesn't drive "Alien
Resurrection" as effectively as her tough, human compassion did in the
earlier films.
Call, a space pirate with very much her own agenda, displays some of the
emotions missing from Ripley, but as played by a miscast Winona Ryder,
she's too wimpy and simpy to be of any real value.
The aliens are as slimy and single-mindedly menacing as usual but with no
audience empathy for the crew members, the buffet can't start fast enough.
"Alien Resurrection" is directed by the provocative Frenchman Jean-Pierre
Jeunet ("City of Lost Children," "Delicatessen") but you'd hardly know it.
The film has a very standard look, as if the production team used leftover
sets from "Event Horizon" (another disappointing science fiction thriller
that wastes a decent cast).  200 years on, we're still looking at the same
old grungy, mechanized interiors with lots of escaping steam; the only
notable technological advance appears to be breath recognition!  Jeunet
should have given us something a little more surreal or at least
imaginative.  Writer Joss Whedon's script is definitely lost in space.
Although "Alien3" wasn't the most satisfying end to the trilogy, "Alien
Resurrection" reminds us that sometimes the kindest thing you can do is let
the dead rest in peace.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Alien: Resurrection (1997)
Sigourney Weaver, Winona Ryder, Ron Perlman, Dominique Pinon, Michael 
Wincott, Dan Hedaya. Directed by Jean-Pierre Jeunet.
** and one half (out of ***** stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott
For more reviews, go to www.nuvo-online.com and click on "film."
Handed the reigns of the moribund "Alien" franchise, French director Jean-
Pierre Jeunet ("City Of Lost Children") faced the daunting task of 
breathing life into a horror series that virtually died in its last 
installment. The pallid "Alien 3" climaxed with Ellen Ripleys swan dive 
into an ocean of fire, a sacrifice to protect humanity from the alien 
growing within her own body. With the heroine fried and most fans of the 
series either angered or bored, whats left to do? Raise the dead, of 
course, and thats just what Jeunet and writer Joss Whedon have done, 
with some intriguing side trips along the way. 
"Alien: Resurrection" contains the requisite extended chase scenes, but 
thats the least interesting part of the movie. The appeal of the film 
lies in the fringes, as Jeunet employs grotesque visions and kinky sexual 
imagery to flirt with some intriguing notions, including what exactly 
constitutes the very nature of identity. While too cold and formulaic to 
fully satisfy, "Resurrection" has enough darkly rewarding moments to 
warrant a visit.
A little history for those who missed the first three films. The aliens 
are incredibly vicious predators with acid literally coursing through 
their veins. An alien grows by emerging from a pod and springing onto the 
face of an unwitting host, then shooting its seed down the gullet of the 
victim. After an incubation period, it bursts through the hosts chest 
and scurries off to finish the growth process. Rumor has it that 
telemarketers are bred the same way.
The film begins with the quasi-resurrection of Ellen Ripley (Sigourney 
Weaver), depicted in a series of stylish fade-ins. On a military 
spaceship 200 years after the last film, scientists clone Ripley in order 
to retrieve the alien queen from her body. Proving that government 
stupidity is timeless, the boys in charge plan to raise a herd of the 
hyper-violent creatures, taming and training them for some unexplained 
evil purpose. Following the surgical extraction of the queen, Ripley 8 
(the first seven clone attempts were nightmarish failures) is kept alive 
for curiosity value alone. A disdainful officer spares her life, while 
declaring "As far as Im concerned, Number 8 is just a meat by-product." 
Ripley 8 grows, and we learn that, due to the alien DNA used in the 
cloning process, she isnt entirely human. Thanks to the racial memory of 
the aliens, the clone retains the memories of the original Ripley, but 
her strange smile, reptilian movements and acidic blood make it clear 
that she is something very, very different.
Enter the Betty, a commercial freighter crewed by mercenaries. Theyve 
hijacked the cryogenically-frozen bodies of a group of miners, to sell 
them as hosts for the first batch of aliens. However, one of the 
mercenaries, junior mechanic Call (Winona Ryder,) has a decidedly 
different agenda.
In short order, all hell breaks loose as the mercenaries take over the 
ship and the aliens get loose, forcing the soldiers, Call and Ripley 8 
into an uneasy alliance.
"Resurrections" action sequences move along well enough, particularly an 
underwater chase scene, but the characters are too disposable to be 
engaging on an emotional level. The blue-collar crew of the Betty is an 
unpleasant lot, sketchy stereotypes mostly, and its hard to look at them 
as much more than Alien Chow.
Thankfully, Sigourney Weavers enigmatic Ripley 8 is a fascinating 
creation. She clearly remembers who she was, but what exactly is she now? 
Did Ripleys soul make the jump to this new body, or is Ripley 8 just a 
Xerox, an alien hybrid with stolen memories? Weaver and Jeunet work well 
together, examining the whole notion of individual identity through this 
unique creature. Weaver gets to deliver a number of deadpan one-liners as 
well, adding a welcome touch of humor while maintaining the cryptic 
nature of the character.
Throughout the film, Jeunet toys with the freaky sexuality that has 
always been an undercurrent of the series. A scientist holds his lips 
close to an aliens face, separated only by protective glass, in one of 
the more obvious moments of perverse sensuality. A shrink would have a 
field day with the whole notion of face-hugging alien breeders, and 
Jeunet knows the real horror story lies there.  Unfortunately, instead of 
pursuing that truly disturbing line, he returns to the tired chase format 
and, despite the inventive set pieces and rich Gothic-industrial art 
direction, weve seen this stuff too many times before. The horror of 
"Alien: Resurrection" doesnt come from the idea of monsters chasing us. 
It comes from the exploration of why we want them to. 

Author
James Sanford
ALIEN RESURRECTION
(Twentieth-Century Fox)
Directed by Jean-Pierre Jeunet
 Chances are good that many of the moviegoers who'll be stand in line for
"Alien Resurrection" this weekend weren't even born when the original
"Alien" debuted in the summer of 1979, introducing the world to Ripley, one
of the most dynamic --and determined-- heroines ever to appear in
science-fiction. Eighteen years later, she's still being played by Sigourney
Weaver, and the most intriguing aspect of "Resurrection" is the way Josh
Wheadon's screenplay allows Weaver the opportunity to overhaul Ripley
somewhat. After all, when we last saw her, she was plunging to her death to
avoid giving birth to a new Alien queen; by the time, "Resurrection" opens,
approximately 200 years later, scientists have successfully cloned Ripley
(after seven botched tries) from DNA samples.
 But their motives are hardly humanitarian. Indeed, when we first see
Ripley, she's in the process of undergoing a kind of Caesarian section,
having the unborn baby queen removed from her chest. From this specimen,
General Perez (Dan Hedaya) spectulates, science can learn about all facets
of the alien and possibly even find a way in which to tame them (!). "As far
as I'm concerned, Number Eight is a meat by-product," says Perez of Ripley,
who, in this new incarnation, is stronger and stranger than ever before. Her
senses are alarmingly acute, and though she looks human, her blood now
sizzles when it's spilled.
 After Perez's ship is visited by the crew of a freighter called The Betty,
"Alien Resurrection" takes a more familiar turn, as the alien specimens
escape and run amok, decimating the human population. Call (Winona Ryder),
the least off-putting of The Betty team, realizes that everyone needs
Ripley's help to survive, but at the same time, Call isn't sure this genetic
superwoman is really trustworthy: After all, who knows how human she really
is?
 Director Jean-Pierre Jeunet (best-known for the cult fave "The City of Lost
Children") manages a stylish mix of arresting imagery and largely non-stop
action. In one of the film's best shots, Jeunet's camera swoops into the
mouth of a screaming man and travels down his throat and into his chest to
reveal the gaping jaws of the alien fetus inside of him, and Internet
addicts will enjoy Jeunet's visualization of the future of computer
interfacing, which looks like a cross between religion and heroin use.
Jeunet and Wheadon also handle the story's quieter moments with equal
finesse: the eerie encounter between Ripley and her failed "forerunners" is
one of the finest, most chilling sequences in any of the "Alien" films.
 Weaver, perhaps inspired by the new kinks in Ripley's character, seems much
livelier and more vigorous than she did in the so-so "Alien 3," and there
are flashes of surprising humor in her exchanges with Call, who Ryder
underplays effectively. Michael Wincott and Ron Perlman contribute the
requisite grit as Call's uncouth co-workers and Brad Dourif's nutty take on
the chief scientist is quite amusing.
 Though "Alien Resurrection" can't entirely sidestep the feeling of deja vu
that hangs over most sequels, and ultimately wraps up with a climax that's
less exciting than most of the rest of the picture, it's a perfectly
respectable sequel, crafted with a certain degree of imagination and
produced with some of the finest special-effects money can buy. If it
doesn't have the novelty value of the original or the relentless suspense of
James Cameron's "Aliens" (1986), "Resurrection" is still a swift, rewarding
shocker in its own right. James Sanford

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Sigourney Weaver, Winona Ryder, Ron Perlman, Dominique Pinon, Dan
Hedaya, J. E. Freeman, Brad Dourif, Michael Wincott. Screenplay: Joss
Whedon. Director: Jean-Pierre Jeunet.
In this resurrection of alien carnage only a handful will survive the
acid test of death. If nightmares could be personified in a living
creature, then whisper the word Alien. Through the miraculous wonders of
cloning we are represented with a newly revived Queen Alien and a
healthier, more robust Ripley. These two mothers who are perpetually on
heat are armed to the teeth, and when it comes down to a dogfight they
really know how to bitch.
The role of Ripley fits Sigourney Weaver as tightly as Indiana Jones has
become synonymous with Harrison Ford. She was made to battle Aliens and
come out smirking. Without her the family gathering would never be the
same. Once again Weaver does her sex proud as she claims the position of
dominant female and takes charge of the situation when aliens start
misbehaving. Unfortunately, the new Queen Alien is not as feisty as
reputed and it will suffice to say that she does a very maternal thing
towards the end of the movie.
The big question on every ones mind is how does this movie compare to
its predecessors? It is not as suspenseful as ALIEN, not as thrilling as
ALIENS and not as outright awful as ALIEN3. Writer Joss Whedon has
decided to mix the popular elements of the previous three movies into
his script. We're back on a research vessel with only a handful of crew
still on board, regenerating the claustrophobic feeling created in
ALIEN. The crew are once again grossly outnumbered and hunted down by a
pack of bloodthirsty aliens as introduced by James Cameron in ALIENS. As
for the other characters beside Ripley and the Queen, they are an
assorted rat bag of space scum, not too dissimilar to the inmates of
ALIEN3. The real fun comes in guessing who is going to have their head
bitten of next. Let's just say if you're not mutilated, mutated, robotic
or crippled  you have a pretty good chance of becoming monster chomp.
In terms of the general feel of the movie. The suspense is greatest when
the aliens are still caged and waiting to escape. After this it becomes
standard running about, with only a few memorable scenes worth
mentioning. Let's just say the aliens are graceful swimmers and I would
like to have them on my water ballet squad. As for acrobatics, I like a
man who can shoot a gun hanging upside down. The ending is not as
spectacular as the 1986 showdown between Ripley and the Queen, not as
melodramatic as the 1992 Ripley throwing herself into an inferno, but it
carries a lot more suck than the 1979 version of vacuuming the beast
into to space. If you're wandering what I mean - think about eating
spaghetti through a straw.

Author
Brian Takeshita
If you talk to some people, they'll say Ridley Scott's ALIEN was the
best of the series, which went downhill after that.  Talk to others
and they'll tell you that James Cameron's thrill-ride masterpiece,
ALIENS, was where the series peaked.  If anyone tells you ALIEN 3 was
the best of the lot, call the nearest mental hospital and tell them
you've found their missing patient.  Fans of the first two films will
invariably join forces to gang up on that installment, directed by
music video director David Fincher.  Four years have gone by since
that fiasco, but the fans' memories have not disappeared, so while the
latest movie, ALIEN RESURRECTION, is approached with high hopes, it is
also approached with a certain wariness.
Ellen Ripley (Sigourney Weaver), the glue that held the series
together, was killed off in ALIEN 3, taking her own life just as one
of those fearsome creatures came bursting out of her chest.  As she
fell toward a fiery pit of molten metal, she seemed to caress the baby
alien as her own baby, embracing the enemy which had haunted her
through six hours of cinema over fourteen years.  A little corny?
Perhaps, but it seemed a fitting closure to a series which had
garnered a lot of fans and their spending cash.  Of course, an ALIEN
movie would not be the same without the venerable Ripley, so in this
new film, they resurrect her.  Hence the name.
In ALIEN RESURRECTION, Ripley is not really Ripley, but a clone
generated a couple hundred years later from the first Ripley's own
tissue that had been saved from the planet on which she died.  The
people cloning her are from a military-business conglomerate which
hopes to use the aliens for the purposes of research and general
killing as the ultimate weapon.  This clone seems to pick up right
where the late Ripley left off, complete with gestating alien, and the
first scenes of the movie show the medical personnel aboard a gigantic
research vessel removing the baby from Ripley's chest.  Following the
operation, the host seems to be doing fine, so hey, they decide to
keep her around, too.
The research vessel is commanded by General Perez (Dan Hedaya), who
has contracted a freelance freighter crew to deliver a number of
people hijacked while in cryo-stasis, whom Dr. Wren (J.E. Freeman)
plans to use as hosts to breed more aliens.  You see, the alien taken
out of Ripley's chest is a queen and by this time is already laying
eggs.
The freighter crew is your usual band of misfits.  There's Elgyn
(Michael Wincott), the tough leader of the group, Vriess (Dominique
Pinon), Elgyn's lover and first mate of the freighter, Johner (Ron
Pearlman), the all brawn, no brain type, Christie (Gary Dourdan), the
techno-wiz, and Hilliard (Kim Flowers), who doesn't seem to be part of
the crew for any other reason than he's in a wheelchair and therefore
adds a little color to the group.  Then there's Annalee Call (Winona
Ryder), another member of the group who's apparently just tagging
along for reasons which aren't really explained (until later, but
those motivations apparently weren't revealed to the crew before she
was taken on board).  These people react to their surroundings with
the predictable suspicion of authority, and of course there's the
compulsory scene where one of the visiting crew finds the supply room
and loots it.  There's really not much we haven't seen before, and you
can almost pick out the characters who are going to die within the
first hour of the film.
And die they do.  Pretty soon the baby aliens are full grown and find
a particularly ingenious way of escaping their confines.  Shortly
thereafter, they are up to their usual mischief, killing here,
snatching there, and overall looking really mean.  So of course it's
up to Ripley to save the survivors by leading them to their only means
of escape, the freighter on which our rag tag band arrived.  I think
it would have been cute for director Jean-Pierre Jeunet to have paid
an homage to STAR WARS and have Ripley say, ala Princess Leia, "You
came in that thing?  You're braver than I thought."  At least that
would have been unexpected.
ALIEN RESURRECTION contains a whole bunch of things you just knew were
going to happen, because you've seen it happen in the previous films.
>From these re-treads you can publish a doctrine on what not to do when
there are aliens on your spaceship:  1) Don't go looking into holes
made by the aliens.  They will probably grab you from their hiding
place just to the side of the hole.  2) If you find some goo on the
floor, don't spend time staring at it and going, "Ewww."  Instead, run
away fast.  There's an alien nearby.  3) Don't walk on floor gratings;
only walk on solid floors.  With gratings, an alien is probably
looking at you from below and will pull the gratings away and grab you
from underneath.  4) Always assume the alien is right behind you.  The
moment you think it's not there, it will come out of the darkness,
hiss at you, and bite your head.
Most of the performances turned in by the cast are pretty
two-dimensional, but it's not really the fault of the actors, given
what they had to work with.  Most of the characters are paper thin and
just fill up slots, with only Winona Ryder given the slightest chance
to exercise any real acting ability.  Even then, her character's
catharsis is decidedly forced, since the reason for her being on the
ship are justified only by a flimsy motivation.  Sigourney Weaver,
however, gets to play her character in a different way than in
previous movies.  First, Ripley's got all the experience from dealing
with the aliens in the past, and therefore she's more intuitive with
regard to the aliens' behavior.  Second, through the cloning process,
Ripley is actually part alien, and therefore can sense where the
aliens are and even when the queen is in pain.  While intriguing, this
limits the amount of fear she has of the aliens and therefore the
amount of tension we have as an audience.  Sure, we can watch as the
other characters get frightened by the aliens, but since they have no
depth, we don't really care if they're frightened or even if they live
or die.  
The aliens themselves are the best they have ever looked, and credit
must be given to the creature crew on this one.  There are
computer-generated aliens too, and they also look a lot better than in
ALIEN 3, where shots of the CGI alien were all too fake.  One
noticeable change from the previous films is that we see the aliens
very clearly in this movie, in rooms which are decently lit.  Although
this helps to show off the wonderful alien artistry, it also somewhat
defeats the suspense generated from knowing there is something out in
the murky darkness but not being quite able to see it.  As a result,
we become so familiar with their appearances that they aren't all that
scary when they subsequently show up throughout the film.
Altogether, ALIEN RESURRECTION shows that the franchise is running out
of plot ideas, and there are only so many times you can take the same
person running from the same aliens.  While a better film than ALIEN
3, ALIEN RESURRECTION doesn't have what it takes to give the series
the shot in the arm it needs, so if there is to be a fifth movie, it's
going to have to be something really special.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     ALIEN: RESURRECTION is a mess.  The fourth film in the series is
easily the worst film in the series.  No, it's not a total bomb-- Ms.
Weaver is immanently watchable, the art direction is a winner, there's
more humor to go around, and director Jean-Pierre Jeunet (THE CITY OF
LOST CHILDREN, DELICATESSEN) has a great eye for the grotesque.  If
nothing else, there's certainly more goo, glop, and gore than in the
first three films combined.  (The opening scene details, in queasy
close-up, the surgical removal of you know what from Ms.  Weaver's
cloned character's chest.)  But is it exciting, suspenseful, or even
scary?  No, not really.  More than anything else, there's just too much
going on.  The various chases and fire-fights are so poorly integrated
that even the best bits often cancel each other out.  To make matters
worse, the score (by John Frizzell) telegraphs each and every boo before
it happens.  The finale is the worst, with a hybrid creature as likely
to inspire giggles as gags.  (Okay, the presence of Winona Ryder is
pretty damn funny, too.)  And can someone please explain the final
scene?  Why is everyone so happy after witnessing such huge and presum-
ably devastating destruction?  Game over, man.

Author
Nick Amado
If you compared the basics of Aliens (the second installment of the series)
with Resurrection (the fourth) you would assume they were identical. Ellen
Ripley (Weaver) leads a group of gritty, mega-gun toting renegades through
the bowels of a ship, looking to destroy the queen alien, in an effort to
save themselves and mankind. Unfortunatley for the gang there is an evil guy
lurking about who's real intention is to save the alien species, even if it
means destroying the humans on board. I half expected Paul Reiser to pop out
and say, "Ripley, if they can clone you, then there's just a whole bunch of
"me's" out there." Eh. Not so much. Despite the core of similarities to
previous Alien films, Resurrection has enough slam-bang action, enough
surprises (and plenty of goo) that in my estimation, it is the best of the
sequels thus far.
What's different about Resurrection is that Ripley has had a complete
personality makeover. Her only similarity to the former Ripley is that she
looks astonishingly like Sigourney Weaver. The fourth installment takes place
approximately 200 years after she died in Alien 3. But those sneaky
scientists managed to find a strand of her DNA in some blood from the prison
compound and, combined with Alien DNA, create a new, more powerful and more
dynamic Ripley clone. One fascinating element about Resurrection is that
since Ripley (still the series' heroine) is part Alien, she has some
compassion for them. She has natural instincts that tell her where they are
lurking, ditching the computer tracers from all the earlier films. ("It's
right behind you man! Get out of there man!") There are some psychosexual
elements that I won't presume to ruin for you. Let's just say there's a lot
of goo involved. Pretty funky stuff.
Another thing that Alien Resurrection offers that the first three hardly
attempted were major digital effects, which make up most of the Aliens you
see in this film. Here's a tip; whenever you see an Alien in a close-up, it
is a slime-splashed animatronic, its really there. If you see an Alien
running or swimming or climbing, it's digital. I tell you this because you
may not be able to tell, they are done astonishinly well. 
For true Alien fans, Resurrection re-hashes some of the old tricks (not
everyone is what you think they are). There is a classic flamethrower which
gets quite a bit of use in one scene. Acid blood plays a big part in this one
too. But not everything is old hat. There are a few new Alien surprises in
this one, which, if you can get past the Grand Canyon sized plot holes, are
pretty creepy and cool.
This is indeed the most violent, gory and gooey Alien film to date. (No, it
ain't Flubber.) But Jeunet manages to make the grotesque somehow fitting and
almost appealing in this fourth installment. Very seldom did I get the
feeling that there was a disembowelment for no reason.  Everything seems to
have its place here. It kept me on the edge of my seat, it made me laugh
(appropriately, of course) and it made me glad that this was such a strong
rebound from the last sequel. What's more, who knows how long they can
continue this series now? After Alien 3, we were pretty dang sure it was
over. But ever since they cloned those sheeps in England, these Hollywood
people have a whole new arena to play with.
3 out of 4 stars
Copyright (C) 1997 Nick Amado

Author
Gerthein Boersma
NOTE: This review contains information that some may consider to be
spoilerish, and those who are yet to see this film and want to know as
little about it as possible before doing so are advised not to read any
further.
--------------------------------
Alien Resurrection (aka Alien 4)
--------------------------------
Starring Sigourney Weaver, Winona Ryder
Directed by Jean-Pierre Jeunet
In resurrecting the character of Ellen Ripley (Sigorney Weaver), lead
character of the Alien-series, the writers of Alien Resurrection fully
intend to have their cake and eat it. Presumably thinking that, since
audiences will have to suspend their disbelief anyway to allow them to
bring back the deceased heroine, they should also be able to swallow that
the Ripley clone is, for all plot-purposes, in the same state as she was in
before she died: not only still pregnant with an alien queen but also, with
help of the shared hive-mind of the alien DNA that she carries inside her
she also has most of her pre-death memories (s-t-r-e-t-c-h) .
Scietists of an organization that is in actuality The Company from the
previous installments in all but name (to make it believable that the film
takes place 200 years after the third episode, you'll understand the
writers at least had to change a few tags) have succeeded, on board of
their huge space-lab (that despite its enormous size employs only 49
people) not only in creating a clone of Ripley, but more importantly, in
getting ahold of that alien queen that has eluded their equally evil
predecessors for so many decades. Living, human cryo-stored host bodies are
smuggled in, unscrupulously impregnated by the "face hugging" aliens that
emerge from the queen's eggs, and soon enough, a dozen of fully-grown
creatures are ready for action. Needless to say, the monsters escape their
cages, and once again Ripley, this time accompanied by the motley crew of
smugglers that unsuspectingly delivered the host bodies to the scientists,
can clean up the mess.
The first Alien film was an undisputed classic, the second a spectacular
and tremendously enjoyable film, one of the few sequels that approach the
original's quality, even surpassing it in some areas. So after the bleak,
empty failure that was the third installment, 20th Century Fox had a lot
riding on Alien Resurrection: it  had to work, or the once mighty franchise
was as good as dead. Fortunatly, the filmmakers, headed up by director
Jean-Pierre Jeunet (City of the Lost Children) made this important
installment with a keen eye for what went wrong in the third one. And to
give credit where credit's due, they do manage to fix most of the problems
that plaqued its predecessor. Unfortunatly, they forget to do much else.
Perhaps Alien3's most destructive failure was that its human characters
were so incredibly dull and uninteresting that no-one could be bothered to
tell them apart, let alone care whether or not they lived or died. In Alien
4, this problem is corrected, but unfortunatly it is done with so much zeal
that the heroes of Alien Resurrection are the other end of a very large
scale: every single character now has a gimmick, a trick, a neat twist, and
as such they seem too "assembled"; more like the pixellated champions of a
computer game like Street Fighter II than the champions of an installment
of a classic movie-series. Granted, they may have bags of
instant-character, but they are seriously shallow as well: the robotic
mechanic Call (an adequate Winona Ryder), for example, can't hold a candle
to female characters from Alien and Aliens in terms of depth and ability to
hold audience interest. Nevertheless, characterization remains undeniably
an improvement over Alien3. Certainly, Ripley's character remains
interesting; Alien DNA now mixed with her own, she has animal instincts and
even more of an attitude than usual. The lead scientist (a good turn by
genre-actor Brad Dourif) says it best when he refers to her as "something
of a predator" and Weaver certainly plays her 'new' role adequately. 
But rather than focusing on what went wrong in part 3 and fixing that, it
would have been nice if the filmmakers would have looked at what went right
in parts 1 and 2 and had expanded on that. The first two films were filled
with original, exciting action-and suspense sequences. Alien Resurrection
has only one that's comparable to the best of those: a beautiful
underwater-chase and subsequent sweaty-palmed ladder-encounter. And even
that scene has a disappointing climax, with one of the Street Fighters
falling a few feet down into the water but, inexplicably, never
resurfacing. Oh, and in the meantime, Ripley is also briefly attacked by an
impregnating "face hugger" alien -- possibly a nice lead-in for episode
number five.
Other scenes that, while not classic, are not at all bad include a short
sequence in which the cryo-stored human hosts are impregnated under
authorization of the very evil scientists, the evacuation of the station
when the alien menace first breaks loose, and a sequence near the end in
which the (otherwise decidedly lacklustre) villain scientist is killed by
an impregnated surviving host that's about to "chest-burst". Other than
these, the film seriously lacks in the all-important department of great
action: it has a few other contrived sequences but nothing particularly
memorable. The aliens themselves aren't particularly threatening,
strenuously holding back whenever the script needs them to, and since it
needs them to so very often, they loose almost all of their punch -- for a
lesson in How To, Jeunet could have looked not only to the originals, but
also to Steven Spielberg's Jurassic Park, in which the velociraptors were
consistantly threatening, and the film therefore consistently suspenseful
(how embarrasing that an Alien film would be outclassed by a PG-rated
Spielberg outing in terms of sheer horror). And I won't give away the
climax of Alien 4, not merely because I don't want to spoil it for those
who are yet to see the film, but rather because it's so ridiculous in every
fashion that it's just not worth talking about.
There *are* some interesting scenes in Alien 4, but they are mostly the
non-exciting ones. The scenes showing  learning process of both the aliens
and Ripley (yes, she *has* forgotten a few trivial things that she needs to
re-learn -- like language) are well done, as is an intriguing (albeit
somewhat oddly inserted) encounter between Ripley and her clone 'sisters':
apparently, the new Ripley was the eighth attempt at a clone, and the ones
among the first seven failures that we get to see are decidedly
Geiger-esque (despite him having little to do with their design) and look
horrifyingly great (production design is high overall: the huge lab-ship is
impressive, the sleek smuggler's ship has a lovely japanimation-look).
Another scene, in which Ripley shows that she can now play a mean game of
basketball, goes a long way in establishing not only her 'new' character,
but also that of her fellow street fighters. All these scenes can't
conceal, though, that the plot is incredibly thin, despite attempts at a a
'different', more artistic Alien film, with 'kinky' moments and a
ham-handed underlying mommy-and-child theme. 
All in all, it sounds pretty terrible, doesn't it? Then let's sum up the
strengths again: nice new characters which are well acted (Ron Perlman's
tough guy Johner being my personal favorite, with Micheal Wincott -- as
smuggler leader Eldyn -- also managing to impress in his short time on
screen), some beautiful design (obviously, a lot of money was spent here),
and a handful of pretty good scenes. Other than that, though, Alien 4 is an
enjoyable but decidedly unspectacular and very shallow alien-battle romp,
scarcely better than the far less pretensious (if more clichd) Alien
rip-off  'The Relic' of yesteryear.  As such, it's much more entertaining
than the third one, and certainly worth seeing for the starving fans of the
sci-fi horror genre, but it is ultimately nothing more than a B-movie in
fancy big budget clothing, and as such does the fans of the series few
favors. 
Ripley may have her full memory back, she's nevertheless appearing in a
very forgetable film -- a film that's not bad in its own right, but in not
exceeding mediocrity still fails to bring the series back on track. Yes,
Fox can rest assured that Alien Resurrection doesn't immediatly kill the
weakened franchise like another bad Alien film would have, but surely that
franchise must now be considered to be living on borrowed time. One more
outing like this and it's dead beyond resurrection.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Jean-Pierre Jeunet
Cast: Sigourney Weaver, Winona Ryder, Ron Perlman, Dominique Pinon,
Michael Wincott, Dan Hedaya, J.E. Freeman, Brad Dourif, Raymond Cruz,
Kim Flowers, Gary Dourdan, Leland Orser
Rated R: Strong graphic violence, language
by Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
    This is rumor control, here are the facts: Alien Resurrection is the
crowning achievement of the Alien saga.
    I am, of course, a fan of this series. And those of you not familiar
with my writing might think that I'm just one of those guys who loves
every film like this. I don't. None of them are this good. I have been
an Alien fan since I could think, and Alien Resurrection is everything I
could have hoped for, wished for, and wanted in a sequel to my favorite
films of all time. I'm biased, yes, but think of that for a moment--with
films of such high stature to which this film had to measure up, my
expectations were higher than any expectations than I've ever had of
anything, ever. Alien Resurrection met them.
    Sigourney Weaver returns, but this time she's not exactly the same
person: 200 years have passed since the events of Alien 3 took place.
Using a blood sample found on Fiorina 161 (the location of the third
film), rogue military scientists clone Lt. Ellen Ripley. Because she was
infected with the queen alien in the third film, her blood is now part
Alien--and so is she. The Ripley specimen they grow is in the same state
as she was just before she died--hosting the queen Alien embryo. The
scientists remove the creature and sew Ripley up.
    A group of space smugglers then show up with highly-secretive cargo,
for which the scientists pay a lot of money. The band is an interesting
group of characters (uniformly well-acted by the cast). My favorites
were the hot-head Johner (Ron Perlman in a strong performance), the
paraplegic technician Vreiss (Dominique Pinon, who is regrettably
underused), and the hard-edged killer of the group, Christie (Gary
Dourdan, in what will hopefully lead to more performances). I found
these characters every bit as interesting and fleshed-out as the
characters from the previous films. They're real characters that we care
about--well-written and human. The two main doctors are great, as well,
with a searing, evil performance from J.E. Freeman as Dr. Wren, and a
wacky bang-up job done by Brad Dourif as Dr. Gediman.
    Their cargo is a group of cryotubes containing living people, ripe
for Alien breeding--the scientists, of course, want to make more. And,
naturally, things don't go as planned--the Aliens escape.
    No, this is not a remake of the first two films. I've heard that
already. It is not. That is why it is so very good. Writer Joss Wheldon
knew what he was doing--he took elements from the first films and
modified them, toyed with them, and made them new. Director Jean-Pierre
Jeunet and cinematographer Darius Khondji then turned these elements
into a package so intense, so visceral, so emotionally and physically
draining, that I was and still am beside myself with joy for their
success. It does require more suspension of disbelief than the other
films, but the more I think about it, the more it makes sense (really).
    Jeunet's direction is splendid, and completely appropriate to take
the series in a new direction. Much like his work on his previous
(brilliant) films Delicatessen and The City of Lost Children, he uses a
lot of close-ups of faces making strange, almost comical, expressions.
Much of the film is humorous in that subtle, French way. There is a
great deal of intricate camerawork that goes into each scene, bringing
the film to life in a unique way that was not done by either James
Cameron or Ridley Scott (though it was touched upon by David Fincher).
Jeunet's intense, very European attack on the film makes it almost look
like a high-budget art-house film (an oxymoron?). What works with this
is Khondji's cinematography, who did similar miracles in Fincher's
Seven. This is a dark film, with breathtaking set pieces and locations,
but it's not dreary and depressing like it could have easily been: the
film has a kind of luminous quality, an obvious lively significance that
keeps it from being "just another sequel."
    As a thriller/action piece, the film is more than adequate. The film
does not base its suspense on scenes in which characters walk quietly
down hallways, looking around, hoping not to run into an Alien, but
having that happen anyway. Pierre and Wheldon both knew that this
approach has truly been done to death. No, now we have precarious and
intense underwater sequences (truly one of the most well-made and
suspenseful moments I've ever witnessed on the screen). We have
completely original moments of Alien self-sacrifice for the good of the
species. The Aliens are more intelligent than they have been in the
past. The film does not, by any means, bank on our fear of what the
creature looks like--we know what it looks like. It's no secret. They
don't just jump out of nowhere for cheap thrills. They're active and
intelligent, and that is more frightening than what they look like. The
Aliens have as much screen time as the humans in this film, and that is
the way it should be. The film goes beyond all three of its predecessors
in examining the Aliens as a hostile species.
    What I was really afraid of is that the film wouldn't delve into the
human aspect of the series, namely Ripley. I had nothing to fear. This
film is about Ripley, and even though the movie-making surrounding the
themes is close to perfect, the themes themselves resonate and truly
have a more potent meaning than anything depicted or explained in the
other films of the series. It has taken the series to a new, almost
unfathomable level--Ripley is now what she hates more than anything.
Even more ironic is her attitude towards the creatures, as if the death
and destruction around her is funny. Weaver is at her all-time best in
this film, a pillar of strength despite all that she has gone through.
In the climactic scenes, a new type of Alien is born, and this is
shocking on both a visual and mental level. The images of this film have
stuck in my mind, and the meaning they carry is just as strong. The
connection between Ripley and the Alien is so fully explored and probed
that it satisfies everything I've ever wanted to know about the species
and Ripley herself.
    So what is this "meaning" to which I keep referring? I'm sure you're
dying to know. Is it that overdone statement, "Cloning is bad!"?
Somewhat. There is certainly a great deal of negative energy guided
towards the scientific aspects of the film. But this film really has the
most significance in its own context: it has expanded beyond the limits
by which the series was originally bound. Certainly there is a very
definitive statement that can be pasted onto what we're doing in
present-day scientific research (though I won't elaborate in the
interest of surprise). One extremely powerful scene in the film has
Ripley meeting one of her defective siblings--when you see that moment,
you'll understand what is behind this movie.
    If you want to see Alien Resurrection, and you plan on reading the
reviews, I suggest you be certain that they're fans of the series
writing them. I don't mean this to sound elitist, but in a way it is:
this morning I read Roger Ebert's review of the film, and only one thing
was clear from it--he had no interest in seeing it in the first place.
It is not fair to rate or review a film from this standpoint. I detested
every word of Ebert's review--not because he didn't like the film, but
because of his lack of explanation, and the obvious fact that he really
didn't think about the film at all as he watched it. There is so much
here as far as human themes go, and the fact that he denounced the film
because it was "just an Alien sequel" is upsetting. The most irritating
statement he makes is a comparison between this and The Lost World. He
said, "that film opened five months ago. Are you still thinking about
it?" and his implication is obviously that no one will think about Alien
Resurrection past the film's end. To him, this is artless, mindless,
money-making slop. I'm just sorry that he missed the point so entirely
that he couldn't even gather enjoyment from the sheer skill with which
it was made.
    In any event, Alien Resurrection has a lot of action, and a lot of
humor, and a lot of very strange material that was, until now, alien to
the Alien series. The link between Ripley and the Aliens is truly
profound, and ultimately very moving. This film will not disappoint if
one just thinks about what it is saying for a moment--there is something
here so much deeper than the thrilling gore and action on the outside
(which, incidentally, is strikingly entertaining). I waited in
anticipation for Alien Resurrection for one and a half years, and I love
every bit of it, not just because of what I described, but because of
what it is on a more obvious level: a perfect sequel to the greatest
saga of all time.

Author
Tom Hartman

It seems not a lot has changed in a hundred years...at least not in the
world of the ALIEN sequels. Somehow, Sigourney Weaver always in ends up in
a steam filled corridor, on a ship with dripping chains that swing
suspended from unseen heights for unknown reasons. The flamethrowers even
look the same, for heavens sake.
What has changed, are the plotlines, which went from sleeper Hollywood
hero film, to MUCH LARGER, CLASSIC HOLLYWOOD HERO FILM, to the last
installments anomalya dark, brooding tale that started things off by
telling us that Ripleys heroic efforts at the end of part two were in
vain, then shaved her head. It got worse from there.
This outing proves to be more interesting. The technical aspectssave for
a few very hokey computer shots (beware the dreaded rolling hand
grenade!), are very good. Cinematography is sharp while keeping everything
low key, sound is excellent and the score odd, but workable. The film
panders to no one, starting things off with only the most brief sketch of
exposition, then plunging headlong into its sinister plot. The downside
is that the film is really for ALIEN fans...the whole thing comes off as
one large in joke. This could not be said of the brilliant ALIENS,
which stands on its own as a masterpiece of suspense.  But ALIENS was a
big, huge, commercial masterpiece as well. It seems that the series last
two directors have been determined not to take that proven route, and to
search out a more low-key, oblique approach that tries hard to
achieve...dare I say...a more artistic approach. Unfortunately, these
directors seem to feel the best way to achieve this is to start off things
with a cast that looks more like a death row lineup, than a group of
characters the audience might actually care about.
The cast, though a raunchy lot, is very good. Again though, the problem
with them is that they are all such a seedy bunch that one doesnt much
care who among them gets the ol ALIEN plunger greeting. This differs from
the first two films where each crew member had its share of fans pulling
for him or her. There are no Game over man, characters in this one.
Sigourney Weaver is a bit more subdued in this film...not the strong yet
still vulnerable heroine that we want to root for (EARTH TO THE
SCREENWRITERS...COME IN...), but she still makes a riveting screen
presence, the most watchable female star in decades. Nope...in this one,
we dont worry about Ripley at all, she can handle herself. Boy, can she
handle herself.
I must admit I was not a fan of the films premise...that Ripley is part
alien, part human. It belies the basic attraction she has for all of
us...she *is* us, albeit a better version of us than most of us would be
in her situations...and like all heroes from Clint Eastwood to, well,
Ripley...she doesnt need the added attributes of an ALIEN to make her
strong or interesting. This Brundlefly approach to her character results
in a few silly scenes depicting her abnormal strength, some of which are
mildly amusing...but also results in some other less effective scenes as
in one where she puts her ear to the floor and says Its the Queen...and
shes hurt.... The ALIEN series deserves better than this kind of hokum.
There are many action scenes, the most spectacular of which involves the
entire crew swimming underwater and holding their breaths for what seems
like an eternity while trying to reach safety on the other side of the
ship. There is a fair amount of suspense in this sequence, some great
editing, and some very impressive scoring.
Unfortunately, the pivotal turning point of the film is one of those
sequences that doom a film if enough people find it incredulous. It came
off a little bit like bad King Kong to me, but I managed to stick with it.
Worse, it is not strong enough to bring the film to its close with the
same kind of get me off this rollercoaster! sense of relief elicited in
the first two films. The ending seems flat in comparison to either of the
first two films.
With a little imagination, one senses in the final scenes that another
sequel might be in order, but if so I hope they write out this whole
Ripley as ALIEN/MOM thing. Clone her again, and do it right guys. There
are enough creeps in the universe as it is---we need a HERO, not a 50/50
BAR.
Three and a half out of Five Stars, if you must have a rating;)

Author
Jamie Peck
20th Century Fox / 1:48 / 1997 / R (language, gore, semi-nudity, creepy images)
Cast: Sigourney Weaver; Winona Ryder; Ron Rerlman; Dominique Pinon; Gary Dourdan; 
Michael Wincott; Leland Orser; Kim Flowers; Dan Hedaya; J.E. Freeman; Brad 
Dourif; Raymond Cruz 
Director: Jean-Pierre Jeunet 
Screenplay: Joss Whedon 
There's nothing more satisfying than a film series that keeps each installment 
fresh and unique, and the movies in the "Alien" franchise are a great example of 
the innovation required in order to maintain interest. Ridley Scott's 1979 
"Alien" was an ominously chilling homage/remake of old-time creature features 
that set the stage for countless copycats and arguably redefined the contemporary 
monster movie. In 1986, James Cameron's crowd-pleaser sequel "Aliens" hit 
screens, and is still considered a classic combination of action and 
science-fiction sensibilities today. Five years ago, David Fincher's "Alien3" met 
with troubling box office performance due to a downbeat tone and depressing 
send-off, but love it or hate it, it's definitely a strong exercise in grim 
atmosphere. Now, there's "Alien Resurrection," which I'm pleased to say is 
*spectacular.* You'll have to excuse the gushing (I'm an enormous fan of the 
series and must consider this film as *the* one movie of 97 I've been looking 
forward to the most -- everyone else can subtract a half-star or so from my 
rating), but "Alien Resurrection" is an exhilarating experience, easily one of 
the most exciting motion pictures of the year. 
When we last left Lieutenant Ellen Ripley (Sigourney Weaver) in "Alien3," she had 
taken her own life in order to prevent the alien queen growing inside her from 
falling into the hands of a selfish, aloof bio-weapons division that wanted to 
create and tame a beastly army of their own. "Alien Resurrection" picks up about 
200 years later. On the space station Auriga, similar-minded scientists have used 
blood samples (taken soon before her death) to clone a Ripley with extremely 
discouraging results on seven separate occasions. But it appears the eighth 
time's the charm: the operation is a success, the queen is removed and Ripley, 
scarred but still beautiful, is cast aside while the project's supervisors can 
figure out how they're going to rid of her. 
Everything seems to be running like clockwork until the small space pirate crew 
of the Betty docks on the Auriga. Their mysterious cargo -- about a dozen live 
bodies in states of suspended animation -- is quickly used to breed a new brood 
of the otherworldly monsters, which, of course, end up escaping. As the bloodbath 
begins, Ripley reveals to Betty shipmate Analee Call (Winona Ryder), a 
seemingly-passive young grunt who may or may not have questionable motives for 
being on the Auriga, that things are not what they seem -- the cloning process 
has resulted in a DNA exchange between human and creature. As a result, Ripley is 
given alien intuition and a few other assorted bonus surprises. 
Because alien movies are such an overworked sci-fi genre, they're also one of the 
most tired. In the past two years alone, we've had entries that range from 
silly-but-enjoyable ("Starship Troopers") to plainly mediocre ("Event Horizon") 
to downright awful (yes, "Independence Day"). Most, if not all, of these films 
are completely shallow when it comes to anything other than blood, guts and the 
requisite jump scene -- there's little intrigue outside of wondering how much the 
special effects cost. Leave it up to "Alien Resurrection" to throw a lot of 
emotion and character into the mix. Thankfully, it's about more than monsters on 
a kill-quest. 
That's not to say that there's a lack of chest-bursting, face-hugging or the use 
of people as in-between meal snacks -- enthusiasts of such violence will find 
much about "Alien Resurrection" to relish, particularly some icky business I 
heard an Internet rumor panel refer to as the "human toothpaste scene" and one 
bit where a general realizes he's a goner by examining a piece of his own head. 
But aside from the gore, there are actual ideas about biological-tampering, 
genetics and loyalty that aren't just confined to a setup or back-story. In one 
particularly thought-provoking sequence, Ripley meets the seven mutated clones 
she very well could have been. The way this quasi-family reunion plays out is 
eerie, stunning and even moving. 
"Alien Resurrection" draws much of its suspense from where Ripley's final 
allegiance will lie -- which of the two species will she end up devoting herself 
to? Weaver obviously relishes the new-fangled spin on her best role ever. Her 
tricky, sly acting is done with the deliciously devious twist that Ripley is a 
savior no longer -- she's actually quite a nasty predator. Weaver's choreography, 
costuming and makeup even add to her neo-alien look. Ryder sports a surprisingly 
strong action presence, proving that she can conquer pretty much any type of 
film. Call makes a great foil for Ripley; their eventually-warm relationship is 
reminiscent of Ripley's bond with the little girl she saved in "Aliens." Other 
cast members register even if their sole purpose is to act as a food source. "The 
Crow"'s Michael Wincott is noteworthy as a semi-good guy (for once) but exits the 
film far too early. Leland Orser is "Resurrection"'s likely scene-stealer, 
playing a jittery traveler who's reluctantly carrying an alien in his own chest. 
Even the aliens themselves are given more character this time around. 
Behind-the-scenes credits are stellar. Director Jean-Pierre Jeunet ("The City of 
Lost Children") frames each and every shot as a visual showstopper, particularly 
a dizzying underwater chase that culminates in a tense vertical climb. 
Screenwriter Joss Whedon gives "Alien Resurrection" the same clever humor that 
crowded his script for "Toy Story." Herve Schneid's editing is taut, John 
Frizzell's original score is eclectic. All of the prowess both on- and off-screen 
carries "Alien Resurrection" to a supremely rousing climax, the aftermath of 
which ever-so-slightly hints at an "Alien 5." And I, for one, am already in line. 
 1997 Jamie Peck 
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
Thomas Skogestad
Directed by: Jean-Pierre Jeunet
Starring: Sigourney Weaver, Winona Ryder, Dominique Peron, Dan Hedaya
Written by: Joss Whedon
(Re)viewed at Soria Moria 1, as part of Oslo internasjonale
filmfestival (http://wit.no/filmfestival) Friday, November 21 1997.
This is the fourth entry in the Alien saga. I've never really liked
Alien, but got a gigantic kick out of Aliens. Alien is perhaps
underrated but I did not like all the tunnell running. And I didn't
particularly like the cop out at the beginning.
The premise for Alien Resurrection (not the lack of colon (:)-, there
is none on screen) is intriguing. Some blood from Ripley has been
recovered and is used to breed a new mother alien. This I think is
fascinating, but handled rather shortly in the film, though there is a
rather explicit hint at previous problems. I'd like tosee more of
this. But the purpose of the cloning is just brushed over and I get a
feeling that this isn't really interesting for the movie. The cloning
only seems to threre to serve as a setup for a remake of the earlier
films.  I.e. there is a lot of attacks and fights and people being
killed. There is a scene that is reminiscent of the death scene in
Alien, and perhaps a character is a homage to both Alien and another
Ridley Scott film (director of Alien) - Blade Runner (which I also
dislike).
Of course the alien breaks loose, and get this - she is not
alone. People have been brought on board to act as incubators for more
aliens. All the aliens on the loose of course leads to a lot of people
trying to escape. Things go awry and the spaceship the movie is set on
reverts to emergency mode and is headed for a place we don't want the
ship to go. This is perhaps meant to be a tense situation, but I never
felt any kind of grip. We all know how things will end, don't we?
There are however several good action scenes, including one under
water. The movie is directed by Jean-Pierre Jeunet who did the
visually wonderful Delicatessen and The City of Lost Children. I
suppose some of his inventivness can be seen on screen, such as (bad)
breath used to identify people. But really - the film doesn't go any
further compared to those two movies. It is just technically very well
done. The cinematography is by Darius Khondji, best known for Se7en
(he also did Delicatessen and City). And just like in Se7en there is
some gruesome violence, but most of it is just hinted at and if you
blink you might miss it.
The movie about 1 hour 50 minutes. This surprisingly short. I felt
that when the movie ended things were getting really interesting. But
perhaps Alien 5 will pick up here... (And there are no crazy credits
from what I could see.)

Author
Kristian Lin
Warning: This review gives out crucial plot information.  Do not read
further if you wish to be surprised.
I ha't.  It is engendered.  Hell and night
Must bring this monstrous birth to the world's light.
I think ALIEN: RESURRECTION might have been more easily understood (if
not necessarily better liked) if more moviegoers were familiar with the
filmography of director Jean-Pierre Jeunet.  Jeunet remains a cult
figure due to his surrealistic, nightmarish, darkly funny French films
such as DELICATESSEN and THE CITY OF LOST CHILDREN.  For its own
reasons, 20th Century Fox tapped him for the fourth film in the ALIEN
franchise.  The result is a mixed bag that's bound to turn off some 
Jeunet fans and action-movie nuts, but I find it fascinating.
The film begins when Lt. Ellen Ripley (Sigourney Weaver), or at least a
facsimile of her, wakes up in a laboratory.  She's part of extralegal
weapons research conducted by the U.S. military, which has cloned her
200 years after her death and cross-bred her with the aliens that in an
attempt to create a new weapon.  Alas, the aliens get loose and eat the
army people, and Ripley must lead a team of smugglers that had been
helping the project to safety.
What we should understand about Jeunet is that, like Terry Gilliam, he's
a futuristic visionary poet rather than a nuts-and-bolts action-film
director, although ALIEN: RESURRECTION works well enough on that level. 
For better and worse, Jeunet is more interested in throwing weird,
psychedelic visuals up on the screen than he is in forming tightly
constructed narratives.  This isn't to say that his movies are plotless, 
but rather that they obey their own logic the way nightmares do.  That's
why the spaceship's cooling tanks open up directly on to the kitchen -
the water from the tanks floods the kitchen and creates a dreamy but 
terrifying De Palma-esque underwater chase.  So who cares if it's
architecturally implausible?  Jeunet's visions also have their own
poker-faced sense of play, like the cube of whiskey or the death of Gen.
Perez (Dan Hedaya), which references the villain's death in
DELICATESSEN.
Screenwriter Joss Whedon shares Jeunet's taste for gallows humor, but
that's about it.  With this film, TOY STORY, his uncredited work on
SPEED, and the movie and TV versions of BUFFY THE VAMPIRE SLAYER, Joss
Whedon is now one of Hollywood's top screenwriters.  Of course, we said
that about another promising Hollywood black comedy writer, Daniel
Waters (HEATHERS, BATMAN RETURNS), and he's disappeared.  Whedon and
Jeunet are a strange pair, and it's too bad that the collaboration
doesn't find either of them at their very best.  Jeunet resorts to a few
cheap tricks like the old it's-not-sex-it's-only-a-foot-massage gag. 
His willingness to let things go unaccounted for leads to
miscalculations like Call's reappearance after being shot.  How she
survives the shooting is explained, but her materialization on the other
side of a locked door stretches credibility too far.  Whedon, for his
part, is cut off from the pop-culture references that make "Buffy the
Vampire Slayer" such fun to watch.  He comes up with a few clunkers like
"No human being is that humane," but the script has many more zesty
lines, most of them well served by Ron Perlman as Johner, the crew's
muscleman and jokester ("I'm not a mechanic.  I just hurt people,
mostly," he snaps).
Nevertheless, Whedon creates an interesting character in Call that holds
out great potential for the series's promised fifth installment,
whenever that may be.  She turns out to be hiding her identity as one of
a line of defective androids recalled for its problems with authority. 
Call is a technological freak whose mere existence renders her an
outlaw.  That shapes her agenda; she knows about the government's
illegal research and means to single-handedly sabotage it.  Her anger,
though, isn't only directed at the authorities.  She also hates herself,
like some minorities who encounter such widespread prejudice among 
larger society that they internalize it and see themselves as deviants
("Look at me, I'm disgusting," says Call).  Except for Ripley and the
wheelchair-bound Vriess, the other characters react with amused 
condescension when they discover Call's secret.  "Can't believe I almost
fucked her," sneers Johner, and you can't help but feel his reaction
would be similar had she turned out to be a lesbian (her situation 
strongly resembles that of some closeted homosexuals).
Having given Call such a background, it's puzzling that Whedon can't
think of anything interesting to have happen to her.  It's suggested
(mainly by the actresses) that Ripley's show of toughness has directed 
Call's energy toward more constructive ends.  It's an intriguing idea
for a feminist action flick, but Jeunet's imagination doesn't run that
way, and the movie never gets more specific on this point.  As one of
the few Hollywood actresses who can project genuine self-loathing,
Winona Ryder's certainly the right choice to play Call.  She's strong in
support, which is hardly surprising, but given the lack of a character
arc and the actress's near-impeccable taste in roles, I have to conclude
that she picked this one less for the scripted part itself than for its
future possibilities.  We can only hope there will be a fifth film to
explore them.
No, ALIEN: RESURRECTION is all Sigourney Weaver's show, and she gives
the performance of her career.  Ripley was human in the three earlier
installments, but Weaver's now playing a being that's part alien.  She
responds by raising her alertness to a stratospheric level.  She's
coiled, like a lioness on the hunt.  She seems to be hearing frequencies
nobody else can hear, and her brain and muscles work in startling sync. 
At first she's slightly taken aback by her new powers, but she comes to
revel in the fact that she's now like Michael Jordan amid a grade-school
basketball team.  Maturity has given Weaver the ability to command
situations and scenes effortlessly, and nowhere else has this quality
suited her better.  Even when Ripley's human emotions break down her
composure, she retains her queenly dignity; she recognizes the deformed
Ripley clone on the operating table, and we see a strong woman whose
sense of self has been profoundly violated.  This performance is unlike
anything Weaver has ever done, and she's glorious.  So powerful is her
presence that it holds together a movie that would otherwise be a huge,
sticky mess.  Jeunet has his visions to pursue, and he makes ALIEN:
RESURRECTION as big and noisy as you would expect, but Weaver stays calm
even as her electricity fills the screen, and she carries the day.

Author
Homer Yen
Will moviegoers ever get enough of these space creatures whose best
attributes are showing off their exceptionally sharp teeth and oozing
slime?  Not yet, it seems.  But that's ok, because this fourth
installment shows signs of life, and once again brings to us the macho
Ripley (Sigourney Weaver) and pits her against those familiar
goo-dripping, acid-for-blood aliens.  
Science-fiction gives writers the latitude to come up with wacky
premises, and the premise here is certainly odd.  Despite its
viciousness and primal urge to kill, it turns out that some people are
enamored with this species and hope to breed more of them.  A complete
explanation is never really given, it may be a secret government
operation or a plan hatched by terrorists.  However, we are made aware
of a couple things.  All of the action will take place on a spaceship,
replete with the obligatory warehouse-like setting, dimly lit
corridors, and smoke billowing out from every angle.  Ripley is a
clone of the original (who died in Aliens3) who has heightened senses
(she can smell the presence of aliens) and some memories of her former
life, realizing all too well the dangerous implications of breeding
such a savage species.  Also, it won't be too long, despite careful
attempts to contain the aliens, before they will escape and run
rampant through the spaceship that carries them.  Their infestation is
actually startling.  As they begin to run amuck, the ships computer
states: "non-human elements detected on levels 2, 4, 5, 9..." and so
forth while the crew frantically makes their way into the escape pods.
However, as this genre mandates, there must be at least a handful of
people who have yet to escape.  Those still on-board include the
Ripley clone and an assorted bunch of grizzled space dogs, including
Call (Winona Ryder).  Naturally, there is no easy way off, and for
them, things will get much worse before it gets better. 
The true stars in this movie, however, are the aliens and the special
effects people that created them.  They are incredible to look at.  An
especially fine scene involves an underwater chase, where the aliens
swim in pursuit of their victims, subsequently climb a ladder and then
dodge bullets being fired upon them.  They are intelligent, merciless,
and genuinely imposing.  Less impressive though is the Ripley clone.
While she embodies the toughness of a soldier and the tenderness of a
human, the clone's persona displays a sense of annoying apathy.  She
blurts out cynical sound bites and laughs at the weakness of mankind.
Also, Ryder is a strange addition to this kind of movie.  Though she
is a wonderful actress, she lacks the heft and presence to stand
alongside Ripley and the other crew members.  
My feelings about this movie were undoubtedly mixed.  While I enjoyed
the beauty of the aliens, the moderate amount of excitement and the
enormous amounts of slime, Ripley's sense of detachment alienated me,
and soon, I found myself less interested in the final result and more
interested in seeing more aliens.  But I suppose that if the focus of
the movie was actually on Ripley, the title of the film would have
been called "Ripley: Resurrection."

Author
Alex Fung
ALIEN RESURRECTION (Fox - 1997)
Starring Sigourney Weaver, Winona Ryder, Ron Perlman,
  Dominique Pinon, Michael Wincott, Dan Hedaya
Screenplay by Joss Whedon
Produced by Bill Badalato, Gordon Carroll, David Giler, Walter Hill
Directed by Jean-Pierre Jeunet
Running time: 108 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   Among science-fiction and fantasy aficionados, few film sagas have
   captured the imagination as much as the ALIEN movie franchise, which
   started off with a bang in 1979's unbearably creepy Ridley Scott
   'haunted house-in-space' entry, and continued with a new bent in
   James Cameron's pulse-pounding action-thriller ALIENS in 1986 (an
   exceptionally well-crafted piece of storytelling which I maintain is
   among the best films of its type ever made).  While David Fincher's
   artsy neo-bleak take on the series in 1992's ALIEN3 only succeeded in
   largely alienating (no pun intended) the sizable mainstream audience
   which the prior two films had accumulated and was deemed a box-office
   dud, it was imbued with a collection of interesting new concepts
   which, given the death of feisty protagonist Ripley at the film's
   conclusion, appeared would never be built upon -- until the
   announcement of a fourth entry in the series: ALIEN RESURRECTION,
   whose marketing tagline is "Witness The Resurrection", but might as
   well have been "Ripley's Back!".  About twenty minutes into the
   highly-anticipated new film, I was suddenly struck by the realisation
   that I found myself experiencing something that I'd never expected to
   occur during the screening of an entry in the venerable ALIEN series:
   I was bored.
   Despite all of the horrendous one-liners in the film -- it's hard to
   believe that Joss Whedon actually wrote this dialogue -- and a basic
   scenario which is woefully stale, one can definitely see the seeds of
   intrigue that enticed star Sigourney Weaver to pull her Ripley
   character out of mothballs for this fourth entry in the series.
   (Let's ignore, for the moment, the $11 million paycheque as an
   alternate motivating factor).  There are some interesting and
   imaginative new concepts in this film, and the strange symbiosis
   between the aliens and Ripley here logically follows from the
   previous three films which have seen the two entities increasingly
   intertwined in an idiosyncratic love-hate relationship.  For a $70
   million-budgeted entry in a huge commercial franchise, there's daring
   evidence of a curiously awkward fusion of arthouse sensibilities with
   the film's basic chase narrative.
   However, the film fails to fully develop upon its more intricate
   elements, and instead teeters precariously between conventional
   action and allegorism, failing to satisfy fans of either camps and
   often resulting in unintentional laughs.  More critically
   problematic, however, is the wretched dialogue in the film, filled
   with snappy, attitude-ladened quips which pander to the audience and
   come off as desperately soundbite-friendly.  Or even less so: when
   Ripley matter-of-factly uttered her one-word retort to the exhibition
   of a fork during her period of re-education, I felt my heart sink.
   Danny Boyle (of SHALLOW GRAVE, TRAINSPOTTING, and A LIFE LESS
   ORDINARY fame -- well, maybe not the last one) was originally courted
   to take over helming duties for the project, but after he ultimately
   turned the job down, THE CITY OF LOST CHILDREN's Jean-Pierre Jeunet
   signed on for the project.  Under his wing, the film is predictably
   stylishly directed and filled with Mr. Jeunet's trademark striking
   visuals; there's a distinctly dull, ugly ocher look permeating the
   film, even becoming occasionally grainy as shot by celebrated
   cinematographer Darius Khondji (who won well-deserved plaudits for
   his stunning work in SE7EN), but the impressive (if overly familiar)
   grungy look doesn't make up for the film's more fundamental problems.
   Chief among them is the absence of rich characters in the film.  For
   the most part, the space pirates which eventually make up the hardy
   band struggling to survive the alien onslaught are nondescript and
   lack personality (except, perhaps, for the crass loudmouth Johner
   (Ron Perlman) --  he simply has a bad one).  The characterization in
   Mr. Whedon's screenplay is woeful -- contrast the ALIEN RESURRECTION
   group against the characters in ALIENS, where even minor characters
   like Vasquez and Gorman are well-developed and consequently memorable
   -- and the resultant effect is very little inherent interest in the
   fates of the film's characters and whether they live or die.  For a
   film whose latter half is essentially an extended chase sequence,
   this is not fortuitous.
   Even worse, our beloved heroine Ellen Ripley, newly revived as a
   clone restored from preserved DNA blood samples, isn't entirely human
   -- she's an alien/human hybrid that's consequently more reptilian in
   nature (ineffectively depicted in a scene where she plays
   *basketball*, for crying out loud), possesses a cold and passionless
   demeanour, and has acidic blood coursing through her veins.  It's an
   innovative idea and definitely a new approach to take with the
   character, but it doesn't work: heartlessly ruthless and caustic,
   she's hardly a compelling character, and it's difficult to be engaged
   or really touched by the plight of such a frigid, dryly-observed
   protagonist.
   ALIEN RESURRECTION also suffers from a mundanely straightforward
   storyline which is overly rehashed from previous entries in the
   series.  It's a given from the outset that the film will eventually
   settle into a familiar predicament where Ripley and her company of
   mercenaries will attempt to escape from the marauding aliens, but the
   degree to which this echoes the scenario from ALIENS (heroes must
   evade monsters and reach escape ship before the venue is
   cataclysmically destroyed) is striking, and the sudden leap involved
   between the chase sequence and the initial thread of the scientists
   onboard the Auriga space station studying and attempting to cultivate
   the aliens (highlighted in a scene which plays as a less sympathetic
   rendition straight out of George Romero's DAY OF THE DEAD) is
   remarkably jarring; it's as if the filmmakers were vainly struggling
   to figure out how to get the film between points A and B, and finally
   threw their arms in the air.  The identity and motivations of a
   mysterious entity amidst the space corsairs, an elfin mechanic named
   Call (Winona Ryder -- umm, what happened?) is far less enigmatic that
   desired, while when the "8" tattoo on Ripley is revealed, indicating
   that she's the successful byproduct of the eighth cloning attempt,
   it's inevitable that the results of the seven previous attempts will
   eventually be encountered.  This sequence, strongly reminiscent of a
   similar scene in Tobe Hooper's goofy THE FUNHOUSE, attempts to be so
   filled with pathos that it's mildly disconcerting that the end result
   is near-laughable due to distractingly poor model work.
   The one impressive sequence is that of the film's heroes being
   pursued underwater, a visually impressive and mildly surreal
   experience in an interesting new context where the tension in the
   scene is heightened by deliberately slowing down and drawing out the
   pace of the action.  It's a smart section of the film -- there's
   nothing quite as dreadful as seeing your demise slowly unfold in
   front of you, and being completely helpless to do anything to prevent
   it -- and I only wish that more of the film had been as adept.
   At one point in the film, there was a briefest of glimpses of the
   vulnerable, fearful, and engagingly humanized Ripley which was so
   compelling in the first two entries of the series, and that reminds
   one of just how potent and riveting this film series once was; that's
   the Ripley that I wanted to see.  The susceptible Ripley temporarily
   fought its way to the surface, but was quickly shunted away, usurped
   by her new ultra-cool, wisecracking, bad-ass persona.  With ALIEN
   RESURRECTION, the series has finally collapsed under a weight of
   style and attitude.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"There was a six-year-old girl sitting near me, and she piped up 'That's
 Harvey Keitel' within seconds of the film's start.  I want to know what
 that kid's been seeing." - Charles Odell

Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair/below average)
1997, R, 108 minutes [1 hour, 48 minutes]
starring: Sigourney Weaver (Ripley), Winona Ryder (Call), Ron Perlman
(Johner), Gary Dourdan (Christie); written by Joss Whedon; produced by Bill
Badalato, Gordon Carroll, David Giler, Walter Hill; directed by Jean-Pierre
Jeunet; based on characters created by Dan O'Bannon, Ronald Shusett.
Seen December 1, 1997 at 7:20 p.m. at The Glenwood Movieplex Cinemas (Oneida,
NY), theater #2, by myself for free (free pass). [Theater rating: ***: good
seats, sound, and picture]
        If there's anything I learned about the "Alien" series, it's the fact it
epitomizes the term "The more things change, the more they stay the same."
Each film has a unique direction to it, yet the stories and individual
elements are basically the same. But what's most annoying about "Alien:
Resurrection," besides the fact it repeats absolutely everything we've seen
before, is it doesn't even try to have any direction or originality.
        Describing the plots and the way they are set up in these films is beginning
to become an exercise in futility, and I wouldn't doubt the screenwriters
feel the same way writing them. Much like the previous sequels, there's a lot
of jargon and rhetoric here to explain how Ripley (Weaver) will end up facing
the aliens even though everything was fine when we last saw her. This time
it's 200 years after the death of her original self, and scientists have
created a clone of her (why did they wait so long?). How they did this isn't
clearly explained, but we are knocked over the head with the fact she has
memories and was slightly crossbred with alien DNA (which explains her
super-strength and psychic abilities).
        We get more variations on the same plot such as the arrogant scientists and
leaders who try to study, breed, and exploit the aliens but something goes
wrong and chaos ensues. There's also a militia brat pack, although this time
they're pirates instead of miners, marines, or prisoners. Much like Ripley,
they're also re-incarnated characters. First there's Johner (Perlman), the
wise-cracking tough guy; then Call (Ryder), the smart, rational,
strong-willed woman; Christie (Dourdan), the special weapons guy; along with
a cripple in a high-tech wheelchair, a frail woman, and the suave leader.
Most of these characters will die just as we're beginning to like them, and
one of them will turn out to be a robot (deja vu!).
        The storytelling here is so choppy we don't really get establishment of
plot, but a collection of remotely related scenes, such as the scientist
driven mad with curiosity studying the aliens, or the meeting between the
pirate leader  and the corrupt military leader which somehow explains why the
pirates are on board the huge military vessel the film takes place in.
        Of course the aliens break free from their cages and run rampant around the
ship, killing many of the humans and giving the pirates something to run from
and shoot at. And if that wasn't generic enough, I counted at least six times
in which the music built up with violins screeching and then an alien popping
out the shadows and killing someone. There's also an interesting scene (the
only one for that matter) that takes place underwater, but somehow the humans
manage to hold their breath for five or ten minutes!
        Most of the film recycles and even rips-off elements from the other films
that didn't work that well to begin with. We get dizzying action sequences
with fire and bullets flying all over the place, corny one-liners, guns jam
up at the last second, and people apparently dead come back to life. The faux
Gothic atmosphere with lots of shadows, strobe lights, and steam all over the
place is also tiring. The aliens themselves are now such cartoony embodiments
of evil it's hard not to laugh at them, much less be frightened by them.
        The "Alien" films are meant to be intense, sci-fi thrillers and there's no
doubt that's what "Alein: Resurrection" is too, and I don't object to that
principle. What I do object to is how the film constantly tries harder to be
intense, but the more it does so, the sillier it seems.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 180
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html
To receive Chad'z movie reviews directly, send e-mail to ChadPolenz@aol.com
with "subscribe" in the header.

Author
Bill Chambers
starring Sigourney Weaver, Winona Ryder, Ron Perlman, J.E. Freeman
written by Joss Whedon
directed by Jean-Pierre Jeunet
The title has a double meaning. In this fourth installment of the
series, not only do producers David Giler and Walter Hill revive their
beloved Ellen Ripley (Weaver), who met her fate last time around, but
they attempt to resurrect the franchise itself: the financial unsuccess
of Alien3 was thought to have killed it.
You can't keep a good monster down. Unfortunately. What was a wonderful,
complete trilogy is now a quadrology that ends with the promise of more,
and if this resurrection is any indication, I'm talking about a series
in decline.
The premise is this: Ripley is revived through genetic cloning on a
military ship. A band of ne'er-do-wells arrive on said ship for a cargo
transfer. One of them, Call (Ryder), fears Ripley when they meet, for
she is aware that the clone is part-alien. What she is not aware of are
the twelve aliens also aboard the vessel-military doctors are trying to
teach the monsters good manners. Must I write that the experiment goes
awry?
Jeunet, famed French director of `Delicatessan', has tried to combine
the spirits of the second and third films. `Resurrection' is artfully
made, aesthetically pretty like David Fincher(`Seven')'s part three, and
it contains some rousing gun play and chase sequences, as in James
Cameron's `Aliens'. But I get the sense that Jeunet's language
difference presented great problems in his assessment of the script,
which is half-baked and desperately familiar. For example, he casts
several colourful-looking people in supporting roles only to hand them
the kind of dialogue you'd hear in `Independence Day'. They're unique
ducks in the same shooting gallery we've been to three times before. And
the alien logic has worn thin-I never did understand which one was
laying eggs, or why this was happening since the script went to great
pains explaining that the queen now had a womb.
Turn off the sound and one is left with a stunning motion picture, a two
hour Romantic painting. The effects are impressive, and there is one
dazzling, showstopping setpiece (involving swimming aliens). But great
art direction does not equal great filmmaking, and therein lies the
problem: the most basic movie element--the screenplay--is still the most
important, and `Alien: Resurrection' made me nostalgic for the original
trilogy, which is not what a sequel should do.
-November 21, 1997

Author
Matt Petras
 http://www.alien-resurrection.com
        Ellen Ripley died 200 years ago trying to wipe out a violent
species, she succeeded. Until now. Brought back to life by methods of
cloning. Brought back to life with the Queen still inside her. The
queen alien is removed from Ripley and raised for breeding. 'Special'
cargo is required for this breeding and science that is going on with
the queen and her young. But as luck would have it the aliens are a
bit on the smart side and they escape, and here begins the fun...
        Well you should now have an idea as to what this movie is
about, nothing spectacularly original on its own. But with enough
originality to be a good idea. The beginning of the movie is great,
really well thought out and really interesting. Then instead of
continuing along this line the movie degenerates into the predictable.
Its pretty well executed with some original scenes that provide some
interest. The plot itself needed a bit of work in my opinion, some
things seem to be taken for granted and somethings seem to happen for
no real reason whatsoever. I wont give examples for that might spoil
the movie for some people, but some of the scenes could be removed and
the plot furthered by other means. All in all the plot is fairly sound
and doesn't leave you wondering why things happen, but then again the
plot isn't very demanding so at least this job was accomplished with
some proficiency. The plot in this movie is by no means perfect
though, but its a good start for a movie. 
        The characters, being such an integral component of the plot
have to be proper. This is usually a given and it in most cases just
ignored.  But in the case of Alien: Resurrection I am brining it up,
because a few of the odd scenes that I found in the movie were caused
by a particular character, Call. I don't know what bothers me about
the character, but something does. I think that the character should
have been looked into with a bit more effort, maybe giving the
audience something more to grasp a hold of so to say. The character
didn't seem to fit too well, I am not too sure that Ms. Ryder was
perfect for the role either. But thinking about it I am not too sure I
could think of any actress that would have been able to do as good a
job. So I will have to concede that she was cast well for the part,
even thought the part is a bit on the odd side. The actual acting in
this movie was fairly convincing, especially Sigourney Weaver. She
plays her part with an interesting passion and wit, very good
performance from her. The rest of the cast performed well, and
convincingly in some cases much better than an action picture could
have hoped for. Although in the end the two things that I will most
remember about the acting and characters from this movie is the
character of Call, simply because something about the character
bothers me and Ripley's new found wit. 
        Having some thought about this movies there is something that
bothers me about it, I have tried putting my finger on it but with no
avail. The character of Call is one thing but that is not the only
thing that bothers me. Something seemed to be missing when I was
finished watching it, I don't get that sort of feeling from most
movies. I got the distinct impression that it was rushed and that the
director was a bit too liberal with his cut. I don't know if I would
recommend this movie to everyone, the special effects of this movie
were spectacular in some scenes and very appropriate but nothing so
revelation that everyone had to see it. SO if you are a fan of science
fiction flicks or horror flicks you should like this movie. Now those
of you who are not die hard fans of either genre, here's the question
you should ask yourself: Do you really want to see a decent action
flick that is a bit out of this world? if yes then you should like the
movie. Just don't come crying to me if you didn't like it. Its nothing
grand, its an action picture you wont get any grand revelations about
life from it. You should enjoy the ride. And If I ever figure out what
is bothering me about the movie I'll add a little PS at the end. Other
than bin a bit rushed with some oddities its an OK flick. You might
want to be able to stomach some gore though. This movie isn't for all
audiences, you should know if this movie is for you or not, please use
your discretion folks, its at most a decent action/sci-fi/horror
flick. 
