Title
Review for Next Stop Wonderland (1998)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Nick Amado
Starring: Hope Davis, Alan Gelfant, Victor Arag, Jon Benjamin
There are some truly funny lines in Next Stop Wonderland that are caught
up in a battle with forced, trendy screenwriting. It is hard to tell
which comes out on top, and it only manages to provide some likable
characters in an all-too-familiar situation. Erin (Davis) is a young
woman who is shattered when her goofy, activist boyfriend leaves her
because she doesn't support him. She then goes on a quest to meet Mr.
Right by way of her mother placing a personal add against her will. Erin
reluctantly ventures out into the singles world, makes headway, and
eventually starts making sport of the situation. 
The film bounces back and forth between two characters who never meet.
Alan, a plumber who is working his way through school to become a marine
biologist, is also not burning up the dating scene. The film is utterly
predictable. We know all along that these two lonley souls are meant for
each other, though they seem unable to meet. Sadly, most of Alan's
screentime is dedicated to the film's subplot of political muscle,
trying to destroy the local aquarium for its prime real estate. It
involves the plans for a mausoleum and killing a balloonfish. Pretty
silly.
The film reminds me quite a bit of Sliding Doors in a number of ways.
Primarily, it deals with fate, Who are we supposed to spend the rest of
our lives with? and, How will we meet this person? There is also some
artsy but jarring camerawork and editing, but it dies down about a half
hour into the film. Strangely, that is when the dialogue perks up.
Next Stop Wonderland is not a very intriguing film, though it has a step
up on the more unique Sliding Doors in that the characters are more
likable. Hope Davis is really a joy to watch. She has a very accessable
beauty that makes the audience care about her, even if she is not being
particularly charming each moment. There are some truly funny lines, but
they are few and far between. Its a story of two people looking for
romance in the wrong places. It has been my contention that Hollywood
has done a poor job with romantic comedies in recent years, with, of
course, a few exceptions. The indie film world has done only slightly
better, but neither side has managed to produce a gem. Next Stop
Wonderland falls short of the mark too.

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        One of the biggest delights of Brad Anderson's "Next Stop
Wonderland" is the simple fact that our heroine, Erin Castleton (Hope
Davis), understands the absurdity of what's happening to her.  Beautiful,
intelligent, yet sadly cynical, Erin refuses to participate in the
standard romantic comedy cliches so prevalent in films of this type.
It's something we discover early on, as three men attempt to play a
cruel joke on her.  Erin cheerfully goes along with them, pretending to
be duped... then brilliantly turns the tables in one of the movie's
funniest scenes.  She's apparently seen "In the Company of Men."
        Being smart isn't enough to ensure her happiness, however.  Her
problems begin in the film's opening scene, in which her boyfriend Sean
(Philip Seymour Hoffman) uncerimoniously dumps her (via videotape, no
less) to go participate in an activist campaign.  Upon hearing the news,
Erin's mother takes matters into her own hands by placing a highly
misleading personal ad in the local paper, extolling her daughter's
virtues.  Erin, understandably furious by this invasion of her privacy,
nonetheless gives into curiousity and listens to her messages... all 64
of them.
        In another part of town, an aspiring marine-biologist named Alan
Monteiro (Alan Gelfant) is also unlucky in love.  He's the proverbial
"nice guy," eschewing the sexual advances of his friend Julie (Caro Buono)
because he'd rather wait for true romance.  His friends don't understand
his sensitive nature: when he complains that he can't find a woman he can
talk to, they burst into giggles.  "What are we, a bunch of chicks?" they
taunt.
        It's obvious that Alan and Erin are meant to be together, but
there's a small problem: they don't know each other.  Over the course of
the movie, we watch them almost meet on several occasions, but something
always happens to negate their encounter.  In the interim, Erin goes out
with many of the respondents to her personal ad (the "loser montage" is
wonderful) while Alan deals with some unpleasant events in his life,
including a gambling-addicted father and a career which isn't progressing
quite the way he wants it to.
        "Next Stop Wonderland" feels more "real" than the average
romantic comedy because it knows the pursuit of love is not a full-time
endeavor.  In the real world, single people go to work, pay bills, and do
things not related to the search for romance.  For this reason, the film
endeared itself to me: it doesn't seem like a fairy-tale, but instead
depicts a couple of everyday people coming to terms with being alone, and
not really minding it.  If they find love, great.  If they don't, they
know they'll survive.  It's definitely the right approach to take.
        Another small touch I liked: Erin practices a bit of philosophy
that I first encountered in Richard Bach's wonderful novel, "Illusions."
The technique states that one should never close an open book without
reading something from its pages, even if it's only a few words or
sentences.  Whatever you read will supposedly give you a clue to your
future.  The film uses this as a clever way to provide foreshadowing,
even though Erin (and we) don't always understand the clues initially.
("Linoleum?")
        "Next Stop Wonderland" has a lot to cover in its 110-minute
running time.  In order to fit everything in, writer/director Anderson
chooses to focus more on the big picture than the little details;
therefore, some subplots are not satisfactorially resolved.  These
include the sudden reappearance of Erin's ex-boyfriend, the fate of
Alan's father, and the outcome of a special assignment Alan is given,
pertaining to the aquarium he's employed at.  The big question is, will
Erin and Alan eventually meet and live happily ever after?  C'mon, it's
a romantic comedy.  What do you think?
        There's nothing really spectacular about "Next Stop Wonderland,"
but it tells its tale entertainingly and competently.  The script is
very funny, the characters are memorable, and the photography is highly
original (I found it interesting that Puff the Blowfish, one of the
aquarium's biggest attractions, is one of the film's most photogenic
characters).  I enjoyed the film a great deal.  If you don't typically
like romantic comedies, this one probably won't change your mind... but
if you do, I recommend you make "Next Stop Wonderland" your next stop at
the movies.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please write
to the above address and ask to be put on my mailing list.

Author
Michael Dequina
_Next_Stop_Wonderland_ (R) ** 1/2 (out of ****)
A fresh location, likable lead actors, a cute concept.  The destination of
the romantic comedy _Next_Stop_Wonderland_ would appear to be moviegoers'
hearts.  But as charming as the film often is, something crucial feels
missing on this journey.
That something missing is not the main character, Erin Castleton, played
with a nice balance of edge and sensitivity by Hope Davis.  Erin, a
registered nurse in Boston, is soured on love after her political activist
boyfriend (Philip Seymour Hoffman) ditches her to take part in a protest.
The last thing on her mind is finding a new man, but her freespirited
socialite mother (Holland Taylor) takes out a personal ad in Erin's name.
Suddenly, Erin finds herself fielding the romantic interests of a number of
not-so-gentlemanly callers.
Of course, the ideal man for her is not among the ad respondents.  Could
that elusive guy be former plumber/aspiring marine biologist Alan Monteiro
(Alan Gelfant)?  Alan is a nice, upstanding guy who, when not attending
school full time, volunteers at the Boston Aquarium and tries to raise
money to pay off a loan shark (Victor Argo).  Alan and Erin's paths
frequently cross, but in the film's central conceit, keep on narrowly
missing each other, creating a "will they or won't they" romantic tension.
Or at least that's the presumption made by director Brad Anderson and his
co-writer, Lyn Vaus (who appears in the film as one of Erin's suitors).  As
pleasant as _Next_Stop_Wonderland_ is, never did I get the feeling that
Alan was truly _the_guy_ for Erin.  He's certainly nice, but Anderson and
Vaus never establish any concrete reason why these two should connect other
than the fact that they, the filmmakers, want them to.  Hence, any rooting
interest I had in their meeting came from less an ardent interest in a love
connection than a simple curiosity as to what would happen.
Still, the film holds a quiet, unassuming appeal, due to some witty
moments (an extended sequence in which Erin interviews her ad respondents is a
comic highlight) and, most especially, the endearing performances by Davis
and Gelfant.  While one may not be terribly invested in them as a pair,
they are each so likable that one is definitely invested in them as
individual personalities.  If that weren't the case, the ultralightweight
_Next_Stop_Wonderland_ could have easily been _Next_Stop_Slumberland_.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Joy Wyse
This is one of those titles, like Good Will Hunting,  that I have trouble
remembering.  Is it just a coincidence that both films are set in the
Boston area?  When you realize that Wonderland is one of the stops on the
transit line, it makes sense.  
A winner at the Sundance Film festival, it deserves the award.  This
really seems like a home movie and that is a sincere compliment.  Unlike
mainstream productions we see the faces of the players complete with
imperfections rather than coats of makeup.  Their hair, beards, clothes,
etc. are like those of real everyday people. It makes it that much easier
to believe that these are real everyday people.
Hope Davis plays Erin Castleton, a nurse who discovers that her live-in
political fanatic beau is leaving her, again.  
Alan Gelfant plays Alan Montiero, an aspiring marine biologist who has
been working as a plumber for his father.
Both Erin and Alan have problems with their parents, their friends, and
their lives.  Throughout the movie you see how close that the two come to
meeting, but they always manage to just miss each other.  And, you do want
them to meet.  Erin's mother places an ad in the Personals column hoping
that someone will answer who will save her daughter from a lonely life. 
Goodness knows, the mother isn't lonely!
Alan's buddies answer the ad, but he doesn't.  Entwined are stories of
political corruption, gambling and the debts that they cause, the media
attention to a balloon fish, an inept security guard, and a wonderful
sound track featuring great piano jazz.  Most of us stayed through the
credits, mainly to hear the music.
Unlike Good Will Hunting, this film has absolutely NO bad language, NO
nudity, NO sex, but plenty of good feelings.  It's excellent.  I can't
stop thinking about it.  And, I want to see it again.
I'll only give it a B, however, because it is too much like a home movie. 
There was a lot of editing that was just too distracting.  It was as if
they hadn't shot enough film to make the necessary cuts.  I wonder what
they would have done with a bigger budget.

Author
W Waffle
Everyweek at WaffleMovies.com, I review independent films and big studio
pictures that deserve a second chance on video.  If you like this review, check
out this week's WaffleMovies.com selection, Ulee's Gold.
As we enter our late twenties and early thirties, those who are unmarried start
to question the possibility of finding that special someone we have been
waiting for all of our lives. Next Stop Wonderland examines this search for
true happiness in the nineties. The movie also uses humor to tackle the weighty
issues of loneliness, self-image and our belief in fate, as well as the
differences between who we are, who we become to please others, and how others
perceive us. 
The movie stars Hope Davis as Erin, a 29 year old woman grieving over the loss
of her father, her unfulfilling love life and expectations of who she is and
what she should want out of life. Hope Davis is destined for Hollywood
greatness. She shows great acting ability by portraying an emotional spectrum
consisting of desperate, sad, tough, playful and vulnerable. She has had major
roles in three movies (Next Stop Wonderland, Daytrippers and The Myth of
Fingerprints), and is on the brink of a stellar career. Hopefully, she will be
able to continue to land roles that utilize her many talents. 
Erin is a night-shift nurse who, much to her mother's chagrin, dropped out of
Harvard medical school. She has chosen to drop out of life as well. Her fun,
vivacious personality has disappeared as she retreats into a state of
emptiness, plagued by a belief that there is no hope for true love, just
reliance on self. Two scenes early in the movie give us true insight into Erin.
The first is the opening scene, where her boyfriend Sean, played by Phillip
Seymour Hoffman, tries to dump her by videotape, but the plan is foiled when
she comes home early. Sean is an emotional activist who feels Erin is void of
passion and decides to leave Boston to pursue his latest cause.  The second
scene is a debate between Erin and her friend Cricket, played by Callie Thorne.
Cricket clings to the belief that fate is real and controls our destiny.
However, Erin disagrees. 
Alan Gelfant plays Alan, a 35-year old plumber who decides to chase his dream
of becoming a marine biologist. Although he tries to shed his image as a
plumber, he is typecast. His friends and family don't understand his dream and
his co-workers at the aquarium continue to take advantage of his plumbing
abilities instead of his love of marine biology. Much like Erin is trapped by
everyone's false expectation of her desire to find a man, Alan is trapped by
people's view that he is just a plumber. 
Alan and Erin and destined to be together, but will fate step in? Director and
co-writer Brad Anderson does a spectacular job of constantly placing Alan and
Erin near each other, only to have them experience a series of near misses.
After several close encounters, Anderson makes the audience root for a moment
of fate that will bring our two stars together. Anderson and writing partner
Lyn Vaus have written solid, witty dialogue that provides insight into our main
characters. Anderson complements the dialogue by filming scenes that reflect
what the characters are seeing and feeling. 
The movie's best scenes result when Erin's mother (Holland Taylor) places a
personal ad for her daughter in the Boston Herald. Erin decides to stop longing
for her boyfriend and weeds out potential suitors from the 64 who have
responded to her ad. Anderson puts together a hilarious compilation of losers,
liars and deadbeats who have responded to the ad. We watch Erin steadily come
to life by toying with the sorry group. Those who misrepresent themselves in an
attempt to impress the beautiful Erin are subject to her intellect and cutting
sense of humor. 
The personal ad is a bust, but Erin meets Andre de Silva (Jose Zuniga) a
patient who instantly falls for her. Andre persistently courts Erin until he
breaks through the wall she has built around herself. Erin is not quite sure
Andre is all he seems to be, but, like other characters, decides that being
with someone is better than being alone. 
While Erin is being romanced by Andre, Alan is chased by classmate Julie (Cara
Buono), a college co-ed who relies on him for notes and tutoring. Alan realizes
he is too old for Julie, but decides to invite her on a disastrous
whale-sighting trip. 
Will Erin dump Andre? Will Alan stop seeing Julie? Will Erin and Alan fall in
love? You'll have to see the movie to find out. Unfortunately, the movie would
be better if the answer to that question came much earlier in the plot, but it
well worth the rental price. Claudio Ragazzi provides a bossa nova driven score
that establishes a relaxed feel and Anderson tackles personal subject matter
with a touch of levity. 
Like many movies reviewed at www.wafflemovies.com, Next Stop Wonderland is an
independent film that didn't have a wide release or a big advertising push. It
was well-received when it premiered at the Sundance Film festival, but was lost
in a crowded field when it debuted late in August of 1998, never a great time
to release a romantic comedy. 
That is unfortunate because you will recognize close friends and yourself in
these characters. Hopefully, the movie will find a new audience in the rental
market. Take a chance and you will like what you see. 
Sean . Phillip Seymour Hoffman 

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   After you see a romantic comedy like "How Stella Got Her
Groove Back"--an overlong, predictable, commercialized take
on the game of romance--you'll have your faith restored with
Brad Anderson's indie gem, "Next Stop, Wonderland." 
Despite its clunky title, this movie has an alternately dreamy,
melancholy, happy and comic ambiance boasting fresh
writing, sensitive direction, and a lead performance by Hope
Davis which reflects the Brazilian term saudade--an
oxymoronic expression meaning sadness and happiness at
the same time.  Ms. Davis is known chiefly to patrons of indie
films which show up at the Sundance Festival, having
garnered enthusiastic responses in movies like "Daytrippers"
and "The Myth of Fingerprints," and is known to Broadway
aficionados for a starring role in Chekhov's "Ivanov."
   Erin Castleton (Hope Davis) is one of the most interesting
young women we've come across in recent months because
she is anything but a one-sided character.  In fact she is a
hodgepodge of opposites.  Though she has no problem being
alone, she feels lonely in crowds, and while she would like to
have a boy friend, she is not the type actively to seek one. 
Though she is melancholy, displaying a broad smile only once
in the entire narrative, she claims to be basically happy.  She
has had the good--and bad--luck to have adored her recently
departed father and will not settle for a young man who does
not embrace her dad's poetic qualities.  The fun begins when
her mother secretly places a personals ad in the local Boston
paper describing Erin as "vivacious and carefree," itself a bold
prevarication because this terminology describes not the
daughter but her mother, Piper Castleton (Holland Taylor), a
smart, bourgeois, fast-talking modeling agent whose
temperament is quite the converse of her daughter's.
  Brad Anderson, who directs and co-wrote the feature
following his less accessible "The Darien Gap, sets up a
series of comical situations of the sort that the dating game
naturally evokes, and in the funniest scene lays out a collage
of suitors for Erin's affections who are virtually all wimps,
jerks, and flat-out liars. A threesome of yuppies call the young
woman and take bets among themselves for who will be the
first to French-kiss her. They plan, in turn, to make
themselves inconspicuous in the bar which she has chosen to
meet her candidates.  Anderson sweeps through a quick take
on the fibbers who don't make it past the telephone
conversation including one who, seated in the john, claims to
operate his own business and, as he reaches for the toilet
paper, asks her to hold on because "a fax is coming through." 
"I'm a temp but that's not a permanent thing," admits a
flustered suitor, while yet another, taken aback that she's
anything but carefree and vivacious, learns that her mother
put in the ad and inquires, "What's your mother's number?"
   The more she tries, the more she fails to meet Mr. Right. 
In one scene she discusses with her fellow nurses whether
love comes along by the Large Hand of Fate or whether it is
a random occurrence.  Director Anderson deliberately does
not take sides but instead lays out a parallel story of an
earnest 35-year-old man, Alan (Alan Gelfant) who is a
plumber but is going to college to become a marine biologist. 
Deep in debt and pressured by a loan shark to steal a
valuable fish from the city's aquarium, Alan gives no thought
to finding a mate, but after repeatedly coming close to
meeting Erin is literally thrown into her arms.
   Erin is surely not an ideal woman.  She does not possess
classic beauty, her expression is deadpan throughout, and is
capable of coming up with some on-the-money put-downs of
aggressive men.  She captures our interest and concern
simply because she cannot be pigeonholed like the bimbo,
Julie (Cara Buono), a gum-chewer who repeatedly throws
herself on the bemused Alan.  
    Alan Gelfant is a model college student, the sort who has
taken many years off to work at a well-paying job but chooses
in mid-life to quit, go to school, and pursue a career he loves.
The only man who comes close to his quality is Andre De
Silva (Jose Zuniga), an ultra-romantic Brazilian who is
returning home to Sao Paolo and, on a whim, invites Erin to
join him.  She is entranced by the poetry of his words, which
reflect the Bossa Nova sountrack permeating this delightful
film.

Author
Scott Hunt
see more reviews at MovieHunt   http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html
Are we victims of fate in life or can we create our own destiny?
Director/writer Brad Anderson seems to be saying yes to both questions
in his witty film "Next Stop Wonderland". The two main characters, Alan
and Erin, spend the entire movie in each other's orbit, catching
glimpses of one another, yet not quite connecting until the inevitable
conclusion. Is it fate that keeps them near each other and ultimately
puts them together? Does this predestination carry over to all aspects
of life?
As the film starts, Erin Castleton (Hope Davis), a melancholy 29- year
old late shift nurse, is ending her live-in relationship with her
boyfriend (Hoffman). Rather, he is ending it with her. Arriving home
from work, Erin finds her boyfriend parked in front of their apartment,
car packed with his belongings. In a fumbling, amusing and self
deluding ramble, he instructs Erin to watch a videotape he's made
detailing why their relationship is doomed to fail and why he's
leaving. It's obvious he lacks the courage to confront her directly as
he rails on about accomplishing something with his life and taking a
stand, all the while backpedaling his way out of their relationship. He
then flees the scene with the grace of an inept thief.
Erin's mother (Holland Taylor, in a surprisingly effective, small
role), fearing that her daughter will be without a man in her
life,takes out a personal ad for Erin. To Erin's embarrassed horror,
the ad describes her as a "frisky, cultured, carefree professional with
a zest for life". Eventually, Erin responds to the tidal wave of
responses, which makes for some of the most humorous, telling moments
of the movie as she meets prospective suitors and "poseurs".
Alan, a plumber and aspiring marine biologist, first spots Erin as he's
cleaning the inside glass of a fish tank at the Boston aquarium.
Wearing a wet suit and goggles, he follows Erin from window to window,
separated by the glass as Erin, oblivious to his gaze, enjoys the fish.
Later, we see him on a train as she sits on a platform outside, mere
feet away. The movie spends it's entirety having their paths circle
each other without crossing.
There are several subplots involving Alan. One concerns his attempts to
get on the job track at the Boston Aquarium, thereby escaping his
apparent fate to carry on the family plumbing business. Another subplot
involves his father's desperate attempts to force fate's hand by
gambling away his life at the dog track. A distracting focus is put on
Alan's debt to a loan shark and the manner in which he pays it off. The
movie tries too hard to make Alan a likable guy. Thankfully, his dream-
guy persona is counterbalanced by Erin's distant, yet fundamentally
hopeful, personality.
The film moves along at an unhurried pace, albeit too much so in the
latter third, as we wait for the two to meet. Co-writers Anderson and
Lyn Vaus throw a couple of possible red herrings into the mix as the
two find other possible relationships. The films shifts into a much
slower gear as we wait for these romances to blow over.
When Alan and Erin eventually do meet, we see that perhaps they both
were destined for each other as they share a lingering, almost
subliminally knowing, gaze. It's a sweet, measured moment. The
disappointment comes in the fact that we've come to know the pair, yet
we don't get to view their impending romance.
The film's inherent belief in the subtle persistence of fate and the
wonder it can bring to one's life makes "Next Stop Wonderland" a quiet
pleasure in a cinematic landscape littered with explosions, shallow
characters and overdone special effects.

Author
Susan Granger
        Independent film-maker Brad Anderson's whimsical, low-budget
romance was a big hit at the 1998 Sundance Film Festival. Hope Davis
is a 30ish Boston nurse who has just been dumped by her political
activist boy-friend, a Marxist, who, heartlessly, took the futon and
left her a farewell message on the video. This callous rejection
prompts her meddling socialite mother, played by Holland Taylor, to
place a personals ad on her behalf in a local newspaper. Meanwhile, on
the other side of town, Alan Gelfont, a second-generation plumber, is
trying to separate from his family's seedy underworld background by
becoming a marine biologist. Unfortunately, however, his work at the
Boston Aquarium revolves around fixing leaky pipes. As sulky Hope
embarks on a series of disastrous dates with strange suitors, she
keeps almost meeting Alan as they're both traveling on the Boston
Metro's Wonderland line. Finally, of course, they do meet and romance
blossoms.  Of course, then there's the 'what next?' problem or, as one
character comments: "The real mystery is what keeps two people
together after they meet." With her big brown eyes, pale skin, long
blonde hair, and tart commentary, Ms. Davis is, indeed, a contemporary
Alice, pondering her destiny as she's gazing into the looking glass
with the same quirky appeal of Lewis Carroll's adventurous heroine. On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Next Stop Wonderland" is a wry,
wistful 7. Set to a Brazilian bossa nova swing called "saudade," it's
an intelligent, upbeat look at the urban singles scene, a "chick
flick."

Author
Dennis Schwartz

NEXT STOP, WONDERLAND (director: Brad Anderson; cast: Hope Davis (Erin
Castleton), Alan Gelfant (Alan Monteiro), Hollan Taylor (Piper
Castleton), Robert Klein (Arty Lesser), Cara Buono (Julie), Jose Zuniga
(Andre De Silva) and Phil Hoffman (Sean), Victor Argo (loanshark) (1998)
Wonderland is a rather sugary romance film that is as subtle as a ton of
bricks falling on you. You can see its plot developing from a mile
away.You are lured into its benign story of a single 29-year-old girl
looking for a soul mate in Boston, as that city is depicted as a
mini-wonderland for singles. This is a star oriented film, and the star
who carries the film is Erin (Hope Davis). That this is a dating film,
about singles who for reasons of fate or luck, or whatnot, have not had
a successful match and are now putting most of their energy into
fulfilling their careers, is nothing new, this type of film has been
done often and better many times in contemporary films. The
fictionalized documentary UNMADE BEDS did it more provocatively and with
more of a sense of urgency than this film.The main quirk in the plot
here, is that Hope's pushy mother (Hollan) visits her in Boston, sees
her daughter's live-in relationship with a radical protester (Hoffman)
breakup and decides to put a personal ad in the newspaper for her
Harvard medical school drop-out daughter, who works as a nurse. This is
done without her knowledge. It is cornball sitcom stuff, but, at least,
it is handled as best it could be by the actors and director.
It is easy to like Erin, she is bright, caring, and attractively blonde.
It is equally easy to care for the soul mate she keeps missing contact
with, the financially strapped, ruggedly handsome, intelligent
35-year-old Alan (Alan), who no longer wants to work with his father as
a plumber but is doing volunteer work at the aquarium and attending
college to be a marine biologist. Of course, he comes across as being so
good (though, he does kill some fish in the aquarium), that it is hard
to believe he's for real, or just some cardboard shining knight put into
the story to give it an ideal to shoot for. The contrived story revolves
around their near misses in meeting each other in such spots as, the
subway, at a restaurant, or on the phone.
Alan's brother answers Erin's ad with a few of his pals, as they each
try to respond to her ad in a phony way, making a bet that the first who
gets to tongue kiss her, that the others witness, will win the bet. This
sub-plot was as obnoxious to see take place as it is to hear told.
That we have to see Erin go through several dates to prove the point how
ego sick these guys are, each one more annoying than the other,
culminating in the most obnoxious one of all, that Brazilian lover
(Jose), who is about as charming as a snake-oil salesman, who is
actually the one she nearly flies away with for a holiday in Brazil, was
not only incredulous but downright contrary to the rich presentation of
her character that was the heart of the story.
Anyway, as expected, all's well that ends well, for this watchable piece
of fluff, that comes over on screen better than it does when relating
its story-line. The dialogue was actually not bad, those dating Erin or
trying to flirt with her seemed to be uttering authentic things they
would actually say in their situation. And, oh, by the way, Wonderland
refers to the stop on the Boston metro, it is where greyhound racing
takes place.
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Marty Mapes
***1/2 (out of 4) NEXT STOP WONDERLAND is a great romantic comedy, but you
wouldn't know it from the first scene. 
The movie opens on a woman getting dumped by her activist boyfriend. The
grainy look of the film, the traditional camera angles, and the youthful
political ranting make it look like a cheaply made student film. 
In fact, the film was cheaply made, and by a novice director. But it wasn't
POORLY made. It is one of the best-made films of the year, with interesting
characters (major and minor) and sharp dialogue. The film is uneven in
places, but the overall quality is good enough to overcome these stumbling
blocks. 
The dumpee from the beginning is Erin (Hope Davis), one of the most
interesting main characters in a long time. Erin is a quiet solitary type.
She's a nurse who likes to read. She enjoys being alone, and the only time
she feels LONELY is on a subway or in a crowded room. If only she could hate
men, her life would be so much easier. Instead, she tries to decide whether
to continue being alone or to make the effort of dating. 
This role required a sophisticated actor who could portray understated and
ambivalent emotions, and Davis did a fabulous job. She was helped by
writer/director Anderson, who surrounded Erin with extroverted friends and a
pushy, matchmaking mother. (Mom's view of single life is opposite Erin's -
she believes that women who are alone cannot be content.) 
Erin spends much of the film pondering Mr. Right: is there such a man, will
they ever meet, should she settle for less, can she be as happy without him?
Her search for love is all the more interesting because, with her solitary
personality, Mr. Perfect is not necessarily Mr. Right.  
Nevertheless, the film has chosen a match for her. The movie's sense of fate
is refreshing. In this film, Fate is not cruel or harsh, but quietly
persistent. Erin doesn't believe in fate, but Fate couldn't care less what
she thinks. 
After Erin dismisses the notion of a fated, perfect match, the movie
introduces Alan. Alan (played by Alan Gelfant) has been a plumber but he's
going back to school to study what he loves: marine biology. He is 35, but
his haggard face makes him look older. He has a tough-guy background, but
he's ready to put that behind him and start over in his new intellectual
pursuits. He is not obviously the most perfect man for Erin, but Fate seems
to think so. 
Though Erin's and Alan's stories are intercut (often cleverly), the two
don't actually meet. Each one has suitors but both are holding out for
something better, someone more perfect. 
An ingenious twist near the end of the film introduces Erin to Andre de
Silva (Josй Zъсiga), a new "Mr. Right," just before it seems that she and
Alan will meet.... 
The romantic tension is great and the dialogue is witty and sharp, but the
film does have some weak spots. Most are in Alan's subplots. He owes money
to a local mobster. When he can't pay on time, he is asked to kill a popular
fish at the aquarium where he works. As if that weren't outlandish enough,
the aquarium security guard is a clone of Don Knotts playing Barney Fife.
The scenes are a silly interlude to the main act of the movie, but they are
light enough that they don't cause any lasting harm. 
A refreshingly low-key main character, dialogue that made me laugh out loud,
and the film's belief in the gentlest kind of fate all made NEXT STOP
WONDERLAND a pleasure to watch. 
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Scott Renshaw
    "I don't believe in fate," says Erin Castleton (Hope Davis), the
wistful heroine looking for love in NEXT STOP WONDERLAND, but _someone_
calling the shots on contemporary romantic comedy sure does.  SLEEPLESS IN
SEATTLE became a huge hit introducing two destined lovers who only meet in
the film's final scene; a few years later, 'TIL THERE WAS YOU also told a
tale of lovers-to-be leading parallel lives until the closing credits
start to roll.  Earlier this year, SLIDING DOORS offered yet another
speculative stab at how and why we meet our soulmates. Something in the
zeitgeist has film-makers falling over themselves to convince us that Mr.
or Ms. Right is out there, somewhere, just waiting for us to go to the
right party or step on the right elevator.
     NEXT STOP WONDERLAND falls into that category, but only in the most
nominal sense.  It does follow the never-quite-converging lives of two
discontented singles, these two in contemporary Boston.  Erin is a nurse
in the middle of the latest of a series of serial break-ups with her
activist boyfriend (Philip Seymour Hoffman); Alan Monteiro (Alan Gelfant)
is a 35-year-old former plumber trying to break with his working class
background and become a marine biologist.  The narrative follows each of
them on the trials and tribulations of their respective lives, Erin
dealing with responses to a personal ad placed for her by her mother
(Holland Taylor), Alan fending off the advances of a fellow student (Cara
Buono) while trying to avoid the wrath of his loan shark Frank (Victor
Argo).
     The reason NEXT STOP WONDERLAND never feels exactly like a fated
romance is that it feels so grounded in the simple reality of its
protagonist.  Hope Davis is an irresistable presence as Erin, a wannabe
cynic whose romanticism bursts through in her love of her late father's
poetry.  It's as complete a female characterization as we've seen this
year -- she's smart, clever, just vulnerable enough that you feel for her,
just tough enough that you trust her.  And it doesn't hurt that she
anchors the best set-up in the script by Brad Anderson and Lyn Vaus, with
a string of would-be suitors, each more unappealing than the last, leaving
hilarious messages on the personal ad's phone line.  Anderson directs
with a 1990s Woody Allen vibe, complete with jump edits and hand-held
camera work, yet the film never comes off as derivative of either the
Allen oeuvre or other SLEEPLESS-style comedies.  A character who grabs
your interest can do that for a story.
     NEXT STOP WONDERLAND is always Erin's story, which makes Alan's half
of the film a very long introduction to "the other guy."  Gelfant is
appealing in a low-key way, but he never gets the audience as emotionally
invested in Alan's hopes and dreams as Davis does in Erin's.  He also has
to contend with a silly sub-plot involving a shady real estate developer
(Robert Klein) with an axe to grind against the aquarium where Alan
volunteers.  The time wasted on Alan kidnapping a balloonfish and dealing
with the buffoonish Frank could have been used to develop a relationship
between Alan and his father, who casts a long shadow on Alan's
aspirations.  Everything involving Alan is secondary to everything
involving Erin.
     The odd fringe benefit of this imbalance is that it takes the focus
off the question that dogged other films employing this gimmick:  why
should we think these two people belong together?  Our concern rests
squarely with Erin; we want her to be happy, whether that's with Alan, the
Brazilian charmer (Jose Zuniga) who catches her fancy, or even alone.
The coda which has been added since the film screened at the Sundance Film
Festival makes that concern even more central.  The ending is no longer
happy just because these two people meet, but because it looks like they
could be happy together, and Davis's delightful performance invests us
in her happiness.  NEXT STOP WONDERLAND is a sweet and entertaining fairy
tale not just because she finds Prince Charming, but because the one fate
we care about -- Erin's fate -- is the only one the film is realy
concerned with.

Author
Matt Williams
Next Stop Wonderland is a nice little independent gem hidden in the
post-Summer, pre-Fall film wasteland.  A quirky and enjoyable romantic
comedy, the film provides refreshing characterizations and plenty of
humor.
Erin Castleton (Hope Davis) is hopelessly single.  Her last boyfriend,
Sean (Philip Seymour Hoffman), a radical environmentalist, has just
ditched her...again.  Erin feels despondent that she never seems to meet
the right guy.
But wait...the perfect man for Erin seems to be always right around the
corner.  He's Alan Monteiro (Alan Gelfant), a part-time plumber with a
passion for marine biology.  But, although their paths keep crossing,
Alan and Erin never quite meet.
So, Erin's mother (Holland Taylor) brews up a scheme to get her daughter
safely married off.  She places an ad in the personals section for Erin
(without her knowledge).  Erin is left to cope with the 64 various
replies to her mother's slightly exaggerated ad.
In most romantic comedies, the leads meet cute, but don't get together
until the end.  Next Stop Wonderland takes the tack of Sleepless in
Seattle, or Til There Was You in which the leads don't even MEET until
the end. However, this actually works well... As usual, you know the
couple is a perfect match, but the film doesn't have to introduce
countless false obstacles to keep the characters from recognizing that
fact.
However, the film has to do something to pass the time before "the
meeting". Next Stop Wonderland handles the problem deftly...not only is
the personal ad situation amusing, but it underscores the wonderful
personalities involved all throughout the film.
Hope Davis dominates the film with her winning performance.  She even
overshadows her romantic costar, Alan Gelfant...mainly because she has
the film's most engaging subplot.  However, that's not to discount
Gelfant's performance, which is good, but simply outshone.
The conversations and characters throughout Next Stop Wonderland would
make it worth watching, even without the romance.  The romantic elements
of the film are simply icing on the cake.  Seek out this little gem.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Nick Amado
Starring: Hope Davis, Alan Gelfant, Victor Arag, Jon Benjamin
There are some truly funny lines in Next Stop Wonderland that are
caught up in a battle with forced, trendy screenwriting. It is hard to
tell which comes out on top, and it only manages to provide some
likable characters in an all-too-familiar situation. Erin (Davis) is a
young woman who is shattered when her goofy, activist boyfriend leaves
her because she doesn't support him. She then goes on a quest to meet
Mr. Right by way of her mother placing a personal add against her
will. Erin reluctantly ventures out into the singles world, makes
headway, and eventually starts making sport of the situation.
The film bounces back and forth between two characters who never
meet. Alan, a plumber who is working his way through school to become
a marine biologist, is also not burning up the dating scene. The film
is utterly predictable. We know all along that these two lonley souls
are meant for each other, though they seem unable to meet. Sadly, most
of Alan's screentime is dedicated to the film's subplot of political
muscle, trying to destroy the local aquarium for its prime real
estate. It involves the plans for a mausoleum and killing a
balloonfish. Pretty silly.
The film reminds me quite a bit of Sliding Doors in a number of
ways. Primarily, it deals with fate, Who are we supposed to spend the
rest of our lives with? and, How will we meet this person? There is
also some artsy but jarring camerawork and editing, but it dies down
about a half hour into the film. Strangely, that is when the dialogue
perks up.
Next Stop Wonderland is not a very intriguing film, though it has a
step up on the more unique Sliding Doors in that the characters are
more likable. Hope Davis is really a joy to watch. She has a very
accessable beauty that makes the audience care about her, even if she
is not being particularly charming each moment. There are some truly
funny lines, but they are few and far between. Its a story of two
people looking for romance in the wrong places. It has been my
contention that Hollywood has done a poor job with romantic comedies
in recent years, with, of course, a few exceptions. The indie film
world has done only slightly better, but neither side has managed to
produce a gem. Next Stop Wonderland falls short of the mark too.

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Hope Davis, Alan Gelfant, Victor Argo, Cara Buono, Holland
Taylor, José Zúńiga, Robert Klein
Synopsis: 
NEXT STOP WONDERLAND is a pleasant, independent, romance movie which
explores the idea of fate in romantic searching. Basically, a gal and a
guy (who are unknown to each other) are fated to get together and become
soulmates, but they keep narrowly missing bumping into each other
throughout the movie, until guess what happens? 
The lady is a nurse named Erin (Hope Davis) whose activist boyfriend has
just left her. The man is a nice guy named Alan (Alan Gelfant) who is
burning the midnight oil studying to be a marine biologist, but comes
from a family business of plumbing. Both are attractive, middle class
types, living around the Boston area near the Wonderland train station.
The background music is soft and Brazilian.
Opinion:
If your romance life has ever gone down the tubes - - say, you've just
been dumped (or duped) by a potential boyfriend or girlfriend and end up
sitting alone in a theater watching a movie - - you'll understand the
humor and appeal of NEXT STOP WONDERLAND, which makes subtle
observations about people looking for love and advocates the notion that
fate has predestined a partner for us all. It's just a matter of
accidentally bumping into them on a train or something.
Unlike the tired formula of "girl meets boy; girl loses boy; destiny
throws them back together" NEXT STOP WONDERLAND  is an exploration of
the myriad coincidences and all the little near misses that happen
BEFORE the momentous "girl meets boy" in the first place.
Bucking this year's embarrassing trend of pairing old guys with romantic
partners less than half their age (Ernest Borgnine with Jenny McCarthy
in BASEKETBALL; Nicholson with Hunt, et cetera) instead of with normal
ladies, Hope Davis and Alan Gelfant do an excellent job as the people
who are oblivious to what fate has in store for them. In the movie she's
29 and he's 35. 
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "Frisky, cultured, and carefree professional," reads Erin 
Castleton's ad in the personals section of the newspaper.  She is 
actually nothing of the kind - her pushy mother put in the ad for her 
without asking.  That's probably okay since the men who answer the ad 
aren't what they claim to be either.
     Director and editor Brad Anderson makes the ad the centerpiece of 
his breezy, little romantic comedy.  Heavy on the melancholy, the tale 
has a pervasive score full of dreamy, sad rhythms.
     Erin is a blonde with pasty white skin and dark red make-up, played 
by Hope Davis from THE DAYTRIPPERS.  Davis gives such a reserved 
performance that the audience doesn't know much more about Erin when the 
story ends than when it began.  Erin's most visible trait is her 
reluctance to smile, and the film's biggest mystery is who will make her 
smile and when.
     Erin is a Harvard Medical School dropout who is now a registered 
nurse, but the hospital part of the story is largely irrelevant.  The 
movie concerns Erin's search for a compatible partner.  (The film opens 
with her live-in boyfriend, played by Philip Seymour Hoffman, moving 
out.  He leaves her a videotape that explains point by point his 
complaints about her.)
     In a parallel story, Alan Gelfant plays Alan Monteiro, a 
35-year-old plumber who is studying to become a marine biologist.  He's 
a serious type and looks a decade older than his age.  With a constant, 
two-day-old beard, he still manages to attract a young student who looks 
like she just graduated from high school.  He tries to fend her off, but 
she keeps coming on to him.  Like Davis, Gelfant doesn't reveal much 
with his acting.
     In an overly complicated story, Alan works at an aquarium that 
wants to expand into the same area where some shady characters want to 
put a mausoleum.  Since Alan has borrowed money for his schooling from a 
loan shark, he is asked to kill Puffy the blowfish, the aquarium's and 
the kids' favorite fish.  With the fish out of the way, the bad guys 
hope the aquarium will become so unpopular it will not want to expand.  
This whole subplot borders on the ridiculous and isn't particularly 
funny.
     In easily the best part of the film, Erin chooses to call back the 
60+ men who responded to the ad.  Like a sequence from a Woody Allen 
movie, we see a whole series of "suitors" telling Erin lies calculated 
to win her heart or at least get her into bed.
     One guy says he is talking to her from the small business he owns, 
but he is actually on the toilet.  When he pulls off some toilet paper, 
he tells her it is an incoming FAX.
     Another man claims he is a graduate student at a divinity school.  
She forces him to trip over his own logic when he starts down the 
minefield of discussing whether God is male or female.
     Most guys try trite come-on lines with "You're the most beguiling 
woman I've ever met" being typical.  One man drops his wedding ring.  He 
sheepishly claims that he was divorced years ago and that he just keeps 
it in his pocket as a memento.
     Most men are so full of themselves that they sound like they might 
burst at any moment.  "I'm out there grabbing," one would-be boyfriend 
modestly explains his philosophy of life.  "I see.  I want.  I take."
     This extended comedy sketch of her interviews and trial dates works 
marvelously well, but it is not enough to sustain an entire movie.  The 
rest of the picture marks time until the sappy ending, which the story 
telegraphs in advance.
     Uta Briesewitz's handheld camera work is dizzying and confusing.  
Coupled with Anderson's fast paced and erratic editing, the movie 
becomes disorienting.  Jokes like the answering machine that keeps 
repeating "You have no messages" lose their punch in the frenzy of the 
hyperactive editing.
     With several good laughs and an undeniable charm, the picture can 
be quite entertaining.  With fewer attempts at cuteness with the camera 
and the editing and with the elimination of some of the subplots, the 
movie could have really blossomed.  As delivered, however, it has a 
hilarious comedy sketch in the middle but little more.
     NEXT STOP WONDERLAND runs 1:51.  It is rated R for profanity and 
sexual situations and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com
