Title
Review for Carlito's Way (1993)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Chuck Dowling
(1993) ****1/2 - C:Al Pacino, Sean Penn, Penelope Ann Miller, Luis Guzman,
John Leguizamo, Viggo Mortensen, Adrian Pasdar, Paul Mazursky.
Director Brian De Palma and star Al Pacino team up for the first time since
1983's "Scarface" to tell us another gangster story. Pacino plays Carlito
Brigante, a Puerto Rican street gangster who is released from jail after
serving five years of a thirty year prison term on a technicality discovered
by his sleazy, cocaine addicted lawyer friend (played excellently by Sean
Penn). Once out, he soon realizes that the streets have drastically changed.
Offers keep coming to Carlito for him to return to his criminal activities,
but he doesn't want anything to do with crime anymore. All he wants is to
earn enough money to buy into a small business owned by a former cellmate of
his down in the Bahamas. He finds that it's not so easy, however, as his
past and his strict sense of loyalty to his friends keep getting him closer
to a one way ticket straight back to jail. Pacino's role will immediately
call to mind his performance in "The Godfather Part III" as Don Corleone,
who kept trying to turn the family business legitimate, but his name and his
code of honor kept him involved the crime world.
Carlito takes a legitimate job as the manager of a local night club, hoping
to quickly earn the money he needs. It's there, ironically, where his
biggest troubles begin. Benny Blanco (Leguizamo), a small time punk who
thinks he going to be the next big boss of the city, is a loyal customer of
the club and Carlito wants nothing to do with him. This rubs Benny the wrong
way and after a couple confrontations, Carlito has his men rough Benny up
and throw him out. Benny then sets out to kill Carlito.
To make situations worse, Carlito reunites with his lover (Miller) whom he
left before heading off to jail and they rekindle their relationship. She
however wants him to leave town with her as soon as possible and cannot
understand his loyalties to the people Carlito is involved with.
"Carlito's Way" is a compelling film to watch and there's hardly a dull
moment. The acting is top-notch from everyone in the cast, especially Pacino
and Penn. It's a great looking film as well, and it has a good selection of
70s songs reflective of the time period in which the story takes place.
Patrick Doyle's score music is also effective exactly when it needs to be.
The only flaw of the film is the very first scene. De Palma has Carlito tell
the story in the overused film gimmick of flashbacks, so we see the final
scene of the film first. This ruins any possibility of suspense during the
film's final moments because we already know how everything is going to end.
"Carlito's Way" was filmed in the widescreen aspect of 2.35:1, and De Palma
takes full advantage of the enormous amount of screen space that he has to
fill. I recommend that if you do watch the film to try and watch it in its
original letterboxed format.
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,500 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office
reports, film related links, and reader's polls and reviews.

Author
Vijay Ramanujan
Cast: Al Pacino, Sean Penn, Penelope Ann Miller
     From the opening shot of Carlito Brigante (Al Pacino) being shot
in Grand Central Station, with his girlfriend Gail (Penelope Ann
Miller) by his side, you know there is going to be precious little
suspense in this movie.  Even the killer's identity is obvious halfway
through the movie (if it takes that long).  And in this case, that lack
of suspense is crucial to the success of the movie.  It doesn't allow
you to spend so much time guessing that you miss the real substance of
the movie, a character drama about a reformed mobster trying to detach
his survival instinct from his killer instinct.
     Brigante is released from prison on a technicality five years into
a thirty-year prison term, and takes this second chance as an
opportunity to go clean.  He gives an acceptance speech in the
courtroom, thanking his lawyer, his supporters, and even the
prosecutor, for obtaining evidence illegally.  His dream is to save
$75,000 to buy into a friend's car rental place in the Bahamas, and to
hook up with Gail, the girlfriend he dumped on the way into prison.
     Right from the start you know two important things. 1) Carlito
doesn't make it.  You've already seen his get shot. 2) There's
something not quite right with Kleinfeld (Sean Penn), Carlito's
lawyer.  Sean Penn turns in a great performance as the coke addicted,
unscrupulous attorney trying to become a player in the Hispanic/Italian
mob scene.  He brings Carlito into partnership with a mobster, as part
owner of a night club.  He steals a girl from Benny Blanco, an up and
coming leader in the drug trade.  He steals $1 million from a client,
bribe money intended to silence a witness.  Now the client is in jail,
and ready to kill Kleinfeld if he doesn't arrange a jail break.
     Carlito is not your typical mobster hero, in control of everything
and everyone.  In fact, there are strong indications that he is washed
up, unfit for the streets.  The first scene is an obvious tip-off.
Carlito doesn't realize that making his way out of the game is probably
harder than surviving within its confines.  He can't afford to take the
liberties with the law that his adversaries can.  Given a chance to
kill Benny Blanco, he tells his henchmen to let Blanco go, admitting
that it is probably a mistake.  But if he doesn't make that kind of
mistake, he is back in again.
     With those two characters in place, the movie is filled out with
the usual backups.  There's the suffering girlfriend who dreams of
becoming a Broadway dancer, but bides her time in a topless bar.
There's Benny, the street punk who thinks he deserves respect from the
legend, Carlito.  There's Carlito's cousin, who is making small cash
running drugs, and makes the mistake of trusting the people he deals
with.  There's the loyal sidekick, Pachango, and Sasso, the old
washed-up loser who Carlito goes into business with.  However, all of
them take on some personality of their own, with the possible exception
of Gail.
     As for the acting, the leading roles were exceptional.  On the way
out of the theater, one of the people I had seen it with complained
that Pacino no longer had the screen presence that he once had, that he
doesn't seem as intimidating and as for the acting, the leading roles
were exceptional.  On the way out of the theater, one of the people I
had seen it with complained that Pacino no longer had the screen
presence that he once had, that he doesn't seem as intimidating
anymore.  All of those things could be said of Carlito.  He not only
looks confused, but gives the feeling that this used to come
naturally.  And Penn, as I said earlier, was excellent in showing
Kleinfeld's descent, and eventual madness.
     The supporting roles were good, especially Blanco, but nothing
spectacular.  The direction was obviously well done, especially the
first and last scenes, in Grand Central Station.  Overall, the movie
rates a high three on a four-point scale.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Brian De Palma
Writer: David Koepp (based on the novels "Carlito's Way" and "After
Hours" by Edwin Torres)
Starring: Al Pacino, Sean Penn, Penelope Ann Miller, John Leguiziamo,
Luis Guzman, John Rebhorn, Viggio Mortensen, Jorge Porcel
What's shocking about "Carlito's Way" is how good it is.  Having gotten
a bit of a bad rap for not being a big box office hit like Pacino's
previous film, "Scent of a Woman," and not having as strong a
performance as he did in that one (he had just won an Oscar), "Carlito's
Way" was destined for underrated heaven.  That's what it is: an
underrated gem of a movie.  And what a shame because Pacino and De Palma
both do amazing jobs with it, and turn it into a great piece of a pulpy
character study.
"Carlito's Way" deals with, well, Carlito Brigante (Pacino), a Puerto
Rican ex-drug kingpin, who gets out of a long jailterm when his
coke-addicted, curly-haired lawyer (Sean Penn) points out a legal
technicality.  Of course, Carlito was actually awoken in prison, and has
decided to go straight, even if he's really a crook at heart.  Carlito,
like Barry Lyndon, is a man who is trapped by fate at every turn, and
can't escape into something he is not.
Carlito's attempts at a clean, legal life are thwarted at nearly every
turn.  When he first gets out, a friend of his ends up leading him into
a big shoot-out, where he has to kill a couple people to survive.  He's
constantly getting bugged by the government to see if he's doing
anything illegal, and his lawyer finds himself neck-deep in a pile of
shit, needing him to try and help him out, which includes him doing some
prison breaking.
Carlito, like Ratso Rizzo, wants to go to Miami (since, according to
film logic, that's where it's at), but needs some funding.  Being a
legend, he is quickly able to get a nice job running a big dance club
(this is the 70s, by the way, and since some of this takes place in
night clubs, we get to hear all sorts of 70s classics, including several
K.C. and the Sunshine Band tunes - my personal favorite).  He gets a
bodyguard (the great Luis Guzman, at his best), and is soon running a
pretty good business, even if he's constantly attracting underworld
young thugs, like Benny Blanco "from the Bronx" (John Leguiziamo), who
is more than once pointed out to be a young version of Carlito.
On the other side, the symbol of promise and hope, is Gail (Penelope Ann
Miller - what happened to her?), his girlfriend from before prison. 
She's a goregeous ballerina, and a stripper, and soon Carlito is trying
to get back with her, and take her with him when he finally leaves for
Miami.  While this relationship is never fully defined or anything, we
get a sense of love between them, and they have some truly interesting
scenes between them (she never gives him addresses or locales - he
always has to track her down).
All of these elements clash together at the end, in a brilliantly
executed, emotional climax, which is inevitable.  When I say inevitable,
I mean we see it at the beginning and then backtrack, putting a great
spin on it.  Sure, it's going to eleveate some of the tension, but it
gives the film a lot of depth, as Carlito is seen trapped by fate. 
What's amazing is the big chase sequence (amazingly done by De Palma)
has a lot of tension and thrills.  Like "Apollo 13," we know what's
going to happen, but we're still thrilled by what happens in the
middle.  It's also very emotional, thanks to a great script by David
Koepp, and amazing performances by Pacino and Miller.
De Palma is famous (or infamous) for lots of violence in his films.  His
earlier flim, "Scarface" (which starred Pacino in the lead), has a ton
of it, especially at the end (and a nasty chainsaw scene towards the
beginning which I'm still not over).  But De Palma actually reigns in
more quieter scenes.  To me, the best scene in the film is when Carlito
is on top of a building, looking down into the room where Gail is doing
ballet.  This is the most brilliantly done, and most emotionally
stimulating scene in the entire film, and probably the best in De Palma
film history.  With a gorgeous soprano duet in the background, and rain
pouring down onto a trashcan lid covering Carlito's head, and a
saddened, remorseful look on Pacino's face, it's a tear-jerker (well,
for me, I dunno about you...).
The acting from all is great, especially from the three leads.  Pacino
was panned for his performance, chiefly because his accent wasn't Puerto
Rican enough and, well, it wasn't as "strong" as his Oscar-winning role
in "Scent of a Woman."  Well, his "Scent of a Woman" performance was
great and all, but it was nothing really but, as comic Kevin Pollack
said, a "Foghorn Leghorn impression."  In "Carlito's Way," he's
emotional, and strong, despite the fact that he's remorseful over his
entire lifestyle, which he cannot change.  I felt more for Carlito
Brigante than I did for the tango-dancing, insult-throwing blind guy in
"Scent of a Woman."
As I said, Penelope Ann Miller is great, and she and Pacino actually
have very good chemistry.  And they're scenes are well-written, with
some good clever dialogue which adds some interest to an otherwise bland
relationship.  And Sean Penn is amazing as the coke-addicted rat
attorney.  Every scene he's in, he has great energy, and even measures
up to the greatness that is Pacino.  In smaller roles, John Leguiziamo
and Luis Guzman are great.
"Carlito's Way" is one of those films which you heard about briefly, but
when you finally watch it, you're absolutely blown away.  It's a
wonderful film, a highly underrated little masterpiece which was shelved
after it didn't do so hot.  But trust me and check it out.  It's a great
little film, and proof that the residential critics and mass populus are
not always right.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Steve Rhodes
     I know I should have liked CARLITO'S WAY, but it just did not work
for me.  Granted there was a lot of dreamy music as you watched an old
time drug dealer played by Al Pacino trying to go straight.  His
performance was good albeit it fairly monotonous.
     Sean Penn was in it, and was wonderful as a drug taking, evil
lawyer.  This type of role is usually overacted, but Penn, who has been
done for overacting on too many occasions, was believable and
fascinating.  It MIGHT be worth going to see the show to see Penn's
performance, but I don't think so.
     The director was Brian De Palma.  He is a director who is willing
to take risks and his work product shows it.  He has directed some of
the best (THE AGE OF INNOCENCE, UNTOUCHABLES, BODY DOUBLE, SCARFACE,
and WISE GUYS) and some of the worse (RAISING CAIN and BONFIRE OF THE
VANITIES).  I would put CARLITO'S WAY as a so-so show, I give it **,
but I do not recommend it.
     Overall, I just could not care about these people.  They could
live or die; I didn't care.  If you do go, besides Penn's role to
enjoy, there are wonderful rain scenes in New York.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Brian Koller
After the disastrous "Bonfire of the Vanities", director
Brian De Palma recovered his career by making a
sure-fire, more conventional film: a crime drama starring
Al Pacino.  While no one will put "Carlito's Way" in
the same category as "The Godfather", it is a slightly
better film than it has been given credit for.  There
is much dramatic tension, the presence of Sean Penn
adds pathos, and the disco-era soundtrack is good.
"Carlito's Way" is based on the true story of Charlie
Brigante.  Brigante (Pacino) is a career criminal,
released from prison in 1975.  He has a deserved
reputation as a narcotics kingpin, but tries to go
straight upon his release.  He runs a disco nightclub,
but inevitably events and loyalties pull him back
into criminal activity.  David Kleinfeld (Penn)
is his brilliant but unstable lawyer, Penelope Ann
Miller is his girlfriend, Luis Guzman is his bodyguard.
John Leguizamo has a small but important part as
rising gangster Benny Blanco from the Bronx.
In "Scarface", Pacino was a Cuban gangster.  In
"Carlito's Way", he is a Puerto Rican gangster.  (In a
rare moment of comedy, an Italian mobster comments
that Pacino 'even looks Italian'.) Pacino is stonefaced
throughout, but he has an intense, world-weary coolness
that gives him star presence.  Sean Penn is well-cast
for his character, initially smug but soon decaying into
a psychopathic cokehead.  Miller is lovely but looks
unhappy throughout, adding to the 'onset of doom' feeling
that permeates the film.  Penn and Miller received
Golden Globe nomimations for their performances.
I'll always take a disco soundtrack over a John Williams
score, but someone should have told Jellybean Benitez
that Cheryl Lynn's hit "Got to Be Real" was from 1979.
The best part of "Carlito's Way" is the dramatic
tension.  Pacino has to resort to gunplay on several
occasions, and admittedly these are the best scenes.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Brian DePalma needs a hit *really* badly.  Since scoring big with
THE UNTOUCHABLES in 1987, DePalma has seen CASUALTIES OF WAR, RAISING
CAIN and particularly the disastrous BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES go down in
flames.  Consequently, it would be easy enough to consider CARLITO'S
WAY a shrewd commercial choice for DePalma, reteaming with Al Pacino
(SCARFACE) and returning to the gangland ground which has yielded his
two greatest box office successes.  It doesn't hurt any that he has
latched on to a solid story and brought out dynamite performances from
Pacino and Sean Penn.  CARLITO'S WAY, while hampered by DePalma's
characteristic excesses and stylistic cannibalism, is a truly tense and
engrossing drama.
     Carlito Brigante (Pacino) is a life-long criminal who finds
himself unexpectedly given a second chance.  In 1975, Carlito is
released from prison after serving only five years of a thirty year
sentence when his conviction is overturned on a technicality.  He
declares himself reformed, tired of life on the streets and determined
to fulfill his simple dream of buying into a rental car business in the
Bahamas.  Among those who find this conversion hard to believe are
David Kleinfeld (Penn), Carlito's crooked attorney and childhood
friend, and bodyguard Pachanga (Luis Guzman).  Carlito rediscovers old
flame Gail (Penelope Ann Miller), and seems ready to retire in peace.
Old ways die hard, though, and old associates pull Carlito step by step
back into a life he can't seem to shake.
     CARLITO'S WAY will probably make the strongest impression with the
two outstanding set pieces which bracket the film.  In the first,
Carlito accompanies his young cousin on a drug buy which will have
anyone with a pulse on the edge of their seat; the film closes with an
equally thrilling chase through the New York subway and Grand Central
Station.  Both highlight DePalma's gift for choreographed mayhem, and
these are not the only occasions when the stage blood flows freely.
Yet for all the viscera, I found the character study even more
compelling.  Carlito Brigante has a lot of Michael Corleone in him, an
aging gangster trying unsuccessfully to go legit.  But where the
culmination of the GODFATHER saga played like opera, there's more of an
immediacy to CARLITO'S WAY, an ever-present sense of doom launched by
the title sequence which sets the flashback story in motion.  You sense
that there's no way, after so many years, that Carlito can stay out of
trouble.  Indeed, he observes that his attempt at the straight life is
more a function of time than a change of heart:  "You don't get
reformed; you just run out of wind."  Pacino captures Carlito's dilemma
with surprising subtlety and the cautious observation borne of years of
experience watching every corner for an enemy.  Sean Penn is even
better, turning in his best performance to date as Kleinfeld.  A Jew in
the world of Puerto Rican and Italian wiseguys, Kleinfeld is an
outsider with a huge chip on his shoulder.  He could have been simply
pathetic, a heavy drinker and cocaine addict playing tough with guys
way out of his league, but Penn invests Kleinfeld with tremendous
nervous energy and an overwhelming survival instinct.  He shows a man
moving steadily towards the brink, making the moment he goes over quite
jolting.
     As compelling as the narrative is, viewers may experience a
profound sense of deja vu.  DePalma continues to steal shamelessly from
other directors, this time adding Scorsese to his repertoire with a
point of view tracking shot and a Copacabana scene with more than
passing resemblances to GOODFELLAS.  He even recycles some of his own
previous plagiarisms, like a 360 degree swing around a kiss (VERTIGO
via BODY DOUBLE) and the climactic shootout which will strike many as
far too reminiscent of the train station sequence from THE
UNTOUCHABLES.  From a story standpoint, there's an obligatory love
story with a cliche'd long-suffering girlfriend character.  Penelope
Ann Miller is a good but limited actor who doesn't do anything new with
the role, and eventually she becomes just a distraction, never
integrated fully enough into the story.
     Still, it's easier to be forgiving of superficial flaws when the
backbone is so solid.  The two principle characters held an iron grip
on my attention, one all the cinematic thievery in the world couldn't
break.  CARLITO'S WAY plays like a tragic novel:  deliberate, confident
and powerful.  Those willing to grant DePalma his tendencies towards
the extreme should find themselves well- rewarded.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Al Pacino, Sean Penn, Penelope Ann Miller, John Leguizumo
Director:  Brian DePalma
Producers:  Martin Bregman, Will Baer, and Michael S. Bregman
Screenplay:  David Koepp based on the novels CARLITO'S WAY and 
             AFTER HOURS by Justice Edwin Torres
Music:  Patrick Doyle
Released by Universal Pictures
     The first scene of CARLITO'S WAY is in black-and-white, and
features a close-up of a bearded Al Pacino as someone puts three
bullets into him.  He slides to the ground and, as the stretcher
arrives to wheel him away for medical care, he begins a mental
monologue that forms the running narrative for the movie--the story of
how Carlito Briganti (Pacino) came to be in this unenviable position.
     It is 1975 in New York City, and Carlito has just been released
from prison as the result of a clever appeal by his good friend and
lawyer David Kleinfeld (Sean Penn).  After delivering an impassioned
speech to the court about how he now intends to go clean, the former
assassin and "J.P. Morgan of the smack business" returns to his Puerto
Rican neighborhood to run a disco club with the aim of legitimately
earning the $75,000 he needs to buy into a rental car business in the
Bahamas.  Along the way, however, Carlito discovers that a violent
reputation isn't easily dismissed, and before long he's forced into a
kill or be killed situation.  Balancing the negative influences in
Carlito's life is his girlfriend Gail (Penelope Ann Miller), one of the
few people he truly trusts.
     Brian DePalma has been on a skid recently.  Although several years
in the past, his disastrous version of THE BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES is
still fresh in the minds of everyone unfortunate enough to have endured
it, and his "return" to the thriller genre with RAISING CAIN wasn't a
whole lot more promising.  CARLITO'S WAY is a step up, but this is not
the same DePalma who got the adrenaline moving with THE UNTOUCHABLES.
     CARLITO'S WAY has a number of superbly-directed action sequences,
and there are moments of absolute brilliance, but these are connected
by a plodding narrative that sputters to find an appropriate pace.  Two
hours and twenty minutes is too long for this motion picture; there are
numerous scenes that could have found their way to the cutting room
floor without sacrificing much of the story.  DePalma, however, appears
unwilling to have cut anything with Pacino in it (the shooting script
was nearly identical to the finished product).
     The last half-hour has the electricity of any good thriller,
except for one little problem:  we already know the ending.  Some films
(NO WAY OUT comes to mind) are aided by the method employed here:
starting at the end, then going back and telling the bulk of the story
as a flashback.  CARLITO'S WAY is not one of these.  By knowing that
Carlito is going to be shot (not to mention how it's going to happen),
it drains away suspense from the big chase through Grand Central
Station.  In fact, it's amazing that DePalma manages to raise the
finale to the level of excitement he achieves.
     Presenting CARLITO'S WAY in this curious fashion is apparently
motivated by a desire to have Al Pacino narrate the story.  This is a
bad decision in more than one way, since the voice-overs are largely
redundant, consisting of observations like "I had a bad feeling about
this" or "Bad move," most of which the viewer can figure out on his or
her own.
     Coming off of his virtuoso performance in SCENT OF A WOMAN, one
expects a lot from Pacino, and he really doesn't deliver.  His
portrayal of Carlito is competent, but not masterful.  While it's
helpful to remember that a below-par offering from Pacino is often
better than an outstanding job by many other actors, that doesn't
prevent the viewer from comparing this to SCARFACE, SERPICO, SCENT, AND
JUSTICE FOR ALL, and THE GODFATHERs.  Pacino fails to invest Carlito
with much energy, and there are times when the performance is flat.
     Also, it becomes something of a challenge to identify Pacino's
constantly-shifting accent.  Sometimes it sounds Puerto Rican (which
it's supposed to be), but there are moments when it strays towards
Italian or is marked by a leftover Southern strain from SCENT OF A
WOMAN.  There are not, however, any "Hoo-haa"s.
     Perhaps the biggest surprise with respect to the cast is that
Pacino gets out-acted by Sean Penn, who hardly looks like himself with
frizzy hair and nerdy glasses.  Penn plays an exceptionally annoying
lawyer who spends most of his time snorting cocaine, and he does an
excellent job in this low-key, but critical, role.
     For the most part, Penelope Ann Miller is "just there."  Her Gail
is perhaps too sweet to work in a strip joint and be the boyfriend of a
gangster; it isn't until one of her last scenes when we see a harder
edge, and even then her performance verges on histrionics.  Gail's love
is supposed to represent Carlito's redemption, and the reason he thinks
dreams are worth having, but I'm not sure the connection between them
is strong enough for this to come across.
     David Koepp's screenplay has some winning lines (such as "Favor
gonna kill you faster than a bullet"), which isn't surprising
considering the source material.  The movie is based on two novels
(CARLITO'S WAY and AFTER HOURS) by New York Justice Edwin Torres, one
of the city's harshest judges (in sentencing one criminal, Torres
informed him that "your parole officer hasn't been born yet").  Torres
writes from his experience of what passes through his courtroom, so
parts of CARLITO'S WAY are based, however loosely, on reality.
     Technically, CARLITO'S WAY is a combination of the innovative and
the banal.  The camerawork is invigorating, if sometimes a bit too
exotic.  DePalma makes good use of the steadicam during the chase
sequences, and this heightens whatever tension is present.  Jellybean
Benitez, a former DJ and club manager, is the music supervisor, and his
choice of about a dozen mid-seventies hits helps to establish the
time-frame.  Patrick Doyle's score, however, is horribly out-of-place.
The composer may do exceptional work for Kenneth Branagh, but his other
movie music isn't particularly noteworthy.
     CARLITO'S WAY probably should have been a taut thriller, but
choices by DePalma in both presentation and editing have hamstrung it.
With the expectations for this film as high as they were, the impact
should have been more forceful, and the focus better tuned.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
