Title
Review for Prefontaine (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Hollywood)
Starring:  Jared Leto, R. Lee Ermey, Ed O'Neil, Amy Locane.
Screenplay:  Steve James and Eugene Corr.
Producers:  Irby Smith, Mark Lutz, John Doonan, Peter Gilbert.
Director:  Steve James.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity)
Running Time:  103 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     As the opening scenes of PREFONTAINE unfold, you could be excused for
worrying about its prospects as a drama.  Those scenes include a lot of
documentary-style footage of track races, as well as "talking head" shots
of the actors playing Steve Prefontaine's friends and family, complete
with captions identifying the characters.  Is Steve James, director of the
acclaimed 1994 documentary HOOP DREAMS, simply planning to tick off the
significant events of Prefontaine's life, accompanied by predictably
glowing commentary?  Is he going to be able to tell us a story?  Well,
anyone concerned about James' ability as a story-teller didn't see HOOP
DREAMS.  Though he may have a few things to learn about directing actors
and writing dialogue, James crafts PREFONTAINE into a compelling character
study which takes surprising turns for a sports film.
     Jared Leto stars as Steve "Pre" Prefontaine, a distance-running
prodigy from the small Oregon town of Coos Bay.  Courted out of high
school in 1969 by dozens of colleges, Pre opts to stay close to home and
attend the University of Oregon, where nationally renowned coach Bill
Bowerman (R. Lee Ermey) leads the track team.  Pre's intense desire to win
makes him an instant success, transcending the sport to become a celebrity
who brings attention to the previously under-appreciated 5,000 meter
event.  With success comes high expectations, however, and Pre heads to
the 1972 Munich Olympics favored to take home a gold medal.  Then tragedy
strikes in Munich, changing the complexion of the Games and setting up a
showdown with Swedish sensation Lasse Viren (Tracy Hollister) which will
change Pre's life forever.
     One of the things which makes PREFONTAINE more satisfying than the
average underdog-makes-good bio-pic is that the style gives it a unique
rhythm.  James has cinematographer Peter Gilbert employ a hand-held camera
for many sequences, creating a kind of urgent energy which matches
Prefontaine's personality.  The script does an efficient job of
establishing how his lack of success as an under-sized youth baseball and
football player drove him to find a place where his refusal to surrender
would be enough, as well as the arrogant sense of personal invincibility
which often made him reckless.  Jared Leto (heartthrob Jordan Catalano
from "My So-Called Life") gives a naturalistic performance encouraged by
the documentary style, but his intensity isn't always as convincing as
it could be.  He has the golden boy charisma down pat, without all the
ferocity.
     He is convincing enough, however, to make the arc of his character
intriguing.  The pivot point of PREFONTAINE is Pre's Olympic final, which
is delayed by the terrorist attack on the Israeli athletes in the Olympic
village; as Pre's doubts begin to grow, the race becomes a frightening
first opportunity to fail.  Then PREFONTAINE makes the unexpected choice
not to be about whether or not Pre wins his race, but about how he
responds to a disappointing result.  James' use of documentary clips from
the Olympics does slow the film down somewhat, but it also establishes the
1972 Olympics as a kind of turning point in the perception of "amateur"
athletics.  As Pre becomes an unlikely advocate for the rights of amateur
athletes, and for reforms in the governing process, his character shifts
from a youth obsessed with the idea that only winning can earn him respect
to a man who learns to find success in different ways.  Most sports movies
are about the main character(s) winning, and a few are about  the main
character(s) just doing their best.  I can't think of many other sports
movies which were about a character who learns to define himself apart
from his sport.
     There are plenty of places Steve James betrays his inexperience with
fiction film-making, notably with some flat characters like Pre's
girlfriend Nancy (Amy Locane) and the tough-but-caring coach played with
enthusiasm by R. Lee Ermey, as well as a pace which makes PREFONTAINE feel
long at only 105 minutes.  Yet there are two scenes in which James shows
the kind of handle he has on his material.  The first is the Olympic 5,000
meter race, directed with a pulse-quickening energy; you know someone is
doing an exceptional job of film-making if you know the result of the race
and you are still sitting on the edge of your seat.  The second is more
subtle, but perhaps more important to the impact of Prefontaine's story.
After showing us a number of early scenes in which the cocky Pre races his
MG around treacherous curves, James gives us a late scene in which Pre,
filled with satisfaction after organizing a successful challenge match
with the Swedish national team, drives home from a party.  There is an
almost subliminal cut-away to his speedometer, showing him driving a
cautious 35 miles per hour when he collides with another car.  Prefontaine
died in the crash at the age of 24, and the success of PREFONTAINE as a
film comes from the fact that we appreciate this tragedy not as the loss
of a fine athlete, but as the loss of someone who was becoming a fine
human being.  A subtle distinction, perhaps, but one which separates
mediocre directors from good ones.  Steve James knows his film-making,
whether the subject is fact or fiction.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Jared Leto, R. Lee Ermey, Ed O'Neill, Lindsay Crouse, Amy Locane, 
      Peter Anthony Jacobs, Henri Lubatti, Laurel Holloman 
Director: Steve James 
Producers: Jon Lutz, Irby Smith, Mark Doonan, Peter Gilbert  
Screenplay: Steve James and Eugene Corr 
Cinematography: Peter Gilbert 
Music: Mason Daring 
U.S. Distributor: Hollywood Pictures 
     Steve James and Peter Gilbert, the men behind 1995's unexpected 
sensation, HOOP DREAMS, must have a fondness for the documentary format, 
since they have attempted to apply it to their first narrative feature.  
PREFONTAINE, based on the life of the '70s track phenom who captivated 
the United States' imagination, is presented as half-story, half faux 
documentary, with actors who have been unconvincingly aged by bad makeup 
jobs looking back two decades and reminiscing about the title character.   
     I suppose that James and Gilbert intended to be somewhat 
unconventional with this approach (maybe to differentiate their film 
from PRE, another Prefontaine bio-pic due to arrive in theaters during 
the Fall), but it isn't wholly successful.  For the most part, the 
documentary segments, in addition to being unilluminating, are 
intrusive.  Every time we're getting into the story, it seems that 
there's a cut away to someone in the "present" who has a point to make 
about their friend/son/boyfriend/student.  Fortunately, this distracting 
technique largely disappears during the film's second half. 
     During the early '70s, Steve Prefontaine was the James Dean of 
track.  The University of Oregon student set nearly every NCAA distance 
record before competing in the 1972 Munich Olympics, where he failed to 
win a medal.  Following his spectacular downfall on the world's stage, 
Prefontaine (or "Pre" as he was commonly called) never recaptured the 
public's imagination the way he had in his halcyon pre-Olympic days.  He 
was gearing up for an appearance in the 1976 Montreal games when, at the 
age of 24, he died in an alcohol-related single car accident that 
further accentuated his similarities to Dean. 
     Prefontaine's sole goal in life was to win, and his arrogant self-
confidence rubbed both friends and enemies the wrong way.  Losing 
gracefully was anathema.  He ran every race to win, but, when it came to 
the biggest race of his life, he didn't quite have enough.  Not only did 
Prefontaine miss the gold, but he fell to fourth place and didn't even 
earn the bronze.  The obsessive drive and determination of the young 
athlete are characteristics that James' film effectively captures.  
There are areas of Prefontaine's personality that are left half-explored 
(such as his family relationships), but the competitive spirit bubbles 
to the surface. 
     Jared Leto does such an excellent job of imitating Prefontaine that 
the film makers are able to seamlessly intercut archival footage of the 
real figure with that of Leto and not destroy the illusion.  In fact, 
Leto looks so much like Pre that contemporaries of the track star have 
commented about how eerie it is watching the film.  Other than Leto, who 
is PREFONTAINE's central focus, everyone in the cast has a supporting 
role.  R. Lee Ermey plays Bill Bowerman, Pre's tough-talking coach.  Ed 
O'Neill is Bowerman's assistant, Bill Dellinger.  Linsay Crouse is Pre's 
mother, Peter Anthony Jacobs is his father, and Amy Locane and Laurel 
Holloman are his two girlfriends.   
     When James stays in the '70s, he fashions an involving, 
occasionally gripping, motion picture.  The sequences at the Munich 
Olympics, which feature footage of Jim McKay reporting on the tragic 
death of 11 Israeli athletes at the hands of Arab terrorists, are 
extremely well-constructed.  The blend of new material and genuine video 
creates a disturbing "you are there" sensation.  Nothing else in 
PREFONTAINE works quite as well as this.   
     Because it mostly follows classic true-to-life sports movie 
formulas, Prefontaine's story is undeniably cinematic, although it's 
essentially missing a final act.  That's not because the main character 
dies, but because he loses the big race without ever getting a chance to 
make recompense.  James tries too hard to bring closure to Pre's life, 
and, as a result, strays a little too far into melodrama.  The tearful 
reminiscences at the end, not to mention some of the stuff at the 
funeral, lay it on thickly. 
     It will be interesting to see how the bigger budgeted PRE develops 
the same story, although it probably won't look anything like a 
documentary.  PREFONTAINE loses some of its dramatic energy by opting 
for that approach.  Still, structural problems aside, the film 
effectively conveys a great deal of information about the track legend 
without ever adopting a didactic tone.  We feel things along with Pre, 
and, by the time the final credits roll, we have developed an 
appreciation for what the sports world lost on that night in 1975 when 
track's most colorful athlete crossed his last finish line. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     When I went into the press screening of PREFONTAINE, I was excited
on several counts.  First, and foremost, director Steve James's last
picture was the great documentary HOOP DREAMS, which he produced and
directed.  I cannot tell you how much I loved that movie.  It easily
made the top of my best of the year list for 1994 as it did both
Siskel's and Ebert's.  Second, it was exciting to see a brilliant
documentarian try his hand at his first non-documentary.  Finally, the
story of someone billed as the "James Dean of track," sounded
provocatively interesting.
     Before I begin commenting of the quality on the film, a warning is
perhaps in order.  After being presented the facts in the film, and I
will accept them all as true, I believe that Steve Prefontaine was a
dedicated and highly successful athlete who overcame the handicap of
his less than optimal physique to set many track records in the United
States.  He was great, but I cannot say the same for the film about his
life.  It was a big disappointment for me.
     The biggest problem with the movie is the script by Steve James
and Eugene Corr.  It rarely rings true and is full of trite little
phrases.  The more obvious, but actually secondary, problem is that
James decided to make PREFONTAINE as if it were a documentary.  There
are numerous cuts to talking heads where the actors with the
character's names below them talk as if they were not actors.  A little
of this might have worked, but combined with the poor script, it came
off as terribly stilted.  The film's pacing is uneven so that the film
frequently drags.  Many scenes that editor Peter Frank should have
deleted are included.
     Jared Leto plays Steve Prefontaine.  Leto has deep blue eyes that
seem to engulf the viewer.  Prefontaine, known as Pre, was a cocky kid
who was too small but tried every sport he could when he was a
youngster.  He finally found that he could excel at running so he set
his sights on the mile since that was the glamour race in track at the
time.  Pre had a big ego and tried to upstage his teammates whenever he
could.  Although physically charming, I had a lot of trouble believing
Leto was the Pre that they talked about.  Leto smiles excessively and
is never convincing as someone who is supposedly so obsessed with
winning.
     Pre goes to the University of Oregon where he plans on being the
next Jim Ryan.  There he meets legendary coach and the co-founder of
Nike, Bill Bowerman.  Bowerman is played by classic tough guy actor R.
Lee Ermey.  His signature role was as Sgt. Hartman in FULL METAL
JACKET, but more recently he has been in SEVEN and DEAD MAN WALKING.
If you recognize his voice, it may be because he did the voice of the
Sergeant in TOY STORY.  In PREFONTAINE he plays his character as too
aloof and quirky.  Except for the great shoes he makes for Pre, Ermey's
coach seems disinterested and fairly useless.  My suspicion is that
Bowerman was more than just the cobbler to which the film relegates
him.
     Easily the best part of the picture is when Pre is running.  The
high point of the movie is the match up between him and a Finnish
runner for the 5,000 meter race at the 1972 Olympics.
     The way in which Pre switches to the three mile race from
competing for the one mile is glossed over too quickly.  Too often the
film is full of talking heads and short, hallow speeches when it should
have been back on the field.
     The further the film gets away from the track, the more it bogs
down.  Pre has to answer mindless questions from the reporters like,
"Hey Pre, how you going to beat the best of the world on their turf?"
     A typical scene has the camera cut to the mom (Lindsay Crouse with
an exaggerated German accent as Elfriede) and the dad (Peter Anthony
Jacobs as Ray) in the stands.  The camera will linger only long enough
for the dad to say, "He ran his heart out."  In another, Pre's coach
tells him, "Nobody can ever coach desire."  Pre's story is reduced to a
series of banal sound bites by the script and the editor.
     The film tries to cast the organization that runs amateur track
(ATU) as a villain, but it makes the ATU into such a Pillsbury Doughboy
that it is not particularly effective.
     About the only line in the film that was worth pondering was the
wisdom from the discus thrower Mac Wilkins (Brian McGovern).  "I live
for the discus," he confesses.  "I hate Christmas and Thanksgiving and
Easter -- anything that breaks my routine."
     Many actors are wasted in the film, but none so badly as Amy
Locane, who was excellent last year in her Lolita-style part in CARRIED
AWAY.  Most people missed her performance in it, which is a shame.  In
PREFONTAINE she plays Nancy Alleman, who is one of Pre's girlfriends.
This talented actress is given a part with no substance.  She is
supposed to be a member of the women's track team, but the movie
introduces this fact, then promptly ignores it.
     Very few documentarians are good at making feature length movies.
Michael Apted (28 UP, 35 UP, GORKY PARK and GORILLAS IN THE MIST) is
the only one I know who can do both well.  Steve James can do
incredible documentaries.  He should stick to what he does best.
     PREFONTAINE runs about 1:45.  It is rated PG-13 for two intense,
but non-graphic, violent scenes and for some profanity.  There was what
appeared to be a seven-year-old near me.  The movie scared him quite a
bit in the intense parts.  Kids, say nine or ten and up, should be able
to handle the movie fine.  A close call, but PREFONTAINE is not well
made enough for me to recommend it.  Perhaps someone will do or perhaps
someone has already done a documentary on Steve Prefontaine's life.
That I would like to see.  I give the movie PREFONTAINE **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
