Title
Review for Danei mitan linglingfa (1996)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David Sunga
Written by: Kuk Tak-chiu, (Gu Dezhao) and Lo Man-shun (Lao Wensheng)
Starring: Stephen Chiau Shing-chi, Carina Lau Kar-ling, Carman Lee
Yeuk-tung, Cheung Tat-Ming, Law Kar-Ying, Manfred Wong (Man Jun),
Ingredients: Hero nerd, faithful wife, ancient Chinese kingdom with
Barney Fife-type emperor, outrageously costumed bad guys
Synopsis: 
FORBIDDEN CITY COP is a Steven Chiau comedy. It's the sequel to another 
Chiau comedy called FROM BEIJING WITH LOVE.
The setting is a shining Chinese City whose evil enemies from the
neighboring Gum Kingdom constantly plot the city's downfall. Among the
colorful bad guys are No Face Man (he has no eyes, nose or mouth), his
wife the Throwing Star Leaf Lady (blowing leaves act like ninja throwing
stars and kill people), and their son, Supertwin Guy (whose special
Siamese twin costume enables him to animate one of two connected bodies,
but you never know which). 
Nerdy main man Ling Ling Fat (Stephen Chow Shing-chi) is a smart-alecky
castle guard with contemporary humor. As the film starts, the Emperor (a
Barney Fife kind of guy) fires Fat because Fat is completely weak and
incompetent at kung fu. Fat can't compete with better superheroes on the
royal force, including Iron Clothe, Unbreakable Leg, Ghostly
Crossdresser and Five Animal Fists. 
Fat is skinny and weak, and he has no superpowers, but he has a lovely
supportive wife named Shing (Carina Lau Kar-ling). Fat is also a
talented tinker (he invents the helicopter among other things) as well
as a bungling herbalist, but his main concern is to redeem himself and
get back on the royal force. 
There are two main adventures for Fat in this film.
In the first adventure, the evil No Face Man and his minions plot to
kidnap the Emperor and to kill off all the doctors in China by luring
them to a bogus surgical convention, setting up a spoof of the Alien
Autopsy. 
In the next adventure, the Emperor sends Fat on a mission to spy on a
prospective concubine (Carman Lee) staying at the local brothel. Fat
ends up battling seduction and supernatural forces. 
Opinion:
Although FORBIDDEN CITY COP is primarily a vehicle for comedian Chiau,
the cast - -  especially leading ladies Carina Lau and Carman Lee - - do
an excellent job at fleshing out their lesser characters in order to
support Chiau's acting. The result is a well balanced and hilarious
movie.
Imagine a contemporary 1990s wimpy wiseguy in a NAKED GUN police comedy
thrown back in time to ancient China, and you'll have a good idea of the
style and pacing of FORBIDDEN CITY COP. The pace slows in the space
between the two adventures where nothing much happens, but once the
second adventure gets underway, the gags are again well-timed and funny.
FORBIDDEN CITY COP manages to spoof several familiar movies and modern
society including the Oscars and DR. NO.
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com
