Title
Review for Waking Life (2001)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
If you're at the theatre and the movie you're watching feels like a
nightmare, you've probably wandered into Serendipity.  But if the images on
the screen make you feel as though you're floating through someone else's
loopy dream, you must be watching Richard Linklater's Waking Life. It's a
terrific new picture that, despite playing tricks with your eyes and making
your head hurt as you begin to obsess about your own dreams, is worth every
single, precious minute.
Unconventional in just about every way possible, Life is the first animated
feature to be shot on digital video.  If the previous sentence makes little
sense to you, you're not alone.  Here's the deal: Linklater (The Newton
Boys) filmed his own script with handheld digital cameras, edited it, and
then turned it over to an animation team that used rotoscoping software to
trace over the video images.  The result is like a watercolor painting come
to life.  It's amazing.  It's breathtaking.  It's hell-a-cool.
The story itself, which actually barely matters here, is really just dozens
of vignettes that feature an unnamed protagonist played by Wiley Wiggins (he
had a small part in Linklater's Dazed and Confused), a college grad
stumbling from one wacky encounter to the next.  Everyone he meets has a
story to tell or some type of unsolicited diatribe to pitch.  Eventually, he
realizes it's all a dream and fights to wake up, only to learn he was in a
dream within a dream.
Seemingly unable to really wake up, the young man tries to understand the
meaning of dreams and, of course, everyone is willing to lay polysyllabic
explanations at his feet.  Each has their own crackpot theory - some are
pretentiously absurd and some are thought-provoking.  Like I said earlier,
though, none of it matters because you'll be so entirely hypnotized by the
visuals.
Part of me wonders if Linklater made the dialogue easy to ignore on purpose.
We're talking about lines like "I feel that the time has come to project my
own inadequacies and dissatisfactions into the sociopolitical and scientific
schemes."  It's like a frigging college lecture - who's going to pay
attention to that?  Is somebody more likely to remember the heady dialogue
or the scene where The Cruise's Timothy "Speed" Levitch materializes like
the Great Gazoo when the main character is on what appears to be the
Brooklyn Bridge?
One of the most enjoyable things about Life is its lack of continuity.  Many
animators worked on the various vignettes, leaving each to look quite
different than the next.  Some scenes resemble blurry live-action, while
some use the animation to exaggerate facial expressions and manipulate the
backgrounds in various ways.  You never know what you're going to see in the
next episode.
Linklater used mostly non-actors in Life, so don't bother trying to figure
out who everybody is.  There are a handful you might recognize, like Ethan
Hawke and Julie Delpy, who reprise their roles from Linklater's Before
Sunrise.  One scene features Nicky Katt and Adam Goldberg, and there are two
directors in the film, too.  Oscar winner Steven Soderbergh (Traffic) stops
by for an animated cameo, and Linklater himself is in the final scene, where
the protagonist tracks him down to find out when he's going to wake up.
How's that for trippy?
1:37 - R for language and some violent images
