Title
Review for Innerspace (1987)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Fritzinger
     INNERSPACE retells the FANTASTIC VOYAGE story, this time going for, and
getting, laughs.  Dennis Quaid plays Tuck Pendelton, a washed-up fighter pilot
with an ego the size of a truck.  He is to man the first miniaturized
exploration of a living animal.  When the experiment is interrupted by
industrial spies, Pendelton is accidentally injected into the rear end of Jack
Putter, a Safeway clerk played by Martin Short.  Putter is a nervous
hypochondriac whose ego is as under-developed as Tuck's is over-inflated.
     Putter, with the help of Tuck's reporter girlfriend, must recover the
stolen microchip needed to reenlarge Tuck, before Tuck's air supply runs out.
They are chased by villains reminiscent of a James Bond film, captured by rival
scientists, and threatened by orange-haired grocery shoppers.
     INNERSPACE takes the elements of a typical adventure thriller, adds some
snappy dialogue and good special effects, and skillfully creates a very
entertaining movie.  More than once the whole theater was laughing out loud.
Dennis Quaid described INNERSPACE as "a dumb, stupid comedy...and I love it.
We encounter every dumb, stupid cliche in the book.  Leave your brain at home
and you'll have a good time."  I took my brain along, and thought INNERSPACE
was great.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  FANTASTIC VOYAGE crossed with FOUL PLAY
     makes for another science fiction comedy cut from the same
     mold as BACK TO THE FUTURE.  INNERSPACE does not always make
     sense, but it is just about always fun.  (Spoiler warning:
     major elements of the plot are presented first as minor
     surprise plot twists.  Read the following at your own risk.)
     Two years ago Steven Spielberg's production company had a big hit with
a light science fiction comedy, BACK TO THE FUTURE.  Success is not
something that Hollywood takes lightly. so presumably it was not long before
Spielberg had a second film, cut of much the same cloth, on the drawing
boards.  Well, INNERSPACE is out and very probably it will be a hit of equal
or almost equal strength.
     INNERSPACE, directed by Joe Dante, is a light-hearted film which can
easily be taken as a prequel to FANTASTIC VOYAGE.  Tuck Pendleton (played by
Dennis Quaid) is a "right-stuff" sort of pilot who feels he never got the
recognition that astronauts have gotten, so he volunteers to be the first
human to be miniaturized and injected into another creature--in this case, a
rabbit.  Through an absurd chain of events he is instead injected into
neurotic grocery clerk Jack Putter (played by Martin Short) who happens to
be in the wrong shopping mall at the wrong time.  Pendleton must make
contact with Putter and together they race against time to stop a weird
assortment of freelance spies who want to steal the secret of
miniaturization and sell it to the highest bidder.  One, we are told, has
already made a fortune by selling the secret of Velcro to the Persian Gulf.
     Pendleton's abilities to enhance Putter's own powers start impressive
and eventually get absurd, while the characters are really only
superficially developed and at times are totally absurd.  At one point,
Putter takes time out from a race against time to do a little jive dancing
around Pendleton's apartment.  The film sometimes relies too much on
slapstick scenes and goofy chases, but at other times it makes very clever
use of its premise to create some exciting action scenes.  And the script
does leave room for the Spielberg trademark (malfunctioning mechanical arms)
and some Dante trademarks (cameo roles by Dick Miller and Kenneth Tobey).
The film is packed.  It has science fiction, comedy, chases, really weird
situations, and really weird characters, and it just keeps delivering.
After the film has already run long, it rolls the end credits before its
story is even finished.  Not a great film, but good light entertainment; it
gets a low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Tim Larison
     INNER SPACE, the latest release produced by Steven Spielberg, is a fun
two-hour romp with the same flair that made BACK TO THE FUTURE such a hit.  The
story involves a top-secret military project to inject a miniaturized pilot and
his high-tech submarine into the blood stream of a rabbit.  Unfortunately, the
bad guys find out about the project, and raid the laboratory just before the
experiment is to take place.  A scientist flees with the miniaturized sub in a
syringe, and injects it into a unsuspecting nerdy pedestrian in a nearby
shopping mall.  Soon  the nerd hears a little voice in his ear telling him what
is going on; he is horrified to learn that he must retrieve a stolen computer
chip from the bad guys in order to get the sub inside of him removed and
reenlarged back to normal size.
     As with his other films, Spielburg borrows concepts from films in the past
and combines them to make an entertaining movie.  The innocent bystander
suddenly involved in political intrigue is pure Hitchcock, the shots of the
tiny sub in the body are reminiscent of FANTASTIC VOYAGE, the high-tech sub and
the situations it gets the nerd into remind me of BACK TO THE FUTURE, and the
mad-cap chase scenes are similar to ROMANCING THE STONE.  The mood is
definitely light and there are numerous well-done sight gags (though at times
the humor gets a little silly).
     If you want a good laugh, and can refrain from thinking too hard, go see
INNER SPACE.  The sneak preview audience I was in thoroughly enjoyed it.
