Title
Review for People vs. Larry Flynt, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
23

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996 
U.S. Release Date: 12/24/96 (limited); 1/10/97 (wide) 
Running Length: 2:09 
MPAA Classification: R (Nudity, sex, profanity, mature themes) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1 
Cast: Woody Harrelson, Courtney Love, Edward Norton, James Cromwell, 
      Crispin Glover, Brett Harrelson, James Carville, Donna Hanover, 
      Richard Paul 
Director: Milos Forman 
Producers: Janet Yang, Oliver Stone 
Screenplay: Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski 
Cinematography: Philippe Rousselot 
Music: Thomas Newman 
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures 
     Larry Flynt, the self-proclaimed king of smut, as an American hero?  
Unlikely as it may seem, that's the scenario set up and successfully 
pursued by Milos Forman's (ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOOS NEST, AMADEUS) 
latest venture, THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT.  While this movie doesn't 
say anything that we haven't learned in high school civics classes, it 
gives names and faces to the subjects, and they're not portrayed by the 
likes of Henry Fonda and James Stewart.  Instead of "righteous" men 
stepped upon by the system, we're presented with a person who has been 
demonized not only by the religious right, but by the mainstream press.  
Nevertheless, when Larry Flynt won his case before the Supreme Court in 
1987, we all emerged victorious.  His wasn't just a fight for his own 
rights, but a battle for everyone who cherishes the freedoms afforded by 
the First Amendment. 
     Perhaps the most obvious flaw in THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT is 
making the central figure too likable.  He's played by Woody Harrelson, 
an actor who has been synonymous with good-naturedness since his days on 
CHEERS.  And, with the real Flynt taking a bit part (an unsympathetic 
judge who presides over the first trial), and his lawyer, Alan Isaacman, 
acting as consultant, it's reasonable to wonder how much the publishing 
magnate's image has been smoothed over to make him more palatable to an 
unbiased viewing audience.  It's no great stretch to assume that Flynt 
wasn't the civil rights advocate he comes across as being, since, by his 
own admission, he was "just trying to make an honest buck."   
     The First Amendment has always offered fertile ground for 
exploration by movies, books, and debates.  No virgin territory is 
investigated here, but the film relentlessly hammers home the reasons 
why our constitutional freedoms are so important.  To paraphrase 
Isaacman (played by Edward Norton), we don't have to like what Larry 
Flynt does to appreciate that we live in a country where he's free to do 
it.  That's the crux of what THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT is trying to 
say, and it's a theme that is effectively conveyed. 
     Of course, if that's all LARRY FLYNT was -- a textbook examination 
of First Amendment rights -- this would be a rather dry experience.  But 
Forman, from a script by Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski, tells a 
much richer and more complex story.  With varying degrees of success, 
THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT presents a character study of its main 
subject, a look at how he raised an empire from a small group of strip 
bars, and the sometimes-tender, sometimes-turbulent love story between 
Flynt and his wife, Althea (Courtney Love).  And, since this movie is 
about the publisher of a skin magazine, there's plenty of bare flesh to 
go around (although, it should be noted, the movie's "R" rating prevents 
the raunchy displays of explicitness that can be found in Hustler 
magazine). 
     The most moving aspect of the film is undoubtedly the relationship 
between Larry and Althea, and the scenes of these two together contain 
elements of eroticism and genuine romance.  Part of this is due to the 
fine, uninhibited performance of Courtney Love; part is because Woody 
Harrelson seems most comfortable in these sequences.  Several scenes in 
the second half of the movie, with an impotent Larry confined to a 
wheelchair and Althea strung out on drugs, are heartbreaking to watch.   
     THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT picks up Flynt's story in 1972 (after a 
brief, telling prologue twenty years earlier), when he's trying to drum 
up business for his "Hustler" go-go clubs.  His solution:  start a 
"newsletter" with lots of pictures of naked women.  Soon, Hustler is a 
nationwide publication, but poor sales resulting from candid depictions 
of female genitalia threaten to financially ruin its publisher.  Then 
Flynt manages an amazing coup.  The Hustler issue featuring pictures of 
a naked Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis sells in excess of 2,000,000 copies 
and puts the magazine in the big leagues.  Suddenly, Flynt becomes the 
target of obscenity and pandering law suits, with big guns like Charles 
Keating (James Cromwell) and Jerry Falwell (Richard Paul) lined up 
against him. 
     Through the whole struggle, Flynt is supported by three people:  
his lawyer, Isaacman; his brother, Jimmy (Brett Harrelson); and, of 
course, Althea.  When Flynt first meets the love of his life, she's a 
bisexual stripper working in one of his joints.  She challenges him:  
"They say you've slept with every girl in every one of your clubs."  The 
next day, they're living together, and, after a time, they're married.  
Their marriage, like Flynt's life, goes through a series of rocky times, 
but Althea sticks by her husband's side no matter what, even when Ruth 
Carter Stapleton (Donna Hanover) briefly converts him into a born-again 
Christian. 
     Why is THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT entertaining?  Probably because 
the lead character is so much bigger than life, and perhaps because, by 
making him into a sympathetic man, we're spared the darkest portions of 
his personality.  There's no doubt that Flynt is a compelling figure, 
but his crusade for personal freedom is only part of the reason.  Sex 
undoubtedly sells, and Forman doesn't skimp on it here.  Ultimately, it 
doesn't matter much how true-to-life everything on screen is.  What's 
important is that THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT tells a good, intelligent 
story that keeps us interested and involved.  Since that's what happens, 
the verdict is clear:  see the movie.  You don't have to like the man to 
support his struggles and enjoy this dramatization of them. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Columbia/Phoenix)
Starring:  Woody Harrelson, Courtney Love, Edward Norton, Brett Harrelson,
Crispin Glover, Richard Paul, Donna Hanover, James Cromwell.
Screenplay:  Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski.
Producers:  Oliver Stone, Janet Yang, Michael Hausman.
Director:  Milos Forman.
MPAA Rating:  R (nudity, sexual situations, adult themes, profanity)
Running Time:  130 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT is such an intriguing and entertaining
film biography that it is almost a shame that it had to have a "message."
Milos Forman's study of "Hustler" magazine publisher Larry Flynt is an
examination of the challenge of accepting potentially offensive material
as protected speech under the Constitution, and as such it is not in the
same class as solemnly liberal films which congratulate themselves for
championing radical notions like "racism is a bad thing."  Still, there is
a slickness to the way Flynt's legal battles are portrayed which makes it
too easy to choose sides.  When the film focuses on Flynt as a character
and on his relationships, THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT soars.  When Flynt
becomes an icon, it slips.
     The film opens in 1952 -- with young Larry and his brother Jimmy
selling moonshine in Kentucky -- then flashes forward twenty years to find
Larry (Woody Harrelson) and Jimmy (Woody's real-life brother Brett
Harrelson) selling a different vice.  Their Ohio-based Hustler strip bar
is only barely staying afloat, however, and Larry starts up a glossy
newsletter to help promote the club.  The newsletter unexpectedly takes on
a life of its own, and "Hustler" is born, much to the consternation of
conservative civic leaders.  In 1977, Flynt is arrested for selling
pornography, and takes on young civil rights attorney Alan Isaacman
(Edward Norton) for his defense.  Though he ultimately wins his first
case, there always seems to be another one close behind, as Flynt becomes
a favored target for anti-pornography legal action.  His legal troubles
are only part of his life's challenges, though, as a would-be assassin's
bullet paralyzes him and his troubled wife Althea (Courtney Love)
struggles with her own demons.
     Screenwriters Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski also wrote the
script for Tim Burton's ED WOOD, and FLYNT demonstrates once again that
they have a marvelous sense for crafting structure out of eccentricity.
Flynt is rendered variously as a libertine capitalist selling what America
is buying, as a half-hearted Christian convert and as a bitter,
unpredictable paraplegic, yet every facet of his character becomes part of
a fascinating whole in Woody Harrelson's performance.  It is a dynamic
piece of acting:  sly and blisteringly funny one moment, quiet and
emotional the next.  He is brought most fully to life in both respects
through his interactions with the cast's other two stand-outs, Edward
Norton and Courtney Love.  It has taken Norton only a year to become one
of the most impressive young actors in film, and he is top-notch as the
attorney and unlikely friend who tries to rein in Flynt.  Love, meanwhile,
simply gives a clinic in creating a complex character.  She is dazzling
even as Althea dissolves in a losing battle with AIDS, and she appears not
at all concerned over whether or not the audience likes her.  Few actors
can muster that kind of fearlessness.
     THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT is frequently hilarious as it explores the
characters' relationships and challenging in its reluctance to offer
embraceable heroes.  When it hits the courtrooms, the lines become more
clearly drawn, to the film's detriment.  The self-aggrandizing
pornographer is too easy to side with when opposed by a villainous judge,
or such obvious symbols of hypocrisy as savings and loan magnate/
soon-to-be felon Charles Keating (James Cromwell); Jerry Falwell (Richard
Paul), whose libel suit becomes the basis for Flynt's Supreme Court
challenge, is rendered similarly as a scowling buffoon.  Giving Flynt's
enemies a face which is easy to laugh at diffuses the point of the film
when it is no longer "the people" who are versus Flynt, but simply some
nasty stuffed shirts.  Flynt's speech is deserving of protection not
because he is better than his accusers, but because it shouldn't matter
who is better; when Flynt tells reporters that a victory for him would be
important because he is "the worst," it is fairly obvious that Alexander,
Karaszewski and Forman don't agree.
     All the legal wranglings come to a thrilling conclusion, however, in
what may be the best courtroom scene I have ever seen.  As Isaacson argues
Flynt's case before the Supreme Court, the courtroom becomes an
opportunity not for sermons, but for the exchange of ideas.  At that
moment, the issues at the heart of THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT matter
profoundly, with Norton's passionate defense shattering the earlier
dichotomies of right vs. wrong.  It made me more disappointed in an
earlier scene in which Flynt gives a sincere speech to civil libertarians
which is presented without a hint of irony.  Larry Flynt, manic
smut-peddler, makes for a much more compelling protagonist than Larry
Flynt, First Amendment hero.

Author
Christopher Null
     What a huge gamble, to make a movie about "Hustler" magazine
founder and die-hard porn king Larry Flynt and his turbulent life.
     Whether or not it's successful, the filmmakers deserve every bit of
praise for having the guts to make a movie like this, especially in an
age where Washington constantly cries foul over Hollywood's depictions
of sex and violence.  And believe me, THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT has
plenty of both.
     Following Flynt's (Woody Harrelson) life from juvenile Kentucky
moonshiner to Ohio strip joint owner to the multi-millionaire ruler of a
publishing empire, the film lays out the facts and doesn't make any
judgments.  Instead, we are invited to decide for ourselves, as the
movie turns around Flynt's almost perpetual run-ins with the law, with
anti-porn crusaders like Jerry Falwell and Charles Keating, and folds in
Flynt's loving (and kinda sick) relationship with his wife Althea
(Courtney Love).
     The biggest surprise in FLYNT is a five-star performance by
Harrelson.  After a series of idiotic movies like INDECENT PROPOSAL and
MONEY TRAIN, who knew there was an actual *actor* under there?  Edward
Norton also redeems himself from the boneheaded PRIMAL FEAR, playing
Flynt's long-suffering attorney Isaacman.  Again, another pleasant
surprise.
     But what truly baffles me is how Harrelson's finest hour is being
overshadowed in the press by the performance of Courtney Love, who is
undoubtedly one of the worst actresses I've ever seen, even in a role
that was custom-made for her meager talents.  That Love is perfectly
credible as a stripper/drug addict is no surprise; it's her credibility
as an actress (i.e. when she opens her mouth) that is more difficult to
swallow, and it is her laughable performance that almost manages to
topple FLYNT from greatness.  I can only assume that people are
confusing acting ability with a good makeup job.
     LARRY FLYNT is not particularly well-written, glossing over a ton
of details, often favoring shock value to storytelling.  Considering
this is the life of Larry Flynt, you can't really fault the writers for
this, but the linear plot progression often feels incidental to the rest
of the picture.  Still, Flynt's story is compelling enough to provide
its own momentum, and with Milos Forman (AMADEUS) behind the camera, it
does.
     As to whether Flynt is a crusader for freedom or the Anti-Christ,
you'll have to draw your own conclusion.  In the meantime, here's
something to think about:  Why is the movie called THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY
FLYNT when the big case in the film is Flynt vs. Falwell?  Discuss
amongst yourselves.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Ben Hoffman
In undoubtedly one of the best films of 1996, this biopic of Larry
Flynt, is astonishingly enough, about the First Amendment to the
Constitution. Despite its subject matter, the film is extremely
entertaining mainly because of the hero . . . well, not really a hero
but the protagonist.  One could hardly characterize a crazy (just
eccentric?) pornographer as a  hero.   The beautiful part is that
neither the brilliant writers (Scott Alexander & Larry Karaszewski,
who did the biopic Ed Wood) as well as Director Milos Forman attempt
to gloss over Flynt's faults.
Flynt is played in an Oscar-grade performance by Woody Harrelson,
aided and abetted by an underage stripper named Althea  (Courtney
Love) in a bravura performance, turning from the teenager into a wife
and drug addict. There is not a dull moment in the film which despite
every kind of nudity (you name it) is never erotic.  Sleaze prevails
because that is Flynt's thing and Forman never forgets that for a
single frame.
For a pornographer to be the catalyst of a fight for free speech that
ends in the Supreme Court is ironic and in a way unfortunate.  But as
that is how it happened in real life it is all the more forceful.
This could not have happened without Alan Isaacman (Edward Norton in a
most satisfying, enjoyable portrayal of the civil rights lawyer who
stuck with Flynt all the way.) Personable, believable, charming,
Norton's every moment on the screen was cherished by me.
The film's dialogue was frequently hilarious, always beautifully
written.  The courtroom scenes, the look-alikes of Charles Keating
(James Cromwell) of the Lincoln Savings funds mishandling and Jerry
Falwell (Richard Paul) of the Moral Majority was very funny.  Also in
the cast are the real James Carville who forged Bill Clinton's first
presidential campaign, Brett Harrelson (Woody's real-life brother) as
brother Jimmy Flynt, Donna Hanover as ex- President Jimmy Carter's
evangelist sister who gets Larry to accept Jesus and become a
born-again Christian.  When he gives up on that phase of his life,
Althea proclaims "Porn Again."
This movie has everything:  great acting, drama, nudity, and much
humor. What else do you want?    Run to the nearest theater that is
showing it.

Author
Eric Walker
Well, look here -- it's a movie from Hollywood that actually defends
pornography! In this day and age when the whining and crying over
sexual content in the media -- especially "newer" media such as the
Net -- seems to be reaching an all-time Pinkness saturation, we
finally get a movie that comes out and says "This is porn, a lot of
people want to see it, and by God, we've got a right to make porn
available to people who want to see it!" It's about damn time we got a
movie that makes a sensible statement like that. The movie's far from
perfect -- it's a typical Hollywood whitewashing of the porn
controversy, a simple black-and-white, good-vs.-evil story -- but
hell, it's still a lot of fun to watch, and at least it says something
about our culture. You'll get more good Slack from this movie than you
will from EVITA or DANTE'S PEAK.
As you've probably heard, THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT is supposedly the
story of Larry Flynt, the owner of a few strip bars and publisher of a
sleazy skin magazine who happened to get lucky: he acquired nude
photos of Jackie Onassis and published them in his rag. That caused a
national sensation, and he rode the wave of infamy to build his baby,
Hustler, into a huge publishing empire. (If THAT'S not Slack, tell me
what is! ) Of course, you have to remember that this is a Hollywood
story, and it's aimed at mainstream audiences -- i.e. the Pink masses
who hate to THINK. So the makers of this movie (Director Milos Forman,
who made ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST -- and producer Oliver Stone,
that egotistic jerk who thinks every one of his movies has to be an
Important Wake-Up Call To America) dumbed it down and made Larry Flynt
into a Hollywood Good Guy. He's a clean, straight, good ol' boy who
loves his wife dearly and just wants to turn an honest profit...and he
just happens to be in the business of publishing dirty pictures.
Right. And I just happen to be J.R. "Bob" Dobbs' legitimate son and
heir, too. Needless to say, the real-life story probably has as much
to do with this movie as the movie JFK had to do with the real Kennedy
assassination -- i.e. little to none -- but hell, at least Woody
Harrelson (who plays Flynt) manages to have a lot of fun with the role
and get away with pulling some fine stunts on film. It's fun to watch
as Flynt tells his photographer to forget trying to be "arty" and just
go for hard-core smut.
There's one great scene where Flynt is standing in front of a huge
movie scene, making a sermonizing speech about the First Amendment and
the right to publish porn; as he says this, the movie screen is
illustrating the difference between pictures of war and murder (which
nobody seems to mind publishing), and sex (which gets people upset for
some reason). It's a great visualization of the classic defense of
pornography, namely: "Why is it okay to show pictures of murder and
suffering, but not okay to show pictures of people having sex and
enjoying themselves doing it?"
It's a simple message, and frankly this is a simple movie. We've got
good guy Larry Flynt, crusading to bring his porn to the grocery
stores of America. For bad guys we've got the usual enemies: Jerry
Falwell and the Moral Majority, and the other fat old white men who
wield all the power in government, and who usually play the role of
the bad guys in movies of this sort. (Falwell sued Flynt after Hustler
made fun of him by publishing an alleged "story" of Falwell having sex
with his mother in an outhouse.) There's no exception here: The rich
old white men in suits all hate this evil, disgusting filth, and the
movie emphasizes their hypocrisy by using Charles Keating as a major
player in the anti-porn crowd. (Keating was the central figure in the
nationwide savings-and-loan scandal of the late 1980s, which cost the
taxpayers over two billion dollars.)
So it's a simple "good" (Flynt) vs. "evil" (Falwell) story. But, the
movie's still a hell of a lot of fun, and Larry Flynt is such an
outrageous figure that even Hollywood can't tame him. He wanted
Hustler to be as lewd, shocking, and offensive as possible, and this
movie has the good sense to give us at least a few glimpses into that
milieu.
We get a lot of laughs (mostly from Flynt's antics at bucking the
"establishment"), we get some great gags (mostly taken from the pages
of Hustler itself -- wait till you see what they do with Santa Claus
and the Wizard of Oz), AND we get a knockout performance by Courtney
Love, who plays Flynt's drugged-out wife Althea. Courtney is
everything Madonna ever wanted to be -- namely, a real actress -- and
she's a wonder to look at. She also does a striptease, so you folks
who want to use this movie as an excuse to look at some naked women
won't be disappointed either. Whether she's posing for her husband (or
the photographer), or getting zonked out on Flynt's "pain killers,"
she steals every scene she's in. You can't help but watch her, even
when she's getting thin and pale.
You can tell Oliver Stone produced this movie because of the two
mysterious "conspiracies" that never really get resolved, one of them
involving the would-be assassin who paralyzed Flynt from the waist
down and confined him to a wheelchair for the rest of his life. But
fortunately, director Forman know how to tell a story without beating
the audience over the head with it (Stone's forte), so we don't mind
the fact that this movie is trying to force its "porn is good" message
down our throats. It even gets wimpy at one point, when Flynt finds
religion and tries to turn over a new leaf (sort of)...but that
doesn't last long.
Hollywood (and Sony Pictures, the distributors) is raining praise on
this movie as a way of trying to show us they can "take a stand" over
a supposedly controversial issue. Bull. If this movie was made at an
independent studio with about 1/10 of the budget, it would probably be
the scathing, vicious attack on "the establishment" it wants to
be...but then it would be rated NC-17 (which is still box-office
death) and it would barely reach 1/10 of the audience it's reaching
now. The original poster for this movie had an image of Harrelson
wearing a diaper made of an American flag, crucified between a woman's
legs...but Sony decided that image was too "controversial" and they
pulled it in favor of the much tamer image we see on the movie posters
now (Harrelson's face, with a flag covering his mouth). That's the
true face of Hollywood, which is (as always) dominated by the
Conspiracy: it's afraid of real controversy, and it pulls back in the
face of anything really daring and produces a pale facade instead.
But, nonetheless, we've still got a fun, intelligent movie from
Hollywood that tells us that people like looking at dirty pictures,
and by God, we've got a right to see those dirty pictures! So even if
it's not a perfect movie, THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT is still worth
seeing. It's a movie with its mouth in the right place. It reveals a
lot more about Hollywood than Hollywood realizes...but then, that's
why Hollywood is Hollywood and we are SubGenii. They've got the
MONEY...and we've got the SLACK.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     As portrayed in this new film, the first directed by Milos Forman
in seven years, Larry Flynt is a free spirit who spent most of his life
drifting.   He makes the decision to publish a magazine with pictures
of the dancers at his sleazy Cincinnati strip club, just as a publicity
stunt, after that things pretty much just happen to him.  The magazine
become popular; Flynt becomes rich and famous filling the demand; the
local government decides to prosecute him; his cause becomes a major
civil liberties case; he becomes a national figure in the anti-
censorship movement.  In the course of all this he occasionally tries
to make decisions that will change the course of his life and his
magazine, but none of these decisions ever sticks.  He decides to have
his Hustler magazine mix fundamentalist Christianity with pornography,
but somehow the combination just does not sell.  Flynt fires the entire
executive staff of his own magazine only to be ignored. He decides that
he and his wife, Althea, should kick their drug habits and though he
succeeds himself,  he finds he has no control over her.  Flynt seems to
want to scuttle himself when he to be as uncooperative as possible with
his lawyer, but his defense goes on in spite of himself, all the way to
the Supreme Court. During all of this Flynt shows no admirable traits
at all beyond loyalty to Althea.
     The film opens with a prologue set in the early 1950s in Kentucky
where a young Larry Flynt is already giving the public what it wants by
making and selling his own moonshine.  Cut to two decades later and
Flynt is running the Hustler Club in Cincinnati.  He has the idea to
have a magazine to promote his club. Once that is in place he decides
to make his HUSTLER magazine what PLAYBOY is not, a magazine overtly
aimed at the shotguns and pickups types who come to his club.  While at
his club he meets dancer Althea Leasure (Courtney Love) who shows
immediate romantic interest in Flynt.  The publicity says that Flynt is
an unlikely hero for a film and that is a true statement.  But the hero
of the film is Alan Isaacman the civil liberties lawyer who took his
principle of defending the First Amendment to the Supreme Court in
Flynt's name, often frustratingly sabotaged by the childish antics of
Flynt himself.  Had there been some nobility shown in Althea beyond her
initial loyalty to Flynt, she might have made an interesting character.
But eventually she will show herself to be even weaker than her
husband.
     Forman tells the story of Larry Flynt, but never gives us much of
an emotional investment in his character. Flynt is never anything but
selfish in the course of the film.  With other characters his love for
Althea might have been touching, but only occasionally is there any
chemistry between the two of them or any feeling that it is good that
these two people have found each other.  Interestingly Courtney Love
made her film debut in SID AND NANCY, in some ways a very similar film
with very similar problems.  Forman may have seen parallels between
Flynt and McMurphy in his ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST, but he was
able to capture an emotional core and a nobility in McMurphy that seems
lacking in Flynt.  Even when his lawyer is winning in court, Flynt
seems determined to play the Bad Boy and to derail the proceedings.
Forman's telling of the story of Flynt moves too quickly with too
little explanation of what is going on.  Flynt will be in jail in one
scene and out the next organizing a free speech rally without
explanation of how he got out of jail.  Other obvious production
details seem to be ignored.  Edward Norton, playing the idealist
lawyer, seems not to age at all over the course of the many years the
film covers (not including the prologue).
     Woody Harrelson will probably never be a great actor.  Here Flynt
is supposed to behave in an eccentric manner, and Harrelson does.
Flynt is supposed to be superficial and have a fly-weight intellect
easily influenced by others, and Harrelson does that sufficiently too.
And he is supposed to be juvenile in unexpected places, and he is.  On
the surface this does not seem like a difficult role to play and
Harrelson is just fine.  Curiously he is out-performed by the much less
experienced Courtney Love as Althea.
     THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT has positioned itself to be an engaging
film on the meaning of the First Amendment of the constitution.  It
also is supposed to be a little titillating, though in a style much
more subdued than is Flynt's enthusiastic approach.  Frankly the film
does a better job of the former than the latter.  I rate it a +1 on the
-4 to +4 scale.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "If the First Amendment will protect a scumbag like me, it will
protect all of you," explains pornographic magazine publisher Larry
Flynt, played with bravado and panache by Woody Harrelson.
     Two time Academy Award winning director Milos Forman (ONE FLEW
OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST and AMADEUS) decided to make a red, white, and
blue film about protecting American freedom, and he chose the unlikely
person of Larry Flynt to be the protagonist.  One wonders if Forman had
a list of candidates from David Duke on, but Flynt does fill the bill
as being a suitably unlikely hero.  You may have never thought about
someone like Flynt being the guardian of your liberty, but in
Harrelson's sympathetic portrayal of Flynt, he makes a compelling and
cogent case.
     The beauty of the film is that, even if you hate everything
"Hustler" magazine stands for and even if you disagree with Forman's
logic in the story, the film itself is so audaciously fun that it is a
certain crowd pleaser.  No one has ever insulted people, especially
courts, with such intense bravado as Flynt does in the movie.  You can
be sure that the picture will garner many an Academy Award nomination
as it has already made most 1996 top ten lists.
     After a brief start showing Flynt selling moonshine as a kid, the
film skips ahead to Flynt in the 1970s running a sleazy strip joint in
Cincinnati.  He falls for a new stripper named Althea Leasure and
brilliantly played by Courtney Love.  She asks if it is true that he
has slept with every stripper in the club, and, when he concedes it is
true, she claims that she has too.  She will go on to become his
lifelong business partner, lover, wife, and constant supporter, but
when she first comes into his life, she has all the markings of a
one-night stand.
     Larry starts up "Hustler" as an offshoot from the club.  The
magazine almost goes under until an Italian photographer sells him nude
photos of "Jackie O."  After that, he is as rich as Croesus for the
rest of his life.  Although he will eventually be almost fatally
wounded and spend much time in seclusion like Howard Hughes, he will
maintain a fabulously wealthy lifestyle.  When his parents first come
to visit his mansion during a party-turned-orgy, he explains, "These
are my friends -- lots of money, lots of friends."  Since Althea and
two of her girlfriends are making love on the bed where his parents are
going to sleep, he sends the women to another room with promises to
join them later in their fun.
     His magazine's idea sessions are provocative.  They decide on
someone to ridicule that week in an offensive sexual parody.  Their
targets range widely from the Wizard of Oz to Santa Claus to Jerry
Falwell, played by look-alike Richard Paul.  Whenever someone suggests
that something is too sick to print, Flynt ridicules them and makes
sure that the obscene cartoon or story runs exactly as proposed.
     Eventually, Larry runs afoul of the law and loses.  His young
lawyer, Alan Isaacman, played with determination by Edward North, can
not pull this one out.  "25 years!" exclaims Flynt.  "All I'm guilty of
is bad taste."
     As you can already see, the script by Scott Alexander and Larry
Karaszewski is full of deliciously funny morsels of dialog.  The
wording manages to be simultaneously humorous, believable, and
insightful.  Combine this with the tour de force acting by Harrelson,
Love, and North, and you have the makings of a great movie.
     People prosecuting poor pornographer Larry are not shown in the
best of lights as this is a fairly one sided presentation.  Typical is
one of his judges who looks exactly like Jabba the Hut and is just
about as reasonable.  Still, Larry makes succinct and convincing
arguments.  As he puts it, "If you don't like Hustler magazine, don't
read it."  "I'm not trying to convince you to like what Larry Flynt
does," confesses his own lawyer in his summation to the jury.  "I don't
like what Larry Flynt does."
     Whenever Larry gets in trouble, and he gets in trouble a lot,
costume designers Arianne Phillips and Theodor Pistek like to dress him
in the flag or at least the colors of the flag.  He also wears obscene
T-shirts designed to ridicule the judges during his trials.
     In a large convention center made up to look like a Presidential
nominating convention, Larry address a crowd.  Behind him is a huge
screen projecting images of death and sex, and the hall is filled with
red, white, and blue streamers.  "What is more obscene?"  he asks
rhetorically.  "Sex or war?"  He then goes on to point out that if you
take a picture of someone committing a murder and put it on the cover
of "Time", you may win a Pulitzer Prize.  If you take a picture of
someone committing sex or just a picture of a completely naked woman
and put it on the cover of a magazine, you may be arrested and thrown
in prison for obscenity.
     Easily the strangest episode in Larry's life is when the then
president's sister, Ruth Carter Stapleton (Donna Hanover), converts
Larry to Christianity.  He decides he wants God brought into the
magazine.  Even Althea thinks he has gone too far this time, arguing,
"Nobody on this planet wants their religion and their pornography
together."  Eventually this phase will pass.  "The reign of Christian
terror is over," screams Althea to the magazine's staff.  "We're going
back to our roots.  Porn is back."
     Believe it or not, I have merely scratched the surface of this
epic drama.  I did not get to the Charles Keating (James Cromwell) as
worse than Larry Flynt subtext, the funny role of Clinton aide James
Carville as an indignant prosecutor, the Supreme Court case, and the
many drug scenes.
     In perhaps the best scene in the show, Larry's lawyer quits in
disgust at having such an unruly client.  "I'm your dream client,"
argues Larry, laughing off his lawyer's resignation.  "I'm rich, and
I'm always in trouble."
     You may or may not buy Larry Flynt as the saviour of your
freedoms, his own daughter ridiculed the idea this week, but the movie
is great and compelling cinema.  Words do not adequately describe its
scale or the effectiveness of its humor.
     PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT runs 2:07, but its breadth made me think it
was much longer.  It is rated R for sex, nudity, violence, profanity,
and hard drug usage.  This is a hard R film and would be appropriate
for teenagers only if they are quite mature.  Unbelievably, many
families in my audience brought their young kids.  There were a dozen
kids ages 3 to 7 near me.  Whenever lewd behavior would start on the
screen, the kids would ask their parents what was happening, but they
were consistently told to shut up.  I felt like grabbing the parents by
their throats and asking if they had lost their minds.  For adults and
mature teenagers, I recommend this film strongly to you and give the
picture *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
dsassoc@neponset.com (D&S Associates)
(This review is an excerpt from Reeling, a movie review show hosted by
Laura and Robin Clifford, running on Boston Cable TV. Note that the
film descriptions vary in completeness due to the fact that they're
actually intros for running film clips.)
"The People vs. Larry Flynt", directed by the great Czech filmmaker
Milos Forman, stars Woody Harrelson as the title character - a sleazy,
flesh-peddling strip club owner who parlayed raunchiness into the
multi-million dollar Hustler empire and became, through circumstance,
a major proponent of the First Amendment right to the freedom of
expression.
Alternative rock star Courtney Love makes her starring debut as Althea
Leasure, the underage stripper who became Flynt's lover, wife and
business partner before succumbing to AIDS in 1983.
The film follows Larry Flynt's beginnings as an adolescent moonshiner,
through his rather amazing career as sleaze-meister,  a redeemed
Christian, and, finally, a crusader of the Constitution, ending in his
Supreme Court victory against the Reverend Jerry Falwell and the
so-called Moral Majority.
Any film about pornography and sleaze, directed by Milos Forman,
starts off with high points from me. "The People vs. Larry Flynt" does
not disappoint, almost, at all.
Up front, I have to say that this an actors movie. All the trappings
of First Amendment rights and the battle to maintain these rights in a
reactionary, self righteous society takes a back seat to the
performances of Woody Harrelson, Courtney Love, Ed Norton and a bevy
of supporting characters.
Woody Harrelson (who would have thunk it when watching him on Cheers)
is proving himself to be one capable actor, possibly only under
capable directors such as Forman and Oliver Stone ("Natural Born
Killers"), possibly because he CAN act. Here, as Larry Flynt,
Harrelson starts off slowly, but builds steadily Flynt's character
until the line between the actor and the character blurs. In the last
half of the movie, I believed I was watching the man, not the actor.
Damn good job by Harrelson that may or may not garner an Oscar nom. He
will get more serious attention in the future.
Courtney Love gives a truly outstanding performance as Althea Flynt.
In the hands of a master such as Forman, Love delivers a powerful and
believable performance as a young woman drawn to the sleaze of Larry
Flynt, mainly because he is her kindred spirit in that sleaze. Altheas
dedication to Flynt, the man and the business, is well drawn and
without any falseness. If Madonna is nominated, for "Evita", over
Courtney Love, it will be one of Hollywood's grander screwups.
Edward Norton, who blew me away in his debut as the psycho in last
years "Primal Fear",  plays a composite of lawyers involved with Flynt
over the years, including the real Alan Isaacman. Nortons boyish looks
belie the inherent acting ability portrayed here. He is convincing as
Flynt's longtime friend and legal advisor and gives a very effective
speech before the Supreme Court in the film's climax. Edward Norton is
an actor to watch for in the coming years.
Other supporting cast, such as "Good Day, New York" correspondent,
Donna Hanover, in a terrific debut as evangelist Ruth Carter Stapleton
, who briefly turned Flynt toward Christ, and political consultant
James Carville, making his acting debut as Simon Leis, Flynt's
opponent in early legal battles, are examples of exemplary casting.
Also notable is Harrelson's real-life brother, as Larry Flynt's
brother and business partner.
 The rest of the supporting cast, such as a Vincent Schiavelli and
Crispin Glover, were not only miscast, they hurt the scenes they are
in. A mixed bag of support, some very good, some not.
Milos Forman ("One Flew Over The Cuckoos Nest", "Amadeus") is a
masterful filmmaker and it shows here. He draws terrific performances
from much of his cast and deftly conveys the screenplay to the screen.
The screenplay, by Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski, is rich in
detail and dialogue. Alexander and Karaszewski also showed an
adeptness with biographies with their script for Tim Burton's "Ed
Wood".
I have one not-so-minor problem with "The People vs. Larry Flyn"t: it
doesnt go far enough in conveying the utter sleaziness that Larry
Flynt and Hustler magazine represented. Some of you may have seen
Hustler, but I can safely bet that most have not. For the uninitiated,
Larry Flynt is portrayed as a working class Hugh Hefner, with a
working class version of Playboy.  He was anything but a Hefner clone.
The purification of raunch that represented Flynt takes the edge off
of what could have been a terrifically edgy film.
Because of this, I give "The People vs. Larry Flynt" an A-.
Czech director Milos Forman ("One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest,"
"Amadeus") has directed an American classic with "The People vs. Larry
Flynt."  I must state right up front, however, that this should not be
considered a Larry Flynt bio-pic, but a piece of American Pop - at
least that's how I'm viewing it.  Screenwriters Scott Alexander and
Larry Karaszewski, whose  last script lionized another oddball
outsider, Ed Wood, have portrayed Flynt almost as a naif who happens
to be a shrewd businessman faithful to his friends, madly in love with
his wife, Althea Leasure, and a crusading proponent of free speech.
I'm sure there are plenty of people (the Reverend  Jerry Falwell
aside) who would love to air a sleezier, darker, nastier more
self-serving picture of the man (as is the case with a former security
man and brother-in-law in the February issue of Penthouse).
"The People vs. Larry Flynt" is essentially about two things - Larry
Flynt's fight for his first amendment rights and the love story
between him and Althea.  Flynt's head for business is established in
1952 Kentucky where he was a child moonshine bootlegger.  The grown up
Flynt (Woody Harrelson) enjoys running a strip club and the employees
who dance there.  He decides to promote his Hustler club via
newsletter consisting of nude shots of his dancers, but the printer
informs him that without any textual content, he'd be arrested for
distributing pornography. Voila - the birth of Hustler magazine.
There are three terrific performances from the three principals in
"The People vs. Larry Flynt."  Woody Harrelson loses himself in the
role, particularly in the latter part of the film after Flynt's
paralyzed by an attempted assassin's bullet.  I found myself watching
Larry Flynt, not Woody Harrelson.  Courtney Love is as good as all the
hype around her performance says - she's a either natural actress or
Althea Leasure's soulmate.  Edward Norton ("Primal Fear") impresses
again as Flynt's lawyer - a very mature performance from a very boyish
looking young actor.  All three performances are strong contenders for
an Oscar nomination.
Also of note is Donna Hanover, a newswoman, as the strangely seductive
Ruth Carter Stapleton, helping Flynt be born again.  James Cromwell
("Babe") appears as Flynt adversary Charles Keating (later of the
savings and loan scandal) and Bill Clinton's campaign advisor James
Carville debuts as a county prosecutor.  Flynt himself appears as
Judge Morrisey, who presided over Flynt's first obscenity trial.
The film is funny, epic, tragic and brashly colorful in a 70's period
way.  The film's locations include Flynt's actual Hollywood mansion
and publishing offices.
My one small nit with "The People vs. Larry Flynt" is that there are
several scenes which are too abruputly editted throughout the
midsection of the film which broke me out of the movie experience.
Otherwise, I was totally wrapped up in Forman's American fable.
Visit Reeling at http://www.neponset.com/reeling.

Author
Brian Koller
At one point during the film "The People vs. Larry Flynt" a
Supreme Court justice makes a statement similar to "The First
Amendment is very important, but it isn't everything."
But to Larry Flynt, freedom of speech _is_ everything, becoming
more and more important after other aspects of his life have
been taken away from him.
In the movie's first half, "The People vs. Larry Flynt" plays
as a comedy.  Larry Flynt (Woody Harrelson) rises from small-time
adult nightclub operator to the publisher of the sleaziest
porn magazine, along the way marrying free-spirited lesbian
Althea (Courtney Love).  Much female naked flesh is paraded,
but this is acceptable given the context of the film.
This leads to legal problems for Flynt, who is prosecuted by
cynical politicians.  These politicians seem more interested
in putting Flynt behind bars than in stopping his magazine,
which continues to flourish.  Flynt does not help his cause
by antagonizing judges and prosecutors in court.  He becomes
less interested in running a magazine, and more interested in
seeing what behaviour he can get away with under the protection
of free speech.
Flynt is paralyzed from the waist down by an unknown assassin.
This changes the nature of the film, which becomes much weirder,
as does Flynt and Althea.  Flynt's southern drawl becomes
a mixture of W. C. Fields and James Stewart, while Althea's
hair color is dyed multiple unnatural colors.
"The People vs. Larry Flynt" is an excellent film.  I especially
liked the variety of the script: the roles of a tough federal judge,
Jerry Falwell, and Flynt's lawyer (Edward Norton) are played
straight with credible lines, while Flynt and Althea can be as
bizarre as, well, the First Amendment allows.
I am not an expert on the real Larry Flynt's life, and I don't
know how accurately he is portrayed.  I don't believe that it
is relevant.  This film should be treated as fiction, even if
it has much basis in fact.  I don't think it glorifies Flynt,
transforming a porn peddler into a fighter for free speech.
Actually, the Flynt character is presented as a jerk, and
sometimes as a lunatic.
There are many standout performances here.  Richard Paul
makes a perfect Jerry Falwell, and Courtney Love is well-cast
as Althea (can't see her playing girl-next-door roles though).
Norton is fine as the intense, disapproving, fresh-scrubbed
lawyer for Flynt.  Donna Hanover is a convincing Ruth Carter
Stapleton.  Clinton pit-bull James Carville even succeeds.
Harrelson is the only actor who gets a raspberry, camping
it up and talking as if he had marbles in his mouth.  He can
be very funny delivering lines, though.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The People Vs. Larry Flynt (1996)
Woody Harrelson, Courtney Love, Edward Norton, Brett Harrelson, James 
Cromwell, Crispin Glover. Directed by Milos Forman
Rated R, **** stars (out of *****)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
For more reviews, go to www.nuvo-online.com and click on "film."
In one scene from "The People Vs. Larry Flynt," the Hustler Magazine 
publisher appears at a self-staged free speech rally. As graphic photos 
flash on a huge screen behind him, Flynt strides confidently across the 
stage, delivering a rousing speech over what really constitutes obscenity.
 The spectacle was reminiscent of the scene in "Patton" where the General 
spoke in front of a giant American flag. Both scenes were stirring, 
larger than life, richly entertaining, and felt totally like contrived 
set pieces for big Hollywood movies. Overall, that sums up "The People Vs.
 Larry Flynt." The film is a wildly entertaining hoot which, despite 
being based on fact, feels like a big, phony Hollywood movie. 
The son of a Kentucky moonshiner, Flynt (Woody Harrelson) ran away from 
home and ended up operating strip clubs in Cincinnati. There he met 
Althea Leasure (Courtney Love), a bisexual stripper who became his fourth 
wife and the love of his life. To bolster interest in his clubs, he 
started a sexually explicit newsletter that grew into Hustler magazine. 
Flynt, along with the magazine's rag-tag management team, headed by his 
brother Jimmy (played nicely by Woody's real-life brother, Steak & Shake 
commercial veteran Brett Harrelson), viewed Playboy magazine with 
contempt. They mocked its slick articles and airbrushed photos, striving 
to keep Hustler focused on "what guys really want," explicit photos that 
would make a gynecologist squirm, and extremely crude humor. The film's 
prime example of Hustler's attitude is a cartoon depicting characters 
from The Wizard Of Oz in an orgy, giving the audience an opportunity to 
giggle at Flynt's "naughtiness." Director Milos Forman conveniently 
ignores the magazine's frequent attempts to derive humor from child 
molestation, racism, and endless scatological cartoons. 
Flynt's rag labored in well-deserved obscurity until he published nude 
photos of Jacqueline Onassis, which brought the magazine international 
attention, big money and the attention of conservatives. An obscenity 
bust followed, the first in a long series of battles between Flynt and 
the law. Lawyer Alan Isaacman (Edward Norton) enters the scene, hired by 
Flynt's wife. Norton, an exceptional actor, is wonderful as the 
beleaguered lawyer trying to navigate the legal system while dealing with 
Flynt's increasingly childish and bizarre behavior. In court, we meet the 
sputtering conservatives, headed by Citizens For Decency leader Charles 
Keating (James Cromwell.) As Keating blathers about Flynt's immorality, 
the camera slowly moves in for a close-up of his name tag, inviting the 
audience to gloat at the notion of morality being trumpeted by Keating, 
who was later convicted in a $2 billion S&L fraud. Flynt's other prime 
foe is Rev. Jerry Falwell, who sues over a Hustler parody involving him 
and his mother having sex in an outhouse. 
Tragedy strikes as Flynt is shot by a would-be assassin, leaving him 
paralyzed from the waist down. A dark period follows, as Flynt and 
Leasure hole up in an L.A. suite, strung out on pain killers. Flynt 
eventually kicks drugs, but Leasure succumbs to addiction, and later, 
AIDS. After watch Falwell on TV, describing AIDS as a punishment from God,
 Flynt directs his lawyer to take the Falwell case to the Supreme Court, 
leading to the film's climactic courtroom scene.
"The People Vs, Larry Flynt" is at its weakest when moralizing on free 
speech and lionizing Flynt. "If they'll protect a scumbag like me, then 
they'll protect all of you," declared Flynt. He's right, of course, but 
the director Forman cheats in portraying the opposition as little more 
than hypocritical buffoons. He also cheats in casting Woody Harrelson as 
Flynt. Harrelson is an attractive, charismatic man, and his strong 
performance paints Flynt as a colorful folk hero. Even a cursory look at 
the real Flynt, who is making the talk show circuit, and plays the judge 
in an early courtroom scene, shows a bloated, morose and bitter man. An 
accurate portrayal of Flynt would have made a more difficult film to 
watch, but a richer one.
Despite its flaws, "Flynt" is a fast moving, rousing movie with some 
terrific acting, especially by Courtney Love, whose vibrant performance 
will likely garner an Oscar nod. The story may be candy-coated, but it's 
still delicious candy. 

Author
Chad Polenz
***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1996, R, 130 minutes [2 hours, 10 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Woody Harrelson (Larry Flynt), Courtney Love (Althea
Leasure-Flynt), Edward Norton (Alan Isaacman), Brett Harrelson (Jimmy Flynt),
written by Scott Alexander, Larry Karaszewski, produced by Oliver Stone,
Janet Yang, Michael Hausman, directed by Milos Forman.
Free speech is an issue we debate every day in the United States, and
although our country has been around for 220 years, we still aren't sure what
the framers of the constitution mean when they wrote the First Amendment.
"The People Vs. Larry Flynt" is an enjoyable, thought-provoking film about a
modern battle over the issue. However, sometimes it becomes just as
gratuitous as the lives of its characters. 
Woody Harrelson stars as Larry Flynt, who most would consider to be the
lowest of society as he makes his living from selling "immoral smut." As a
child he sold moonshine, and as an adult, he and his brother Jimmy (played by
Harrelson's brother Brett) run a strip club. The immediate atmosphere of the
film is quite lighthearted and satirical. It doesn't seem like something to
take too seriously even when a passionate relationship forms between Larry
and a bi-sexual stripper named Althea Leasure (Love). None of these
characters are all that likable, but they are not repulsive either.
Larry and Jimmy start publishing "Hustler," a pornographic magazine, but
unlike "Playboy," the Flynts' magazine contains much more explicit
photographs. Larry knows no one buys such magazines for the articles, and
he's just giving his customers what they want - right? 
Flynt is arrested for selling obscene literature, and is defended by a young
lawyer named Alan Isaacman (Norton) who comes to Flynt because he is a
champion of civil liberties. They lose the case and he is sentenced to 25
years, but in the next scene he is out of jail. This is one of my small
peeves with this film, as it seems to cop-out often. Flynt is constantly
arrested, tried, sentenced, and then released - and it becomes a bit
predictable as a whole, but still manages to be interesting.
Although the dominating theme is Flynt's battle for free speech, the film
also acts as an offbeat love story. Love is great as Larry's drug addled wife
Althea, who is the only woman who seems to love and support him through his
troubles. Harrelson and Love do make for an interesting couple, but they seem
to be in constant haze of drugs and sex - what is their relationship based
on?
The films' biggest problem is the constant flip-flopping between the
satirical aspect of Flynt's court battles and the depravity of his
relationship with his wife, who eventually is diagnosed with AIDS. Because
this is based on a true story I understand why both themes and moods are
relevant and important, but they tend to cloud each other's impact. One
minute we are laughing at Flynt in the courtroom, and the next we are
supposed to be crying over his home life.
The final legal battle Flynt endures is a libel suit issued by Jerry
Falwell, which goes all the way to the Supreme Court. Falwell and the
Christian right are constantly portrayed as enemies throughout the film, and
I think this is shaky ground. The film seems to depict them all as insane
zealots, and I really don't think that's true. 
Most people don't realize how important Larry Flynt's legal battles really
were. His ultimate victory was one involving libel, not pornography, and I
don't think the film emphasizes this enough. Whether or not you agree with
Flynt's life is irrelevant; what everyone must understand is the U.S.
Constitution must protect "scumbags" like him in order to protect everyone
else. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Author
Michael Redman
Virtually everything connected with "Hustler" publisher Larry Flynt is
tinged with controversy, even the poster for this movie. Elsewhere in
the world the film is advertised with an image of Flynt (Woody
Harrelson) draped in an American flag being crucified on the body of a
nearly nude woman. In the United States, because the Motion Picture
Association Of America wouldn't approve the artwork, the poster is of
Harrelson's head with a flag over his mouth.
The film itself has also stirred up emotional feelings. While there is
general agreement among critics that it is an exceptionally well crafted
piece, not everyone believes that the screen Flynt is much like the real
Larry Flynt. Produced by Oliver Stone ("JFK", "Nixon") who is known to
present his own particular version of history, directed by Milos Forman
("One Flew Over The Cuckoo=92s Nest", "Amadeus") who specializes in
iconoclast as hero films and written by Scott Alexander and Larry
Karaszewski ("Ed Wood") who delight in the low-brow; Flynt's life story
is from a very personalized point of view.
Growing up in the hill country of Kentucky, he graduates from a child
moonshiner to running a seedy strip club in Cincinnati. Looking for a
way to promote his establishment, he hits upon the idea of a glossy
newsletter featuring photos of his dancers. Reluctantly agreeing to
adding words as a result of a conversation with his printer who tells
him "This is it? You=92ve got to have text, like 'Playboy' " to make it
legal, Flynt begins his publishing empire. Said empire is going nowhere
until he lucks into nude shots of Jackie O for the second issue. Then
everyone in the country wants to see what he describes as "The First
P****! [expletive for female genitalia deleted]"
The film is a combination of court room drama and an offbeat love story.
Rags-to-riches Flynt=92s battles with fundamentalist preacher Jerry
Farwell make it to the Supreme Court with a case concerning a satire ad
in "Hustler" featuring Farwell=92s supposed confession of his first sexua=
l
experience which was with his mother in an outhouse. Last seen as the
naive hillbilly kid (or is he really a criminal genius?) in "Primal
Fear", Edward Norton is excellent as Flynt's attorney although he looks
remarkably young for the role. =
Flynt's temporary conversion to born-again Christianity by President
Carter=92s sister is included in the film, but not very well explained. I=
t
is amusing, however, to watch him try to combine his newly found
religion with the porn mag. Naked women on transparent crosses floating
in water, indeed!
The romantic tale is equally interesting. He finds his wife-to-be when
she is an underage stripper in his club. Althea Leasure (that can=92t be
her real name) is played to a T...make that a G...by rocker Courtney
Love (that can=92t be her real name). Seconds after they meet and an equa=
l
number of seconds before they consummate their relationship, she brags
"You=92re not the only one who=92s slept with all the women who dance her=
e."
Larry and Althea=92s courtship is unlike most. After sharing three other
women in a hot tub with him, Althea proposes and is astonished to learn
that her intended has confused the word "marriage" with a desire on her
part for monogamy.
Harrelson captures the self-confessed scumbag perfectly for the screen.
His transformation after Flynt is shot and ironically paralyzed below
the waist by an unknown assassin is top notch. Love is wonderful as the
bi-sexual devil-may-care temptress who later becomes drug addicted,
contracts AIDS and withers away before our eyes. Their scenes towards
the end of her life are touching no matter how you judge their
lifestyle.
Flynt's life is not exactly the stuff of traditional role models and
this film barely touches on the question of whether "Hustler" promoted
violence towards women, but it certainly is one of the few Must-Sees
that have come our way.
[This appeared in the 1/16/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
Eric Robinette
Starring:  Woody Harrelson, Courtney Love, Edward Norton, Brett Harrelson.
Written by Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski; directed by Milos
Forman.
"The People vs. Larry Flynt" is gross. That's why it's so great.
Okay, so the choice of words, is, well, a little blunt. But hey, since
we're talking about the infamous Hustler founder who won over the Supreme
Court, someone whose middle name might have been "blunt," I figure it's
only appropriate.
Anyway, back to this gross thing.  Things that are gross tend to be great
movie subjects. Take "Vertigo," for example. It's about a man unerringly
obsessed with a dead woman, "A Clockwork Orange is about a man who goes on
violent sprees just for kicks.  These people at heart, are really
repellent, and yet, for better or worse, the audience is made to like them
and side with them because we hate the forces against them worse than we
do the one being maligned.
Along these lines, the fact that "Larry Flynt" very obviously sides with
its hero is not, as some people have indicated, a flaw.  Focusing only on
the pro-and-con of free speech could be boring and obvious.  In fact, I
would argue that the free speech debate, while powerful, isn't the most
compelling part of the movie. It was  a much more impressive  feat to take
a repugnant character and make the audience side with him even if they 
might not personally like him.
First and foremost to credit in this feat are the actors.  Woody Harrelson
turns in a veritable tour de force that ranks, I think, as the most
powerful of 1996..  As Flynt veers from smug bar owner to devout,
born-again Christian to crestfallen paraplegic to defiant crusader, we see
a man put through an emotional wringer that literally almost killed him. 
The fact he keeps standing up despite all his enemies, despite his
confinement to a wheelchair, is what makes him such a compelling figure.
No less astonishing is Courtney Love as Flynt's flamboyant wife, Althea
Leisure.  No, it's not so surprising that she can play a scraggly,
strung-out prostitute, but how sympathetic she makes her.  The image of
her gripping the barrier separating herself and Flynt while he's in prison
burned into my memory.
And caught in the middle of this Constitutional whirlwind is that rising
star Edward Norton, who remains the calm of the storm as he dazedly tries
to hash out all the craziness around him and becomes the clear ringing
voice in support of free speech that even repellent trash like Hustler is
right to practice. 
Ultimately, the tricky balancing act this movie pulls off is what makes it
one of the best films of the year. I've heard people argue that it's
drama, while others insist it's a comedy.  A case can be made for both;
after all, a movie that has about a man despised by many who gets shot and
paralyzed with a wife who irrevocably spirals to doom wouldn't seem to be
a barrel of laughs.
And yet the picture is acidly funny. Screenwriters Scott Alexander and
Larry Karaszewski, who also penned "Ed Wood" have a gift for making
guttural characters seem both funny and human. They have an ideal partner
in director Milos Forman, who has his own gift for taking larger-than-life
characters (like Mozart) and making them seem more human by revealing how
humorous and vulnerable they are.
So, at heart, The People vs. Larry Flynt, is a dramatic comedy, and a
great one at that. I know that it's cheating by having my cake and eating
it too, but it's the best description I could come up with about this
story of a man who is so gross he's fascinating.

Author
Jerry Saravia
It is rare for Hollywood, especially in these politically correct
times, to pursue controversial biographical figures who leave a bad
taste in societal and political terms. Bad taste could be the title of
director Milos Formas's unequivocally great film biography on the king
of bad taste - the controversial Hustler magazine publisher, Larry
Flynt.
Woody Harrelson plays the flashy Larry Flynt (always wearing loud
disco suits) who starts out in Ohio running a plethora of strip clubs
with his patient brother (played by Harrelson's real-life younger
brother). Flynt loves the job because he can sleep with any woman he
wants. He decides to start putting nude pictures of women in
newspapers and eventually magazines. At one of these strip clubs, he
meets Althea Leasure (Courtney Love), a 17-year-old stripper who
becomes Larry's wife and business associate. They have an open
marriage - Althea is bisexual and has many male and female lovers, and
Larry can screw every woman he meets, as long as he doesn't kiss
them. Their love and commitment is deep, and their relationship
reminded me a lot of the two lovers in "Leaving Las Vegas" where two
people can fall in love despite who they are, and what they do for a
living.
"The People vs. Larry Flynt" is not just a love story, it is a hybrid
of events in Larry Flynt's life such as the lurid, loathsome porno
magazine he created, which has sparked dissent among feminists and the
like, the eventual tragic circumstances of the attempt on his life,
Althea's death from AIDS, and the Supreme Court ruling centering on
his right to Freedom of Speech - the right to mock any politician
without being sued for hurting his/her feelings.
Firstly, Forman concentrates deeply on the emotional bond between
Flynt and Althea, it is a relationship based not only on respect but
also mutual honesty.  For example, there's a crucial scene where Flynt
decides to become a born-again Christian and attracts the attention of
Jimmy Carter's evangelist sister, Ruth Carter Stapleton. Afterwards,
he decides to make Hustler a "safer" magazine by eschewing
misogynistic, violent pictures of women and replacing them with
religious symbolic collages. Althea can't and won't accept his
moralistic and religious stance - she doesn't want him to stop being
the avaricious publisher he is.
The second half of the movie becomes a springboard for Flynt's Freedom
of Speech defense as he is sued for libel by Moral Majority leader
Jerry Falwell (apparently, Falwell was offended by Hustler's depiction
of an incestuous relationship with his mother). As Flynt memorably
retorts, "If the First Amendment can protect a scumbag like me, then
it will protect all of you.  Because I'm the worst." He is persecuted
by all kinds of moral watchdogs, prosecutors, protesters, and
political affiliates. Flynt is a hard man to keep down - he continues
to fight even after being shot and paralyzed, enduring never-ending
trials, and jail. He doesn't stop for a second after being released
from jail - he wears an American flag as a diaper to court, throws
oranges at the judge, and becomes a political freedom fighter
defending his pornographic magazine all the way to the Supreme Court.
Woody Harrelson gives the boldest, most liberating performance of his
career - he growls, he spews, he laughs in the face of every judge,
and generally offends everyone because he has the right to do
so. Harrelson delivers to the fullest extent with verve and a
wonderful sense of humor - it is impossible to hate Flynt based on
Woody's emphatic, likable performance. Ditto the trashy Courtney Love
who brings a fuller sense of empathy and humanity for the smart,
vivacious Althea - she is the film's soul and it is a performance on
par with Elisabeth Shue in "Leaving Las Vegas" and Sharon Stone in
"Casino." Love also has that rare gift for an actress where she
doesn't seem to be acting - she is giving us a long look at this
woman's tragic, frail human soul (and unlike some naive critics, it
isn't due to Love's similar addictive background that gives the
performance fire and dynamic energy). Kudos must also go to Edward
Norton as Flynt's long-suffering lawyer.
Director Milos Forman has crafted a rich, penetrating, entertaining
tapestry of Larry Flynt's life with the help of screenwriters Scott
Alexander and Larry Karaszewski (who helmed the similarly ironic "Ed
Wood"). What the movie is most successful at is making Larry Flynt
into a national hero for all liberals out there. The screenplay,
however, omits the most obvious aspect of Flynt's life - he is
notorious in this country for his controversial magazine, and not so
much for the Falwell case. Throughout the film, we never really see
what drove or even inspired him to create such a magazine - the movie
opts to present a balanced viewpoint on the issue of censorship but it
is a mistake not to include the pictures of bestiality, violence,
masochism and, arguably, sheer hatred of women included in his
magazine (A brief shot of the infamous cover where a woman is being
fed into a meat grinder barely skims the surface). And where are all
the feminist characters such as Gloria Steinem who decried Flynt?
Perhaps I am being a bit too harsh but in order to see why so many
people hated Flynt, we have to see what drove them to hate him. He is
essentially protecting the entire magazine (as he does through the
movie) from censorship and libel, and not just the political
cartoons. It is his vision he wishes to protect.
Regardless of these significant oversights, "The People vs. Larry
Flynt" is director Milos Forman's finest film since Amadeus. He has
managed to bring a vivid, penetrating portrait of the most infamous
magazine publisher of the 20th century. His film biography is witty,
humanistic, honestly emotional, three-dimensional, acutely written,
and marvelously acted and directed. Forget "Michael Collins." Based on
the film and the renewed interest in this man, Larry Flynt is an
individual who will be talked about for decades.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or
Faust667@aol.com 

Author
Bryant Frazer
THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT does for sex magazine publishers
more or less what ED WOOD did for bad filmmakers.
That is to say, it's a whitewash. But what a charming
whitewash, and for what a good cause. THE PEOPLE VS.
LARRY FLYNT is an epic American saga, the tale of a young
entrepreneur (er, strip club owner) who starts his own
publishing venture (er, Hustler magazine) to forge a place in
American discourse for his own home-spum philosophy (his
principal contribution to the visual grammar of pornography
seems to have been the "beaver shot"). The theatrical trailer
promotes this one as a drama, and the newest TV spots present
it as a comedy, and they're both right. Much of LARRY FLYNT
has a cheerily surreal bent to it, which actually enhances
the impact of the stuff that's played straight. It's far from
the last word on free speech and dirty magazines, but LARRY
FLYNT scores points for engaging the issues in the first
place.
After an odd, mannered prologue showing young Larry's
beginnings as a Kentucky hillbilly, the movie concentrates on
his rise from Ohio strip-club owner to Los Angeles publishing
magnate. He begins publishing the Hustler newsletter to
promote his clubs, and stakes all his savings on turning the
modest handout into a nationally distributed magazine. The
first issue tanks disgracefully, but just when all seems
lost, Flynt comes into possession of nude snapshots of Jackie
Onassis sunning herself on a Mediterranean vacation. Sales go
through the roof, and Hustler becomes an American
institution.
The movie has conflict -- Flynt's efforts run afoul of local
authorities, and he will eventually wind up in the Supreme
Court, appealing a lower court's judgment against him for
publishing a satirical ad suggesting that Jerry Falwell had
sex with his mother. The movie has romance -- Flynt falls in
love with the grungy-gorgeous Althea Leasure, a new face in
his club who turns out to be a more savvy publisher than
Flynt himself. And it has tragedy -- overzealous prosecuting
attorneys drag Flynt through the judicial mud, a
fundamentalist sniper puts him in a wheelchair for the rest
of his days, and his lovely Althea turns out to be a diseased
junkie, unable to kick the same painkillers that eased
Flynt's unbearable paralysis.
Terrific performances, sharp direction, and broad comedy --
THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT has everything except a 
sense of why Flynt has been so reviled, and what drove him on in the
face of revulsion. As played by Woody Harrelson, Flynt is no
traditional hero, but he's not really an object of scorn,
either. When he explains that a Hustler front-cover image of
a woman's naked body being fed through a meat grinder --
probably the most effective image ever co-opted by the
anti-porn movement -- is meant as a symbol of his born-again
sensitivities (he was briefly converted after having dinner
with then-President Jimmy Carter's sister, Ruth Carter
Stapleton), it's hard to tell whether the movie is taking him
at his word or if it's just unwilling to call its protagonist
on the carpet for using misogyny to sell magazines.
It's easy to take a perverse delight in watching Flynt wheel
around the bedroom of his Bel-Air mansion, watching on
security cameras as federal marshals swarm the building after
he releases a videotape of the FBI's cocaine sting operation
against John DeLorean. And no matter how lowbrow Flynt's
sense of comedy, it's hard to fault him for dragging the
beatific Falwell portrayed here (by Richard Paul) through the
mud. Even when Flynt hurls invective and vegetables at a
judge from his wheelchair, he's not much more offensive than
your crazy Grandpa (his speech impediment makes him talk like
Jimmy Stewart). Only in one scene, where Flynt delivers a
sermon of sorts in front of a giant screen montage
alternating naked girls with wartime atrocities, does the
film really suggest that he may be as looney as the opposing
forces.
Courtney Love is marvelous. In the film's early scenes, she
plays a worldy stripper who nicely balances Flynt's lack of
grace. Later, when she portrays the shambling wreck that
echoes some pointed media coverage of her own life, she
doesn't embarrass herself. Oliver Stone has described her
casting as "the great battle of this picture," but how much
riskier is it to cast Love as Flynt's wife than to cast, say,
Madonna as Eva Peron? Her haunting, girlish performance
doesn't quite deliver on the same level as her songwriting
(Hole's 1994 LIVE THROUGH THIS was an astonishing album), 
but it's a remarkable debut, and she'll likely earn the respect
of even those who can't stand her music.
Edward Norton is nearly as good in the pivotal role of Alan
Isaacman, Flynt's longtime attorney (in the movie, the
character is actually a conglomeration of different real-life
lawyers including Isaacman) who explains to the Supreme Court
-- and thus to the movie's audience -- why even lowbrow
speech deserves full Constitutional protection. Bright and
savvy to a fault, Norton almost helps us forget that he's
preaching to us in a scene that could easily have fallen flat
on its face. But after Norton articulates the argument in
response to probing questions from the justices, the court's
unanimous decision in favor of Flynt really feels like a
triumph.
Cameos by political strategist James Carville, TV journalist
Donna Hanover (who happens to be Mrs. Rudy Giuliani), a
Memphis judge, an NYU law professor, and Flynt himself (as a
Cincinatti judge) add character to this free speech circus,
which is part historical drama and part broad satire. I guess
I prefer my satire a little more narrow, since I would rather
have seen a lot less of the Jerry Falwell impersonator. And a
reference to infamous financial shyster Charles Keating would
have seemed a slyer commentary on "decent" citizenry had the
point not been hammered home with an insert of the guy's name
tag in close-up. Too often, LARRY FLYNT nudges your shoulder,
making sure you "get it."
But for the most part, Milos Forman proves himself once again
to be a skillful director who guides winning performances and
makes the most of his well-chosen material without
overpowering it -- certainly this production breaks ranks
with his previous films. More than AMADEUS or ONE FLEW 
OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST, LARRY FLYNT is of a piece with 
ED WOOD, the previous film from screenwriters Scott Alexander 
and Larry Karaszewski. Both films romanticize their protagonists,
but ED WOOD clicked as Tim Burton's valentine to a
down-on-his-luck ancestor. LARRY FLYNT has no such sense of
closure. Instead, the film offers congratulations to the
First Amendment. Poets and pornographers alike, Forman wants
to say, we're all in this together.
On the one hand, the film goes to great lengths to distance
itself from Flynt's accomplishments. "I don't like what Larry
Flynt does," Isaacman tells a courtroom at one point in the
film. "I never bought Hustler, and I doubt I ever will,"
Forman says in the press kit. But on the other, the movie
never shows us what was so distasteful about the magazine.
Shots from your typical Hustler pictorial would likely earn
this movie an NC-17, but when Harrelson's Flynt breaks
taboos, it's in a playful way. In one scene, he urges a model
to spread her legs a little wider. Althea playfully suggests
sexualizing THE WIZARD OF OZ. Flynt publishes a cartoon
featuring Santa Claus sporting a gigantic erection. And so it
goes. Still, there must have been more to Hustler than that.
Flynt's whole career seems to be predicated on his feeling
that the working class deserves pornography without
pretension -- "Playboy," he anounces to a roomful of
compatriots, "is mocking you." But the film never expands on
those feelings in any meaningful way, and the early scenes
speed by without showing us enough of that feisty, subversive
spirit. "All I wanted to do was make some money and have some
fun," Flynt has said, and the movie seems willing to leave it
at that. And maybe that's the point -- whether Flynt was a
hero, a pioneer, or simply a coarse nut job, whether there
were any principles at all behind his endeavors, he's one of
the people who's helped make this country great.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Woody Harrelson, Courtney Love, Edward Norton, James Cromwell,
Crispin Glover, Brett Harrelson, James Carville, Donna Hanover, Richard
Paul Director: Milos Forman Screenplay: Scott Alexander and Larry
Karaszewski
The First Amendment. It's a wonderful way of life when an ideal as
powerful as freedom itself, is allowed to protect and represent the
American people. However, when this unique law of the forefathers is
used and abused by the likes of Larry Flynt, then something beautiful
and natural, has become polluted by the fumes of the depraved and
amoral.
The issues begin with pornography and Larry's freedom to express his
views. I won't debate this point; but when Larry uses  his freedom to
fraudulently defame others, I cannot and will not side with him. His
utter contempt for the court and justices also becomes evident at every
hearing; when Larry needs to take centre stage in his shameless mockery
of the establishment.
Larry Flynt, "Hill Billy" child of misplaced dreams who,
Mounted only to sleaze and hustle, greed and "girly" bustle,
Whose claim to fame rests with spitting in righteous face,
Whose grievous deed protected by righteous grace,
Mock and laugh at Her Lady's Laws,
Rape and desecrate her first and most precious gift,
But True Freedom comes only to those who respect it,
Not to those who misuse and abuse it.
So the same law which guide and protect the innocent, need also turn a
blind eye to Larry Flynt. Although Lady Justice herself is prevented
from spitting back at this foul-mouthed monstrosity, this will not
shield Flynt from the contempt of others who have witnessed a
desecration of the First Amendment. No sympathy points for this lonely,
bitter, angry old man, who has pit himself against God, the world and
the goodness of life.
Solid performances by Woody Harrelson whose choice of "smutty" roles
"King Pin", "Natural Born Killers" etc. seem to have become his forte.
Courtney Love, a queen of the fast lane, instinctively knows how to
recreate the likes of Althea Leisure.

Author
Walter Frith
'The People vs. Larry Flynt' is a flagrant and courageous success in tackling
the subject matter it set out to conquer.  Hustler magazine publisher Larry
Flynt took a civil case against him all the way to the Supreme Court of the
United States claiming his right under the first amendment of the U.S.
Constitution to publish his material anyway he saw fit.  You may not like
Larry Flynt or what he stands for but the amazing thing about this film is
that despite the repellent nature of the characters and ideas shown to the
public at large, sympathy and tolerance is created for Flynt's situation
symbolizing the fact that if his rights can be protected then so can anyone el
se's.  Two time Academy Award winning director Milos Forman ('One Flew Over
the Cuckoo's Nest,' 'Ragtime,' 'Amadeus') is a master of making intellectual
artistry alive and vibrant and he is helped by head producer of this movie,
Oliver Stone (himself a two time Oscar winning director) who is no stranger
at being socially aware.  Together along with the antics and reality of Scott
Alexander and Larry Karaszewski's screenplay, this team has fashioned a story
of society's ethics (or lack of them) against the backdrop of freedom which
so many of us take for granted.  Woody Harrelson portrays Larry Flynt with an
eccentric quality of flamboyance and unintended humour along with
intelligence and a daring dose of questioning authority at any cost to
himself or his business.  The real scene stealer in this movie is Courtney
Love who portrays his wife and unquestionably his best friend who stands by
him during and despite an assassination attempt and court battle.  Her
characterization of Flynt's wife is savagely loyal and we see her life played
out on the screen eventually contracting AIDS from her morally decaying
lifestyle.  A breath of fresh air for this movie is delivered by the straight
laced performance of Edward Norton ('Primal Fear') who plays Flynt's
attorney.  He is dedicated to his client's cause even though he dislikes
Flynt's tactics and publication business.  His character is both interesting
and tips the scales as the centre of the movie's legal interpretation.  Look
for this one to score big at Oscar time.  Updating my pick of the best film
of 1996, 'The People vs. Larry Flynt,' is probably going to remain intact.

Author
modemac@tiac.net
Well, look here -- it's a movie from Hollywood that actually defends
pornography!  In this day and age when the whining and crying over sexual
content in the media -- especially "newer" media such as the Net -- seems
to be reaching an all-time Pinkness saturation, we finally get a movie
that comes out and says "This is porn, a lot of people want to see it, and
by God, we've got a right to make porn available to people who want to see
it!"  It's about damn time we got a movie that makes a sensible statement
like that.  The movie's far from perfect -- it's a typical Hollywood
whitewashing of the porn controversy, a simple black-and-white,
good-vs.-evil story -- but hell, it's still a lot of fun to watch, and at
least it says something about our culture.  You'll get more good Slack from
this movie than you will from EVITA or DANTE'S PEAK.
As you've probably heard, THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT is supposedly the
story of Larry Flynt, the owner of a few strip bars and publisher of a
sleazy skin magazine who happened to get lucky: he acquired nude photos of
Jackie Onassis and published them in his rag.  That caused a national
sensation, and he rode the wave of infamy to build his baby, Hustler, into
a huge publishing empire.  (If THAT'S not Slack, tell me what is! )  Of
course, you have to remember that this is a Hollywood story, and it's aimed
at mainstream audiences -- i.e. the Pink masses who hate to THINK.  So the
makers of this movie (Director Milos Forman, who made ONE FLEW OVER THE
CUCKOO'S NEST -- and producer Oliver Stone, that egotistic jerk who thinks
every one of his movies has to be an Important Wake-Up Call To America)
dumbed it down and made Larry Flynt into a Hollywood Good Guy.  He's a
clean, straight, good ol' boy who loves his wife dearly and just wants to
turn an honest profit...and he just happens to be in the business of
publishing dirty pictures.  Right.  And I just happen to be J.R. "Bob"
Dobbs' legitimate son and heir, too.  Needless to say, the real-life story
probably has as much to do with this movie as the movie JFK had to do with
the real Kennedy assassination -- i.e. little to none -- but hell, at least
Woody Harrelson (who plays Flynt) manages to have a lot of fun with the
role and get away with pulling some fine stunts on film.  It's fun to watch
as Flynt tells his photographer to forget trying to be "arty" and just go
for hard-core smut.
There's one great scene where Flynt is standing in front of a huge movie
scene, making a sermonizing speech about the First Amendment and the right
to publish porn; as he says this, the movie screen is illustrating the
difference between pictures of war and murder (which nobody seems to mind
publishing), and sex (which gets people upset for some reason).  It's a
great visualization of the classic defense of pornography, namely: "Why is
it okay to show pictures of murder and suffering, but not okay to show
pictures of people having sex and enjoying themselves doing it?"
It's a simple message, and frankly this is a simple movie.  We've got good
guy Larry Flynt, crusading to bring his porn to the grocery stores of
America.  For bad guys we've got the usual enemies: Jerry Falwell and the
Moral Majority, and the other fat old white men who wield all the power in
government, and who usually play the role of the bad guys in movies of this
sort.  (Falwell sued Flynt after Hustler made fun of him by publishing
an alleged "story" of Falwell having sex with his mother in an outhouse.)
There's no exception here: The rich old white men in suits all hate this
evil, disgusting filth, and the movie emphasizes their hypocrisy by using
Charles Keating as a major player in the anti-porn crowd.  (Keating was
the central figure in the nationwide savings-and-loan scandal of the
late 1980s, which cost the taxpayers over two billion dollars.)
So it's a simple "good" (Flynt) vs. "evil" (Falwell) story.  But, the
movie's still a hell of a lot of fun, and Larry Flynt is such an
outrageous figure that even Hollywood can't tame him.  He wanted Hustler
to be as lewd, shocking, and offensive as possible, and this movie has the
good sense to give us at least a few glimpses into that milieu.
We get a lot of laughs (mostly from Flynt's antics at bucking the
"establishment"), we get some great gags (mostly taken from the pages of
Hustler itself -- wait till you see what they do with Santa Claus and
the Wizard of Oz), AND we get a knockout performance by Courtney Love, who
plays Flynt's drugged-out wife Althea.  Courtney is everything Madonna
ever wanted to be -- namely, a real actress -- and she's a wonder to look
at.  She also does a striptease, so you folks who want to use this movie
as an excuse to look at some naked women won't be disappointed either.
Whether she's posing for her husband (or the photographer), or getting
zonked out on Flynt's "pain killers," she steals every scene she's in.
You can't help but watch her, even when she's getting thin and pale.
You can tell Oliver Stone produced this movie because of the two
mysterious "conspiracies" that never really get resolved, one of them
involving the would-be assassin who paralyzed Flynt from the waist down
and confined him to a wheelchair for the rest of his life.  But
fortunately, director Forman know how to tell a story without beating the
audience over the head with it (Stone's forte), so we don't mind the fact
that this movie is trying to force its "porn is good" message down our
throats.  It even gets wimpy at one point, when Flynt finds religion and
tries to turn over a new leaf (sort of)...but that doesn't last long.
Hollywood (and Sony Pictures, the distributors) is raining praise on this
movie as a way of trying to show us they can "take a stand" over a
supposedly controversial issue.  Bull.  If this movie was made at an
independent studio with about 1/10 of the budget, it would probably be the
scathing, vicious attack on "the establishment" it wants to be...but then
it would be rated NC-17 (which is still box-office death) and it would
barely reach 1/10 of the audience it's reaching now.  The original poster
for this movie had an image of Harrelson wearing a diaper made of an
American flag, crucified between a woman's legs...but Sony decided that
image was too "controversial" and they pulled it in favor of the much tamer
image we see on the movie posters now (Harrelson's face, with a flag
covering his mouth).  That's the true face of Hollywood, which is (as
always) dominated by the Conspiracy: it's afraid of real controversy, and
it pulls back in the face of anything really daring and produces a pale
facade instead.
But, nonetheless, we've still got a fun, intelligent movie from Hollywood
that tells us that people like looking at dirty pictures, and by God,
we've got a right to see those dirty pictures!  So even if it's not a
perfect movie, THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT is still worth seeing.  It's a
movie with its mouth in the right place.  It reveals a lot more about
Hollywood than Hollywood realizes...but then, that's why Hollywood is
Hollywood and we are SubGenii.  They've got the MONEY...and we've got the
SLACK.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        With nearly all the critics in the world calling THE PEOPLE 
VS. LARRY FLYNT  the best movie of 1996 and most major religious 
figures decrying it from the pulpit, this movie was top on my list of 
movies to see this holiday season. TURBULENCE and THE RELIC 
can wait, because this movie's got everyone shaken up in one way or 
another. The movie theater people were actually checking IDs and for 
this one so you know it's controversial. And yes, it is damn good.
        THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT tells the fascinating true 
story of a low-class man's rise to fame through the exploitation of 
nude women. Larry Flynt, played by Woody Harrelson, is stereotypical 
white trash running a series of seedy strip joints when he gets the 
idea to publish a newsletter to promote it. The newsletter is, of course, 
a bunch of topless photos, and that leads to the establishment of 
Hustler magazine, which begins selling millions of copies an issue 
once it prints nude pictures of Jackie Onassis.
        Hustler, like Flynt himself, is undisguised perversion. It 
doesn't have the pretenses of the higher-class Playboy, which tries 
to mix articles and interviews with the photo spreads. Hustler focuses 
solely on sex, and so does Flynt. It's Playboy for the common 
pervert -- sure there's the Playboy Mansion, but wouldn't most 
people rather visit the Hustler Mobile Home?
        With the success of Hustler, Flynt becomes rich and 
influential but retains the same set of friends and associates as 
before. Making the journey with him is bisexual stripper Althea 
(Courtney Love, of Hole), who becomes his wife early in the film. 
Swingers that they are, though, they scoff at the notion of 
marriage and monogamy being interrelated. There are a couple 
sex scenes in THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT, and Love 
does appear in the buff many a time. Being subjected to her 
naked body so many times, I'm starting to get an idea of why 
Kurt Cobain shot himself.
        With the graphic pictures and cartoons in his magazine, 
outcries are inevitable. Flynt goes to court three times in the 
movie, twice because he's being sued by the Reverend Jerry 
Falwell for printing a parody ad that quotes Falwell as saying he 
had sex with his mother in an outhouse. The court scenes are 
the most memorable in THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT, 
particularly the scene in which Flynt decides to get back at the 
system by throwing an orange at the judge and wearing the 
American flag as a diaper.
        Life is a long, twisted trip for Mr. and Mrs. Flynt. He turns 
to God after much prodding from the President's sister, Ruth 
Carter Stapleton, but his outlook remains as sex-saturated and 
blasphemous as before. Once he is shot by an unknown sniper 
and ends up paralyzed from the waist down, he abandons his 
belief in God entirely and gets hooked on various forms of 
drugs, legal and illegal, to ease the pain. Althea too finds herself 
hooked on heroin and eventually dies of AIDS.
        THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT has a compelling story 
that is most interesting for trying to paint Flynt as some kind of 
folk hero but only making him look more insane and perverse. 
Harrelson did a great job portraying a complicated man who 
has at least a small degree of mental illness, but the big acting 
trophy here should go to Love. I never would have pegged her 
as someone who would make the transition from music video 
to movies so successfully on the first try.
        The movie depicts a lot of depravity and is uncomfortable 
to watch at times, but still brings with it a very powerful and very 
true theme -- that the First Amendment of the United States 
should provide freedom of expression for everyone. Defining 
obscenity is difficult and undeniably subjective, but as this 
movie points out, outlawing one form of speech could lead to 
the outlawing of other forms. Flynt may not be the picture 
perfect messenger but the message is at the heart of 
American freedom.

Author
Kah Seng
It shows that America remains ambivalent over the nature of its
political system. No major surprise, when J. S. Mill in his Victorian
classic On Liberty could not make up his mind over liberal democracy
either. The Americans are wrought by the archetypal paradox under
which they exist, the supreme contradiction between the right of the
one and the right of the majority. Small wonder that Hollywood's most
compelling movies have oft been on the struggle of the
individual-underdog against some larger collective oppressive -
witness Braveheart, Born on the Fourth of July, Rocky, First Blood,
Clear and Present Danger, JFK, the list goes on.
There's little of that in Singapore - we are barred access to Playboy
and Penthouse both on and off line, though the government's been long
worried about the younger people getting "Americanised" and advocating
individual rights and parliamentary opposition.
The People vs. Larry Flynt locates the political debate within the
greatest social taboo in America - sex. Does pornography have a right
to exist and circulate? Larry Flynt, the publisher of Hustler
magazine, thinks so, and obviously so too the U.S. Congress which last
month threw out a Bill to curb pornography on the Net. But even with
such actions, Americans remain undecided. The Oscars apparently
shunned the movie because it was an embarrassing and sensitive
livewire.
What they have ignored is actually a great picture. Woody Harrelson as
the lead character reprises his role as a to-hell-with-morality,
to-hell-with-the-law, and to-hell-with-the-system anti-Christ that we
last saw in Natural Born Killers. And he is outrageous and convincing
as a nihilistic atheist who nonetheless loves his ex-stripper wife
dearly. The latter is played with abandon, conviction and sensitivity
all at once by Courtney Love, who is the real star of the show and
really snubbed of an Academy Award Best Actress nomination, if not of
the award itself. Edward Norton plays their jerky lawyer. The
relationship between Harrelson and Love brings out another great
paradox - superficially they are immoral outcasts who've had it
coming; Woody gets shot and becomes paralysed from the waist down, and
Courtney dies of Aids. God's damnation. But in the powerful love they
have for each other, each standing by the other in turn, the two leads
highlight the question how much is the nihilist still a moralist and
(in the American context) a Christian, if they can love and care, and
feel just like anyone else on a personal level. Friedrich Nietzsche
once talked about how the atheist must uncover for himself the full
consequences of atheism by ridding himself of all moral-Christian
influences. To go beyond good and evil.
This is a great picture, no doubt, and I love it personally. Because
it is moving, funny, ends with open American optimism blah blah. But I
like it and admire it because it comes from a fine American tradition
that dares to raise difficult questions, and call into doubt ideas and
doctrines that otherwise are used as catchphrases. There are times
when movies go beyond the story they tell and reflect something of
hidden realities. This movie is not so much about Larry Flynt, but
about Americans and American society.
check out http://www.cyberway.com.sg/~perrin. reviews n comments n
grading of the latest movies. check out the people vs. larry flynt. if u
like it, drop a link to me, will link back. give me your comments.

Author
Andy Wright
Traditionally, the big-budget bio-pic has generally been reserved for 
historical figures of great nobility or significance (Mozart, Malcolm X, 
Gandhi, Oscar Schindler, etc.), so it's somewhat jarring at first to 
see unredeemed '70s smut-meister Larry Flynt get the same treatment. The 
fact that it turned out to be one of the best pictures of 1996 is 
equally surprising, until you realize the amount of talent involved. As 
his previous films ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST and AMADEUS have 
shown, director Miles Forman has a knack for humanizing even the most 
potentially unredeemable characters, of which this film gives you a wide 
assortment. (The scriptwriters, Scott Alexander & Larry Karaszewksi, 
seem to be making a career out of stories about the historically 
unsavory; they also wrote ED WOOD, and are presently working on a 
screenplay about the late, great, and totally freakin' nuts comedian 
Andy Kaufman.)
The cast is up for the challenge as well. In the lead role, Woody 
Harrelson does a wonderful job playing a man whose very outrageousness 
and outward loathsomeness make him strangely appealing: his best scenes 
occur late in the film, after Flynt has been paralyzed from the waist 
down and starts taking his war against censorship to a new level in the 
courts. Courtney Love, no stranger to controversy in her own life, gives 
a jawdroppingly good performance as Althea, Flynt's drug addicted, 
ex-stripper wife; the role might not be much of a stretch for her, but 
the amount of feeling she invests into it is amazing. The standout, 
though, is Edward Norton as Flynt's long suffering lawyer. After only 
two movies (PRIMAL FEAR and this one) he's already at the top of his 
field. His wonderfully naturalistic final summation in front of the 
Supreme Court is the best scene in the film.
This movie isn't perfect; there are a few too many times when the 
heavy-handed moralizing of Executive Producer Oliver Stone can be caught 
peeking out from behind the curtain, but what it accomplishes is 
remarkable. I never thought that a movie about pornography could make 
you feel proud to be an American, but this one somehow does: by the end, 
I was ready to buy a flag.
Copyright 1997 The Critic Formerly known as Andrew Wright
For more Reviews check out http://www.seanet.com/~louk/
email louk@seanet.com

Author
Alex Fung
(Columbia-Phoenix - 1996)
Starring Woody Harrelson, Courtney Love, Edward Norton, James Cromwell,
   Crispin Glover, James Carville, Brett Harrelson, Donna Hanover
Screenplay by Scott Anderson & Larry Karaszewski
Produced by Oliver Stone, Janet Yang, Michael Hausman
Directed by Milos Forman
Running time: 127 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned.
Milos Forman's first film since the ill-fated VALMONT, Columbia's THE
PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT, is a vastly entertaining (if not particularly
enlightening) biopic of Hustler publisher and self-made millionaire
Larry Flynt, who became an unlikely champion of freedom of speech rights
in the United States in the late 1970s and early 1980s.
The film unweaves its tale in a chronological order: we open with young
and dirt-poor Larry Flynt and his brother Jimmy, peddling jars of water
in true entrepreneurial spirit out in the rural outback of Kentucky.  Cut
to forward in time, where the two Flynt brothers, now young men, are
running the struggling Hustler Go-Go Clubs in Cincinnati.  The strip clubs
are in a dire financial state, and in a last-ditch effort to salvage the
operations, Flynt decides to go to a print shop and churn out a promotional
newsletter.  This evolved into the adult periodical _Hustler_ magazine,
creating Larry Flynt a vast financial empire, and the rest is history.
What sets Flynt apart from other publishers is his struggles against those
who would have him cease publication of his adult material, and who railed
and preached against him - Flynt spent time in incarceration and was
paralyzed by an assassination attempt - and his driven, single-minded
insistence to buck the system and fight for his freedom of expression,
regardless of personal cost.
THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT also weaves in the bittersweet story of Flynt's
true love, Althea Leasure, whom he meets as a dancer in his club and
later marries, and who devotedly stands alongside him throughout his
trials and tribulations.
Considering the serious nature of the film's theme - the importance of
the United States' First Amendment - THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT is
surprisingly and wonderfully light-hearted and humourous.  Much of the
comedy is elicited from Larry Flynt's outlandish stunts at his courtroom
appearances - some of his chosen apparel is hilarious - and for the most
part these elements of the film work far better than some of the more
dramatic points, such as an uninspiring Flynt monologue set at a Free
Speech rally in front of an enormous American flag dealing with the
subjectivity of obscenity.
The film's focus is on the Flynt's many battles over First Amendment
rights and freedom of speech, but the heart of THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT
is the touching love story between Flynt and Althea.  Larry Flynt is
shown as being occassionally gruff, harsh, and overtly aggressive with
his friends and colleagues, but with Althea, we see his loving, affectionate
side.  There's a scene where Flynt tenderly takes his ill wife on a ride
on his wheelchair that is heartbreaking.  Ultimately, the emotional power
that the film hits at its conclusion comes not from his achievements from
his battles against censors, but from the strength of Flynt and Althea's
love for each other.
Woody Harrelson is entirely engaging in what must be certainly a
career-topping performance as the irrepressible Larry Flynt.  Harrelson
plays Flynt with the right mixture of outrageousness and confident
stubborness to make him endearing and entirely sympathetic to the audience,
and a very compelling protagonist for the film.
Courtney Love plays Althea Leasure in a startling turn, completely raw
and impulsive.  It's a very solid performance, brash and naturalistic,
and Love is extremely compelling; it's difficult to take your eyes off
her onscreen, and her chemistry with Harrelson is dead-on.
Edward Norton, as Flynt's straight, level-headed lawyer is often upstaged
by his flashier co-stars in THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT, much as his
counterpart lawyer Alan Isaacman was upstaged by Flynt during many of the
courtroom scenes, but Norton shines in his big scene where he addresses
the Supreme Court in the climactic scene of the film.  One can sense the
frustration that Norton's character feels when Harrelson's free-talking
Flynt sabotages trial after trial on him by openly speaking his mind, and
this results in a heightened emotional punch when Norton's Isaacman has
the opportunity to sway the Supreme Court judges.
Milos Forman keeps the film moving - although it runs over two hours, it
never drags - and his direction of the film is very effective, eliciting
a great deal of empathy for a subject which could be construed by some as
extremely sordid and unsympathetic.  There's also a great visual technique
which Forman uses to indicate the passing of time in one shot, which is
both clever and extremely entertaining.
Two minor quibbles with the film - it certainly seems like THE PEOPLE VS.
LARRY FLYNT is in a rush to get to its main theme, with Flynt battling
against authorities and the system for his freedom of speech.  Consequently,
the first thirty minutes of the film, introducing and setting up the
characters, seem unduly rushed; perhaps it is merely due to the fact that
these characters are so interesting, but I felt it would have worked better
if this route was taken in a more leisurely fashion.  It also felt like
there was a distinctive lack of insight into the inner workings of these
characters - the film clearly shows what Flynt, Althea, Isaacman, and
Rev. Jerry Faldwell did, and on a superficial level some of their
motivations, but it never seemed like one could really understand the
characters on a deeper level.  For example, why Larry Flynt was compelled
by Ruth Carter Stapleton (President Carter's sister) to be born-again is
a mystery to me.  Then again, perhaps it was to him as well.
These two points don't detract greatly from the film.  THE PEOPLE VS.
LARRY FLYNT is certainly among the very best studio-released films of
1996, and works both as a ringing political statement about the importance
of freedom of speech and the depths to which Larry Flynt would go to
advance the cause of free expression, and as a touching love story.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/

Author
Mike Joyce
Larry Flynt is a self proclaimed smut pedlar and the owner/publisher of the
multi-million dollar Hustler Publications company. The People vs. Larry
Flynt is the story of Larry Flynt's fight for the freedom to circulate and
sell his pornographic magazine, Hustler. Based on a true story, the film is
almost a documentary in that it's a very vivid and detailed look at Larry
Flynt's life.
Woody Harrelson gives an excellent performance. He conveys Flynt's
peculiarities and his character with depth and focus. By the end of the
film the audience actually finds themselves, somewhat grudgingly, liking
Larry Flynt. This is some feat given Flynt's apparent lack of any morals or
ethics and his extremely smutty and childish behaviour in court. However,
Flynt has a number of things going for him, he's rich, he's funny, and most
importantly, he says exactly what he means.
Larry Flynt's wife, Althea Leasure is played by Courtney Love. Larry meets
Althea at one of his clubs, and they fall in love (a very sexual and open
love). Both of them indulge in a world of too much sex, and eventually too
much drugs. Flynt had been taking an excessive amount of pain killers after
being paralysed from the waist down (which was especially upsetting for
him) by an assassin. Althea had joined him in taking the drugs. Following
an operation Flynt decides to stop taking drugs, Althea does not have any
such plans, nor the determination to follow them. As the film progresses we
see her become increasingly frail and sick. Courtney Love obviously has a
great understanding for Althea's situation, as she is brilliant in
portraying Althea in every respect. It's extremely sad to watch Althea
literally wither away.
Edward Norton plays Flynt's lawyer, Alan Isaacman. Again, this is a solid
performance. The audience finds it easy to sympathise with Isaacman who
somehow puts up with Flynt's courtroom antics. Flynt is not only childish
in the courtroom, but downright rude to the judges, and lands himself in a
lot of trouble (and even in a mental institution) because of it. Isaacman
is very easy to like, and great at proving (in quite clever ways) his
points to the court.
Milos Forman has done a great job in directing The People vs. Larry Flynt.
It is not really an exciting or thrilling film, but instead a highly
interesting portrayal of a true story. Due to Larry's character it is also,
at times, a very funny film. However, it is much more than that. It is
about the fight for freedom of speech, anti-censorship, and the right to be
able choose for oneself what to see and buy. An excellent look at Flynt,
his life, and his story. Keep a look out for the real Larry Flynt who makes
a cameo as Judge Morrissey.
Please visit Movie Mania at http://www.home.aone.net.au/joyce/adamframe.htm
