Title
Review for Blood of the Innocent (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
When Walter Hill made RED HEAT more than a decade ago, idea
of East Europeans becoming major players in organised crime
looked preposterous. In the decade after the fall of Berlin
Wall this vision became reality - East European countries
became more than fertile ground for various forms of
organised crime, many of them previously unheard in the
West. BEYOND FORGIVENESS, 1994 Polish-American action
thriller directed by Bob Misiorowski, deals with such
reality. Its protagonist, Chicago policeman Frank Wusharsky
(played by Thomas Ian Griffith) is searching for the
murderers of his brother. The trail leads him to Warsaw
where he would gradually discover Russian mafia setting up
major business of killing innocent people in order to sell
their organs on the black market. This discovery would also
endanger Wusharsky's life.
Being shot on Polish locations, BEYOND FORGIVENESS had a lot
of potential to look at least marginally more interesting
than usual by-the-numbers low-budget action film. Script by
Charles Cohen actually mentions some problems that are
characteristic to the newly democratic countries of Eastern
Europe - namely the fact that the old and corrupt Communist
Nomenklatura simply transformed itself into new yet equally
or even more corrupt establishment. However, those issues
are barely touched upon, and instead director Misiorowski
delivers predictable yet utterly unconvincing story about
American superhero that rescues helpless Poles from evil
Ruskies. To make things even worse, the action scenes are
badly directed, the protagonist Thomas Ian Griffith is
unconvincing, and otherwise respectable actors like John
Rhys-Davies and Rutger Hauer don't seem very enthusiastic
about their roles either. Because of that BEYOND FORGIVENESS
is a wasted effort that potential viewers shouldn't award
with their attention.
Review written on September 21st 2001
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
