Title
Review for Shadow of a Doubt (1943)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Alfred Hitchcock
Writers: Sally Benson, Alma Reville, and Thornton Wilder (story by Gordon
MacDonell)
Starring: Teresa Wright, Joseph Cotten, Macdonald Casey, Patricia Collinge,
Henry Travers, Hume Cronyn, Wallace Frod, Edna Mae Wonacott, Charles Bates
Alfred Hitchcock was always more interested in human emotions and how he
can play with them than he was in cheap suspense thrills.  He once said
that he enjoyed playing the audience like a piano, and he did this almost
effortlessly in his films, giving us protagonists who we can all identify
with, and then putting them in the most dangerous of situations.  While he
sometimes diverted from this trend, his films nevertheless show a man more
fascinated with humanity than just general chills.  It's what separates him
from any other director of suspense: he knew the secret to scaring people
was preying on real human emotions.
"Shadow of a Doubt" is not one of Hitchcock's best, but is still one of his
most intriguing, mainly because it presents what could have been a typical
chase movie, and instead opts for a complex and very human tale of the
relationship between a serial killer and a close member of his family. 
"Shadow of a Doubt" concerns itself with Charlie Oakley (Joseph Cotten,
friend of Orson Welles), who has been killing numerous women who gain a
fortune from their dead husbands and then do nothing with their lives but
spend it.  When we first meet him, he's trying to elude the police, and
decides at a moment's notice to head to his sister's home to lay low for a
bit.
His arrival sparks the interest of his niece, also named Charlie (Teresa
Wright), a young adult who has become somewhat bored with life and figures
that her uncle, whom she is said to have a lot in common with, will bring
some interest back into her life.  This sets up an intriguing psychological
tale that is constantly twisting: Uncle Charlie is constantly trying to
paranoiacally hide his crimes from his family, and the truth about him is
always on the verge of popping out.  As we watch, we're afraid of many
things: will Charlie find out about her uncle, and if so, what will her do
to her?  Will the police come and take him away, executing him, or will he
get away with what he's done?  The film is a suspense film, but only in
that we're more worried about what will happen to the characters and less
how it happens.
The film introduces a couple sub-plots, the most prominent being a pair of
so-called reporters who come to do a socialogical survey on the family,
conveniently when Uncle Charlie's in town, and soon turn out to be cops,
following a lead (there are two people they think is the serial killer -
Uncle Charlie's one of them).  Charlie soon falls in love with one of them
- Jack Graham (Macdonald Casey) - and she finds herself torn between her
Uncle's possible secret identity and her newfound love.
Hitchcock builds the film up so well, piling on a surprising amount of
depth and emotion for a suspense film, and in turn explores many of his
favorite themes, such as man's ability to commit murder (her father and a
friend of the family, played by a comparitively young Hume Cronyn,
playfully discuss how they would murder eachother), knowledge of a loved
one's crimes, and, most prominently, the duality of man, which elevates the
film to a higher plain than most suspense films like this.  Both of the
Charlies in this film are built up to be like twins, but as the film goes
on, and the truth comes out into the open, we see how different they are. 
They almost become like two battling parts of the human psyche, each
fighting for dominant control.  "Shadow of a Doubt" becomes almost more of
a suspense film at times, and is rather an intelligent debate over the
control of the id.  What other suspense films have this kind of
psychological depth.
It doesn't hurt that the film plays so well with our emotions.  Uncle
Charlie, played to an eerie kind of perfection by Joseph Cotten, is a
sympathetic character, all because Charlie likes him so much.  After
awhile, we begin to see him as a loving uncle as well, and we can identify
with her feelings when his shady past begin to catch up with him.  And the
film is wise in bringing in the other members of the family as well.  The
family is presented as a parallel to a lot of the things that go on,
serving as a lot of comic releif, but later the film fully fleshes out the
mother, who almost needs Uncle Charlie, and would probably be devastated
for life if she learned of his past.
Unfortunately, a couple things crop up later on that bring the film down a
bit.  The last act takes a couple misteps, going for a more traditional
suspense ending rather than really digging deep, and coming to a totally
intelligent conclusion, which is what this film needs.  The ending does
work a bit though, but more in favor of the psychogical undertones, and
less in favor of the dramatic undertones (back to that whole battle over
the id thingy).  And the romance between Charlie and Jack seems more of a
requirement of a film for the time when it was made - they get together
more out of necessity for the plot than anything else.
"Shadow of a Doubt" overcomes these, though, but not totally.  What it
needs is a much better ending, and a lot more development in the romance
department, if it really needs a romance, that is.  You still have to
admire Hitchcock for not making this overtly cheap by giving into every
single suspense tactic in the book.  In fact, the film is very mild
mannered in the action department, and it opts to work with the suspense of
humanity rather than the suspense of just easy thrills.  That's what makes
Hitchcock better than everyone else, and that's why this film is so
admirable.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Brian Koller
"Shadow of a Doubt" is a suspense thriller directed by
Alfred Hitchcock.  The film stars Joseph Cotten as a bitter
man who has strangled several widows for their fortunes,
and Theresa Wright as his niece, who is unaware of his
crimes and worships him.  When Cotten pays an extended
visit to Wright's family, his curious behavior as well as 
visits from detectives lead Wright to realize that he
is a murderer, putting her own life in jeopardy.
"Shadow of a Doubt" is a good film despite many nagging
problems.  It benefits from an excellent cast and an
intelligent script.  Most of the problems arise from
character development and plot, and while each taken
separately are minor, they combine to keep the film from
being one of Hitchcock's best.
Detectives track Cotten to Wright's home.  They go to
much trouble and waste much time to obtain Cotten's photograph
on the pretext of a magazine article.  They want to
detain Cotten for questioning, but they don't want to
upset Wright's mother, so they wait until Wright can
convince Cotten to leave town.  These detectives are
the nicest and most inoffensive in screen history,
and I don't understand how a murderer's freedom of
movement is a secondary consideration to his sister's
temporary emotional state.
Hume Cronyn and Wright's father enjoy conversations
about the best ways that one could murder the other.
The film does need comic relief, but the droll British humor
doesn't cross over well to this side of the Atlantic.
Hitchcock didn't learn this lesson, as he would later
make an entire film with this style, "The Trouble With Harry."
Presumably, Cotten went to visit his sister to escape
detectives.  You would think he would keep a low profile
and remain pleasant, but instead he launches into diatribes
against wealthy widows and loudly suggests at the bank
that his brother-in-law is an embezzler.  He is also fond
of bragging of his wealth.
Eventually, Wright realizes that Cotten is guilty.  He
all but confesses to her.  Later, he makes two nearly
successful attempts at her life.  Still, she says nothing
about this to the detective, even though he is courting her.
She even agrees to get on the train with Cotten, where,
of course, he makes a third attempt on her life.  Despite
being half his size, she manages to outwrestle him 
on the train.
Since it is revealed in the opening scenes that Cotten
is guilty, the suspense comes from Wright's relationship
with him: will she discover his crimes, then, will he
succeed in killing her.  It is inconceivable that Wright
would not figure things out, and also inconceivable that
she would be murdered.  The suspense seems manufactured
in scenes such as Wright rushing to the library before
it closes, as if the library would not be open the next day.
One final, minor complaint.  Does every film have to have a
romance?  This is a movie about Cotten and Wright, and
a romance between Wright and a detective (who presumably
is many years older than her) seems an unnecessary addition.
Hitchcock is held to a high standard, and that is the
standard I judge his films by.  "Shadow of a Doubt" remains
a good and interesting film, but he has made many that
are better.
kollers@shell.mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
