Title
Review for Steele Justice (1987)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
A few years ago, my country was embroiled in long and bloody
war, and I had lot of opportunity to see what happens with
the veterans afterwards. Usually, those who spent time on
the front lines are getting little more than tap on
shoulder, measly pension and rejection by society that
considers them basketheads and losers; on the other hand,
those who contributed to the war effort by doing nothing in
safety of the rear are ones that are massing fame, fortune
and political power. As this film shows, that sad truth is
universal, and Vietnam War wasn't exception. John Steele
(Martin Kove) and Lee Van Minh (Robert Kim) risk their lives
at the end of war, only to see corrupt South Vietnamese
general Kwan (Soon Teck-Or) taking CIA money and leaving
them for die. Twelve years later, general Kwan is a
respected businessman and unofficial leader of Vietnamese
community in Los Angeles. John Steele, on the other hand, is
an unemployed loser, who was thrown out of police five years
ago. His war comrade and former partner Lee is still in the
force, and unsuccessfully trying to connect Kwan with
drug-smuggling operations. After Lee and his family get
killed by Kwan's henchmen, Steele decides to go to war
against Kwan to avenge his best friend's death.
For many critics STEELE JUSTICE was nothing more than
routine and not very original LETHAL WEAPON rip-off, filled
with all the clich‚s of 1980s action cinema. Here we have
Vietnam veteran as a synonym for invincible one-man- army;
businessmen that can't make money in any other way than by
smuggling drugs; killing of partner/significant other as
motive for revenge; and final showdown in a warehouse. What
distinguishes this film from the rest of many similar
B-products is huge army of capable actors like Ronny Cox,
Bernie Casey and Joseph Campanella in supporting roles,
together with Sarah Douglas, Sela Ward and Shannon Tweed
that fill the babes quota. Unfortunately, the main lead,
Martin Kove, looks like caricature of Rambo, same as Soon
Teck-Or looks like a caricature of Fu Manchu. Although
writer and director Robert Boris tries to take subject
matter seriously, this movie occasionally slips into camp
territory. Most obvious example is a sequence when rock
music video, directed by Sela Ward's character, suddenly
turns into gunfight between Steele and Asian assassins, led
by Al Leong, Asian stuntman with long hair who made
reputation by playing cannon fodder in such movies. All in
all, although the viewer might get drowned in the sea of
clich‚s and bad 1980s music, STEELE JUSTICE might serve him
as mild guilty pleasure.
