Title
Review for Fury, The (1978)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
Trivia time!  Brian DePalma has directed two 1970s films starring
Amy Irving.  One of them marks the screen debut of Darryl Hannah.
Bzzzzzt!  We're talking about "The Fury", a mystery drama that 
turns into a horror film.
Kirk Douglas and his teenage son Robin are vacationing at a
Middle Eastern beach.  Douglas is to send Robin to special 
institute in the states to better develop/understand Robin's 
unusual ESP ability.  Long-time friend and co-worker Childress 
is also there.  Suddenly, snipers fire at Douglas, but somehow 
are unable to shoot him.  He ends up in the hiding by rocks along 
the beach, but takes a rifle from a dead sniper and manages to 
shoot Childress, whom he realizes is behind the attack.  Childress,
who works for a secret government agency, has kidnapped Robin 
to use his special powers for espionage purposes. 
Douglas now is on a quest to find and liberate Robin.  He is
wanted by the Feds, who have many men on his tail.  Douglas
hires the psychic Raymond Dunworthy, to find a better psychic 
who can find Robin.  Dunworthy comes up with Irving, a teenager 
also with strong ESP powers.  But Dunworthy is being monitored
by the Feds and leads them to Douglas, who makes a narrow
escape that involves jumping half-naked from a hotel room,
tying up innocent bystanders, stealing a new car occupied by
two cops, and later driving that car off into a lake, much
to the cops chagrin.
Meanwhile, Irving's abilities are attracting the interest
of her teachers.  She can make a toy train move by telekinesis,
and makes classmates bleed when they make the mistake of
touching her.  She is sent to the same special institute 
Robin was sent to. At first, life is peaceful there, and
she bonds with instructor Hestor (Carrie Snodgrass) who
is also Douglas' girlfriend.  The institute is headed
by Charles Durning, who recognizes Irving's power and
tries to protect her from Childress, who has spies at
the institute and is looking for more psychics to add to
his collection, that already includes Robin.
Irving begins having visions of Robin.  Sometimes these coincide
with her being touched.  After Irving causes a hemmorage in one
of the staff, Childress gets wind of this and begins drugging
Irving, in preparation of removing her from the institute to
work with Robin.  Douglas and Snodgrass decide that Irving must
escape from the institute before it is too late, with Douglas
wanting to use her to locate his son.
Meanwhile, Robin is under great stress at his government gig.
He is isolated and treated as a guinea pig.  His only contact
is with an attractive but manipulative agent whom he does not
trust.  He is being drugged and is emotionally unstable, 
becoming paranoid and psychotic.
Irving escapes from the institute, but it isn't easy,
with Douglas killing two security guards and Snodgrass also
killed.  Irving and Douglas go to rescue Robin.  They
break into the government compound.  Robin senses her
presence, and afraid of being replaced, goes into a
rage, torturing and killing his agent girlfriend using his
powers.  The film has definitely slipped into the horror
genre, as blood splatters the walls.
Irving and Douglas are caught by Childress.  Childress
sends Douglas to go after Robin, who is killing everyone
who enters his room.  Douglas enters the blood soaked
room.  He finds Robin suspended in mid-air with a crazed
look on his face.  Robin attacks Douglas.  They fall out
of the window and land on the roof.  Douglas hangs on
the gutter for dear life, with the other arm supporting
Robin, who is suspended high above the cement street.
We think they will make it, but Robin claws Douglas
and both fall to their deaths.
Now Childress only has Irving to use as a psychic.  He
visits her the next morning in her new bedroom, and
tells her that life must go on, that she is special
and important, etc.  She responds by using her powers
to make his head explode.  This explosion is graphically 
shown several times from different angles.
"The Fury" is a surprisingly good film.  Douglas' struggle
to find and save his son, and Irving's and Robin's struggle
to cope with their abilities, are successfully developed themes.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Dennis Schwartz

FURY, THE (director: Brian De Palma; screenwriter: from an original
story by John Farris; cinematographer: Richard H. Kline; editor: Paul
Hirsch; cast: Kirk Douglas (Peter Sandza), John Cassavetes (Childress),
Carrie Snodgrass (Hester), Charles Durning (Dr. Jim McKeever), Amy
Irving (Gillian Bellaver), Fiona Lewis (Dr. Susan Charles), Andrew
Stevens (Robin Sandza), Carol Rossen (Dr. Ellen Lindstrom), Jane Lambert
(Vivian Knuckells), Joyce Easton (Katharine Bellaver), William Finley
(Raymond Dunwoodie), Dennis Franz (Bob, The Policeman), Michael O'Dwyer
(Marty, The Policeman), 1978)
Brian De Palma's idea of a thriller is short-changed as far as plot and
substance in favor of style. He has created a silly but entertaining
film, where one shocking scene tops another, and numerous Hollywood
cheesy gimmicks are used instead of relying on John Farris' tightly
drawn suspense story. Tis a pity such crass commercialization should
rule the day for De Palma, instead of artistic integrity! This follow-up
to his commercially successful Carrie, takes the director further into
the ridiculous realm of demonic possessions and all that would imply to
a Hollywood director who is looking to make a popcorn movie.
It is 1977 and someplace in Israel the widowed Peter Sandza (Kirk
Douglas) is on the beach with his teenager son Robin (Andrew Stevens),
and colleague, Childress (John Cassavetes), who have known each other
for some twenty years, where they both work at a secret government
agency for psychic research. Suddenly, after Robin is told by his dad
that he will be going to a special school in Chicago for his psychic
gifts, he is alone with Childress and a group of Arabs arrive by boat
and an Arab machine-gunner on a tower starts shooting at Peter, but he
escapes and grabs a dead Arab's gun, wounding Childress when he realizes
that he is behind the attack. Childress kidnaps Robin because he has a
special gift for telekinetic communication, which he intends to use for
secretive government activities.
The next thing we know, we're in Chicago and Peter is looking for his
son, but is being tailed by Childress's secret federal agents. Peter has
hired the psychic Raymond Dunwoodie to get him a more gifted psychic to
track down Robin. But Dunwoodie is being tailed by Childress' men and
they trace Peter to a hotel through him. Peter jumps out of his hotel
window in his underwear, bursts into someone's apartment and steals
their clothes and dyes his hair, and goes out into the Chicago streets.
But his disguise wasn't good enough, as he is spotted by the secret
agents. So he car jacks a brand new Caddy, with two of Chicago's finest
sitting in it and takes them for a daredevil ride, trying to avoid the
pursuing agents. There's some comedy to be had, as the policeman who
owns the car, only hopes his brand new car doesn't get scratched, and
after riding over bridges in the fog and other dangerous crossings at
high speed, the car doesn't have a scratch on it. But at the last
minute, Peter has to drive the car into the lake in order to fool his
pursuers of his whereabouts.
The story also tells about another psychic, a teenager, Gillian Bellaver
(Amy Irving). She comes from a wealthy family and was the one that
Dunwoodie was about to get for Peter before he was spotted by the secret
agents. Gillian has trouble with the children in her prep school because
of her genius in psychic powers; she therefore talks her mother into
enrolling her in a special school that does research in these matters,
little realizing that Childress monitors the school.
Peter has been looking the last eleven months for Robin to no avail. But
he met someone who works in the research clinic, Hester (Snodgrass), and
she believed him when she heard his story. She keeps him in contact with
any developments in the clinic, and when Gillian arrives and
demonstrates that she is the real thing, by making everyone she touches
bleed profusely and also has disturbing visions, there is little doubt
that she's the real thing. Peter is told about her. But, unfortunately,
there are spies in the clinic, like Dr. Ellen Lindstrom (Rossen), who
tell Childress about her. The director of the clinic, Dr. Jim McKeever
(Durning), is forced to let Childress take her, even though he doesn't
want to let her go to these awful people. The girl has the same power as
Robin and the two can even communicate with each other when at far
distances through their ESP skills.
Meanwhile Robin is told his father is dead (I wonder- if he's such a
great psychic why doesn't he realize that this isn't so!). He has been
taken to a secret estate where a team of psychics are training him. He
has developed his psychic skills to a great degree but has also
developed a serious personality disorder and is being constantly drugged
and is under constant stress. The attractive Dr. Susan Charles (Fiona)
is in charge of his training program and tries to keep the young man
happy by providing him with her sexual pleasures, which he appreciates;
but, he still distrusts her.
Any hope for this being a plot oriented film soon goes down the drain
and the movie turns into a horror film, with special effects galore,
rolling demonic flashing eyes, and shocking scenes with blood and gore.
The two special psychic prodigies have different reactions to
discovering there is another like them in the world. Robin is jealous,
figuring she will replace him and he will no longer get such good
treatment. She, on the other hand, wants to help him, after Hester tells
her of what is going on. Peter plans to get her to escape from the
clinic, and to show him where his son is. The escape works but is
costly, as Hester suffers a gruesome death, as she is hit by a car
driven by one of the agents who was just shot by Peter.
The final scene is the most tawdry and bloodiest one of all, as Peter
sees his antagonistic son suspend himself in mid-air and a few dead
bodies lie on the floor, with blood splattered all over the walls, and
when he tries to rescue him from this evil house, they both fall to
their death from the ledge. But if you hang around for the ending, then
you will finally see Childress get what he deserves the next morning, as
he comes into Gillian's bedroom and sweet talks her into believing that
he will treat her as a father would, knowing that he needs her powers
with the demise of Robin. But Gillian rolls her supernatural eyes and
blinds him, and then explodes his head, which De Palma shoots again and
again in slow motion. How wonderful!
Cassavetes is a great villain. But there's really not much in this film
that is plausible, except a chance to escape from the world for two
hours.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
