Title
Review for Mr. Holland's Opus (1995)
Number of Reviews
13

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     I greatly respect for the teaching profession, though I cannot say
the same of all films made about teaching.  We see a lot of films about
the teaching profession and with a few notable exceptions (much notably
THE PRIME OF MISS JEAN BRODIE), they generally make the teacher a hero.
Teacher-hero stories fall into two different categories.  One is the
"flashbulb" sort of story, the other is the "candle."  Flashbulb
teacher films generally cover one semester.  They have a new teacher
come in and be faced with a nearly impossible situation.  Either the
students are totally establishment thinkers, the classroom is in total
anarchy, or the students are treated by school officials as if they
have the intelligence of water fowl.  The teacher comes in, bringing
with him or her the word that there is a world out there of knowledge
and culture.  Then in one quick semester the new erudition transforms
the lives of the students.  Example of this sort of film include DEAD
POETS SOCIETY, RENAISSANCE MAN, TO SIR WITH LOVE, and STAND AND
DELIVER.  The teacher has brought enlightenment in one quick flash.
This is rarely how the teaching profession operates.
     Not as common, because they are generally less dramatic, are the
films in which the teacher deals with many classes of students over a
long period of time.  This sort of film is much more realistic.  Rather
than as a flash of enlightenment, the teacher has been there as a
source of culture for generations of students and, like the candle, the
more that is given the less there is left for the teacher himself.
Often the teacher has wondered if it has all mattered or not and his or
her efforts have made a difference.  But in the end the teacher who may
even consider himself or herself as a failure comes to realize the deep
respect that the effort has brought.  This sort of film is a little
more realistic.  It includes GOODBYE, MR. CHIPS; GOOD MORNING, MISS
DOVE; and the latest along these lines, MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS.  In 1964
Richard Dreyfuss is a young musician and would-be composer who, in
order to keep food on the table, takes a job as the high school music
teacher of the newly-renamed John F. Kennedy High School.  He finds the
faculty unfriendly and unwelcoming and the students completely
indifferent to the history of music.  The school band makes a noise
about as pleasant as the sound of a dentist's drill.  He also has to
admit his teaching is uninspired and unsuccessful.  Eventually Holland
decides that if his students cannot relate to Bach, he should try rock
and roll and from there slowly he makes headway.  The film follows
Mr. Holland's life in and out of school.  What he first thought of asa
temporary teaching job that would give him the leisure to compose his
own music instead soaks up all of his time for more than three decades
of his life.  He is able to overcome most obstacles by being well-
meaning and being willing to put in the effort.  The film concentrates
on Holland's relationship with his wife, with his deaf son, with the
buzz-cut assistant principal (William H. Macy), with legions of
talentless students and one very talented singer, and especially with
himself and his dream of composing.  The story of his career for more
than three decades of teaching are shown in about two and a half hours
as a diverse and diffuse mosaic.  Some of the scenes are overly
emotional, but for the most part the film retains an air of
authenticity until the last ten minutes.   The film tries too hard to
have a big finish and spoils much of its credibility.
     Dreyfuss is an accomplished actor, but a lot of accomplished
actors have played teachers.  However, one thing that set Dreyfuss
apart is that he really looked like a high school teacher.  Instead of
handsome and dynamic, he looks very average, the model of what viewers
will remember their teachers looked like.  Because there are a lot of
different relationships in this film, we see considerably less of any
of the other characters.  Glenne Headly is believable but not memorable
as the long suffering Mrs. Holland who only occasionally shows a
resentment that her husband allows himself to be consumed by his job.
The film was written by Patrick Duncan, who wrote and directed 84
CHARLIE MOPIC and wrote A HOME OF OUR OWN.  Director Stephen Herek
seems to have learned a lot about how schools run since he directed
BILL AND TED'S EXCELLENT ADVENTURE.  More recently he directed THE
MIGHTY DUCKS and THE THREE MUSKETEERS.  The film is a little on the
manipulative side, but it should be an audience pleaser.  I give it a
low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Any motion picture that promotes music appreciation is well-deserv-
ing of a look, arguably even one as excruciatingly slow and predictably
dopey as MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS.  Agony is the best word to describe sitting
through Stephen Herek's 144-minute epic of a minor scale.  The story
charts 30 years in the life of high-school music teacher Glenn Holland
(Richard Dreyfuss), from the inevitable first-year frustrations right on
up to the only-in-the-movies appreciation-at-retirement rally.  Though
credible as a honest-- if rather tidy-- portrait of the educational
process, the movie goes flat when scoring the weepy melodrama of Hol-
land's family life.  (The ads reveal a son who's born deaf and you can
take it from there.)
     Ignoring the deeper issues in Patrick Sheane Duncan's script, Herek
opts for an OPUS that's part fantasy.  Such as a school orchestra that
sounds like seasoned studio players, or the magical acceptance of a
teenaged son who has been terribly ignored through his life by his
father.  (Or even the small fact that we never see much evidence of
*Holland's* impact on his student's lives.  We only see how they affect
*him*.  How selfish.) And it only gets worse, quickly proving that more
than just fairy dust is missing here.
     The integration of the music is particularly horrid.  Instead of a
*real* review of the classics, we get a bit of Bach, a handful of old-
ies, and an overdose of overblown orchestrations from composer Michael
Kamen.  Ugh.  The lack of snap is equally abominable.  Even the most
patient for a good cry will likely find their bottoms growing sore long
before their tear ducts do.  Thank goodness for the solid work of
Richard Dreyfuss.  Wearing a great make-up job that successfully spans
three decades, Dreyfuss gives a workmanlike performance that even
survives him having to sing "Beautiful Boy." Who knows, he may just win
a nomination.
     Slow, sappy, and shameless, MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS is Hollywood happily-
ever-after as only Hollywood can make it.  The masses will probably eat
this stuff up and, judging from the weekend grosses, they already have.
Take Grandma; take the kids, and then run like hell for the door. 
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit the MOVIE HELL site http://www-nvision.com/hell/>

Author
Chad Polenz
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1995, PG, 143 minutes [2 hours, 23 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Richard Dreyfus (Mr. Glenn Holland), Geane Headly (Mrs. Iris
Holland), Joseph Anderson (Cole Holland at age 15), William H. Macy
(Vice/Principal Walters), produced by Ted Field, Michael Nolin, Robert W.
Cort, written by Patrick Sheane Duncan, directed by Stephen Herek.
There seems to be only two types of dramas: those that are good because
they're true to themselves, and those that are sappy and pander to the
audience. "Mr. Holland's Opus" is one of the latter. This is a pretty good
movie for what it is, but it tries so hard to be something it is not,
throwing in every overly dramatic element you can think of.
Richard Dreyfus stars as Glenn Holland, a musician with dreams of composing
The Great American Symphony. But, like most dreamers, he is knocked back down
to Earth and realizes he better settle for a steady job instead, so he
becomes a music teacher in a typical high school in a typical suburban town. 
Movies about teachers are pretty much the same: a new teacher comes in...
the students do not like and/or do not understand them... the teacher
realizes they've been going about it all wrong and all of a sudden figure out
what to do... the students love the teacher... a controversy ensues. 
Mr. Holland realizes the students are trying to learn notes on paper, not
the music itself, and so when he tries to use rock music as a teaching device
they are suddenly interested. Of course this is all set in the mid 1960s so
the administrators protest his actions and we are supposed to get angry with
them alongside Mr. Holland because "they're just plain wrong!" The choppy
storytelling style makes it seem as if this is going to be the entire premise
of the film, but it is not and I felt confused and anxious while watching the
rest of it.
If the movie machine had not already been set into motion, it really starts
to kick in when Mr. and Mrs. Holland (Headly) have a baby and later realize
he is deaf. What a case of tragic, but cliche irony. It is this kind of
sappiness and drama for the sake of being dramatic that is symbolic of the
entire film. A more general example of this is the constant musical montages
showing pictures of historical events and things that happen in Mr. Holland's
life. But the world is not as simple as this movie would make it out to be -
life's problems aren't solved by cliche montages. This also detracts from the
story and from building characterization.
The last act depicts a brief encounter Mr. Holland has with a beautiful and
talented student named Rowena (Jean Louisa Kelly). It seems as if the two
might be falling for each other despite their age difference, but one can
only assume what they are actually thinking because the story is so quickly
paced. 
We also suddenly realize his son, Cole (Anderson) is 15 years old already
but neither he, nor we the viewers, seem to know him at all. Herek keeps
making this mistake of trying to cram too much story into too little space.
All the little plotlines and conflicts that happen within the movie could be
entirely separate films, especially these two storylines. 
I didn't hate "Mr. Holland's Opus," but I didn't love it either. It does
have an overall sense of goodness and quality to it, but it is just too sappy
and too formulated for its own good. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Author
John Schuurman
     Now I am not proud to say it, but I'll admit my eyes have welled
up with tears at "Little House on the Prairie" reruns and so you might
not want to take the following too seriously, but this movie had me
dabbing and daubing and wiping away from about fifteen minutes in.  I
don't know when I have been to a movie that had its way with me like
this one. A couple of hours removed, it seems a little silly to be
affected so, but I want to go once again and wait for the last scene.
     It is a "school movie" dealing as such movies do with the heaves
and hos of teaching. At the outset the viewer expects the usual formula
of an idealistic teacher arriving in a tough school and, after some
initial disappointments, working a wonder through that magical mixture
of pluck, toughness and tenderness. Well, only some of that is here.
Which parts aren't important. The parts of the formula that are not
here, are refreshingly absent.
     What is important about the movie is that it shows us the
essential truth that meaning in life comes through sacrifice and
faithfulness rather than individual dream pursuit. I am sorry for the
way that sounds and want to promise you that you will delight in the
movie despite that dreary sentence. But that it is about and you will
love it.
     This movie will make you want to search out and do something
gracious for those career teachers who could have made other choices
and who no doubt wanted to but didn't.
     Richard Dreyfuss gives a career performance.
for more reviews by John Schuurman
http://www.mcs.com/%7Esjvogel/wcrc/movies.html

Author
Michael Redman
For the first several minutes of this film, it seems as if it's going to be
another "Stand And Deliver" or "Up The Down Staircase" or "To Sir With Love"
or any one of the other zillions of `teacher turns on disillusioned students"
movies. And for the first few minutes it is, but then it turns into something else.
Richard Dreyfuss is playing the Holiday Inn circuit, but decides to teach
high school because the monetary rewards of musicianship leave something to be
desired. His lack of enthusiasm for his teaching career just about equals the
kids' level of excitement for music appreciation. No one wants to be there.
Dreyfuss connects with the students by finding the common interest of popular
music. Then he helps a girl transcend her horrible playing. Slowly it dawns on
him that there may be something to teaching besides the bucks. He also
discovers that his idea of composing in his spare time is a dream as the
demands of his job and caring for his deaf son overwhelm any possibility of
time that is spare.
There are a few cliches in the movie. When the teacher's marriage grows
tedious, his relationship with the talented young high school honey is
inevitable. The students' instant recognition that the subject matter is cool
is in every teacher movie ever made. But the scenes, familiar as they are to
the audience, ring true.
The film spans several decades as Dreyfuss changes the lives of his students
but can't do his own work or relate to his son. The make-up job is so
convincing that it's hard to remember what age the actor truly is. The story
is real enough to allow you to vicariously experience the teacher's agony and ecstasy.
This may be the first time that I've reviewed three films (this, "Nixon" and
"12 Monkeys") in a row and given them all four stars. There's some good stuff
out there and you owe it to yourself to catch them. ("Nixon" is already gone.)
The other two appeal to a narrower audience, but if you aren't touched by "Mr.
Holland's Opus", go home and check for a pulse. 
(Michael Redman, having written this column week in and week out for almost
half of his life, sometimes spends the early morning hours sitting in front of
a Mac trying to find the right words for this italicized section.)
[This appeared in the 1/24/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Edwin Jahiel
MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS *** 1/2  Directed by Stephen Herek. Written 
by Patrick Sheane Duncan (also co-executive producer). 
Photography, Oliver Wood. Production design, David Nichols. 
Editing, Trudy Ship. Costumes, Aggie Guerard Rodgers. Music, 
Michael Kamen. R. Dreyfuss's make-up, Ken Chase. Cast: Richard 
Dreyfuss (Glen Holland), Glenne Headley (Iris Holland), Jay 
Thomas (Bill Meister), Olympia Dukakis (Principal Jacobs), 
Terrence Howard (Vice Principal Wolters), Terrence Howard 
(Luis Russ), Damon Whitaker (Bobby Tidd), Jean Luisa Kelly 
(Rowena Morgan), Alexandra Boyd (Sarah Olmstead), Nicholas 
John Renner (Cole at 6 years old), Joseph Anderson (Cole, 15), 
Anthony Natale (Cole, 28), et al.  Distributed by Buena Vista. 
143 mins. Rated PG.
"Mr. Holland's Opus" is a "biopic"(biographical picture), a 
genre common in the 1930s and generally reserved for famous 
figures. Mr. Holland is not famous. He is a well-trained 
performer-composer who, tired of dragging himself and his wife 
from odd job to odd job, decides to try teaching near 
Portland,  Oregon, in the newly named John F. Kennedy High 
School. He plans to stay only for a short while and devote 
himself to composing. He remains for at least 30 years, 
through 1995. devoting himself to young people.
The biopic, smoothly combined with a school picture with a 
difference, becomes a triple whammy paean to music, education 
and the teaching profession.  While there have been hundreds 
of movies involving schools, very few reach the seriousness 
and depth of this film. Fewer yet depict so well a teacher's 
dedication. 
Arguably, the first classic school picture was Jean Vigo's 
"Zero for Conduct," in which all the teachers but one (a 
younger newcomer who clowns like Charlie Chaplin) were 
miserable creatures  loathed by the students.  Schools were 
present in the pleasantly corny Andy Hardy series. Later,  
American high schools (Ridgemont, Cooley, Rock 'n' Roll, 
Central, et al.) were venues for student sheenanigans. So were 
the comic British "St. Trinian's" series.  Hardly any students 
ever seem  to study in those movies.  
In a  handful of fine, non-comedic foreign works l("Pocket 
Money,"  "Au Revoir les Enfants,"  "Heavenly Creatures")  the 
actual educational process in them was secondary to other, 
serious themes. 
A few schools were the settings for personal dramas ("The 
Browning Version"),  dark deeds ("Diabolique," "Unman, 
Wittering and Zigo," "Pretty Maids All in a Row") or armed 
revolts (the British "If" that derived from "Zero for 
Conduct").  Two notable films centered on girls' crushes on 
their female teachers, the German classic "Maedchen in 
Uniform" and the little-known French  "Olivia."
"Lean on Me" was about a disciplinarian principal. "Madame 
Sousatzka," where the teacher gives private lessons, stresses 
eccentricity, as does "Dead Poets Society. " There is, of 
course, Frederick Wiseman's epoch-making "High School," but 
that's a documentary. And so on...
Among the movies that focus strongly on truly dedicated 
schoolteachers, the more familiar titles include a classic 
"Goodbye Mr. Chips," as well as "The Blackboard Jungle," "To 
Sir, with Love," "Conrack," "Ciao Professore!," and the 
wonderfully quirky "The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie." I would 
also recommend the odd but successful casting of Bette Davis 
in an older movie, "The Corn Is Green." 
"Mr. Holland" joins this small, select group, in a different 
context and with a new approach. Glenn Holland at first feels 
and fumbles his way to teach musically inept and cacophonous 
kids and to put up with a fine but demanding principal 
(Dukakis, with a delicious wink in her eyes) and her 
semi-martinet, crew-cut assistant principal.  Gradually, 
Holland learns how to teach, and does so superbly. Slowly, he 
gets caught up in the passion for teaching. He also reaches a 
persuasive level of eloquence without ever becoming a 
goodie-goodie speech-maker. 
A natural, what with his original methods, warmth, love of 
music and the arts, Mr. Holland forms students who are almost 
too accomplished to be true. He must face the killing schedule 
of so many teachers, a the low pay that must be supplemented 
by odds and ends , like driving lessons. Obliged to form a 
marching band, he manages it only through the friendship of 
the gym teacher --for a change, not an uncouth or comical type 
-- and a quid pro quo: Holland will teach an instrument to a 
black wrestler who needs the credit. In one scene, Mr. H.  
improvises tricks that inculcate rhythm to the kid. This could 
be a subtle attack on the old cliche " blacks are born with 
rhythm." There are several more excellent scenes in the film, 
but let the viewer discover them.  
When a son is born to the Hollands he turns out to be deaf.  
The shock to Mr. Holland is not followed by the expected 
sentimentality but by complex, believable reactions which over 
the years include difficulties, frustrations and 
misunderstandings as well as love. 
As Mr. H gets older, there is also a nicely handled bit of 
temptation. Typically, script and direction do not make a 
mountain of this or of a mid-life crisis. In general the movie 
skirts schmaltz, feel-good saccharine or feverish drama. It is 
also mercifully free of the usual school bullies, toughs or 
clowning figures. 
Perforce episodic, the movie is intercut with documentary 
footage to show the passage of the years and to orient us, a 
procedure that reminds me of Olympia Dukakis addressing 
Holland about his "compass." (See the film and you'll get the 
point). Viewers should be ready for several moments when it 
seems that the movie is about to end.  
The music, classical and popular, is beautiful. The aging of 
the actors (makeup, hair, movements) is most skillful, as is 
the dosage of routine, solemn, funny and sad elements.  
Richard Dreyfuss, in an Oscar-worthy,  sober performance is 
entirely convincing. With luck, some of us had someone like 
Mr. H in our school days. 
Many moments are touching and could be eye-wetting, yet all 
done without pulling out all the stops as  "Mr. Holland's 
Opus" remains steadfastly sweet but never becomes cloying, 
never departs from realism. The characters, their lines and 
behavior feel genuine. Even the deaf people are really deaf.  
One small flaw in the movie is the finale's improbably 
well-organized homage to the music teacher. It happens just 
after the school is forced to cut 10 percent of its budget.  
Of course this gets done by eliminating programs in music and 
other arts. 
By coincidence, just before seeing the film I had caught 
documentarist Ken Burns on C-Span where, rationally, lucidly 
and passionately he made a case for not cutting federal 
subsidies to the arts. Mr. Holland is not alone in trying to 
send us a message.  

Author
Nicholas Capezza
     Mr. Holland's Opus is definately one of the finest movies ever 
created about teachers. It shows the life of a man who first started out 
as being a temporary teacher into a legendary community member. Richard 
Dreyfuss gives one of the best performances of his career as the teacher. 
While there are not a lot of big names, the supporting cast is very good. 
I recommend Mr. Holland's Opus to anybody who likes a good, old-fashioned 
movie.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Richard Dreyfuss, Glenne Headly, Olympia Dukakis, W.H. Macy, 
      Jay Thomas, Alicia Witt, Jean Louisa Kelly, Terrence Howard
Director: Stephen Herek
Producers: Robert W. Cort, Ted Field, and Michael Nolan
Screenplay: Patrick Duncan
Cinematography: Oliver Wood
Music: Michael Kamen
U.S. Distributor: Hollywood Pictures
     When THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT was released, many knowledgeable movie-
goers commented how the sentimentality of its "feel good" storyline 
recalled the work of director Frank Capra.  Now, with MR. HOLLAND'S 
OPUS, another Capra-esque motion picture has reached today's theaters.  
Similar in theme and content to DEAD POETS' SOCIETY and IT'S A WONDERFUL 
LIFE, this movie persuades its audience that no life spent in a worthy 
pursuit is ever wasted.  Unlike THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT, however, it 
doesn't stoop to heavy-handed proselytizing.  And, while no one will 
accuse MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS of getting its message across subtly, it's a 
more dramatically secure picture than Rob Reiner's -- when it 
manipulates, it does so skillfully.
     MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS spans thirty-one years in the life of a high 
school music teacher.  When Glenn Holland (Richard Dreyfuss) first comes 
to the newly-dedicated JFK High School in 1964, he has a dream of 
spending a few years teaching to accumulate a nest egg, then returning 
to his true passion:  composing.  His loving wife, Iris (Glenne Headly) 
is completely supportive -- until she becomes pregnant.  After that 
unexpected event, teaching is no longer just Glenn's "fall back 
position".  It has become his means to provide for his family.
     Yet Glenn finds that instructing students in music appreciation has 
its rewards.  When lectures and text assignments don't fire his pupils' 
passion for the subject, Glenn tries unique ways of encouraging an 
understanding that "playing music is supposed to be fun -- it's about 
heart... not notes on a page."  Repeatedly during his three decades of
teaching, Glenn chooses boys and girls with special skills to nurture 
and encourage.  In the process, he creates a deep loyalty among JFK's 
student body while straining the harmony of his home life.  His wife and 
son wonder if Glenn cares more about his pupils than about them.
     The musical metaphors in MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS are rather obvious, and 
the soundtrack is an effective mix of pop tunes, classical compositions, 
and Michael Kamen's score.  While no film this decade has equaled the 
accomplishment of Krzysztof Kieslowski and Zbigniew Preisner in wedding 
music and visuals for 1993's BLUE, MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS has moments when 
it comes close.
     Like IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE, this movie is about appreciating the 
value of every person's effort to better the lives of others 
irrespective of the individual cost.  DEAD POETS' SOCIETY told a similar 
story in a similar setting with similar themes, but MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS 
has enough singular material to preserve its unique identity.  Those who 
prize the message and tone of those other pictures, however, will almost 
certainly enjoy this one.
     Most of the time, when Hollywood wants to show changes to a 
character over a significant span of time, a relatively young actor is 
used, and the aging process is accomplished via (usually fake-looking) 
makeup.  For MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS, the film makers tried the opposite, 
choosing a performer whose actual age closely matches the final age of 
the main character, then using makeup to rejuvenate him for the film's 
early sequences.  Surprisingly, the result doesn't excessively stretch 
credibility, although Richard Dreyfuss never looks thirty (possibly 
forty).  As always, the actor turns in a strong performance, regardless 
of how old Mr. Holland is supposed to be.  Supporting players like 
Glenne Headly, Jay Thomas (as one of Glenn's teaching buddies), Olympia 
Dukakis (as a crusty principal), Alicia Witt (as Glenn's first 
"project"), and Jean Louisa Kelly (as a student with a crush on her 
music teacher) keep MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS in tune.
     In recent years, it has become common practice for movie studios to 
release at least one emotionally stirring drama around the holiday 
season.  In 1992, it was SCENT OF A WOMAN.  In 1993, SHADOWLANDS.  Last 
year, NOBODY'S FOOL.  Flaws aside, one common element in these films is 
that each focuses on the triumph of the human spirit, using a story that 
seeks to touch the heart.  MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS deserves a place in their 
ranks.  It's a symphony of solid storytelling and good feeling that pays 
tribute to Hollywood's rarely-seen, gentler side.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS is the classic fictional story about a teacher
who uses rock 'n' roll to teach untalented kids to appreciate music.
The twist in this version is that the teacher wants to be a composer
and only takes a teaching position so that he can have the time and
money to be able to compose, but he finds teaching to be more than a
full-time job leaving little time for outside interests.  When he
finally does finish his American Symphony, he demonstrates, in my
opinion, that teaching was the right profession for him anyway.
     As the movie starts, Mr. Glenn Holland (Richard Dreyfuss) is
beginning his first year at John F. Kennedy High School by teaching
music to the class of 65.  As someone who was a member of another high
school class of 65 (Garland, Texas), I can attest to the careful
accuracy of the sets (David Nickolas) and the costumes (Aggie Guerrard
Rodgers).  Mr. Holland finds he has a group of lethargic and untalented
students, and their attempt at music results in a horrible cacophony.
He hates his job, and at first he is terrible at it.  He uses little
witticisms like "There's more to music than notes on a page" and
"Playing music is supposed to be fun" in attempts to awaken and inspire
his stoic students.  Nothing works until he starts playing rock 'n'
roll to them and after that he becomes a big hit with the kids although
their playing only goes from pathetic to passable.
     In a great performance W. H. Macy is Vice Principal Gene Wolters.
He is the tuff principal with a flat top that you remember from high
school.  You know, the one that measures girls skirts and sends them
home if their skirts are not regulation length.  Wolters does not
approve of Mr. Holland's unorthodox methods and tells him sternly that
"Rock 'n' roll by its very nature leads to a breakdown in discipline."
Olympia Dukakis plays Principal Jacobs who supports Mr. Holland.  Jay
Thomas is excellent as football Coach Bill Meister and Mr. Holland's
best friend at school.  In a story with a plethora of cliches, the
coach gets his students to dance at the school play and thus boost
ticket sales.
     The corny but fun script (Patrick Duncan) is peppered with great
little one liners.  The coach wants his wrestling star Louis Russ
(Terrence Howard) to play an instrument in the band so he can get his
grade point average high enough not to get kicked off the wrestling
team, but Mr. Holland has trouble finding an instrument for him.  When
offered a tuba, Russ complains that, "Tubas are for fat guys with
pimples."
     The secondary theme in the show surrounds Mr. Holland's family.
His wife Iris (Glenne Headly) has a son whom Mr. Holland names Col
after his idol John William Coltrane, the innovative American jazz
saxophonist and composer.  Mr. Holland loves music and wants his son to
be just like him.  Well, his son turns out deaf.  In a scene that will
tear your heart out, Col throws a temper tantrum at age 6 because he
can not communicate with his parents enough even to tell them his most
basic needs.  Mr. Holland is too busy at school to pay much attention
to his son or to learn minimal competency in sign language so he can
talk to his son.  Iris laments to him, "Why is everyone else's child
more important than yours?"
     Hands down, the best actor or actress in the whole movie is Jean
Louisa Kelly who has a small but important role as Rowena Morgan.
Rowena is a surprise star for the school musical.  When she sings or
acts she casts a spell on people in the movie and in the audience.  A
great voice and a mesmerizing smile.  I'd love to see her up for an
award for supporting actress, but I am sure she will be ignored in
favor of Olympia Dukakis's more traditional performance.
     I find Richard Dreyfuss an uneven and hence frustrating actor to
watch, but in MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS, director Stephen Herek has him in
perfect control.  Dreyfuss never overacts as he has been known to do,
see for example, THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT or LET IT RIDE.  Here Dreyfuss
is a master at manipulating the audience's emotion for maximum effect,
but yet he gives a restrained rendition of the character.
     MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS is sappy and predictable.  It uses a lot of
stock film footage of the Vietnam war to remind the audience of the
tragedy of that era.  Since I had friends die in Vietnam, I found the
burial scene extremely moving.  The editor (Trudy Ship) is quite adept
at cutting at just at the right moment between tragedy and joy and
between the movie and the old film clips of that period.
     This is definitely a message movie.  Principle Wolters sums it up
with, "If I'm forced to choose between music and reading, writing, and
long division, I choose long division every time."  This is contrasted
with Mr. Holland's view that "the day they cut the football budget in
this state, that will be the end of Western Civilization as we know
it!"
     The ending is a full blown tearjerker.  Save a spare batch of
hankies for the conclusion.  At least it ends on a complete high note
(pun intended).
     MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS runs an incredibly long 2:22.  I think this is
completely unnecessary since this is not GANDHI, but I must admit it
did keep my attention, and I never looked at my watch.  The movie is
incorrectly rated PG.  This is a G movie where I think they said a
couple of cuss words just to keep it from getting a G rating.  There is
no sex, nudity, or violence.  There is a key scene where one character
kisses another on the cheek.  I recommend the movie to you and give
this sweet, upbeat tearjerker ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        It almost seems like the title of a porno movie, doesn't it? 
But the friend I saw it with, who knows infinitely more about music 
than I do, assures me an opus has something to do with symphonies. 
He started to explain it, but after having just sat through a 145-minute 
epic melodrama, my attention span was too far gone to listen. MR. 
HOLLAND'S OPUS covers thirty years in the life of a high school 
music teacher and, believe me, you feel like you've aged along with 
him.
        Richard Dreyfuss plays Glenn Holland, a composer working 
on a symphony that he believes will earn him riches and fame. He 
spends thirty years on this symphony, which lasts only two and a 
half minutes when played at the end of the movie. The same musician 
friend I saw the movie with assures me that symphony would never 
make anyone rich or famous. "It sounds like something Yanni would 
play live at the Acropolis," he remarked. Even I didn't believe anyone 
would spend a third of a century working on something I'd swear I 
heard the last time I was in an elevator.
        Holland is sick of the wedding/bar mitzvah life of a man in 
a traveling band, and decides to take a job teaching, just for a few 
years, to have more time to spend with his wife (Glenn Headly) and 
his symphony (Elle Vator-Muzik). Principal Olympia Dukakis 
assures him it won't just be a job "to fall back on" and gym coach Jay 
Thomas scoffs at the notion of a teaching job giving anyone free time. 
Mr. Holland hates the job at first, but soon discovers that interactive 
Hollywood teaching style we've all seen. You know, where the 
actor/actress makes teaching fun and the whole class goes crazy 
about learning. Never mind that this has never once happened in real 
life, where school is a boring necessity that motivates few, including 
the smart kids. But nothing in MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS has any 
bearing on reality.
        This is a movie where you know every single character 
they introduce will fall victim to some melodramatic tragedy, whether 
it's the football player who has to join the band to keep his grade 
point up but has no rhythm (a black guy with no rhythm -- told you 
the movie wasn't believable) who is later killed in Vietnam, or the 
girl who took up clarinet playing because everyone else in her family 
was good at something and she felt like an utter failure, or the young 
singer who wants to follow her Broadway dreams but is held back 
by her father. Speaking of the believability factor, we're supposed to 
believe this girl wants Mr. Holland to run away to New York with 
her for a life of free-swinging sexual euphoria. What is it about 
Dreyfuss that attracts the teenage girls, the liver spots or the 
bifocal glasses?
        The biggest dramatic obstacle for Dreyfuss to overcome 
is his own son, who is born deaf, the ultimate irony for a father who 
wants his son to live and breathe music. But the most emotional the 
movie gets on this issue is having Dreyfuss sing John Lennon's 
"Beautiful Boy" (not one of his hundred best, let me tell you that) 
to him at a recital. It's more awkward and laughable than touching, 
and is just one of the many gratuitous musical numbers in the film 
that add to the eternally-long running time.
        MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS spends most of its time in two 
years -- 1965 and 1980, the first year showing Dreyfuss' first teaching 
days and the second year introducing the struggles with their son 
and the temptations offered by the young singer. Then we finally 
flash-foward to 1995 and the ending of the film, which is more than 
suiting for a movie that's been absurdly far-fetched and handled the 
dramatic issues in ineffective ways.
        Every student he's ever taught shows up for a surprise 
ceremony in the gym, where his symphony is finally played. So we 
get a bunch of testimonies about how his teaching style changed 
their lives (the clarinet girl, it turns out, is now the state governor), 
though for some reason the fate of the singer is never mentioned. 
This ending seemed ridiculous to me because I don't think there's 
ever been a teacher who's altered my goals or beliefs in any way. 
There have been plenty I've liked and now miss a little, but nothing 
life changing, especially from a music teacher. My old Sex Ed. 
teacher, on the other hand...
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Christopher Null
     Out-and-out begging for an Oscar might have been more dignified than
the brazen performance by Richard Dreyfuss in the title role of MR.
HOLLAND'S OPUS.  Here, Dreyfuss makes his bid for Oscar number two (he won
in 1977 for THE GOODBYE GIRL), and given the fare Hollywood has seen fit
to throw us this year, I'll be surprised if he doesn't win.
     Mr. Holland is, of all things, a lowly high school band teacher, and
the film follows 30 years of his life, from 1965 to the present.  Mr.
Holland, in his first year of teaching, finds himself turning into that
very thing which he detests, a dry and boring instructor who isn't getting
through to the kids, so he decides to make a few changes in his teaching
style to get the students involved and interested.  Using all manner of
unorthodox teaching methods, Mr. Holland eventually breaks through and
becomes the darling of John F. Kennedy High School, and we see the
profound effect he really does have on a number of his students.
     The film is something akin to a series of vignettes, each profiling
Mr. Holland's relationship with one student or another, most notably the
driven yet apparently talentless Gertrude (Alicia Witt, who appears all
too briefly) and vocal ingenue Rowena.  All the while, Mr. Holland's own
life seems to play second chair to his teaching.  His own symphony goes
virtually ignored, as does his family:  his wife, Iris (Glenne Headly),
and his deaf son, Cole.
     MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS treats us to the transformation of the students
without relying too much on the corny antics that similar films tend
toward.  Rather, the movie is filled with genuine, tearjerking emotion
despite its often rambling 2 1/2 hour length, and we are constantly
entertained by a number of moving performances of classic tunes and modern
ones.  The one over-the-top element of the picture is, of course,
Dreyfuss, whose performance culminates in the singing of a heartfelt yet
nearly unbearable rendition of John Lennon's "Beautiful Boy," dedicated to
his estranged son.  But you've gotta give him points for trying.
     The integration of political messages and stock footage into the film
is a bit distracting, as it is used to set the time frame and little
more.  But if you can get past this and let yourself slip into the web
that Dreyfuss manages to weave, you'll find a heart of sincerity in this
lazy, free-flowing, and only sometimes obvious picture.  Be sure to bring
a hanky.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback/
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
John Paul Powell
Published In The Outreach Connection Newspaper (Jan. 24, 1996)
Starring:    Richard Dreyfuss, Glenne Headly, Jay Thomas, Olympia Dukakis  
             and W.H. Macy. 
Written by:  Patrick Sheane Duncan.
Directed by: Stephen Herek.  
Produced by: Scott Kroopf and Patrick Seane Duncan. 
             A Buena Vista Pictures Distribution release.  
This review is dedicated to those whose love, guidance and support shaped 
and enriched my life. I am a better person for knowing you.  
Mrs. Shirley Powell: You shared your love of literature and film, inspiring 
your grandson to follow in your footsteps.  
Mr. Kellman: My high school English teacher. You opened my eyes to the special
"gift" I had. The purpose and direction of my life changed forever.  
John Lott, Lindy Oughtred and Steve Cogan: Journalism's "Holy Trinity". You 
altered my view of the world. My peepers thank you.  
Chris Farrer/Adrian Bromley: My partners in crime. You are more than friends
to me, you're my brothers.  
Julie Powell: My wife. If there ever was a choice between you and my "gift", 
this keyboard would fall silent.   
Bodies and minds recharged, we'd file into the ground floor music room, a 
leisurely stroll from the cafeteria. Chit-chatting, we unpacked our 
instruments. Hinges popped like fireworks. Metal clanged against metal. 
Trumpets blared. Tubas bellowed. Flutes cooed. Mr. Ford slung his jacket 
over a chair and rolled his sleeves up. The symphony of the damned 
evaporated into thin air. Class was in session.
Music was Mr. Ford's life. When he spoke, you half-expected a string of 
musical notes to cascade from his lips. He could play any instrument, any 
instrument at all, just like he'd crawled out of the crib with it tucked 
under his arm.  
He taught in earnest. It was in the intensity of his eyes as he conducted. It
was in his face which flushed blood-red when the class goofed off. It was in 
his smile when you really nailed apiece, stomped its ass and sent it home 
crying to Mother. 
I don't remember much from music class, though I pulled decent grades. If I
put a trumpet to my lips now, you'd swear a duck got its tail feathers 
caught in an outboard motor. Am I a failure? Nope. In that ground floor 
music room I learned the committment to hone a skill and the significance
of respecting the "gift" God gave you.  
Man, does my chest hurt. It hit me once the theatre lights illuminated the 
joint. I stood up. A sharp pain seared my ribcage. My family quack diagnosed
it as "Gumpcarditis" (E.T.'s Disease). The symptoms are nausea, shortness 
of breath and the aforementioned chest pains.  
Gumpcarditis manifests after prolonged exposure to sappy filmmaking. The 
kind that plucks at your heart-strings not with nimble fingertips but 
needle nose pliers. The cure? Plenty of bed rest and Clint Eastwood or John 
Woo flicks to cleanse the system. 
Mr. Holland's Opus pushes the hokey meter. Sugary scenes stand out as 
deliberate attempts at manipulating our waterworks. I would be in favor 
of marching the producers to detentionhall. Yeah. Dig it. Scrub those 
boards. Scrape the gum off those desks. Mop those floors. And if they do a
real good job, they'll be treated to lunch in the school cafeteria.  
"What kind of people like to go to work at seven-thirty in the morning?"  
sums up Mr. Holland's feelings towards his new job. A travelling musician, 
Holland (Richard Dreyfuss) has settled down with his wife Iris (Glenne Headly)
and at battle axe's urging, he nabs a teaching gig. Holland formulates a master
plan. Teaching in the day will accord him "free time" to compose at night. 
A teacher with "free time" on their hands? This guy has been watching too
many Welcome Back Kotter re-runs.  
The class is a tough crowd. Holland reads exclusively from the text and 
assigns homework. His students don't retain a thing. Frustrated, he almost 
calls it quits. Principal Jacobs (Olympia Dukakis) steps in, whispering words
of wisdom. Holland drastically modifies his technique and the students 
excel.  
In the meantime, Holland's relationship with his son isn't exactly Ward and
Beaver Cleaver. Cole is deaf and Holland, the musician, has a hard time 
relating to him. Ain't life ironic?
In spite of the incriminating deficiencies, Mr. Holland's Opus makes the 
grade. Enough superior scenes balance out the defects. Richard Dreyfuss 
hangs tough as the anchor, stopping this leaky ship from drifting out to 
sea. 
Mr. Holland's Opus is rated T for Touching. Dreyfuss bagging an Oscar 
nomination x two boxes of Kleenex x Glenne Headly - a nagging case of 
Gumpcarditis + a gym teacher who plays..chess?!?! - Dreyfuss butchering
a John Lennon ditty x sign language for the word "asshole" - MTV video
montages = a run on Teacher's College applications.
Outreach Rating: 9 bitter hall monitors / 10

Author
Andy Jacob
     I was not exactly excited about going to see Mr. Holland's Opus.
I probably should have been working on notecards which are due for my
term paper anyway. But I went ahead and saw it.
     After the first hour, I had high hopes for the movie, and even up
to the last ten minutes I had high hopes for it, but then it just died.
Like a person recovering from surgery better than anyone expected and
then taking a turn for the worst. I'll get back to this later.
     One reason why I didn't want to see the movie in the first place
is because it looked so corny. A music teacher taught at a school for
30 years.  He had a son who was deaf. Everyone liked him. The end.
Not my idea of a very exciting movie. However, the movie turned out to
be more than that.
     There were many more pluses than there were minuses to the movie.
Richard Dreyfuss certainly deserves an Oscar for his performance as
Mr.  Holland. Almost all of the things in the movie were realistic,
which added to the serious atmosphere. The way the movie progressed was
great. I liked the little segments where events of the time period were
shown. The portrayal of Mr Holland's deaf son was excellant. And most
of all, you really got the feeling that Mr. Holland loved music.
     However, despite all of the good things about the movie, the two
major bad things killed it. First of all, it was too long. The middle
of the movie was pretty much Mr. Holland teaching three different kids
from three different time periods how to play music. It was nice for a
while, but it got boring. Some time could have been cut out there. And
the part about the girl singer trying to seduce Mr. Holland was way
over the top. It just didn't fit in with the rest of the movie. Also,
in real life, he would have been fired for encouraging her to run off
to New York like he did.
     Finally, the worst part of all, was the ending. For those of you
familiar with tennis, it was like a bad serve. When you "wind up", you
build up a lot of kinetic energy in a coil behind your back. This is
what gives the serve the power. If you effectively transfer the energy
to the ball, you have a good serve. But if you bring your arm forward
too soon, you lose the energy and it is all wasted. Your serve won't go
anywhere. It doesn't matter how good of a windup you may have had, it
doesn't matter in the end.
     That's what happened to this movie. It built up a lot of energy
and had a lot of potential, but wasted it with a bad ending. It was
just not fitting. The movie had a message. It was a message that most
of the time the best people who touch almost everyone's life that
they come in contact with never get any appreciation. At the end, the
school where Mr Holland works cuts the music budget. When he finds out
about it, he talks about how "you think you're cared about, but then
you realize 'Wait. I made a mistake. I'm exspendable.'" Then he makes a
comment while talking to the football coach that "the day they cut the
football budged in this state is the day when culture in the western
world as we know it will come to an end."
     This was great. It was setting up a good ending. Then, he's about
to leave for the last time. He is walking out of his empty band room
after looking around one last time, and he's walking down the
hall. He'll walk out and leave and that's the end, right? No. Instead,
there is a celebration in the auditorium with all of his former
students. In the end he leaves conducting the symphony that he spent
his whole life on. Everyone claps.  Tears are flowing. Can we spell
CORNY? While we're at it, why don't we spell UNREALISTIC.
     The movie would have been much better (even though it still
would've been too long) if it would've ended with him walking out
of the band room alone. It fits the message of the movie. That kind of
ending is much more powerful.
     Despite the bad ending, the movie still brought up some
     points about society. And unlike many films these
days, it had a message. It was actually a little bit serious. But a bad
ending makes for a bad movie, and a bad movie is a bad movie. Well, the
producers can look on the bright side. At least they've made a movie
that band directors across the nation will see at least five times.
Andy's rating of Mr. Holland's Opus: ** 1/2
--------------------------
Rating system:
**** Fantastic! Don't miss it!
***  A good movie. Worth seeing.
**   Ok. Average. Probably not worth seeing until it's out on home video.
*    Bad. Don't bother seeing it.
x    This movie is so bad that it should be burned.
--------------------------
