Title
Review for Wings of the Dove, The (1997)
Number of Reviews
21

Author
Jamie Peck
Miramax / 1:41 / 1997 / R (sex, brief nudity, adult themes)
Cast: Helena Bonham Carter; Linus Roache; Alison Elliott; Charlotte Rampling; 
Elizabeth McGovern; Michael Gambon; Alex Jennings 
Director: Iain Softley 
Screenplay: Hossein Amini 
Fast on the heels of October's "Washington Square" comes "The Wings of the 
Dove," another Henry James-based tale that glamorously showcases the 19th- 
and 20th-century author's brilliance in creating robust characters. "Square" 
and "Dove" are James' second and third adaptations to hit theaters in less 
than a year -- couple last December's opulent but uneven "The Portrait of a 
Lady" with these two dazzlers and you've got enough arty appeal to crown 
James as *the* dead literary author of the moment. (He takes the crown from 
Jane Austen, as 1995 through 1996 saw the hot streak of "Persuasion," 
"Clueless," "Sense and Sensibility" and "Emma.") 
In bringing "Wings" to a contemporary screen, director Iain Softley and 
screenwriter Hossein Amine have changed a few details, like pushing the 
story's setting ahead a decade into 1910. But the film still boasts an 
anti-heroine for its lead role, spirited free-thinker Kate Croy (Helena 
Bonham Carter). Following the death of her mother, Kate moves in with her 
financially loaded Aunt Maude (Charlotte Rampling) and is quickly inducted 
into the upper rungs of high London society. But Kate is lustily involved 
with journalist Merton Densher ("Preist"'s Linus Roache), a commoner who 
doesn't comply with her aunt's elitist ideals. Kate wants to be with Merton, 
but requires the wealth of Maude's upscale offerings to care for her 
impoverished father. 
Into this complicated picture comes American heiress Millie Theale (Alison 
Elliott), who fast becomes close friends with Kate and even accompanies her 
and Merton on a trip to Venice. But under Kate's civil exterior lies a 
diabolical scheme -- upon learning that Millie is stricken with an eventually 
terminal disease, Kate leads her to believe a relationship with Merton is 
possible. He'll seduce her, she'll die and leave her fortune to him. Millie's 
money will be able to solve all of Kate's problems, but the plan comes with a 
high price. 
The narrative employs most of Henry James' usual focuses (wealth, social 
status, etc.), so anyone familiar with his literature or films or melodrama 
in general will probably be able to anticipate "The Wings of the Dove"'s 
downer of an outcome. The predictably tragic story arc, however, is 
overshadowed by superb technical credits. The production design and 
cinematography are tops. Director of photography Eduardo Serra's camera 
captures palazzos and gondolas in all of their old-time extravagance, and the 
steamy, rain-soaked clinches between Kate and Merton will induce swooning 
among more romantic audience members. 
"The Wings of the Dove"'s cast and characters are its two most laudable 
assets. Carter, Roache and Elliott are never cheap enough to do one-note 
riffs on any of Amine's strongly-scripted roles. Period piece veteran Carter 
("A Room With a View," "Howards End" and the Mel Gibson "Hamlet") plays Kate 
as both a manipulative and sympathetic force -- it's a difficult combination 
to bring to an already-difficult part, but she aces it. The other two leads 
aren't quite what they seem either; Roache's Merton is smarter and more 
passionate than his hesitant, easily-influenced guise, and Millie is far from 
brittle -- she's nobody's victim. As played by the feisty Elliott ("The 
Spitfire Grill"), the latter is also a sunny scene-stealer. 
Director Jane Campion infused her Portrait of a Lady with surreal ostentation 
that occasionally doused its potency. Softley ("Hackers" and "Backbeat") 
renders "The Wings of the Dove" in a much more straightforward manner -- 
delivering his best film yet -- and although it's not as polished as 
"Washington Square," it's still beautiful and moving. And perhaps it's no 
coincidence that "Wings" and "Washington" are playing simultaneously -- 
they'd be quite a lovely afternoon double bill, and make one look forward to 
James' next screen venture with dizzy anticipation. 
Š 1997 Jamie Peck 
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE WINGS OF THE DOVE
(Miramax)
Starring:  Helena Bonham Carter, Linus Roache, Alison Elliott, Alex
Jennings, Elizabeth McGovern, Charlotte Rampling.
Screenplay:  Hossein Amini, based on the novel by Henry James.
Producers:  Stephen Evans and David Parfitt.
Director:  Iain Softley.
MPAA Rating:  R (sexual situations, nudity)
Running Time:  101 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     From beneath broad-brimmed hats, the dark eyes of Helena Bonham
Carter burn with primal ferocity in THE WINGS OF THE DOVE; behind veils of
lace, her mind ponders decidedly un-ladylike thoughts.  Carter's body of
film work, including noteworthy roles in A ROOM WITH A VIEW, HOWARDS END,
WHERE ANGELS FEAR TO TREAD and TWELFTH NIGHT, might lead you to suspect
she was born wearing a corset.  It also makes WINGS a particularly
intriguing addition to her resume.  Like most of her previous films, this
one is a costume drama based on a classic novel (by Henry James).  This
time, however, Carter creates a character who prowls through every scene
as though she may tear off that corset at any moment with a howl of rage
against the social order.
     Eventually she does remove the offending garment (more on which
momentarily), but the preceding moments build with a powerful sense of
anticipation.  Carter plays Kate Croy, a young turn-of-the-century
Englishwoman of minimal means taken in by her wealthy Aunt Maude
(Charlotte Rampling).  Maude has plans for her neice's future, plans which
do not include a poor husband like Kate's beloved, journalist Merton
Densher (Linus Roache).  Faced with choosing between her patron and her
heart, Kate discovers another alternative when she befriends American
heiress Millie Theale (Alison Elliott).  The terminally ill Millie has
eyes for Merton, which Kate sees as a perfect opportunity:  if Merton can
woo his way into Millie's will, Kate and Merton could eventually marry
after all.
     At the heart of this convoluted romantic triangle is author Henry
James' fascination with the differences between English and American
society.  For Kate, wealth means obligatory membership in a stratified
social system which has become a farce by 1910, with landed gentlemen like
Lord Mark (Alex Jennings) reduced to fortune-hunting to stave off
insolvency; for activist writer Merton, wealth is an arbitrary dividing
line separating him from his object of desire.  When Millie enters their
lives, both are confronted with challenges to their assumptions.  Though
wealthy, Millie is kind and never condescending, nor is she restricted by
social mandates.  While Kate envies Millie's freedom, Merton begins to
realize that Kate's actions are the result of her choices, not an
inevitable by-product of money.
     Those tense interpersonal dynamics are rendered with impressive
economy in Hossein Amini's screenplay.  THE WINGS OF THE DOVE comes in at
under an hour and 45 minutes, a remarkable achievement for a literary
adaptation made even more remarkable by the richness of the
characterizations.  The requisite sumptuous production values are all in
place (notably John Beard's spectacular production design), yet THE WINGS
OF THE DOVE never once sacrifices focus on the characters for fetishistic
period detail.  Merton's background is less focused than the rest, but
Linus Roache creates a convincing portrait of torn loyalties; as Millie,
Alison Elliott plays the doomed Millie with a tenderness of spirit which
never lapses into cinematic sainthood.
     Both Roache and Elliott are strong, but Helena Bonham Carter is a
powerhouse.  Her performance pulses with resentment and rationalized
deviousness, captured by Iain Softley in direction which holds on her face
whenever possible.  The potentially unsympathetic character of Kate
becomes a tragic figure who feels forced into plotting for her most basic
happiness.  In the film's climactic scene, Kate attempts to win back
Merton's affections by stripping naked in front of him, an achingly
desperate seduction by a desperate woman.  Carter shows plenty of nerve
(and plenty of skin) in that scene, but she also shows a range few of her
previous characters have required.  Freeing herself from the broad-brimmed
hats, veils of lace and, yes, even her corset, Helena Bonham Carter
exposes a tortured soul struggling to break free of roles dictated by
costume.  How very fitting.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     It was an age of sincerity.  Set in Europe in 1910, THE WINGS OF
THE DOVE, based on the Henry James novel, relates a tale of people who
are utterly sincere, albeit only on the surface.  Below their placidfacades they seethe with repressed emotions and hatch elaborate plots
against one another.
     "I don't believe in any of the things I write about," confesses
journalist Merton Densher, played earnestly by Linus Roache from
PRIEST.  "I fake passion.  I fake conviction."
     When Merton asks his girlfriend Kate Croy, played with all the
complexity the part demands by that veteran of costume drama Helena
Bonham Carter, to spend the night, she refuses and explains why.  "I'd
be penniless -- cast out of society," she tells him because her rich
aunt, played with aristocratic disdain by Charlotte Rampling, would cut
her off and throw her out.
     Director Iain Softley, whose only other films are the mediocre
BACKBEAT and the painfully unwatchable HACKERS, succeeds marvelously
this time.  "Three's a charm" as they say.  But with top-notch actors
and a timeless story, he would have had to work hard to make it
otherwise.
     If the movie sounds like Martin Scorsese's award winning THE AGE
OF INNOCENCE, it should.  The time period and the study of restrainedresponses are similar, which is not to say the results are the same.
Scorsese's characters are untapped volcanoes, never erupting but always
on the verge.  In contrast, as good as Softley's presentation is, and
it is quite good, his actors smolder rather than burn beneath their
calm exterior.  Never in THE WINGS OF THE DOVE does a character seem
truly in danger of an unchecked explosion.
     Any lack of perfection in the direction is more than made up by
the other members of the film's crew.  THE ENGLISH PATIENT's Academy
Award winning composer Gabriel Yared provides an abundance of dramatic
music to punctuate almost every scene.  JUDE's cinematographer Eduardo
Serra gives the film a strikingly handsome look.  And most of all, John
Beard's sets are nothing short of breathtaking.  Venice has never been
more lovely.  From the canals lit by gondolas carrying torches to the
side streets and alleyways during a festival, the city has a heavenly
appearance.
     The heart of the story is a love triangle between Merton, Kate,
and a rich but sick American heiress, Milly Theale, played delicately
by Alison Elliott from THE SPITFIRE GRILL.  The triangle involves love,
money, and deception.  Another character, Lord Mark (Alex Jennings),
tries unsuccessfully to create his own triangle with Kate and Milly.
     The excellent, but largely forgotten, actress Elizabeth McGovern
plays Milly's friend and traveling companion Susan.  McGovern, from her
first film, the brilliant and devastating ORDINARY PEOPLE, has brought
something special to any character she has played, but her career has
never taken off.  Her all too small part in THE WINGS OF THE DOVE is
unlikely change this.
     "You don't understand me, and I don't understand you," complains
Merton to his true love Kate.  The entire age was like that.  People
avoided revealing themselves which guaranteed them little hope of being
understood.  The picture's fascination comes from watching people in
torment over these social constraints.
     THE WINGS OF THE DOVE runs 1:41.  It is rated R for some sex and
nudity.  The movie would be fine for teenagers.  I strongly recommend
this moving story to you and give it *** 1/2.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: September 24, 1997
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
United Kingdom, 1997
U.S. Release Date: beginning 11/7/97 (limited)
Running Length: 1:48
MPAA Classification: R (Sexual situations, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Helena Bonham Carter, Linus Roache, Alison Elliott, 
      Charlotte Rampling, Elizabeth McGovern, Michael Gambon, 
      Alex Jennings
Director: Iain Softley
Producers: Stephen Evans, David Parfitt
Screenplay: Hossein Amini
Cinematography: Eduardo Serra
Music: Edward Shearmur
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
     When Henry James wrote THE WINGS OF THE DOVE around the turn of the 
century (he first put pen to paper in 1894; the novel was published 
eight years later), one of his primary objectives was to dramatize the 
conflict between the fading morals and traditions of the 19th century 
and the emerging, "modern" liberality of the 20th century.  The 
resulting book has been numbered among James' richest and most 
intriguing works -- a tale that has lost none of its fascination and 
relevance nearly 100 years later.  
     When adapting classic novels (such as THE WINGS OF THE DOVE) into 
movies, there are generally two approaches that film makers consider.  
The first is a straightforward, literal translation that leaves the 
characters, narrative, and dialogue intact (this can often be a 
cumbersome approach for a motion picture, unless the source material is 
short).  The second is to opt for a more "free" adaptation that allows 
condensation, change, and, in some cases, "modernization."  Sometimes it 
works (SENSE AND SENSIBILITY), sometimes it doesn't (ANNA KARENINA).  At 
any rate, the latter method is the one chosen by director Iain Softley 
and screenwriter Hossein Amini for THE WINGS OF THE DOVE.  While leaving 
the general storyline and basic themes of the novel intact, these two 
men elected to alter certain key aspects of James' book to make it more 
cinematic and to give it greater appeal for a 1990s audience.
     As might be expected, the basic plot of the movie and the book is 
the same (although the time line has been shifted by ten years to 1910 
in the film).  THE WINGS OF THE DOVE opens with Kate Croy (Helena Bonham 
Carter) going to live with a wealthy, cultured aunt (Charlotte Rampling) 
shortly after the death of her mother.  Kate's aunt has every intention 
of setting up her niece in a comfortable, socially-acceptable marriage.  
But Kate, who has fallen in love with Merton Densher (Linus Roache), a 
poor journalist far below her social station, has other ideas.  But when 
her aunt threatens to disinherit her if she doesn't break off the 
illicit relationship, Kate is faced with a moral dilemma.  Her singular 
solution proves to be damaging to all involved.
     Kate befriends a wealthy young American, Milly Theale, who has come 
to Europe for health reasons.  Milly is seriously ill, and her state of 
health suggests a plan to Kate, who contrives for Milly to meet Merton.  
Soon, Milly is hopelessly in the thrall of the handsome journalist, and, 
with Kate's aid, Milly makes a play for him while all three are on a 
holiday in Venice.  It is only then that Merton divines the nature of 
Kate's plot:  that he should marry Milly for her money, then, upon her 
death when he would be rich, he could marry Kate.  
     THE WINGS OF THE DOVE is very much an actors' film because, 
although the characters are set down on paper, it's up to the performers 
to bring them to life.  A viewer's appreciation of the film, with all of 
its powerful drama and uncomfortable moral questions, depends on his or 
her acceptance of each of the three principals as unique individuals, 
not stereotypical "heroes" or "villains."  Kate, who was presented 
harshly in James' novel, is developed in the movie as a flawed woman 
trapped between her desire for love and wealth.  And, although her plan 
is calculated and manipulative, she embarks upon it with deep misgivings 
and emerges from it with scars that will never fade.  Likewise, Merton, 
although Kate's reluctant accomplice, shares a portion of the 
responsibility, since he wants Kate more than anything.  And Milly, who 
could easily be portrayed as the helpless victim, is given a backbone 
and strength of personality to go along with her love of life.  She is 
willing to do just about anything to capture and hold Merton.
     The trio of actors in the lead roles all perform effectively, using 
facial expressions (Softley employs numerous closeups) and body language 
to highlight the moral ambiguities of their characters.  Helena Bonham 
Carter, who is presented with the difficult task of fashioning a 
sympathetic character whose actions are distasteful, offers an 
emotionally naked portrayal of a woman who makes all the wrong choices.  
Linus Roache (who played the title character in PRIEST) develops Merton 
as a man who suddenly finds that he wants more than he can ever have.  
And, as Milly, Alison Elliott (THE SPITFIRE GRILL) embodies the woman 
about whom James wrote, "She is in love with life, her dreams of it have 
been immense, and she clings to it with passion."  Supporting roles are 
filled by Charlotte Rampling as Kate's cold, stature-conscious aunt; 
Michael Gambon as Kate's penniless, debauched father; and Elizabeth 
McGovern as Milly's companion.
     Much as he did with his adaptation of Thomas Hardy's JUDE THE 
OBSCURE, screenwriter Amini focuses on the emotional aspects of the 
story, detailing how the consequences of each of the characters' actions 
tears at their psyches.  Like JUDE, THE WINGS OF THE DOVE is not a happy 
tale, but it is a vivid and unforgettable one, featuring multi-
dimensional characters, beautiful cinematography, impressive set design, 
and accomplished acting.  THE WINGS OF THE DOVE will surely be one of 
the Fall's most thoughtful and impressive motion picture adaptations of 
a classic novel.
The website has moved!!
The new address is: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."

Author
James Sanford
       "The Wings of the Dove" --which is "inspired by the novel by
Henry James," according to the press notes-- lifts James' basic
situation and characters but ignores the extensive backstories that
clutter the book, as well as the judgmental tone the author seemed to
take toward his anti-heroine Kate Croy (luminously played by Helena
Bonham Carter). Kate is rescued from a life of destitution with her
opium-addict father (Michael Gambon) by a generous but domineering
Aunt Maude (Charlotte Rampling) who frowns on Kate's beloved, a
penniless journalist named Merton Denscher (Linus Roache). Marriage to
Merton is out of the question, since it would mean Kate being cut off
from both 1910 London society and her aunt's much-needed money. "You
make her sound like a witch," gasps Kate's new friend Milly (Alison
Elliott), when Kate crabs about Maude's restrictions on her. "Oh no,"
Kate says, "she can't fly. . .yet."
Milly, an American innocent with millions in the bank, an eye
for Merton and a cough like Camille's, becomes Kate's unlikely
passport to happiness. What if Merton could be persuaded to woo the
terminally ill heiress? Then she might leave him her fortune, making
it possible for Kate to escape Maude's clutches and marry the man of
her choice.
"The Wings of the Dove" is almost a sort of
turn-of-the-century "Indecent Proposal," with the canals of Venice
standing in for the casinos of Vegas. But though Hossein Amini's
eloquent screenplay brings to the surface the eroticism James only
hinted at, it doesn't neglect the fascinating psychology of the
characters, all of whom have their own agendas and desires to
satisfy. Director Ian Softley (best known for "Backbeat") keeps the
picture sailing along at a surprisingly brisk pace for a period-piece,
and he's gotten exceptional performances from everyone in his cast,
particularly Roache, who conveys Merton's troubled conscience
exquisitely, and Carter, who makes sure we understand Kate's scheming
is motivated by love and desperation, and not by maliciousness.
One of the fascinating sidelights in "Dove" deals with a
skid-row doctor who "repairs" child prostitutes and sends them back
out on the streets with "virginity certificates"; though the Age of
Innocence is gone, those British do like to keep up appearances. James
Sanford

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on 22 November 1997 with Laura for $8.50 at the Angelika.
This is the latest entry in screen adaptations of Henry James novels
(quickly following the latest version of *Washington Square*), and it's a
very good one. Henry James' characters are complex--no cookie cutters
here. What could have been a soap opera--poor man is urged by girlfriend
to seduce her dying friend--is in fact a sophisticated emotional drama. 
Set in London in 1910, Kate Croy (Helena Bonham Carter) is a poor relation
who winds up living under the auspices of her coercive Aunt Maude
(Charlotte Ramplng), who controls not only Kate's finances but those of
her opium-addicted father (Michael Gambon). She forbids Kate to be
involved with poor journalist Merton Densher (Linus Roache). Since her
choice involves two fates, she tried to relegate Merton to her past.
Resentfully settling into her new glamorous life, she meets Millie Theale
(Alison Elliott), the "richest orphan in America,"  who is visiting from
New York.
The two women become close friends and in due time, they start running
into Merton all over town; Millie fancies him. When Kate finds out that
Millie has a terminal illness, she starts to think... 
Millie and Kate go on a trip to Venice, and they both invite Merton to
join them. They both love him, but Kate urges him to cozy up to the
heiress with an illness, thinking it will solve all their problems, and
free them financially so they can--eventually--be together. 
Luckily, this is not *Days of Our Lives*. The characters are richly drawn
and the actors all do a wonderful job. Their faces reflect their changing
emotional tides. It's a joy to watch talent in action. You really feel the
emotional consequences to their actions. Linus Roach, who I last saw in
*Priest*, is both attractive and talented, but not in the usual Hollywood
sort of way. It's nice to see someone who is both offbeat *and* appealing.
Venice is the fourth star of the movie. It is one of the only cities in
the world that is guaranteed never to change; a city without auto traffic
built in a lagoon on stilts is not going to sprout character-altering
skyscrapers.  Whether it's *Summertime* or *Comfort of Strangers*, putting
a film in Venice changes it completely. It's hard to imagine this story
taking place entirely in London. 
Director Iain Softley deserves special mention. It takes something special
to make a park bench look like an island of loneliness or a rowboat for
the lovelorn. He really knows when to, and not to, use a close-up. For
example, when Helena Bonham-Carter's full moon of a face fills the screen,
there's a good reason for it, and it shows. 
Kudos also to Sandy Powell (II) for costume design. The flamboyant
fashions of the 1910s are captured perfectly. The whole production looks
like Merchant Ivory, even though it's not. 
MPAA reasons: Rated R for sexuality. That would be *hetero*sexuality in
this case. 

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The characters that Jane Austen writes about are almost from
another world.  Perhaps that is part of their appeal.  An Austen
heroine may spend the best part of a novel wondering if she should make
her move and profess her love for some man, or if she will instead
follow the conventions of her society.  That helps us get a better feel
for early 19th century British society, but it makes it a little harder
for the viewer or reader to identify with her characters.  Henry
James's characters, coming from a world a century later, are far more
modern and they get involved in situations the modern viewer can more
easily recognize.  While set in 1910, THE WINGS OF THE DOVE might have
taken place in the middle or maybe even the late 20th century.
Certainly the characters could be ones from a much more modern novel.
     Years ago Kate Croy's mother married for love a man from a lower
class.  The mother is apparently dead and her father has returned to
the lifestyle of drinking away what little money he has left.  Kate
(played by Helena Bonham Carter) now lives with her aunt (Charlotte
Rampling), who wants to protect her from making the same mistake her
mother did.  And protect she must because Kate loves a poor journalist,
Merton Densher (Linus Roache).  Kate's Aunt will not allow Kate and
Merton to even see each other.  Kate wants to marry Merton, but they
cannot live on the small salary that Merton makes.  Kate has a friend
who is an heiress from America, Millie Theale (Alison Elliott).  Millie
is a fresh young woman who appears to enjoy life, but as Kate discovers
Millie is actually dying.  Millie is being courted by Lord Mark, who
has breeding, is of the noble class, and otherwise is a consummate
jerk.  Kate would much prefer to see Millie leave her money to her
Merton.  That will make him acceptable to her class and will give them
both the money to live on.  She sets about trying to act as matchmaker
for her friend and her lover.  The story unfolds on a backdrop of
Kate's native London and Venice where she visits.
     To be frank, I have liked many of the films that Helena Bonham
Carter has been in but never been particularly fond of her as an
actress.  Her trademark has seemed to be an indelible indignant pout.
She has too often played the woman who knows all too well what is wrong
with society and has every right to pout. Ironically she is much more
likable as an actress when she is playing someone who is essentially a
deceitful schemer and who is betraying one of her closest friends.  I
liked her in this film as much as I ever have in any role.  My one
complaint is that the screen was probably just not ready for a Helena
Bonham Carter nude scene.  Nor was I.  Much more captivating is Alison
Elliott as the dying heiress.  She is brash yet unassuming,
representing all the positive characteristics that the British used to
think Americans had.  She is a very flattering stereotype.  Neither
Linus Roache nor Elizabeth McGovern (as Theale's friend and nurse) make
much of an impression.  Both are a little bland, though the film
suffers more from Roache's blandness.
     Under Iain Softley's direction Eduardo Serra's camera captures
memorable views of both London and Venice.  London is usually seen in
business-like blues and grays, often showing the coming of the modern
age.  The film starts on an underground train and often shows us
streets choked with cars and busses. Venice on the other hand is
usually shot in earth tones.  Most of what we see is centuries old.  Is
there some ironic comment that Kate's aunt with her old school ideas of
class remains behind in a very modern seeming London, while the more
modern seeming, cigarette-smoking Kate and her modern-thinking friends
gravitate to the antique splendor of Venice?  One remarkable scene is
captured by Serra has Kate's face lit up and framed in an oval mirror
so that the subtle conniver looks a lot like the witch from SNOW WHITE.
     THE WINGS OF THE DOVE surprises the viewer in several ways.  While
the ending is not much of a surprise, the film is creative in the ways
it get there.  I think people will find this film more approachable
than they expect.  I rate it a 7 on the 0 to 10 scale and a +2 on the
-4 to +4 scale.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
The Wings of the Dove is a 101 minute adoption of one of Henry James lesser
known novels.  A short and sweet soapy, if you will.
Kate Croy (Helena Bonham Carter) is a conniving and repressively gloomy
character, who is wholly in love with town commoner Merton Densher (Linus
Roach).  Forbidding their relationship is Kates upper class Aunt Maud
(Charlotte Rampling), who threatens to exclude Kate and her divorced father from
the familys vast fortune.
The lovers sexual and emotional relationship is based on their understanding of
each other, and the knowing that wherever one goes the other will be standing
with them side to side.  But Kate doesnt think twice about ignoring Mertons
pleads for a low-standing-in-society-but-spiritually-beneficial marriage, and
explores all opportunities to have her cake and screw it too.
The dazzling Millie Theale (Alison Elliot) enters the scheme; a charming and
gorgeous millionaire who is slowly dying of a terminal disease. Kate works up a
devilish scheme for Merton to seduce Millie, thus inheriting all her money if
the plan goes right.  But sooner or later she is forced to contemplate her
relationships integrity by balancing her desire to be rich by her longing to be
the only woman in Mertons mind.
What director Iain Softley (who gave us Hackers in 1995) delivers in Dove is
provocative, finely tuned romance of a dark nature.  The essence of real
situations and characters are existent is so many ways  Carters performance as
the arrogant Kate, the lush surroundings of London and Venice and most of all a
genuinely well written script.  He has been careful not to make the film place
all its cards on the table too soon, so interesting character developments occur
which renew the viewers interest levels.  And just when you thought that the
Wings of the Dove had shown you all it has to offer, riveting ending scenes put
everything into perspective.
If films like Sense and Sensibility or SBS movies have put you off period
dramas, then rest assured that Wings of the Dove is much more enjoyable than
many others of its kind.  Although not exactly easy viewing, this is one motion
picture than deserves to be known as something very unique and artistic.


Author
George Papadopoulos
There is a sense of familiarity about THE WINGS OF THE DOVE that appears to
cloud its subtle originality and inventiveness. There has been a plethora
of late eighteenth-century English period dramas over the last five years
and we have become accustomed to the overstated costumes, bombastic scores
and soap-opera narratives. In fact, there have been so many that this
little gem may get overlooked as yet another Merchant-Ivory imitation when
it is vastly superior in every way.
The film starts off innocuously with a romantic interlude on a crowded
train which leads to a passionate affair between Kate Croy (Helena
Bonham-Carter) and Merton Denscher (Linus Roache). However, their love
affair is thwarted by Kate's wealthy Aunt Maude (Charlotte Rampling) who
threatens to disinherit Kate if she continues her flirt with a middle-class
journalist.Their relationship appears doomed until they meet Millie Theale
(Alison Elliot), an American millionairess who happens to be dying of
cancer. As Kate forms a friendship with Millie, she gets this crazy notion
that if Merton should seduce Millie then they would be inherit her wealth.
The film's premise may appear slight and familiar but Iain Softley's
sensitive and intelligent direction transcends the film from mere soap dish
to a provocative and poignant drama about passion, obsession, greed and
ambition. What sets this film apart from the Merchant-Ivory drivel is the
restrained and subtle way the narrative unfolds without resorting to
stating the obvious. There is no unnecessary dialogue exposition stating
what we already know. For once, the audience is assumed to have an
above-average mentality and we are grateful.
The acting all round is outstanding. Helena Bonham-Carter deserved her
Golden Globe nomination and will definitely get an Oscar nod as well. She
gives a striking performance of a woman who is caught between her desires
and ambitions. She often see-saws from a sympathetic character to a villain
but at the end of the film, it was she who received our greatest sympathy.
The complexity of the character would have been quite daunting to any
performer but she pulls it off brilliantly and has now stepped up to the
big league of female actors. However, who knows what Hollywood would do to
her. We may see her in the next Scorsese flick or we may see her strutting
her stuff in SHOWGIRLS 2. Hollywood awaits!

Author
Charles Henderson
Along comes another adaptation of a great, Henry James novel, the second
this fall, and as is the case of Washington Square which preceded it, we
could endlessly debate the virtues of the movie, compared to those of
the book. One might as well compare a photograph of Pablo Picasso, to a
Picasso painting. Aside from the fact that both bear some relationship
to the artist, there's not much more than the name, Picasso, to connect
the photograph and the painting. The same applies to The Wings of the
Dove. Don't expect a movie like this one to equate with the book. The
Wings of the Dove is one of the greatest novels of a writer whom many
believe is one of the very best American writers, perhaps the best
novelist this country has ever produced. In his writings Henry James
explored such issues as the conflict between cultures European and
American, but as much as anything else his novels are about character.
And his nuanced descriptions of character, together with the dialogue
and narrative out of which his stories are built, constitute the essence
of his work. His novels exist in the form of text; yet in the reading of
the text pictures emerge, and are seen against the screen of the
imagination which one brings to the reading.
With movies things are very, very different. The pictures predominate.
The director (Iain Softley) and the cinematographer (Eduardo Serra)
provide the visual images out of which flow a sense of place and story.
And it's up to the actors by the tone and tenor of their voices, body
language, and other visual cues, as much as through lines of dialogue,
to suggest what is happening within. All of this is supported,
especially in period movies like this one by costumes and sets that
convey mood as well as a sense of time and place. This film is highly
visual....from the lively street scenes of turn-of the-century London to
the luscious interiors of English town houses and Italian canal houses
and churches. Of course, visual images can have symbolic depth and
power, just as words do, but they function on a different wave length
altogether. For example, in one transition, a rather scary looking
medical instrument in an operating room dissolves into a soccer ball
that seems to descend from the heavens into the midst of a soccer game.
In another scene the central characters, riding in gondolas illuminated
by the warm light of oil lanterns, drift off into the distance, and into
the darkness of a Venice canal. And in visual gestures such as these,
the contrast between life and death, light and darkness reinforce what
is happening within the lives of the novel's central characters.
Against this visually rich backdrop, the novel's three central
characters play their parts: Kate Croy (Helena Bohnam Carter), the
protagonist, who is torn between love of journalist Merton Densher
(Linus Roache) and her need for social and financial security; the
young, zestful and idealistic American heiress, Millie Theale (Alison
Elliott) who is fighting for life in the midst of death. These three
form a classic triangle, a configuration of love and hate, commitment
and betrayal, friendship and deceit in which we see all that is both
virtuous and sordid in human relationships combine and collide. In this
complicated and perplexing set of relationships there is some evidence
of what made Henry James a great novelist. James had a profound
sensitivity for the moral complexity of human relationships; he
understood that one cannot divide the human family neatly into tribes,
with villains on the one side and heroes on the other. He knew that both
good and evil can and do reside within a single life, and that for us
all life is a struggle of life against death and darkness against the
light.
I would recommend this movie for three reasons. First, the scenes of
London and Venice are quite well done. You'll want to visit Venice soon
after seeing this movie. Second, the actors all do a very credible job,
with only a modest quantity of dialogue, suggesting and evoking some of
the more complicated themes of the novel. And finally, this movie will
give you a number of reasons to ponder your own motives and examine your
own relationships with what may be an embarrassing recognition of how
closely the desire for friendship and love can be related to the need
for power. Four
flames.
For additional reviews visit our website at
http://christianity.miningco.com/library/weekly/blmovies.htm

Author
Michael Dequina
Washington Square (PG) *** (out of ****)
The Wings of the Dove (R) *** 1/2 (out of ****)
With each fall movie season comes a rash of literary adaptations dangled
like bait in the Academy voter pool, and more often than not these films
derive from the work of a single classic author.  This year's featured
author is Henry James, whose Washington Square and The Wings of the Dove
are brought to the screen in intelligent, skillfully crafted translations
that tower over last year's James adaptation, Jane Campion's maddeningly
obtuse The Portrait of a Lady.
Washington Square centers on the romance between gawky, naive Catherine
Sloper (Jennifer Jason Leigh), the daughter of the wealthy Dr. Austin
Sloper (Albert Finney), and dashing but penniless Morris Townsend (Ben
Chaplin).  Naturally, their relationship does not sit well with Austin, who
suspects Morris's true motives--after all, how could a poor young man
honestly be enamored by the meek and woefully unrefined Catherine?--and
does all within his power to keep his daughter and the suspected golddigger
apart.
Agnieszka Holland's film is a joy to look at, yet for a film that focuses
on a grand passion, the final product is strangely cold and distant.  But
that shortcoming is made up for by the work of the cast.  Leigh may sound
like a peculiar casting choice for a costume drama, but her trademark
mannerisms and mumbly elocution are a perfect fit for the insecure, awkward
Catherine.  She has a nice rapport with the charming Chaplin, who sports a
convincing Yank accent.  Finney's Austin makes a despicable, yet archly
funny, villain, and Maggie Smith provides some delightful comic relief as
Catherine's hopelessly romantic Aunt Lavinia.
A more involving James adaptation is Iain Softley's swifter-moving and
more understated The Wings of the Dove, which takes a more complex slant on
the rich girl-poor boy romance.  The woman of wealth here is Kate Croy
(Helena Bonham Carter), who has a forbidden affair with common journalist
Merton Densher (Linus Roache).  Kate and Merton long to marry, but Kate
refuses to give up her lofty position in society and the luxuries her
snobby aunt (Charlotte Rampling) provides her.  When wealthy, ailing
American Milly Theale (Alison Elliott) arrives in London, Kate and a
reluctant Merton engage in a cruel scheme that could ultimately enable them
to marry without sacrificing Kate's riches.
What makes Wings soar above the fairly black-and-white Washington are the
richly shaded characters and relationships, brought to vivid life by the
central trio of actors.  Despite her evil plot, Bonham Carter never allows
the audience to lose the feeling that Kate truly does care about
Milly--it's just that she cares about herself even more.  Predictably,
Merton develops feelings for Milly as well, but Softley and Roache wisely
do not spell out whom he loves more, which creates genuine dramatic
tension.  Milly is weak in body, but deceptively so; inside she is strong
in spirit and quite clear of mind. The sparkling Elliott, who was just
about the only redeeming quality of last year's dreadfully overwrought
Sundance sensation The Spitfire Grill, delivers a quiet performance that is
astonishing in its power, most notably during a climactic tete-a-tete
between Milly and Merton.
Whether or not Washington Square and The Wings of the Dove, which have
both received favorable notices from critics, garner the hoped-for Oscar
nominations remains to be seen; there is no question, however, that they
are both quality pieces of filmmaking, with Wings being the worthier
contender.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown@michaeljordanfan.com  |  mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
Michael Jordan Sites:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html  &
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/
"I can accept failure.  Everyone fails at something.  But I can't accept
not trying.
It doesn't matter if you win as long as you give everything in your heart."
--Michael Jordan

Author
Alex Fung
THE WINGS OF THE DOVE (Miramax - 1997)
Starring Helena Bonham Carter, Linus Roache, Alison Elliott,
  Elizabeth McGovern, Charlotte Rampling, Alex Jennings
Screenplay by Hossein Amini, based on the novel by Henry James
Produced by David Parfitt, Stephen Evans
Directed by Iain Softley
Running time: 101 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   While the recent film adaptations based upon the works of Henry James
   -- Jane Campion's THE PORTRAIT OF A LADY and Agneiszka Holland's
   WASHINGTON SQUARE -- were mildly disappointing to various degrees,
   such is not the case with the latest James-inspired piece, Iain
   Softley's richly handsome production of THE WINGS OF THE DOVE.
   Finely observed and splendidly performed, this is a most impressive
   costume drama which is sure to draw heavy attention during awards
   season.
   The screenplay by Hossein Amini (who splendidly adapted Thomas
   Hardy's JUDE for Michael Winterbottom last year) heavily revamps
   Henry James' story, giving it a modern spin, pushing the action
   forward up eight years to 1910, and extensively rewriting the
   dialogue of the characters, but retains the novel's essence and loses
   none of its moral ambiguity.  That the audience's sympathies are
   exchanged so fluidly between its characters is indicative of THE
   WINGS OF THE DOVE's transcendence of the staidness often associated
   with the costume melodrama genre.
   At first, our sympathies belong with Kate Croy (Helena Bonham
   Carter), who serves as the focal figure and the catalyst in THE WINGS
   OF THE DOVE.  The young Englishwoman's foothold in high society is
   tenuous; her mother has recently died, her father is a penniless
   opium addict, and the only thing separating Kate from poverty is the
   patronage of her wealthy Aunt Maud (Charlotte Rampling), who's
   determined to marry Kate to someone with social stature -- perhaps
   snooty Lord Mark (Alex Jennings).  Kate's heart, however, belongs
   elsewhere -- to an upstanding man distinctly of lower class,
   struggling journalist Merton Densher (Linus Roache) -- and this
   enrages her benefactor, who forbids Kate from seeing him and
   threatens to cut off her father's meager subsistence allowance.
   Enter Millie Theale (Alison Elliott), a fabulously wealthy young
   American, of whom it is remarked "She'd be the Queen of America, if
   they had one."  She and Kate meet at a dinner party and quickly
   strike up a close friendship.  When Kate finds that Millie (who's
   unaware of Kate's clandestine relationship) has eyes for Merton, and
   learns elsewhere that Millie is stricken with a terminal illness, she
   unhatches a deceptive scheme which ultimately has unexpectedly
   powerful and tragic repercussions for all involved.
   THE WINGS OF THE DOVE smartly avoids explicitly spelling out Kate's
   devious plan for as long as possible, and while it could have stood
   to improve by omitting a unambiguous description of her plot, it's
   nonetheless effective both in underlining the stealthful complicity
   of Kate and Merton, and their unspoken reluctancy to perpetrate their
   self-serving deed.
   What's interesting here is that despite the hurtful treachery
   committed against unsuspecting Millie by Kate and Merton, their
   intentions towards her are anything but malicious; unlike in James'
   novel, it clearly comes across in the film that the lovers genuinely
   like Millie, and this brings new dimensions to what would otherwise
   be a fairly superficial depiction of green-eyed villainy.  The
   machinations are a consequently a little less ruthless, a little bit
   more compassionate in nature, and one can legitimately begin to
   consider how much of Kate's plotting serves the needs and desires of
   her ailing friend's as much as it does her own.
   Ms. Bonham Carter is very effective as Kate.  Despite her complex
   character's less-than-honourable motivations and her dishonestly
   manipulative tactics, she still manages to come across as far from
   villainous, a desperate woman whose circumstances have culminated in
   this dishonourable path to tread.  Even as we view her actions as
   abhorrent, Ms. Bonham Carter makes us if not sympathise, at least
   empathise with Kate's dilemma.
   Mr. Roache is very good as a man torn between desire and duty, and
   his character's struggle with his conscience and his own moral fibre
   is palpable.  Caught between the desire to do right by both women and
   his passion for Kate, Merton is perhaps the character who's
   ultimately affected the most; Mr. Roache's heartwrenching performance
   is key in the tumultuous emotional buildup at the conclusion of THE
   WINGS OF THE DOVE which pays off lavishly.
   Ms. Elliott is nothing short of beguiling as Millie, whose presence
   throughout the film is bittersweet.  To reconcile her distinctly
   beatific aura with her ailing mortality is heartbreaking, and her
   intoxicating demeanour and dreamy-eyed smile while sharing stolen
   moments with Merton are luminous.  The dizzying sense of passion so
   missing in WASHINGTON SQUARE is perfectly captured here with a scene
   which features Ms. Elliott up high on a church, beaming upwards,
   completely enraptured.  I've admired Ms. Elliott's work for several
   years now; her performance here is a major step forward for her and
   marks a career best.
   The supporting players in THE WINGS OF THE DOVE are solid in
   relatively minor roles.  Mr. Jennings is very good in a limited
   capacity, while Elizabeth McGovern, although fine in her supporting
   role as Millie's faithful travelling companion, seems somewhat out of
   place here in a period piece.
   THE WINGS OF THE DOVE is precisely captures emotional truths, both
   big and small.  The delicacy of the interplay between the characters
   rings true -- the encounters between Merton and Millie in scenic
   Venice, riding in the canals or walking in the perpetual rainfall are
   fraught with charged sexual tension, and the lovemaking scene between
   Kate and Merton is one of the most passionate ever put to film --
   except here, the passion shared between the lovers is not that of
   lust, but grief.  The film even has a sense of humour, with Kate
   arranging for Millie and Merton to share an awkward private moment at
   an art exhibit of nudes.  Within the context of a highly mannered
   piece, the cumulative effect of the bombardment of emotionality, both
   high and low, is a highly affecting denouement.
   This is a masterful direction job by Iain Softley, who rebounds from
   the disappointment of HACKERS and fulfills on the promise of his
   feature film debut work in BACKBEAT.  Confidently helmed, THE WINGS
   OF THE DOVE has a nice deliberate pace where every shot is efficient
   and purposeful; there are are no throwaways.  There's a particularly
   interesting shot sequence early in the film where Merton vainly
   protests with Aunt Maud's doorman, arguing that he won't leave until
   he can speak with Kate.  The shot of Kate in the window, forlornly
   gazing down upon Merton in the street with her huge smoldering eyes,
   is strategically placed to obscure her lips -- and indeed,
   communication between the two is severed at this point in the film.
   While the film could certainly excise the reiterative flashback shots
   that appear at a climactic point in the film that prove to be
   redundant and ineffective, as a whole Mr. Softley's helming of THE
   WINGS OF THE DOVE is impressively proficient.
   In fact, THE WINGS OF THE DOVE is precisely the sort of film which is
   undoubtedly bound to draw the attention of year-end award voters, and
   could conceivably snare no less than five and perhaps as many as ten
   Oscar nominations -- Picture, Actor, Actress, Supporting Actress,
   Director, Adapted Screenplay, Art Direction, Cinematography, Costume
   Direction, and Editing (there's one transition shot which is
   strikingly distracting -- you can virtually see the shot freeze --
   but it's otherwise elegantly edited by Tariq Anwar) are all eminently
   feasible possibilities.  This is a superb, moving film, easily the
   best costume drama of the year to date, and among the finest of
   recent years.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"I was reminded for some reason of something Fred Kareman, my acting
 teacher, had once said: 'Most people in this business should be selling
 zippers on 7th Avenue.'" - Tom DiCillo

Author
Dan Kim
The third adaptation from novelist Henry James, "Wings of the Dove" is
a complex and heartbreaking love story taken place in turn of the
century Europe. It's more absorbing and much deeper than what most
moviegoers might be accustomed to. In stark contrast to most of this
summer action blockbusters, or even drama for that matter, "Wings" is a
plot, character, and dialogue driven story that relies on shrewd and
perceptive writing to entertain the audience. Conventional Hollywood
material this is not.
Apparently movie-makers have a strong desire for James' novels. This
last year has seen Jane Campion's "Portrait of a Lady," Agnieszka
Holland's "Washington Square" and now Iain Softley's "The Wings of the
Dove." 
This emotionally involving story explores love, would be lovers, and
the desire to be loved in a status-conscious 1900s Europe. Helena
Bonham Carter gives a subtle but heartfelt performance as Kate Croy.
Her character is introduced just after she has been acquired as a ward
by her aunt, the dominant and aristocratic Maude (Charlotte Rampling).
Maude gives Kate wealth and status and also provides money for the
girl's father, but at a price. Kate is forbidden to marry for love
alone or do anything else that might offend the sensibilities of the
ruling class. Aunt Maude makes no pretense of the fact that she intends
to marry Kate off to an equally wealth-obsessed suitor, and she's shown
doing just that early on in the film.
Unfortunately for her, Kate is in love with a handsome journalist
Merton Densher (Linus Roache). He wants to marry her immediately, but
Kate, is reluctant professing to be "not good at being impulsive." She
also knows such an act would threaten both her own and her father's
security. Her apprehension eventually breaks the relationship apart.
Time passes, and American heiress Millie Theale (Alison Elliott), "the
world's richest orphan," appears in London. A free-spirit blessed with
a warm heart and, she quickly develops a relationship with Kate.
Their friendship grows but Millie doesn't reveal that her trip is also
for medical reasons. Kate starts to suspect that Millie's trip to
Europe is indeed for more than just an impulsive need to travel.
Consequently, she develops a brazen plot that may result in her and her
father's financial dependence on their control-freak aunt.
The two of them eventually run across Merton at a social gathering.
Millie eyes the handsome young reporter and quickly develops a crush on
him. Kate doesn't reveal until later that the two of them were once
involved.
We're led to believe that Kate is just using the friendship to gain
wealth but when suspicions of her fragile wealth are confirmed, it
turns out she does in fact, have deep personal connection with Millie.
This is shown in one of the more touching moments of the movie. Upon
finding out Millie is dying, Kate walks to her bedroom and curls up in
bed next to her with a look of sadness on her face.
Millie's wandering needs eventually leads the two of them to Venice,
Italy where we see the relationship continue to grow. She doesn't hide
the fact that she would like to feel a man's love, but continues to
hide the reason for her urgency. Kate, being quite perceptive,
persuades Merton to join them in Italy. He shows up and eventually
finds out the real purpose of why she is going out of her way to him
and Millie together. When questioned whether the ploy will work, Kate's
best reply is "I know how she loves."
"Wings" is a powerful movie due primarily to the skillful acting by all
the cast. Carter especially stands out, giving a well developed, deeply
moving performance as the lead protagonist. You can truly feel the
romantic desires and passions both expressed and repressed as she
reluctantly pushes herself and her companions to continue in what will
obviously and in emotional tragedy. She's adept at portaying an
enigmatic character; she causes much of the anguish yet we can't help
but feel sympathy when she says, "I hurt so much you can't imagine."
Being required to play someone unknowable and emotionally complex, she
is sensational.
The setting itself is richly appointed and beautifully artistic. The
filming takes place in both upper-crust London and an especially artsy
Venice, which may lead an imaginative viewer to believe this was the
Italy of the renaissance era. Costume designs are equally elaborate,
whether it's the simple tweed of the men's suits or the intricate
dresses and enormous hats that were in vogue during that period. 
The settings being what they are, "Wings" succeeds because of James'
gift for developing charters throughout the story. This is indeed the
quintessential "art-house film" that is all too lacking from the
studios of Hollywood.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Helena Bonham Carter, Linus Roache, Alison Elliott, Charlotte
Rampling, Elizabeth McGovern, Michael Gambon, Alex Jennings Director:
Iain Softley
Silently she walks across the train carriage, her delicate eyes at first
downcast, her porcelain complexion hiding the pounding excitement that
fills her veins. Timidly she looks up, to find a gentleman who stands,
allowing her to take his seat. She trembles as her hand brushes against
his coat; momentarily she closes her eyes to allow his presence to fill
her. Her fingers long to touch his, but precaution restrains temptation.
Wisely she waits for the train to stop. Departing the carriage like a
bird taking flight, he follows like a moth attracted to the flame.
Together they enter a lift, when alone at last restraint falls from the
hand like a misplaced glove. The first touch, the kiss and embrace is
passion defined. She is an heiress, awaiting her fortune, to be disowned
if found in his presence. He is a man of no consequence, with everything
to gain and nothing to lose. She is Kate and he is Merton and when their
lust is forbidden, a way is found to find a fortune to fulfil their
communion.
There is another, her eyes are sad. An orphan who has everything in life
except for one true love, and nothing in death, except a wealthy
inheritance to fall where true love lies. Life has cursed her with frail
health and death bids his time at her doorstep. Her gift to the world is
her choice to see the good in all, and generosity is her mantle piece.
So these sad eyes fall on a man of no consequence and to him she bestows
her parting gift, for she can only see the good in him. She is Millie
and he is Merton. When death comes on raven wings to this sweet child,
regret and sorrow fills the man who deceived innocent love. For nothing
can lift his heinous crime except for the wings of the dove.
Reflections on The Wings of the Dove' by TMT Voon.
This movie is beautifully crafted and almost flows like poetry. The
hauntingly sad tale carries with it complex issues about love and
betrayal. Helena Bonham Carter is exquisite as the passionate Kate, who
devises the plan to obtain Millie's fortune. Linus Roache plays Merton,
the man who agrees to win Millie's affections and thus her inheritance,
before being filled with despair for having partaken of the evil deed.
Lastly, Allison Elliot plays the role of Millie, the dying heiress whose
trusting belief in others is abused by the aforementioned. This is a
touching story, which may not be appreciated by all, but is a
wonderfully acted and performed piece of cinema. Well worth watching.
Timothy Voon
e-mail: stirling@netlink.com.au
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Tim+Voon
http://www.labyrinth.net.au/~bouclier/week/movies.html

Author
Walter Frith
A number of people who read my reviews have recently contacted me and
asked why I changed my rating system in my recent reviews of 'Firestorm'
and 'The Boxer' from five stars to four.  They mentioned to me that they
preferred the five star system and suggested that I return to it.  I
guess if something isn't broken, it shouldn't be fixed, as the old
saying goes, so, I will return to the five star rating system I am
humbly known for.  An now, on with the review.....
A division of society's classes has always offered the opportunity for
great film making.
'The Wings of the Dove' is based on the novel by Henry James and is
adapted for the screen by Hossein Amini and is set in the Victorian era,
1910 to be exact, and tells a very subtle story of poverty's desperation
striving for notoriety and a better way of living.  The book is actually
set closer to the turn of the century but is moved forward a few years
to 1910, perhaps as an attempt to show the more slowly eroding
traditions of the 19th century in terms of honour and tradition to the
very different social trends the 20th century would bring.
Two British lovers, Kate and Merton (Helena Bonham Carter and Linus
Roache) star in this rather cold yet meaningful study of morality and
conscience.  Kate's mother is deceased and her father is a hopeless
alcoholic living in the excesses of poverty.  Through the course of
their relationship in the film, they meet a young American girl named
Millie (Alison Elliott) whom they discover is dying from a disease that
is undisclosed to the audience.  They find that she is quite wealthy.
She meets Merton and later asks Kate what kind of man he is since she is
aware they know each other but never counting on the plot that is
devised against her by the two of them.  Kate and Merton plot for him to
marry Millie, suspecting and almost certainly counting on the fact that
she will leave her money to him upon her death and Kate and Merton can
finally be together enjoying a better way of life.  As the film moves
on, all the characters eventually know more or less what is happening.
The picture is nurtured and given a very gentle tone courtesy of
director Iain Softley who allocates a great amount of detail to the
overall quality and outcome of the film.  Helena Bonham Carter has won
virtually every major critic's award for this film and she has a good
shot at the Academy Award.
The Victorian era is paid tribute to in a very flattering manner as
everything from the costumes to the set design and the moody photography
is given great attention.
'The Wings of the Dove' runs a surprisingly short 108 minutes but
because it is such a laid back film with ongoing dialogue that is never
boring and is the type of story that is always interesting to watch, it
may have done its service as a short but satisfying offering to the
medium of film..
Visit 'FILM FOLLOW-UP' by Walter Frith at:
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) Sometimes I find 19th century British costume dramas a
little hard to relate to. It's not the time or the distance, it's the
rules and conventions of a social class that deserves resentment rather
than sympathy. Yet somehow, the movies are all well made and I always
get caught up in the story. 
THE WINGS OF THE DOVE fits the pattern. 
Kate (Helena Bonham Carter) and Merton (Linus Roache) are in love.
Merton, a newspaper writer, would like to marry Kate. But Kate's "job",
if you will, is to be a member of the British upper class. Her father
lost all of her family's money, but a wealthy aunt agreed to take care
of her until she married a nice rich man. Naturally, a newspaper
writer's wages don't count as "rich." 
Kate leads him on, but she always ends up giving him the cold shoulder,
ultimately because he's not marriageable. 
Kate's American friend Millie (Alison Elliot) stops in for a visit on
her way to Venice. At a party, Millie catches a glimpse of Merton and
likes what she sees. Kate realizes that if Merton were introduced to
Millie, he might forget about her. It appears that she is trying to
spare him from the heartbreak of their inevitable breakup. Merton sees
what Kate is doing and resents her for it. He is still in love with
Kate, and will accept no substitute. 
The three of them, along with a fourth friend (Elizabeth McGovern) end
up on holiday in Venice together, where their interactions are quite
complicated. Let's sum up: Millie has fallen for Merton. Merton has no
feelings for Millie because he is still in love with Kate. Kate loves
him but can't marry him, so on the one hand she's trying to match him up
with someone who will make him happy, but on the other hand she's
jealous of them as a couple. 
A clear solution presents itself to Kate when she realizes that Millie
is very sick - dying, in fact. At this point she decides that Merton
should marry Millie until she dies. Millie will leave her money to
Merton, who will then be rich enough to marry Kate. She lets Merton know
of her schemes and, since it will help him win Kate, he reluctantly
agrees. 
Kate leaves Venice so that the two M's can be alone together. Merton
finds that pretending to love Millie is a lot like actually loving her.
He's not sure he can separate the two. Kate finds that she's not so sure
she really wants her Merton falling in love with and marrying anyone
else. The brilliant scheme proves to be painful to all involved. Without
revealing the details, suffice it to say that the situation ends badly.
The title refers to the object of Merton's vain hope that something
might lift him from his predicament. 
One is left with feelings of regret and despair. What started as such a
promising relationship was damaged by greed, anger, and jealousy. An
interesting thought struck me after the movie was over, and that is that
THE WINGS OF THE DOVE almost fits the story line of a film noir. A
Couple conspires to cheat someone out of their money so they can live
happily ever after. Their involvement in the deception makes each less
attractive to the other, and after a few things go wrong, the whole idea
seems like an awful life-ruining mistake. I wouldn't call THE WINGS OF
THE DOVE a film noir, but the comparison is interesting. 
As I have acknowledged before, I am not a wonderful judge of acting, but
I liked the performances from Roache and Elliot. Roache successfully
conveyed his character's ambivalence toward Millie: near the end, he
hugs her, at first staring into space, as if he's thinking about his
plan with Kate, then giving that up to fully embrace Millie. Millie's
part didn't require as much range, but Elliot gave her the necessary
bubbly personality that made her irresistible. 
I will probably file away THE WINGS OF THE DOVE in the same low-traffic
corner of my mind as SENSE AND SENSIBILITY and PERSUASION. Their
settings are far removed from my personal experience - geographically,
historically, and socially. Still, the movies are well made and the
stories inevitably win me over.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Homer Yen
Whenever I watch a film that boasts period costume pieces and whose
central characters are primarily English aristocrats, rest assured
that the core of the movie will be a heavy-minded drama.  Frequently,
the story focuses on elements of debauchery and deception.  The burden
of relaying the fears and joys and tension that inevitably exists lies
not only on the shoulders of the characters and their ability to
involve us in the story, but also on how the movie skillfully unfolds
itself to reveal the characters' motivations and intentions.  Here,
the cast does a fine job in reaching out to our emotions, but the
movie unfolds too quickly, which tells us too much too soon.
Set in the early 20th century, we meet up with Kate Croy (Helena
Bonham Carter), who is secretly engaged to Merton Densher (Linus
Roache), an underpaid writer and commonfolk.  Kate is under the care
of her wealthy socialite Aunt, who adamantly insists that she marry a
man of higher standing.  If not, the Aunt will not only cut her off
from her generosity, but will also cease to support Kate's father, who
has fallen onto hard times.  Kate has what amounts to a tenuous
foothold in society, but her heart belongs to Merton.  She has a
burning love, but no money.  
Kate eventually befriends a very wealthy, American girl.  Millie
Theale (Alison Elliott) is a lonely American heiress who has money but
no love.  She is also dying from a rare ailment, which reinforces her
drive to find love before her death.  As Kate and Millie continue to
bond, Kate sees that this doe-eyed girl may hold the key to breaking
free from her Aunt's rule.  With the help of Merton, they formulate a
dastardly and unforgivable plan.  But they are scoundrels of love, and
it is this kind of delicious balance that gives it dramatic juice,
allowing the characters to be simultaneously tender and cruel.
But the sin of the movie didn't rest with the characters; rather, it
rested with the movie itself.  Within the first 30 minutes, it told us
everything that we needed to know.  But as the film moved into its
final 60 minutes, when the three main characters decide to take a
vacation in Venice, it seems as if we go along with them as
vacationers as well.  Progress is slow, and the meaty scenes become
heavily interspersed with scenic shots of the Basillica, street café's
and the Venetian waterways.  Also, the direction of the film looked
and felt more like a stage play rather than a cinematic offering.  And
since we know where the story is heading, we are on cruise control for
much of the film until the final few scenes where any remaining
conflict is resolved.
The Wings of the Dove has a lush yet aching beauty that is both visual
and dramatic.  Also, Helena Bonham Carter brings to her role an
incredible sense of maturity as a woman who is as earnest as she is
conniving (Best Actress Oscar contender).  Despite this bold effort by
all, the award for 'greatest effort' will ultimately go to the
audience member who must sit with their legs crossed as they patiently
wait for this film to end.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Miramax  Films/Renaissance Dove Productions
 Director:  Iain Softley
 Writer:  Hossein Amini from the Henry James novel
 Cast: Helena Bonham Carter, Linus Roache, Alison Elliott,
Elizabeth McGovern, Charlotte Rampling
   During the working week, the subways of New York City--
and presumably those of other urban centers--are filled with
people of all types.  "Suits" are conspicuous enough: those
middle-class executives and salespersons hustling around
town making their appointments; while more youthful students
boisterously ride the rails with an assortment of panhandlers,
and preachers. And yet to see Kate (Helena Bonham Carter)
straphanging in the British Underground circa 1910 as the
opening scene of "The Wings of the Dove" is nothing short of
astonishing, serving quite well to set the tone for the entire
work.  Kate is dressed as a member of London's upper crust. 
She appears immediately to be "slumming"--as though curious
about the manners of the lower orders, even eager to arrange
a liaison with one of its constituents.  The initial minutes of
this genuinely satisfying film of class and caste are its most
startling, as Kate catches the eye of a handsome lower
middle-class fellow, Merton Densher (Linus Roache), follows
him silently up the lift leading to the street, and spontaneously
embraces and passionately kisses the object of her lust.  We
know from that point that we're in for a thoroughly
contemporary adaptation of this, one of James's lesser,
novels, which takes flight with Hossein Amini's reworking and
Iain Softley's comeback direction.
   As portrayed deftly by the excellent Helena Bonham Carter,
Kate is caught between passion and security.  It's the old
story, perhaps one of the six basic themes of all literature. 
The alluring young woman has one foot planted in the 19th
century, a twenty-something plotter who has been taken in
after her mother's death by her fabulously rich and socially
conservative Aunt Maud (Charlotte Rampling).  Her other
foundation is purely twentieth-century, a liberated female
determined to follow her appetites even when her lusts
threaten her new and very appealing social standing.
   In essence, we are shown a high-minded, intelligent version
of the Eternal Triangle.  Kate is loved by Lord Mark (Alex
Jennings), a bored, alcoholic, albeit witty member of the upper
echelons whom Maud has chosen for Kate's future husband. 
Kate, however, is in love with a commoner, however
intelligent, one Merton Densher (Linus Roache), who argues
for class reform and publishes opinion pieces in a London
newspapers about such matters as the evils of the medical
profession.  Their clandestine meetings take on new meaning
upon the arrival of Millie (Alison Elliott), a gorgeous and very
rich young American, who is on a grand tour of Europe and is
condoned by Maud's circle of snobs as one of them, a woman
who would be "Queen of America" is that country had such a
position.  When Kate learns that Millie--also in love with
Merton--is dying, she conspires to arrange a marriage
between Millie and Merton, assuming that the latter would
inherit a fortune upon the death of his new wife.  Kate and
Merton could then marry and live happily ever after, their
need for love and money both entirely satisfied.
   To the film's credit, the surprising conclusion is in no way
prettified, an ending which is altogether Jamesian in capturing
the irony of the situation.  We are reminded immediately of
this year's other highly successful adaptation of the Henry
James novel of "Washington Square," in which a suitor,
having flown from the affections of a shy and trusting partner,
returns years later upon hearing that his former steady has
accumulated a satisfactory inheritance.  
   Linus Roache and Helena Bonham Carter, both exceptional
performers, make the sparks fly and in one explicit sexual
situation, Carter poignantly exhibits her torn feelings about a
man she is no longer sure she trusts.  The key figure of Millie
is played with American gusto by Alison Elliott, whose
exuberance despite illness contrasts auspiciously with the
jaded manner of a declining Eurotocracy.  "Wings of the
Dove" is more satisfying than "Washington Square," even
while a bit less accessible to an American audience, given
director Softley's ability to communicate the more intricate
complexities of life among the pre-World War I elite.
Rated R.  Running Time: 103 minutes.  (C) 1997
Harvey Karten

Author
Ivana Redwine
Starring: Helena Bonham Carter, Linus Roache, Alison Elliott, Elizabeth
McGovern, Charlotte Rampling. Directed by Iain Softley. Written by Henry
James (novel), Hossein Amini (screenplay). Cinematography by Eduardo Serra
(II). Music by Ed Shearmur. Production Design by John Beard. Costume Design
by Sandy Powell (II).  Film Editing by Tariq Anwar. MPAA Rating R. Running
Time 101 Minutes.
THE WINGS OF THE DOVE is a tragic romance and a powerful film about the
painful personal prices that are sometimes paid for passion. I highly
recommend this movie as one of the most entertaining and emotionally
satisfying films of the year. A lavish costume drama with exquisite
production values, this moving story of friendship, love, and betrayal is
set in the early 20th century in the glamorous and cinematically lush world
of London drawing rooms and Venetian palazzos. The story centers around a
complex young woman named Kate Croy (Helena Bonham Carter) and her doomed
love for Merton Densher (Linus Roache). The acting in the film is superb in
general, and in particular, Bonham Carter's performance is extraordinary
and seems likely to win her an Oscar nomination.
The film is loosely based on Henry James' novel, but admirers of that great
writer should be warned that the sensibilities of the movie are not
entirely faithful to those of the book--for example, the film shows that
Kate and Densher have a steamy extramarital sexual relationship. And in
many other ways the characters in the movie seem strikingly modern compared
with those in the novel. Such liberties are partially justified by setting
the film around 1910, which is about ten years later than the time frame of
the book. Also, the film adaptation streamlines James' story to fit the
confines of the leaner form of the screenplay, making the movie less
cerebral and complex than the novel, while shifting the story's focus to
its emotional aspects. But the screen adaptation succeeds brilliantly in
finding those elements of the book that translate well to the visually
aggressive and emotionally immediate medium of film. The result is a
compelling and accessible movie that is not just for Henry James fans or
for the costume drama crowd--it's a movie for anyone who enjoys getting
caught up in the sweep of a passionate drama.
Bonham Carter imbues the story's main character Kate Croy with a spectrum
of emotions that makes her almost impossible to completely figure out. At
times Kate is almost as coolly cynical and selfishly scheming as a
film-noir heroine. But although Kate makes cynical decisions, it is not
clear whether she is a selfish monster or a victim who has been corrupted
by the cynicism of the society that surrounds her. She is a character who
at first inspires sympathy which later becomes mixed with disdain. I think
this adds resonance to her character, and as is often the case with
fictional characters who have substantial psychological depth, much of the
fascination lies in the fact that she is neither completely bad nor
completely good.
When the story opens, Kate's mother has died recently and her
opium-addicted father is living in poverty. Kate has been taken in by her
wealthy socialite aunt who is intent on matching her with a suitable
husband of appropriate wealth and social standing. The aunt forbids Kate to
see her father, fearing his negative influence on her will hurt her chances
for a good marriage. To complicate matters further, Kate is passionately in
love with Merton Densher, a young journalist who can barely support
himself. Kate's aunt also forbids her to see Densher, forcing her to meet
him secretly in such unlikely places as an elevator in the London
Underground. Kate is in the nearly impossible situation of being torn
between her love for Densher and her fear of being cut off financially by
her aunt. To make matters worse, her father is also being supported by her
aunt in return for his staying away from Kate. Thus, it is more than
destitution that Kate fears--she is afraid her aunt's wrath will hurt her
father. 
Kate's dream of being able to openly be with the man she loves seems all
but impossible. But things change when Millie Theale (Alison Elliott), a
wealthy American heiress, enters the glittering social scene. Kate soon
learns that Millie harbors a tragic secret: The heiress suffers from a
fatal disease and is not expected to live much longer. Based on this
information, Kate devises a desperate scheme that she hopes will allow her
to end her financial dependence on her aunt and marry Densher. Since I
don't want to spoil the story for those not familiar with it, I'll say no
more about how all this plays out, but I will say that things come out
quite a bit differently from what I think most people will expect. 
In my opinion, Bonham Carter's performance steals the show, but there are
also other strong performances. As Kate's aunt, Charlotte Rampling has just
the right touch of icily patrician villainy. Linus Roache takes on a
difficult role with Merton Densher--he plays a man weak enough to be putty
in the hands of a manipulative woman, yet he manages to project enough
masculine appeal to make it credible that women like Kate and Millie would
be in love with him. And although Alison Elliot does not have the kind of
patrician looks that would make her perfect for the part of Millie Theale,
she brings to the role the kind of luminosity and innocence that makes her
portrayal come to life.
The gorgeous cinematography--which includes stunning location shooting in
Venice, Italy--heightens the film's impact while adding additional layers
of subtle meaning. I interpreted the seductive appeal of the visual
opulence of some of the imagery as a metaphor paralleling the hedonistic
influences that helped to shape the actions of Kate, Densher, and Millie. I
thought that the cinematography's lushness was the perfect way to
illustrate luxury's sensual lure. Especially effective was the scene in
which Millie and Kate walk through an exhibition hall where the works of
the Viennese artist Gustav Klimt are being exhibited. Klimt's paintings
brilliantly foreshadow the sensual richness and passionate sexuality of
much of what is about to unfold in the film. I was also particularly
impressed by the lyrical, innovative, and silkily smooth visual transitions
between the scenes; they reminded me of the facile, poetic complexity of
Henry James' prose style.
One thing the film did that struck me as incredibly powerful was to show
just how much Kate has to lose by contrasting the world of wealth and
privilege with the world that she is likely to descend to if she does not
obey her aunt's wishes. In one stunning scene, Kate sneaks out to slip her
father an expensive piece of jewelry her aunt had presented her as a gift.
Kate gives the necklace to a woman standing at the door of an opium den
that her father patronizes. The camera then provides a glimpse of the den's
dark and ominous interior, which is tinged with a nightmare's horror. Much
later, near the end of the film, comes another powerful scene, similar in
its feeling of heartbreak, when Kate makes love with Densher in his small,
stark London apartment. The treatment of this scene is anything but
romantic; it is a scene of desperation and tragedy. Both Bonham Carter and
Roache are unforgettable here as two people whose love for each other has
been poisoned by what they have done and the kind of people they have
become.
The psychological and intellectual depth of Henry James' stories have
proven irresistible to filmmakers during the past couple of years, and THE
WINGS OF THE DOVE is the third recent major movie to have been adapted from
the great writer's novels, the other two being THE PORTRAIT OF A LADY and
WASHINGTON SQUARE. While all three are films of high quality, it seems
probable that general contemporary audiences will like THE WINGS OF THE
DOVE better than the other two, although some Henry James devotees will
never be able to get past the fact that great liberties were taken in
adapting this classic work to the screen. 

Author
Duncan Stevens
Helena Bonham Carter either has a pact with the devil or some very good
friends in the makeup business, as she's been playing the same
role--passionate impetuous girl defies societal mores-- for more than a
decade now. "Room with a View" was, if I remember correctly, 1985, and the
intervening years have featured her in "Howards End", "Enchanted April,"
and the Zeffirelli "Hamlet" as a rather assertive Ophelia, among others.
Though her character is inevitably in her late teens or early twenties,
she didn't seem young for the part when she started, and certainly doesn't
seem too old to play the central character in Iain Softley's "Wings of the
Dove," recently released. Perhaps more importantly, she gives each role
life in ways that typecast actors or actresses sometimes don't--each part
has its own peculiar motivations and quirks--and her performance is
perhaps the best thing about "Dove."
That, however, is somewhat faint praise, because this film is something of
a mess. The third recent adaptation of a Henry James novel, "Wings of the
Dove" tackles a work whose drama is arguably more psychological than that
of "Washington Square" or "Portrait of a Lady" (not that those were
action-packed, but you get the idea), and ends up with a pace so languid
that the whole thing feels in danger of grinding to a halt. The plot is
not particularly complex--Carter, an orphan unable to marry her
impoverished journalist lover because of her patroness aunt's disapproval,
schemes to have him inherit the fortune of an ailing, naive American
heiress--and the film relies on the talents of the leads to hold the
audience's interest. But though Carter is up to the task, with flashing
eyes, pouty lips, and intimations of a hot temper, the other two underplay
their parts. Linus Roache of "Priest" is the lover imprisoned by his
conscience and torn by two different attachments, but very little of it is
actually apparent; the best word to describe his expression is "blank." We
can, of course, infer what he's supposed to be thinking, but it might be
nice to get more of a hint of it now and again. And Allison Elliott's
dying heiress seems either too forgiving to be a real character or simply
rather dim, and Elliott never really gives her understandable motivations.
Of course, many a film has ben carried on the strength of one performance,
and Carter's is good enough--but she spends little of the last third of
the film on screen, and the pace consequently drags considerably.
Softley does best when he lets the camera stay on Carter, and he does that
often enough at the beginning, when the film's clear focus is on
developing her character. But when the story turns to the triangle and
Softley wants to point out tensions or problems, he resorts to intrusive
devices--voice-overs, strange camera angles, inexplicably poor
lighting--that distract from the story. After all, a psychological drama
is interesting because of the characters, and holds our attention only if
the characters are compelling; direction that takes the audience's
attention away fromt he performers doesn't help. Particularly emblematic
in that repsect is s scene toward the end, after the heiress' death; yes,
a gondola hearse in Venice is a striking picture, but it also might have
been nice to get a look at Roache during that scene, even if all we're
going to get is more blankness. There are some skillful moments, notably
one where Carter and Raoche pass each other in a stairwell and the camera
trades angles repeatedly, but Softley calls attention to himself too
often. Perhaps the worst example is the transition from the clinic where
Elliott goes for treatment--Softley makes the transition out of the scene
by zooming in on an object and turning it into another object in a new
scene, but the new scene has nothing to do with anything and serves only
as a flimsy transition into an entirely different scene. Clever camerawork
is all very well, but it should aid, not impede, the story.
"Wings of the Dove" certainly looks good. The pitch for a costume design
Oscar is fairly obvious (how often does costume design make it into the
opening credits?) and it even seems that Carter's elaborate dresses and
hats become shabbier as her spirits sink. One particularly well-mounted
sequence follows the three in a pair of gondolas through a long series of
tunnels: there, and elsewhere, the languid quality of the life the people
lead translates well into the feel of the film itself.
As with "Washington Square," the story here centers on ambiguous
motivations, and the ambiguity gives the drama whatever force it has. But
the problem here is that the chemistry between Carter and Roache is less
than strong, and thus it wouldn't feel particularly significant if their
relationship took an unexpected turn. Put another way, his commitment to
her seems lukewarm from the beginning--perhaps there's supposed to be
something there that Roache's underacting doesn't convey--and a change in
his affections doesn't feel like all that dramatic a development. The
erotic element of their relationship, though it gets a lot of camera
time--starting with a scene in an elevator in Carter's dream in the
beginning, a scene which she (in her own dream) halts--is not particularly
well developed, and if the intent was to portray unbridled passion, it
doesn't quite work (and it's hardly what James had in mind). One scene
where Carter is bewailing her separation from Roache gets a gratuitous
little touch when the camera moves from her to the empty pillow next to
her and stays there, as it to say "Ha! That's what this is REALLY about!"
But the story is more interesting as a tale of three characters struggling
to understand each other than as a collection of frustrated desires, and
the quasi-erotic bits that Softley throws in are not highlights.
Paradoxically, though, the one sex scene in the film is done with some
intelligence--it isn't interchangeable with any other such scene, for one
thing-- and captures something of the rift between the characters
involved. Even if the idea of depicting such a scene would have been
anathema to James, it does provide a measure of resolution.
"Wings of the Dove" is certainly not a dreadful film; there are some
memorable scenes and some snappy dialogue, and Carter's performance is
consistently strong. But even at 105 minutes, relatively short these days,
it feels long and drawn-out; it often takes three scenes to convey what
could have been done in one. Whatever its merits, the appeal of "Dove"
will likely be lost on all but the most die-hard of period piece fans.
The room is as you left it; your last touch--
A thoughtless pressure, knowing not itself
As saintly--hallows now each simple thing,
Hallows and glorifies, and glows between
The dust's gray fingers, like a shielded light.
--from "Interim," by Edna St. Vincent Millay

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Iain Softley
Cast: Helena Bonham-Carter, Linus Roache, Allison Elliott, Elizabeth
McGovern, Michael Gambon
Rated R: Sexuality
by Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
    The Wings of the Dove is a vicarious experience, a film that
instigates more thought than outward reaction. It's a tale of lost love
and death, a film about unhappy people who become even more unhappy in
desperate attempts to make themselves feel better. The characters are
quiet, and they don't always tell each other what they're thinking. It's
a subtle, touching movie, enhanced by some of the best acting of the
year, and by director Iain Softley's striking artistic eye for scenery
and human emotions.
    Helena Bonham-Carter stars as Kate Croy, a young Englishwoman who
lives under the wing of her rich Aunt Maude (Charlotte Rampling). Kate's
life is clearly not what she wants it to be--her idea of fun has nothing
to do with socializing at large, exquisite gatherings at which the
richest individuals in society get drunk and have grand conversations.
She's in love with Merton Densher (Linus Roache), a journalist who
doesn't mesh well with her own social status. Maude insists that they
don't see each other, but Kate can't live with this.
    It's not long before she meets Millie Theale (Allison Elliott), a
dying American heiress. The two become friends, but Kate's intentions
far exceed friendship--her plan includes convincing Merton to seduce
Millie and get her to fall in love with him so that she will leave him
all of her money. This will leave Merton a rich man and therefore in the
appropriate social class for Kate to marry him.
    Carter gives a deep, brooding performance as Kate; her struggles are
what makes this film such a ponderous experience. Here we have a woman
who loves a man so much that she implores him to do something that, at
first glance, is a truly awful piece of manipulation. The trick is that
Kate actually cares very much for Millie, but her love for Merton is
much stronger. Kate is not a hateful woman, but she is as unhappy as
they come. Her love for Merton is all that keeps her going, and this
plot she contrives serves not to make her better, but to hurt the people
involved. Carter's work here is strikingly good; she evokes the kind of
sexual and emotional passion that is rarely associated with this
seemingly serene time period of the early 1900s, and the outcome is a
character who is somehow always sympathetic, even in her worst moments.
    Linus Roache is very strong as Merton, though his character is the
one who speaks the least. His intentions and thoughts are not always
apparent, but little subtleties in his language and facial expressions
tell the audience exactly what it wants to know. Allison Elliott gives
the film's best performance as the rich American girl, an person so
frayed and ruined by her disease that pity is the last thing she
wants--she doesn't even tell her friends that she is sick. The
relationships between these people are always under examination, and
constantly changing. What they go through is nothing short of mental
torture.
    Softley's direction, mixed with the John Beard's breathtaking
production design and Eduardo Serra's cinematography, make The Wings of
the Dove one of the most attractive pictures of the year; it's a film
seamless in period detail and mood. Softley also does some subtle things
with the camera--watch carefully the final scene between Kate and
Merton. Moments like this are what I love to see in movies. The Wings of
the Dove is one of those films that makes you think for a long time
after it's finished; only then can the power and depth of this story and
these people be completely understood.
