Title
Review for T-Rex: Back to the Cretaceous (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
David Sunga
Ingredients: Young girl ignored by her father, daydreaming, dinosaurs,
meteor shower, 3-D vistas, landscapes, effects
Synopsis:
In this 3-D (IMAX) film, a girl named Ally (Liz Stauber) is ignored by
her paleontologist father Dr. Hayden (Peter Horton) who works at a
dinosaur museum. One day, she visits him while he is working after
hours. Ally gets lost in the big museum and has daydreams in which she
sees real dinosaurs and meets up with historical figures in dinosaur
research who encourage her to form her own theories.
Opinion:
Kids under 5 might find big animals too scary, and kids over 13 might
not identify with the main character, but children of grade school age
will probably like T-REX: BACK TO THE CRETACEOUS because the movie's
gigantic dinosaurs and breathtaking landscapes really come alive with
the 3-D effects and huge screen. It's a good chance for a family outing.
No, this isn't one of those action packed Jurassic Park sequels where
hapless folks get chomped and stomped by oversized forbears of modern
birds. T-REX: BACK TO THE CRETACEOUS is a children's educational flick.
The plot is more like the kind you see on public television afterschool
specials where some kid has wonderful imaginary adventures and learns a
lot, too. The theme music can be a bit repetitive, and the fragmented
daydreams don't offer much suspense, but for its young educational crowd
T-REX: BACK TO THE CRETACEOUS is satisfying enough.
In general 3-D movie-making has a lot of untapped potential, despite
idiosyncrasies. On the negative side, directors can't do as many
fade-ins and fade-outs because it would make the audience too dizzy, and
so you would have to do the whole film with only a few main locations.
But on the plus side, 3-D would be an ideal medium for suspense films.
Headphones are used by the audience members, so the music and targeted
sound effects can be very sophisticated. And instead of using weird
camera angles (a la Alfred Hitchcock) you can create instant suspense by
showing the stalker's point of view, as he crawls around 3-D objects and
the music ratchets up the tension. Not to mention how in 3-D a direct
attack jumps right out at you. Given the targeted music and visual
angles, imagine how terrifying SILENCE OF THE LAMBS might be, especially
the scene where Jody Foster navigates the dark room where the killer is
stalking her. At any rate, advances in 3-D movie-making are something to
look out for in the future. 
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
T-Rex: Back to the Cretaceous (1998)
Peter Horton, Liz Stauber, Kari Coleman, Laurie Murdoch, Tuck Milligan. 
Screenplay by Andrew Gellis and Jeanne Rosenberg, based on a story by 
Gellis and David Young. Music by William Ross. Produced by Antoine Compin 
and Charis Horton. Directed by Brett Leonard. 45 minutes.
NR, 4 stars (out of five stars) 
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
Remember the scene in "Jurassic Park" where a character avoids becoming 
human sushi by standing perfectly still, even as the massive head of a 
mighty Tyrannosaurus Rex looms mere inches from his own? In the Imax 
feature, "T-Rex: Back to the Cretaceous," you get to be that character, 
with an incredibly realistic 3-D thunder lizard baring its teeth so close 
to your face that you can almost feel its hot breath on your cheeks.
"T-Rex: Back to the Cretaceous," offers the most effective use of 3-D and 
the best special effects of any Imax production to date. For those who 
marvel at dinosaurs, this is an absolute must-see. That said, the 
production suffers from the same liabilities that have hobbled previous 
Imax 3-D offerings. Wafer-thin plotlines, underdeveloped characters and 
too many stodgy educational sequences are hallmarks of Imax movies, and 
the features still play more like engaging novelties than fully-
satisfying films. 
Going to an Imax movie is a lot like visiting any exhibit at Disney's 
Epcot theme park. In exchange for a few minutes of razzle-dazzle, you 
must submit to long stretches of scholastic force-feeding. Please 
understand, I'm all for learning, but at $8 for a 45-minute movie, the 
emphasis should firmly be on entertainment. In the case of "T-Rex," that 
translates into a strong craving for more dinosaurs and less paleontology.
Director Brett Leonard ("The Lawnmower Man," "Virtuosity") uses 
spectacular 3-D effects to inject as much excitement as possible into the 
tepid story of the strained relationship between obsessed paleontologist 
Donald Hayden (Peter Horton) and his neglected daughter, Ally 
(Indianapolis native Liz Stauber). During an early scene at an 
archeological dig, rock fragments fly straight into the face of the 
audience. The effect was so convincing that it sent a brave six-year-old 
sitting next to me diving under his seat for cover. 
Another shot of a woman dropping 35 feet down the side of a cliff also 
maximizes the 3-D effect. The cast worked without stunt doubles and actor 
Kari Coleman noted "All I could think about when we were doing that stunt 
fall was 'Boy, people will be sitting in an Imax theater seeing my rear 
end six stories high just coming at them in 3-D.'"
The big find from the dig is a fossil that may just be a Tyrannosaurus 
egg. That's the hope of young Ally, who wants to prove her theory that 
dinosaurs were the ancestors of today's birds. More importantly, the girl 
is sick of being left at the museum and dreams of the day when her 
preoccupied pop will finally give her the attention and respect she 
deserves.
After way too much filler, we finally get to the good stuff when Ally 
knocks the fossil to the floor and the object cracks, emitting a 
mysterious dust. Strange things begin to happen around Ally in the 
darkened museum. First, a T-Rex skeleton comes to life, turning to roar 
right into the camera. The magic continues as Ally wanders into various 
dinosaur exhibits, traveling through time to see the real thing.
Between visits with a couple of historical figures, the young woman 
encounters a number of dinosaurs, beautifully rendered in the most 
convincing computer graphics this side of Steven Spielberg. A Pteranodon 
swoops in front of our faces, impressively flapping its huge leathery 
wings. An Ornithomimus, looking like the mischievous kid brother of a 
raptor, snatches an egg from the nest of T-Rex, triggering an angry 
response from a protective T-Rex mama. The climax comes when a meteor 
screams down from the heavens, triggering the death knell of the giant 
lizards and the beginning of the Ice Age.
The 3-D dinosaur scenes are perfectly realized and incredibly cool. If 
only there were more of them. Sure, computer graphics are expensive, but 
the Imax folks can certainly afford the costs. Less educational 
exposition, a better storyline and more dinosaur scenes would have made 
"T-Rex: Back to the Cretaceous" the event of the season. As is, the 
feature is still a hoot, but you'll likely find yourself fidgeting right 
along with the kids as you wait for the film to kick into high gear. 
