Title
Review for Weekend at Bernie's II (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     For me WEEKEND AT BERNIE'S was precisely the right film at the right
time since I usually find it difficult to sleep on an airplane.  What I saw-
--a total of about ten or fifteen minutes--seemed like mis-fire humor.  A
lot of it was the same joke--abuse of a dead body--ad nauseum.  When I saw
that the sequel was being made I said, "They'd have to pay me to go see
that."  Then a friend who gets paid by the distributor to count audiences
asked Evelyn and me to cover for her.  That fulfilled the condition.  This
time I stayed awake, and while I cannot say I thought it was a genuinely
good film, it would be about average for cable fare (which is pretty much my
definition of a zero rating--+1 is average for a theatrical release).
     Robert Klane once again wrote and directed.  Terry Kiser again played
the corpse.  I suspect in the first film Kiser had little opportunity to do
much in the line of physical comedy.  This time around, however, Bernie has
been subjected to a voodoo ceremony that went wrong and he gets to return as
a zombie whenever music with a strong beat is playing.  His almost animated
body is probably the best thing about this film.  Certainly inferior is the
acting of Andrew McCarthy and Jonathan Silverman as the two cretins who are
stuffing the body into suitcases, dragging it down stairs, banging its head
around, and in general having the scene stolen from them by a mostly
inanimate object.  It seems they have grabbed the corpse and are trying to
use it to get their paws on Bernie's ill-gotten gains.  All the while they
are chased by company detective Hummel (played by Barry Bostwick).
     What can I say that is good about this film?  A few of the gags work,
though many of the jokes that were not funny in the first film are trying
again and failing again in the second.  The opening credit sequence managed
to tell enough of the plot of the first film so that I did not feel lost in
the sequel.  Moving the story to the Virgin Islands ties in with the voodoo
plot and adds some nice scenery.  This film is a time-waster but it managed
to keep me out of trouble for an hour and a half (and awake this time).  I
would rate it a 0, as I said before, on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Dead man seen dancing in a Congo line, picking up date for the
rest of the night, and fighting with her overmuscled boyfriend.  Film
at eleven.
     The original WEEKEND AT BERNIE'S is an incredibly stupid film with
enough off-color, macabre physical comedy to generate some laughs.
It's a perfect VCR film--little or no attention is required to the
plot, you can walk out of the room and come back in without missing
anything, and the reduction of the picture to television size does
nothing to hurt the film.  It's not intuitive to expect a sequel to
this brainless movie, but the original WEEKEND did surprisingly well at
the box-office.  Add to that the results from a big video market and a
second installment became in inevitability.
     Part two, helmed by Robert Klane, the man behind the previous
effort, starts off basically where part one ends.  Bernie (Terry
Kiser), murdered in the original film, is now in the morgue.  The two
idiots (Andrew McCarthy and Jonathan Silverman) who dragged his body
around through the original discover the key to a safety deposit box in
his personal effects.  This starts them on a treasure hunt for the
missing two million dollars that Bernie embezzled from the company.
Also along for the ride is Hummel (Barry Bostwick), the company's
sneering head-of-security, who needs to find the money to save his
job.  Then there's a third group, working for some unnamed criminals,
and using voodoo to animate Bernie's dead corpse so that it will lead
them to the cash.
     Like HOME ALONE 2, WEEKEND AT BERNIE'S 2 is pretty much a re-hash
of the first movie.  You get just about what you expect--two morons
dragging around a dead body (that they use deodorant to "freshen up")
that everyone mistakes as being alive.  There's a girl who spends a
night on the beach with Bernie (no sex--not even this movie is that
off-color) and claims it was the most enjoyable time she's had in a
while.  Of course, the corpse also gets viciously abused in every manner
possible, without ever showing a scratch.  In addition to repeats of
what happened in WEEKEND 1, the body gets stuffed in a suitcase, jammed
into a refrigerator, and shot through the head with an arrow.
     In this movie, the body can move, thanks to a voodoo ceremony
involving a pigeon (replacing a chicken that ran away--smart move on
the chicken's part).  We're treated to numerous scenes in which a
herky-jerky Bernie dances to whatever tune is playing nearby.  However,
when the music stops, the body collapses like a marionette with its
strings cut.
     As was true in WEEKEND 1, the best performance is turned in by
Terry Kiser as the corpse.  That certainly isn't an endorsement of the
abilities of the rest of the cast, but it's a true statement.  Kiser's
sense for physical comedy is good, and he manages to infuse this
otherwise worthless movie with enough energy to keep it out of the
bottom rung of 1993 films.
     WEEKEND AT BERNIE'S 2 is made for a certain audience--the
indiscriminate movie-goer who will see almost anything that guarantees
a few laughs.  Those that belong to that group will find what they're
looking for in this film.  Almost all the humor is macabre and
repetitive, but the film manages to be sporadically funny.
Nevertheless, I find it hard to believe that many people will pay $6 or
$7 to see a picture that has TV sitcom production values, writing, and
acting.
     For those who like movies in which corpses get knocked around and
banged up, yet still manage to be more engaging than the living people
around them, this film will not disappoint.  Also, fans of the original
WEEKEND AT BERNIE'S will probably be satisfied by this latest (and
hopefully last) installment.  Everyone else, especially those who
restrict their film diet to "good" movies, should stay away (not that
many of them would have considered going in the first place).
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
