Title
Review for Przypadek (1982)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Gareth Rees
     A man sits in a chair screaming "No!."  A bloody corpse is dragged
through a hospital corridor.  A young boy, emigrating from Poland, says
goodbye to a friend.  Two young lovers are talking by the side of a
road.  A student doctor is disturbed by watching an autopsy of her
schoolteacher.  A man makes a phone call to his dying father and is
told "you are under no obligation." Krzysztof Kieslowski's film BLIND
CHANCE sets up these mysteries--important events in the life of the
protagonist, Witek--in the first couple of minutes, and then one by
one resolves these initially confusing and isolated fragments into the
story of a man's life (though we are made to wait until the very last
seconds for a final connection to be made).
     Kieslowski has always been fond of formal structuring devices in
his films--the changing cinematic styles of CAMERA BUFF, the separated
twins in THE DOUBLE LIFE OF VERONIQUE, the three colours of the French
flag and the three ideals of the French revolution in his recent
trilogy--and BLIND CHANCE exploits this potential for setting up
comparisons, irony and unexpected connections to the full.  Three times
Witek runs through a railway station, desperate to catch the train to
Warsaw.  Three times we see him run down the platform and reach out his
hand for the door.  Three possible futures await.  In one, he catches
the train, is befriended by a Party member and enters the Communist
Party himself; in another he knocks down a guard, is arrested, makes
connections with an underground movement and becomes Catholic; in the
third he misses the train and returns to his studies, marries and
becomes a successful doctor.  The three films of Witek running through
the station differ in tiny details; in one he knocks a man flying, in
another he just jogs his beer.  From such tiny changes grow the shape
of Witek's life.  Chance seems to have intervened in the lives of other
people in the film: two old Party members were both in prison at the
same time, but now one is in disgrace and the other has a high position
yet insists that it is only good fortune that has put him there.
     But there are constants too.  In each variation he meets a woman
from his past, falls in love with her and is separated from her.  He
wants to do good, to help people, but it's never quite clear to him how
to accomplish this in a country run by secret police, informers and
totalitarian government.  Three times Witek is offered a chance to
visit France--which seems to offer some elusive chance at
salvation--and each time events conspire to prevent him.
     Such is the skill with which the film is structured that, although
it ends in tragedy, the revelation of the last mystery completes the
story so surprisingly and yet so well that we feel, yes, this is right,
it has to end like this.
