Title
Review for żQué he hecho yo para merecer esto?!! (1984)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Edwin Jahiel
WHAT HAVE I DONE TO DESERVE THIS? (Que He Hecho Yo Para 
Merecer Esto?)(Spain,1984*) Written and directed by Pedro 
Almodovar. Cinematography, Angel Luis Fernandez. Art 
direction, Pin Morales, Roman Arango. Editing, Jose Solcedo. 
Music, Bernardo Bonezzi. Cast: Carmen Maura, Angel de 
Andres-Lopez, Veronica Forque, Gonzalo Suarez, Chus Lampreave, 
Juan Martinez, Miguel Angel Herranz, Amparo Soler Leal, Luis 
Hostalot. A Tesauro and Kaktus coproduction, released by 
Cinevista. In Spanish with subtitles. 100 minutes. No rating.
Pedro Almodovar, who has been emerging in the 1980s as the 
naughty boy of Spanish cinema, may baffle you with WHAT HAVE I 
DONE..., but he will also amuse you and instruct you. The 
film's mixed-genre is  something that unsettles habitues of 
commercial spectacles. Although our desire to classify what we 
see makes us wonder where exactly this movie fits (from scene 
to scene--and within scenes --it swings from farce to drama 
and from comedy to tragedy), the unorthodox effects build up 
into a coherent absurdist whole, somewhat like a play by 
Eugene Ionesco.  
Gloria is a woman in her thirties. She would be attractive 
were she not so harried. She lives in a  cramped apartment 
within a monstrous low-cost housing development. Co-existing 
around her is a gallery of individuals, each of whom is    
outrageous in a different way, each of whom is worked into the 
plots and subplots of the movie. 
There's Antonio, the chauvinist pig taxi-driver husband who is 
hung up on German songs by Zarah Leander (the darling of the 
Nazi era) ; who has a talent for imitating handwriting; who 
once forged some letters of Hitler to a mistress, when he 
(Antonio) was a chauffeur in Germany and sleeping with his 
lady employer. 
There's the older son who deals drugs and the younger son who 
goes to bed with his classmate's father. There's Antonio's 
stingy old mother (played with filmic effrontery by a young 
woman in opaque glasses) who's hung up on sweets and mineral 
water ("with  lots of bubbles") and sells part of her stock to 
her son, as needed. 
Across the hall is sexy Cristal, Gloria's only friend and a 
whore. Another neighbor is a seamstress who hates her former 
husband and takes it out on her cherubic little girl. The 
child has telekinetic powers.
If movies had a face, this one would have a deadpan 
expression. In a series of off-the-wall crises, the film 
proceeds imperturbably, treating the most outlandish or 
immoral events in casual fashion. Ill-husbanded Gloria, long 
on household slavery and short on household  money, also works 
as a cleaning woman. She pops uppers to steady her nerves. As 
the picture opens, she has a sexual encounter of the LAST 
TANGO IN PARIS school. Later, one of her husband's fares who 
also  happens to be one of Cristal's clients, hires her for 
himself and his brother. The man is a failed writer whose wife 
is another failed writer as well as  a kleptomaniac. He 
hatches a plot involving Antonio and another Nazi forgery. His 
brother,  a psychiatrist who ought to be seeing a 
psychiatrist, counsels an impotent police inspector who is in 
and out of everyone's life.  
Gloria lets a pederastic dentist adopt her junior  son so that 
the youngster may have a better life. Grandma adopts a lizard 
and baptizes him "Money," the most important thing in life. 
That's only part of the criss-crossings where each individual 
gets by hook, crook , or  arbitrariness, involved with several 
others, but is hardly involved in any concern for others. It 
takes a while for us to  sort things out  in those concentric 
circles, to realize that the shifting  center of the movie is 
Gloria, to see  that the main point is a feminist one about 
the still-unliberated woman in Spain. Women may have come a 
long way since Franco died, but they still have a much longer 
way to go.
Almodovar, performer, cartoonist, writer and filmmaker, 
conducts his movie like a series of  mad  yet cool 
improvisations. WHAT HAVE I DONE.... may remind you in some 
ways of  underground features, of the work of   American 
director Paul Bartel, of  gonzo journalism, of the dark humor 
of Bunuel and other Spaniards, but it is essentially an 
original work.  
The French New Wave--by now old  but staging a welcome 
comeback via contemporary  imitators in Britain and 
elsewhere--may also come to mind, with for example, 
Almodovar's   asides on top of asides. Some of those are 
obviously relevant. Others are indirectly relevant, like the 
very funny parodies of  neo-Hispanic TV commercials which 
comment on the ludicrousness of the media and the way they 
stultify the public. Others yet (like a man who makes car 
noises) look like inventions that were too good to pass up--so 
why not throw them in? 
As you watch this film, you may go through different stages, 
including one where you think that there's overkill, but keep 
going and the purposes of Almodovar's exaggerations fall into 
place. Paradoxically, as matters become increasingly surreal, 
social criticism becomes increasingly real. I will not reveal 
all the ins and outs of the plot, but when a hambone and 
police investigators get involved, not only does this in with 
the opening sequence in a "kendo" (martial arts) academy, but 
also with a once-famous black humor story by Roald Dahl, first  
printed in the New Yorker magazine many years ago.* 
In keeping with  its subject(s), the film has  provocative 
tastelessness at times, and always a voluntarily garish look, 
from the amateurish  opening credits in strong, primary 
colors, to its defiant use of unsophisticated lighting 
set-ups.  The closing shots of the building complex may or may 
not be a reference to Godard's  denunciation of soulless 
low-cost housing and living in his film ONE OR TWO THINGS I 
KNOW ABOUT HER. But anyone who knows European public housing 
will see the validity of those simple, emblematic images. 
In speech and deed,  there's much bawdiness, with parodistic 
sex scenes and Rabelaisian glee at bodily functions and 
references to them. The subtitles try much too hard to render 
the Spanish slang  into English slang, with unintentionally 
funny results and misspellings: you get sonny for Sony, smak 
for smack, nitwuit, or cryptic things like " my j'ug." 
WHAT I HAVE DONE is not a "finished" product by ordinary 
standards. I say this as a compliment to its 
convention-defying nature ,  to its maverick power, the method 
in its madness, and the consistently ironical view of a world 
which is askew. 
It is certainly one of the most interesting films shown in the 
US in 1988.     
 -------------------------------------------------------
Review written in 1988. 
* 1996 addenda: 
(1) Many sources in US film guides give it erroneously a 1985 
release date. 
(2) The Roald Dahl story and/or its main trick found their way 
into TV programs of the Alfred Hitchcock Presents type, as 
well as in features. 
