Title
Review for Planet of the Apes (1968)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Dragan Antulov
The author of this review has rarely greeted a film with
higher expectation than in the case of original PLANET OF
THE APES. I have been hearing great things about the film
decades before being able to see it for the first time. My
expectations weren't discouraged by the fact that I was able
to see the important Final Scene or with the utter
disappointment in the form of 1970s TV series. When I
finally watched the film for the first time, I was
nevertheless forced to admit that PLANET OF THE APES falls
deep bellow my expectations. Afterwards, when I had the
opportunity to watch the film for the second or third time,
or had the misfortune to watch some of the four sequels, I
managed to have my opinion about the film improved, although
not very much.
The plot of the film is based on the novel by French author
Pierre Boulle who had been fortunate enough to have his
previous work, BRIDGE ON THE RIVER KWAI, turned into one of
the greatest films of all times. In 1968 it seemed that this
happened for the second time - PLANET OF THE APES was the
first science fiction film to transcend the usual fan base
and become an interesting cultural phenomenon of its time.
Genre aficionados later never failed to mention this film as
one of the milestones in the history of science fiction
cinema. For them, THE PLANET OF THE APES is the film that
made an important leap from the realms of genre ghetto into
the world of mainstream cinema, mostly due to employing the
previously escapist genre to talk about important issues of
its time and thus paving the way for the intelligent and
socially conscious brand of science fiction cinema that
would dominate Hollywood until the arrival of Spielberg and
Lucas.
Genre credentials were given to the film by Rod Serling,
famous creator of THE TWILIGHT ZONE, who paired up with
Michael Wilson, screenwriter previously targeted by 1950s
witch-hunts, who would contribute to the plot with his
experiences. The film begins in the U.S. spaceship that is
about to spend thousands of years travelling through space
until it finds a new solar system. The crew, led by Colonel
George Taylor (played by Charlton Heston), is going to spend
much of this time in hyper- sleep before it awakes and start
a new human civilisation on the new planet. The plan,
however, doesn't go as it should be - the only female part
of the crew has died during the travel, the spaceship
crashes into the lake, and Taylor, as well as two of his
companions - Landon (played by Robert Gunner) and Dodge
(played by Jeff Burton) - now must fight for survival on an
alien and presumably hostile planet. However, the crew soon
finds that the planet is populated by a race of humans who
appear to be mute and not very intelligent. It soon appears
that the humans are not the dominant species on the planets
- the real masters are the intelligent apes who hunt and
imprison them. Taylor is the only survivor of the raid, yet
he is shot in the throat and unable to speak when he is
being imprisoned. He is nevertheless peculiar enough to
arouse interest in the chimpanzee scientist Zira (played by
Kim Hunter), as well as her fiance, archaeologist dr.
Cornelius (played by Roddy McDowall). Their interest is
rewarded when Taylor finally manages to establish
communication. But for the authorities, embodied in the
powerful orangutan Dr. Zaius (played by Maurice Evans),
Taylor represents the threat to established order of the
apes' world and therefore has to be eliminated.
Original PLANET OF THE APES might be criticised for many
things, but hardly for not being an entertaining and
thought-provoking science fiction film. From strictly
technical standpoint, the film is more than adequate - the
action scenes are intense, while the architecture, clothes
and artefacts of the ape society still manage to create a
sense of wonder despite having recognisable human origin.
The apes are among the most convincing aliens in the history
of science fiction cinema and the "Oscar" for the make-up is
well deserved. Finally, Schaffner manages to establish the
pace of the movie, keeping it a short, yet giving it an epic
scope, thus giving the feel of "larger than life" film to
the PLANET OF THE APES.
However, the most important element of PLANET OF THE APES
comes in the context that is going to be missed by
contemporary audience. This film is undoubtedly a product of
its time. Created in 1968, one of the most turbulent years
of American history, PLANET OF THE APES was heavily
influenced by the conflicts that threatened to tear American
society apart and end the Western civilisation - the never
ending nightmare of Vietnam War, radicalisation of the race
issue in the era of civil rights and, finally, the
escalating struggle between the new progressive ideas of the
young and conservative order embodied in the old generation.
All those themes - racism, bigotry, and, more than anything
else, human ability to destroy the world - are present in
this film. The script goes even further than the most
radical filmmakers in the era when radicalism used to be the
norm and the sight of protagonist laughing at the sight of
U.S. flag was not the unforgivable atrocity as it is today
(even before WTC massacre, which gave whole new dimension to
the ideals of patriotism). For filmmakers, the mankind is
not only the victim, but also the cause of the evils in this
world. Screenplay cleverly brings this thesis in the
powerful finale, in which all tables are turned. The
protagonist, for whom we were supposed to root for, was
suffering terrible humiliation from the hands of racist and
bigot apes that are supposed to represent all the worst in
humanity. When he is finally free and unconstrained, he
shows his true nature by using violence in order to achieve
his ends, thus justifying his ape oppressors who saw him as
a dangerous freak. In view of this, even the powerful final
scene, which was supposed to clear this point, as not as
powerful as it should be and it could have remained on the
cutting room floor without damaging the film.
Because of this radical departure from dominant
anthropocentric point of view, PLANET OF THE APES was often
seen as one of the most important films in the history of
science fiction genre. However, because it approached the
issues seriously, it also required more scrutiny and this is
exactly the reason why it fails to reach criteria necessary
to be viewed as a truly grand film. While some corners might
be cut in a light-hearted fantasy like STAR WARS, the
"science" in the whole concept of "science fiction" prevents
us from having the proper suspension of disbelief necessary
to truly enjoy this film. There is simply too much of
implausibility for that, ranging from the fact that three
Adams and one Eve would be sent to start new Eden to the
obvious fact that the apes speak perfect English and
understand Latin alphabet, yet our hero still believes that
he is not on Earth. Because of this, what was supposed to be
one of the defining films of 20th Century can be seen as a
trash. This impression is enhanced by the presence of Linda
Harrison, whose character doesn't usher a word during the
whole film and whose acting ability is proportional to the
quantities of textile she is wearing. Her presence in the
film, although at times pleasing to the eyes of male
audience, is almost insulting in the same company with
talented actors like Heston, Kim Hunter, James Whitmore and
especially Roddy McDowall, whose role of Cornelius would
afterwards be one of the rare things worth watching in
sequels and subsequent TV series.
The first incarnation of PLANET OF THE APES is, regardless
of its apparent flaws, a very good film, that could be
enjoyed in appreciated even by those who might not see it
worthy of its cult status.
Review written on September 17th 2001
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
The wonderful thing about Tim Burton's "retelling" of The Planet of the Apes
is that most of the people involved with the original are dead and, thusly,
can't make annoying cameo appearances like we've gotten used to seeing in
the remake genre (who cares if Roddy McDowall plays an ape again if you
can't see his face?).  Sure, Charlton Heston is in it, but he's practically
dead.  His brain is, anyway.  It's a prerequisite for membership in the NRA.
It's been over 30 years since Apes' initial release in 1968, and while the
special effects, which include a barber pole in the spaceship, don't exactly
hold up, the story does, even though it's better suited for something like
The Twilight Zone (in fact, Rod Serling was one of the film's writers).  The
Gen-Xers to whom the new film is targeted probably see the original as a
cheesy sci-fi adventure, thanks to four sub-par sequels (they got worse and
worse) and the lame-o television spin-off that followed.  Sure, it was
cheesy, but the original was so much more than sweaty actors in plastic
monkey suits.  Apes examined difficult issues like bigotry and evolution in
a unique and thought-provoking way, making it a whole lot more interesting
than, say, 95% of the sci-fi films that followed it.
After a brief monologue from Heston (a previous Oscar winner for Ben Hur)
explaining that he and his three-person crew have been traversing space for
hundreds and hundreds of Earth years, his Colonel George Taylor straps
himself into a space-bed with the intention of waking up as his ship
approaches Earth.  But like they so often do, things go wrong.  One of
Taylor's shipmates doesn't survive the journey, and to make matters worse,
the craft has somehow veered off course, leaving the three survivors
believing that they're 320 light years from home.  The ship crashes into a
body of water on a strange planet and quickly sinks just after the men
escape (they don't bother checking the composition of the atmosphere, but
that's just one of the film's many unintentional laughs...like when they
wake up after years of space-sleep with full beards but the same haircut).
It isn't long before Taylor and his men are rounded up, like so many Jews
and Africans, by the apes that control the planet.  While the message isn't
at all blunt (Taylor and crew are White; apes are Black), it's delivered
extremely well.  The monkeys think all humans are filthy, smelly and
disease-ridden, and spray them down with high-powered hoses (the original
was more of a straight role-reversal than the remake). And if the
stereotype-smashing isn't enough for you, there's also a debate on
evolution, in which Drs. Cornelius (Roddy McDowall) and Zira (Kim Hunter)
clash with the old, conservative Dr. Zaius (Maurice Evans).
So the story (written by Serling and Michael Wilson, based on Pierre
Boulle's novel) is cool and the effects are dated - what about the acting?
It's god-awful.  Is there any actor alive capable of overacting like Heston
does here?  He makes Rob Schneider and Troy McClure look like Olivier and
Gielgud.  The highlight of Apes is the 30 minutes that Heston is unable to
speak.
Apes landed Oscar nominations for its costumes and Jerry Goldsmith's
unmistakable score, and won an Honorary Award for the cutting-edge makeup
used to create the apes.  The film's sets are strikingly similar to those
recently seen in the Oscar-nominated Dr. Seuss' How the Grinch Stole
Christmas, and the scarecrows that the apes use to frighten the masses away
from The Forbidden Zone probably inspired the stick man figure from The
Blair Witch Project.  And it was rated G, despite Linda Harrison's skimpy
outfits and the nude swimming scene Taylor shares with his crew before the
apes show them what for.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        "You damn dirty apes!" That's just one of the inadvertenty 
hilarious lines from PLANET OF THE APES that's taken on a comedic 
context over time. No one back then seemed to realize how over-the-
top Charlton Heston's acting style was, but it shows now, particularly 
in this "Mystery Science Theater 3000" wannabe that was taken for a 
film masterpiece in its time, actually winning one Oscar (for makeup, 
no less) and being nominated for a couple others. It also spawned 
multiple sequels like Beneath the Planet of the Apes, 
Escape From the Planet of the Apes, Return of the 
Planet of the Apes, Beneath the Escape from the 
Return of the Planet of the Apes, Planet of the 
Apes: The Next Generation, Police Academy of the 
Apes... the list goes on.
        Heston is an American astronaut who spends a few thousand 
light years in space with his three companions and ends up on a planet 
not too dissimilar from Earth. The thing is, on this planet humans 
can't talk or think and the guys in the gorilla masks are the dominant 
species. Heston's companions are killed or turned into vegetables by 
the apon is imprisoned. He surprises them all with his 
gift of speech, making two primate scientists (Roddy McDowall and 
Kim Hunter) believe Heston is the missing link between ape and man. 
Believe me, we movie critics have been thinking the same thing for 
years.
        When the two apes present the idea before a judicial 
counsel (the head ape being Shakespearean actor Maurice Evans), 
it is received as heresy, for all good monkeys know God "created ape 
in His image." But Heston has already seen a cave that contains 
evidence that humans were originally the dominant species, before 
apes ever gained the ability to speak and run for president. And he 
takes them there, holding up a baby doll and yelling, "If humans 
couldn't speak, then how do you account for this TALKING DOLL?!" 
And how do you account for your acting ability, Mr. Heston?
        The absolute most laughable scene comes with the movie's 
surprise conclusion. I won't reveal the details except to say it involves 
Heston falling to his knees on a beach and yelling "God damn you all 
to hell!" several times in succession. The movie is atrocious and 
should only be viewed by those members of society who like to 
watch bad movies and laugh at them.
        What makes PLANET OF THE APES even more amusing 
is that it was supposed to function as some sort of social irony, a 
condemnation of fundamentals who reject the theories of evolution. 
But let me tell you, if Darwin could see the ape masks and hear the 
rotten dialogue exchanges (HESTON [to female ape]: May I kiss you 
before I go?  APE: But... you're so... ugly.), he'd convert to creationism
on the spot. Luckily for us, science-fiction movies have evolved over 
time to the point at which some of them are actually good.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Mathew Tschirgi
STARRING: CHARLTON HESTON AND RODDY MCDOWALL
There are mainly two groups of science fiction.  One group is primarily action 
based using scientific impossibilities as objects in the story, such as 
INDEPENDENCE DAY, STAR WARS, and EVENT HORIZON.  The other group creates a 
scientifically impossible situation that is resolved by using brains and logic 
rather than brawn and weapons like many of the STAR TREK films, DARK CITY, and 
DR. STRANGELOVE.  PLANET OF THE APES falls in the "brains" category.
It starts with a ship crashing on another planet.  The crew members, which 
include Taylor (CHARLTON HESTON), decide to explore.  This planet seems barren 
until the trio of astronauts discover a race of stupid humans.  Taylor 
comments, "If this is the best they have, we'll have this planet conquered in 
about 6 months."  Soon chaos erupts as a group of gorillas charge forward and 
begin to brutally attack any human they see.  Taylor is trapped on the PLANET 
OF THE APES.  He finds some friends in the form of Cornelius (RODDY MCDOWALL) 
and Zira (Kim Hunter), a pair of chimpanzees devoted to domesticating humans.  
The Head of Science and Religion, Dr. Zaius (Maurice Evans), doesn't wish 
humans and apes to get along however...
This movie won an Honorary Oscar for its detailed make-up effects used on the 
many varieties of apes in the film.  The acting is pretty decent throughout, 
with some exceptions.  Several of the lines are variations on classic humans 
phrases: "Monkey see, monkey do" becoming "Human see, human do" is a decent 
example.  The special effects of the opening sequence leave a lot to be 
desired.  The first 30 minutes of the film are pretty slow, but the film picks 
up as soon as the apes come in and doesn't stop until the surprise ending.
Those who are used to more action-oriented films will probably be bored by 
this movie.  It has a little bit of action here and there, but not enough to 
say that it dominates the whole film.  PLANET OF THE APES is an interesting 
science fiction film that will leave you thinking at the end with its subtle 
commentary on humans as a race.  I give it *** out of ****.
