Title
Review for American Pie (1999)
Number of Reviews
37

Author
Ross Anthony
I took my 17 year old nephew to this flick. (More on that later.)
"Divided we're flawed and weak, but united we ensure our sexual
destinies" -- or something like that. Four senior male buddies make a pact
to lose their respective virginities by the last of their high school days
(i.e. prom night).
It must be impossible to make a teen movie that doesn't somehow wind up at
the prom. There's some huge film-magnet in the punch bowl or something. But
that's forgivable, because this film is bold, funny, charming, uncomfortably
honest at times, and seldom (if ever) boring. The characters are likable,
roughly believable (or obvious caricatures) and played by apt actors.
"American Pie" is well paced. In fact, as the end approaches, you'll want it
delayed because you'll be enjoying the movie that much. Ultimately, the peak
of a film is important and fulfilling; but it's what leads up to the ending
that makes it so. (Could that be why they call it the climax?)
What about all this talk of sex? Inevitably, parents are going to claim that
this movie condones teenage copulation. And, you know what? It actually may.
However, it's also likely that actual teenagers are actually having sex.
This, despite the fact that I was not one of them. And while I think teens
will enjoy this movie, I don't condone teen intercourse. Unless the teens
are paying their own rent or something. Still "American Pie" bent over
backwards to encourage the usage of condoms -- so that is to its credit.
But enough about what I think. My nephew says parents don't need to get all
uppity about how movies make teens feel or act. "There's bound to be some
film next week that has the opposite message. Hey, they're just movies after
all. People are going to do what their going to do ... regardless." He
enjoyed the film.
We went on a Monday night  at 10:10 or something -- the show sold out,
filling the theater with teens who laughed a lot (me too). There were times
I couldn't even hear the response line to a good wisecrack.
(A few days prior, my nephew attempted to see this film with some of his 16
year old buddies. When the attendant denied them access based on the rating,
my nephew remarked, "These (pointing at his buddies) are exactly the people
they made the movie for -- I can't believe you won't let them in!")
Starring Jason Biggs, Shannon Elizabeth, Alyson Hannign. Directed by Paul
Weitz. Screenplay by Adam Herz. Produced by Warren Zide, Craig Perry, Chris
Moore, Chris Weitz at Universal. Rated R.
Grade ......................................... A-
(C) 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted and shot
documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across North
America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com.

Author
Kent Johnson
Well, I did know better, but I was curious, went anyway and I got what I
deserved -- the reaffirmation that I'm not eighteen any more.
For adults, while there are funny moments in this film about four high
school guys who vow to end their virginity before their impending
graduation in three weeks, overall the jokes and dialog are not sharp or
clever enough and the movie just rates an OK.
But this isn't a movie for adults.  It's a comedy for teenagers and as
such, it's a good one.  Teens can see and identify with their real
non-idealized selves up there on the screen and will find the
over-obvious, gross, embarrassing and sexual humor to be hilarious.  The
dialog is dumb, but realistic, since real teens aren't exactly fountains
of wit.  And contrary to most teen films, the six male characters don't
break down into simplistic good and bad guys -- they're all pretty much
clueless dweebs (which certainly echoes my high school experience) and
the worst ones are jerks, but those can still be part of your social
circle.
The film's R rating is one of those ironies that occurs frequently in
the American censorship system -- it makes it difficult for a large
portion of the film's target audience to actually see the film.  (It's
not exactly a film you'd enjoy watching with your Mom.)  Perhaps it will
reach its intended audience on video.
One scene that adults *can* totally enjoy is when Alyson Hannigan
(Willow from the TV series BUFFY, THE VAMPIRE SLAYER), who plays a
mousy, motormouth band dweeb constantly telling boring stories about
band camp, suddenly does a 180-degree turn and says to her prom date
"And then there was the time I stuck a flute in my pussy."  As her date
spurts out his beer, she tells him that band camp is really more of a
sex ed camp.  Then she says something like "Are we going to fuck soon?
I'm getting bored."  In the bedroom, she reveals she chose him for the
prom simply because he was a Sure Thing.  Now dominantly aggressive,
riding on top of him, she yells "What's my name?" slaps him and shouts
"Say my name, bitch!"
Another good one is when one girl is quizzing another about her lack of
orgasmic experience and says "Not even a manually-assisted one?  You
mean you've never double-clicked your mouse?"
Highly recommended for teenagers (particularly males).
Worth a video rental for adult Willow fans.
May or may not be worth a video rental for other adults.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
American Pie (1999)
Jason Biggs, Chris Klein, Thomas Ian Nicholas, Eddie Kaye Thomas, Natasha 
Lyonne, Seann W. Scott, Eugene Levy, Tara Reid, Mena Suvari, Chris Owen, 
Shannon Elizabeth, Alyson Hannigan, Jennifer Coolidge, Lawrence Pressman. 
Screenplay by Adam Herz. Directed by Paul Weitz. 97 minutes.
Rated R, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
The most surprising thing about the we-must-lose-our-virginity-before-we-
graduate comedy, "American Pie," is what goes on beneath the burlesque. 
How often do you see a film of this type where one of the male leads 
tells his buddies that he is tired of the endless chatter about getting 
laid, adding that he's going to visit with a young woman because "at 
least she knows how to talk about something besides sex." What a 
refreshing statement to hear. 
I laughed at most of the raunchy gags in "American Pie," but found them 
less shocking than promised by the advance hype. Yes, the film includes a 
live Internet peep show, semen-laced beer drinking, jokes about oral sex 
techniques, a lengthy diarrhea segment and the already infamous shot of a 
guy screwing an apple pie, but after "There's Something About Mary," 
"Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me," and "South Park: Bigger, Longer 
and Uncut," there was nothing here I haven't seen before. 
Well, except for the sex with dessert scene. Speaking of which, it may 
seem utterly ridiculous to think practically about this sort of thing, 
but I couldn't help wondering exactly how this guy expected to 
successfully masturbate with an apple pie. I mean, where's the friction, 
for Pete's Sake?
Most of the comedy in "American Pie" revolves around the embarrassment 
that comes with sex; from being caught in a compromising position to the 
awkwardness of the act itself. Fair enough, sexuality is a funny subject. 
But how about a little internal logic? Too many punchlines depend on 
situations that would never have occurred had the involved characters 
simply locked their door. While everyone fears public humiliation, 
teenagers are even more sensitive about potentially embarrassing 
situations, often to the point of paranoia. A teenager locks the door 
before masturbating in his room. Hell, a teenager locks the door before 
listening to CDs in his room. And I guarantee you, if a kid decided to 
have a sexual liaison with baked goods, he would not do so in broad 
daylight in his parent's kitchen. Jokes work better in at least a semi-
realistic context and, too often, "American Pie" forgets that crucial 
point.
Still, the film is funny. The young cast (particularly pie-boy Jason 
Biggs) displays a nice gift for comedy and "SCTV" veteran Eugene Levy is 
a riot as the ultimate understanding father. But I enjoyed the 
relationships in the film more than the rude and crude shenanigans. Some 
of the pairings have a disarming, and very welcome, sweetness. When 
lacrosse player Oz (Chris Klein) sets his sights on young Heather (Mena 
Suvari), he tries to feign a sensitive side to win a place in her bed. 
Along the way, he discovers that he likes the man he is pretending to be. 
The romantic story arc of Oz and Heather is the heart of the movie, 
thanks in large part to the magic of the actors. Chris Klein (Matthew 
Broderick's candidate in "Election") is bound for stardom, with his clean 
cut good looks complimented by an open, unaffected screen presence and 
Mena Suvani, who shares a passing resemblance to Heather Graham, has the 
rare ability to project strength and vulnerability at the same time.
Natasha Lyonne, so wonderful in "The Slums of Beverly Hills," makes the 
most of her much smaller role here. As Jessica, she dispenses advice on 
all matters related to sex and romance, while being the only character 
not in a relationship. Lyonne is a terrific actor with a great earthy 
quality, effectively painting Jessica as a young woman using a persona of 
frankness to avoid real intimacy. She left me wanting to know more about 
what makes Jessica tick, quite an accomplishment in this context. 
Within the generally strong cast, there are a few duds. As Stifler, the 
mandatory sexist jock, newcomer Seann W. Scott looks and sounds like a 
junior Jim Carrey, giving a one-dimensional, leering performance that 
never elevates his character above archetype status. Chris Owen, who was 
good as an outcast intellectual in "October Sky," is annoying here as a 
smarmy geek with delusions of grandeur. 
"American Pie" succeeds because of the winning efforts of most of its 
cast, coupled with deft editing, especially during the aforementioned 
Internet peep show scene, which turns a retread gag from "Revenge of the 
Nerds" into a genuinely funny set piece. And, even though teen sex 
comedies have been done to death, I found it impossible to resist 
laughing when a young man studies a homemade sex manual that includes a 
picture of a vibrator accompanied by the heading, "Know Your Enemy." 
"American Pie" is not as shocking as it desperately wants to be, but when 
it works, it works very well.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more movie reviews and screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
This film is being touted as the 90s version of PORKY'S or FAST TIMES AT
RIDGEMONT HIGH, and the conglomeration of last year's THERE'S SOMETHING
ABOUT MARY (7.5/10) and CAN'T HARDLY WAIT (7/10). It stars a bunch of
unknown teens in a raunchy script which actually talks about the main thing
that most kids talk about in high school: getting laid!
PLOT:
Four good friends, who all happen to be virgins, make a pact to get laid
before prom nite. Prom nite happens to be only three weeks away.
CRITIQUE:
Finally, a high school movie that puts the "T" back in Teen flicks! Yes,
there is nudity in this film. Yes, there are masturbation scenes, oral sex
scenarios, intercourse montages, but nothing too graphic on the whole.
Mostly implied. Overall, the film features a few huge laughs (a la MARY),
featuring a doctored cup of beer, the by-now infamous apple pie sequence,
the Internet used to its full potential and a cute Mrs. Robinson vibe
nodding THE GRADUATE, and a lot of open talk about sex, masturbation, porn,
but nothing terribly insightful, shocking or hilarious for my taste. I was
personally hoping that this film would take more chances than it did, but
ultimately it seemed to go for the easy visual gag or toilet humor (one
pulled directed from the Farrelly's DUMB AND DUMBER (7.5/10)). Sure, I did
laugh at most of them, but the script seemed to play more like a few funny
sketches plotted against an average high school story, than a string of
laughs strategically laced through a unique script.
The couples in the film were also so-so, with one of them not really all
that interesting to keep track of, and another tapping into a sugary
fairy-tale ending. The few actors that did stand out for me included Jason
Biggs, who played the every-guy who we could all relate to (And yes, we've
all pulled a whack to scrambled TV porn!), Chris Klein reprising his
goofy-nice-guy role from ELECTION (7/10) (Two funny performances, but now
it's time to stretch, Chris) and Sean William Scott, as the jerk with all
the over-the-top insulting lines. Other than that, the film seemed to run a
little long, although they might cut it by release date, since our preview
was a "rough cut", and featured a decent teen soundtrack. Overall, I think
that the frank sexual content and dialogue in this film will be refreshing
to most teens, despite the script's lack of other innovative narrative
additions: it's still the nerds vs jocks, prom nite, kids lying about their
virginity, etc... A teen version of THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY? Kind of.
But certainly not your average high school flick, and certainly eons away
from the safe teenage flicks bestowed upon us by the great John Hughes in
the 80s.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Big Ben Affleck's baby brother, Casey Affleck, makes a cameo in this film as
the "older, wiser brother".
Director Paul Weitz and producer Chris Weitz are brothers. They are known to
have co-written the screenplay for ANTZ (6.5/10). Born in New York, the
brothers are third generation Hollywood pedigree. Their grandfather was the
fabled agent Paul Kohner, who represented such legendary filmmakers as John
Huston, Billy Wilder and Ingmar Bergman and their parents are fashion
designer John Weitz and Academy Award-nominated actress Susan Kohner.
Californian punk-rockers BLINK 182 are featured on the soundtrack, and also
make an appearance in this movie. Their band name is derived from the number
of times Al Pacino uttered the F-word in SCARFACE (8.5/10).
This film was originally sold as the "Untitled Teenage Sex Comedy Which Can
Be Made For Under $10 Million Which Studio Readers Will Most Likely Hate But
I Think You Will Love". It then went through two other name changes, GREAT
FALLS and EAST GREAT FALLS HIGH. It also took this film four tries to get an
R-rating instead of an NC-17.
Actor Chris Klein got his big break in the acting world when he literally
bumped into director Alexander Payne (ELECTION) while he was scouting
Klein's high school as a possible shoot location for his film. Months later
when Klein was attending college at Texas Christian University, Payne cast
him in the co-starring role of Paul Metzler.
Actress Alyson Hannigan is best known to television audiences for her
regular role as Willow on TV's "Buffy, the Vampire Slayer".
Actor Thomas Ian Nicholas is also touring on the road with his band, "The
T.I.N. Men". Some of you may remember his girlfriend in this film, actress
Tara Reid, from her role as Bunny Lebowski in the Coen Bros' film THE BIG
LEBOWSKI (6.5/10).

Author
Bob Bloom

American Pie (1999) 3 stars out of  4. Starring Jason Biggs, Chris Klein, 
Thomas Ian Nicholas, Eddie Kaye Thomas, Eugene Levy, Mena Survari, Tara 
Reid, Natasha Lyonne and Alyson Hannigan.
 In the telling, American Pie may sound like a semi-gross adolescent sex 
comedy.
 In truth, though, it is a rather engaging and likable feature film that 
at times nudges the gangplank of bad taste without diving overboard.
 The story is simple: Four high school seniors  all virgins  make a 
pact to lose their virginity by the time of the senior prom.
 The quartet are basically all types: Jim (Jason Biggs) is the nerdy guy; 
Oz (Chris Klein) is the jock; Kevin (Thomas Ian Nicholas) is the smooth 
one who already has a girlfriend; and Finch (Eddie Kaye Thomas) is the 
brain.
 Enough hormones are raging among these four to generate the heat needed 
to evaporate the Great Lakes.
 The pleasure of American Pie is that despite it being a comedy, it 
convincingly covers the angst and awkwardness most young men experience 
when trying to connect with the young females of the species.
 It's all here: the false bravado, the exaggerations concerning size and 
prowess, the lies about previous trysts. The boys all set out to find 
dates/potential partners for prom night.
 Jim's plans go awry when the Romanian exchange student who shows 
interest in him is deported. This sequence, the funniest in the movie, 
involves some graphic magazines, the Internet and a most appreciative 
audience of peers and classmates.         
 Oz joins an a cappella jazz ensemble where he meets Heather (an ethereal 
Mena Suvari), who begins to transform him into a caring and sensitive 
all-around person. 
 Finch hires a classmate to begin spreading rumors about him, while Kevin 
uses "the Bible" to learn how to please his girlfriend, Vicky (Tara 
Reid), and prepare them for the perfect night in which they will finally 
consummate their romance. 
 Credit for American Pie should go to screenwriter Adam Herz. In his 
initial screenplay, Herz shows a definite ear for the rhythms, mores and 
attitudes of contemporary high school students.
 The one area in which he falls short is the privacy issue. No one locks 
their doors. Show me one teen who hasn't installed a dead bolt or 
trained a watch dog to keep intruders out of his or her room.
 Director Paul Weitz keeps the film moving at a brisk pace. And while not 
every sequence pays off, there are no dead spaces. Even the throwaway 
scenes involving Jim and his dad, a funny, trying-to-be-hip Eugene Levy, 
are witty and a bit touching. 
 American Pie is a fine ensemble comedy. The entire cast deserves high 
marks: Klein, who played a similar character earlier this year in 
Election, is touching; Biggs, as the sympathetic Jim, is klutzy, but 
endearing; Nicholas shows a vulnerability and an awakening 
self-awareness; while Thomas is a bit cynical, yet as wanting as the 
others.
 Also worth noting are the contributions of Natasha Lyonne as the 
frank-speaking Jessica, Vicky's best friend; and Alyson Hannigan as 
Michelle, the band-geek from hell who surprises the pants off Jim.
 Since this is a teen comedy, American Pie does have some raunchy 
moments, but overall it is a warm, pleasant outing about the travails of 
growing up. It's fun and a bit wise, but without being preachy. 
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, 
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at 
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Jamey Hughton
All those who were offended by There's Something About Mary should not
tread in the waters of American Pie, a gratuitously sexual rollercoaster
ride of raunch. And while this uproariously funny, gross-out summer
movie is basically an exercise in bad taste, it also demonstrates a
surprising sweetness in the end.
American Pie is the latest entry to the offensive teenage-targeted fare
this season. I must question the studio that releases a movie like this.
The producers are aiming these films at the 15-24 crowd, but while
pushing the limit of possible sex and violence in an R-rated film. Some
have even been narrowly avoiding the dreaded NC-17, a rating the MPAA
gives when the adult content surpasses even that of a Restricted movie.
American Pie was threatened with an NC-17, but after snipping a few
scenes from the finished product, it was given an R. But at least this
new addition is not as careless and unforgiving as something like South
Park. It is sick, perverse, and ultimately disgusting - not to mention
extremely funny.
American Pie is about four desperate teenagers who make a pact to lose
their virginity by prom night. Jim (Jason Biggs), Kevin (Thomas Ian
Nicholas), Oz (Chris Klein) and Finch (Eddie Kaye Thomas) are a quartet
of high school students in their senior year who think sex is something
they must experience to be successful in their lives ahead. Jim inquires
what it feels like when you reach third base, to which one of his
friends replies: `Like warm apple pie...'. Of course, this prompts the
scene unfairly exposed in the trailers, in which Jim and a freshly baked
pie have a very intimate moment in the kitchen corner. There are many
moments, such as this, in which director Paul Weitz uses a game-plan
similar to the one frequently displayed in Mary: to cause the audience
to break down laughing in disgusting disbelief. American Pie is a
hard-fought effort that has replenishing rewards if you manage to stick
with it.
I loved the young cast in this movie. Consider the subject matter that
these actors have dealt with, obviously suggestiveness never rivaled in
any of their previous projects, and you should appreciate their
performances. Biggs is more than enjoyable, and Chris Klein (who
recently played a similar jock in Election) is obviously a young talent
on the rise. But in a teen-dominated movie, the best performance comes
from comedian Eugene Levy (of television's SCTV), who is unexpectedly
brilliant as Jim's uneasy father. Scenes in which the familiar
father-son conversations are brought to interesting new levels are the
funniest moments to be found in American Pie. After Levy discovers Jim's
new use for apple pie, he tells him, `I did a fare share of that sort of
thing when I was your age. But I never used baked goods.' It is
performances such as his, and Bill Murray's in Rushmore, that are often
unfairly dismissed when awards are handed out.
There are some less-than-original aspects of the film. A bathroom
incident involving Finch and a bottle of Ex-Lax is something we've seen
before. If Weitz is planning to take after the Farrelly brothers, then
this is a decidedly unwise move: the same prank was pulled in the
brother's Dumb and Dumber, and used to greater effect. Secondly, the
characters are forced into a half-hearted climax that seems more
artificial than amusing. But at one point, in which we discover that
American Pie does have a heart of it's own, Biggs asks his buddies why
he's going through so much pressure for something that's `not very
important anyway.' And so we realize that while the film is expressive
about a subject that is hardly appropriate, it still manages to be
mature. In it's own way.
MOVIE VIEWS by Jamey Hughton:  http://Welcome.to/MovieViews
.......................

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Universal Pictures
 Director:  Paul Weitz
 Writer:  Adam Herz
 Cast: Chris Owen, Thomas DeLonge, Mark Hoppus, Travis
Barker, Jason Biggs, Jennifer Coolidge, James DeBello,
Shannon Elizabeth, Alyson Hannigan, Chris Klein, Eugene
Levy, Natasha Lyonne, Eli Marienthal, Thomas Ian Nicholas,
Tara Reid, Woody Schultz, Sean William Scott, Mena Suvari,
Eddie Kaye Thomas
   If director Paul Weitz truly has his finger on the pulse of 
American teens and collegians, box offices around the
country will not soon be saying bye bye this "American
Pie."  A raunchy and sometimes sweet tale marrying George
Lucas's 1973 classic "American Graffiti" to Bob
Clark's take on a lusty bunch of South Florida high-
schoolers, "Porky's," Weitz's comedy deals with a group of
senior boys determined to shed their virginity before
graduation day.  With Adam Herz's script pulling out sit-
comish stops and getting an overdrive boost from slick editing
that takes us quickly from one chaste high-school senior to
the others, "American Pie" is a fun film for the summer that
pushes the "There's Something About Mary" envelope.  Yet it
easily avoids the dreaded NC-17 by keeping private parts
off-limits to the audience throughout its just-right 95 minutes
of tenure.  
   If Trey Parker's hilarious "South Park," which opened just
days earlier, forms an accurate, if heightened caricature of
how 12-year-olds actually talk when parents are not around,
Paul Weitz's "American Pie" does likewise for the 18-year-old
set whose obsessive conversations give new meaning to the
concept "coming of age."  The sexual revolution either has
never filtered down to middle-class high schools in America
or has already gone through a Thermidorian reaction,
because the particular fellas whose hopes and dreams are
conceived by scripter Adam Herz are all NATO--no action, talk 
only.  Why is all their verbal promiscuity followed up by virtually 
nothing involving the southern regions of their torsos?  As Dr. 
Freud might say, these dudes are in conflict.  On the surface, 
they all want it.  Deep down, they're scared out of their minds of women. 
Some of these clean-cut juveniles are darn good looking with
good futures ahead of them.  Each time they get close to
their goal of polluting themselves, they self-destruct by
bragging openly and thereby showing their fear of and
hostility toward the alluring females.  What they really want is
not fulfillment with the opposite sex but stature with their own.
   Parents should not be alarmed if their teenagers are more
interested in sex than in Shakespeare.  Hormones are
vigorous, perhaps more energetic in people their age than
they will be at any other time in their lives.  One
understanding, if dippy, individual who grasps this is Jim's
Dad (Eugene Levy), a well-meaning fellow with eyebrows that
rival John L. Lewis's and a confident tone belied only by an
occasional hesitation in his voice.  When he catches his boy
(Jason Biggs) masturbating in the bedroom to a porn tape, he
sizes up the situation, reassuring Jim's mom about the TV
program: "it's only bad reception."   Jim's pop stands in for
the kind of dad that every kid would love to have for his own
while being simultaneously embarrassed by him.  Having no
anxieties about his young one's introduction to the lives of
birds and bees, he enthusiastically plunges magazines of
varying degrees of pornography into his kid's hands,
explaining each centerfold as might your favorite biology
teacher.
   "American Pie" highlights an ensemble cast that play off
one another so well that you'd swear that they'd spent their
four years of secondary school in the same classes.  They're
fond of one another but like all adolescents they are given to
ribbing and jiving because each is so temperamentally
different.  While the onanistic Jim (Biggs) metaphorically
settles for playing squash instead of tennis, his athletic pal
Oz (Chris Klein) is forever getting caught by the ladies in
boasting falsely of his conquests.  Finch (Eddie Kaye
Thomas), on the other hand, comes across as a fan of Oscar
Wilde, running home when nature calls because he will not
use the slovenly seats that his school's bathrooms provide;
Stifler (Sean William Scott) is a boor who regularly opens his
lavish home for parties; Sherman (Chris Owen) is the classic
geek whose major sexual activity consists of wetting his
pants while disconcerted; and Kevin (Thomas Ian Nicholas) is
under pressure from his girl friend Vicky (Tara Reid) to
confess his love.
   As in so many "Porky's" type films, the strong parts all go
to the males, while women like Vicky and Oz's new love
interest Heather (Mena Suvari) largely react to the male
advances and set the rules of the games.  Only Jessica
(Natasha Lyonne), a liberated Dear Abby type who advises
both male and female classmates about getting it on, and
Nadia (Shannon Elizabeth), a promiscuous foreign exchange
student, could be considered assertive, independent and
confident enough to make their own advances and treat
sexuality as good, healthy fun.  Indeed the best quote in the
movie comes from Jessica who, when told by her virginal pal
Vicky that she wants the right time and the right place for her
first sexual encounter, responds sharply, "It's not a space
shuttle launch: it's sex!"
   While little in "American Pie" could be called original, the
film breaks ground by the staggering number of gross-out
situations and objects.  The include masturbation with a sock;
sexual congress with a freshly-baked apple pie; a suspicious
liquid found in a glass of beer that leads a hapless 
drinker to an extended session of regurgitation; a rash of
ribald rhetoric that everyone in the audience has heard
before; and just one hard-to-take setting in the school
women's room to which the finicky Finch has repaired
following his consumption of a drink doctored with a laxative.
   Like the usual high-school movies, this one culminates in a
prom, but this time no queen is chosen.  Instead a band of
fellows and gals reach the climax of their lives and undergo 
the bittersweet realization that not wedding bells, but college,
will be breaking up that old gang of theirs.  "American Pie"
has moments of genuine romance but while it's not "An Ideal
Husband," neither is the film an anarchic "Animal House." 
Weitz and Herz have fun with their young ensemble but both
scripter and director convey a sincere interest in the lives and
concerns of these young people.  Any parents who think that
their own adolescents are not like these pubescent yet
inexperienced youngsters just haven't been listening.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Paul Weitz.
Cast: Jason Biggs, Chris Klein, Thomas Ian Nicholas, Eddie Kaye Thomas, Mena 
Suvari, Tara Reid, Alyson Hannigan, Natasha Lyonne, Shannon Elizabeth, Seann 
W. Scott, Eugene Levy, Jennifer Coolidge, Chris Owen, Lawrence Pressman, 
Molly Cheek.
1999 - 95 minutes
Rated R (for raunchy humor, profanity, nudity, and sexual situations).
Reviewed July 11, 1999.
Like last year's sleeper hit, "There's Something About Mary," or "South Park: 
Bigger, Longer & Uncut," first-time director Paul Weitz's "American Pie" is 
an outrageous comedy that gets its kick out of being as raunchy and shocking 
as ever, in the confines of an R-rating. It's unfortunate, however, that 
"South Park" was just released because no movie, I think, could measure up to 
the tastelessness that that film had. Still, amidst all of the buzz on 
"American Pie" concerning its envelope-pushing humor, in essence what we 
really have here is a surprisingly sweet sex comedy that, unlike many recent 
"teen"-oriented pictures, is frightening in its realism of teen life. There 
are no blatant cliques to be found in the film's Michigan high school of East 
Great Falls, at least not of the popular type, no overly snotty teens that 
are as one-dimensional as a drawing on a piece of paper. No, instead what we 
have are just anonymous high school students dealing day-to-day with their 
raging hormones and budding relationships. Sure, there are the jocks (who, 
interestingly, play lacrosse rather than football); the singers in the glee 
club; the band, just as in a real high school, but their personalities are 
rarely ever exaggerated to fit a certain mold. That is exactly the element of 
"American Pie" that was most appreciated, but don't get me wrong. It's a 
laugh-riot, too.
The premise is very simple: Four friends about to graduate from high school 
in a few weeks make a pact to lose their virginity by prom night, 
particularly when it appears that Sherman (Chris Owen), one of the nerdiest 
people in school, had sex at a party. The film's main character of the four 
is Jim (Jason Biggs), a likable, horny lug who nonetheless fails miserably 
with practically every person of the opposite sex he runs into, and is 
constantly being caught by his parents pleasuring himself. He first sets his 
sights on the beautiful foreign exchange student, Nadia (Shannon Elizabeth), 
but plans go awry when he has an embarrassing encounter with her that is 
accidentally transmitted via internet to the whole town. Desperate for a date 
to prom, he settles on the band geek, Michelle (Alyson Hannigan), whose every 
sentence that comes out of her mouth starts with, "and this one time, at band 
camp..." 
Oz (Chris Klein) is the "jock" of the four friends. He plays lacrosse, and 
whenever with a woman, feels like he has to throw a bunch of corny lines her 
way. Hoping to meet someone, he joins the chorus and finds that he actually 
begins to like it, and like the sweet, innocent Heather (Mena Suvari), as 
well. Something Oz doesn't anticipate in their relationship, though, is that 
he would really begin to care for her, and grow a more honest heart, which he 
also starts to do.
Kevin (Thomas Ian Nicholas) is the only one in the group with a steady 
girlfriend, Vicky (Tara Reid). As he tells it, they've only gotten to third 
base, but are beginning to have serious thoughts about going all the way. But 
first, Vicky wants to hear him say, "I love you," three words that Kevin 
personally feels should not be thrown around lightly.
And, finally, Finch (Eddie Kaye Thomas) is a clean freak who runs home from 
school each day just to go to the bathroom ("Have you seen the facilities 
they have here?!"). All of the girls at the school begin swarming around him 
mysteriously, thanks to some rumors that the wordly Jessica (Natasha Lyonne), 
the advice-giving non-virgin of the group, is paid to spread around to help 
Finch out.
In the pantheon of teen comedies, "American Pie" doesn't come close to 
measuring up with the '80s John Hughes flicks, like "Sixteen Candles" (still 
my favorite), "The Breakfast Club," or "Ferris Buellers Day Off," nor is it 
quite as satisfying overall as the recent "10 Things I Hate About You," but 
this film is actually different than those. Focusing more on the 'sex' 
aspect, rather than the romance one (even though there is a bit of that too), 
"American Pie" is more reminiscent of the various '80s raunch-fests, like 
"Porky's" or "The Last American Virgin." The one vital difference, however, 
is that this latest picture is unusually intelligent and cleverly written for 
the disreputable genre, and has a lot of heart, even as someone is portrayed 
as unknowingly drinking a beer someone has just sexually released themselves 
in.
As Jim, Jason Biggs is a real find, an everybody guy that many people his age 
will most likely be able to relate to, including the desperation of a boy of 
17 or 18, and the humility he gets when his caring father (a very funny 
Eugene Levy) is constantly finding him in the most uncompromising positions 
(including, yep, in the infamous "pie scene"). 
Also, those actors that should be additionally noted (this movie is going to 
make many of them stars, I suspect) are Chris Klein, who is absolutely 
charming here, just as he was in last spring's brilliant high school satire, 
"Election." Klein's impending romance with Heather, played memorably by Mena 
Suvari, is the film's direct emotional center, and one of the most important 
things to attribute to the pic's success. Natasha Lyonne ("The Slums of 
Beverly Hills") is underused, but clearly one of the most talented in the 
cast, and every scene she is in shines. 
But the one person who stands out from among the crowd, who creates the 
unforgettable character I will easily remember for years to come, is Alyson 
Hannigan (TV's "Buffy the Vampire Slayer"), as the annoying flutist who never 
stops talking about her experiences at band camp. Hannigan is a comic 
delight, a marvel to behold who should gain a lot of further film work thanks 
to this thought-to-be dim character who is hiding a secret of her own.
If only "American Pie" had been about a half-hour longer, the film's rating 
may have skyrocketed up to an even higher plateau, which is rare for a 
small-budgeted teen comedy. With so many characters, many of them are not 
developed to their full potential, but there is no doubting that they are all 
fine up-and-coming talents. But still, for the debut directing/writing team 
of Paul Weitz and Adam Herz, and for the umpteenth film just this year alone 
that climaxes at the high school prom (if you are thinking right now what I'm 
thinking about that last phrase, you're very naughty), "American Pie" manages 
to come off as, dare I say it, somewhat fresh. Forget those safe, little 
PG-13 teen movies. As Hannigan said in an interview, a teenager's life is 
NC-17 rated, and far from PG-13. Credit Weitz and Herz for realizing this, 
and for Universal Pictures not backing down on the R-rating, as the film 
never once talks down to its target audience, but listens to its characters 
and portrays them in an oh-so-real light. 
Oh, I almost forgot! A particular line of dialogue towards the end comes 
straight out of left field and is so utterly shocking, especially for the 
"innocent" character, that I suspect it will be quoted by the teen generation 
for many, many years, and is worth the full price of admission alone. It also 
happens to be the biggest laugh I've had at the movies all year.
     - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
       Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Frankie Paiva
First of all, let me explain why this movie will do so well. Should I go see a
terrorist thriller or see a movie where a boy gets freaky with some apple pie?
Should I see a western action movie where I see Salma Hayek bear her rear, or a
movie where a foreign exchange student bears her enlarged chest? 
American Pie is like this in many ways, possibly the most outrageous movie this
year, it has several plot holes, but other good stuff to pull itself out of
them. Jim, (Biggs) Finch, (Eddie Kay Thomas) Kevin, (Ian Nicholas) and Oz
(Chris Klein) vow not to keep their penises "flaccid and unused" and thus they
begin their conquets to end their virginity. Jim goes after a foreign exchange
student (Shannon Elizabeth) and broadcasts his experiences over the internet.
Finch has Jessica (Natasha Lyonne) spread rumors about how great he was in bed.
Oz tries to score on the girls in the choir by putting on a sensitive side that
he ends up liking, and Kevin's having trouble with the "l" word.
But what American Pie really does is assualt us with countless sexual gags and
dialog that becomes overwhelming. Whereas, There's Something About Mary
(obviously a major inspiration) centered on love and romance (no matter how
sick and twisted it may be) this attacks us with the same stuff over, and over,
until it decides in it's final minutes to change. Yes, this change comes way
too late and it came off to me as an easy way to end the film. American Pie's
message is that sex isn't everything...but if that's true...what was all the
80-minute masturbation, oral sex, and porno magazines about?

Author
Roger Gerbig
A Thumbs For Sale! Review: http://www.thumbsforsale.com
Oh, to be the nice guy...and actually win for a change. That, if you'll
allow me to get slightly philosophical for a moment, seems to be one of
the key themes behind "American Pie", that perverse Home Economics
lesson now playing down at your multiplex. Or, if you're a Hollywood
exec, or one who likes to sit at home and play Hollywood exec (I like to
think I play one on TV, for example), the theme might appear to be
"everything old is new again." Or, "what comes around goes around." You
see, "Pie" is like a late nineties remake of "Porky's", with the
requisite twists. With all the doubling up of condoms, they could have
called this one "Pigs in a Blanket."
But let's get back to deconstructing the Pie, which appears the media is
trying to turn into a spectator sport for the duration of the summer.
Don't let them. Not only is there little to deconstruct here, the flick
is enough of a spectator sport in and of itself to warrant little
popcorn-laced pontificating after the fact.
The high concept on display here is watching four perfectly average and
perfectly nice guys wallow in an increasing surreal world of
masturbatory mishaps. Mostly, these happen to the generally innocuous
Jim (Biggs), which serves to bring him all that much closer to his
clique of friends who spontaneously decide after one particularly frigid
beer-soaked evening, that they must band together and form a little
blood cult if any of them ever hopes to get some action before D-Day--I
mean, Senior Prom.
But in typically late-90s fashion, rather than sign a pact (in blood, of
course!) with an unholy spawn of Satan, they agree to form what amounts
to a little support group. Yup, when the going gets rough, or fails to
get going altogether, they'll chime in with a little well-deserved
support for the poor libidinous sod left to his own devices after
another failed attempt at gaining maturity.
Of course, in high movie fashion, the flick ends the morning after the
Prom and the impossibly Hollywood-esque party that follows. And amongst
our little group of friends, there are the typical smiles of
accomplishment, little moral lessons floating about in their heads, and
a wave of nostalgia so instant, it makes VH-1 look as fresh as PBS in
between pledge drives.
True, unless you're a hopeless prude, or vying for an internship at "The
700 Club", you'll laugh and laugh until the fateful moment your Coke
makes a safe passage through your sinuses. But we're talking about
extremely cheap thrills here. Unlike, for instance, "There's Something
About Mary", the best stuff wasn't left out of the trailer.
For the most part, the guys mulls about like a bunch of mostly
well-behaved B-average students on their way to Big-10 universities in
the fall. Which, I might add, the flick points out on occasion after
occasion. They're extremely likeable, but not charismatic to say the
least. Even Finch (Eddie Kay Thomas), the resident geek and sophisticate
of the gang, isn't so weird that he won't be able to pick up quality
dates down at the library once he makes it to U-State or wherever his
student loans take him.
The girls, on the other hand, are the fascinating folks in this story.
Unfortunately, unlike other aspects of their character, their roles are
a tad underdeveloped. Natasha Lyonne, who ruled the indie world for a
few weeks last year in "The Slums of Beverly Hills", begs for a spin-off
starring her worldly-wise Jessica. I think she gets all of eight or nine
minutes of screen time here. And Alyson Hannigan will probably spend a
few months in the limelight for her captivating "Band Camp" schtick.
Both will then move onto bigger and better projects.
As will this critic. Make it a matinee, if you must.
Thumbs For Sale! Online: http://www.thumbsforsale.com.

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Jason Biggs, Thomas DeLonge, Mark Hoppus, Travis Barker, Chris
Klein, Eugene Levy, Thomas Ian Nichols, Natasha Lyonne. Rated R.
Hollywood has been buzzing about American Pie for months, with early
rumors comparing it with There's Something About Mary and claiming that
it "pushes the envelope" with regard to outrageousness. They were wrong.
It doesn't push the envelope: it throws the envelope at you, and damned
if it doesn't work.
This is unquestionably a teen film but the plot is enough to make
parents wince: a group of high school seniors make a pact that each of
them will lose their virginity by graduation time in order to avoid
potential embarassment in college. There's barely a few weeks left and
for most of them it looks like prom night is their last hope. Each of
them tries to devise their own plan to reach their goal, and some of
those plans have unexpected consequences.
Of course there has to be some experimentation before they get to the
real thing, so one of the protagonists asks "what third base feels
like," and the response he gets is "like sweet warm, apple pie." When he
comes home and finds a delicious looking apple pie on the kitchen table,
what happens is anyone's guess. In another, equally gross scene, another
one of the characters "inherits" a sex bible, made by high school
seniors for high school seniors and passed down each year to another
deserving candidate. He learns something new to try on his girlfriend
called "The Tongue Tornado", which I won't (and can't) describe here.
First time director Chris Weitz (who co-wrote the film with brother Paul
Weitz, the two also wrote Antz, one of last year's best films) first
throws every trick in the book at you, then he throws the book and then
starts hurling random objects (including that envelope I mentioned
earlier) at the speed of a very large rabbit on steroids. He invariably
gets the audience hooting, applauding and -- oh yeah -- laughing their
hearts out. His jokes are disgusting and juvenile but also hilarious,
even though we're not often proud of what we're laughing at. That, too,
can be taken as a virtue: it takes talent to make us laugh at something
we find vulgar, profane and gross.
The acting is of no importance in a movie like this, but what is present
here is more than passable. Newcomer Jason Biggs is palatably insecure
in what is probably the most significant role in the movie. Natasha
Lyonne (whom we first saw in Slums of Beverly Hills) is delightful in a
disappointingly minor role.
I'm not quite sure that I like the ending of American Pie. It's
needlessly shallow, and I predict that Conservative activist groups will
never let the filmmakers hear the end of it. But despite the movie's
eventual fallacy, there is no ignoring its merits. It's a hilarious,
affectionate look at teenagers' obsession with sex. While it's not
exactly substantial and thematically sound, it'll sure as hell do.
What we have here is one of the rudest and crudest films I've seen this
side of Pink Flamingoes. What we have here is one of the funniest films
I've seen this side of the Austin Powers franchise and some of Mel
Brooks' work. What we have here is a rollicking comic delight, an eye-
popping gross out and a terrific summer film.
Š1999 Eugene Novikov
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
Jesse Kopelman
This movie is pretty much an updating of _Fast Times at Ridgemont High_. If
you haven't seen _Fast Times_, the plot goes something like this: teenagers
think about having and sometimes have sex. Just as today's world is faster
paced than that of the dawn of the 80's, so is _American Pie_ faster than
_Fast Times_. While the latter covers several months time, _American Pie_
covers less than one month. Still, it is a very busy month, packed with
pathetic teenage behavior the likes of which I have never seen. That is the
problem with most teenage movies; the characters are either unbelievably
slick (_10 Things I Hate About You_) or unbelievably pathetic. I can think
of only two movies that have really got it right and been great movies:
_Fast Times_ and _Dazed and Confused_. Still, if you take this movie for
what it is, a pleasant sex comedy with an attractive young cast. I am happy
to report that this movie contains some excellent nudity, although I am sad
to say that it was of the designated nudist type (one actress was singled
out to be naked). Something tells me that the sale of those little video
cameras that hook up to your computer is about to go through the roof. By
the way, while the movie bills itself as having outrageous humor, it falls
short. The movie is generally funny and some scenes are down right
hilarious, but, compared to _There's Something About Mary_, there is nothing
outrageous. Don't let that discourage you. There is plenty of raunchy humor,
just don't expect it to warp your fragile little mind.
Ratings go like this: Abominable, Bad, Fair, Good, Very Good, Great, and
Perfect. As you might guess, most movies are Fair to Good. Very few movies
are either Abominable or Perfect.
--
Jesse Kopelman - thebruce@paonline.com
"It's not worth leaving, until you've worn out your welcome."

Author
Robert Workman
The Happy Bastard's 30-Second Review:
   The summer of raunch continues to spread into theatres with this
latest yuk fest, filled with sick jokes and teen dialogue aplenty.  If
you go expecting Dawson's Creek, you're in for a problem.  If your
expectations are lower (and better, I might add), you will enjoy the
hell out of American Pie.
   The movie casts several unknowns, with the only real recognizable one
being SCTV's own Eugene Levy as a happy-go-lucky dad.  The story
revolves around four high school seniors who have one goal before the
school year gets out- get laid.  That's pretty much it.
   Throughout the movie, little sick comic bits are sprinkled
throughout, including a memorable scene involving an apple pie (I won't
give it away, but you probably know what it is) and an Internet
broadcast gone horribly awry.
   Of course, the movie has some slightly sentimental bits, but they
don't drag the movie's humor content down that bad.  Most of the actors
get their job done, but it's Levy who's a hoot, a father who tries to
talk sex with his son with the help of some curious "visual aids".
   I couldn't stop laughing during this movie, and if you can stand all
the raunch and the sex references, then American Pie is for you.  If
you're one of those "conservative" types, well, I'll bet you're having
fun at home while this, South Park, and Austin Powers II plays in
theatres, now aren't you?

Author
Jon Ridge
    In trying to give proper praise to AMERICAN PIE, the drop-dead funniest
film of 1999, I compare it to other recent teen comedies, like CANšT HARDLY
WAIT and SHEšS ALL THAT.  Movies which have zero ambition, go for the cheap,
easy laugh and nothing more, and dare not delve into the intricacies of what
adolescent sexual confusion might actually entail.  Movies concerned with
plot contrivance (will the geeky guy get the prom queen; will the girl be
able to figure out a devious bet against her, in time to fall in love), and
nothing that has to do with real life.
AMERICAN PIE puts them right in their place, with honesty and
unparalleled situational humor - embarrassing and rude as it may be.  Simply
put, this movie rocks.  Not about anything in particular, PIE focuses on a
group of high school guys who, three weeks before graduation, vow to lose
their virginity as of prom night, out of dignity if nothing else; because,
"Itšs tradition.  Like the Rose Bowl."  Oz (or Nova, played by a marvelous
Chris Klein) starts off the cliché misogynist pig jock, but then joins the
school choir, in hopes of wooing the pretty Heather (Mena Suvari), only to
realize his sensitive side.  Kevin (Thomas Ian Nicholas) already has a
girlfriend, Vicky (the sexy Tara Reid), but shešs holding out for just the
right time to consummate their relationship; "Itšs not a Space Shuttle
launch.  Itšs sex" love that line.  Jim (a break-through Jason Biggs) has a
slight crush on foreign exchange student Nadia, but faces more complicated
issues with masturbation, mainly on the homefront, to wonderful comic
result; the uncomfortable discussions with his father (a sly Eugene Levy),
about the birds and bees, are perfect gems of comic timing.
Will they succeed in getting laid?  No matter.  What makes AMERICAN PIE
great is its intrinsic sweetness.  Even the narrow-minded Stifler (Seann W.
Scott), who accidentally drinks "pale ale", has a core of innocence ­
albeit, buried far beneath an abrasive exterior.  Perverted and lewd, at
times, the film remains not mean or bitter in the least.  You want these
guys and girls to find happiness, or as much as one can reasonably expect to
find at that age.  Every character is thoroughly likeable, which is kind of
rare in a film like this.  I think, again, back to CANšT HARDLY WAIT, from
earlier this year, in which just about every one of the characters was
immature and selfish, and compare it to AMERICAN PIE, full of real and
genuine people experiencing more truthful trials of growing up.  There isnšt
a comparison to be made, really.
I like the way Kevin goes the distance to please Vicky, and their
exploration of sexual satisfaction; you donšt see many teen comedies where
both the male and female party concentrates respective attention on the
otheršs personal gratification.
I also found Ozšs slow progression into true romantic kind of endearing.
And, not to be overlooked, is the filmšs overt raunch.  I laughed my ass
off during Finchešs (Eddie Kay Thomas) bout with uncontrollable diarrhea in
the girlšs bathroom.  Jim copulating with the titular centerpiece comes in a
close second.  And, I especially love Alyson Hanniganšs (doing her Willow
bit) band dork, who gets the two biggest guffaws during the concluding
post-prom party. The film originally garnered an NC-17 rating for its
full-bore graphic content, but all that does is minimize the heart of
AMERICAN PIE - a true-blue coming of age tale.  The script, by Adam Herz, is
audacious and perceptive, while at the same time smart and sophisticated and
surprisingly gentle.  The actors are amicable and seem to be having a good
time.
If the movie falters, itšs by ending on such a feel-good note.  By then,
it makes no real difference, however, as AMERICAN PIE has proved itself a
raucous hit.  Go!

Author
Davis Monroe
With "Ten Things I Hate About You", "She's All That", "Idle Hands", "Cruel
Intentions", "Carrie 2", and "Never Been Kissed", I'm very tired of teenage
movies with bad teenage actors trying to make disastrous teenage
performances with lame teenage dialog and bad thirty year old directors. I'm
up to my ears in this crap and it keeps making money. "American Pie" isn't
ground breaking material. In fact, out of all the examples above, this film
is the best reason to fully examine why exactly this material is so beloved
by the 17-21 year old film audience.
Screenwriter Adam Herz and director Paul Weitz fashion "American Pie" as
this year's "Porky's". A movie about four high school seniors who vow to
lose their virginity before prom. Each one will woo a fellow student to
varying results, each will engage in completely unfunny comedic shenanigans
that left my screening audience with tears in their eyes. I had a lump of
coal in my stomach.
It's rare to come across a comedy that on the outside has really nothing
wrong with it. It tries to be funny. It's gross-out gags are appropriately
gross (but damn them for outright stealing the laxative gag, so soon at
least, from "Dumb And Dumber"). It also features the grotesquely gratuitous
nudity that I adore from a sex comedy. After "Pie" was served, I was left
with the feeling that the audience was had too easily. If this move would
have been half as clever as it could have been, we would be witness to the
biggest teenage comic gem since Ferris took the day off.
The script is a loose concoction of distressingly elementary teenage drama
intermixed with bawdy gags involving bodily secretions in beer, foreign
exchange students (actress Shannon Elizabeth will be forgiven when she
badmouths this performance in the future), self "love", and the typical
set-pieces that come around whenever a "movie" keg is tapped. The entire
film reeks of disrespect to females, but I will surely be creamed by
everybody for bringing that up. I'll just leave my criticisms to the simple
"It's just isn't funny". None of it. When Austin Powers drinks a cup of
liquefied stool or the South Park kids swear without remorse, both films
have plenty of ingenuity up their sleeves (in South Park's case, brilliant
musical numbers). We can count on hysterical visual gags or rip-roaring
lines to back up the questionable material. "American Pie" can't do this. It
isn't written with care or respect to the audience. Director Paul Weitz
doesn't help the proceedings by making "Pie" the most aesthetically bland
film of the year. That's surprising considering "Blair Witch Project" is
shot with a camcorder and "South Park" is a creation of construction paper
and glue. It's a long shot, but some style might have made the bad medicine
go down easier.
The cast if "American Pie" isn't anything to write home about. Chris Kline
was memorable in April's "Election" as the dimwitted jock with the heart of
gold. Here he plays... the dimwitted jock with the heart of gold. Those
scoring at home, scratch him off the list of ones to watch. Personal faves
Natasha Lyonne and Tara Reid are asked to do nothing more that be the
"girls" of the film. If they needed the money badly, that would explain
their presence. Both actresses have done better previously. Here's to the
hope that they make rent this month and get back to films that exploit their
respective talents more precision. Again I blame Paul Weitz's blasted
direction. All that is expected of this cast is reaction and shock, not
acting. Even comedy needs talented actors. That's why Eugene Levy ("SCTV")
makes the only favorable impression here. He's a comedy legend and he doesn'
t have to break a sweat to make a joke click. The rest of the cast could
learn a thing or two.
"American Pie" is like catnip for teens. It's outrageous, it's naughty, and
the boys are cute. There's always that feeling when I don't like a certain
comedy that I didn't quite get it. I don't feel that here. "Pie" is a bad
film. A comedy that forgot the jokes and remembered the
nonsense.---------------- 2

Author
David N. Butterworth
        "American Pie" does for deep dish baked goods what "There's
Something About Mary" did for styling gel.
        Ever since Cameron Diaz first put *that* stuff in her hair,
filmmakers have been trying to out-vulgar the Farrelly Brothers' runaway
hit of last year.  With its story of four high-school seniors forming a
pact to lose their virginity before they graduate, "American Pie"
screenwriter Adam Herz has devised a fertile proving ground for doing
precisely that.
        While it's not subtle (not that anyone could accuse the Farrellys
of subtlety either), it sure is funny, and its fine young cast keeps the
film humming along even if, as with "'Mary," the vulgarity is often way
over the top.
        The four high schoolers who form the core of this juvenile sex
comedy aren't your typical teenage stereotypes.  In fact, they're all
pretty normal, right down to the burning desire to cross that line into
manhood.
        Kevin (Thomas Ian Nicholas) has the advantage over his three
friends in so much as he actually has a girlfriend.  And he's even made it
to third base with her which, he tells his friend Jim (Jason Biggs, with a
'macadam geek cut), is like warm apple pie.  But Vicky (Tara Reid) is
looking for the L-word (not to mention perfection) for her first time and
Kev isn't quite ready for that.  Vicky's girlfriend is played by Natasha
Lyonne who, unfortunately, fails to live up to the promise she showed in
"Slums of Beverly Hills."  She simply follows Vicky around making off-color
remarks.
        Jim has an understanding father (played by Eugene Levy, the only
"star" name in the picture) who tries to educate his son in the sexual
reproduction arena, much to Jim's obvious embarrassment.  Finch (Eddie Kaye
Thomas) is also girlfriend-less, perhaps because of his unusual habit of
heading home from school every time he needs to use the bathroom.  And Oz
(Chris Klein), the sensitive one of the bunch, is an affable big lug of a
lacrosse player (Klein played an affable big lug of a football player in
"Election") who joins a singing group in order to stake his claim on an
unsuspecting vocalist.
        The "action" tends to center at the home of the loudest, most
abrasive guy on campus, who throws the kind of wild parties at which most
kids get drunk, get sick, get laid, and pass out.  Stifler, expertly played
by Seann William Scott, is a spot-on personification of the jock we've all
had the misfortune to know at one point during our pubescent years, but
it's Stifler's Mom (Jennifer Coolidge) who gets one of the film's biggest
laughs.
        Although director Paul Weitz has a real knack for conjuring up
outrageous scenes (which include such props as a tube sock, the
afore-mentioned lattice tart, the Internet, and everybody's favorite, a
bottle of laxative), he's not quite as adept at pacing the scenes for
maximum effect.  Often the punch line is staring us right in the face for
several minutes while Weitz waffles around with the set-up.  Fortunately
Herz makes up for Weitz's poor timing by cramming his script with enough
raunch and risqué humor to sink a battleship.
        "American Pie" has already knocked "Wild Wild West" off the top
spot and word of mouth will assure it of a huge box office return.  For all
of its crudeness and lewdness, the film does provide something of a public
service: it teaches us that sex is as wholesome, natural, and all-American
as apple pie.

Author
Jeremy McVay
        I like comedy. Who doesn't? I'm sure there are those who don't,
but I have yet to meet them. Comedy, at its best, reflects our culture.
But it does not merely reflect it for observation. Great comedy can make
insights into culture in ways that make us realize not only how we are,
but also how we should be. Great comedy makes profound observations so
that we can possibly make profound insights. Great comedy makes one
think.
         American Pie may be the furthest thing from profundity that I
have yet seen onscreen. Sure, many of the characterizations are pretty
good; unfortunately, characters in the film reminded me of some people I
went to high school with, but I learned nothing new from seeing them
portrayed onscreen. That is, unless you count the "insight" that
teenagers are apparently obsessed with sex among profound realizations.
Obviously, I do not.
         So many films have already treaded this water, that it seems
amazing that no one has yet drowned in their wake. For some reason,
these films continue to make money. I suppose they are reaching an
audience, but it is apparently not an audience of which I am a part. I
will avoid calling the humor in this film "gross-out" humor as so many
already have. Instead, I will call it "gag humor." The film is simply a
series of gags that, while obviously related through their teenage angst
and sexual content, fail to coalesce in any way to speak about anything.
At no point did I learn anything new from the seemingly endless stream
of gags.
         The question now raised may be, "does a series of gags
necessarily need to answer some larger question or make some unique
statement?" And while I believe any film that achieves this has all the
greater potential to be a great film, I do believe a film can be great
without doing so. Gag humor is obviously nothing new. I tend to think of
a number of silent films that relied on numerous gags, and even a number
of these were great films without making a profound statement. Why,
then, were these films great? Probably because they were great exercises
in storytelling and cinema. This brings us back to American Pie and its
qualities as cinema (or lack thereof).
         First of all, the screenplay was horrendous. Perhaps the only
film I have seen so far this year that is more trite would be The Mummy.
Every joke was so obvious and repetitive that, by the time the credits
rolled, I felt as if I'd already seen the film half a dozen times [and
perhaps I have with different actors and titles]. Those jokes that did
somehow seem relatively new relied, for the most part, on shock value,
which means it's really only funny once or twice if at all. Even if I
had enjoyed the film the first time, I'm sure that I would enjoy it less
and less every time I re-screened it.
         Perhaps not all can be blamed on the writing. Most of the
acting was pretty bad as well. None of the cast really seemed very
natural. It all seemed forced. Again, this goes back to the situations
involved in the screenplay, but the acting only magnified the feeling.
Some of the acting was, of course, better than the rest- most notable
would be Chris Klein as Oz, the jock of the group. Between this film and
Election, I would say he is one to watch. He just needs to choose the
right breakthrough. Alyson Hannigan as Michelle, the flute-toting band
geek, provided the only moments where I really laughed at all through
the whole film, but it still remains to be seen whether any more should
be expected from her. Jason Biggs as Jim, the most desperate of the
group, was merely watchable, as was SCTV alum, Eugene Levy, as his
father, and the rest of the cast was either throw-away or unwatchable.
         As for the direction, not much can really be said. Why is this?
Basically because there was none. It was as unnoticeable as it was
useless.
         This is hardly the first film to rely on gross-out humor
[err.... I mean gag humor], but unlike films such as last year's There's
Something About Mary (which I enjoyed to some extent), this film was a
useless exercise in mindless "entertainment." It remains to be seen what
the lasting value of films such as the aforementioned Mary will be, but
they seemed to at least make some sort of effort at being new and
well-crafted. American Pie seems to be more fleeting than any film I
have seen... Or maybe I should say "remember" as I have forgotten those
films I'm sure I've seen that were somehow more fleeting than this.
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
Stephen Graham Jones
American Pie: the last american virgin
In Happiness everything revolved around a young boy's ejaculation, and we
all kind of looked away and accepted it. In American Pie, happiness is
ejaculation, only now there are enough puerile body fluid jokes that we
can't look away. Too, though, the trailer didn't mislead us. With a logline
like 'There's something about your first piece' and a title as suggestive as
'American Pie,' we have a pretty good idea what the movie's going to be
about--getting some--which is of course hardly pioneer country for the
hormone-charged teen flick. What is new ground, however, is getting caught
in flagrante delicto with the pastry, which both adds a little something to
the title and takes a little something away from afterdinner dessert.
But there are people in the movie, too, don't forget. Specifically, four
high school guys--Jim (Jason Biggs), Kevin (Thomas Ian Nicholas), Finch
(Eddie Kaye Thomas), and Chris (Chris Klein)--virgins all, but not for a
lack of trying. They are well-practiced though, should the need ever arise
to prove themselves. And they do have lots of sure-fire schemes for scoring,
all of which get launched three weeks before prom, when they make a
Seinfeld-ish pact to get some either by or on prom night, which supplies the
deadline these kinds of movie depend upon. Which is to say it allows a lot
of comic foreplay before the big night.
But of course they big night can't be only about sex, either, but instead
has to function as a collective disillusionment, an awakening to the fact
that sex isn't quite as important as they've been fantasizing it was. Well,
this is how it works for two of the four, anyway. For the other two, their
illusions are simply reinforced. Fifty percent's better than no percent,
though, and isn't really all that bad for a movie where everybody's playing
18 and under. And there are some good lines, the best of which is maybe from
Kevin, the most likeable of the lot, trying to defend himself against his
girlfriend: "It's not always about sex. I just though it was about sex this
time."
The teen movie works best when the characters get lines like these, which,
instead of speaking to the individual issues and concerns of a single teen,
speaks for all teens. Which is to say it's bland and vague and wry enough
that it applies to all, leaves no one out. And high school is of course
about not being left out. That's more or less what Breakfast Club was about,
yes? How similar we all are minus the social veneer? American Pie is no
Breakfast Club, though--or Ridgemont High or Grease or Say Anything, either.
It does play some token Simple Minds at the prom, however, but that's a
gimme, just necessary homage. As are all the variations on Damone's
time-honored tricks ('play side 2 of Led Zeppelin IV,' etc). No, American
Pie, while entertaining, doesn't quite have the resonance of the Breakfast
Clubs we know and love. It's more of a She's All That, with a little
Stewardess School thrown in for good measure. Just be happy that Jim--our
pieboy here--lives in a house without pets. It could have been a wholly
different movie, then.
(c) 1999, Stephen Graham Jones, http://www.cinemuck.com

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
rated R
Universal Pictures
starring Jason Biggs, Chris Klein, Thomas Ian Nicholas, Eddie Kaye
Thomas, Sean William Scott, Tara Reid, Natasha Lyonne, Alyson
Hannigan, Mena Suvari, Shannon Elizabeth, Jennifer Coolidge, Eugene
Levy, Chris Owen
written by Adam Herz
directed by Paul Weitz
If you've been to a movie theater in the past 2 or 3 months, chances
are you've seen the hilarious, shocking trailer for "American
Pie". And while the film is lewd and consistently hilarious, it's also
derivative and largely unconvincing. "American Pie" is part Farrelly
Brothers and part "Porky's", but at its core is yet another
traditional high school comedy leading up to the prom. However, from
the first scene, we know things are going to be a little bit
different.
We first meet Jim(Jason Biggs) as he is masturbating to an illegal
porn channel on his television set.  His mom barges in and sternly
says "I think you're trying to watch some illegal channels." His very
frank father(Eugene Levy, who deserves some kind of award for his role
here) then assures her that "It's only bad reception, honey."
After a party during which none of Jim's friends(all virgins) get
laid, they decide to make a pact.  They will all lose their virginity
by the end of this, their senior, year.  Kevin(Thomas Ian Nicholas,
from "Rookie Of The Year") is going steady with his girlfriend,
Vicky(Tara Reid), but she's decided to push away sex until Kevin tells
her that he loves her. Oz(Chris Klein, who was so good in "Election")
hasn't had much luck with girls(his main pick-up line is "Suck me,
beautiful"), but he has just met Heather(Mena Suvari), a
goody-two-shoes from his singing class whom he is starting to fall
for. The geeky Finch(Eddie Kaye Thomas) has paid a girl(Natasha
Lyonne of "Slums Of Beverly Hills") to start passing around
tantalizing gossip about him. Jim's best chance is with a sexually
promiscuous foreign exchange student named Nadia(Shannon Elizabeth),
who is coming to his house to "study".
Right from the initial setup, the laughs keep coming, but sadly, so do
the cliches. Because of all the fun, it's hard to care about the many
holes in the plot, but writer Adam Herz feels the need to fill the
gaps with things we've seen and heard too many times before. The
misguided love story between Oz and Heather doesn't work, and a lot of
the dialogue seems forced.
Many envelope-pushing scenes almost nabbed the "teen" film an NC-17
rating, but Universal seems to think that the film will have crossover
appeal(not unlike last year's summer sleeper "There's Something About
Mary"). Universal may have their fourth straight hit on their hands,
following "Life", "The Mummy", and "Notting Hill". There's also the
"South Park" movie and the Eddie Murphy-starring "Bowfinger" on their
summer lineup.
Paul Weitz, making his directing debut here, shows some talent with
his talented teenage ensemble cast. "American Pie" may be the first of
the recent crop of teen movies to have a built in camp value. Although
it may be hard to believe, "American Pie" reaches a level of
raunchiness that "There's Something About Mary" or even "Happiness"
never comes close to.  Whether that's a good thing or not, I'm not
sure.
It's hard for me to call "American Pie" a disappointment, since I had
so much fun. It is a very flawed movie, but anyone who can take it
will have a good time. I wouldn't be surprised if "American Pie" is
the funniest movie to be released this summer.
Note: One of my favorite bands, Blink-182, makes an appearance in the
film.  Their new album, "Enema Of The State" is on sale now. Buy it,
you won't be disappointed.
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://www.angelfire.com/mo/film


Author
David Wilcock
Following in the grand tradition of comedy classics such as Porkys and
Revenge of the Nerds, American Pie arrives in cinemas to relieve the heyday
of the smutty college sex comedy. Even though narrowly avoiding a NC-17
rating with a few cuts, American Pie is still not really raunchy enough to
make it really funny. The story centres around four boys, all virgins, who
make a pact to get laid by prom night. It's proves to be quite a challenge
though, and breasts, laxative and erotic dancing, plus the inevitable apple
pie, all make an appearance.
American Pie has it's fair share of gross out gags: early on there's a scene
involving a glass of beer that may have a few gagging. But in-between these
gross out highlights, the film gets very shaky trying to develop some kind
of plot. The script, by Adam Herz, just isn't strong enough to make these
scenes. Boredom sets in, then, while the audience has to sit through badly
written mushy romantic scenes while waiting for the next set of tits to
appear. Still, the characters are a likeable bunch, if hideously
stereotypical, and there's an hilarious performance by Alyson Hannigan as a
band member with a more sinister agenda. The four leading lads aren't bad,
although one of them is stuck with a girlfriend meaning he can't be as
outrageous as the others. The girls are O.K, although the mechanics of the
script push them to the sidelines and don't make them as exciting or funny
as they should be. One highlight of the cast, however, is 80's comedy God
Eugene Levy turning in a funny performance as Jim's dad. He provides some of
the biggest laughs in the film.
American Pie is also startlingly predictable. Many of the jokes can be
anticipated well before they lumber on the screen. There are also some jokes
that fall flat, and the last twenty minutes occasionally turn very flat.
Although the belly laughs really are belly laughs, the film really needs
more work as a whole, to make the running time go by a bit quicker.
As per standard in college sex flicks, the soundtrack isn't bad, and there's
a good selection of music. The direction is pretty much straightforward, and
doesn't detract from the film. It looks as though censorship has affected
the film, because some of the scenes look a little jumpy, making the cuts
obvious.
American Pie is a odd affair to watch. I knew the gag was funny, but it just
wasn't funny enough. This combined with the fact that the jokes are entirely
predictable make American Pie somewhat of a disappointment. But the cast and
the big set pieces are really rather good, dragging it out of mediocre
territory. American Pie is worth a look.

Author
James Brundage
Starring Jason Biggs, Shannon Elizabeth, Alyson Hannigan, Chris Klein,
Natasha Lyonne, Thomas Ian Nicholas, Tara Reid, Mena Suvari, Eddie Kaye
Thomas, Seann William Scott, Jennifer Coolidge
As Reviewed by James Brundage (MovieKritic2000)
 All right.  I never saw Porky's, I missed Animal House, and the entire
genre of sex comedy isn't really my forte, but I know good movies when I see
them, and take it from me, American Pie is good on its own.
 The funniest movie I have see so far this year (although that may change
when I see South Park), American Pie is the story of the common high
schooler on the common high school quest: to get laid.  And, like any man
faced with the prospect of unwillingly going to college a virgin, they are
going out of their minds.  So, in the morning after a beer party at which it
appears everyone was having sex but them, the four (led by Kevin (Thomas Ian
Nicholas), who just lost his girlfriend over his desire to go all the way
instead of settle for getting head.) make a pact to get laid by the prom.
Of course, the funniest thing about this is the speech Kevin makes about the
virtues of helping each other get laid --Sometimes, when you're exercising,
you need a spotter, someone to make sure you keep going," he says.  That, he
proposes, is the function each of them will serve for one another.
 Jim (Jason Briggs) attempts to go about this by helping a Chezch vixen,
Nadia (Shannon Elizabeth) with her studies and offering to help in more
obscene matters.  When a netbroadcast goes terribly wrong, he turns to the
already infamous flute-girl Michelle (Alyson Hannigan), and if you don't
know where the flute goes, you can be pleasantly surprised.  Oz (Chris
Klein), jock to the core, joins the choir to get girls like Jessica (Natasha
Lyonne).  Kevin (Thomas Ian Nicholas) decides that he should learn how to
return his girlfriend Vicky's (Tara Reid) favor.  And finally Finch (Eddie
Kaye Thomas) decides that the best way to go about getting laid is to pay
Heather (Mena Suvari) to sing his sexual praises.
 Like all plans that virgins have to deprive themselves of their
predicament, they inevitably go awry.  As in any comedy of errors, the how
is the funny part, and thus I can't tell you.  What I can tell you, however,
is that the movie takes every crude joke it can get and then takes a few
intelligent ones.  For a good description, imagine There's Something about
Mary with a pastry and a flute.
 The film isn't for virgins, because they won't at all respect the jokes in
there.  American Pie, although over the top, is remarkably true-to-life as
far as how we all grow up.  It brings back memories of those awkward talks
with Dad, those even more awkward moments of foreplay, the rumors, the
insanity, and the crazy desire to act cool while you fail utterly.  As far
as any guy or girl past highschool goes: we've been there before.
 Despite the fact that our own personal demons may be more or less
frightening, and we may or may not want to revisit that bizarre quest to
psychosexual maturity, American Pie's ability to strike a common chord is
part of its great charm.  Because we've been there before, we can get all
the jokes, immediately relate to the characters (who represent all of the
high school sets from jock to nerd), and love the movie all the more.  The
kids that had snuck in or were going with their carded friends or boyfriends
didn't laugh nearly as much... or as hard... as everyone who was of age.
 American Pie is this year's funniest sex comedy for sure and probably this
years funniest film period.  Crude, rude, and in the groove, it's not one to
miss.

Author
Scott Renshaw
AMERICAN PIE
(Universal)
Starring:  Jason Biggs, Chris Klein, Thomas Ian Nicholas, Tara Reid, Eddie
Kaye Thomas, Natasha Lyonne, Mena Suvari, Seann W. Scott, Alyson Hannigan,
Shannon Elizabeth, Eugene Levy.
Screenplay:  Adam Herz.
Producers:  Chris Weitz, Warren Zide, Craig Perry and Chris Moore.
Director:  Paul Weitz.
MPAA Rating:  R (sexual situations, profanity, nudity, adult themes)
Running Time:  96 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Ah, for those carefree days when a sniggering teen sex comedy could
be a sniggering teen sex comedy.  The time was the early 80s, when films
like PORKY'S, LOSIN' IT and THE LAST AMERICAN VIRGIN celebrated the
adolescent male in all his sex-obsessed glory.  That was pre-AIDS, when no
one thought twice about mining the blinding surge of hormones for all the
low-brow humor it was worth.  In 1999, apparently, you need to be more
socially responsible in your portrayals of high school horn-dogs.  Leering
and debauchery are permitted only if you note the foolishness of leering
and debauchery.
     It's that one hypocritical miscalculation that spoils much of the
puerile fun of AMERICAN PIE.  The premise is teen sex comedy at its most
fundamental: four seniors at a suburban Michigan high school, virgins all,
make a pact to do the deed by prom night.  Jim (Jason Biggs), utterly
inept in his sexual explorations, finds himself sharing intimate moments
with his dad (a brilliantly cast Eugene Levy) more often than any girl.
Kevin (Thomas Ian Nicholas) is involved with Vicky (Tara Reid), but finds
potential consummation complicated by the "l-word."  Oz (Chris Klein), a
jock who wants to be more sensitive, joins the choir to get closer to
Heather (Mena Suvari).  And mature-beyond-his-years Finch (Eddie Kaye
Thomas) prefers having the worldly Jessica (Natasha Lyonne) spread rumors
about his manly prowess.
     Naturally, all of their tentative fumblings lead to humiliating,
disgusting -- and sometimes very funny -- situations.  Jim is caught by
his parents in compromising positions with a tube sock and a warm apple
pie.  Party animal Stifler (Seann W. Scott, marvelously epitomizing teen
jerk-dom) consumes a beer featuring a mystery ingredient.  Finch falls
victim to a laxative-laced mochachino.  And unlucky Jim becomes an
Internet star in a web-cast display of over-enthusiastic libido.  The
belly laughs are crude and far between, interrupted too often by the bland
romance between Oz and Heather, but the outrageous situations and
appealing cast maintain a high energy level.  As unapologetic raunchiness,
it's fairly effective.
     Then, without warning, AMERICAN PIE turns into apologetic
raunchiness.  As the film draws to a close, Jim lets loose with a speech
about how tired he is of the emphasis on sex, which "isn't really that
important."  It's a jaw-dropping display of chutzpah from a film that has
just spent 90 minutes yanking laughs from its audience with the idea that
sex isn't everything, it's the only thing.  The commentary rings even more
hollow when AMERICAN PIE ends with a four-way, er, climax in which our
protagonists all find themselves scoring anyway.  And after that, the film
tries once again to get message-y on us by having the four friends share a
carbonated toast to the notion that the simple pleasures of high school
friendship are more valuable than sex.  It's enough to make you gag on
your laxative-laced mochachino.
     There is a place, of course, for films that cast a more thoughtful,
skeptical eye on the caprices of youthful sexuality.  Those films may be
even more necessary now than ever.  AMERICAN PIE, however, shouldn't have
tried to be one of them, because there's also a place for a throwback to
a time when you weren't expected to feel guity about your guffaws.
Screenwriter Adam Herz and director Paul Weitz play the disingenuous game
Don Rickles plays when he closes his act with an admonition that "we're
all just one big family of Man" -- this after spending 90 minutes joking
about tightwad Jews and Chinese drivers.  If you're going to be naughty,
at least have the nerve to stand by your naughtiness when it's funny.
Herz and Weitz want to have their AMERICAN PIE and eat it too.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Ho hum.  A movie about high school senior buddies who vow to lose their
virginity before the school year is over.
The big surprise?  With this theme, AMERICAN PIE, which spends half of
the movie trying to be a teenage version of THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT
MARY, devotes the other half to a sweet story about the awkwardness of
sex and the tenderness of one's first intimate relationship.  While
never fully satisfactory at either, it is a comedy with some nice
laughs, and a romance with some sweet moments.
Four guys take the sex-by-prom-time pledge. Kevin (Thomas Ian Nicholas),
who has already been to third base, is the most advanced sexually, but
he has a phobia about saying the word "love." Jim (Jason Biggs) is the
"batboy" since he hasn't even been to first base. Chris "Oz" Ostreicher
(Chris Klein) is a jock with a heart of gold, who is willing to take up
choir to impress the girls. Finch (Eddie Kaye Thomas), a Latin geek
whose meticulous sensibilities keep him from using the restroom at the
high school, plants rumors of his alleged enormous organ as a come-on to
the opposite sex.
In contrast, their other buddies, including Stifler (Seann William
Scott) and Sherman (Chris Owen), appear to be getting all the sex they
want.
Although the movie is presented from the boys' point of view, the girls
(Mena Suvari, Natasha Lyonne, Tara Reid, Alyson Hannigan and Shannon
Elizabeth) get much better written parts than might be expected.  There
is even a Mrs. Robinson clone, played by Jennifer Coolidge.  Lest we
miss the allusion to THE GRADUATE, they play the Mrs. Robinson song
during the seduction scene.
The film moves with relative ease between scenes involving oral sex,
masturbation, diarrhea and regurgitation and those of romantic
affirmations of love.  It is a tribute to writer Adam Herz and director
Paul Weitz that they manage to put both extreme sexual humor and
delicate romance in the same movie without the one completely canceling
the other.  Even so, the blend causes neither to fulfil its promise.
The audience is forced to vacillate between emotions, never comfortably
settling in either mode.
Don't ask.  The pie, like MARY's hair "gel," is the story's comedic
centerpiece.  Suffice it to say that Jim, a shy teen with raging
hormones, finds something to do with a warm pie that doesn't have a
Better Homes and Gardens' seal of approval.
AMERICAN PIE runs 1:35.  It is rated R for strong sexuality, crude
sexual dialogue, language and drinking, all involving teens.  The movie
would be acceptable for older teens.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Jerry Saravia
I am not a big fan of gross-out comedies, particularly teenage gross-out
comedies a la "Porky's" or the "Animal House" variety. Somehow, the idea that
teenagers having nothing more on their heads than sexual promiscuity is not
very appetizing. Well, sure, I was once a teenager myself, during the
Republican 80's, and I did think about sex, but there were other things on my
mind too. "American Pie" is about teens in the 90's, sharing their zestful
quest for losing their virginity on prom night. But I am convinced that sex is
not the only preoccupation facing teens of America. 
Nevertheless, the film's opening sequence is a classic piece of raunchy humor.
Jim (Jason Biggs) is watching a porno channel that is barely registering on the
cable channel. But the channel's soundtrack is unmistakably clear, as Jim
fondles himself until his parents enter the room and are horrified by his
hormonal desires. He gets comical, expert advice from his father (hilariously
played by Eugene Levy), who buys him all the porno mags he needs to understand
sex. Still, Jim's curiousity gets to him when he is told that sex feels like
"warm, apple pie." 
Jim is not the only teen in high school hung up on sex - so are all his
buddies, mostly lacrosse players. One player (the winsome Chris Klein from
"Election") is not all he's cracked up to be, and feels that he has real
sensitivity. He woos an intelligent choir girl (Mena Sevauri), who is taken by
his willingness to sing just to get close to her. 
The Jerry Lewis-like Jim may not just be interested in sex, but he has a
predilection for its orgasmic innuendoes. In a triumphantly classic scene, Jim
broadcasts his bedroom antics with a sexy foreign exchange student on the
Internet. Only problem is that he is not aware this is being broadcast to the
whole high school community! Jim struts barechested while the voluptuous female
gets aroused by a skin magazine, and all the immature high-schoolers howl with
laughter. 
"American Pie's" saving grace is that some of these kids are made to seem
human, unlike the cardboard cartoon characters of "Animal House" or any other
horny teen flick from the late 80's starring Corey Feldman. No, these kids are
sweet and human and, uh, oh, sensitive! Jim's one line about how a nerdy,
talkative band player (Alyson Hannigan) has something else to talk about
besides sex pretty much sums up the sensitivity factor. Naturally. it turns out
she wants to use Jim because of his lusty, Net activity. Jason Biggs, Chris
Klein and Mena Sevauri at least seem to come from the real world of teenagers,
but the burning question remains: is there more to life in high school than
sex? If you have seen "Election" or went to high school, you may be compelled
to agree that there is. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or general comments at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

AMERICAN PIE (director: Paul Weitz; screenwriter: Adam Herz;
cinematographer: Richard Crudo; editor: Priscilla Nedd-Friendly; cast:
Jason Biggs (Jim), Shannon Elizabeth (Nadia), Alyson Hannigan
(Michelle), Chris Klein (Oz), Natasha Lyonne (Jessica), Thomas Ian
Nicholas (Kevin), Tara Reid (Vicky), Seann W. Scott (Stifler), Mena
Suvari (Heather), Eddie Kaye Thomas (Finch), Eugene Levy (Jim's Dad),
Jennifer Coolidge (Stifler's Mom), Chris Owen (Sherman); Runtime: 95;
1999)
A gross-out teenage spoof about their need for sex to give them respect,
as four upper-middle-class suburban high school male seniors make a pact
to lose their virginity by the end of the senior prom. The film has no
point to make but to emphasize that silly challenge, but, it at least
softens its obnoxious attitude with an ending that is more satisfactory
than what I expected from this shallow film. I can't see anyone but
teenagers and, perhaps, hapless parents of teenagers, finding anything
here of interest. Though some adults might look back to those halcyon
school days with an anxious leer and wish to recapture some pubescent
memories of some shameful incident and to feel the nostalgia again
through this movie. Looking through the eyes of a lost adolescence is
perhaps the only way to view this movie, a movie that makes sex into
something that is implicitly evil.
Nevertheless, as awful as this gross-out film is, it will become a movie
and video hit with its targeted youthful audience, following the
footsteps of that other cheap thrill movie, "There's Something About
Mary,"and because sex sells, other films like this one will
unfortunately follow.
The sexual awkwardness of the boys is exaggerated for comedic purposes,
and the school looks as if it is around only as a stage for the
teenager's rite-of-passage. Everything in the film is used to get a
laugh, but the film wasn't really funny, though its commercial success
is due to the guilty laughs it evokes. For me, it was just a childishly
gross and a sexually raunchy movie. But it smartly restrained itself and
never pushed the envelope that step too far, staying well within the
framework of how traditional sitcom comedy works.
The film's four grossest scenes are: 1) Beer with scum in it is
swallowed by an unsuspecting victim. 2) A girl unknowingly undresses in
front of a videocam, while the entire school watches on the Internet, as
an email is mistakeningly forwarded to all the high school students
telling of the site. 3) One of the boys masturbates on his mother's warm
baked apple pie. 4) A boy is given a strong dose of laxatives and runs
into the girls' bathroom and can't control the embarrassing sounds the
girls hear. There were other gross-out scenes in a movie that had no
edge, just embarrassing moments and vulgar gestures. If it weren't for
all the grossness about sex and toilets, this would be a typical
family-fare TV sitcom. There is nothing political about these seniors,
and the only thing that humanizes their obnoxious antics, are the girls.
They are around to tell these immature boys what a girl wants in a
relationship.
The film sells itself through its sex scenes and then after exploiting
every awkward sexual moment it possibly can from the teens, it reverses
itself with a contrived moral ending to say that love is not forced and
comes naturally, while those only interested in sex are creating
unnecessary problems for themselves and putting undue pressure on
themselves to be happy.
"Pie" makes four slices, showing how the four high school failures
graduate in sex, as they are seen together and individually as they make
their moves. Jason Biggs is Jim, a good student, an affable and
sympathetic figure, who gets tongue-tied when trying to talk to a girl
he is attracted to. He is experimenting with different ways to
masturbate, but he seems to get interrupted by his father (Levy) when he
is in the middle of stroking the salami. His understanding father uses
these opportunities to drily lecture him about the birds and the bees.
His moment of truth will come when the geek (Hannigan) he takes to the
prom, turns out to be sex freak. Thomas Ian Nicholas is Kevin. He has
gotten to third base with his steady girlfriend Vicky (Tara Reid) and
spends the entire picture trying to score with her. His big deal, is
that he can't say the four-lettered word love -- like, I love you Vicky.
Chris Klein is Oz. He's a handsome but not-too-bright star lacrosse
player, who strikes out with the girls because he acts like a jerk. He
realizes that he is not getting anywhere with that macho jock attitude,
so he switches directions and decides to join the chorus and become more
sensitive. He meets Heather (Mena Suvari), and she is supposed to be a
goody two-shoes, as they try to see if their relationship can be the
real thing. Eddie Kaye Thomas is the intellectually gifted Finch. He
gives Vicky's friend, the sexually mature and wisecracking Jessica
(Natasha) $200 to spread the word that he's a great lay and
well-endowed. Natasha overshadows the teens in this film, as she appears
like Mae West, much too advanced for this crew. She says that she lost
her virginity when she believed the guy who said he loved her.
The side players add to the gross-out gags. Seann W. Scott is Stifler.
He is a particularly rich and obnoxious jock. He throws the parties all
the in-teens attend, and he constantly gloats about how great he is.
Chris Owen is Sherman. He is a creepy character who gloats of a sexual
conquest which turns out to be a lie. For what goes for comedy, he
pisses in his pants when he gets caught in his lie. Shannon Elizabeth is
Nadia. She is a sexually appealing exchange student from Eastern Europe,
who is the victim in the videocam. Jennifer Coolidge is Stifler's
mother, who will do a Mrs. Robinson for Finch's post-prom graduation in
sex. A totally unnecessary scene, that was played without emotion or
reason.
The film's saving grace is the sound advice given about romance by the
females. Everything else about the film was just as gross as it appeared
to be. The unimaginative comedy is of the lowest level, meant to
titillate those in need of a teenage sexual massage.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Bill Chambers
AMERICAN PIE *** (out of four)
-a review by Bill Chambers (pie@filmfreakcentral.net)
starring Jason Biggs, Thomas Ian Nicholas, Chris Klein, Tara Reid
screenplay by Adam Herz
directed by Paul Weitz
American Pie acknowledges a cold, hard fact that most movies don't: it
is very difficult to get laid. Its four virgin heroes are Jim (Biggs),
a chronic masturbator, Kev (Nicholas), who desperately wants to
deflower his girlfriend (Reid), Oz (Klein), a lacrosse player whose
approach requires some fine tuning, and Finch (Eddie Kaye Thomas), a
germphobe (his crass nickname is hilarious, but I won't spoil it here)
who pays a classmate to spread rumours about the size of his member. 
Jim, Kev, Oz and Finch attend a high school in suburban Michigan full
of so many impossibly beautiful women it's no wonder they're horny all
the time. After a party at their studly friend Stifler's (Seann
William Scott, in the film's sharpest performance) house leaves them
sexually unsatisfied, the quartet make a pact: to "lose it" by
graduation-specifically, prom night, which is only a few weeks away. 
American Pie is in the tradition of Bachelor Party or Revenge of the
Nerds. Almost every conversation these characters have revolves around
makin' whoopee. All women are there to be ogled. (Alyson Hannigan's
perky music student is the only memorable female of the bunch.)
Situations abound that defy logic only to arouse and/or amuse its core
audience, adolescent boys. (To arouse: Nadia's (Shannon Elizabeth)
Internet striptease-an unexpectedly raucous (and guiltily pleasurable)
sequence. To amuse: Jim's lusty encounter with a hot apple pie.) 
What differentiates American Pie from those dirty eighties comedies,
aside from a very nineties obsession with bodily fluids*, is a cast
that's light years more appealing than that of, say, Just One of the
Guys. Two more standouts: Klein and "SCTV"'s Eugene Levy. Klein plays
a kind-hearted athlete for the second time in a row, after Alexander
Payne's underappreciated Election. I hope to see more of this warm
actor with the disarmingly honest face very soon. Levy's is the most
crowd-pleasing performance, and indeed, it's nice to see him back on
the big screen in a role that makes wonderful use of that expressive
brow.
American Pie also wants to emulate the teen flicks your parents
_would_ let you watch growing up. It skillfully employs a broad mix of
pop tunes, much like John Hughes' movies did, and even pays homage to
The Breakfast Club a couple of times, most evidently when the prom
band covers Simple Minds' "Don't You (Forget About Me)." 
The picture ultimately has a healthy, if obligatory, attitude towards
safe sex-even at their most libidinous, American Pie's protagonists
first whip out a condom. The filmmakers prove that socially
responsible raunch is possible. 
For its familiarity and for its charming leads, I recommend American
Pie, but the buzz on this film had me expecting something...fresher.
As far as the New Teen Cinema goes, it's at the top of the heap. 
*Don't say I didn't warn you about the party scene.

Author
Christopher Null
     This is certainly the year for comedy, with SOUTH PARK, AUSTIN
POWERS 2, and now AMERICAN PIE making the last month alone nothing short
of a gut buster.
     With all the sophistication of PORKY'S 2, AMERICAN PIE is a teen
sex comedy (and was originally titled as such) that leaves taste and
sophistication at the door and goes straight for the comedic jugular.
The highest-of-concepts plot is simple:  Four high school virgins vow to
lose their virginity by the end of school, and the prom is only three
weeks away.  Plots and schemes are hatched out the yin-yang.
     What these guys will do for sex is... well, is what any guy will do
for sex, of course.  But these guys are really funny about it.  Antics
include paying off a girl to spread rumors of one's endowment.  A secret
book of advanced technique.  Joining the choir to meet chicks.  Hooking
up a net-cam to catch the exchange student undressing.  And of course, a
practice session with the titular pie.
     AMERICAN PIE isn't so shocking as SOUTH PARK, which has mercilessly
stolen its thunder, but it's got moments of such sheer hilarity you
can't help but feel drained (from laughter) after leaving this pic.
Sure, it isn't going to appeal to everyone, but if you've grown tired of
the histrionics on shows like `Dawson's Creek,' this movie is a breath
of fresh air.
Director: Paul Weitz
Producer: Chris Moore, Craig Perry, Chris Weitz, Warren Zide
Writer: Adam Herz
Starring: Jason Biggs, Thomas Ian Nicholas, Eddie Kaye Thomas, Chris
Klein, Seann William Scott, Jennifer Coolidge, Alyson Hannigan, Shannon
Elizabeth, Natasha Lyonne, Eugene Levy, Tara Reid
http://www.universalpictures.com/americanpie/
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999, ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Author
James Sanford
     In the interest of full disclosure, I must preface my review of
"American Pie" by noting that I am a graduate of Forest Hills Central in
suburban Grand Rapids. That's the arch-rival school of East Grand Rapids
High, the alma mater of "Pie" author Adam Herz. As a transfer student,
however, I always thought the animosity between the two camps was based
entirely on jealousy. The only differences between FHC and EGR were FHC
kids lived in smaller homes, drove cheaper cars and spent a lot more
time acting like snobs than the East Grand Rapidians I knew.
Now EGR alumni have something else they can hold over FHC: They're
pretty funny. Despite its crass ad campaign and sleazy-sounding subject
matter, "Pie" turns out to be a generally amusing, somewhat honest
picture of the pressures put upon kids to become sexually active.
Despite a few gross-out gags and a corny wish-fulfillment finale, "Pie"
is closer to a "Fast Times at Ridgemont High" than it is to the infamous
"Porky's" trilogy.
What separates Herz's story from most films of this kind is its
depiction of young women, most of whom have some semblence of
intelligence and one of whom -- Jessica, warmly played by Natasha Lyonne
("Slums of Beverly Hills") -- is quietly fascinating in the way she
shares her hard-won wisdom with both her male and female friends. The
general rule in most of the adolescent sex comedies of the 1980s was to
objectify women as much as possible, preferrably by turning them into
strippers, hookers or frosty virgins. Herz isn't interested in playing
that game, and his movie is all the better for it.
 That's not to say that it breaks a lot of ground in other areas.
Although the jockish Oz (Chris Klein) eventually discovers he has a
heart, his buddies are mostly hormonally driven buffoons who would
rather die than face the prospect of going to college without a whit of
carnal knowledge. Finch (Eddie Kay Thomas) has an undeserved reputation
as a world-class Casanova, Jim (Jason Biggs) has already humiliated
himself via the Internet and Kevin (Thomas Ian Nicholas) can't get past
"third base" with his girlfriend Vicky (Tara Reid).
Though most of "Pie" consists of the quartet trying to get some
action before graduation, the movie also manages to touch on a lot of
little truths along the way, particularly when it focuses on the
communication gap between the sexes. Kevin and Vicky in particular have
all the classic "Men Are From Mars, Women Are From Venus" problems and
Jessica sometimes seems to function as a translator, interpreting
manspeak into womanspeak and vice versa.
The most unusual aspect of "Pie"'s male characters is their desire
to please their partners instead of just scoring. Most of them come to
the realization that a woman's feelings ultimately figure into the
sexual equation, something no one ever gave a second thought to in the
"Porky's" era.
But lest you think "Pie" is a thoughtful meditation on young love,
it also dishes out plenty of jokes, some of them predictable (such as
the hot-to-trot exchange student) and some of them so outrageous you may
laugh in spite of yourself (the "pale ale," for example, and an
encounter with an apple pie one can only hope was deep-dish). Those who
know East Grand Rapids -- renamed East Grand Falls here -- will also
enjoy the movie's allusions to the city, including a hang-out that looks
suspiciously like Eastown's renowned Yesterdog and a Trailblazers logo
prominently featured in the school.
 The only downside of "Pie" is that its probable success at the box
office will almost certainly bring on a wave of shoddy imitations, much
as "Porky's" did in the mid-1980s. For those of us who survived "The
Last American Virgin," "School Spirit" and the unforgettable "Zapped!",
the prospect of another wave of such junk is about as appealing as
guzzling a cup of "pale ale."

Author
Mr. Bryan Frankenseuss Theiss
  There are a couple of movies this summer that we've been hearing too much
about for months. I'm not talking about manufactured hype that comes from huge
advertising budgets and star studded Entertainment Tonight appearances. Rather,
I'm talking about the kind of positive word-of-mouth and word-of-word-processor
that starts with test screenings and spreads across the internet and magazine
sidebars and turns the entire cast into celebrities and it-people long before
the film's release. Before tonight, I had already seen or read about most of
the big jokes in American Pie, even the shots that were cut out. And I'd heard
about how outrageous and funny and surprisingly moral it was. 
  The hype, not surprisingly, has backfired. The movie's not bad - I certainly
enjoyed it more than most of the recent crop of teen comedies like Can't Hardly
Wait and She's All That. It's more observant, it pushes the envelope in a few
ways that a lot of former teen boys can relate to, and it has more laughs. But
most of the film's charm was wasted away in the advertising. We already saw the
hapless protagonist, played by Jason Biggs, caught watching a scrambled porn
channel with a tube sock over his penis. We know why the movie is called
American Pie and what Eugene Levy, as Biggs' father, has to say about it. And
worst of all, TV advertisements have given away a great shock value line by the
film's funniest supporting character.
  I can understand why test screening audiences might have loved the movie when
it came as a surprise, but once you strip away the surprising freshness of
these jokes, you leave a pretty standard teen sex comedy. While some of the
male characters show a fairly honest portrait of the humiliation of being a
teenage boy, many of the female characters are a ludicrous fantasy. Most
typical of the genre is a model-like "European exchange student" who at first
gives Biggs the cold shoulder, then with no explanation or motivation invites
herself over to his house to strip naked and  masturbate to his porn magazines.
There is also a hard-to-buy subplot about numerous girls trying to date a nerdy
character because he's rumored to have a large penis.
  But Natasha Lyonne and Alyson Hannigan do bring a lot of charisma to their
small roles. Lyonne, who was appealing as the star of the rather dull Slums of
Beverly Hills, doesn't really do anything besides offer sex advice to the other
characters. But Hannigan, known for playing Willow on Buffy the Vampire Slayer,
gets some of the movie's biggest laughs with her goofy portrayal of a nerdy
flutist.
  Most of the cast is good - Biggs shows particular promise as an
oft-humiliated everyman. Eddie Kaye Thomas, who plays Finch, seems doomed to
the life of the unnoticed character actor. He's believable as a dead-eyed
misfit who doesn't know how to use a public restroom. Chris Klein may be
typecast as dumb but likable jocks after this and a similar (but more
memorable) role in Election.
  Although I think it's been overwhelmed by its hype, people are definitely
still enjoying the movie. Teens and pre-teens will laugh hard at it, and if the
audience I saw it with is any indication then the younger kids will repeat all
of the punchlines out loud two or three times. These kids didn't seem to know
what was going to happen to the pie, and even if they had, the movie itself
can't really be faulted for its advertising. 
  But the aspect of the American Pie hype that is a bit silly is the claim that
it's "surprisingly sweet." It's full of sex talk and disgusting bodily function
mishaps, goes the argument, but you know what? In the end it turns out - and I
know you're not going to believe this, but I swear to god it's true - in the
end it turns out to have a heart of gold, a solid moral and message of love to
impart to the teens of America. 
  But what, honestly, did these people expect? The heroes finally get laid, and
then they light up joints, high five each other and the credits roll over an
epic kegger/wet t-shirt contest? Of course it ends with a positive message
upholding wholesome family values. Even if they do all get laid. That's how all
teen movies turn out in the end. 
Bryan Frankenseuss Theiss
http://www.bucketheadland.com/visitorcenter/
"Shit, I'm the *reverse* of jiggy." --Chuck D

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "AMERICAN PIE" (Universal Pictures)
 You don't need a ouija board to predict that outrageous,
adolescent sex comedies will be big box-office. Milder versions like
"Porky's" and "Fast Times at Ridgemont High" were hot in the '80s, but
the trend, ever since "Something About Mary," is toward edgy, raw,
in-your-face vulgarity. And a slice of "American Pie" is about as
raucous, raunchy, and ribald as you can get. Surprisingly, it's a true
teen-sounding movie. The testosterone-driven plot revolves around four
insecure high school seniors who make a pact not to be virgins after
Prom Night, which is only three weeks away.  There's Jason Biggs,
who's like a young Adam Sandler, gamely agonizing through a hilarious
"date" with a Czechoslovakian exchange student that's accidentally
broadcast over the Internet. Thomas Ian Nicholas initiates the "We
will get laid!" vow, despite the fact that he's never gotten past
"third base" with his girl-friend.  Eddie Kaye Thomas relies on rumors
he's invented about his sexual prowess. And Chris Klein cultivates a
corny sensitivity to charm a sweet choir girl. First-time film-makers
Chris and Paul Weitz are heavily into gross-out humor, like the "Dumb
and Dumber" Farrelly brothers, and Adam Herz's screenplay is slick,
straight-forward funny with zero subtext. Sex itself is described as
"warm apple pie." (Sara Lee is cringing!) Despite the crude jokes
about masturbation, penis size, condoms, and various bodily functions,
the underlying theme is about losing one's innocence.  "It's not a
space shuttle launch..it's sex."  On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, "American Pie" is a spicy 6 if you're a teenager but a stale 4 if
you're old enough to be out of college. Odd, isn't it, that Hollywood
knows that its young target audience will somehow wangle its way into
this R-rated movie?

Author
Homer Yen
I recall the trials and tribulations of my high school years.  It was a
period that would mercilessly force me to exit boyhood and thrust me
into the unwelcome arms of adulthood.  But of all the experiences that
I collected throughout those tender years, I can honestly say that the
toughest and the scariest thing that I had to cope with was my raging
hormones and my crazed curiosity about girls and sex.  Yes, more
scarier than my seventh grade English teacher and even scarier than the
bullies that constantly hounded me, trying to deal with my personal
wonderment about sex was like trying to fight an invisible monster. 
For all teenagers, it's almost like a rite of passage.  And what we did
was sometimes downright nasty, sometimes funny, and sometimes shocking.
 And all of that is terrifically and shamelessly brought to light in
what might be the funniest movie this summer.
`American Pie' is a comedy about four sexually frustrated seniors that
enter into a pact to lose their virginity by the end of the school
year.  Just how great are their hormones raging?  One of them notes,
after watching Disney's The Little Mermaid, that Ariel is soooo hot. 
The four schoolmates are Kevin, Oz, Finch and Jim.  Kevin is the only
one with a steady girlfriend, but doesn't want to have sex until the
time is just right.  But what is the perfect time?  There is just no
way to know, and that frightens him.  Oz is the big jock who decides
that the way to score with the girls is to listen to them and to be
more sensitive.  He joins up with a jazz choir and discovers that
getting in touch with his feminine side has some tremendous advantages.
 Finch is the phobic hermit who doesn't stand a chance with any girl. 
So, he pays someone $200 to start spreading rumors about his prowess. 
Suddenly, girls are lining up to go out with him.  But among these
friends, it is Jim that is the most curious and the most fearful.  When
he has a chance to romp with a pretty exchange student, his
inexperience comes shining through.  He has much to learn, and will do
anything to seek out this kind of knowledge.  This may include watching
scrambled porn channels or experimenting with Mom's apple pie in a
scene that is completely shocking, raunchy, yet unbelievably funny.
The one thing that I want to say about this film is that it well
deserves its `R' rating.  There is stuff in here that is completely
gross in the same manner that `There's Something about Mary' was
gloriously ribald.  In fact, at first this film received a sinful NC-17
rating before a couple of more cuts finally brought it down to a
teen-accessible rating.  But I guess after seeing the no-holds-barred
coarseness of South Park, this seems tame by comparison.  Teens and
anyone who can still remember their acne years are the ones that will
laugh hardest.  But unlike many teen sex comedies, there is a genuine
intelligence at work here.  These are four normal boys who have a
natural curiosity about sex.  Their plans of action are thoughtful and
they think about the consequences.  They know what they want, yet
temper it with responsibility.  But almost always, it's impossible to
know how to fight the invisible monster, and it's these episodes that
make `American Pie' such a carnal delight to watch.


Author
John Beachem
Think back to the year 1981, when one of the raunchiest comedies of
all time hit theaters. That comedy was, of course, Bob Clark's now
infamous "Porky's". I'd actually recommend that anyone who loved
"American Pie" go back and catch "Porky's" to see how a comedy like
this can be made even more amusing. I suppose the biggest difference
between these two sex comedies is that "American Pie" is basically a
safe film. It may not seem this way at first glance, but relative
newcomer Paul Weitz does not make his film as raunchy as it could have
been. He even tries to stick some moral messages in near the end of
the movie. Bob Clark, on the other hand, took no prisoners with his
film. "Porky's" is as obscene as possible with an R rating. By playing
it safe, Paul Weitz and Adam Herz have managed to sap a lot of
potential humor out of their film.
Four high school friends have just made a pact to lose their virginity
before graduation. Jim (Jason Biggs) is willing to try just about
anything, with any girl, to fulfill his obligation. His latest plan is
to bed the exchange student, Nadia (Shannon Elizabeth). If that plan
fails, his backup is the school's nerdy band member, Michelle (Alyson
Hannigan). Kevin (Thomas Ian Nichols) is trying to get his long time
girlfriend, Vicky (Tara Reid), to finally sleep with him. However,
this will involve him saying the three most dreaded words he can think
of. Oz (Chris Klein), a rugby player, has decided to take the
sensitive approach by joining the school choir to gain the affections
of Heather (Mena Suvari). Last we have Paul Finch (Eddie Kaye Thomas),
who is so stuck up that he won't even go to the bathroom in the
school's facilities. His plan is to start rumors about how great he is
in bed so that every girl in the school will be crawling all over
him. The friends' put their plans into motion, but time is running
out, and it looks like everything is going to come down to prom night.
Despite what you may have heard, "American Pie" is not a very
offensive movie. I'm not saying it doesn't have its cringe worthy
moments (like a scene where something which shouldn't be drunk is
placed in a cup of beer), but the movie is far too good natured to
seriously offend anyone. This is too bad because "American Pie" had
the potential to be one of the funniest movies of the past few
years. For example, a scene in which Jason Biggs and Alyson Hannigan
get together starts off uproariously funny, but it is cut short before
reaching its full comic capacity. This happens in an unfortunate
number of scenes. The big laughs are promised, and are nearly brought
to the screen, before Weitz chickens out and alters the course of the
film towards safer ground.
"American Pie" is the sort of movie used to showcase young
talent. Half the cast members will never move on to greater things,
while the other half will be in important, dramatic films a few years
from now. Mena Suvari has obviously already begun her transition by
appearing in the excellent "American Beauty". Even with a script as
shallow as this one, Suvari already displays some amazing emotional
range considering her age and experience.  Alyson Hannigan, who is
already famous for playing the cutsey Willow on television's "Buffy:
The Vampire Slayer", gives a hilarious performance in what is really a
very small part. While the remaining cast members give adequate
performances, the only other standouts are newcomer Jason Biggs and
Eugene Levy ("Multiplicity"), as Jim's dad. Levy's character is one of
the few who grants us some real belly laughs by awkwardly trying to
help his son understand the birds and the bees - so to speak.
Actually, the lack of any big laughs is one of my biggest problems
with "American Pie". There are some movies which contain very few big
laughs, but cause you to chuckle the whole way through, like 1998's
sadly underrated "Rushmore". "American Pie" may have a few chuckles
but not enough to sustain the movie through its 95 minute running
time. I'm sure "American Pie" will be a huge hit with teenagers who
are too young to remember "Porky's" and too old to settle for typical
teen fare. I know, it has an R rating, but I'm not naive enough to
believe that every highschool student in America isn't going to see
this movie. I'd recommend "American Pie" to those desperate for a new,
raunchy comedy since Hollywood hasn't put one out in quite some
time. I give the movie three out of five stars.
Any past movies you want me to review? Send to:
johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
For past reviews, movie news, and other fun stuff, visit:
http://www.dependentfilms.net
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Chad Polenz
American Pie
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1999, R, 100 minutes [1 hour, 40 minutes]
[comedy]
Starring: Jason Biggs (Jim), Chris Klien (Oz), Thomas Ian Nicholas (Kevin), 
Eddie Kaye Thomas (Finch); written by Adam Herz; produced by Chris Moore, 
Craig Perry, Chris Weitz, Warren Zide; directed by Paul Weitz.
Seen July 15, 1999 at 7:50 p.m. at Crossgates Cinema 18 (Guilderland, NY), 
theater #14, by myself for free using my Hoyts season pass. [Theater rating: 
***: good sound, picture and seats]
    Dammit. It's been over two weeks since I saw `American Pie' (and almost a 
month since it was actually released) and I'm just now sitting down to write 
this review. In `filmcriticworld' - to let a review go a fews days later than 
the date the film was released is an eternity. 
Anyway, I'd been thinking long and hard about how to review this film and 
it became clear to me after a while that it would be a difficult review to 
write. If you've been following my reviews this summer you'll notice I've 
been experimenting with style and I guess this would be another good test 
case. 
So, I dedicate this review to one of my best friends, Matt Perreault, who 
I've known since sixth grade and have been able to talk to and relate to on 
just about any and all subject matters. The problem is the guy is 200 miles 
away in Boston and I haven't seen or talked to him in a while despite 
repeated phone calls and e-mails. Maybe this review - a hypothetical 
conversation Matt and I might have about this film - will get him to 
respond...
CHAD: What's up?
MATT: Nothing. What're you doing?
C: I'm trying to figure out how to write my review of `American Pie.'
M: I didn't see it, is it good? What's it about?
C: Yeah, it's really good. It's got like everything in it. It's like raunchy 
in some parts and sweet in others and throughout the whole thing you get that 
feeling that the dudes that made the movie grew up on the same movies and TV 
shows that we liked. I sensed a strong John Hughes inspiration here because 
they show teenage kids for what they really are and what they really act 
like. They're not just a bunch of sex-crazed maniacs.
M: That's what the commercials and the previews make it look like. They make 
it look like some kind of `Porky's' or something for the 90s.
C: Well, actually, there is that kind of sleazy feeling during some parts. 
Some of it looks like they're making the movie purposely for horny teenage 
boys cuz of all the sexual innuedo, but it's like, REALISTIC sexual innuedo. 
The guys in this movie - they're actually realistic teenagers. I mean, 
they're all in their senior year and they make a pact to lose their virginity 
by graduation. That's pretty original right there because I think Hollywood 
assumes all kids lose their viriginity at like age 14 or something. It 
actually acknowledges the fact that, hey, it's pretty fricking hard to get 
sex when you're a kid. But the actual plot is about them trying to keep this 
pact and like encourage the other guy and by the end when it doesn't look 
like they're going to keep the pact they all start to blame each other for 
not keeping the pact.
M: Sounds like that `Seinfeld' where Jerry and George made a pact to get 
married and then George got pissed that Jerry reneged on it.
C: Yeah it's kinda like that. There's some other subtle Seinfeldian things 
going on here, but it's more geared towards teens so it doesn't try to be too 
super highbrow comedy about little things. I mean, it's a sex comedy.
M: Yeah. So what's the plot about?
C: Well it's mostly about this kid Jim (Biggs) who's in this clique that's 
not at the highest social rung on the high school clique ladder, but it's 
pretty high up. Jim's kind of a quiet, sorta goofy guy. He's a lot like one 
of those characters you'd see on a sitcom, especially like something on one 
of those ABC TGIF shows or something... only in an R-rated movie.
M: Okay.
C: Anyway, so Jim has three best friends: Kevin (Nicholas), Oz (Klein) and 
Finch (Thomas) who also fit that kind of sitcom-esque, 
sorta-cliche/sorta-real kind of personality. Like Kevin is the sensitive guy 
in a long-term relationship with this hot chick named Vickie (Tara Reid, 
who's a helluva lot different than the chick she played in `The Big 
Lebowski'). He keeps thinking they're gonna do it because they've been going 
out for a few months and it's just like the law of dating ya know? Him and Oz 
make fun of Jim because he's never been to third base and that's where that 
pie joke comes from (and the title of the movie). There's a good joke when 
they tell him that and he says `McDonald's or homemade?'
M: 
C: And that Finch guy is like this really dorky guy who's just kind of 
friends with these other guys. He's like if Niles Crane (from TV's `Frasier') 
was a kid in the 90s. He drinks mocha chino at school and he refuses to use 
the school's bathrooms (oh they exploit that for a Faralley-brothers type gag 
that's really funny even though you're totally grossed out and winching the 
whole time). After they all make the pact he suddenly gets this reputation 
for being like a total stud and that he has like, uh.. ya know... like... a 
big schlong.
M: How does that happen?
C: Well, that's one of the movie's many surprises. It's better to find out 
for yourself.
M: So what happens, is it like they all try to seduce chicks or something?
C: Sort of. I mean, Kevin already has a girlfriend to work on and Oz, who's 
like a total jock and sort of a mimbo, a lot like the character Chris Klien 
played in `Election,' well he decides to fake being really sensitive and he 
joins a singing group to try to start with a clean slate so the girls there 
won't know what he's really like. And then it turns out that he's not just 
faking being sensitive and sweet and stuff, he actually is. There's this 
really good subplot where he meets this cute blonde girl who you think he's 
going to just seduce and use and all that, but they end up being a really 
good couple. They have a few fights but they have some good talks and stuff 
too. That's kind of where you notice the John Hughes-type themes and dialogue 
going on.
M: Yeah whatever happened to John Hughes? He should make more movies like 
`Breakfast Club' and `Ferris Bueller' again. All he does now is like these 
gay Disney kids' movies.
C: Yeah I know. But anyway I'm getting off track. So a lot of the movie is 
about the four guys and their quests to do it. But a lot of stuff happens 
along the way. Like there's a few scenes where Jim's dad keeps coming in and 
talking to him about sex and masturbation and stuff. It's really funny 
because the dad just says it so non-chalently and you can tell it's an 
uncomfortable subject for him. He's like `Jim, I want to talk about 
masturbation... It's like banging a tennis ball against a brick wall - which 
can be fun, but it's not a game. What you want is a partner to return the 
ball. Do you want a partner Jim?'
M:  I can't imaging having a conversation with my dad like that. Is 
there any cheesy subplots going on, like does someone get knocked up or get 
AIDS or something ?
C: No, but I think they should have delt with those issues. But then again, 
this is a mainstream comedy movie so they're going to get realistic and 
stuff. I mean, that's what the afterschool specials are for. Still, they do 
take it pretty seriously. There's this one conversation Vickie has with her 
friend and she asks if it hurts. I can't remember any movie where a girl even 
remotely hinted at the possibility that sex might not be completely 
pleasurable ya know? I talked to a lot of girls and they say it does hurt the 
first few times. I can't imagine THAT hurting.
M: So is the whole movie about sex?
C: I wouldn't say it like that. It's more like an honest coming-of-age story 
of kids in the 90s and what they think about sex. It's more about the hope 
of getting it than the act itself. There's a lot of taboo stuff going on 
during it all too, like this secret book that Kevin's brother tells him about 
which says how to give a girl oral sex where they actually enjoy it. There's 
a funny scene with that in which the chick screams out `I'm coming' and she 
doesn't mean for supper!
M:  That IS pretty raunchy, but that sounds really funny though.
C: There's a lot of other parts like that, that should be offensive and 
stuff, but they just weren't to me, like a beer cup full of semen and this 
part where this madd hot chick gets naked in Jim's bedroom and... well.. it's 
like almost porn at one point, but it's really funny. I saw it with some 
girls and I was totally surprised they didn't find that disgusting or 
offensive or anything.
M: So, it sounds like you're saying it's like a guy's comedy that girls will 
like too. And you're sure it doesn't get too sappy or corny or anything? I 
mean, it's gotta have some cheesiness if it's going to get girls to like it.
C: Yeah sorta. There's no one specific aspect I'd say is like that, but it's 
there. But it didn't bother me. I laughed a helluva lot and it's just a 
really good and a witty script and it's easy to relate to and everything. 
(8/1/99)

Author
Greg King
AMERICAN PIE (M).  
(Universal/UIP)
Director: Paul Weitz
Stars: Jason Biggs, Chris Klein, Thomas Ian Nicholas, Natasha Lyonne, 
Tara Reid, Eddie Kaye Thomas, Mena Suvari, Eugene Levy, Shannon Elizabeth,
Chris Owen, Seann William Scott.
        A Porky's for the '90's?  Although this raunchy but very funny
adolescent comedy explores problems of adolescent angst and the sexual
follies of youth, it does so with more honesty, intelligence, sympathy
and insight than one expects from a movie squarely aimed at the MTV
generation.
The plot centres around four high school seniors who make a
pact to lose their virginity by prom night - a mere three weeks away.
After all, if Sherman (Chris Owen, from the coming of age drama
October Sky), the school's biggest geek, can get laid, why can't these
four handsome studs?  Although sex is the prime object of their quest,
the four lads end up discovering more important values, such as
friendship, honesty, and love, along the way.
The closest thing American Pie has to a central character is
Jim (Jason Biggs), who finds his sexual awakening has also become a
matter of major concern to his overly concerned father (a droll Eugene
Levy).  Jim's stocks plunge to an all time low when his humiliating
attempt to seduce a foreign exchange student is broadcast to the
entire school body over the internet.  Kevin (Thomas Ian Nicholas)
finds his long-term relationship with Vicky (Tara Reid) threatened by
the sudden pressure to have sex.  The hygiene-conscious Finch (Eddie
Kaye Thomas) circulates rumours concerning his sexual prowess in order
to make himself more appealing, but comes unstuck after an
embarrassing prank.  Meanwhile Oz (Chris Klein) joins the singing club
to impress Heather (Mena Suvari), and ultimately finds he has to
choose between his jock friends and a chance at happiness with her.
American Pie thankfully avoids the cliché of having the prom night
become the climactic moment of the film, and opts for a far less
formulaic way of resolving its plot.  The largely unknown cast throw
themselves into the material with enthusiasm, and their performances
bring the characters alive nicely.
First time film makers, writer Adam Herz and director Paul
Weitz, deliberately push the boundaries of good taste here, but
nowhere near as relentlessly as did the Farrelly brothers with last
year's enormously enjoyable but tasteless There's Something About
Mary.  American Pie features some of the best, and grossest, visual
gags since Cameron Diaz tried out a new brand of hair gel, and should
prove a real winner with adolescent audiences.
This is essentially a bloke's movie, about secret men's
business and featuring plenty of locker room humour - but it's all
done with a modicum of sensitivity that, strangely enough, appeals to
broader audiences.  At the preview I attended, teenage girls were
laughing just as hard as the guys, while many teenage boys were
shrinking with knowing embarrassment.

Author
Michael Dequina
If you see the trailer for _American_Pie_ in the theatre, temporarily
leave the auditorium.  If you see the commercial on TV, change the
channel.  This raucous teen sex comedy's most powerful weapon is the
element of surprise--a tactic that, based on their full disclosure
marketing campaign, Universal seems intent on ruining.
But even if you have already caught a glimpse of an ad or two, there are
still a good amount of big, unexpected laughs in this unapologetically
raunchy romp from screenwriter Adam Herz and director Paul Weitz, both
making their debuts in their respective fields.  What isn't so
unexpected, however, is the thinness of the premise.  Four seniors (Jason
Biggs, Chris Klein, Thomas Ian Nicholas, and Eddie Kaye Thomas) vow to be
virgins no more after prom night.  C'est tout.
It's not like anyone buying a ticket to _American_Pie_ is looking for
plot innovation; they are looking to laugh, and indeed they will.  Along
the way, though, viewers will be meet a variety of keenly defined
characters--an uncommon occurrence in this era of _Can't_Hardly_Wait_s
and _She's_All_That_s.  The focal guy is Jim, a nice, if bashful and
hopelessly desperate (as evidenced in the infamous scene that lends the
film its title) guy made very sympathetic by Biggs, who is like a younger
and much more likable David Schwimmer.  Thomas's mochachino-drinking
Finch is given the last amount of screen time of the four, but, like the
even more peripheral players, such as sex advice-dispensing Jessica
(Natasha Lyonne) and gabby geek Michelle (Alyson Hannigan), he carves out
a memorable niche.
The same goes for Oz (Klein), the jock who turns over a sensitive new
leaf en route to the big score; and Kevin (Nicholas), who is anxious to
go all the way with his girlfriend Vicky (Tara Reid).  But their
respective plot threads eventually point up to _American_Pie_'s
shortcoming.  Oz's newfound gentle side wins him the genuine affection of
jazz ensemble singer Heather (Mena Suvari), and he finds himself feeling
the same way; and issues of true love play a major role in the
Kevin-Vicky relationship.  Needless to say, these forays into more
earnest territory don't quite gel amid the air of tawdriness.
Audiences will be too busy eating up the many hilariously inspired
moments in _American_Pie_ to remember, let alone think, about any serious
issues it misguidedly touches upon.  That's the whole point of the
exercise, anyway--having a good time, and audiences are certain to have a
blast.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline:  http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Mac VerStandig
Note: For personal reasons, I will be on hiatus from June 30, 1999 until 
August 25, 1999. No reviews will be published during that time. -Mac
American Pie is a guilty pleasure at its best, and an outrage at its 
worst. The film is indisputably funny; due to a script filled with 
hilarious and memorable quotes, and the forthright use of sexual 
content. However, the same sexual aspects push the movie's R rating 
closer to "adults only" than the target teenage audience, and the often 
predictable nature of the work plays as a spoiler as well.
Jim (Jason Biggs), Oz (Chris Klein), Kevin (Thomas Ian Nicholas), and 
Finch (Eddie Kaye Thomas) have three weeks left in their high school 
careers and all face a probable realization of their worst nightmare: 
graduating a virgin. The last straw for them comes when their friend 
Sherman, long considered a semi-geek, announces his introduction into 
manhood. Realizing that prom will be their last chance in high school to 
achieve their goal, the four friends make a pact to help each other and 
get the job done, no matter what the cost.
Candidates for the group's goal include a choir girl named Heather (Mena 
Suvari); Kevin's long time girlfriend, Vicky (Tara Reid); Nadia (Shannon 
Elizabeth's), a foreign exchange student; and some assorted other 
females. The guys also have friend Jessica (Natasha Lyonne, who is 
fabulous) to help out and give advice when things get way too bazaar.
The funniest part of the production is a sub plot focusing on Jim in 
particular, his relationship with his Dad, and a certain act of 
disparity he commits involving an apple pie. But it is Jim giving a live 
broadcast over the internet that wins the funniest scene contest.
The MPAA issued American Pie an R rating. However, the film is more 
deserving of an NC-17 rating that the user friendly R mark. Some of the 
more offensive scenes include masturbation with a sock, a condom, and 
the aforementioned baked goods. The movie also highlights two premature 
ejaculations, some dirty magazines, oral sex, regular sex, nudity, 
mention of masturbation with a musical instrument, the consumption of 
male bodily fluid, and an entire plot focussing on sex. If this film 
doesn't merit an NC-17 mark, then the MPAA needs to start asking itself 
what does.
One thing American Pie is not lacking is memorable quotes and moments. 
As the four friends agree to make a pact to lose their virginity, the 
audience is treated to the most uproariously funny speech since John 
Belushi addressed the Delta fraternity in another Universal film, 
National Lampoon's Animal House. This memorable speech ends, of course, 
with "We will get laid!" And Natasha Lyonne has wonderful advice for her 
friend who wants to experience her first time in the perfect 
setting-"it's not a space-shuttle launch. It's sex!" And some of the 
greatest dating advice ever "Just ask 'em questions and listen to what 
they have to say and (explicative)."
Unfortunately, American Pie does have some predictable aspects. The 
production also has the dubious accomplishment of being a high school 
comedy with a plot that leads to the prom, something that has become 
nearly synonymous with 1999. Perhaps the most predictable "surprise" of 
the movie is the revelation of a certain character's prevarication that 
became central to the plot. But to the credit of the film, the four 
central character's fate is unknown until the film ends.  
American Pie opens with a scrambled video. It is obvious that the video 
is pornographic and a teenager is getting his "jollies" from it. 
Ironically there may be no better metaphor for the film itself. It is an 
entertaining work that seems to have gotten scrambled somewhere in the 
process, but teenagers will still enjoy every last moment, just as most 
older audiences will as well. 

Author
Indra Moeljadi
If you take a look at this movie's poster, then you will find this movie
probably not worth seeing. No big names and not an attractive title.
Probably another high school movie. But if you go and see this movie, all of
that will change.
This movie must be one of the funniest movies since There's Something About
Mary, but this time without a hot Cameron Diaz.
It's about four regular high school seniors, Jim, Oz, Finch, and Kevin. They
are not the studs of the school, nor the nerds. Just the average student,
which you'll probably forget after 5 years. At one party they made a pact to
have sex and lose virginity, after they hear that Sherman (the nerd a.k.a.
The Sherminator) brag about sex. And what better time to lose virginity than
on prom night?
So the story goes on, with each character using their own method of getting
laid, or at least a date to prom night. What makes it very real is the
reality of this condition. Regular guys not being able to "get some" during
high school years, and with peer pressure this becomes very obsessive to
some of us... eh... them.
In this movie you'll find funny but very real things: watching scrambled
adult movies on television when his/your parents suddenly walked in (most
probably at least once happened to you guys), father gives son adult
magazines (luckily that didn't happened to me), parent find condoms in
his/your drawer, and premature ejaculation.
This movie is as real as it can get, and with the R-rating it gets better.
Not because the audience can see some tits, but also because teenagers these
days live in a R-rated society. The cast also portraits the average high
school senior, not too cocky or too nerdy or even too beautiful.
Will Jim, Oz, Finch, and Kevin score on prom night? American Pie is just not
about the quest for sex, but also about relationship, friendship, safe sex,
love, and offcourse home made American apple pie!
for more reviews, visit Indra's PopCulture Reviews
http://www.geocities.com/anakzaman
