Title
Review for Scorta, La (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ben Hoffman
     From the moment the machine guns rattle and the old father runs
out into the street, letting out a heart-rending cry when he sees his
son has been assassinated in a car, along with a judge, the action
never lets up ... and this is before the opening titles.  Timely,
because of the political corruption being unveiled in Italy, the film
depicts the lengths to which the rightwing government officials and the
Mafia will go to silence those who would expose and jail them.
     In real-life Italy, the Mafia in 1992 had placed a bomb under the
car of anti-Mafia Judge Giovanni Falcone as he was on his way to
Palermo airport.  The judge, his wife, and three police bodyguards
were killed.  Based on incdents such as that, La Scorta takes you
right into the action in one of the most exciting, tense thrillers in
years.
     Judge De Francesco (Carlo Checchi) has been sent to this Sicilian
town to investigate the murder of his predecessor.  For his protection,
although he says he does not need them, four body guards are assigned
to look after him, to guard him ... and watching how they do just
that will keep you on the edge of your seat.
     There is Angelo (Claudio Amendola) who has come from Rome to his
home town in Sicily to join the Escort.  His chief is Andrea (Enrico Lo
Verso).  The other two guards are Raffaela (Tony Sperandeo) and Fabio
(Ricky Memphis).  All have bonded together with the one object:
protecting the judge.  That, of course, is not an easy job as they have
to be on the lookout for potential car bombs, grenades, and other forms
of mayhem.
     When the judge finds that there are politicians who are in the
pocket of the well-owners who sell water to the city, he has the water
shut off, raising the hackles of the local government who then try to
defame him and antagonize everyone against him  All sorts of ploys are
used by both sides and all are nail-biters.  One of the beauties of the
film is that, shunning a Hollywood climax, it opts for truth and a
realistic ending.  You will love it!
