Title
Review for Lugar en el mundo, Un (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Gaston Batyi, Federico Luppi, Celia Roth, Jose Sacristan, 
           Leonor Benedetto 
Director:  Adolfo Aristarain 
Producer:  Adolfo Aristarain 
Screenplay:  Adolfo Aristarain and Alberto Lecchi 
Cinematography:  Richard De Angelis 
Music:  Emilio Kauderer 
Released by First Look Pictures 
In Spanish with subtitles 
     Too often, it's the thoughtful films that slip through the cracks
unnoticed.  And A PLACE IN THE WORLD is nothing if not thoughtful.
Living in the years following the death of Argentinian President Juan
Peron, the characters in this film argue about religious ideologies,
political views, and human rights.  Against this intellectually rich
backdrop, we are treated to another well-crafted coming of age story.
The protagonist is twelve-year old Ernesto Dominici (Gaston Batyi), and
the plot is reminiscent of George Stevens' classic Western SHANE.
     Ernesto's parents Mario (Federico Luppi) and Ana (Celia Roth) are
ex-Peron supporters who have recently returned to Argentina following a
decade of exile.  Instead of moving to Buenos Aires or another city,
they have chosen to settle out on the frontier.  Using their knowledge
and skills, the pair have formed a cooperative among the locals that
allows them to fight against the wealthiest - and most unscrupulous -
landowner.  In addition, an educational system has been established,
and Ana, a doctor, provides free medical care.
     Into this struggling-but-hearty community comes Hans Mayer Plaza
(Jose Sacristan), a Spanish geologist with a German name.  Following an
initial period of mistrust, Hans becomes a close friend of both Mario
and Ana, and something of a mentor to their only child.
     Numerous wonderful vignettes mark A PLACE IN THE WORLD as a
special film.  With a style far from Hollywood's overexaggeration,
Adolfo Aristarain's film knits several independent stories into a
whole.  With a tone more suggestive of real life than melodrama, he
examines love affairs, clashes of wills, and intimidation tactics.
Ernesto's journey from child to man is not an easy one.
     One of the most touching of these individual tales involves
Ernesto's romance with an illiterate girl that he's teaching to read
and write.  Her father is against her education, so the two must meet
in secret, which leads to some interesting speculation by others about
their occasionally-odd choices of meeting places.
     The film's title comes from a statement made by Mario, who
believes that every man and woman has a special place in the world
that, once they find it, they will be unable to leave.  Ernesto
questions how he will recognize his place when the time comes.  There
is, of course, no answer to his query, although the film centers on
showing the ties that bind Mario to his poverty-stricken settlement.
     The acting is uniformly strong, with all the principal and
secondary performers delivering believable portrayals.  Celia Roth is
especially worthy of mention for the emotion she projects through her
eyes.  She and Federico Luppi are perfectly matched.
     A PLACE IN THE WORLD offers a frank, somewhat unusual view of the
relationships that form families and communities.  Although the film
has a lot more meat to chew on than that, the issues presented by A
PLACE IN THE WORLD would not generate the same degree of interest
without the characters who argue about and live them.  It's hard to
deny the effectiveness of this marriage between personalities and
ideology where neither eclipses the other.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Ben Hoffman
     This film was disqualified for nomination for a 1993 Best Foreign
Film because it was a joint Uruguay/Argentine production.  In any case
it was not the best of those that were nominated.
     Ernesto (Gaston Batyi) as a young man returns to the village where
he grew up to see what the place looks like today.   His mother, Ana
(Cecilia Roth), was a doctor, and his father, Mario (Federico Luppi), a
former university professor who now taught school, went to Spain where
Ernesto was born.  His parent had fled the dictatorships that
flourished in Argentina.  Ernesto, in flashbacks, relives some of the
events of his youth.
     Using flashbacks, the film relates how the family returned to
Argentina, carrying on their struggle for the working class by actually
working with poor shepherds.   Mario tries to persuade the landowner's
foreman to let his daughter, an illiterate, attend his school but the
father refuses, saying it is unnecessary for a girl to be able to read
and write.  Ernesto takes on the task of teaching her without her
father's knowledge and ends up falling in love with her (Lorena del
Rio).
     Any number (too many) subjects are tackled by the director so that
there are some lulls.  Overall, it is well intentioned and does have
lots to say about the politics of Argentina.
