Title
Review for Private Parts (1997)
Number of Reviews
19

Author
Scott Renshaw
     The sum total of my direct familiarity with Howard Stern, including
the 110 minutes of PRIVATE PARTS, now stands at about 114 minutes.
Before seeing the film I had not read his book, had never heard his radio
program, and seen him only in passing as a guest on T.V. talk shows or on
his own E! Entertainment Television program.  I knew Stern only
indirectly, as a much-reviled icon of all things excessive and an object
of adoration for devoted fan base, but I did not know enough about him to
have a real opinion.  I suspect that mine was the best possible point of
entry for PRIVATE PARTS, because I was expecting neither to hate it nor to
revel in vulgarity.  Without the burden of preconceptions, I was free to
laugh myself silly at a completely unexpected delight.  It's hard to say
who may be more surprised at PRIVATE PARTS -- Stern's fans or his
detractors -- because it is funny in almost every possible way:  at times
goofy and low key, at times undeniably outrageous.
     Based on Stern's best-selling 1993 autobiography, PRIVATE PARTS stars
Stern as himself in the story of his own life.  Beginning with Stern's
childhood in New York, the film traces his interest in radio from an
early age to his study of communication at Boston University.  There Stern
meets Alison (Mary McCormack), the woman of his dreams who becomes his
wife and devoted supporter.  That support is necessary through tough early
deejay jobs in upstate New York, Hartford and Detroit, where Stern
develops a conventional on-air persona.  It isn't until he gets a plum job
in Washington D.C. that Stern invents his more shocking style, and
becomes an instant ratings sensation.  That success wins him a spot at New
York's WNBC, but the management, including program director Kenny Rushton
(Paul Giamatti), is determined to rein in the often-offensive Howard.
     The savvy edge of PRIVATE PARTS really should not have been a
surprise considering Betty Thomas was in the director's chair.  Thomas
previously did sharp work with THE BRADY BUNCH MOVIE and HBO's talk show
wars docu-comedy THE LATE SHIFT, proving herself adept with the worlds of
media and pop culture, and she manages to put a surprising amount of
energy into scenes of people sitting around talking into microphones.
Some of those scenes are simply brilliant, including the attempt by a
flustered Kenny (a wonderfully slimy performance by Paul Giamatti) to stop
Stern's broadcast of an off-color parody of "Match Game."  Thomas' most
impressive achievement, however, may be taking a group of radio
personalities -- including Stern's cohorts Robin Quivers and Fred Norris
-- and putting them in situations where they could be comfortable.  Norris
in particular has some hilarious moments, notably in a sequence in a
B-movie actress's hotel room where he steals every scene hardly saying a
word.
     Then there is Stern himself, who proves, if nothing else, that he is
an extraordinarily canny manipulator of his own image.  For those who
think of him as an evil lecher, PRIVATE PARTS offers a portrait of Stern
as a devoted family man whose reverence for his wife borders on idolatry;
for those who think of him as the self-aggrandizing, self-proclaimed "King
of All Media," PRIVATE PARTS offers the humbling vision of Howard the
adolescent geek, strolling through the '70s with a Mike Brady perm and a
cheesy moustache.  Most notably, PRIVATE PARTS offers those who consider
Stern's routines mean-spirited the chance to watch him as he performs,
grinning at his own naughtiness like a gangly Benny Hill.  It may not be a
tremendous challenge to make an acting debut playing yourself, but Stern
makes the character he plays something you might never expect:  charming.
     Is the Howard Stern of PRIVATE PARTS the _real_ Howard Stern?
Probably not.  There's certainly a contradiction between Stern's
announcement to Alison prior to the emergence of the now-recognizable
Stern persona that he's going to "be myself," and the disingenuous
suggestion that he's just playing a character on the air; the truth
probably exists somewhere in the middle.  It does grow a bit tiresome
hearing Howard bemoan how misunderstood he is, and the film slows down
considerably whenever he feels obliged once again to show us his sensitive
side.  PRIVATE PARTS is much funnier when Stern laughs at himself, or when
he does the things that make other people laugh at him.  Still, it's no
easy trick to please Stern's fans while placating his enemies, and PRIVATE
PARTS serves up raunchiness and bad taste in a slick and snappy package.
No matter how much of Howard Stern you've seen, this is a Howard Stern you
haven't seen.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Howard Stern, Mary McCormack, Robin Quivers, Fred Norris, 
      Paul Giamatti
Director: Betty Thomas
Producers: David Kirkpatrick, Ivan Reitman, Keith Samples
Screenplay: Michael Kalesniko and Len Blum, based on the book by 
      Howard Stern
Cinematography: Walt Lloyd
Music: Van Dyke Parks 
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     Will the real Howard Stern please stand up?  For, in truth, the man 
who haunts the airwaves of nearly three-dozen radio stations each 
morning seems vastly different from the kinder, milder version who 
graces the screen in Betty Thomas' sweet, often-hilarious biopic.  Based 
on the bestselling book of the same name, PRIVATE PARTS relates some of 
the details of Stern's life -- his romance with his wife, Alison (Mary 
McCormack), his early radio failures, his development into America's 
foremost "shock jock", and his vitriolic war with NBC's top brass.  
Along the way, we get to know Howard as a tender, intelligent, affable 
guy who just happens to do an "offensive... obnoxious... disgusting" 
radio show.  So who is Howard Stern, really?  Is he PRIVATE PARTS' 
gentle soul with a loud mouth, or is he just the loud mouth?  In recent 
interviews, Stern has asserted that the latter is correct; his wife, on 
the other hand, claims it's the former.  Actually, it doesn't make much 
difference; the truth about Stern's nature doesn't alter the fact that 
PRIVATE PARTS is an entertaining motion picture.
     As astonishing as it may be for his fans to acknowledge, Howard 
Stern is not a universally-known personality.  His syndicated radio show 
boasts about 10 million listeners and his program on E! ENTERTAINMENT 
TELEVISION reaches another 40 million, but that's less than a quarter of 
the United States' population.  And there's no overseas outlet.  That 
will change with PRIVATE PARTS.  Howard Stern is about to go 
international, and, the more money this film makes, the bigger his name 
will become.  
     Stern's outrageously vulgar, sexually-explicit radio program has 
polarized nearly everyone who lives within hearing distance of his 
voice.  The religious right wants him banned from the airwaves, the 
Moral Majority wants him muzzled, and the FCC continuously tries to take 
him down.  But his legion of loyal listeners have kept him at the top of 
the ratings heap with a support that sometimes borders on rabid.  
PRIVATE PARTS contains an anecdote that explains why Howard is #1 in the 
morning.  Everyone, whether they love him or hate him, listens for hours 
on end for one simple reason:  they "want to know what he'll say next."
     PRIVATE PARTS contains re-enactments of some of Stern's most 
memorable radio comic routines from over the years.  There's a mock quiz 
show where he tries to get around FCC guidelines prohibiting 
vocalization of the "seven dirty words".  There's a sequence where he 
has sex with a woman over the radio.  An on-air argument with his 
program director (Paul Giamatti) turns into a physical fracas.  And, in 
another groundbreaking moment, he does the first-ever live radio 
interview with a naked woman.  However, while these scenes offer a 
flavor of what Stern's program is like, they don't really capture the 
true "feel", which is harsher, edgier, and more prone to offend.  In 
fact, there are numerous times when PRIVATE PARTS seems to pull its 
punches rather than letting them fly without concern for the 
consequences.
     The film begins when Howard is a child and traces his life to the 
present.  His sidekicks are accounted for -- Fred Norris, whom he met 
while working in Hartford during the late '70s; Robin Quivers, who 
started as a newswoman in Washington D.C. before becoming his friend; 
joke writer Jackie Martling; producer Gary Dell'Abate; and even 
Stuttering John Melendez, who pops up for an unforgettable cameo.  Much 
of PRIVATE PARTS details Howard's always-loving, occasionally-rocky 
marriage to Alison, who's played with warmth and charm by MURDER ONE's 
Mary McCormack.  The battles with the FCC have been relegated to a minor 
annoyance (this isn't a First Amendment "message movie" like THE PEOPLE 
VS. LARRY FLYNT), although the ongoing feud with a WNBC program director 
takes center stage during the film's final third.  
     It will probably come as no surprise to Stern fans to learn that 
their hero has an undeniable screen presence.  Unlike many 
personalities-turned-actors, he never seems awkward or out-of-place.  
Stern's surprisingly subdued portrayal of himself may open a few eyes, 
however.  He's never out-of-control, and the only time he plays a 
"sexist, racist pig" is when he's on the air.  In fact, during a 
voiceover, he makes the comment that everything he does is 
misunderstood.  As for Howard's most prominent real-life-turned-reel-
life associates -- while Quivers and Norris are unlikely to win Oscars 
for their work here, they don't embarrass themselves, either.  
     PRIVATE PARTS is aimed primarily at a mainstream audience.  The 
humor here is racy, but also universal, and many of the jokes will cause 
viewers to double over with laughter (like the dig at the Academy Awards 
during the end credits).  And, as bizarre as it may sound, Stern is the 
kind of guy you can't help pulling for.  The question hanging over 
PRIVATE PARTS' financial success is whether enough non-Stern fans will 
venture to see what they may view as a "cult" or "niche" film.  Most who 
take a chance, regardless of what prejudices they harbor against WXRK's 
top personality, will find themselves rewarded by a surprisingly 
pleasant two hours. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Rhodes
I saw Howard Stern's movie at the press screening, and I laughed
through almost every minute of it.  The film opens nationwide this
coming Friday, March 7.
     First, let me assure my loyal readers that I have not been cloned.
My evil twin is not the one writing this review, and I have not lost my
mind.
     First, confessions are in order.  Before seeing Howard Stern's
movie, called PRIVATE PARTS, I had never seen nor listened to Howard
Stern even for a single minute.  Moreover, I was absolutely sure that
I had no desire to ever see him.  I was so sure that his humor would be
gross and mean spirited that if there had been a conflict with another
press screening, as there frequently is, I would have gone to see the
other film instead -- any other film.
     Well, PRIVATE PARTS was the biggest pleasant surprise for me in a
quite a while.  Yes, the film is certainly outrageous, but so was
AIRPLANE! (1980).  And yes, Howard is shocking.  I would postulate that
Howard Stern is one of the funniest and sweetest people around.
Although I laughed so hard that I even got choked, the biggest surprise
for me was how tender and good spirited the show is even at its most
audacious.  The plot even contains the long lasting love story between
Howard and Alison, his wife of twenty years.  (All of Howard's
entourage in the film, with the exception of Alison, are played by
themselves.  Alison is acted by Mary McCormack.)
     PRIVATE PARTS is the autobiography of Howard's life and is based
on his book.  In the first part, his father Ben (Richard Portnow) tells
Howard at every opportunity how moronic he is.  "We never went to
ballgames," reminisces Howard.  "The only sport my dad liked was
yelling."  This gave Howard his tough skin and his obsession with being
liked.  Howard's antics, like those of any class clown, are disguised,
plaintive cries to be wanted and be popular.
     His ability to simultaneously disgust and involve an audience is
seen when he is twelve.  He gives a traditional puppet show at a senior
citizen's home that has them all dropping like flies.  He decides to
jazz up the act with simulated puppet sex.  Needless to say, the
audience is so shocked and enraged that they can't take their eyes off
the stage.
     Howard's movie isn't just about Howard.  The film is careful to
focus in on his supporting crew, especially Robin Quivers and Fred
Norris.  The first to join him was cherubic looking black newscaster
Robin Quivers.  The rules of the time were that the DJ did his shtick,
and when it came time, they switched to the newscaster.  From the first
day, Howard pulled Robin into his comedic fray.  She is as sweet as
sweet can be, but she can hold her own.  In her own more subtle way,
she manages to top Howard in the banter on the air.  Robin gives a
marvelously compelling performance in the film.
     Although much of the show does happen on the air, a large portion
is devoted to Howard's constant battles with management.  When he
finally works his way to the top -- the biggest radio station in New
York -- the NBC lawyers read him the riot act.  There are seven words
you can not say on the air so he must stop saying them.  So what does
he do?  In arguably the funniest scene in the show, he devises a match
game where he picks a common word and lets his coworkers guess the
missing, and, if taken out of context, obscene word that goes with it.
(For example, if I say Hoover, you would say Dam.  This is not used in
the movie, but it is the only G rated one I could think of to give you
the idea.)  His nemesis and personal watch dog manager, Kenny (played
with angry fervor by Paul Giamatti), goes ballistic when Howard
violates the rules.  Howard becomes vindictive and refers to Kenny on
the air only as Pig Vomit.
     NBC executive Roger Erlick (Michael Murphy) says that "Howard is
on the FCC's Most Wanted List."  NBC wants to fire him, but there is a
problem.  He has become the hottest DJ in the nation.  How long does
the average listener stay tuned to the same station?  18 minutes.  For
Howard it is an hour and twenty minutes.  Well, how about the Howard
haters, the managers ask, since there are a lot of those?  Over two
hours.  In both cases the reason is that listeners want to know "what
will he say next?"
     "After all, being misunderstood is the fate of all true geniuses
is it not?"  laments Howard.  Even earning a fortune and having
millions of fans, he still worries that people will think he is just a
moron.
     I do not want to mislead you.  The show manages to insult just
about everyone.  Still, the humor is non-stop, and based on the theater
audience's reactions, people respond extremely well to his jokes.  Go
with an open mind, and you may not be able to control yourself.
Howard's film raises comedy to a new level.  I will reject the urge to
recount more of the film's crazy antics and let you experience it
yourself as I did.
     As I left the theater I began to recount my favorite scene to my
friend I had taken with me.  As soon as I laughed my way through one, I
kept remembering another that was even better.  If the film had had one
tenth the humor or one fourth the likeableness of its stars, I would
have counted it a success.  The movie it most reminded of was PEOPLE
VS. LARRY FLYNT, but I liked PRIVATE PARTS better.
     An incredible and unique experience.  An infectiously happy show.
Howard teaches us to laugh at everything in life.  And yes, by the end
we have fallen in love with him, his comedic conspirators, and just
about everyone associated with the production.  A more likable group I
haven't seen in a long time.
     PRIVATE PARTS flies by at 1:49.  (Stay through the final credits,
for the film keeps coming back on.)  It is rated R for strong language,
dope smoking, crude sexual humor, and nudity.  Teenagers will probably
love it, but make sure they are mature enough for the material.  I give
the film my strongest recommendation and my top rating of ****.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael Yagnow
     This movie IS NOT a two-hour radio show. Stern-lovers as well as
haters will love this comedy, whether they like it or not. It is a
touching love story and the journey of a nerd to the top.
"Private Parts" begins with several comedic scenes that grip you
and pull you into the movie. Several people remark on how much they love
or hate Stern in funny, documentary-like scenes.
For the fans, there are plenty of scenes you'd expect of Stern:
there is a scene where Stern sees Carol Alt's breasts practically burst
out of her bra; there is an orgasm scene in which a fully nude woman
rips off her shirt while on top of a speaker; there is the infamous
bathtub scene; and there is, of course, the Jenna Jameson scene, in
which we see everything (EVERYTHING) she has to offer.
And, for the non-fans, there is a touching love story between Stern
and his wife, Alison, played wonderfully by Mary McCormack.
The performances are the best they can be, with Stern playing
himself, Robin Quivers playing herself, Paul Giamatti playing "Pig
Vomit," the villain, Jenna Jameson playing Mandy, the first nude woman
in radio, and, of course, Fred Norris, who steals the movie from his
first scene.
In "Private Parts," Stern show us his PRIVATE PARTS! It is a movie
for everyone (except the kids). Despite the raunchy Stern we know, he is
a really nice guy, who will keep us laughing long after we've left the
theatre.

Author
Chad Polenz
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1997, R, 109 minutes [1 hour, 49 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Howard Stern (Himself), Mary McCormack (Alison Stern), Robin
Quivers (Herself), Paul Giamatti (Kenny - "Pig Vomit"), written by Len Blum,
Michael Kalesniko, produced by Ivan Reitman, directed by Betty Thomas, based
on the novel by Howard Stern.
Howard Stern has declared himself the "King of All Media" because he knows
how to get our attention - by making us wonder what he'll do next. He
constantly says he is misunderstood and "Private Parts" is an attempt to show
us the man behind the sunglasses.
The film works in three ways: as a satirical biography; as an extremely
lighthearted drama of free speech and romance; and as a wild, sexual comedy
farce. The only problem is trying to force these elements to work with each
other when they really do not. 
The first act plays like a lowbrow "Forrest Gump," but it becomes a bit more
serious through Howard's college years. Stern (played by himself) is a geeky
nerd with few friends, but has a quiet passion for radio. He meets his future
wife, Alison (McCormack), and the two connect instantly. Then we get the
standard opposites-attract romantic comedy gags, such as when Stern plays
Frisbee with the his wife's group of mentally challenged adults (this joke
sets up itself). There are a few sight gags like these throughout the film,
but this is not a film about stupidity (a la "Dumb And Dumber") and thus they
seem out of place.
They don't call Howard Stern a shock jock for nothing. Sex sells and he
knows this, but because of the medium of radio he must be careful with what
he says and does on the air. Stern often talks about his own sexual conquests
with his wife, which she doesn't mind at first, but when he jokes about her
miscarriage the semi-serious breakup/makeup routine comes into play. I know
this is based on a true story and this probably did happen, but it doesn't
seem to keep with the rest of the film.
The storytelling throughout the second and third acts is quite choppy: one
minute the movie is a wild comedy with Stern's shocking sexual antics (some
that are nearly pornographic); the next minute he is looking for loopholes in
his battle for free speech; and the next minute he is either arguing or being
romantic Alison. 
The second half of the film essentially becomes a filmed version of "The
Best of the Howard Stern Show." And it's not that Stern is an idiot, just the
opposite in fact. Unlike Beavis and Butt-Head, he seems too smart to be
making such lowbrow humor. When the story eventually returns to its
supposedly lighthearted romantic comedy roots, I had almost forgotten about
the Alison character because she disappears for almost 30 minutes.
Although there are some flaws, "Private Parts" is not a bad movie at all. It
simply tries too hard to be too many things. Stern's claims of being a
regular guy are vindicated, but through a somewhat mediocre manner.  
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Author
Michael J. Legeros
    Believe it or not, this short 'n' sweet biography of shock jock
Howard Stern is rather endearing.  The self-proclaimed King of All Media
is portrayed as a loving father and devoted husband.  He's just a guy
with a raunchy radio act and, thus, is misunderstood by everyone but
himself.  The makers of this movie make it very easy to like Mr. Stern.
Or at least tolerate him.  His hair looks good, he's filmed under favor-
able camera conditions, and the snippets of his show are considerably
toned done.  (Toned down, but still funny.  A kielbasa-swallowing
stripper is something you don't see every day.  For my money, though,
it's the bit with a woman and a woofer that's worth the price of
admission.) Much of PRIVATE PARTS is about the History of Howard, pre-
NBC and before his battles with the program director he dubbed Pig
Vomit.  We see some of his childhood, watch his marriage dissolve and
repair, and wince in embarrassment at his early attempts behind the
mike.  This is mandatory viewing for anyone who's ever worked in radio.
I was taken back to *my* first time in the booth, when the wrong button
stopped George Thorogood's "Bad to the Bone" in mid-song.  I hear ya,
Howard.
    PRIVATE PARTS was screened at the Six Forks Station Cinemas in
Raleigh on 3/7.  Screen #6 smells bad, but the sound was decent.  Except
for the hiss, that is, that was audible when the movie wasn't.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
I'm also on the Web!  http://www.pagesz.net/~legeros/

Author
Walter Frith
Shock jock Howard Stern's rise to stardom in the radio business is profiled
in 'Private Parts'.  The picture is based on Stern's best selling novel and
literally traces the earliest days of his life as a child growing up on Long
Island to his rise and eventual success as a media phenomenon.  Despite
intense controversy over Stern's vocal tactics which include topics dealing
with just about everything explicit and sexual in society, the choice is
easy, like him or hate him.  Those who hate Stern need to simply tune him out
but his fans (who have been criticized by media analysts as 'undesirables')
have launched his program to national syndication for well over ten years.
The central focus of 'Private Parts' is not just Stern's dealings in the
media but rather on his personal life as we see him go through college to his
humble beginnings at radio stations in Detroit, Hartford, Washington D.C. and
New York City.  All the while the movie centres on Stern's relationship with
his wife Alison (Mary McCormack).  The movie strives to inform us that Stern
isn't who he seems to be on the radio but that it's all just an act and that
he's really a decent, loyal and loving husband and father of three.
Unfortunately for the audience, the entire film is dull, flat, repetitive at
times and makes its point and yet continues to bash us over the head with
Stern's antics.  Director Betty Thomas ('The Brady Bunch Movie') is not the
best person qualified to sit at the helm of this very intense and mesmerizing
adult subject matter.  The movie is disappointingly tame for Howard's true
fans and for the rest of us, we wonder exactly what the point of the entire
picture is since it seems to have a split personality.
Filmmaker Ivan Reitman ('Stripes', 'Ghostbusters', 'Twins', 'Kindergarten
Cop', 'Junior') is in the producer's chair for this one and along with
screenwriters Len Blum and Michael Kalesniko they have made what isn't
necessarily a bad film, just one that isn't very exciting and Stern's fans
should be patient as I'm sure the next film ( if there is one) will be much
jucier and at par with what Howard Stern's career is really all about.  There
is an interesting rumour circulating that may interest a lot of movie fans.
 'Batman and Robin' which is the fourth chapter since 1989 in the story of
the Caped Crusader is due out June 20th and if 'Private Parts' does well at
the box office, there's talk of approaching Howard Stern in the hopes of
casting him in the fifth chapter as one of the film's villains.  I'm not
kidding!!!

Author
Brian Koller
There is much to like and dislike about Howard Stern.
Radio's #1 bad-boy, he is a shock jock who tests
the taboos of society.  Of course he can be a real
jerk, but underneath it all, he's just an average
guy and a wonderful family man.  Or so he repeatedly
tells us, as he plays footsie with naked bimbos
while on the air.  It's just a joke, get it?
Perhaps Stern has the greatest job in America, getting
paid zillions of dollars to express his outrageous
opinions on the air, which includes the hiring of hit
men to kill people that he dislikes.  But it takes talent
to ad lib with such flair, and it has to be admitted:
Howard Stern is funny, much, much more so than Jerry Springer
could ever hope to be, and that is a very redeeming quality.
"Private Parts" tells the Stern saga, rising from
clumsy, nerdy college DJ to NBC's flagship radio station
in New York.  Along the way he marries blonde goddess
Mary McCormack, whom he nearly loses due to his radio
prattle about his marital intimacies, and his on-air
flirtations with bimbo guests and call-ins.
Although (both thankfully and surprisingly) the First
Amendment is never mentioned, Stern fights the good fight
against censorship, battling a dislikable program manager
(Paul Giamatti, dubbed "Pig Vomit" by Stern) for the
all-important right to say 'cock' on the air.  Wisely,
director Betty Thomas softens Stern's persona, downplaying
the occasional hatred and emphasizing Stern's role as
a family man.
Also appearing in "Private Parts", and also playing
themselves, are Stern's radio show cohorts Robin Quivers,
Fred Norris, and Jackie Martling.  Quivers is especially
good.
That "Private Parts" is a modestly good film is not
a surprise, given Stern's talent for dialogue.  While the
film could not have been much better, given his limitations,
it could have been much worse, as most comedies are.
"Private Parts" is well structured and avoids repetition,
and is more than willing to place Stern in embarassing
situations.  The film never drags and a good laugh is
always around the corner.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
David Blatt
Released: 1997 United States
Runtime: 109 minutes
Distributed: Paramount Pictures
Director: Betty Thomas
Executive Producer: Jeffrey Chernov
Screenplay: Len Blum, Michael Kalesnio and Howard Stern (book)
Starring: Howard Stern, Mary McCormack, Robin Quivers, Paul Giamatti,
Fred Norris
        Given Hollywood's most recent ode to a sexually-obsessed bad boy,
it's natural to expect `Private Parts' to be `The People vs. Howard
Stern', a ringing affirmation of how our basic constitutional freedoms
must be protected against the crusades of the prudish religious right. 
To the filmmakers' credit, `Private Parts' opts not to wrap itself in the
flag or present Stern as a crusader for any ideal loftier than ratings
and his right to stay on the air. But even without pretensions of
political or historical weight, `Private Parts' is crafted as a movie
about a hero's triumphant struggle in support of a cause.  In the
tradition of such diverse films as `Mister Roberts',  `One Flew Over the
Cuckoo's Nest',  `Dead Poets Society', or most similarly, `Good Morning,
Vietnam', the film adopts the tried-and-trued Hollywood formula of
pitting a rule-breaking, authority-defying rebel against the bureaucratic
stuffed shirts.  Guess who wins and guess whose side we're on?
`Private Parts' follows Howard Stern, playing himself, from his
childhood as the son of a carping radio engineer through his gawky
college years at Boston University to his first jobs with small radio
gigs on Long Island, Hartford and Detroit.  To his own amazement, his
pitiable attempts to attract women bear fruit with the radiant and
warm-hearted Alison, who agrees to be his wife and support his struggling
career.
While Howard's love for radio stems from childhood visits to his
father's station, his success in the business comes only slowly.  He
lacks a natural radio voice, a flaw which he tries to mask by raising his
voice half an octave to a near sing-song, and lacks a comfortable on-air
identity. It is only when Alison convinces him that he is at his best
when he is being himself that Howard starts attracting big ratings while
provoking the frantic anxiety of station managers and account executives.
What exactly is Howard Stern when he's being himself?  The film
begins with a voice-over declaration from Stern bemoaning how he is
always misunderstood.  It is hard to tell from this film, or from
occasional exposure to his radio and TV shows, what there is to
misunderstand.  Quite simply, Stern is the uninhibted, unleashed, voice
of male pre-pubescent masturbatory fantasies, a cross between
Beavis-and-Butthead and Penthouse Forum, with a brain focused on penis
size, large-breasted women, menage-a-trois, lesbian love scenes and the
like.  Where most of us restrict this kind of talk to private spaces and
eventually (pretend to) grow out of it, Stern gets to share his pee-pee
and wee-wee talk daily on the air.  And given that most of this subject
matter remains officially taboo, he gets to attract a mass audience in
the process.  The Howard Stern phenomenon is nicely explained in a scene
where a station executive shares audience research showing that the #1
reason why Stern's fans listen to his show is to find out what he'll dare
to do next--and that Stern's haters listen even longer for the very same
reason.
Stern's material is vulgar, infantile, offensive and in many
cases, extremely funny. The movie plays the laughs brilliantly by
delivering the raunchiest bits as part of Stern's on-going battles
against the tight-assed executives of his stations in Washington and WNBC
in New York. After Stern's been reminded of the seven dirty words not to
say on radio, he and his cronies play an on-air game show that involves
searching for the missing words that go with `willow' and `a-doodle-doo'.
 Another outrageous scene involves Howard leading a female listener to
on-air orgasm. The higher-ups may fume and rant, but they can't stop him
because the more outrageous his material, the better his ratings.
The movie's message seems to be that no matter what Stern says or
does on the air, it's okay because it's honest and because deep down he's
a nice guy who's all talk but no action.  The counterpoint to all Stern's
fantasy talk about sex with Playmates is his marital fidelity to Alison
(Mary Mc.Cormack) and his personal loyalty to his on-air colleagues
Robin Quivers and Fred Norris (both played by themselves).  Like most
fictional Hollywood heroes, Howard nearly loses both Alison and Robin at
different points, but manages to regain their trust and win them back. 
Alison genuinely struggles with embarrassment over her husband's on-air
antics, but ultimately retains her confidence that he's a good man.
The film, directed by Betty Thomas (`The Brady Bunch Movie'), 
mostly follows a straight-forward narrative style, punctuated by
occasional fantasy scenes and `here's-us-filming-a-movie' interludes that
simply seem out of place.  Stern does a marvelous job playing Stern,
especially during the bell-bottomed, big-afro, cheesy mustache 1970's. 
Paul Giamatti, a largely unknown film actor, is especially hilarious as
the New York station manager, nicknamed Pig Vomit by Stern, driven to
apoplectic fury by his foil's unstoppable antics. Giamatti creates one of
the finest buffoons since Herbert Lom's days as boss to Inspector
Clouseau.
`Private Parts' concludes with three scenes: a triumphant concert
in Central Park to celebrate Stern's rise to #1 in the ratings; Howard
turning down an easy score and embracing his wife and children; and a
defeated Pig Vomit grumbling about that goddamned Howard Stern.  With the
support of the people, the rebel has conquered the stuffed shirts and
kept his gal. And thanks to the courage of this true-life Hollywood hero,
most of America can now share a grown man's locker-room sexual fantasies
for hours on end every day.

Author
Dave Cowen
In order to write this review, I need to admit that at one time I 
considered myself to be something of a Howard Stern fan.  It was about
the time back in college when I had shown a number of friends Stern's
Pay-Per-View special, in which a man sets his private parts aflame.  
The man explained that he was trying to combat a case of the crabs and
had succeeded in burning them to death by dousing that area of his 
body with lighter fluid.  This sparked a discussion among my friends 
about the safety of using lighter fluid to burn off bodily hair, which 
ultimately ended in one of them running down the hallway of the dorm 
to the bathroom with a flaming hand.  He spent the rest of the day with
his hand in a bucket of water.  So much for the safety of using lighter 
fluid to burn off bodily hair. 
But watching Howard Stern's PRIVATE PARTS provoked something in me 
that I've only felt one other time when watching a movie, and it wasn't
the kind of combination of titillation and amazement that Stern's radio
and TV work seems to inspire.  During the climactic scene, after Howard 
is cut off of the air after interviewing the first naked woman on radio 
and has stormed into his producer's office provoking a fight, I felt
nauseous.  My legs gave out, my stomach seized, and for once, I wanted
nothing more than to get out of the theater.  The other time this had 
happened was during the second half of Scorcese's GOODFELLAS, in which I 
was overwhelmed by the paranoia Ray Liotta's character was experiencing. 
At the viewing of PRIVATE PARTS I attended, though, it wasn't paranoia 
that made we want to leave the theater.  It was disgust.
Throughout the past couple of years, I've found myself strangely charmed
by two movies which portrayed men who found success in life by doing
things that offended other people: Terry Zwigoff's CRUMB, and Milos 
Forman's PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT.  CRUMB, seemed to overcome the 
insanity present in his family and provide brilliant social commentary 
by venting those impulses through brilliantly illustrated comics.  Flynt, 
in a somewhat inadvertant way, upheld the rights for Americans to parody 
public figures and display the human body without restriction.  I expected 
PRIVATE PARTS to trigger the same feeling in me: the triumph of an 
underdog who pays his dues, but ultimately gets what he wants in life by 
acting on his impulses, the "moral majority" be damned.  But after Stern's 
on-air massage from a naked woman, during the fight, I didn't find Stern 
heroic... but pitiful.  What was he fighting for?
Critics have expressed surprise that PRIVATE PARTS would portray 
Stern as being a good-hearted family man, and that at many times, 
PRIVATE PARTS seems to want to do nothing but espouse family values.
How could it be any different?  If you were making a movie about your
life, with you playing yourself in the starring role, would you really
make yourself look like, well, you really are?  Of course not.  With the
vast majority of life stories, the film would be a huge flop.  It's all
ridiculously cynical -- in order to make the film make money, you've got 
to play to the type of person that the masses want to see, so you make 
yourself seem like you're just "playing a role," that you're really a 
sweet person underneath it all to win over both friends and enemies.  
Throughout the film, Stern gripes that he's always misunderstood.  No
wonder!  With such brazen manipulation of public perception, glossing
over the contradictions in his personality, Stern seems nothing more 
than a money grubbing jerk.  "Put the kids in the last scene!  People
will eat it up!"  It's that cynical calculation of alternating 
sleaze with a family values image that made me literally sick to my
stomach.  
The film isn't without good points.  Stern's acting is natural, and
his co-hosts Robin Quivers and Fred Norris do an admirable job in front
of the camera.  The film moves at a fast pace, and Stern, when he's 
shown doing the show itself, never fails to be hilarious.  It's when 
the movie goes "behind the scenes" that it become artificial, treacly
and rings horribly false.  
The Neue Slowenische Kunst have a similar problem.  NSK, an art 
collective based out of Ljubljana, Slovenia, bathe traditional art
such as music, painting and dance with the overtones of fascism.  
Adopting the images and sounds of the totalitarian rule of their hometown 
Ljublijana, industrial musicians Laibach create pounding modern 
symphonies, often converting American or European pop standards into
a frightening, pounding industrial brew.  Their album Let it Be, in
which the entire Beatles album Let It Be is transmogrified into a 
throbbing, stomping teutonic sound, is a classic of industrial music.
It's also very funny, and very obviously an ironic joke.  It's a pity
that PREDICTIONS OF FIRE isn't as well.
In a completely deadpan style, director Michael Benson analyzes the
development of the Neue Slowenische Kunst and the origins of their 
art, linking it with Ljublijana's history of occupation.  Benson spends
most of the movie's time showing old newsreel footage and reciting,
in a dry and monotonous tone, the history of Slovenia.  
How does hostory ultimately affect Neue Slowenische Kunst's art?  Very 
little, it would seem.  In what brief moments of what we see of Laibach, 
Irwin, or any of the other artists in the collective, it would seem that
they're doing nothing more than pulling off postmodern pranks in the art 
world (similar to Britain's K Foundation, whose film debut was the much 
more impressive and direct WATCH THE K FOUNDATION BURN A MILLION QUID),
adopting the image of fascism to do nothing more than shock.  The
mixture of dry documentary footage and art terrorism never meld, and 
much of the output of the NSK is glossed over to make way for history 
lessons which sound recited from a textbook.  Like PRIVATE PARTS, 
PREDICTIONS OF FIRE seems to be revisionist history, trying to force
NSK's output into a historical context to make it look serious or 
important, and ultimately, PREDICTIONS OF FIRE rings just as false. 
Signed: ESCHATFISCHE, david
(esch@fische.com) --------------------------------------------------------

Author
Chuck Dowling
Private Parts (1997) ***1/2 out of ***** - Cast: Howard Stern, Robin
Quivers, Mary McCormack, Fred Norris, Paul Giamatti, Gary Dell'Abate, Jackie
Martling, Carol Alt, David Letterman, many musician cameos. Written By: Len
Blum and Michael Kalesniko. Directed By: Betty Thomas. Running Time: 109
minutes.
Before I review this film I need to set a few things straight about my views
of Howard Stern. I have no views of Howard Stern. Now please, before you
Stern fans start sending me hate mail consisting of "YOU SUCK! STERN
RULES!", let me explain. I live in a town where Howard Stern's radio show is
not aired. My only exposure to the man is when I occasionally watch the 30
minute show of his on the E! network. And, just watching that show is not
sufficient enough to form an opinion of the man. The E! show represents, at
the most, 1/6th of his daily radio show. So please, understand that I have
no preconceived opinions about Howard Stern. I'm not a fan, and I'm not an
enemy. Let's continue...
"Private Parts" chronicles shock-jock Howard Stern's rise to fame and
fortune. The story begins as Stern recalls his childhood to airplane
seatmate Carol Alt. We see a few select scenes from Howard's childhood: His
early brushes with radio, and his days at an all-black high school, for
example. Then the main story begins: Howard Stern wants to be a disc jockey.
We see Howard working various radio jobs across the country, meeting his
future wife Alison (Mary McCormack), and assembling the team which he
currently employs. These scenes are certainly entertaining, but aren't
necessarily laugh out loud funny.
The hilarious scenes come later as Howard has moved to New York City to work
at WNBC radio. The network weasels who hired him without even knowing what
kind of show he did are shocked to discover the content of his radio show.
They attempt to censor him at every opportunity through an executive named
Kenny (Paul Giamatti), and these confrontations provide the best moments of
the film. I don't particularily think that Stern's radio persona is all that
funny, but when he's fighting the establishment it serves a purpose.
(Please, I liked the film, no "YOU SUCK! STERN RULES!" letters.)
There are some flaws in the film, mainly the interruptions in the story so
some naked woman or society freak can tell us that Howard is now in Detroit
or whereever. They don't fit the film and are an unwanted distraction. The
film ends abruptly and it feels like there's much more story to tell. I'll
be looking forward to a possible sequel to continue that story. Stern proves
himself to be a good actor, but the true test will come when he plays a
character other than himself. I'll be looking forward to that as well. [R]
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, film related
links, and reader's reviews.

Author
Andrew Hicks
     Howard Stern is one of those phenomena no one can quite
figure out. Maybe people like him because culture has so rapidly
declined and he appeals to the most juvenile sex-obsessed
elements of people, or maybe because he so openly says
whatever's on his mind or possibly because he has all that money
and he still stands well outside the usual kiss-ass celebrity
structure. He's famous and a multi-millionaire but he still 
seems like a disgruntled working-class man. 
     I can't say I'm a big fan of Howard Stern but he does
fascinate me. I read his books Private Parts and Miss America
because of the three reasons listed above, but also because
psychologically, Stern's mind works like no one else's. He's hard
to figure out just because he's so full of contradictions. On one
hand he's the biggest egomaniac on the planet, but on the other
hand he's constantly insulting himself. He's intelligent but immature.
A psychological profile of Stern would fill books. 
     The PRIVATE PARTS movie could have gone in two
directions. It could have been an over-the-top satire of someone
who creates controversy everywhere he goes with juvenile
behavior but still takes himself completely seriously. Or it could be
a serious look through Stern's eyes at his climb from obscurity to
fame and the obstacles along the way. PRIVATE PARTS takes the
second approach, which I think is the more interesting one (and
the more risky one), and still manages to be funny a lot of the time.
     The film begins at its end, a 1991 appearance of Stern as
"Fartman" on the MTV Movie Awards, and soon flashes back to
the roots of it all -- Stern as a child constantly being told to shut up
by his father, Stern as a teenager going on the radio for the first
time, Stern meeting and falling in love with his wife, etc. From
about the age of 18, Stern plays himself, which isn't incredibly
convincing, but as he says, "It's a movie; you're supposed to
suspend disbelief." 
     That's one of the elements that should have been dropped
from the film -- the constant self-reflexive "We're in a movie"
references. Several times, Stern's real-life cohort Gary Dell'Abate
interrupts the film to persuade scantily-clad women to hold up title
cards telling us where Howard went next. This is intrusive,
although I am grateful all of the Stern crew (Robin Quivers, Fred
Norris, Jackie "The Joke Man" Martling) were cast as themselves
in this film. 
     We follow Howard from his early days as a wacky
drive-time jockey, as he meets people like Norris (who is
throughly weird) and Quivers (who is thoroughly likeable and
always seems to be above what Howard does) who help him shift
his show from lame and forced comedy to genuine conversation.
Stern is at his best when he's talking about what's on his mind,
which the executives at WNBC radio constantly try to restrict. 
     The only major player in the Stern story (beside the evil
radio executives who try to keep Stern down) who isn't played by
a real-life counterpart is Stern's wife Allison, played by Mary
McCormack. Casting someone we've never heard of who isn't
model-gorgeous was also a good idea -- it seems more geniune
this way. I overheard several people in the theater asking other
people if that was Stern's real-life wife, which is probably the
response director Betty Thomas and producer Ivan Reitman were
aiming for. 
     What seems less convincing is one of the film's plotlines --
Stern's loving relationship with his wife. His dilemma, which he
addresses in the Private Parts book, is that he married her before
he was famous. After he got famous, beautiful women came out of
the woodwork, all begging for sex. As someone who was
unsuccessful throughout his life with the opposite sex and basically
never grew up, it's a hard road trying to stay faithful to Allison.
"This is the hell that is my life," he says, completely straight-faced. 
     In the end, the message is that Stern is completely
misunderstood. He's not the Antichrist, he's just out to entertain
and make money. And he loves his wife. Just as in THE PEOPLE VS. 
LARRY FLYNT, we as the audience are in no position to determine
how much of this is the God's-honest-truth and how much is
romanticized by Hollywood, but the movie is entertaining enough
that if they want to make their protagonist out to be a martyr, we
can't complain. 
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Over 750 detailed reviews with a comedic flair.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Howard Stern will do just about anything to be funny on the radio
from having guests strip naked (could anything be more pointless in
this medium!), having another stick a thirteen inch kielbasa down her
throat, inducing a listener to have an orgasm from the vibration of her
woofer, and making dead fetus jokes the day after his wife's
miscarriage.  His humor is not so much off-color as two counties away
from being even near- color.  PRIVATE PARTS is his autobiography in
book form and the film based on the book.  Except for his personal
style of gags the plot is of how his straight-laced management at his
various jobs tried to tone him down and how he always reacted by
becoming even more of the Bad Boy of Radio.  This basic conflict is the
same sort of thing we saw in NATIONAL LAMPOON'S ANIMAL HOUSE,
MEATBALLS, STRIPES, and GHOSTBUSTERS.  Since each of those films was
either produced or directed by Ivan Reitman, it should come as no
surprise that he produced PRIVATE PARTS also.
     As the film Howard Stern (played by Howard Stern) opens is
performing a stage act as Fartman in a pair of pants tailored to leave
his butt cheeks exposed.  As Stern walks back stage he worries that his
humor is not appreciated by others as he gets disapproving stares from
other performers.  To a woman sitting next to him on a plane, he begins
to recount his life, told in a flashback.  We start with Stern as a
cute child with a father who seems constantly angry.  Starting as a
geeky teenager and then as a geeky adult (who looks a lot like Weird Al
Yankovic), he goes from one radio job to the next fighting
unsympathetic management and territorial fellow disk jockeys.  At first
he is usually the victim of these conflicts, and he drifts through jobs
in one city after another.  Stern finds himself in larger and larger
conflicts culminating in his being hired at New York City's WNBC whom
we are told hired him only on the basis of his high ratings at his
previous job at a Washington DC radio station.  When they found out the
nature of his radio program they decide it is necessary to tame him.
But in a series of battles Stern always wins eventually because he is
so popular with the listeners.
     Howard Stern could conceivably be a good actor with the right sort
of material, but here he is cast hopelessly against type.  He never
seems get much of a handle on his character and without an
understanding of what makes someone like Howard Stern tick, he seems to
be just going through the motions.  Along the way Stern picks up the
rest of his comedy team including his female straight man, Robin
Quivers playing herself.  Quivers is charming as is Mary McCormack as
Stern's long suffering and ever-perfect wife Alison.  Holding his own
for the comic drive of the film is Paul Giamatti as the NBC executive
who has vowed to tame Stern and who, at least to hear Stern tell it, is
hopelessly outclassed by the classless Stern.
     Ironically with all the sexist and sexual humor, the film was
directed by a woman, Betty Thomas (who some will remember played Lucy
Bates in "Hill Street Blues").  This is a cotton candy film, light,
pleasant, but without much substance and what little there is made to
go a long way.  If there is not a whole lot to think about here, at
least the film moves well and is entertaining.  Probably people not
offended by the style of humor will enjoy the show.  This is the kind
of film that generates from critics a lot of positive votes but not a
lot of enthusiasm.  I rate is a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Michael Redman
First off I should confess that I am not a Howard Stern fan. I primarily
attribute this to the fact that I have not lived in a market where I
could hear him on the radio. I'll also have to admit that I never
thought that my life was incomplete due to this lack of experience.
Until this film, "Howard Stern" was more of a concept than a person. Now
we see the man behind the shock jock  =97 at least we see the image  that=
the man behind the shock jock wants us to see. Although it's impossible
to determine the truth of the person, there is one fact that is
indisputable: Stern is certainly the virtuoso of self-promotion.
>From a very early age, the outrageous radio personality wanted to be
famous and discovered that scandal was a sure way to achieve that goal.
After overcoming his initial on-air shyness, "Howierd" hit the country
by storm although like most overnight sensations, it took him years to
get there.
The rally where he accepts the honor of being New York's most popular DJ
in front of thousands of screaming (and semi-nude) fans occupies a major
point in the film and was obviously a major highlight in his life.
Stern's public persona is the man who pushes the envelope of decency as
far as, if not further than, it can go. He sneaks the words you can't
say on radio into a quiz show skit ("Complete the phrase: 'Blank
Willow'."). He has radio sex with one of his listeners on air by having
her sit on her speaker with the bass turned up as he hums into the
microphone. He conducts the world's first radio interview with a naked
woman while she massages him on the studio floor.
His epic battles with the powers that be at NBC, especially his nemesis
"Pig Vomit", are at the heart of the Howard Stern The Hero portion of
the film. You can't help but root for the everyman jerk as he takes on
the corporate jerks.
Now we have his new public image. He's also the man who fell in love and
has stayed faithful to the same woman for over 20 years. He's the
devoted father of a brood of lovely children. He's probably even kind to
dogs. Methinks reality lies somewhere inbetween.
Stern plays himself as does his on-air team. They are all naturals at
being themselves: a task undoubtedly more difficult than it seems. He
and his partners-in-crime Robin Quivers and Fred Norris are often
hilarious even as they go for the lowest level of humor possible.
With this film, Stern has made his splash in yet another medium. It
remains to be seen if he can portray anyone other than himself, but he
is magnificent in this role. Its the one he was born to play.
There are many similarities between "Private Parts" and "The People
Versus Larry Flynt". Both feature men who are public sleazeballs shoving
the limits of free speech, but privately have a heart of gold. Both are
about figures that publicly treat women in a less than PC fashion, but
behind closed doors conduct long term loving relationships.
Perhaps we are seeing the beginning of a new trend in films. I can't
help but wonder if the next thing to look forward to is "Rush Limbaugh:
The Movie".
[This appeared in the 3/20/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
Marty Mapes
*** If anyone ever had to play Howard Stern in a cartoon, Alan Alda is
the man. Stern and Alda have the same projecting deep voice with just a
hint of an east-coast accent. It's eerie. But I digress already. 
Private Parts is a typical rags-to-riches story. It tells the life of
Howard Stern from cowed kid to troubled teen to Number One in New York.
Along the way he gets married, finds the perfect co-hosts and pisses off
his bosses and their advertisers while pumping his show's ever-growing
ratings. 
 The story is told (mostly) chronologically, but it plays more like a
series of comic bits threaded together. There's not much overarching
plot or conflict, but structuring and pacing the movie this way was the
right decision. There is some growth in Stern's character, but that's
not what's interesting about the man. What's interesting is the funny
stuff he does on the air, and there's no overarching coherence to any of
that. 
Private Parts handles this problem of realism very well. When a movie is
based on actual people, sometimes it's distracting when you don't know
what's true and what was made up for the movie. Just rent an Oliver
Stone movie (JFK, The Doors, Nixon) if you doubt me. 
Private Parts tells you right out that it could be lying at any time.
Early on, the movie shows us Stern's childhood while in voiceover, Stern
describes his parents as very restrictive. The movie cuts to a shot of
his actual parents, today, denying everything we just saw on screen.
There are documentary aspects to the movie, intermixed with standard,
staged movie drama, along with Stern the man's voiceover for Stern the
character. The movie tells you that the drama and "reality" are mixed
together and that you shouldn't believe everything you see. 
 Again, this was the right decision for the movie because it allows more
funny stuff to happen without raising the distracting questions of
reality. A young starlet invites Stern to have his way with her in a
bathtub. First, it seems unlikely it would happen to an admittedly ugly
man like Stern; it seems much more likely that he's trying to impress
the Stern-worshippers in the audience. Then, when he turns her down
(sort of), it seems much more likely that he's trying to impress the
other half of the audience. Maybe what's on screen is all true, but
because the movie plays loose with the facts anyway, it doesn't matter.
It's a funny bit that adds to the movie. 
 After the movie, I liked Howard Stern. He comes off as a fun, likeable,
good guy. A little more thought reveals how well made and well
publicized this movie is. I don't know if I'd really like the real
Howard Stern, but by playing up the character Stern's devotion to his
wife and setting up straw-man detractors for him to knock down, he
becomes not just the hero of the movie, but a hero 
 By playing "match game" with his co-hosts, he gets the "contestants" to
say "pussy" and "cock" on the air by having them complete the phrases
_____ Willow and ____-a-Doodle-Doo. In the context of an irrational,
unfair, red-faced, prig of a program director sworn to the task of
keeping Stern reined in, this is a very funny and satisfying bit. Try to
imagine the same bit without that straw-man context, though, and four
adults giggling at the words "cock" and "pussy" is almost sad. 
 The publicity plays on Stern's reputation as a vulgar, obscene,
despicable fellow. Stern himself bragged to several critics about how
successful the movie was with test audiences, even with those who say
they don't like Howard Stern. One ad for the movie even says "the most
shocking thing about this movie is how much people love it." But really,
by building up this bad-boy aura about Stern, the publicists are also
setting up their own straw men for the public to knock down when they
see the movie, by finding the movie's radio bits more amusing than
offensive and by finding character Stern to be a loving family man. 
 The movie and the publicity are manipulative and the movie lies to the
audience, but in the case of Private Parts, it's all in the name of
making a better movie. I found it enjoyable and funny, and I found
myself liking Howard Stern. The movie says Stern is not only successful,
he's as a decent family man, too. Who could possibly dislike such an
American figure? 
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes

Author
Ben Hoffman
Right up front I have to admit that before attending a screening of
PRIVATE PARTS, the only thing I knew about Howard Stern was based on
the occasional articles I had read in the Los Angeles Times.   None of
it was flattering.   I was, therefore, expecting to see an outrageously
disgusting display by this top-rated  radio talk-show host.  In that, I
was not disappointed; he is disgusting and he is outrageous.
However, to my surprise, I found him a warm person, a devoted husband
and a loving father.  In addition, he is in no way stupid.
College-educated  in Communications, he seems to have learned more than
many who are currently executives in radio and TV.
Howard's goal was to stop being hired and fired by every radio station
all over the country.   He wanted to be number one, have a secure job,
and do things his way.   He then surrounded himself with some wonderful
people, notably Robin Quivers, elevating her from just reading the
weather reports to engaging in exchanges with Howard.  How the
executives railed against that!  How they screamed that they were
losing advertising clients.   All of this, of course, until the ratings
started coming in and they realized they had a gold mine.   So, if
Howard Stern is disgusting, what can one say of those who hired him,
wanted to fire him, but succumbed to the ratings?  Who has fewer decent
values?
The "utterly without redeeming qualities" of many of his gags are,
pitifully, funny but I am not about to enumerate them.   My
understanding is that the director and Stern both did not want to
soft-pedal any of what really has taken place on some of his shows, so
we get to see a few choice ones.   Even as we gag, we laugh.   Some are
so infantile, it speaks volumes about the public that adores him.
One executive explained that of those who listen to his programs, there
are those who love him and want to know what next outrageous thing he
is going to say or do.  For those who watch but hate him, they do it
because they want to know what next outrageous thing he is going to say
or do. So there you have the reason for his large audience, as well as
the sales of his book, PRIVATE PARTS.
Mention must be made of the cast, many of whom are real-life people
from his show as well as others who make this a very funny movie:   In
addition to Howard and Robin, there are Mary McCormack who plays his
wife; Fred Norris who plays himself as he has been on Stern's show as
engineer for some 18 years;  Jack Martling, the show's real head
writer; Gary Dell'Abate, the producer of Howard's show . . . and a
dozen others who contribute to the film, including some stunning
nudes.
So, if you are squeamish, perhaps you ought to stay away.  But if you
are able, as I was, to enjoy the spectacle of Howard Stern putting
everyone on . . . and I have no doubt but that is exactly what he is
doing, . .  I suggest you catch PRIVATE PARTS and get yourself a good
laugh while learning about the phenomenon that is Howard Stern.

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen at the Loew's Orpheum, Third Ave. and 86th St. by myself at 11:30,
with a half-off coupon.
Many have made mention of Howard Stern coming off as a big pussycat in
this dramatization of his life that finally makes him "King of All Media."
Unlike the book of the same name, this movie covers Stern's life from
childhood to about 1984, just before he is fired from WNBC in New York
City.
The story is told mainly in flashback, the movie framed by Howard's MTV
Awards appearance as Fartman and his arrival at JFK Airport. Audiences are
immediately disarmed when it is revealed that the publicly vainglorious
Howard is embarrassed and belittled by his butt-cheek-baring appearance
on cable television, viewed as an oddity by the stars he would have as his
peers.
We are taken through Howard's early radio career, where he is suppressed
by the understood confines of American radio. In the film we are led to
believe that the reason Howard is obnoxious is that he had been holding
back and not being himself. However, it is hard to believe that this is
Howard just being himself. He obviously knows how to get an audience going
and the act is actually rather calculated. This is probably just one of
the many reasons people, and the FCC, are out to get him.
The film's true heart is Howard and his crew versus the radio stations
where they work, especially in Washington DC and at WNBC in New York,
where "Pig Vomit" (a/k/a Kenny, Paul Giamatti's performance lives up the
the character's nickname) is set against him before he is even on the air.
Any attempt to reign him in is met with greater and greater resistance,
with bits like Lesbian Dial-a-Date or Out-of-the-Closet Stern.
There is a certain amount of event-altering, which to Howard's many fans,
are evident: The schism between Howard and Alyson, for example, is something
I never recall hearing about on the radio show or reading in the book. It
is hard to believe, after listening to Howard's show for more than a decade,
that he saved something, or anything, new for the movie.
Mary McCormack is wonderful as Howard's wife Alyson, who often suffers the
public recounting of their lives on the radio. Howard Stern, Robin 
Quivers, and Fred Norris play themselves in the film. 
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/Acropolis/8588/kino.html

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Private Parts (1997)
Howard Stern, Robin Quivers, Mary McCormack, Fred Norris, Paul Giamatti, 
Gary Dell'Abate, Jackie Martling, Carol Alt, "Stuttering John" Melendez, 
Michael Murphy, Reni Santoni. Directed by Betty Thomas. 109 minutes.
Rated R, 3 and one half stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott
NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
About mid-way through "Private Parts," radio bad boys Howard Stern and 
Fred Norris concoct a stunt to drive their program director crazy. 
Annoyed by the PD's edict that they perform wacky character bits instead 
of free-form chatter, the men agree to his demand with a vengeance. Using 
thick, lisping voices, they play an effeminate gay couple, gushing their 
love for one another. The scene climaxes, so to speak, with Stern 
pretending to gargle a cup of semen as a sign of his devotion, gurgling 
obscenely and popping off one-liners about swallowing. As a gay manhell, 
as an ADULT, I should have been offended watching these clowns reinforce 
negative gay stereotypes with their juvenile display. Instead, I couldn't 
stop laughing. Hunched over their microphones like co-conspirators, those 
two giggling overgrown schoolboys were delightfully naughty, not 
malicious. Oddly enough, the whole ludicrous scene was actually endearing.
The publicity campaign for "Private Parts" has been one of the most 
aggressive in recent memory. Beyond the barrage of promotional ads, Stern 
has appeared on every magazine cover, news program, and talk show in 
sight. If fact, I'm surprised he hasn't dropped by my apartment to offer 
suggestions on how to write this review. Over and over, Stern has 
hammered away at his message that "Private Parts" is more than just an 
outrageous comedy  it's also a sweet story of a misunderstood guy who is 
deeply devoted to his wife and family. 
He's more or less correct. The film is a entertaining, surprisingly 
traditional biopic; liberally peppered with Stern's gross-out humor. 
Based on his 1993 autobiography, Stern provides the voice-over as we 
watch sepia-tone images of his childhood in New York, with Dad calling 
little Howard an idiot. Stern's interest in radio leads him to Boston 
University, where he meets Alison (Mary McCormack of "Murder One"), the 
love of his life. Playing himself, in a hilarious variety of bad 
hairstyles, Stern pays his dues working as a floundering mainstream 
deejay in various radio stations, eventually landing a gig in Washington 
DC, where he, along with cohorts Norris and Robin Quivers, develops his 
shock jock on-air personality.
Director Betty Thomas ("The Brady Bunch Movie") handles the trio of radio 
performers well, placing them in familiar settings where their fledgling 
skills as actors are not overly taxed. Quivers, Stern's newscaster and 
straightman, handles her scenes well, but Fred Norris, Stern's engineer 
and cohort,  is the film's real surprise. His deadpan delivery ("Fred's 
like wallpaper," explains Stern), coupled with a naive sexiness, provides 
some big laughs. During a hotel room sequence with Stern and a B-movie 
starlet, Norris says little, but completely steals the scene in hilarious 
fashion.
Stern is at his best when in the studio or onstage, reenacting his bits 
with infectious glee. His acting ability is shakier during the much-
heralded tender moments, although McCormack's quietly assured performance 
is strong enough to carry the two of them. Early scenes of Stern as a 
geeky novice are ham-handed, to say the least. Still, the gags are good. 
One of the funniest shots is a visual; a close up of Stern's crotch as he 
clearly becomes aroused beneath his trousers. God help the special 
effects person assigned to produce that shot.
"Private Parts" includes moments of shocking tastelessness, particularly 
a sequence of Stern making jokes on the air about his wife's miscarriage. 
But the scene is quickly followed by a "heartfelt" apology from Stern, 
reinforcing the film's incessant portrayal of Stern as a man whose rude 
demeanor is just a cover for the lovable cuddle-bunny that lies inside. 
Stern likens his life story to "Rocky," seeing himself as a gangly 
outcast who succeeds against all the odds. That seems simplistic and a 
bit suspect. "Private Parts" plays like a well-done snow job; a candy 
coated valentine to an self-obsessed media hound. I doubt that Stern is 
the demon some paint him to be, but he's certainly not Mister Rogers 
either. Regardless of "Private Parts" self-serving design, the bottom 
line is that this rude, funny and sweet movie works. So Howard wins again.
 Geez, who'd have thought?

Author
Joshua McAdams
        The movie "Private Parts", starring popular radio personality
Howard Stern, documents the rise of a obscure kid from sub-urban New
York who becomes the self-crowned "King of All Media." Director Betty
Thomas paints by numbers over an Ivan Reitman comedic template that
had given us such films as "Ghostbusters" and "Stripes." In this time
test formula the hero gets laughs while battling an oppressive
establishment that wants to shackle all that is funny and good in the
world. Throughout the film the audience is blatantly  manipulated into
routing for the shock-jock. Poor Howard is constantly belittled and
picked on by everyone from his father to the WNBC program manager. He
is ridiculed by other performers for his Fartman act at the MTV Music
Awards. Meanwhile the guy carries on a romance with his beloved wife
Allison that is straight out of Brothers Grimm fairy tales. When he
finally gets some clout he uses it to stand up to the evil corporate
lawyers and management types that want to tone down his radio show. In
the end Howard spells out (for anyone who missed the first ninety
minutes) how misunderstood he has been his whole life and how is
really just a loving father and husband. Message received loud and
clear.
"Private Parts" reminds me of a book I read in high school.
Its called "Fahrenheit 451". It a prophetic novel by Ray Bradbury
that deals with a society devoid of books and completely dependent on
television. Truth and fiction have become so ambiguous that only the
weather is immune to manipulation. People become like drones willing
to accept what ever form of reality is offered to them.  Welcome to
the United States of America circa 1997.
You see I dont like or dislike the man personally nor do I
have any objection to any of his humor. Ive listen to his radio show
before on many occasions and have seen him of E! Entertainment
Television where Howard has a half hour show. I never read the book on
which "Private Parts" basicly because I wasnt really interested in
what a radio disc jockey would write about. Of course plenty of people
were extremely interested in what Stern was saying - the book became a
bestseller. Its not really the vulgarity of his shows that attracts
me, its the spontaneity of the individual. Like his WNBC program
director is told in the movie, people tune in because you never know
what Howard is going to say next. Unfortunately, in "Private Parts"  I
knew exactly what was going to happen next.
This film is not about Howard as much as it is for Howard and
his handlers. The man needs more mainstream appeal in order to sell
future movie projects. Enter the Hollywood machine which cranks out a
thinly veiled piece of propaganda and then creates a marketing
blitzkrieg surrounding it. People flock to it because of star
recognition and curiosity, they leave assured that Howard is really a
sweet guy, unfairly persecuted by a conservative society of idiots in
seal suits.   They may never hear his caustic humor that ended up
costing him almost two million in fines from the FCC. They may never
see the pornographic pay per view specials that netted him over twenty
million dollars.  They will never witness his treatment of women and
mental handicapped people. While I find of this type of corrupting and
infectious humor to be extremely funny, the mass audience may not have
approved. Then again, he would have never become the media behemoth
that he is by catering to family values.
Its shocking how much this film behaves like a marketing
infomercial for the kinder, gentler Howard.  I almost expected to see
a preview for some high concept comedy starring Stern to run before
"Private Parts." Howard and Jim Carey are wacky Siamese twins joined
at the waist in the 1998 release of "Oh, Brother!"  Or maybe, as
rumored,  Shumacher will put him in the  Batman serial as the
Scarecrow opposite the next  actor to prostitute himself as the cape
crusader. Either way both Howard and those who hold his leash are
looking at significant returns.
Incredibly Private Parts has not only been well accepted by
the general public(who may be helpless after years of idiotic sitcoms)
but also by critics who are supposed to protect us from the
unscrupulous designs of the movie business. Films should be
trade-offs, you take my seven bucks but I get something in return. It
could be a good, entertaining story, it could be(but usually isnt)
some though provoking insight. If all the filmmaker is doing is
polishing a persons image then you come off feeling like a hooker who
not only gets rode hard but is stiffed on her fee as well. 
To me, Stern comes off not as the All American anti-hero but
as the Benidict Arnold of entertainment, selling out his hard core
antics in favor of the marginalized profits of world-wide super
stardom. Some may claim the humor make for a better movie, I think it
serves to disguise the true purpose of the what you are watching. If
you are busy laughing at jokes about genitalia how much objective
thinking can one do? To her credit,  Betty Thomas tries to show
Howard in all of his glory, behind the microphone stirring up trouble,
but I imagine her hands were tied by powers from on high from the word
Go. But we arent talking about historical accuracy or artistic
integrity here, were talking money. We are talking box office. We are
talking sequel.  Cha-Ching!
