Title
Review for Tarzan and His Mate (1934)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Tarzan and His Mate" is an early Tarzan picture that is
an improvement over later films in the series, but still
lacks the quality to pass for anything above escapist
entertainment.
The plot has white ivory hunters using Tarzan to locate
and plunder a huge elephant graveyard of ivory tusks.
The hunters encounter resistance from enemy african tribes
and organized animal armies.  Jane tries to help the
hunters, one of them a discarded beau, getting in frequent
trouble and requiring rescue from Tarzan.
The film starts slowly, with our two safari-clad hunters
talking to various uninteresting white people we never see again.
The expedition begins for the ivory.  An enormous number of
Africans are hired for labor, and are cruelly used, even
shot, by the reckless expedition head.  There is a disorganized
battle with an opposing tribe, and an unlikely confrontation
with rock throwing apes.  Finally, we meet Tarzan, as he prevents
the apes from further killing off unlucky Africans.
Tarzan rules the apes and the elephants.  Heaven knows how he
has trained him, but they obey without question.  He has no
power over "bad" animals, such as lions, rhinos and crocodiles.
When he makes the mistake of leaving Jane's side, she ends
up trapped by these bad creatures, but Tarzan comes to the
rescue when called.  The lion and rhino fights are good stunts,
but the crocodile is an obvious spinning dummy.  These scenes
are possibly derived from "King Kong" (1933) which had
the big ape battling various dinosaurs to impress Fay Wray.
The wild finale involves an army of lions who for no apparent
reason are after the hunters, and even attack an opposing army
of elephants.  Tarzan is the improbable victor of a series of
one-on-one battles with enormous lions.
It is refreshing to see Jane with more sensuality than clothes,
and a sense of adventure sparks the movie.  The sets are
impressive as well.  However, muddled direction and plot keep the 
film from being more than watchable.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
