Title
Review for Rapture, The (1991)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Kevin Patterson
        Few films can be said to be as bold and unwavering as Michael Tolkin's
The Rapture.  Not only does it deal with issues of religion and spirituality
that are usually ignored by popular culture, but it takes its story to
extremes rarely seen outside of films such as, say, Stanley Kubrick's A
Clockwork Orange.  It asks questions many of us would rather not think about:
What if the doomsday cults have got it right? What if the end really is
coming? And what does this mean for our eternal souls?
Tolkin explores these issues through the story of Sharon (Mimi
Rogers), a woman stuck with an arduously boring job as a telemarketer.
Desperate for some sort of novelty in her life, she turns to wild group sex at
night, and when she recognizes it as empty and unrewarding, she turns to
alcohol. Confused and nearly suicidal, she takes an interest in members of a
cult-like fundamentalist Christian religion who answer to a child "prophet"
and have been sharing a vision of a shining pearl as an indication that
Armageddon (hence "The Rapture") is soon to come. When Sharon herself has this
vision, she joins the group, eventually convincing her lover Randy (David
Duchovny) to convert as well. Later, after Randy is killed by one of his
disgruntled employees, she has a vision of him summoning her to a remote
desert location where she and her daughter are to wait for the Rapture.
Had Tolkin stopped there, the film would have been an interesting
story with some mild insight into opposite extremes of society, but then he
takes it even further. Sharon does not lose her faith, but she begins to feel,
after another tragedy, that God is asking too much. She still believes, but
the belief is not enough; it begins to seem as unrewarding as her previous
life. In a captivating sequence, the Rapture comes as promised, but Sharon is
so depressed and bitter that she now stands in defiance of God.
Obviously any film that deals with such riveting subject matter and
goes so far as to have the "crazies" be right all along is so provocative that
it is easy to overlook its flaws, and there are a few. One is that Tolkin
treats the characters mostly as devices to explore these themes. Sharon's
initial conversion, for example, is presented rather matter-of-factly; one
minute she is going about her usual decadence and hopelessness, the next
minute she is kicking her lover out of bed and declaring herself "clean."
Furthermore, the fact that Tolkin refuses to hold the viewer's hand,
taking his film to overwhelming extremes without missing a step, ultimately
becomes a bit of a problem because it is not quite clear by the end what he is
trying to say. If he is simply satirizing fundamentalism and trying to show
how a blind, thoughtless faith might not provide any better spiritual guidance
than self-abandonment and empty pleasure, then he succeeds. If he is trying to
set Sharon up as an anti-religion heroine, then he doesn't quite pull it off.
The tone of harsh realism leaves it up for debate whether or not the real
"error" is God expecting too much or Sharon misinterpreting what God wants,
and in any case the film's theology is far too simplistic to represent
religion in all its forms and variations. On the other hand, perhaps Tolkin
does not intend to push any particular message; perhaps he is simply asking
the "big questions" and leaving them for his audience to answer.
As a religious person myself, I of course find it difficult to be
objective in evaluating this film since it touches on some pretty sensitive
subjects. I can say this, however: The Rapture  put images and ideas in my
head which I will not soon forget. If you have ever thought about issues of
faith and spirituality, this film at the very least brings into focus some of
the questions you have probably always had. If you have never thought about
these issues, then you will after seeing this film. Decide for yourself the
answers, but at the very least follow in Tolkin's footsteps part of the way
and don't duck the questions. Films as bold and thought-provoking as this do
not come along often: don't miss it.
Grade: A

Author
Jeff Davis
     A friend of mine and I took in THE RAPTURE last night at the newly
opened Kentucky Theater here in Lexington.  The 7:30 show was delayed
for more than fifteen minutes to accommodate the large crowd of almost
800 people.  This is the second movie I've seen recently at the
Kentucky--the first was SINGING IN THE RAIN--and it is as large a
contrast in movies as could fit in my squeegeed psyche.  THE RAPTURE is
an odd-ball movie.  Imagine MY DINNER WITH ANDRE with Billy Graham and
Albert Camus: MY LAST SUPPER WITH ANDRE, maybe.  Mimi Rodgers stars as a
telephone information operator who handles four calls a minute, eight
hours a day.  After work, she clears out the cobwebs with a (male)
friend of hers by picking up strange couples in bars.  This is not a
Good Thing and we see it pall on her.  At work, she overhears some Born
Again Christians talking about their Secrets and little by little she
becomes hooked.  Rodgers is fine at projecting the iciness of this
woman.  At one point in a sexual encounter while her partner is all
sweaty with bump and grimace, she wiltingly enquires about the prominent
tattoo which her partner's female friend displays, and her voice betrays
less involvement in the proceedings than her, "Please hold for the
number" at work.  Rodger's shows us a woman intent on convincing herself
she's human.  The bulk of the movie is her involvement in the rigors and
terrors and logical consequences of her hard won faith, but to get too
explicit about that would tread into "spoilers."
     There is a large amount of the movie which is locked into working
out the dialectics of the Born Again movement, like the Grand Inquisitor
from THE BROTHERS KARAMOZOV.  I didn't much care for that angle although
taking the Born Again movement and its belief's seriously (taking *any*
religion seriously) has not been a strong point in Hollywood film 
making.
     As for an evaluation: I liked the film.  Its subject matter was
fresh although the director (Michael (?) Tolkin) apparently has a
burr-in-the-blanket fascination with Christianity rather than an actual
involvement.  I don't know if that isn't actually some kind of Faith.

Author
Anthony Horan
Written and Directed by Michael Tolkin.
Stars Mimi Rogers, David Duchovny, Patrick Bauchau.
Rated M, 102 Mins.
Screens at the Valhalla from October 2.
[This film has already been available on video in the US for a couple of
months; however, it's just (!) gained a theatrical release here in
Australia, and I was sufficiently intrigued about the film to want to
post this review I wrote originally for Beat Magazine, a Melbourne
street paper.  Everyone I've spoken to has a different take on this
film, so here's mine....]
     Writer Michael Tolkin has already made a big splash this year with
his hilarious and incisive attack on the Hollywood studio system, THE
PLAYER.  But just prior to that film, he made his directing debut with
another one of his scripts, and the resulting film has finally made its
way to Australia.
     Sharon is a telephone directory assistance operator who balances
the mundanity of her job with a hedonistic lifestyle that encompasses
group sex in all its permutations.  But even the most creative sexual
encounters are becoming as unsatisfying for her as her job, until one
day at work when, on a break, she overhears some of her co-workers
talking about a shared dream, a dream which is intended to signal the
second coming and with it, armageddon.  With the sort of routine
coincidence that only happens in Tolkin's screenplays, two door-knocking
religious evangelists appear at her door, and she lets them in, more out
of boredom than anything else, and listens to what they have to say.
Soon after, when Sharon is on the verge of suicide in despair at her
empty life, she turns to the book the evangelists gave to her, and finds
safety in religion--a religion that looks forward to armageddon, as
prophesied by a young boy.
     Many have criticised this film as being too earnest and
fundamentalist.  Where that comes from is anyone's guess--THE RAPTURE
is, in fact, a strange, bitter and caustic cautionary tale about the
dangers of total surrender to organised religion, and the truly extreme
lengths to which believers will go on their path to their long-awaited
salvation.  Tolkin's script seems totally straight on the surface, but
has an underlying weirdness and menace that rivals the best of David
Lynch's work.  Make no mistake, this is an unnerving tale, but it's also
rich in humour and wry observation.  
     As Sharon, Mimi Rogers delivers the performance of her career, in a
role that will polarise audiences; the scene in which Sharon--desperate
for a manifestation of her beliefs--takes matters into her own hands in
the film's penultimate scene, is the most riveting and terrifying piece
of cinema seen this year.  
     The low budget of this New Line produced film results in a
relatively special-effect free ending that still works thanks to the
fact that it's totally unexpected.  Despite money limitations, the film
looks great, thanks in no small part to the excellent work of cameraman
Bojan Bazelli.
     This is one of the most unique films, not only about this subject
but *any* subject, seen in a long time.  It's intelligent, witty, moving
and compelling, and is not to be missed.  Superb.
