Title
Review for Little Caesar (1930)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
There had been several silent films about
organized crime, but the mobster genre didn't
really take off until "Little Caesar".
Perhaps this was because the harsh slang
and accents given to the characters couldn't
come across in silents, or perhaps this was due
to the quality of Edward G. Robinson's
starmaking performance.  Robinson would
play numerous gangsters throughout his
career ("Key Largo", "The Last Gangster",
"Larceny, Inc.") with his ugly mug and
unsympathetic manner making him well cast for
such roles.  James Cagney and Humphrey Bogart
also contributed to the genre, which saw
a revival in the 1970s with the "Godfather"
films.
What is so striking about "Little Caesar"
is just how evil the crooks really are.
Robinson as Rico only cares about power,
money and glory.  Romancing 'dames' is
'soft stuff'.  Rico will kill anybody who
is in the way of his ambitions, especially
those crime lords who stand above him in
the hierarchy.  A tough guy who believes
a man's worst sin is to be 'yellow', Rico's
only human traits are vanity and cruelty.
He is only happy when his power is well
recognized, especially when strutting down
a street with his gang in tow.
The supporting cast isn't as interesting.
There are the usual cops and robbers,
tough guys all of them, as well as a few
'yellow' softies who need to be 'rubbed out'.
Among the latter is dancer Joe (Douglas Fairbanks
Jr.) who, under pressure from do-gooder
girlfriend Olga (Glenda Farrell), threatens
to turn Rico over to the cops.
The problems with the simplistic characters
are partly overcome by the direction, which
is full of energy and action.  Francis Faragoh
and Robert N. Lee received an Oscar nomination
for the screenplay, which was adapted from
W.R. Burnett's best selling novel.
"Little Caesar" also marks the debut of Hal
B. Wallis.  It was the first of 203 films that
he would produce.  Wallis and prolific director
Mervyn LeRoy would combine for another successful
action film in 1932, "I am a Fugitive from
a Chain Gang".
briankoller@usa.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
http://www.epinions.com/user-briankoller
