Title
Review for Curve, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Brandon Herring
Rated R for strong language, violence, some sexuality and drug content.
Starring: Matthew Lillaird, Keri Russell, Michael Vartan, Randall Bartikoff,
Dana Delaney.
In 1998 a movie was made that was promised theatrical release. That movie was
'The Curve' it was however never released in theatres like it was promised, and
I see why. 'The Curve' is a movie that was well-written and directed by Dan
Rosen who also wrote the clever 'The Last Supper. The cast was well assembled
with lots of talent. Matthew Lillaird who was annoying but funny in 1996's
classic 'Scream', Keri Russell who plays in TV's popular 'Felicity' are all
good in a film that is so wrapped up in it's plot it forgets to include us in
having fun, and takes itself way to seriously.
Matthew Lillaird and Michael Vartan play college roomates Tim and Chris, whose
friend Ran (Randall Bartikoff) girlfriend found out she was pregnant, not
taking it too well he gets drunk and fights with his roomates. A new law has
come out that in the US if your roomate commits suicide than you get a perfect
4.0 grade average for having to go through the whole 'trauma'. They do so, but
when they learn some surprising things about Ran's death Chris doesn't know who
to trust or who to turn to. The ending finale has about 25 twists all rolled
into one, that pretty much saves the film from being a washout.
The film had many flaw in it, including it's plot. It was completely
unbelieveable and the previews I saw for this, they made it look like a horror
movie or even a thriller. It's not in any way intense or scary, mysterious and
overly dramatic it is. What got me the most was the final 5 twists in a row,
that you had to keep up with or you were lost. Some didn't like the ending
which I can see, one twist is good, 2 twists is fine but 5 in a row is
annoying. 
The acting was incredibly above normal, Keri Russell gives the best performance
as Chris's girlfriend, Matthew Lillaird gives a good performance too as does
Michael Vartan. Dana Delaney who plays the college's counselor who learns a few
surprising things about everyone. The movie does prove a good point as in Who
Can You Trust? Because everyone in this movie is not whom they seem at first,
by the end it's like your watching a totally different movie. At 92 minutes the
film does seem to go on and on and on, but finally starts to speed up towards
the end.
So if your in for a fun time at the movies, 'The Curve' is there, but only if
there is nothing else. The final twists and the acting keep it afloat, it's
sometimes clever and sometimes boring, sometimes good and sometimes bad. A
misleading movie to which it is not a horror flick. 'The Curve' is not a bad
movie however it's not all that great either.
Reviewed By Brandon Herring October 2, 1999.
Brandon Herring
Movie Review Heaven
(http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Dan Rosen.
Cast: Matthew Lillard, Michael Vartan, Randall Batinkoff, Keri Russell, 
Tamara Craig Thomas, Anthony Griffith, Bo Dietl, Dana Delany.
1999 - 91 minutes
Rated R (for profanity, sexual situations, and a suicide).
Reviewed June 13, 1999.
There's a long, unfortunate story behind "The Curve." Originally titled "Dead 
Man's Curve," the film premiered at the 1998 Sundance Film Festival, was 
eventually picked up by Trimark Pictures, and the director, Dan Rosen, was 
promised a theatrical release. Time ticked by, its name was changed, and it 
finally ended up bypassing theaters for home video in March, 1999. But 
there's still one more catch: even on video, it is only available at 
Blockbuster (which is where, of course, I rented it), although the DVD is 
available everywhere. Sound strange? I thought so too. 
"The Curve" is an inauspicious thriller set at a Maryland college that, like 
1998's dumb comedy, "Dead Man on Campus," takes off from the urban legend 
that if your roommate commits suicide, you automatically receive a 4.0 GPA 
for the semester. Tim (Matthew Lillard) and Chris (Michael Vartan) despise 
their roommate, Rand (Randall Batinkoff), both for his cruel attitude and 
emotionally abusive way he treats his girlfriend, Natalie (Tamara Craig 
Thomas), who has just discovered she is pregnant. When Rand finds out about 
his oncoming child, he explodes, giving Tim and Chris a fairly good chance to 
murder him and make it look like a suicide. Spiking his alcohol with rat 
poison, Rand, sure enough, dies, and Tim eagerly pushes him off a cliff. 
Although Chris does need the 4.0 since he is hoping to be accepted to 
Harvard, he gradually grows with guilt, and it soon becomes apparent that Tim 
may very well be setting him up to take all blame for the murder, even though 
Rand's body has yet to be found. And Chris is even more outraged when he 
finds Tim trying to take advantage of his girlfriend, Emma (Keri Russell).
"The Curve" is a thoroughly despicable mystery-thriller, a film that 
eventually gets so over-to-the-top and convoluted it quickly becomes 
ludicrous. It's the type of movie where you're never quite sure who the 
characters are, or their intentions, until the "shocking" climax. This 
tried-and-true plot device sometimes works ("The Usual Suspects," "Clue: The 
Movie"), but more often than not risks the posssibility of going so far over 
the deep end to completely lose its audience. That is one of the major 
downfalls of "The Curve." As plot twist after plot twist gathers on top of 
each other, up until the very end, I did not feel a sense of shock (even 
though I admittedly didn't see some of it coming), but instead felt simply 
jerked around. It's OK to want to be unpredictable and surprising, but there 
comes a point when the shocks stop becoming effective and turn into a great 
annoyance.
The characters in "The Curve" are rarely who they say they are, but some of 
the performances are adequate enough. Matthew Lillard doesn't do as much of 
his usual comedic schtick as usual, but also does not turn in nearly as 
impressive a performance as in "SLC Punk!" Michael Vartan ("Never Been 
Kissed") is the only actual character that is successfully developed beyond 
merely being a pawn to the plotting, and is believable as a young man who is 
desperate to get into Harvard, but not enough to want to turn to murder. Keri 
Russell (TV's "Felicity") is fine as Vartan's grilfriend, but her 
thought-to-be intelligent character makes a u-turn at the midway point and 
becomes nothing more than a floozy. Randall Batinkoff does nothing with his 
villainous character of Rand, but it isn't entirely his fault since the 
screenplay only calls for him to be a one-dimensional jerk. None of the other 
performances make any impression, with the only other central character, 
played by Tamara Craig Thomas, a passive "object" who takes the abuse from 
Rand and does nothing about it. Sure, there are people like this in the real 
world, but writer-director Dan Rosen should have written at least one of his 
female characters to be a strong individual.
Ultimately, "The Curve" is so concerned about its plot that it doesn't pay 
much attention at all to its characters, and therefore, the film only comes 
off feeling even more empty-headed. I enjoy a good thriller as much as the 
next person, but this film is ridiculous and often even inane. Rosen has made 
a technically pleasing independent film, with competent cinematography and a 
memorable music score. It's too bad his film was treated so neglectfully by 
its studio and sent straight-to-video, but after seeing it for myself, I 
honestly blame them for only one thing: picking up the film's distribution 
rights in the first place.
     - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
       Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
DeWyNGaLe
http://members.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe
So many students strive to get into schools such as Harvard of Princeton, but
they just don't get the good grades.  So many students would do ANYTHING to
reach their goal of getting into this schools.  Legend has it that if your
roommate commits suicide, the remaining roommates will get an automatic 4.0. 
Chris (Michael Vartan) and Tim (Matthew Lillard) are two guys who really want
the 4.0 to get into Harvard.  How far will they go to get their 4.0?
Chris and Tim are also roommates with Rand, played by Randall Batinkoff.  The
two scheme to murder Rand, make it look like a suicide, so they can supposedly
get their 4.0.  They have heard this rumor many places, and they are willing to
take the chance to find out.  Rand is a very, very mean person.  He treats his
girlfriend Natalie, played by Tamara Craig Thomas, like she doesn't matter at
all.  She is very afraid of him, and she especially afraid now that she must
tell him she is pregnant.  She does tell him, and he becomes enraged.  That
night would be the last night of Rand's life.  Tim and Chris give Rand a bottle
of rat poison, making him think that it is beer.  Rand drinks down the poison,
and then dies.  Now, Tim pushes him off of a mountain with a suicide note near
the site to make it look like he killed himself.
It does not take long until the suicide note is found, but the body isn't
found.  The police question Chris and Tim about Rand to try and find any
information.  Feeling extreme guilt, Chris is having a very hard time,
especially with his girlfriend, Emma, played by Keri Russell.  She wants to
know more, but he will not even speak with her.  Will he give in?  Will Tim
turn Chris in?  Will Chris turn Tim in?  Will they turn themselves in?  All of
these questions were running through my mind while watching this slick suspense
film.
The events in The Curve are very surprising, original, and fun.  The plot
sounds much like Dead Man on Campus, but that is not the deal with this film. 
This film is a very serious one, with not many laughs.  There are many twists
and turns that make this film different from most films.  The ending in
particular is completely unpredictable and satisfying.  It is a terrific,
suspenseful ending that I could never predict would happen.  Hands down to Dan
Rosen who wrote this wild ride.  The sound really stood out in the film.  It is
quite eerie and it really adds to the feel of the film.  The way the movie is
filmed is also great.  All of the technical aspects, as well as the acting and
directing aspects are very well done. 
The performances in The Curve are very good.  Matthew Lillard gets to play
another creepy role, just like in 1996's Scream. (A+) He is very strange in
this film as well.  I like him in this sort of role, rather than the roles he
has been playing in comedies such as Senseless and She's All That.  Michael
Vartan is fantastic as Chris, who has extremely mixed emotions about the entire
murder and the 4.0.  Michael Vartan was also superb in Never Been Kissed, where
he co-starred with Drew Barrymore as a teacher who fell in love with his
student.  Keri Russell also gives a great performance.  She should be a good
actress in the horror department of the film.  Tamara Craig Thomas is also
realistic, especially coping with the death of her boyfriend.  Some very strong
supporting performances came from smaller roles, such as Bo Dietl and Anthony
Griffith who play two detectives investigating the case.
The Bottom Line- I might just have to curve that A- into an A.
*Note- The Curve premiered at the Sundance Film Festival in early 1998.  It was
decided the film would not be released widely.  It is now available at
Blockbuster Video only, and for rent only.  See you at the video store!   
