Title
Review for Glengarry Glen Ross (1992)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Frank Maloney
     GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS is a film directed by James Foley, from a
script by David Mamet, based on Mamet's play of the same name.  It stars
Al Pacino, Jack Lemmon, Ed Harris, Alan Arkin, Kevin Spacey, with Alec
Baldwin and Jonathan Pryce.  Photography by Juan Ruiz Anchiaad and music
by James Newton Howard.  Rated R, due to rough language.
     GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS won David Mamet a Pulitzer nine years ago.
Mamet has written the screenplay for the movie version in which he has
preserved the nervy, shorthand rhythms of the salesmen.  It is the
dialog, faultlessly executed, the choppy interplay of half-developed
ideas and over-repeated assertions that captures the panic, desperation,
and limitations of the characters and their hapless lives.
     In the process, Mamet has added a new character, played by Alec
Baldwin, whose function is to clarify the situation for the audience,
and several new scenes.  The movie also benefits from the canny
direction of James Foley, the expressionistic photography of Juan Ruiz
Anchiaad, and the jazzy background music of James Newton Howard.  But
mostly, of course, the film luxuriates in the presence of one of the
most impressive ensemble casts of U.S. male actors assembled for one
film in many years.
     In speaking of the actors, one hardly knows where to begin.
Perhaps with the team acting of Alan Arkin as the lost, unnerved George
Aaronow, and Ed Harris, as the poison-spewing Dave Moss.  Their verbal
pas de deux, in the salesmen's lounge, in a car, in the Imperial-red
Chinese restaurant, despite the anger, the desperation, become an
esoteric comedy act, a kind of high-level "Who's on First" routine piped
through a Gatling gun.  Staccato bursts of such complete understanding
that conventional sentences are no longer required alternate with
deceit, revelations, and the inability to understand simple assertions.
These are men whose lives are based on playing fast and loose with both
language and truth, whose every utterance is laced with meanings
accessible only to the cognoscenti.
     Then there's Kevin Spacey as the ice-cold John Williamson, the
office manager, the go-fer for the unseen Mitch and Murray who own this
seedy little sales office under the elevated train tracks.  Williamson
hands out the hot leads to the closers and recycles the cold ones to the
salesmen who aren't.  He's the hitman, the executioner, who is willing
to commute the sentence only for a sizable bribe.  He is universally
hated and reviled because he is not a salesman, he's a bureaucrat, not a
"man in a man's business."  The issue of manhood, which is central to
GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS, is particularly focused on the character of
Williamson.  Spacey reads the role perfectly, thawing out only at the
prospect of bribery or revenge, like any spoiled, sulky child.
     Williamson's role as executioner is aided and abetted by the
unnamed character played by Alec Baldwin.  Baldwin appears in one scene
only, a scene written for the movie, a sales meeting in which the
desperate situation is outlined clearly and mercilessly.  Baldwin
flaunts his BMW, his Rolex, his income, his brass testicles (one wonders
whom he castrated to get them) taunts the failing salesmen as queers and
otherwise impugns their "manhood."  He struts, threatens, insults,
patronizes, and does a riveting job of exemplifying, of symbolizing, the
worst of free enterprise as dining with cannibals: eat or be eaten is
the only rule.
     Al Pacino plays Ricky Roma the only success in this hellish office.
His control of language, his ability to mimic language, to mimic
meaning, in his sales rap has put him on top, made him the prince of the
hour.  Pacino's scene in the glowing red interior of the restaurant qua
Inferno with Jonathan Pryce, his next victim, is a dizzying mix of
obfuscation masked as candor, of a parody of "male bonding," of words
without meaning, of courtship and seduction, and booze and smarmy malice
slippery as an iceberg in an oil slick
     Pryce himself delivers what may well be the most amazing
performance in a film that is virtually defined by remarkable
performances.  First as the dazzled mark and then as the apologetic,
wife-driven backslider, Jonathan Pryce displays an amazing range of
emotions on his rubbery face that suffuse it in the rapid, smooth,
transparent successions of color-switching octopus.  He has to get out
of the deal, but in doing so he is also driven to apologize for letting
Roma down, in another statement on the absurdity and touching
sentimentalism of male friendships.
     Finally, a word of praise for Jack Lemmon as Shelly "the Machine"
Levine.  The rumpled, wrinkled duffle bag of better times, down on his
luck, unable to sell his worthless properties, his daughter in the
hospital, the money for special care running out, desperate for a taste
of that old success that won him his now too-ironic nickname -- all
these Lemmon captures with a veteran grace and effortlessness in the
kind of performance that would have won him a knighthood, were he a
British actor.  We sympathize with Shelly without liking or approving of
him and his scams, such is the skill that Lemmon brings to his part.
     What's it all about, I asked myself and my friend, whose reviews
also appear on the net from time to time, as we exited the film.  The
ending is desultory at best, not satisfying dramatically and is perhaps
is a little disorienting, distracting.  The foci of the script seem to
be twofold: a critique of capitalism and free enterprise and a dual
attack on and an encomium to a world of men, maleness, and machismo.
How do the two interact?  What is the influence of the shark-pack
pressures of having to be always closing on the natural friendships of
men?  Were these men corrupted by the system?  They don't see themselves
as corrupt; Roma, I think it is, says "We're salesmen, not thieves."
     Yes, well, that is the question, ain't it?  Salesmen are men who
sell, what they sell is hardly relevant.  Mamet is not about to have one
idea about any large subject.  His world is one of conflict, mixed
emotions, and ambiguity.  It would be a distortion, I think, to say that
Mamet wants us to react to his themes in any one way.  Much more likely,
he wants us to become sensitized to the complexities and moral
ambiguities, to say that there is conflict in our values, to see the
good and ill of basic things.
     The comparisons for GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS are usually in the
criticism I've read so far with DEATH OF A SALESMAN.  Without getting
an extended digression of about similarities and differences, the film I
kept thinking about was TIN MEN, Barry Levinson's second Baltimore film,
about aluminum-siding salesmen.  Willy Loman is not the type for The
Machine, instead Shelly Levine seems a lot more like Danny DeVito's
character, an honest thief, a manly man doing manly work, if only the
powers that be would let him.
     I recommend GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS for anyone with an appetite for a
serious film, intensely dramatic, darkly comic, and for some of the
finest film acting one is going to encounter this year.  Well worth full
ticket price to the right film-goer.  But if the f-word bothers you,
please stay away; the language is strictly barracks-level in this
regard.

Author
Lon Ponschock
     When I first read GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS all of six years ago it had
preceded such film events as WALL STREET and other films which, in the
classic Hollywood patois "rips the lid off of business."  Oh, yeah, I
was working in a sales office at the time, so you may be able to
appreciate my perspective on the play/film.
     Mamet actually worked in a small real estate office such as the
location in which the film takes place.  And as with any film
adaptation of a stage play, I think that the elements of the power of
language captured on stage are diluted in the film presentation.
Everyone wanted to be in this show.  And the ones who made the cut are
are; Jack Lemmon, Al Pacino, Alan Arkin, Alec Baldwin, and Ed Harris.
     The film is denser with each viewing but the central element for
me is this:  GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS is a film about men.  It is a film
about men as you have probably not seen them before.  What you see is
the reason why the men women marry behave differently than women had
always expected them to behave them in the home.  The world of business
teaches men to behave in a certain way: Alec Baldwin asks Jack Lemmon
early in the picture if he has the guts to take people's money.  If he
has the balls.  The office supervisor makes a gaffe during a meeting
which Pacino has with his client Mr. Linkq (Jonathan Pryce) and Pacino
asks him after he has committed his error, "Who told you you could work
with men?" In the final moments of the film, Pacino as Ricky Roma says
"This is no longer a world of men, it's a world of clock watchers.
Where's the adventure?"
     The premise of the film is this: the sales staff in a real estate
office has to compete for the top position or be fired.  The rest of
the action follows.  They are told this in a sales meeting by Alec
Baldwin.  The Pacino character is not present.  He is at the bar across
the road picking up a client.  Yes, picking up a "john" in a bar to
*sell him real estate*.  This is brilliant: to see the mark and
practice ABC: Always Be Closing.  Idle conversation becomes an $80,000
sale of a piece of property in Florida.
     GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS is an object lesson: be good, go to school,
eat your Wheaties, become a computer technician, *do anything* but
enter the world of men.  And in this Mamet has crafted something that
has not been seen before: a play about the powerlessness of men before
their jobs, before their wives, before their responsibilities.
     In the truest sense, it is a film for women to experience.  If
they have not understood it before, they can understand it now.

Author
Pedro Sena
This is a depressing film, and story.   But if you can get by all that, you
ought to appreciate some dynamite acting, the type that you hope to catch on
a stage at least ONCE in your lifetime.
Like the play, to which this is faithful almost to the last letter, this
piece is one of David Mamet's best known pieces of work.  And while it is
not a fancy piece, or a Broadway piece of shlock, this is what the theatre
loves to have around, as a chance to blow audiences all over, and allow the
actors a chance to shine.  Glengarry Glen Ross is about just that.
It is the story of a few down and out real estate salesmen that are in one
office, who are at the end of their ropes.  Their selling abilities are now
moved into a new style of hype and slickness, that underlies all the
characters.  Only that these guys have not updated their game to the new
ways and styles.  It seems that this particular office is now relegated to
the junk departments, or to the lists that are left overs, and to try and
sell some property to tenants that have been targeted for years, but have
never given in.  Downtown, all the salesmen are getting all the new leads.
But here, they never see a new lead, because none of these guys has the
talent to sell them, or they have not sold anything in so long that they
have forgotten how to sell.
And the characters panic, scream, talk, lie, and do what they can to book
the client that might just get them a chance to try and sell one of the
prime pieces of properties around, which are the new dwellings in Glengarry
Glen.  And to this extent, one, two, or three, it is never really clear, of
the salesmen, conspire to rob the office and steal the list of new leads,
with the hope of getting a chance to sell one or two of those properties.
And the rest of the play is a series of moments trying to find out who
exactly did it, because the two who seemed to have planned it, may not have
been involved in it at all.
The two acting jobs that stand out are Jack Lemmon ( Oscar Nomination ) and
Al Pacino, the two aging selling superstars, now trying so hard to close yet
another deal which might save their job.  Accolades regarding their ability,
and their smoothness, is just about impossible... there are not enough words
to describe acting in this level.
The weakest part in this film, believe it or not, is the directing. As a
play, this is ready for "movement", and the lines has quite a bit of it, and
the characters use it very well.  The director is afraid to keep his camera
still, and many times gets caught off guard by the charging actor.  The
angularity with which David Mamet loves to work with, is not at all clear
here in this film, something which is readily visible on stage.  It moves in
small
concentric circles from this space to the next.  We might have been able to
enjoy this better if we had just placed these actors in a building, tore
down the fourth wall, and just turned the  camera on ... and watch them kill
themselves trying so hard.  To make a close up, for emotionality's sakes, is
un-necessary, and a bit of film idiom, that is wasted here.
But this film, despite a flaw that is questionable by this reviewer, still
is about the one thing that we need so much in this country. Live theatre...
this is IT, at its finest.  If you ever wonder where these people learned
their craft, take a good look.

Author
Ron Hogan
1)  The LA WEEKLY capsule review on this film describes David Mamet,
author of the original play and the screenplay, as a "goombah Pinter."
I like it.  The great thing about this screenplay, or any of Mamet's
best work, is the poetry of simplicity.  Like Pinter, Mamet deals in
terse dialogue, people who may not *do* anything spectacular, but who
reveal themselves gradually through what they say.  The minute that a
character opens his mouth in this film--and Alec Baldwin is a good
example of this--you know *exactly* where he's coming from.  Very few
writers could get as much out of a simple line like, "Will you go to
lunch?"  Mamet can use those words to say more about a personality than
most films reveal in entire scenes.
2)  If I was going to search for a parallel to this movie, I might say
RESERVOIR DOGS.  The significant difference between the two films is, of
course, which side of the law the group of men in each film is on.  But
both films feature a group of men who specialize in "dirty" work, who
define themselves by incessant talking about that work and how they do
what they do, and have vocabularies that would put Marine DIs to shame.
Take away the Reservoir Dogs' guns, age them about twenty years, stick
them behind desks, and you're heading towards GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS.  If
you were interested enough, I suspect that Norman Mailer's essay "The
White Negro" would provide some insight into these characters--but then
so would THE WILD BUNCH.
3)  GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS takes the goombah mentality and brings it into
the world of real estate.  Legitimates the capitalist warrior ethic that
is an undercurrent in RESERVOIR DOGS and THE WILD BUNCH.  In those
films, the dark aspects of the ethic are acknowledged by placing the
characters on the wrong side of the law--but the Reservoir Dogs still
wear suits.  Another example might be WALL STREET--Michael Douglas'
character is the high-price example of the powers that the real estate
agents "have" to have if they want to succeed.  "Always be closing" is
one of the mottos of the film--and "Salesmen are born not made."
Either you can make it in the capitalist market or you're dead weight.
As Baldwin says, "You're a good father?  Fuck you, go home and spend
time with your kids."
4)  Make no mistake about it, either--this is a man's world.  There was
a woman in the opening credits; if you look closely, you *may* see her.
But for the most part, women are off-screen, at the other end of the 
phone line, the ones that the agents have to exploit to make their deal,
or the ones who screw the deal for them.  They are something with which
to be dealt as men go about the important task of being men and making
their money.
5)  Jack Lemmon plays Shelly Levine, the one who doesn't seem to be able
to hack the business any more.  He isn't on the board, he can't close,
he is on the verge of losing it all if he doesn't get back in shape.
The role is a man on the edge, but still not ready to admit that he has
had it, still trying desperately to make a deal, either selling the
property or cutting an arrangement with his office manager, anything
that will let him keep his job.  He thinks he can still control the
situation, can still come up with the angle that will make everything
come his way--it's goombah desperation, and Lemmon makes it work.
6)  At the other end of the scale is Al Pacino as Ricky Roma.  While the
other agents (Lemmon, Ed Harris, and Alan Arkin) are scrambling through
the rain trying to score, Pacino sits high and dry in a bar and
virtually plays at being a philosopher-king, offering discourses on the
nature of morality and of capitalism.  All of which, naturally, is just
smooth talk on the way to getting his mark, Jonathan Pryce, to sign on
the line that is dotted.
7)  But let's look at one of those statements, the idea that property
isn't just the material object, but the potential events that object
represents, especially (in this context) the opportunity to generate
capital around the property.  In a way, it's the lesson of FERRIS
BUELLER'S DAY OFF (shiny cars aren't meant to be stored in the garage;
they're meant to be *driven*, dammit) and the nature of the capitalist
beast.  Money's value has always been symbolic--the cash is not as
valuable as what it represents, what you can do with it.
8)  That's what makes the Glengarry leads so damn important.  From an
outside perspective, it's a stack of cards with a bunch of names on
them.  Big effing deal, right?  Wrong.  Those names are information, and
information that can be used as capital.  Names that can generate sales,
sales that can rake in money.  That stack of cards becomes as valuable
as stocks or bonds because what can be done with it in the hands of the
right capitalist warrior.  That's why nobody likes the leads they've
been given--they're lousy capital.  They don't score.
9)  So it's urban capitalist soldiers of fortune, cruising the streets
and the bars and the office trying to make the big deal.  What film
style is going to work here?  *Noir*.  The shadows of Venetian blinds,
the rain that never stops coming down at night, the harsh glow of red
and blue neon shining in everybody's face, even the style of dress.
10) And the music: jazz.  Wayne Shorter, primarily.  And a soundtrack
that doesn't have to propel the film along its narrative path, since
Mamet's words are more than enough to keep you locked into the film.
The music is a background complement, reinforcing the tone without
overpowering it, and subtly adding to the noir nuances.
