Title
Review for North Beach (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Brundage
As we've seen in several recent Clerks knock-offs, doing nothing isn't
anywhere as entertaining as we've all thought.  Starting out with damn
near no plot, almost no point, and a collection of bizarre characters
and ending up with a funny movie that keeps your attention for a good
hour and a half just can't be done in Hollywood style.  So when I find
myself watching a film like North Beach, which proves its tagline of
"Once in a while, a movie comes along that defines a generation.  Let's
hope to God this ain't it," quite effectively, I can't help but enjoy
it.
North Beach centers (as much as a movie that wanders its way through its
story can center) around Tyler (Casey Peterson), a denizen of North
Beach, San Francisco who happens to have made the mistake of sleeping
with a 19-year-old stripper from New Orleans.  Slacker movie that North
Beach is, no matter where Tyler goes, everyone knows about this before
he tells them including his girlfriend.  The inevitable result is that
Tyler spends all day in frantic attempts to win his girlfriend back and
manage whatever else pops up in his slacker life.
As clichéd as the plot sounds (I mean, let's face it, this is the same
deal as every slacker film), North Beach has the rare panache required
to pull it off.  Casey Peterson, who also wrote and produced the film,
provides just the right combination of multidimensional characters,
witty dialogue, and insanity to make North Beach work, and North Beach
does work in most ways.
Co-directors Jed Mortenson and Richard Speight Jr. are proficient in
their craft despite this being their first time in the chair, and the
cast works together like a well-oiled machine.  At times North Beach
pushes it a little too over-the-top.  Just like the Redbank Trilogy or
Dazed and Confused, North Beach finds itself more than once in a
situation that's just a little too surreal for a slacker comedy, and for
that moment it losses its charm.
But such moments are fleeting.  For the most part, North Beach is simply
a highly entertaining comedy with few flaws other than its level of
realism.  And hey, as everyone who flames me is so fond of saying, it is
only a movie.
Director: Jed Mortenson, Richard Speight Jr.
Producer: Jed Mortenson, Casey Peterson
Writer: Casey Peterson
Starring: Casey Peterson, Jjennifer Milmore, Gabrielle Anwar, Richard
Speight Jr., Jim Hanna, Barrow Davis, Hopwood DePree
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
