Title
Review for Cheun gwong tsa sit (1997)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Harvey S. Karten
HAPPY TOGETHER
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Kino International/Golden Harvest
 Director:  Wong Kar-wai
 Writer:  Wong Kar-wai
 Cast: Leslie Cheung, Tony Leung Chiu-wai, Chang Chen
   Immersion in another culture can work differently for
different people.  For some, the experience is broadening, for
others constricting.  For some, the ordeals are invigorating, for
others, enervating.  Heinrich Herrar, Brad Pitt's character in
"Seven Years in Tibet," changed from a narcissistic Nazi to a
Buddhist mensch with a deep regard for a culture of
nonviolence during his trip from Austria to Lhasa.  But Lai
Yiu-Fai (Tony Leung Chiu-Wai) and Ho Po-Wing (Leslie
Cheung), at best have mixed reactions from their expatriate
life in Argentina.  At worst, they grow so bored and lonely that
they become desperate for meaning.  "Happy Together," a
somewhat ironic title, deals loosely with an off-on relationship
of Lai and Ho, a homosexual pair from Hong Kong living in
Argentina.  The picture bears the signature of its independent
director, Wong Kar-Wai, whose "Chungking Express" deals as
well with lovesickness, obsession, and the peccadilloes of
relationships in a modern world.  Like that 1994 film, "Happy
Together" is light and offbeat with much activity centered on
restaurants, though instead of dividing his film into two
tangentially related stories, director Wong this time simply
brings in a third character midway into the tale.  The
homosexual element, which caused the films to be banned in
some Far Eastern states, is soft-pedaled, though a sizzling
and comic scene which opens the movie announces the
relationship of its principals in no uncertain terms.
   The $4.2 million release has no plot to speak of but is
instead an existential, even postmodern take on the difficulties
which people have in sustaining a connection.  Lai (Tony
Leung Chiu-Wai) and Ho (Leslie Cheung), two travelers from
Hong Kong, are on their way to the mystical Iguazu Falls on
the Argentine-Brazilian border, a symbol of renewal much as
the red rocks of Sedona, Arizona are a drawing point for New
Age folks in the States.  Symbolically, they get lost on the
way, ultimately leading a major argument and their going
separate ways.  Though Ho comes across at first as a
confident, frivolous fellow, he surfaces as the one who is hurt
more by the detachment than the serious Lai.  Lai takes a dull
job as a doorman at a tango bar while Ho hires himself out as
a hustler.  Spending a good deal of time trying to patch up
the bond, Ho is finally welcomed back by Lai when he
appears at Lai's door after having been beaten up by a client. 
Strangely enough, though, there is no sex in the new
affiliation, though Lai has become fonder of Ho than ever
before, even hiding his passport to make sure he does not go
home.  
   Midway, director Wong introduces Chang, who works in a
kitchen with Lai.  Though Chang is straight and naive, the two
become fast friends, but when Chang leaves for his home in
Taipei, Lai faces his own desire to leave the Spanish culture
for his native Hong Kong.
   In the film's seminal shot, cinematographer Christopher
Doyle sums up the experience of living as an expatriate by
showing Hong Kong as an upside-down city in the eyes of the
travelers who are, in effect, on the opposite side of the world. 
This visual says reams about the effect of living in a culture
not ones own and goes a way toward explaining why
immigrants everywhere, however prosperous, often talk with
longing of their "country."  
   Given the near-invisibility of plot, what gives the film its
staying power is Mr. Doyle's startling photography . Using
high-contrast film and shifting regularly from black-and-white
to color, Doyle tries his darndest to keep us involved even
when the circular activity threatens to exhaust the audience. 
There's a terrific closing sequence as Lai rides Taipei's newly-
built rapid transit, contrasting effectively with the remoteness
he feels when he visits "the end of the world" in Argentina's
Tierra del Fuego.  The movie will appeal to those who can
accept that its kicks come from the optics rather than the
narrative, but it likely to be off-putting to a constituency who
may wander into it thinking that "Happy Together" is a gay
film and to straights who may wonder what the fuss is about. 
Not Rated.  Running Time: 93 minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey
Karten

Author
Omar Odeh
Wong Kar-Wai is in the middle of one of the most exciting periods of
sustained brilliance in some time. Although it would be sheer hyprbole
and, frankly, totally out of order to compare it to Godard in the 60's
I'm sure it won't be long before someone does. It was a relief to have
Happy Together land in the Ottawa region, particularly after being
denied the inestimable treat that is Fallen Angels (Wong Kar-Wai's
fourth film that never made it here).  The film has no doubt
benefitted from the 'Best Direction' accolade it earned at Cannes last
year.  Although, praised or not, there is really no need to look for
an excuse to show Wong's films. He is one of the most unique
filmmakers practicing today and has shown the ability and willingness
to transcend and challenge past triumphs. It would be easy to imagine
an interminable series of variations on Chungking Express's style and
technique but instead the director has treated it as one step in his
filmmaking. Some will argue that Fallen Angels disproves this, and
they may be right (though I would beg to differ) but the fact remains
that taken as a whole the filmmaker's canon (Days of Being Wild, Ashes
of Time) is void of redundancy.
    The film chronicles the trials and tribulations of a gay man whos
trip to Argentina with his partner has not turned out as planned. The
film is about their relationship: jealousy, ambiguity, hypocrisy and
sincerity. It is about travel: spontanaeity, discovery, adventure and
the unexpected. It is about Hong-Kong: It's limitlessness, isolation
and ambivalence. And it is about a million other things that I surly
missed altogether.
    This is only the most superficial layer of the film. It is
cursory, maybe even unimportant since Wong's and DOP Christopher
Doyle's off-balance style take center stage. Although the events and
situations in Wong's films are never banal or uninteresting the real
strength of the filmmaker is his abiltiy to appropriately employ every
facet of the medium. The photography in this film consists of murky
gray-scale scenes or sepia tinted, washed out colour. The colour is
controlled quite carefully with the sepia occasionally being replaced
by more natural skin tones as to create certain associations between
the state of the relationships shown. One effect of this
cinematography is a bewildering number of allusions emerging. The use
of sound in the film is equally complex: Wong has a predilection for
voiceover which is a device that can easily get annoying. It was used
expertly in Chungking. It's use in Happy Together, however, is
comparatively spare. The relative futility of spoken words is alluded
to by the repeated references to nature (the waterfall) and in the bar
scene in which Liu is asked to leave a message on a tape recorder and
can only muster sobs. In this way the confusion and difficulty of
expression that the protagonists seem to experience is mirrored by the
film's technique. This provides a very distinct tone compared to the
dismayed though rarely verbally challenged characters of Chungking
Express.
    The narrative technique used can best be descrtibed as
non-continuous.  It contains fragments, repetitions isolated musings
and coincidences. The film ends up feeling like a rough copy, however,
further inspection betrays this first impression. I am not sure why
but an event that should be little more than an awkward sledgehammer
beating of a point to death such as the Taiwanese friend's trip to the
'bottom of the world' seems eleagant in Wong's hands. Scenes that
could deceptively be passed off as filler like the repeated soccer
games with the many bumps, touches and glances that Liu throws his
Taiwanese friend speak volumes. And cruel coincidence that could feel
totally contrived such as the bathroom scene in which Liu resorts to
acts he has condemned earlier in the film feel absolutely perfect.
Perhaps it is because Wong places his emphasis in the right
places. There is no long deliberate scripting process (thought to be
essential for a well planned relatively low budget shoot) instead his
last three films were largely based on notes and sketches made on the
day of shooting. The result is a very specific spontanaeity to the
films. There are no heavy handed compositions or forced
symmetries. Instead the films seem to be the result of intuitively
collecting the right material and then rigorously editing it together.
I have already heaped enough praise on the results that these methods
yield.
    When so much cinema seems to be at pains to push the limits of
content: more violence, more nudity, more shock therapy Wong Kar-wai
seems much more interested in pushing the limits of how things are
said and told as opposed to what is told. On this basis, Happy
Together seems linked to Sokurov's Mother and Son. The two films are
negatives of each other that on first glance could not be more
different. Both films however, render wholly new methods of expression
positioning themselves well ahead of their peers and their time.  --
-Omar Odeh http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Theater/3920

Author
Steve Rhodes
     From Hong Kong filmmaker Wong Kar-Wai,the writer and director of
the highly regarded CHUNG KING EXPRESS (CHONGQING SENLIN), comes HAPPY
TOGETHER (CHEUN GWONG TSA SIT).  HAPPY TOGETHER tells the story of a
gay Chinese couple in Buenos Aires, Argentina, who are anything but
happy.  The story, to the extent there is any, consists of a series of
vignettes about their petty fights.
     In this two person drama Leslie Cheung Kwok-Wing plays Ho Po-Wing
and Tony Leung Chiu-Wai plays Lai Yiu-Fai.  Leslie was last seen in
TEMPTRESS MOON (FENG YUE) and Tony in CYCLO (XICH LO).  Both are quite
capable actors, but the parts they are given in HAPPY TOGETHER almost
dares the audience to care.  Their lifeless performances are right in
line with Wong's dreadfully dull screenplay.
     Although the movie contains some of the most graphic homosexual
scenes I've encountered, the actors present no passion or love during
them with the result that the scenes are coldly antiseptic.
     Most of the movie has them arguing with each other, complaining
about the lack of jobs in Argentina and living a life of poverty in
their (literally) flea-bag room.  Never is the narrative interesting
and rarely are the characters the least bit compelling.
     The picture has a single saving grace.  The cinematography by
Christopher Doyle punctuates the otherwise uninvolving scenes with
fascinating images.  Although Doyle's work in HAPPY TOGETHER is not
nearly as good as his stunning work in TEMPTRESS MOON, he enlivens an
otherwise tedious picture.  Using both oversaturated black-and-white
sequences and lush color ones, he keeps the audience's attention even
when the story doesn't.  One evocative scene has our two lonely leads
stranded on the highway.  Shooting from a distance, the black-and-white
highway seems as infinite as Tony and Lai's troubles.  Another scene is
shot from high above the city streets.  Using color at night and a
strobe effect, the cars dart around the turns like colored rats in a
maze.
     "Turns out that normal people are all the same," concludes Lai.
Similarly, the movie HAPPY TOGETHER has a dreary sameness to each of
its vignettes, only the handsome cinematography saves it from being an
unwatchable, boring film.
     HAPPY TOGETHER seems to go on forever but its running time is
actually only 1:37.  The picture is in Cantonese with Chinese and
English subtitles.  The film is not rated but would get an R for
nudity, profanity, violence and graphic sex.  The film is not
appropriate for teenagers.

Author
David Dalgleish
"One day we might start over.  For him, 'starting over' has many 
meanings."
Starring Tony Leung, Leslie Cheung, Chang Chen
Written & Directed by Wong Kar-wai
Cinematography by Christopher Doyle
        When you watch a Wong Kar-wai movie, you get the impression that he 
is impatient with the way things are usually done in movies.  He isn't 
interested in story as a join-the-dots sequence of events, but as a 
basis for visual improvisation.  He isn't interested in exploring 
people and their feelings through dialogue and conflict, but is 
intrigued by the patterns of light and shade on someone's features as 
they stand brooding in a dark street, lighting a cigarette.  It's a 
shame, then, that HAPPY TOGETHER devotes so much time and energy to a 
love story which doesn't much seem to interest him, never mind the 
audience.
        The lovers are Lai and Ho, two Hong Kong ex-pats living in Argentina.  
They are played by two of Hong Kong's leading men, Tong Leung (CHUNG 
KING EXPRESS) and Leslie Cheung (FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE).  The movie 
isn't sentimental or prudish or righteous about their relationship.  
It is unusually frank in its depiction of their sexuality--there's no 
way in hell two Hollywood stars would have accepted these roles as 
written--but it is not a platform for gay rights.  They are lovers who 
happen to be homosexual.  End of story.  There is no concession made 
to the possibility that some people might consider the subject matter 
risqué or offensive or controversial.  What a relief.
        But this refreshing directness goes only so far.  The movie seems 
intent only on proving that a story about homosexual lovers engaged in 
constant spats and confrontations and reconciliations can be just as 
pointless and repetitive as its heterosexual equivalent.
        The pattern is established early on.  Ho is moody and mercurial and 
petulant and needy; Lai is balanced and stoic and responsible.  He 
loves Ho, but knows that he shouldn't: Ho is one of those 
self-destructive personalities who drag others down with them.  When 
Ho leaves Lai early in the movie, Lai tries to maintain a certain 
distance when Ho comes back to him, knowing that if they resume their 
relationship, he will be hurt again.  And so it goes: Lai tries to 
maintain an even keel while Ho is unpredictable and exasperating.  
        The film also explores, in a desultory way, the lives of 
ex-patriates, people far from home in a foreign land; it considers 
what it feels like to be an outsider.  Lai strikes up a friendship 
with another Hong Kong man (Chang Chen) who works in the same kitchen, 
because of their shared nationality.  This relationship is, oddly, 
more affecting than that of the lovers.  The friendship picks up a 
recurring theme in the three Wong films I've seen: it shows how brief 
relationships, lives that touch each other only tangentially, can 
still be profoundly important to us.  These fragile connections are a 
vital part of what it means to be human.
        This theme is the closest Wong comes to making any sort of deep 
philosophical statement, but such a statement is hardly necessary: the 
man has style, and this is HAPPY TOGETHER's saving grace.  He has a 
marvellous sense of texture and ambience; watching his movies, you 
become aware of how monotonously glossy, polished, and sterile other 
movies are.  He infuses his works with energy and vibrancy and colour 
and sound--with life.  The cramped, hot, seedy apartment where the 
lovers live.  A noisy, smoky, neon-shot club.  A cool, shady doorway 
in a cobblestoned alley, touched by the first light of the day.  Wong 
and cinematographer Christopher Doyle are sensitive to each setting, 
and the way they shift restlessly from one shot to the next keeps the 
film fresh and invigorating.
        This kaleidoscopic approach is rather hit-and-miss, but, still, it 
seems to me that Wong is one of the few directors working today who is 
genuinely interested in extending the possibilities of cinema, of 
finding new means of expression.  When he can combine sounds and 
feelings and pictures in just the right way--as he does in the closing 
sequence, when a melancholy Lai rides the Hong Kong subway to the tune 
of "Happy Together"--his work is exhilarating.  It is poetic, intense, 
entrancing.  When it doesn't all fit together, I find myself wishing 
he'd hurry up and get to the point.
