Title
Review for Less Than Zero (1987)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Brundage
Based on the novel by Bret Easton Ellis
Starring Andrew McCarthy, Jami Gertz, Robert Downey, Jr., James Spader
     I am probably one of about five people in the world who got this, but,
in Bret Easton Ellis' "American Psycho" there is a conversation that takes
place in a video store relating to why the clerk should know who Jami Gertz
is.  Patrick Bateman mentions something about her being in a Diet Coke ad.
Being an avid fan of Ellis, I know that "American Psycho" was written in
about 1988.  So, based on the fact that the adaptation of his 1985 novel
"Less Than Zero" came out in 1987, I suppose he liked the film.  I, on the
other hand, did not.
     I've seen better and I've seen worse, but, you know what, I think there
are better ways to remember the 80s than watching Robert Downey, Jr. when he
only acted like he was high, instead of actually being it.  I know that the
point of the book was to display the laisse-faire nihilism that is/was so
characteristic of LA, and thus showing someone who played at being high and
ended up being a regular customer of Betty Ford should be a touch of
bittersweet irony, but its not.
     Instead of a bittersweet irony, the film gets to be a real pain in the
but.  The novel was excellent, and the film does its job in the fact that it
captured what was basically an unadaptable novel... or at least half of it.
The novel "Less than Zero" is written in very short bursts, each of them an
image that all sums up to a very complete collage of a nihilistic culture of
LA's youth.  To be honest about the book, it has no plot, but only in a good
way.  In order to keep idiots occupied, the novel puts in a subplot of a
romance between Clay (Andrew McCarthy), a Los Angelino gone East,  and Blair
(Jami Gertz), a coke-addicted fashion model.  It also places in another
subplot where Clay tries to save a washed-out Julian (Robert Downey, Jr.)
from a drug dealer named Rip (James Spader) who is pimping Julian out to pay
back his debt.
     It is these two subplots that make up the whole of the movie Less than
Zero, which paints the same picture that the book did but only in a very
streamlined fashion.  It basically glosses over the entire LA-sucks vibe
that the book sent out and puts in a hip soundtrack in its place.
     Less than Zero makes the mistake of targeting its target audience.
Sure, movies like She's All That and the two Scream films have sucsessfully
hit bullseyes on teeny-boppers while at the same time appealing to them, but
Less than Zero spends most of its time just trying to be cool, something
that the novel didn't really do.
     The movie Less than Zero is populated with the brat pack members Andrew
McCarthy, Robert Downey, Jr., and James Spader as well as the pin-up girl
Jami Gertz, who is surprisingly the only recognizable talent in the film --
the rest of the people just do a mediocre job.  It spends all of its time
doing what was so chic during the 80s that bothered me so much: making a
point.
     Part of the appeal of the book was that it was able to be essayistic in
a very subversive manner.  Ellis, the youngest author of literary merit and
a student of our generation, has always been able to be very subversive in
his attacks.  His insults have a careful, quiet tone... the very key that he
has always had to remaining hip while hating the hip.  The movie doesn't try
to conceal its anti-drugs message one bit (a message, mind you, that didn't
appear much in the book).  Coming out (or off) of it, I got the impression
that I had just watched a long Regan-era anti-drugs campaign... and wanted
to see a Cheech & Chong movie to make up for it.
     As I said earlier, the film is mediocre.  The cinematographer (Edward
Lachman) should be praised with his adept ability to take in the club scene
without a hitch: low light, high light, red light, blue light... he can
handle it all.  He also does what the script would not... depict the culture
in a way that would target it.
     Jami Gertz should be lauded for her performance as Blair, although the
character does have its trite moments (thanks to the script, not to her).
Aside from a brief stint on "ER", I've never seen her so good.
     Also, certain people should be shot for it.  For one, David Ruben, for
casting most of the people.  For two, Thomas Newman, for turning out the
decade's worst score, and Marek Kanievska, for giving us a movie that can be
used in dungeons.
     We should have smelled disaster with this movie.  But, it's a little
fun.  We get to see the brat pack before they became regular customers at
Betty Ford.  We get to see Brad Pitt when he was only a cameo.  We don't get
to see much else.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Bret Easton Ellis's flash-in-the-pan novel becomes a weak and
sentimental movie. Casting of Robert Downey, Jr. is an asset, though.
I read LESS THAN ZERO when it was first published, and several other times
since. Each time I've come back to it, it seems to contain that much less.
It wasn't that profound a book to begin with, and what little insight it did
have (Los Angeles is a terrible place for anyone to try to be a moral
person, for one) has not survived the transition to the big screen. LESS
THAN ZERO, the motion picture, is even less absorbing than the book that
spawned it. It's just not a good movie, despite the presence of three good
actors (Andrew McCarthy, Jami Gertz, and Robert Downey, Jr.) who are given
potentially interesting roles to play.
McCarthyis a young L.A. denizen, Clay, who goes off to an Ivy League
university. His girlfriend and best friend (Gertz, as "Blair", and Downey)
enter into a kind of relationship of the damned, and then a panic-stricken
Blair calls Clay at Christmastime. Maybe he can help straighten his friend
out. Maybe not.
Downey has drifted into the coke-and-decadence orbit that many people fall
into for no particular reason. In Downey's case, it's boredom, more than
anything else. He's got pretty much everything he could ask for -- he's more
or less been given a recording studio by his father -- but none of it is
enough. He has never learned how to really enjoy any of it, and so of course
he's thousands of dollars in debt to a drug dealer (James Spader, also
good). All of this is played out against a glossy, 90210-ish backdrop of
pool parties, rock clubs, coke binges, and so on.
It's funny how many individually good things there are in the movie -- and
sad how they never quite add up, probably because the movie's agenda is too
cut and dried. Instead of getting a story about lives in decay, we get a
simpleminded parable about the dangers of cocaine; it's on the level of an
ABC AFTERSCHOOL SPECIAL. The worst thing about LESS THAN ZERO is how, like a
bad gangsta rap video, it winds up glorifying what it's supposed to be
attacking -- partly because it doesn't know how to be angry enough about its
subject, I think. It winds up being more like a resigned sigh.
And yet in the middle of this movie there are some very good performances.
Jami Gertz takes what could have been a one-note role and populates it with
small tics and mannerisms that make it real and substantive. Spader, as the
drug dealer, sounds like a human being, not a stupid Hollywood conception of
what a drug dealer is supposed to sound like. And Downey, despite the fact
that the script he's given marches him clean off a cliff, works nicely as
the damned soul. What was missing was a stronger backbone to the movie, a
more definite sense of purpose other than the easy target of drug addiction,
to make it really worth the experience.
