Title
Review for Get on the Bus (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Charles Dutton, Ossie Davis, Thomas Jefferson Byrd, 
      Andre Braugher,  Richard Belzer, Gabriel Casseus, 
      Roger Guenveur Smith, Isaiah Washington, Harry J. Lennix, 
      Hill Harper
Director: Spike Lee
Producer: Bill Borden, Reuben Cannon, and Barry Rosenbush
Screenplay: Reggie Rock Bythewood
Cinematography: Elliot Davis
Music: Terence Blanchard
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     GET ON THE BUS is the first film since SPEED to spend this much 
time in the cramped interior of a bus.  The budgets of the two movies, 
much like their intentions, couldn't be more different.  The 1994 action 
blockbuster was a major Hollywood undertaking, with significant studio 
backing.  GET ON THE BUS, Spike Lee's smallest-budget feature since his 
early days as a director, was financed exclusively by 15 wealthy, 
influential African-American men, including Danny Glover, Wesley Snipes, 
Will Smith, Robert Guillaume, San Antonio Spurs basketball player 
Charles D. Smith, and attorney Johnnie L. Cochran, Jr.  Each contributed 
$100,000 or $200,000 to the overall $2.4 million used to make the 
picture.
     The Million Man March, which took place on October 16, 1995, was 
arguably the most important display of male black solidarity since the 
'60s.  As depicted in GET ON THE BUS, it was about unity, self-
discovery, and taking responsibility.  Black women were divided in 
opinion about the March -- some thought it was a great idea, others 
found it to be a "sexist, exclusionary" activity.  Many whites didn't 
understand the point of such a massive gathering, and reacted with 
mistrust and fear, especially when they realized that controversial 
Nation of Islam leader Louis Farrakhan was the organizer.  
     GET ON THE BUS doesn't attempt to tell the story of the Million Man 
March -- that would be a monumental, epic undertaking.  Instead, it 
investigates the spirit and meaning of the March as seen through the 
eyes of a group of diverse men taking the long bus trip from Los Angeles 
to Washington D.C. for the event.  Lee's primary objective is to reflect 
back and offer a uniquely personal perspective of that single day last 
October.  This viewpoint, which ultimately transcends the movie's flaws, 
is one of the aspects that makes for a worthwhile two hours.  
Unfortunately, many of the bus riders are just variations of stock 
characters.  Neither Lee nor screenwriter Reggie Rock Bythewood crafts 
more than one or two well-realized personalities.  While it's true that 
many of GET ON THE BUS's men are sympathetic, that's more a function of 
good acting than of the uneven script.
     The men who board the "Spotted Owl" bus in South Central LA are 
certainly not all cut from the same mold.  There's Gary (Roger Guenveur 
Smith), a half-white cop who's insecure about his "blackness" and whose 
girlfriend is mad at him for making the trip.  Evan (Thomas Jefferson 
Byrd) and his son, Junior (De'aundre Bonds), are shackled together by 
court order.  "Dog", as Junior calls him, is trying to make up for years 
of absent parenting by taking his reluctant, delinquent offspring to 
this historic event.  Two homosexual lovers, Kyle (Isaiah Washington) 
and Randall (Harry J. Lennix), are in the midst of a breakup.  An up-
and-coming actor, Flip (Andre Braugher), is waiting to hear whether 
he'll get the co-starring role in a new Denzel Washington movie.  Also 
along for the ride are Xavier (Hill Harper), an aspiring film student; 
Jamal (Gabriel Casseus), a reformed gang-banger; and Jeremiah (Ossie 
Davis, in a standout performance), the aging voice of wisdom and 
experience.  The trip has been organized by George (Charles Dutton), and 
the driver is a white Jew named Rick (Richard Belzer).
     Needless to say, there isn't enough screen time to develop these 
stories more than fitfully.  Some get better exposure than others -- 
most notably those of Gary, the light-skinned cop; Jeremiah, the quiet 
man with a poignant past; and the handcuffed father-and-son tandem.  
Conversely, the struggle of the homosexuals to attain acceptance is 
handled in a superficial manner.  The battle lines between gay rights 
supporters and homophobes are clearly established on the bus, with each 
side mouthing the requisite slogans.  Lee doesn't really offer anything 
new as far as the gay black man is concerned, and appears to have 
included this pair primarily as a means of illustrating diversity within 
the community.
     The melodramatic ending, which includes a sermon on unity, is 
excessively manipulative.  And there are several instances throughout 
when Lee uses contrived events to advance the plot (the bus runs off the 
road, a black Republican comes on board, a fight breaks out).  Still, 
all things considered, GET ON THE BUS presents an involving, intimate 
portrait of a group of men gathered for a common purpose.  Artificial 
plot devices don't divert our attention from the strong, heartfelt 
performances.
     What is occasionally distracting, however, is Elliot Davis' 
camerawork, which includes frequent changes in film stock and lighting 
levels.  Apparently, Lee thinks this is artistic, but it's also 
intrusive.  This kind of film making technique is fine for experimental 
and art features, but, for a drama, its pulls the viewer away from the 
characters, momentarily creating an unwanted awareness of the process 
that's telling the story.  
     Some moments in GET ON THE BUS cut to the heart of what the Million 
Man March symbolized.  One such occasion has the characters singing an 
improvised "Roll Call", introducing themselves to each other in song.  
Another is an intense confrontation between Gary and Jamal about street 
violence, a topic that has a deep, personal meaning for each of them.  
Scenes like these, ripe with genuine emotion, are the most compelling 
reason to take this trip with director Spike Lee and his talented cast.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
"We go away from our parents in youth and then we gradually come back to
them; and in that moment, we have grown up." -- Ingmar Bergman

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Always imaginative director Spike Lee turns his attention to a
real event in his fictionalized account of last year's October 16th
Million Man March.  His vision of the events is called GET ON THE BUS,
and it takes the perspectives of one busload of black men from South
Central Los Angeles headed to Washington for the big march.
     The show is a rich tapestry of subjects and contrasting opinions.
Just about every type of African American male gets on the bus.  We
have well off ones (Andre Braugher as up and coming actor Flip) and
poor ones (Ossie Davis as downsized employee Jeremiah), cops (Roger
Guenveur Smith as ghetto cop Gary) and reformed killers (Gabriel
Casseus as ex-gang-banger Jamal), homosexuals (Isaiah Washington and
Harry J. Lennix as lovers Kyle and Randall) and heterosexuals (the
rest), promiscuous ones (notably Flip) and abstainers (Jamal),
Christians and Muslims, religious believers and atheists, and most
surprising of all, they even let a black Republican car dealer (Wendell
Pierce as Wendell) on the bus.  This faux piece of inclusionary
politics is soon eradicated by having the Republican painted as such an
enormous bigot that they declare him to be an "Uncle Tom" and quickly
and physically throw him off of the bus.
     Also on the bus is a father, Evan Thomas Sr. (Thomas Jefferson
Byrd), and his teenage son Junior (DeAundre Bonds), who have been
shackled together by a court order.  The driver of the bus, George, is
played in a rock of Gibraltar roll by Charles Dutton.  George tries to
make Evan Sr. feel better by telling him, "Teenagers mess up.  You know
man, that's what they do best."
     Hill Harper is UCLA film student X, short for Xavier.  There is a
token white - a Jewish person named Rick (Richard Belzer) who is the
alternate bus driver for a while until all of the discussions, pro and
con, about Louis Farrakhan become too much for him.  His parting words
to George are, "I wouldn't expect you to drive to a Ku Klux Klan
rally."
     Perhaps the best part of the film is the lack of conclusions.
Other than the one sided view of Republicans, other issues are
introduced and pondered, but the film does not attempt to lead the
viewer to any particular point of view.  The script by Reggie Rock
Bythewood seems happy just to be able to bring all of the subjects up.
     When the show starts, Gary's girlfriend Shelly (Kristin Wilson) is
dropping him off in her fancy convertible.  She complains about the
male only march that, "this thing is exclusionary."  He listens
politely, but gets on the bus anyway.  He is half white, and the color
of his skin makes him an easy and frequent target on the bus for the
more prejudiced.
     "Father God, we come to you on a pilgrimage that is bound for
glory," intones Jeremiah on the bus before they embark.  Soon they are
off to the loud and rhythmic music of James Brown.  As in most Spike
Lee movies, there is a lot of music and singing.  It reminded me of the
bus on the way to the football games in high school where all of the
players sang.  Their Washington journey starts off full of high energy
and fun.
     Along the way they spend their time on the bus gabbing about their
lives back home and arguing issues.  There is even the obligatory
fistfight, which I could have done without.
     Sometimes they do take a break as they do at a rest stop where
ever on the make Flip tries his moves on a couple of female strangers.
His come on line is, "I've always heard that Dallas has the finest
honeys on the planet."  He sees this as natural male behavior whether
single or married and argues with his fellow men, "You tell me what men
who like women wouldn't want a little something on the side?"
     This is film with so many people in it, it is easy to lose track.
Even Randy Quaid drops by in one scene playing the cliched racist
southern police officer.
     Most of the show is a talkfest heading no place in particular.
Only the bus has a direction.  In a meandering show, toward the finish
it takes a dramatic and unexpected turn.  This is quite well done, but
Spike Lee then throws on several extra endings which are only
redundant.
     There is one serious problem with the show.  The prints of Elliot
Davis's cinematography have major color problems.  There are two long
sequences, one lasting ten minutes where the color is so far off that
you would refuse to pay for the processing if some lab did this to your
film.  It is my understanding that this is not some problem with just
the print that I saw, but that it is a general problem and an artifact
of rushing the show to the theaters in time for the march's
anniversary.
     As a film critic, I see a lot of very low budget pictures
including ones where everything is financed on the filmmaker's Visa
card.  None of them have had severe color problems like this picture.
The studio should be ashamed of themselves for letting it out in this
shape.
     GET ON THE BUS runs 2:00.  It is rated R for the some bad
language.  There is no sex, nudity, or violence.  The film would be
fine for any teenager.  I recommend the picture to you and give it **
1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
    To the credit of Spike Lee and screenwriter Reggie Rock Bythewood,
GET ON THE BUS *did* get me thinking.  I thought about the fifteen men
bound for the Million Man March and wondered how many of them were
representations of Mr. Lee.  (The film student is an obvious choice, but
do we see a side of Spike in the macho actor played by Andre Braugher?
Or, maybe, in the mulatto police officer portrayed by Roger Guenveur
Smith?) I thought about Ossie Davis and wondered how many times I'd seen
him playing the wise old man.  (Remember how good he was with Burt
Reynolds on that TV show, some years back?) I thought about all the
weighty issues riding on that bus and wondered if any of these preachers
would stop sermonizing long enough to simply "be." (The one passenger
who stays silent is a Nation of Islam attendee and what does that tell
you?)
    I thought about the great state of Tennessee and wondered if a bevy
of black men would find hospitality in a Memphis redneck bar.  (I bought
the State Police stopping them on suspicion of drug traffic, though.)
Mostly, I thought about Albert Einstein and wondered how he would
explain the stretching of time inside of a movie theater.  (The film
runs two hours and feels like three.  Wait, I remember an exciting
exchange!  Yes, somewhere in the second hour, when an auto dealer gets
on da bus and begins offering some choice opinions about affirmative
action.)
    GET ON THE BUS is clearly the best movie that Spike Lee has made in
a while, or, at least, since before CLOCKERS and GIRL 6.  (When was the
last *funny* Spike Lee movie?  CROOKLYN in '94?  JUNGLE FEVER in '91?)
Those reading their eyelids may beg to differ, but Lee has very nearly
succeeded with this rolling sermon that, like the Million Man March
itself, pushes the promotion of unity among African-American males.
Leave it to Lee to bring nobility to the multiplex.  Now, if only he'd
though to put Sandra Bullock behind the wheel of that rig...  Pop quiz,
Hotshot:  you've got a movie about a bus, loaded with black male
stereotypes and rigged to make the viewer fall asleep no matter how fast
it goes.  What do you do? 
Mike Legeros
Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>"Orange whip?  Orange whip?  Three orange whips." [and do gesture]

Author
Zak Forsman
First, I'd like to say it's nice to have Spike Lee vindicate himself after
doing something like GIRL 6. GET ON THE BUS is easily the best film he has
made since DO THE RIGHT THING with the exception of maybe MALCOLM X. Spike
does in this film what he does best--he presents issues that face society
in an unbiased manner and lets the audience sort their feelings on their
own. I love a film that engages my mind.
The story is about a busload of black men that board in South Central Los
Angeles and drive across the country to The Million Man March in
Washington D.C. The film was funded by fifteen African-American men and
shot in just 18 days. This is another example of expert filmmaking
(writing, directing, acting) that I hope the Oscars do not overlook.  The
screenwriter, Reggie Rock Bythewood is very talented.  However, I would
say that the screenplay is a little weak in a few spots.  This may be due
to the film's hurried production. But I tell you that nothing in the
script is so bad as to detract from the better scenes. The greatest aspect
of the screenplay is that the ideas behind The Million Man March and the
reasons for going are expressed without directly involving the march
itself. This makes those ideas much more powerful because it eliminates
the inclusion of Minister Farrakhan, to which many would disregard the
march's message in favor of claiming it racist and sexist. This idea is
also expressed in another way. There is a member of The Nation of Islam on
the bus who never says a word and never gets involved in any of the
scenes. His presence is a symbol of the march, in that, even though The
Nation of Islam was there and organized the march, the march was not about
The Nation of Islam.
Spike Lee is one of the best filmmakers working today. In GET ON THE BUS,
he's trying something different--the sure sign of a filmmaker that
understands that the learning process never stops. Here, he meshes his
ever-evolving style with that of a documentarian's eye. The bus ride feels
"captured" by the filmmaker. Although there is plenty of hand-held
camerawork, it is as though Spike Lee was able to film a documentary and
still maintain effective use of dollies, cranes and tripods. It is an
astonishing feat from a filmmaker's perspective and an effective technique
for anyone watching.
As I watched the film, I noticed two things about the audience. The first
was that anytime a character made a slant toward one of the homosexual
characters, the audience laughed hysterically. The scenes were obviously
written to be funny, but I think that the predictability of our own
stereotypes was what the screenwriter was knowingly commenting on. I back
this up with another scene where the bus stops at a roadside diner in
Tennessee. The instant we see all the white faces inside, the audience
expects a confrontation.  In fact, everyone gets along pretty well. Even
when Ossie Davis explains that steer wrestling was invented by a black
cowboy, his listener responds with, "How about that."  It's fairly obvious
that these two scenes say more about the audience than the characters. But
then, that's what I expect from a Spike Lee joint.
Ratings are based on the four-star system.
