Title
Review for Golden Disc, The (1958)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Roger Mellor
Between 1956 and 1958 film producers were confused. They didn't know whether
rock and pop was just a passing fad (like 3D movies, another 1950's
phenomenon), or whether 'rock was here to stay'. So  producers were clearly
hedging their bets with 'The Golden Disc' (Directed by Don Sharp), which
manages to embrace a wide range of musical styles.
The musical numbers (musical director: Philip Green) feature :'I'm Gonna
Wrap You Up' (by Ray Mack, Philip Green) performed by Dennis Lotis; 'Before
We Say Goodnight' (by Norman Newell, Philip Green) performed by Mary Steele;
'Dynamo' (by Tommy Connor) performed by the Terry Kennedy Group ; 'C'min and
be Loved' (by Len Paverman) performed by Terry Dene ; 'Charm' (by Ray Mack,
Philip Green) performed by Terry Dene; 'The Inbetween Age' (by Ray Mack,
Philip Green) performed by Sheila Buxton ; 'Let Me Lie' (by Sonny Stewart)
performed by Sonny Stewart and his Skiffle Kings; 'Candy Floss' (by Len
Paverman) performed by Terry Dene;  'Lower Deck' (by Phil Seamon) performed
by Phil Seamon Jazz Group; 'Balmoral Melody' (by Philip Green) performed by
Murray Campbell ); 'Johnny O' (by Len Praverman) performed by Nancy Whiskey,
and 'The Golden Age' (by Michael Robbins, Richard Dix) performed by Terry
Dene.
'The Golden Disc' includes some skiffle, rock n' roll,  jazz (in an all to
brief 'Birth of the Cool' type piece from a British jazz combo), ballads,
and even a trumpet solo clearly modelled on the then popular Eddie Calvert.
The story revolves around the 'Lucky Charm' coffee bar (the name 'sounds
gay' says wide eyed Mary Steele who looks and sounds as if she has just
stepped out of a 1950's television commercial for OMO or DAZ, and probably
has).  Her acting is wooden and awkward - Mary Steele is delightfully bad,
in a particularly 1950's way.....The movie also stars Canadian Lee Patterson
(who had very period hairstyle, became a regular star of British second
features between 1956 and 1960), and the DJ  David Jacobs (as a TV presenter
of 'Tip for the Top').
However, if you recall being a 1958 teenage bobbysoxer who screamed and
swooned at the microphone technique of Denis Lotis and mobbed him at the
stage door of provincial variety theatres, or are an archeologist interested
in 1958 pop, then you will find much to enjoy. For this is the real
thing........however bad it may seem to us in hindsight, particularly in
this very 'B' grade movie from Butchers Film Productions, which was filmed
at (the soon to close) Walton Studios, Walton on Thames. With movies like
this, it is not difficult to see why........
By Roger Mellor
If you have any comments on this review, or the movie, you can e mail me at:
roger@mellor48.freeserve.co.uk
Check out the British Musical Movies site at:
http://britmusicalfilm.webjump.com
