Title
Review for Visit, The (2000/I)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Laura Clifford
Alex Waters (Hill Harper, "He Got Game") is in prison for 25 years for a rape
he swears he didn't commit.  As members of his estranged family visit him,
he dreams of each relationship in a musical interlude.  He also dreams of
travelling on the trains which pass by the prison walls, gradually opens up
to prison psychiatrist Dr. Coles (Phylicia Rashad, TV's "The Cosby Show"),
and prepares for his first meeting with the parole board.  As if Alex didn't
have enough to cope with, he also must face AIDS in "The Visit."
Adapted from Kosmond Russell's stage play by director Jordan Walker-Pearlman,
"The Visit" is actually a series of visits, beginning with Alex's older
brother Tony (Obba Babatunde, "Life") whom he hasn't seen in ten months.
Alex demands that Tony get their parents to visit him and admonishes him
for not bringing his family (although later their Dad turns the tables on
Alex, when he's not able to name is niece and nephew).  Alex dreams of disco
dancing with Tony is his cell.  
Next, Henry and Lois Waters (Billy Dee Williams, "Lady Sings the Blues" and
Marla Gibbs of TV's "The Jeffersons") appear, both nervously twisting their
wedding rings as they await Alex.  Father and son clearly have serious
issues, the stern Henry disapproving of Alex's lifestyle even before he
was jailed.  Motherlove is strong though and Alex dreams of dancing with his
mother to "For All We Know."
Meetings with Dr. Cole are intriguing as the psychiatrist pushes Alex to
confront himself.  Rashad makes some interesting acting choices, putting
a real spin on the tough-as-nails, but ultimately supportive doctor.  Harper,
as Alex, frequently recalls Denzel Washington's demeanor and delivery.
The film's strongest scene, however, comes when Alex's childhood friend
Felicia (Rae Dawn Chong, "Commando") comes to visit, apologizing for not
having spoken to him in twenty years.  As a child, Alex witnessed the sexual 
abuse Felicia suffered at the hands of her father and her guilt made
her unable to face Alex anymore.  Now a born again Christian, Felicia begins 
to push many of Alex's buttons, challenging and angering him, before finally 
presenting her deep empathy with his past - she was a crack addict who sunk 
even lower than he, selling herself to support her habit and bearing a severely
handicapped child.  These three broken people form a family, inspiring
all around them.  Rae Dawn Chong delivers a powerhouse performance here
that should garner strong Best Supporting Actress consideration.
Alex's parole board (Talia Shire, David Clennon, Glynn Turman, Efrain Figueroa
and Amy Stiller) functions almost as a Greek chorus, asking Alex searching
questions and debating the merits of Dr. Cole's recommendation behind
closed doors.
"The Visit" features tight shots which frequently fade to black after
snippets of conversation and jump cuts which make the film feel
self-consciencely stylish.  Lighting is anything but natural (as is
evidenced when Alex refolds a positively glowing piece of tissue) and
sound editting is a bit ragged.  Some of the fantasy sequences play like
a Hallmark Hall of Fame production, as does the overly sentimental ending.  
Yet the story works strongly when it does, aided by the terrific performances 
from Rae Dawn Chong and Phylicia Rashad.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Robin Clifford
Alex Walter (Hill Harper) is serving 25 years for a rape he says he didn't
commit. His once close knit family has abandoned him, except for the
occasional visits by his brother, Tony (Obba Babatunde). Now, five years
into Alex's sentence, Tony journeys to the prison once again, but this time
it's different. Alex has AIDS. With the help of prison psychiatrist Dr.
Coles (Phylicia Rashad), Alex learns to cope with his disease and confront
the rift he caused for his family in "The Visit."
Newcomer Jordan Walker-Pearlman's ambitious debut as
director/writer/producer is based on the play of the same name by Kosmond
Russell. The story begins with a long overdue visit by Tony to his younger
brother. It has been ten months since their last reunion and, it turns out,
Alex's parents have never been to the prison to see him. The younger man
breaks the news to Tony that he is dying and wants to see his family, maybe
regaining some of their past closeness.
When Lois and Henry Walters (Marla Gibbs and Billy Dee Williams) finally
make the two-hour journey to the prison, mom could not be more ecstatic
about seeing her little boy after so many years. But, dad can't let the
past just sit and stew, so he begins to deride Alex for his mistakes. All
the while, Alex denies his guilt. The confrontation abruptly ends the visit
and Lois must leave with not enough time with younger son. But, a seed is
planted and there is the hope of more time together.
Soon after, Alex receives another visitor, Felicia McDonald (Rae Dawn
Chong), a childhood friend who has had her own series of hard knocks
through life. Felicia suffered the incestuous advances of an abusive
father, bore his child, and became a crack cocaine addict and a petty
criminal. She killed her father to protect her son. Now, she's on the mend,
is off of drugs and is caring for her son and his cerebral palsy - a
product of her father's rape. Her visit to Alex is a recuperative one as
she rekindles their old friendship, giving Alex some solace in his despair.
The episodic visits continue with mom and dad, Tony, Felicia and her son
coming back to see Alex. A new life, of sorts, emerges as Alex loses
himself in a fantasy world of soft lights and the gentle touches of loved
ones. It's a nice melding of the sweet fantasy with the brutal reality of
prison life. The despair is well tempered by the positive developments
spawned by the visits and some fabulous acting.
The ensemble cast focuses on Alex as he undergoes an odd sort of redemption
in the life he finds, again, with his family and Felicia.  Alex is
spiritually rescued as he draws his family back to him. The real treat is
Rae Dawn Chong as Felicia. She comes on screen as a nice, well-adjusted
woman visiting an old friend. As she unfolds her past to Alex, we find out
what a harsh life she has had, making her present state of well being all
the more remarkable. It's a stunning performance that reps one of the best
supporting roles this year. Marla Gibbs actually glows in the warm light of
her love for her sons. Billy Dee Williams is suitable gruff as the
disappointed dad whose love for his family helps him get past his shame of
Alex. Obba Babatunde serves well as the bridge between Alex and his family.
Fledgling filmmaker Walker-Pearlman makes a striking first entry into
feature films. There is a great deal brewing in the mind of the writer that
makes a statement on the psychological impact of incarceration on the
inmate and his family. Innocent or guilty, the fact that he is in prison is
a stigma that Alex, his family and, especially, his father must overcome.
The helmer's visual style is raw with overused close-ups and shaky hand
held camerawork, but there is talent there, too. I give "The Visit" a B-.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Christopher Null
     Earnest, heartfelt, and soul-searching.  These are qualities that
are great to see in a film.  It's too bad that those qualities don't
necessarily mean the film will be any good.
     The Visit is a prime example of a movie that has clearly been
agonized over and loved, but to virtually no ultimate effect;
writer/director/producer Jordan Walker Pearlman is so obviously enamored
with the material he can't see the forest for the trees.  Adapted from a
play, The Visit still has that boxed-in feeling, with virtually all of
the action taking place in the visiting room of the prison where Alex
(Hill Harper) is incarcerated.  Wrongly so, we are led to believe.
     A tragically sad tale of woe, The Visit is so overwrought it's hard
to know where to start explaining it.  Not only is Alex in prison for a
rape he claims he didn't commit, he's abused by the inmates, his father
(Billy Dee Williams) hates him, and the parole board won't hear his
pleas.  And he's got AIDS.  The only one who'll visit besides his
parents and brother (Obba Babatundé) is an old childhood friend (Rae
Dawn Chong), a recovering crack addict/whore/incest survivor who wants
to help Alex put his life together again.  And she has a crippled son.
     Folks, it doesn't get much sadder than this, and faster than you
can say "Can I get an amen!?" (no, seriously, that's in the movie),
Pearlman has us begging for the message of hope that must be found
somewhere among all this melancholy.  If it's there, I never found it,
unless presenting a dying prison inmate to your son as some kind of
surrogate father is a hopeful message.  But that's not a memory I'd
exactly cherish from my youth -- and sure enough, The Visit lost my
attention after 40 minutes.
     Sadly, The Visit isn't even much fun to watch.  Pearlman clearly
has a lot to learn about directing movies.  The production is
alternately rough and pedestrian, yanking you in and out of the action
through tired fades, dream sequences, and music cues.  Also of note is
the jazz and soul soundtrack, which sounds really good -- but simply
doesn't fit what's going on in the film.  You know, I love Rae Dawn and
Billy Dee as much as the next guy, but I don't want to wade through two
hours of badly made melodrama just to get a peek at 'em.
Director: Jordan Walker Pearlman
Producer: Jordan Walker Pearlman
Writer: Jordan Walker Pearlman
Starring: Hill Harper, Obba Babatundé, Rae Dawn Chong, Marla Gibbs,
Phylicia Rashad, Billy Dee Williams, Talia Shire, David Clennon
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Urbanworld Films
 Director: Jordan Walker Pearlman
 Writer:  Kosmond Russell (play), Jordan Walker Pearlman
 Cast: Hill Harper, Obba Babatunde, Rae Dawn Chong, Billy
Dee Williams, Marla Gibbs, Phylicia Rashad, Talia Shire,
David Clennon
   Remember when you were a senior in high school applying
to three colleges: one that you really wanted to make and the
other two for backups, two that you dreaded going to?  The
letter arrives in May.  The tension mounts as you open the
tightly sealed envelope.  Your hands shake.  You ask your
brother or sister to read you the contents.  Or maybe you're
not applying to college at this time but you had taken your
road test four days ago and the small envelope arrives from
the motor vehicle department.  Same tension.  In "The Visit,"
the film debut of writer-director Jordan Walker-Pearlman (who
adapted Kosmond Russell's play for the screen), a convict
serving a twenty-five year term in a Los Angeles County
prison receives a letter considerably more important than the
aforementioned from the parole board.  He thought he made
a decent impression, but still...his hands shake.  He asks the
guard to read the note to him.  Will he be a free man in a
couple of days or, now dying of AIDS, will he spend the rest
of his life in his solitary cell?  I've got to tell you: I felt the
same when Alex Waters (Hill Harper) received that letter,
having seen him struggle through the 5-member parole board
hearing, that I felt when I got that envelope from the motor
vehicle bureau at the age of eighteen.  That's how involving
the film had become by then despite its slow start, its obvious
origin as a theatrical piece, and the strangely muffled sound
coming from the theater speakers.
   While the film takes place both in the correctional institution
and in the mind of the frustrated inmate--convicted of a rape
he insists he never committed--the real story deals with the
effects on Alex of family estrangement.  Based on a true
story of playwright Kosmond Russell's relationship with his
brother in an Ohio prison, "The Visit" tells of an angry fellow
whose moralistic father, Henry (Billy Dee Williams) only
reluctantly visits his son after some time because he is feels
that the boy has brought shame upon the family, though
Henry's wife Lois (Marla Gibbs) continues to love him with
qualification.  Alex's successful brother, Tony (Obba
Babatunde), drops into for a chat only after a full year, using
the excuse that the jail is no place for his wife and children to
be.  Tormented by the passive belligerence shown him by his
family, Alex is fortunate in being able to confide in the
understanding and sympathetic psychiatrist, Dr. Coles
(Phylicia Rashad), without whose warmth and guidance Alex
might well have lost all desire to live.
   We never do find out whether Alex is guilty of the rape he
persistently denies, even refraining from showing the parole
board any remorse because, he insists, he never committed
that crime. But this is not relevant since Walker-Pearlman is
interested in penetrating the mind of the prisoner,
demonstrating to us in cinematic imagery some of the
thoughts and feelings going through the poor guy's mind--
both banal and startling.  Walker-Pearlman does a particularly
good job showing the ways that each character in turn breaks
down Alex's wall, with a particularly tender scene involving a
former drug addict and incest victim Felicia McDonald (Rae
Dawn Chong) who visits the prisoner without advance notice
and, at first not recognized for the childhood companion that
he once knew, ultimately provides Alex with a tender fantasy
of the two dancing slowly and lovingly in the lonely cell.  
   Along the way we learn the workings of what is perhaps a
typical parole board hearing, as the five judges question Alex
in turn, trying to find out how the man would cope if on the
outside.  We are allowed to enter the private discussions of
the board, noting the lack of unanimity and the downright
verbal battles that the group engage in while reaching a
decision.
   Best of all is Hill Harper in the central role.  Harper is
known to the mostly young audience who took in "The Skulls"
opposite Joshua Jackson and performed as well in Jonathan
Demme's ghost story "Beloved" as well as Spike Lee's "He
Got Game." Harper conveys Alex's moods with pathos,
epitomizing a man who considers himself unjustly imprisoned,
dying of AIDS, who is more solitary than most in that he
refuses to socialize with his fellow inmates.  If you don't mind
the theatrical nature of the work (as I do not), if you are open
to a leisurely paced psychological drama which enters the
mind of a very unhappy fellow, you might gain the same
satisfactions as I.
Not Rated.  Running time: 107 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
