Title
Review for Twelfth Night: Or What You Will (1996)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Helena Bonham Carter, Imogen Stubbs, Nigel Hawthorne, 
      Richard E. Grant, Ben Kingsley, Mel Smith, Imelda Staunton, 
      Toby Stephens, Steven Mackintosh, Nicholas Farrell
Director: Trevor Nunn
Producers: Stephen Evans, David Parfitt
Screenplay: Trevor Nunn based on the play by William Shakespeare
Cinematography: Clive Tickner
Music: Shaun Davey
U.S. Distributor: Fine Line Features 
     Move over, Jane Austen.  Even with all the SENSE AND SENSIBILITYs, 
PRIDE AND PREJUDICEs, and EMMAs, the 19th century author is about to be 
passed by someone older and better-known:  William Shakespeare.  With 
the new influx of play-to-film adaptations, the market is absorbing no 
less than six Shakespeare films in thirteen months.  It started with 
late 1995's OTHELLO and RICHARD III, and will now continue with LOOKING 
FOR RICHARD, TWELFTH NIGHT, ROMEO AND JULIET, and, in late December, 
Kenneth Branagh's much-anticipated HAMLET.  
     With TWELFTH NIGHT, director Trevor Nunn (LADY JANE) follows in 
Branagh's footsteps by adapting one of the comedies for the screen.  
However, while this picture doesn't have quite the same level of style 
or energy evident in MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING, solid performances and a 
lucid interpretation keep it afloat.  And, because cuts have been made 
sparingly, this is one of the most faithful (at least as far as 
completeness is concerned) of the recent Shakespeare movies.
     For some bizarre reason, Fine Line Features has decided to compare 
TWELFTH NIGHT to THE BIRDCAGE, THE ADVENTURES OF PRISCILLA, and TO WONG 
FOO, when about the only element all four have in common is cross-
dressing.  Anyone going into a British adaptation of Shakespeare 
expecting to see Nathan Lane cavorting around in drag is in for a rude 
surprise.  That being said, however, at least TWELFTH NIGHT hasn't 
suffered from cinematic overexposure.  None of the other filmed versions 
of this play are especially well-known.
     TWELFTH NIGHT opens with a scene alluded to, but never presented in 
the original text.  Twin siblings, Viola (Imogen Stubbs) and Sebastian 
(Steven Mackintosh), are aboard a ship that is wrecked off the coast of 
the imaginary country of Illyria.  Although both characters escape the 
disaster, they are separated, and each believes the other to be dead.  
In order to survive more easily in a "man's world", Viola cuts her hair, 
glues on a fake mustache, and dresses in men's clothing.  Going by the 
name of Cesario, she enters the service of a local Duke, Orsino (Toby 
Stephens).  Orsino is madly in love with a young countess, Olivia 
(Helena Bonham Carter), who steadfastly refuses his advances.  Orsino 
sends Viola to woo Olivia in his name.  Olivia immediately falls for 
Viola/Cesario, while, at the same time, Viola realizes that she is in 
love with Orsino.  And so the triangle is established.
     A secondary story concerns the goings-on in Olivia's household, 
where the countess' frequently-drunk uncle, Sir Toby Belch (Mel Smith); 
her maid, Maria (Imelda Staunton); a foppish noble, Sir Andrew Aguecheek 
(Richard E. Grant); and an itinerant entertainer, Feste (Ben Kingsley), 
plot the downfall of Olivia's bad-tempered steward, Malvolio (Nigel 
Hawthorne).
     TWELFTH NIGHT is chiefly about the similarities and differences 
between the sexes.  By dressing Viola as a man, Shakespeare establishes 
an opportunity to explore through one character the different manners in 
which men and women approach the same situation, especially if it 
involves love.  The play also addresses the deceptiveness of judging by 
appearance.  After all, appearance, especially as it relates to 
identity, is an important aspect of TWELFTH NIGHT.
     Veteran stage director Trevor Nunn, who spent more than two decades 
with the Royal Shakespeare Company, has attempted to modernize the play 
without changing its meaning.  The era has been shifted from the 1600s 
to the 1800s, and, using the vibrant Cornish countryside, Nunn has 
opened up the previously-stagebound tale.  Also, through glances and 
actions, the director brings the gay and lesbian subtext a little more 
out of the closet.  
     With TWELFTH NIGHT, as with any of the Bard's comedies, there's 
always a question of how well the humor will translate to a modern 
audience.  Fortunately, in large part due to a wonderful comic turn by 
Nigel Hawthorne, the film offers plenty to laugh at.  The finale, where 
all the mistaken identities are unraveled, is an example of how perfect 
timing can accentuate comedy.
     The cast includes a number of accomplished performers, only three 
of whom -- Helena Bonham Carter (MARY SHELLEY'S FRANKENSTEIN), Nigel 
Hawthorne (THE MADNESS OF KING GEORGE), and Ben Kingsley (GANDHI) -- are 
likely to be recognized by the majority of American movie-goers.  Bonham 
Carter, who is well-suited to comedy, sparkles, as does Imogen Stubbs 
(SENSE AND SENSIBILITY).  Mel Smith is delightfully boisterous as the 
drunk and disorderly Sir Toby.  The real standout, however, is 
Hawthorne, whose version of Malvolio can alternately provoke laughter 
and tug at the heart strings.
     Shakespeare aficionados will probably be pleased that so much of 
the written word has made it to the screen, but the two-plus hour 
running length is a bit burdensome.  Branagh's MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING 
can be criticized in many areas, but one of its great strengths is 
pacing -- a trait not shared by TWELFTH NIGHT, whose best comic moments 
all occur past the half-way point.  Nevertheless, the slow spots are 
worth sitting through, because, as a whole, this is solid entertainment.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
"We go away from our parents in youth and then we gradually come back to
them; and in that moment, we have grown up." -- Ingmar Bergman

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
Shakespeare's plays are some of the hardest to follow for us here in modern
times. With odd, lengthy character names, a busy hustling of events, and
loquacious dialogue spoken swiftly and fluently in thick English accents, us
Americans generally ain't got no clue what's going on. That's what makes the
actors (or players to sound more authentic) so very important whenever a
Shakespearean production is presented, whether it be for the big screen, the
small screen, or the stage. It is up to them to convey to us what they're
saying and feeling, and a good actor can make the most complex character easy
to understand and follow.
Sadly, TWELFTH NIGHT: OR WHAT YOU WILL is one of the poorer examples of such.
This is one of the hardest to follow Shakespeare adaptions of recent memory,
but I do admire anyone who attempts to tackle such a feat, and the effort here
is credible even if the overall result needs a bit of a tune up. An otherwise
mediocre film, TWELFTH NIGHT is saved by a few, *very* few, commendable
touches, particularly Helena Bonham Carter who stars as the Countess Olivia.
Olivia has recently suffered the death of a brother, and is using the tragedy
to ignore the repeated efforts of Duke Orsino (Toby Stephens) to swoon her.
Orsino has enlisted the aid of Cesario (Imogen Stubbs) to assist him in his
efforts by sending the young man to profess of the Duke's love. As common
Shakespeare would always have it, however, nobody loves who they're "supposed"
to, and Olivia ends up falling for the messenger instead. There's just one
catch . . .
Cesario is in reality a young *woman* named Viola who washed to shore after a
terrible storm wrecked the ship she was traveling on with her almost identical
brother, Sebastian (Steven Mackintosh). Both survived and drifted to different
shores, but both assumed the other to be dead. With nothing left, Viola took
the disguise of a young man and became a servant to the Duke, a man she would
come to love without revelation due to her male semblance.
Also coming into play is a barrage of comic relief characters who flail about
to our amusement in yet another typical attribute of any Shakespearean comedy.
This time around, they consist of Olivia's steward Malvolio (Nigel Hawthorne),
Olivia's drunken uncle, Sir Toby Belch (Mel Smith) and waiting gentlewoman
Maria (Imelda Staunton), and Orisno's jester of sorts, Feste (Ben Kingsley).
While these characters are meant to lighten up the film, they are quite
dizzying and confusing, and although they do play somewhat of an important
role in the overall story, the focus on them may have been a bit excessive.
It is by far Carter who shines and lures you into the story, but unfortunately
she is the one whose character is used less than we'd like, proving a bit
ironic when she is such an important element in the story. Stubbs is almost
annoying, but handles her transvestite role well enough to satisfy, and it's
true that her scenes with Carter are some of the best the movie has to offer.
It is these scenes that make the film worth watching, even if it means wading
thru the boringly hectic scenes carried by the more mundane cast of actors.
It is crucial to note that the time frame of this story has been moved up to
the 19th century, which leaves no need for adaption from Carter, who has spent
a great amount of screen time reveling in both Shakespearean films and period
pieces set in the 1800's (think 1990's HAMLET and HOWARDS END as well as the
current WINGS OF THE DOVE). Shakespeare being set in futuristic (as far as the
time they were written is concerned) settings seems to be the latest trend,
with a present day ROMEO + JULIET and a RICHARD III set in the 1930's being
recent examples. It's a bit off-kilter when they rely heavily on the original
dialogue, such as with this film and ROMEO + JULIET, but it's also an
interesting transposition of the classics that make it interesting to watch.
In fact, this is one to be seen simply for the fact that it's Shakespeare if
for nothing else.
Shakespeare movies definitely require the right audience. He is definitely not
everybody's taste. This adaption of TWELFTH NIGHT is perhaps a bit too
sophomoric for loyal enthusiasts, and yet too luxurious for those better
suited with a high-caliber action flick. Finding the right middle ground will
be a definite chore as this one doesn't hold the class of such "elegant
comedies" as EMMA, and yet doesn't resemble silly farces that best accompany a
pajama party. What that means is that this film will likely dwindle away in
mediocrity, but if it's any consultation, not too much will be lost.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     This is the film to take a Shakespeare fan to see so he will
understand why so many people do not care for Shakespeare.  Trevor Nunn
put a lot of unconventional touches into this TWELFTH NIGHT.  He took
risks and in many cases demonstrated just how they were risks.  I
previously saw TWELFTH NIGHT performed in a San Jose park by a bunch of
unknowns who passed a hat at the end.  And I saw the Trevor Nunn film
with respected professionals and highly paid name actors.  It is
surprising how much better the play was done in the park.  Nunn is a
director whom I have respected in the past.  He directed the TV version
of THE LIFE AND ADVENTURES OF NICHOLAS NICKLEBY, the film LADY JANE,
and more recently the PBS "Les Miserables in Concert."  Each is good,
and each is downbeat in tone.  Perhaps that is the only tone with which
Nunn feels comfortable, but TWELFTH NIGHT is about as downbeat a
treatment as we could expect from this comedy.
     The first of the problems is that Nunn had moved the story to the
late 19th century for no apparent reason and adding no value to the
story.  A year ago Ian McKellan did a magnificent updating of RICHARD
III, giving the film not just a beautiful look, but adding a great deal
to the meaning of the story.    No reason for the updated setting here
is apparent and in some cases clothing details required by the story
just do not fit with the dress of the characters in the film.  While we
are on the subject of the look of the film, the dim lighting does odd
things to the tone of the film.  Nunn chooses to light very much like
this is a film noir production. There are a few sunlit scenes, but a
great deal of the film seems to take place in semi-darkness with
characters having half of their faces lit, the other half fading into
the darkness of the background. Frequently there is one bright source
of light in a scene and the rest is bathed in black.  In a crime film
it would have worked very nicely because it lends a powerful downbeat
and oppressive feel.  Using that sort of lighting in a light comedy is
creative, but the effect fights what should be the tone of a film with
characters like Sir Toby Belch (played by broad comedic actor Mel
Smith) and Sir Andrew Aguecheek (Richard E. Grant of "Franz Kafka's
It's a Wonderful Life").
     The plot is as complex as many of Shakespeare's comedies.  Viola
and Sebastian are identical twins who are shipwrecked separately in a
place called Illyria.  Each is unaware that the other has survived, and
each goes into the service of one of two rival dukes.  In order to do
this Viola has to dress as and pretend to be a man. She apparently does
it very well since the Countess Olivia (Helena Bonham Carter) falls in
love with her, thinking her to be a man.  You can imagine the
possibilities that a Shakespeare (or for that matter a Mozart) would
see in male and female twins, otherwise identical and now actually
identical since both now appear to be male.  The Bard has his usual fun
with mistaken identities and odd love alliances.   For additional humor
Shakespeare has peppered the plot with characters who often have
humorous names and a subplot involving a puritanical servant, Malvolio
(Nigel Hawthorne).
     Viola is played by Imogen Stubbs who gets surprisingly low billing
considering that she really is the main character.  Her best known role
is as Lucy Steele in SENSE AND SENSIBILITY, though if the reader wants
to make a terrific film discovery, I can suggest her earlier A SUMMER
STORY.  Stubbs has the talent for the role, but has a hard time making
herself even look like a man, much less make herself mistakable for
Stephen Mackintosh, who plays her twin brother Sebastian.  There is one
really stunning performance in the film, and even that is not entirely
obvious until the end: Nigel Hawthorne is actually very good as
Malvolio.  In his last scene he manages to turn much of the play
upside-down.   Another very good actor is used to much less effect.
Ben Kingsley plays a sort of narrator and chorus, Feste.  In the
original he was the court fool, here turned into a wandering minstrel.
This gives Kingsley what I think is his first and hopefully only
singing role.  Rounding out the cast is Helena Bonham Carter in a less
pouting role than most of hers, but not one with which she did a whole
lot.  There is a lot of comedy in the play, but somehow nothing seems
all that funny on the screen, due in large part to the restrained
performances of the cast and the dour feel of the lighting.
     Trevor Nunn's version of TWELFTH NIGHT does some things original
but not a lot that really improve on the material.  I rate it a high 0
on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     The use of twins as a tool for a plot in farce or semi-farce is
not new.  It goes back before Shakespeare who some 400 years ago
employed it in the most popular of his works, TWELFTH NIGHT.   While
this is a comedy, like all good comedies there is a lot of truth in
it.  In this case Shakespeare examined the man that is in most women
and the woman who is in most men.
     And here is how he did it:  Look-alike twins Viola (Imogen
Stubbs) and her brother Sebastian (Steven Mackintosh)  are separated
when a ship on which they are cruising is wrecked off the coast of the
imaginary country of Ilyria.  Coming ashore, Viola is convinced that
her brother must have drowned.
     Viola discovers that she is near the home of a young countess,
Olivia, (Helena Bonham Carter) who has sworn not to have anything to
do with men for seven years because both her father and brother
recently died.   Duke Orsino (Toby Stephens) is in love with her but
she rejects any of his advances.
     Alone and unknown in this new country of Ilyria, Viola changes
her name to Cesario when she decides her safety lies in disguising
herself as a boy, which consists not only in wearing a fake mustache
but in learning how to ride a horse, fence, smoke and play billiards.
The truth is her disguise would not have fooled anyone except in a
comedy where it is OK to suspend reality.  "He" then gets himself a
job with the Duke Orsino where his first assignment is to woo the
countess on Orsino's behalf. . . but Olivia gets a bit of a crush, to
her surprise, on the slender boyish-looking Cesario, as Viola falls
for Orsino . . . while the plot thickens.
     Let us not forget that twin Sebastian is not dead and shows up
one fine day to further complicate that triangle of Cesario, Countess
Olivia and Duke Orsino.  All this time, the Countess' household is
having its own love battles as Malvolio (Nigel Hawthorne, whom you will
remember as the king in THE MADNESS OF KING GEORGE) and, others are
involved in their own chicanery.   Throughout all of this, there is a
strolling minstrel, Feste, played to perfection by the amazing Ben
Kingsley who has enthralled us ever since he hit the screens as GHANDI
way back in 1982 when he won an Oscar for Best Performing Actor, as
well as everything else he has been in since.   This performance
should get him a Best Supporting nomination.     This being a comedy
we must expect that all's well that ends well.

Author
Cynthia A. Bussiere
TWELFTH NIGHT is an adaptation of Shakespeare's bittersweet
romantic comedy about shipwrecked siblings, mistaken identities,
and, of course, true love.  The story opens with a storm at sea
during which Sebastian and Viola, twin brother and sister, are
separated in a shipwreck.  Each presumes the other dead and
proceeds to make a new life for himself and herself in Illyria, the
ancient country on whose shores each is washed up.  Viola dis-
guises herself as a man and befriends Orsino, Duke of Illyria.
Sebastian lies low with the assistance of his friend Antonio.  Even-
tually, Viola and Sebastian are reunited, but not before they both
participate in the wooing, winning, and wedding of the Duke's
beloved Countess Olivia -- together, that is, with Olivia's uncle
(Sir Toby Belch), her steward (Malvolio), her woman (Maria), 
and the uncle's protege (Sir Andrew Ague-cheek).  Feste, one
of Olivia's servants and resident clown, wanders in and out of the
proceedings, alternately making trouble and dispensing wisdom.
Director-screenwriter Trevor Nunn, a director emeritus of the
Royal Shakespeare Company, has adapted the play to film in
a variety of structurally effective ways.  Initially, while keeping
the locus of the action in the Dukedom of Illyria (watch for a
quick cut to Baedeker's ILLYRIA), he has updated the play in
both time and setting to the early-middle nineteenth century.
Additionally, he has reordered the sequence of a number of
scenes in the play and presented them in such a way as to
make greater cinematic sense of the action as a whole.
Finally, he has "opened up" the play for the film.  The ship-
wreck scenes, in particular, have been judiciously expanded
to provide some enlightening backstory on the characters.
Among other things, these scenes establish Sebastian and
Viola as professional performers, thereby lending credibility
to their subsequent disguises.  These scenes also establish
the nature and depth of the friendship between Antonio and
Sebastian.  Overall, despite some vocal dubbing inconsist-
encies, and a few rather abrupt scene changes that could 
have been fleshed out to provide clearer narrative transitions,
the film is a delightful adaptation of the play.
The film was shot on various locations in Cornwall in the autumn.
Thus, the sea is present and visible in many key external scenes.
Additionally, the locales have a fairy-land aura to them:  Olivia's
manor seems like Cinderella's house, and Orsino's fortress seems
like the Prince's castle.  While there are no specific allusions to 
Christmas time (apart from the title of the film), the warm reds,
greens, and golds of the season, as well as of autumn, predominate.
Outdoors, these are the colors of fruit and foliage.  Indoors, these
are the colors of interior decoration and decorative foliage.
The acting is superb.  Nicholas Farrell's Antonio adds a dimension
of sexual attraction to his friendship with Sebastian that Farrell
sublimely conveys without speaking.  The fact that Antonio knows
the attraction is not mutual only serves to deepen the pathos of the
friendship.  This male-male pairing is contrasted to the female-female
pairing of Olivia and Viola, another situation in which the attraction is
not mutual.  Both of these pairings are set off against a third male-
female pairing of Orsino and Viola.  This pairing is not conveyed
dramatically as well as it could have been; one senses an incipient
attraction more because one perceives it to be logical than because
the actors have conveyed it emotionally.
Helena Bonham Carter's Olivia is a joy.  In a well-paced transition,
her Olivia moves from grief-stricken sister who has sworn off men
to eagerly lovestruck ingenue and covers all points in between.
Similarly, Nigel Hawthorne's brilliant Malvolio is a character of 
many layers.  Wearing an obvious and ill-fitting toupee that is both
the symbol of his dignity and an object of derision, he is capable
of low comedy, high dudgeon, and touching pathos.  Ben Kingsley's
Feste is a fabulous concoction of reserved wisdom and loud annoy-
ance.  He is also possessed of a very sweet singing voice and sings
all of the songs in the play.  Considering that these have been sung
and recorded fairly frequently by world class singers of art song,
Kingsley does a remarkably fine job with this music.
The depth of affection between Viola and Sebastian in this film is
something profound to behold.  The invisible bond between them
conjures up the other when only one is on the screen.  Imogen
Stubbs and Steven Mackintosh are made up and photographed
in such a way that they really appear to be twins.  Moreover,
the resemblance goes more than skin deep, because they truly
act as brother and sister.  As individual actors, each seems to be
an opposite side of the same coin.
As the film ends, various couples come together and various single
persons go their own ways.  The dispersion of the latter is quite 
touchingly staged, suggesting that, while all may end happliy ever 
after for those who have found their true loves, others are still left
alone and bereft.
Apart from everything else this film has to offer, it presents an excel-
lent opportunity to watch an ensemble of accomplished Shakespearean
actors at work.  Additionally, it offers an opportunity to bask in the
rhyme and meter of Shakespeare's spoken verse.  Finally, it provides
an opportunity to consider, or reconsider, an ostensibly light-hearted
play that nevertheless continues to reveal hidden depths of the human
heart in a series of small epiphanies.

Author
Alex Fung
(Fine Line - 1996)
Starring Helena Bonham Carter, Richard E. Grant, Nigel Hawthorne,
   Ben Kinglsey, Mel Smith, Imelda Staunton, Toby Stephens,
   Imogen Stubbs
Screenplay by Trevor Nunn, based on the play by William Shakespeare
Produced by Stephen Evans and David Parfitt
Directed by Trevor Nunn
Running time: 125 minutes
The onslaught of film adaptations based upon Shakespeare's plays in
recent years (among them being RICHARD III, OTHELLO, and the upcoming
HAMLET and ROMEO & JULIET) continues with Trevor Nunn's first feature
in ten years, TWELFTH NIGHT, a comedy of mistaken identities and
genders. Despite a cast with impressive credentials, the end result is
a dreary film, punctuated with stacattos of bemusement.
After a shipwreck off the coast of fictional country Illyria separates
twins Viola (Imogen Stubbs) and Sebastian (Stephen Mackintosh), Viola
is distraught.  Mistakenly believing her brother to be dead, she
disguises herself as a young man and enters the services of Duke Orsino
(Toby Stephens), and on his behalf attempts to court Countess Olivia
(Helena Bonham Carter).  Confusion reigns as Olivia instead falls for
the disguised Viola, who's now going under the name "Cesario", while
Viola herself becomes enamored with Orsino. Meanwhile, boozing Sir
Toby Belch (Mel Smith) and wacky Sir Andrew Aguecheek (Richard E. Grant)
mischievously torment Olivia's repressed manservant, Malvolio (Nigel
Hawthorne), with a forged love letter.
Despite the classic material, the film seems to lose the comedy in the
circumstances, and most of the laughs instead come from various reaction
shots from the characters to the unfolding situations.  The subplot
involving Sir Toby Belch, Sir Andrew Aguecheek, and Malvolio proves
to be both overlong and completely disinteresting, and is saved only
by a wildly amusing performance by Nigel Hawthorne from sinking the film.
The other bright spot in the film is a solid lead performance by Imogen 
Stubbs as Viola/Cesario.  Possibly best known in North America for her
performance as Lucy Steele in Ang Lee's SENSE AND SENSIBILITY (1995),
here Stubbs invests a great degree of pluck in her character, making her
performance eminently watchable.
The film's pacing suffers greatly from the subplot; after investing much
time in setting up the situation and introducing the various characters,
the film's momentum screeches to a halt midway through as the subplot is
played out, before picking up again to the film's inevitable merry
conclusion.  TWELFTH NIGHT's look is surprisingly dark and cold
considering the general tone of the material.
Commercial prospects for TWELFTH NIGHT are probably modest.  The film
lacks A-list star power, and will likely not generate the raving
word-of-mouth required to convert this film into a mainstream hit.  As
such, TWELFTH NIGHT would probably expect a successful run in arthouse
theatres.
TWELFTH NIGHT is a passable and relatively faithful adaptation of
Shakespeare's classic play.  However, it fails to exploit the inherent
comedy of the situation, and one would expect more, particularly from
a cast of such calibre given such source material.  On my four-star scale,
I give TWELFTH NIGHT two stars.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Helena Bonham Carter, Imogen Stubbs, Nigel Hawthorne, Richard E.
Grant, Ben Kingsley, Mel Smith, Imelda Staunton, Toby Stephens, Steven
Mackintosh, Nicholas Farrell Director: Trevor Nunn Screenplay: Trevor
Nunn based on the play by William Shakespeare
Shakespeare is a visionary. This comic tale of mistaken identities,
cross-dressing and love triangles is way ahead of its time. The Master
of mirth and mire has impeccable timing, when it comes to awkward
situation comedy. This is no exception.
Picture the scenario of almost identical twins, a he and a she who are
lost at sea. The she-twin, Viola, (Imogen Stubbs), survives and arrives
in a land where a Duke (Toby Stephens) is infatuated with the
neighbouring Countess (Helena Bonham Carter). Viola assumes the
personage of a male, and finds work as the Duke's steward, before
becoming his closest confidante. She is sent as a messenger of love from
the Duke to the Countess, and unwittingly becomes the Countess's object
of passion. At the same time Viola bares a secret love for the Duke.
Thus, forming a love triangle uncommon for its time.
Amusing moments of note. When Viola has her breasts strapped, an
absolute look of delight crosses her face. At the end of the day when
the breasts are finally unstrapped the look of absolute pain, is
replaced with a look of absolute relief. Sexual tensions mount as the
Countess loses any understanding of personal space, and literally throws
herself at Viola with every opportune moment. At the same time, Viola
unavoidably keeps intruding into the Duke's personal space at the most
inopportune moment i.e. when he's taking a bath and needing a scrub on
the back, or when listening to a minstrel, comes close enough to kiss.
Anybody with a sound mind could tell a man from a woman, especially back
in the days when hormonal therapy wasn't an option. Imogen Stubbs does
her best to be as manly as possible, but the low voice and wispy
moustache is as effective as trying to strap down her chest. Helena
Bonham Carter grows more enchanting as she grows older, and the rest of
the well known cast - Ben Kingsley, Nigel Hawthorne, Richard E. Grant
etc. play supporting roles of side characters, who remain confusingly
anonymous until midway through the movie. Again, it is the language of
Shakespeare, which remains the true winning element of this movie.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Director:  Trevor Nunn.
Screenplay:  Trevor Nunn, based on the play by William Shakespeare.
Director of Photography:  Clive Tickner.
Producers:  Stephen Evans, David Parfitt.
Starring:  Imogen Stubbs, Helena Bonham Carter, Toby Stephens, Nigel
Hawthorne, Ben Kingsley, Mel Smith, Richard E. Grant, Imelda Staunton,
Stephen Mackintosh.
     There is a sub-category of Shakespeare's comedies referred to by
scholars as the "problem plays," and thought TWELFTH NIGHT is not
technically one of them, it is rather problematic in its own right.
Though primarily a farcical tale of confused romance, mistaken identity
and sexual politics, TWELFTH NIGHT also includes a sub-plot in which a
character is humiliated, imprisoned as a lunatic and released to vow his
revenge on his persecutors.  Trevor Nunn's adaptation of the play retains
that sub-plot, which makes the film quite faithful.  At the same time, it
is only that dark business in an otherwise bright and breezy film which
prevents TWELFTH NIGHT from being as successful at traditional Shakespeare
as WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE'S ROMEO AND JULIET was successful at the
un-traditional.
     The central plot of TWELFTH NIGHT involves a woman named Viola
(Imogen Stubbs) who survives a shipwreck which apparently claims the life
of her twin brother Sebastian (Stephen Mackintosh).  Stranded in the
unfriendly nation of Illyria, Viola disguises herself as a boy named
Cesario to go into the service of the Duke Orsino (Toby Stephens).  Viola
is then given the task of wooing the beautiful Olivia (Helena Bonham
Carter) on Orsino's behalf, but not only is Olivia unreceptive to Orsino's
suit, she falls in love with the messenger she believes to be a boy.
Viola, meanwhile, has fallen for Orsino, creating a rather unique romantic
triangle.  To complicate matters further, Sebastian turns up alive,
resulting in no end of confusion.
     It is easy to turn TWELFTH NIGHT into a rather trivial farce, if an
entertaining one, but Nunn has opted for a surprisingly sensitive
rendering of the tale.  Imogen Stubbs is an appealing Viola whose
unrequited love is a source of both pain and frustration, and her defense
of the depth of a woman's love is given a confident strength.  Perhaps
most unconventional is Nunn's choice of making the reunion between Viola
and Sebastian the emotional climax of the film rather than the joining of
any pair of lovers, yet it works thanks to a carefully established 
prologue and the restrained work of Stubbs.  Helena Bonham Carter is
simply wonderful as Olivia -- smart, sexy, seductive and _very_ funny --
leaving a somewhat stiff Toby Stephens as the only squeaky wheel in an
otherwise smooth, clockwork romantic comedy.
     The more broadly comic secondary plot involves the machinations of
Olivia's drunken uncle Sir Toby Belch (Mel Smith) and her maid Maria
(Imelda Staunton) against the fussy, dour steward Malvolio (Nigel
Hawthorne of THE MADNESS OF KING GEORGE).  The scheme involves persuading
Malvolio that Olivia loves him, inspiring him to uncharacteristic behavior
which eventually lands him in a madhouse, and the set-up for that scheme
presents Hawthorne with some priceless comic moments.  Hawthorne is an
actor with a remarkable range, which results in the curious case of him
pitching portions of his performance in a way which makes Malvolio too
sympathetic.  A scene in which the fool Feste (a wry, philosophical Ben
Kingsley) impersonates a cleric to further taunt the imprisoned Malvolio
should be simply amusing, but Hawthorne seems so genuinely confused and
tormented that his comeuppance seems dreadfully unfair.  When he
interrupts the revelry of the united lovers to swear his vengeance upon
those who tricked him, it truly spoils the festive mood.  It is an unusual
instance where a less accomplished actor, who might have played the role
quite broadly, might also have maintained a lighter tone.
     TWELFTH NIGHT may be uneven, but is still largely appealing, thanks
to the talented cast and the unique design of the film.  The locations in
Cornwall allow for some marvelous, liberating exteriors, and the late 18th
century settings and costumes allow Nunn to balance TWELFTH NIGHT on the
border between period piece and contemporary romance.  Kingsley and Smith
make particularly inspired choices for their roles, lending humor both
subtle and expansive, and Richard E. Grant is a perfect dim-witted fop as
Sir Andrew Aguecheek.  Trevor Nunn's direction is unexpectedly restrained
in small moments between Viola and Orsino given Nunn's recent history
staging massive stage productions like CATS and LES MISERABLES, but his
over 25 years as director of the Royal Shakespeare Company have not been
forgotten so easily.  TWELFTH NIGHT is a problematic play, but Nunn has
served it well, making it a revel with a dark side that can't eclipse the
bright.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Shakespeare has become a hot author of late in Hollywood.  He is
pushing out Jane Austin and Henry James as the dead author of choice.
Director and writer Trevor Nunn's (HEDDA and LADY JANE) TWELFTH NIGHT
proves my thesis that even a mediocre film adaptation of one of the
Bard's plays is well worth savoring.
     Trevor Nunn's LADY JANE was a touching piece of filmmaking, but
his TWELFTH NIGHT is fairly inaccessible due to the by-the-numbers
acting of most of the principals.  The adaptation of the text is quite
literal, but the passion and the chemistry is not up to par.
     According to the film's press kit, TWELFTH NIGHT is "the most
popular of all of Shakespeare's comedies."  As far as plays go, I don't
think I agree, but when it comes to films, I know that Kenneth
Branagh's MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING is much better than Nunn's TWELFTH
NIGHT.
     TWELFTH NIGHT also suffers in comparison to Baz Luhrmann's recent
ROMEO AND JULIET which he transformed into an extremely high energy and
audacious comedy.  TWELFTH NIGHT seems lifeless in comparison.  Granted
TWELFTH NIGHT is a much more traditional rendition, but ROMEO AND
JULIET is much more involving and fun even if it is a romantic tragedy
recast into a comedic farce.
     TWELFTH NIGHT is a typical Shakespearean comedy full of
ambiguities and errors about identities and intentions.  Nothing is
quite what it seems to be, but the audience is in on the tricks and
mistakes.  The script is full of subtleties and complexities that the
actors have to flesh out.
     The show starts with a shipwreck off the coast of Illyria where
twins Viola (Imogen Stubbs from SENSE AND SENSIBILITY and A SUMMER
STORY) and Sebastian (Stephen Mackintosh) both think the other has
perished.  They not only look alike; they even make their living as
actors where Viola dresses up as a male complete with a false mustache
just like Sebastian's.  Although she looks like a woman trying to look
like a man, it is enough to entertain the passengers.
     "If music be the food of love, play on," says Duke Orsino of
Illyria (Toby Stephens) as Viola, now called Cesario, plays in drag.
Orsino enlists Cesario to court Countess Olivia (Helena Bonham Carter
from HOWARDS END and LADY JANE) on his behalf, but it is not that
simple as Olivia ends up falling for Cesario and Cesario for Orsino.
     The most interesting and outlandish acting is done by Nigel
Hawthorne (THE MADNESS OF KING GEORGE) as Malvolio.  Malvolio is
tricked into believing that Olivia is in love with him and that all he
needs to do is wear bright yellow stockings and smile incessantly to
signify his love for her.  Olivia is not in on the joke and is bemused
by his sudden change in behavior.
     "I am not what I am," confesses Cesario to Olivia.  Later she
tells Orsino, "I am all the daughters of my father's house and the
brothers too."  The film subtlety examines the characters' bisexuality.
Most of this is done in knowing looks and quick kisses and is one of
few times the movie really comes alive.
     "Why, this is very midsummer's madness," claims Olivia.  The
problem with the picture is that it isn't.  Other than Hawthorne's
performance, it is very tame.
     The ending is the best part of the play.  As Olivia says, it is
"most wonderful."
     Technically the film is more successful.  The cinematography by
Clive Tickner radiates golden autumnal colors.  Shaun Davey's music is
majestic as would befit a much more substantial and serious movie.  My
favorite little touch is the hats created by John Bright for the
soldiers.  They wear what can only described as an elevated mortar
board on their heads.  I laughed every time I saw them.
     The full name for the play is "Twelfth Night; or, What You Will."
With "what you will" meaning roughly "whatever" in today's vernacular.
"Whatever" is my reaction to this adaptation, but I did enjoy hearing
the lilt of Shakespearean verse while I soaked in the lush countryside
and listened to the music.
     TWELFTH NIGHT runs 2:05.  It is rated PG, but there is no sex,
nudity, bad language, or violence other than some fights in jest.  It
is basically a G film so any kid old enough to be interested could see
it.  Although I wish it had been more involving and lively, I did have
a good time so I give it a thumbs up and ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
