Title
Review for Ghost World (2001)
Number of Reviews
13

Author
Dennis Schwartz
It is rare to see a film that transports and moves me in such a way as to be
breathtaking. Not so much that but a film that leaves me so ecstatic and excited
by cinema all over again - a sublime experience in an era of dumbed-down,
mediocre pictures. For the 1980's, "The Breakfast Club" was the ultimate
statement about teenagers in high school. For the 1990's teen way of life,
perhaps something like "American Beauty" stands as definitive about how
teenagers think and talk nowadays (unless you prefer "American Pie"). But a
defining statement of the world today is clearly felt in "Ghost World," an
unparalleled masterpiece of pop culture attitudes and more specifically, teenage
alienation and discomfort in an era of Internet hype and media hogwash. I was
planning on seeing Kevin Smith's latest the following day but I just couldn't.
After seeing "Ghost World," you may not want to see anything else for a few days
since it gets under your skin so thoroughly that you will feel compelled to buy
the graphic novel fro
m which the film is based on or listen to the soundtrack or both. It is that
good. 
Based on the comic book by Daniel Clownes, "Ghost World" is a bleak view of
America today in an suburban town where 50's retro diners coexist with
politically correct art teachers. It is also a world of lonely, miserable people
who can't help being where they are in their station in life. Enid (Thora Birch)
is the offbeat, downbeat, ironic, contradictory, sarcastic teenager who has just
graduated from high school. Her best friend, Rebecca (Scarlett Johansson), has
also graduated and is relieved. Their relief does not translate to collegiate
futures - they have their own plans. Enid and Rebecca plan to work full-time
jobs and rent an apartment and basically make ironic statements on people who
surround their field of vision. Enid not only spouts ironic commentary, she
lives by it. She hates any and everything except for her friend Rebecca. She
sees a bald man and his wife at a cafe and immediately suspects they are
Satanists. Both Enid and Rebecca decide to spend their time gazing and talking.
One day, Enid r
esponds to a personal ad where some guy had seen a blonde and felt they shared
something special. Enid pretends to be the blonde and calls for a date. The guy,
Seymour (Steve Buscemi), comes to one of those 50's retro diners to meet the
blonde, who is of course not present. But something curious happens - Enid
follows Seymour around and begins to like the fact that he is representative of
everything she doesn't hate. He is a dork in her estimation but he also loves to
collect 78 rpm records of old blues singers. More importantly, Enid can relate
to Seymour's loneliness. 
Enid's home life is not pretty. Her father (Bob Balaban) eats jelly with relish
and dates a woman she hates. He does try to support his daughter but she is
unresponsive and selfish. Enid lives in her own fantasy world of irony and of
dancing to Indian music - she does not see that she alienates people by hiding
or being cleverly ironic. After alienating even Rebecca and Seymour, Enid feels
lost - a lost soul in search of her inner self. "I don't know what I am doing,"
says Enid at one point and that statement sums up her life. If Enid hates any
and everything and can't commit to a job, then where is her station in life? Can
it be with the summer art class where she has to contend with a politically
correct art teacher? Can it be the old man who waits for a bus that never comes?
Who can Enid relate to now if she can't hold on to her own friends?
"Ghost World" is not likely to appeal to the same teenagers who love "American
Pie" and its score of imitations. After all, Enid's preoccupation in life is not
sex - she would like to belong to something but she is too honest in this media
age to belong to anything she doesn't already despise. The same is true of
Seymour who is offended by shouting radio deejays and modern blues songs. He may
feel that times are better but he is still rooted in the past, particularly with
offensive minstrel ads and old blues songs. But he is a loner too and despises
society yet works for a corporation to support himself and his collection of
78's. 
Thora Birch encapsulates the modern alienated and alienating teenager perfectly
in Enid. She is a wonder to watch as she unfurls her commentary on screen with
winking nuances and explosive fierceness, always wearing horn-rimmed glasses.
Look at the scene in a zine shop where she dresses up in original punk rock
clothes, combat boots and green hair and claims her fashion statement as irony -
none of the clerks in the store see it that way. Birch screams, crackles,
hollers, whispers, laughs and cries, and she is sarcastic not to mention
touching in her weaker states where she starts to lose what she had. It is a
brave, risky performance by Birch that embellishes the promise she showed in
"American Beauty."  
Also noteworth is Scarlett Johansson as Rebecca, also ironic in her own way but
also looking ahead in the future - she does not wish to stay in the same town
forever. Her dry, low monotone voice is in direct contrast to Birch's
occasionally high-pitched delivery. Johansson first came to prominence in the
sweet film "Manny and Lo" and here, she is maturing into a fine actress. 
Finally, there is Steve Buscemi in one of his best roles as the lonesome
Seymour. He connects with Enid but also wants to move on in his own station in
life. The tragedy of his character is that he can't despite trying to. Buscemi
is as restrained as ever and gives measured poignance to Seymour's downfall. 
"Ghost World" is directed by Terry Zwigoff, who helmed the fabulous, disturbing
documentary "Crumb." This is Zwigoff's first non-documentary film and it is a
great, poetic masterwork - his restraint and static camera style are perfect for
the observations of this ghostly world as seen through Enid's eyes. And the
ambiguous ending will haunt you for days as to where Enid's future lies. It is
as moving and poetic as any film you will see this year. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at Faust668@aol.com
or at faustus_08520@yahoo.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz
GHOST WORLD (director/writer: Terry Zwigoff; screenwriter: based on Daniel
Clowes's comic book series; cinematographer: Affonso Beato; editor: Carole
Kravetz; cast: Thora Birch (Enid), Scarlett Johansson (Rebecca), Steve Buscemi
(Seymour), Brad Renfro (Josh), Bob Balaban (Enid's Father), Illeana Douglas
(Roberta), Teri Garr (Maxine), Stacey Travis (Dana), Tom McGowan (Joe), Rini
Bell (Graduation Speaker), Dave Sheridan (Convenience Store Customer); Runtime:
111; United Artists; 2001) 
At last, a black comedy, coming-of-age, romantic melodrama about teenagers in
rebellion that is not a formulaic clichéd one and actually makes an attempt to
flesh out the character of a teen who is searching for something that is not
trivial, as she lashes back at being stuck in the urban sprawl scene of LA that
is inhabitated by so many shallow and phony people. It's filmed by documentary
filmmaker Terry Zwigoff, a nerd himself, who gave us the excellent documentary
Crumb. Ghost World is based on Daniel Clowes's underground comic book
series--though the story is dramatically expanded. The comic book drawings were
done by Robert Crumb's daughter Sophie. He, of course, is the great comic book
illustrator. 
It's a film that best captures the uncertainty in the life of a very bright
recent high school graduate who is a misfit, Enid (Thora Birch). She uses
intellectual barbs and pure scorn to fend off her foes who are: anyone new she
meets, waiters, would-be friends and even her appeasing single-parent dad
(Balaban) and his girlfriend (Garr) she can't stomach because of her pushiness.
She saves most of her wrath for her vacuous high school classmates, all of whom
are preoccupied either with going to college, fitting into society or going
straight into the serious workforce. She and her girlfriend Rebecca (Johansson)
choose not to go to college, get involved with boys, or plan for a career. They
are close high school friends who will soon have a more distant relationship as
they have different needs and can't keep up their intense friendship when out of
the school environment--which gave them their common enemy: the high school. 
Enid has one obstacle before getting her high school diploma, she must go to
summer school to take a remedial art appreciation course she failed. She's
saddled with a gooey teacher (Illeana Douglas) who makes art secondary to
conforming with society, as she praises the students who create safe politically
correct art works rather than praising those who take risks and create works of
art. She promises much to Enid and, as one might expect, delivers little. 
Rebecca who is attractive and Aryan looking, but who identifies with the Jewish
Enid, decides to work at a pretentious coffee shop and get an apartment with
her. Enid, meanwhile, fumbles a popcorn vender job in a movie theater by
mistreating the customer's she hates and spends the summer mischievously
searcing for something that she doesn't even know she's looking for. 
The main plot develops out of a tasteless joke the girls play on a loser, who
put an ad in the personals of a local newspaper for the blonde woman he met at
the airport to call him. Enid calls pretending to be that woman and leaves a
message on his answering machine to meet her at a vintage '50s retro diner. The
girlfriends get Josh (Renfro), a classmate now working at a counter job at a
convenience shop, to go with them to the diner and see what this dwork looks
like. He turns out to be a sad loner named Seymour (Steve Buscemi), whom they
follow home. When she meets this much older man whose passion is collecting
valuable 78 rpm records of old-fashioned country and blues music and old
advertising art, she's surprised that they have similar socially unacceptable
personalities that are unbending and vulnerable--which makes it very difficult
for them to have relationships. She's, at last, met her kindred soulmate, but
they are both such social misfits that even that recognition might not be enough
to bring them together. He tells her he obsessively collects things to make up
for not having relationships with others. At first goofing on him, she soon
decides to help him find a woman to date and when the real Dana he put the ad in
the paper for calls--she gets him to call her. But soon becomes jealous when she
realizes that she really wanted to go out with him and now tries to destroy this
budding relationship. It is one that Seymour is willing to have even if it means
he has to compromise all his beliefs to keep it going, as he curiously says "I
don't want to meet someone who shares my interests. I hate my interests." 
He works days at a nondescript managerial office job for a fast food chicken
place, that he tells her once had the racist name of Coon's Chicken but changed
to Cooks to avoid any controversy. 
Through his unapologetic loneliness she sees her own, and even though this film
is not geared for a predictable or a happy ending, it's this relationship with
all its incongruities that is so fascinating, touching and tender to behold. It
certainly sharpened their awareness of who they were, and the poetical ending is
fitting for a free flowing story like this one. I honestly can't remember how
long its been since I have seen a teenage film as memorable as this one
(Rushmore comes the closest). 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Christopher Null
It's been seven years since director Terry Zwigoff impressed moviegoers
with his documentary Crumb, an uncomfortable look at pop comic artist R.
Crumb and his disturbing, grotesque, dysfunctional family.  Zwigoff's
ability to make viewers squirm and laugh at the same time is again in
full bloom, with the fictional Ghost World, a funny, sympathetic look at
a whole new group of awkward, unhappy people.
Based on a comic/graphic novel by Daniel Clowes (who co-wrote the
screenplay adaptation with Zwigoff), Ghost World provides the
point-of-view of young Enid, just out of high school, and aimless in
both direction and identity.  In the able hands of Thora Birch, who's
already suffered the ennui of suburbia in American Beauty, Enid is a
caustic, sarcastic, yet charming, sweetie.  Birch is in practically
every scene of the film, and anchors it with perfect tone.
Enid pals around with best friend Rebecca (a mopy, wonderfully
understated Scarlett Johansson), wondering about their futures, and
looking for cheap thrills.  Their dialogue is an exciting mix of slacker
smarts, movie fantasy, and the words of the inexperienced.  Rebecca
proclaims that she wants to "fuck" the worst stand-up comic in the world
(a guy they see on TV, appearing at the "Humor Grotto"), but she wants
to "make love" to the mullet-wearing spaz working at a pathetic
50s-style diner.  Zwigoff's choice of words, as well as biting settings,
give Ghost World a strange, easygoing sensibility that's tough not to
like.
As Rebecca gravitates toward the straight and narrow, Enid spends more
time with Seymour (played with appropriate shamelessness by indie hero
Steve Buscemi), a slightly pathetic record collector who's painfully
self-aware of his anti-social tendencies.  In Seymour, Enid sees a soul
mate, someone else who can't figure out humanity, and may just despise
it.  What Seymour doesn't know is that the pair's unlikely meeting is
the result of a heartless practical joke that Enid and Rebecca have
initially played on him.
The wonderful thing about Ghost World is that it finally provides an
original mood to the "misunderstood teen" genre.  One wrong move and
Enid's just another Daria (from the animate TV series; indeed, Ghost
World is originally a comic book).  Too much bitching about life, and
these characters would seem as familiar as those in other movies that
have tried to capture this tough period of a person's life (Reality
Bites, subUrbia, etc.)  Instead, Zwigoff skews everything just
left-of-center, including important details in music, costumes, and even
freaky background players.
Zwigoff's total package so successfully bucks convention that when Ghost
World slides off-course or pushes a bit long, it's easily forgiven. 
Soon enough, we're back in a revealing conversation between Enid and
Seymour, or in Illeana Douglas' hysterical remedial summer art class,
which Enid must pass to get the hell out of high school.
Some interesting visual references are made to the director's old
friend, R. Crumb (pale, sorry-looking mini-strip malls, a crisscross of
endless power lines), and the look of the movie is always exciting. 
Zwigoff even works in blackly comic comments about the interpretation of
art, race in America, and the culture of political correctness.
In an early scene, one of the girls proclaims, "That's so bad, it's
good."  The other replies, "No, that's so bad, it's gone past good, and
back to bad again."  This sort of retro-retro is exactly where Terry
Zwigoff has gone, creating a mood that's so geeky, it's gone right past
hip, and back to geeky again.  But it's still pretty cool.
Director: Terry Zwigoff
Producer: Lianne Halfon, John Malkovich, Russell Smith
Writer: Daniel Clowes, Terry Zwigoff
Starring: Thora Birch, Scarlett Johansson, Steve Buscemi, Brad Renfro,
Illeana Douglas, Bob Balaban, Teri Garr, Stacey Travis
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
JoBlo
For more reviews and movie scripts, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
After graduating from high school, two girl best friends try to figure out what
they want to do with their lives. In the meantime, they make fun of people
around them, attempt to get real jobs and play a dirty trick on an older, lonely
guy. That being done, one of the girls gets a job, hoping to move on with her
life, while the other, falls for the older, lonely guy, and starts hanging out
with him more. Okay, so it doesn't sound all that exciting, but trust me...it's
got some cool insight, great characters and a wonderful ambiance all around. See
below...
CRITIQUE:
There are great movies and then there are movies that hit you on a personal
level and elevate it to an even greater level. Does that make any sense? Well,
either way, I really loved this flick. It's not a "big movie" by any stretch of
the imagination, but its characters, its environment, its authenticity and its
capacity to capture the feeling of an outsider living in society today, well,
really drew me into its story. A story which incidentally, doesn't have a
typical structure. It's basically about these two high school girls who are
trying to figure out what the next step in their lives will be. This leads to
self-discovery, some introspection and an insightful look at the way people use
facades in order to get by in life. Of course, you don't have to be a teenage
girl to be able to relate to any of their feelings of alienation, concern for
their futures, non-conformity and the general notion of not being able to "fit
into" society (do you ever just feel trapped?). For many, there is a fine line
between "putting food on the table" and "selling out".
I've personally always had a fascination with the so-called "weirdos" from high
school (especially the goth chicks and girls with Doc Martens...yeah, baby!)
Maybe because I was kinda weird myself (or maybe I still am...not sure). But the
bottom line with most of these folks, as with the two girls in this film, is
that they're basically just like the rest of us, but with some deeper
insecurities, and a greater need to put up walls. The two ladies in this film
put others down in order to feel better about their own stations in life and
because they cannot seem to pursue their own goals. Of course, they don't do any
of this consciously, but just like in real life (boy, do I ever know a lot of
people like this!), it happens and it's interesting to watch them interact with
the rest of the characters in this movie.
But don't let me make this film sound too profound! It's actually very funny,
clever, extremely well-written and everyone in the cast fits their parts to a
tee. Especially Buscemi and Birch, who are both perfect in their roles, and
really give their respective characters the added layer of vulnerability needed
to pull you in even further. I also appreciated the various plays on stereotypes
in this film, but with a twist. Buscemi plays the typical "collector guy" with
all of his anal habits ("I don't want to meet someone who shares my interests. I
hate my interests!"), but he's surprisingly very conscious of himself being that
person. He doesn't pretend to be anything else. He's honest about it and that's
what makes him that much more appealing. Birch's friend is also very typical of
your know-it-all, sarcastic chickie-dee at the beginning of the film, but as
their lives move forward, she grows, adapts and accepts some of what her life is
offering, as opposed to Birch's character, who simply cannot seem to let go of
her irresponsible teenage self.
Man, but there's so much more in here as well. There's drama, there's a genuine
sense of empathy for the characters, there's an open-ended resolution that could
not have been more ideal for a film as such, there are some nifty old-time tunes
and there is an incredible feeling of loneliness woven deep within the film's
fabric. Mind you, if you've read my entire review up to this point, you should
also note that this is not your typical movie for your everyday moviegoer. Let's
face it...it's a bit of an "art-house" movie, but a damn good one! (in the same
vein of a, let's say...RUSHMORE) Oh yeah, I also forgot to mention the entire
sub-plot with Illeanna Douglas playing the over-the-top "performance artist"
teacher, who skewers all of those pretentious bastards and the whole lesbian
undertone running throughout the entire picture, between Birch and her "best
friend" (or was that just me?). Anyway, as you can see, I really, really loved
this movie, even more so because I'm quite confused about my own dinky future at
this point in my life as well, so it likely struck a chord, or
actually...several chords! Either way, check it out if you're looking for a
sardonic flick with a unique point of view, some great performances, fun
dialogue, a catchy soundtrack, many clever bits and a resounding, heart-felt
message.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
American Beauty (8/10) - Election (7/10) - Fight Club (10/10) - Ginger Snaps
(8/10) - Happiness (3/10) - Magnolia (9/10) - Requiem for a Dream (8/10) -
Rushmore (9/10) - Taxi Driver (10/10)

Author
Steve Rhodes
"I'm sick of everybody," angst-filled teen Enid (Thora Birch, AMERICAN BEAUTY)
tells her older soul mate Seymour (Steve Buscemi).  "Why can't I just do what I
want?"  Looking her straight in the eye, he shoots back the obvious question in
reply, "What do you want?" 
The problem with Enid and her joined-at-the-hip-since-childhood friend Rebecca
(Scarlett Johansson) is that they don't have a clue as to what they want.  The
only thing that they're sure of is what they don't want, and that is to be like
everyone else.  The opening line in GHOST WORLD, a coming of age drama with dark
comedic undertones, summarizes the position of the rest of the world, the world
that sarcastic teens Enid and Rebecca reject.  "High school is like the training
wheels for the bicycle of real life," their wheelchair-bound valedictorian
lectures the students.  Enid and Rebecca couldn't be happier to be rid of high
school.  They just wish that they could abandon real life.
Although the acting is flawless, the script isn't.  Flashes of brilliance are
interrupted by sections in which the story wanders aimlessly.  These flaws are
easily forgiven since the movie is so sharp when it clicks.  Still, I have
trouble understanding the absolutely rave reviews that many are giving the movie
since this is far from a masterpiece.  Although I liked it and, indeed,
recommend it, it is a candidate for my list of the most overrated films of the
year.
The movie is based on Daniel Clowes's comic book story of the same name, and he
and director Terry Zwigoff share the screenwriting credits.  Buscemi plays a
character whom the girls initially torment with an act of random cruelty in
order to pass the time.  The director's previous film was the documentary CRUMB
about controversial comic book writer Robert Crumb.  The casting of Buscemi
might be considered something of an inside joke given his resemblance to
Crumb.
The girls, who try to dress as uncool as possible in combat boots and
miniskirts, see Seymour as someone who will be fun to ridicule.  His hobby is
collecting old 78s.  How uncool is that?  Then it hits Enid, Seymour is one of
them.  "He's such a clueless dork," she tells Rebecca.  "He's kind of cool."
In my favorite side story, Illeana Douglas plays Roberta, Enid's art teacher. 
Roberta puts down anything remotely resembling traditional art.  Enid's cartoon
drawings are quickly ridiculed as not being substantial.  Roberta is impressed
by another student's wire clothes hanger "art" because of the student's message.
 These half-dozen, randomly bent hangers represent nothing less than "a woman's
right to choose."
GHOST WORLD runs a little long at 1:51.  It is rated R for "strong language and
some sexual content" and would be acceptable for teenagers.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, who didn't find anything in movie to interest him, gave
it just 1/2 of a star.  He thought it was boring.  
The film is playing in nationwide release now in the United States.  In the
Silicon Valley, it is showing at the Camera Cinemas.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Laura Clifford
Enid (Thora Birch, "American Beauty") and Rebecca (Scarlett Johansson, "The
Horse Whisperer") are best friends and determined outsiders graduating from
High School.  While Rebecca's set on getting a job and finding an apartment
that she and Enid can share, Enid's having trouble finding a direction and
becomes fascinated by an older, nerdy record collector, Seymour (Steve
Buscemi).  Daniel Clowes and director Terry Zwigoff ("Crumb") adapt Clowe's
graphic novel, "Ghost World."
In the film adaptation, Enid's clearly the more caustic, artistic one
('That's really gonna happen,' she states to an over eager classmate who
suggest they get together during the summer), while quieter Becky is more
focused.  Ironically, Enid must make up art class during summer school in
order to complete her diploma, where she drolly endures the antics of
clueless teacher Roberta (Illeana Douglas, "Stir of Echoes").  She barely
puts up with her meek, single dad (Bob Balaban, "Best in Show") and is
horrified when he begins to see old flame Maxine (an almost mummified looking
Teri Garr), whom she really loathes.  
For entertainment, Enid and Rebecca lure a lonely-hearts loser out on a 
bogus date.  When they run into the man again at a yard sale, Enid, to Becky's 
complete mystification, is intrigued and begins an odd relationship with 
Seymour.  At this point Becky pretty much falls out of the picture.
What makes "Ghost World" worthwhile are the terrific performances from 
Thora Birch as the ultimate counter culture wiseass and Steve Buscemi, who
finds exactly the right note for a difficult character.  Seymour's pathetic,
but acknowledges it (he refers to himself as a cranky eccentric specimen).
Enid's fascinated because Seymour knows who he is and has housed himself 
in his own weird world of old 78s and vintage artifacts.  Birch, sporting
an overripe body and cats eye glasses, puts up a hip front to hide the fear
of growing up and eventually drags Seymour into her confused state of being.
Clowes and Zwigoff throw in plenty of amusing sidelines, too. Enid and Rebecca 
share a crush on Josh (Brad Renfro, "Apt Pupil") and constantly torture him
at the convenience store where he works and where the Greek owner is in a
constant battle with a hilarious mullet-head.  Enid's art
teacher Roberta is hilariously out of touch, preferring a jumble of coat
hangers with a pandering description to Enid's own Crumb-like artwork.  Enid's
stab at a job selling concessions at a movie theater is an amusing example
of knowing self defeatism.
But Zwigoff allows the central story to drift away, arriving at an
unsatisfying conclusion for both Enid and Seymour.  Becky steps over the line
into grownup land by becoming concerned with material household goods, her
rebellious move of skipping college landing her in a job at a coffee shop.
Production Design by Edward T. McAvoy, Art Direction by Alan E. Muraoka,
Set Decoration by Lisa Fischer and Costume Design by Mary Zophres provide
the film with a desolate, retro look in well chosen L.A. locations.  The
film's final scene is reminiscent of Edward Hopper's "Nighthawks."
"Ghost World's" ectoplasmic protagonists are haunting, but it's ethereal
conclusions leave us wanting.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Although this weasel-y character actor has over 70 movies to his credit
he's still not a household name.  His face, however, is instantly
recognizable, a cross between Willem Dafoe and John Waters on a good
day--arched brow, thin hair, slightly crooked teeth.  Buscemi almost always
improves any movie he's in, whether it's an uncredited turn in an Adam
Sandler comedy ("The Wedding Singer," "Billy Madison") or a classic Buscemi
creation itself: Chet the Bellhop in "Barton Fink," Mr. Pink in "Reservoir
Dogs," Map to the Stars Eddie in "Escape from L.A.," Garland "The Marietta
Mangler" Greene in "Con Air," and now simply Seymour in "Ghost World."
        Buscemi is never likely to be mistaken for a leading man, but he's come
about as close as it gets in Terry Zwigoff's film.  Zwigoff's previous
feature was the 1994 documentary "Crumb" (about the underground artist
Robert Crumb) and with "Ghost World" the director has once again gone
thumbing through the world of comic books for his cinematic inspiration
(the film is based on the popular underground rag of the same name).
        Seymour isn't exactly the star of "Ghost World" but he's the catalyst at
its very special center, a social misfit who greatly affects the
relationship between two high-school outcasts (played by Thora Birch--the
daughter in "American Beauty"--and Scarlett Johansson--the daughter in "The
Horse Whisperer").  Birch and Johansson fulfill the promise they showed in
their earlier work and the character of Seymour is, perhaps, Buscemi's best
work to date.
        And that's saying a lot given the many memorable characters he's given us
over the years.
        Enid (Birch) and Becky (Johansson) are best friends who have just
graduated from high school.  Whereas Becky is responsible and quickly finds
a job to pay for the apartment she hopes to share with her "neo cool"
friend, Enid--a counter-culture rebel through and through--has different
ideas.  As a prank, the girls respond to a personal ad by arranging a bogus
meeting in a tacky diner with a middle-aged loser (Buscemi), but Enid soon
becomes so obsessed with the man, a self-deprecating collector of old blues
78s, that it begins to threaten her friendship with Becky.
        "Ghost World" is slow moving and thoughtful and worth savoring, as
director Zwigoff (together with Daniel Clowes, creator of the original
comic book) unearth the frustrations and discontentedness experienced by
individuals--here two teenage girls--reluctantly forced to face reality.
The performances in the film are all excellent, from the three leads to
almost all of the supporting players (including Bob Balaban as Enid's
ineffectual father, Illeana Douglas as an art teacher with pretensions, and
Teri Garr--in a scene not much longer than the one in the trailer--as Maxine).
        These are indelible, finely-etched characters that, together with Enid,
Becky, and Seymour (especially Seymour), stick with us long after the film
is over.
Got beef? Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 United Artists/ Granada Film
 Director: Terry Zwigoff
 Writer:  Daniel Clowes, Terry Zwigoff
 Cast: Thora Birth, Scarlett, Johansson, Steve Buscemi, Illeana
Douglas, Bob Balaban, Brad Renfro
   We all know people like the lead characters in Terry Zwigoff's
"Ghost World," based on an underground comic strip by co-
scripter Daniel Clowes.  They are people who are so judgmental
that they look down on the rest of the world, considering all others
to be dorks.  Generally these types are pretty dorky themselves,
and they tend also to be unhappy folks whether extroverted or
otherwise, covering up their feelings of inadequacy by their cynical
demeanor.  "Ghost World" describes a relationship between two
such people, the outgoing, fun-loving Enid (Thora Birch) and her
more withdrawn and also more attractive best pal Rebecca
(Scarlett Johansson--who at the age of 15 is playing someone
three years her senior).  Enid and Rebecca are at a crossroads in
their lives having just graduated from high school. Will  their
friendship slip away as, regrettably, so many harmonious
connections do at this point?  Since neither young woman is
going to college and the two even plan to share an apartment, the
odds are that their close affiliation will be unaffected. And yet...
   "Ghost World" is about the "and yet," about how events
conspire to change their fellowship and lead Enid into quirky new
affiliations that help her to find out who she is.  Zwigoff opens the
story at a graduation from a high school in a small-to-medium
sized town.  Enid discovers that she must attend summer school
to make up an art class that she did not pass, a circumstance that
sees her predictably rolling her eyes and turning down her
brightly-painted lips in at least mock disgust.  To brighten what
looks like an otherwise dull season, Enid coaxes Rebecca into
another bout in her favorite game: humiliating people she
considers beneath her, and sets her sights on an ad she finds in
the personals.  Pretending to be the woman that the ad placer
had once almost met and now seeks, she induces the middle-
aged man to meet his alleged date in a restaurant, only to watch
him suffer as his intended does not show.
   The story, written by comic strip writer Daniel Clowes and the
director, puts us into the world of these two 18-year-olds, allowing
us to eavesdrop on a series of events, some humorous, others
poignant, still others a combination of the two.  While Enid takes
her art class with a New-Age instructor, Roberta (Illeana Douglas),
who encourages the kids to express themselves, she winds up in
a relationship with the "loser" whom she humiliated days earlier,
Seymour (Steve Buscemi), who turns out to be a quiet collector of
78 rpm records and knows a lot about jazz from the '20's on.  She
acts as his dating service, fixing him up with an attractive and
willing woman, even forcing Seymour to realize that she likes the
bespectacled 18-year-old more than the woman he had once
speculated was made for him.
   The film is brimming with shtick, a particularly incisive one
occurring in a movie theater with Enid working the concession
stand, losing her job within hours because she is brutally honest
with the customers.  
   The title of the movie comes from graffiti that Daniel Clowes
once saw on the wall in a bad Chicago neighborhood--which got
the scripter to think that the America of today is undergoing a
steady change for the worse, as malls and fast-food chains take
away a sense of neighborhood; and to the characters themselves
who are about to lose their friendships.
   There are marvelous performances in this toned-down film, 
different from the usual summer teen fare, with Bob Balaban
playing the laissez-faire single dad whose rekindled alliance with
his ex-wife Maxine (Teri Garr) puts additional pressure on Enid's
current living arrangements and by Illeana Douglas as the kind of
art teacher we wish we had in high school.  Lenser Affonso Beato
wisely keeps his camera pretty steady throughout avoiding the
quick editing and panoramic views that cause audiences to reach
for the dramamine.  The end, slightly surreal, is a magical
moment, giving the viewers some insight into a major decision
which Enid is forced to make.
Rated R.  Running time: 111 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Jonathan F. Richards
Terry Zwigoff made `Crumb', the startling, insidiously brilliant
documentary about cartoonist R. Crumb and his world-class dysfunctional family. 
With his first fiction film, `Ghost World', Zwigoff stays on the underground
comics reservation, tackling the comic book of the same name by Dan Clowes, who
collaborated on the screenplay.
Enid (Thora Birch of `American Beauty') and Rebecca (Scarlett Johansson of
`The Horse Whisperer') are a couple of high school misfits who have ostracized
themselves from the shallow mainstream.  They stand apart, lips pursed in
cynical scorn at the hypocrisy and false values of the world they inhabit at
arm's length.  At their high school graduation, an uplifting speech is given by
a girl strapped to a wheelchair and propped up by an erector set of braces.  In
the audience, Enid winces.  `I liked her better when she was an alcoholic and
drug addict. She gets in one stupid car crash and suddenly she's Little Miss
Perfect." 
But for all its traumas, high school affords a buffer against the quicksand
of the real world.  It's a safe house where poses, even the pose of outsiderdom,
are easier to maintain.  As graduation recedes, Enid and Rebecca are faced with
getting on with the rest of their lives.  College isn't an option; though
they're smart as whips, they want nothing to do with the structured expectations
of more schooling  though you half suspect, in a world beyond the last frame of
this movie, that someday Enid may reconsider.  What they want now is their own
apartment, that first great badge of adulthood and independent life.  That means
getting a job.  Rebecca finds one at Starbucks, and begins drifting away from
Enid and the Puritanical code of alienation that has forged their sisterhood.
Enid can't hold a job.  Her determined truth-telling gets in the way.  So
she continues to live at home with her well-meaning but ineffectual father (Bob
Balaban), and forms an unlikely relationship with a lonely-hearts loser named
Seymour (Steve Buscemi), whom she encounters first while playing a cruel prank
on him, but later comes to understand and appreciate, because "he's the exact
opposite of all the things I hate."  
Seymour has practically no illusions about himself.  He knows he's a dork,
he knows he hasn't a ghost of a chance with women.  He collects old jazz
records, one of the blessed refuges of the marginalized; jazz taps into a
spirituality that floats above the rat race of societal positioning, its pioneer
artists were marginalized themselves by a white society, and anyway discs of
grooved, recorded acetate don't judge or betray.   
`Ghost World' is based on a comic book, and it reflects its origins in a
surface depth that implies more meaning than it delivers.  It's nominally a
comedy, but it's more `hmm' than `ho-ho.'  It moves a bit haltingly, with
awkward editing, as if progressing along cartoon frames on a printed page, and
there's a designed flatness to the color and the visual plane.  Some of its plot
turns, particularly the romantic pairing of Seymour and a lady from the
personals, aren't persuasive.  But it digs at truths both disturbing and
amusing.  Enid has to attend a summer art class to fulfill her graduation
requirements, and she encounters a post-hippie teacher (Illeana Douglas) who is
dismissive of her cartoons (drawn for the screen by Crumb's cartoonist daughter
Sophie) and only values conceptual art.  Enid, borrowing an old poster from
Seymour, comes up with a humdinger of a concept.  
The great lift of this movie comes from its two excellent central
performances.  Thora Birch, playing an antiheroine role that a few years ago
might have gone to Christina Ricci, radiates intelligence through her hip
dissatisfaction, and promises a character with many worlds to explore as she
grows older.  And Buscemi grounds Seymour in a clear-eyed pathos that is both
funny and heartbreakingly true.  
Almost, but not quite, as funny, heartbreaking, and true as R. Crumb.

Author
Jerry Saravia
It is rare to see a film that transports and moves me in such a way as to be
breathtaking. A film that leaves me so ecstatic and excited by cinema all over
again - a sublime experience in an era of dumbed-down, mediocre pictures. For
the 1980's, "The Breakfast Club" was the ultimate statement about teenagers in
high school. For the 1990's teen way of life, perhaps something like "American
Beauty" stands as definitive about how teenagers think and talk nowadays (unless
you prefer "American Pie"). But a defining statement of the world today is
clearly felt in "Ghost World," an unparalleled masterpiece of pop culture
attitudes and more specifically, teenage alienation and discomfort in an era of
Internet hype and media hogwash. I was planning on seeing Kevin Smith's latest
the following day but I just couldn't. After seeing "Ghost World," you may not
want to see anything else for a few days since it gets under your skin so
thoroughly that you will feel compelled to buy the graphic novel from which the
film is b
ased on or listen to the soundtrack or both. It is that good. 
Based on the comic book by Daniel Clownes, "Ghost World" is a bleak view of
America today in an suburban town where 50's retro diners coexist with
politically correct art teachers. It is also a world of lonely, miserable people
who can't help being where they are in their station in life. Enid (Thora Birch)
is the offbeat, downbeat, ironic, contradictory, sarcastic teenager who has just
graduated from high school. Her best friend, Rebecca (Scarlett Johansson), has
also graduated and is relieved. Their relief does not translate to collegiate
futures - they have their own plans. Enid and Rebecca plan to work full-time
jobs and rent an apartment and basically make ironic statements on people who
surround their field of vision. Enid not only spouts ironic commentary, she
lives by it. She hates any and everything except for her friend Rebecca. She
sees a bald man and his wife at a cafe and immediately suspects they are
Satanists. Both Enid and Rebecca decide to spend their time gazing and talking.
One day, Enid r
esponds to a personal ad where some guy had seen a blonde and felt they shared
something special. Enid pretends to be the blonde and calls for a date. The guy,
Seymour (Steve Buscemi), comes to one of those 50's retro diners to meet the
blonde, who is of course not present. But something curious happens - Enid
follows Seymour around and begins to like the fact that he is representative of
everything she doesn't hate. He is a dork in her estimation but he also loves to
collect 78 rpm records of old blues singers. More importantly, Enid can relate
to Seymour's loneliness. 
Enid's home life is not pretty. Her father (Bob Balaban) eats jelly with relish
and dates a woman she hates. He does try to support his daughter but she is
unresponsive and selfish. Enid lives in her own fantasy world of irony and of
dancing to Indian music - she does not see that she alienates people by hiding
or being cleverly ironic. After alienating even Rebecca and Seymour, Enid feels
lost - a lost soul in search of her inner self. "I don't know what I am doing,"
says Enid at one point and that statement sums up her life. If Enid hates any
and everything and can't commit to a job, then where is her station in life? Can
it be with the summer art class where she has to contend with a politically
correct art teacher? Can it be the old man who waits for a bus that never comes?
Who can Enid relate to now if she can't hold on to her own friends?
"Ghost World" is not likely to appeal to the same teenagers who love "American
Pie" and its score of imitations. After all, Enid's preoccupation in life is not
sex - she would like to belong to something but she is too honest in this media
age to belong to anything she doesn't already despise. The same is true of
Seymour who is offended by shouting radio deejays and modern blues songs. He may
feel that times are better but he is still rooted in the past, particularly with
offensive minstrel ads and old blues songs. But he is a loner too and despises
society yet works for a corporation to support himself and his collection of
78's. 
Thora Birch encapsulates the modern alienated and alienating teenager perfectly
in Enid. She is a wonder to watch as she unfurls her commentary on screen with
winking nuances and explosive fierceness, always wearing horn-rimmed glasses.
Look at the scene in a zine shop where she dresses up in original punk rock
clothes, combat boots and green hair and claims her fashion statement as irony -
none of the clerks in the store see it that way. Birch screams, crackles,
hollers, whispers, laughs and cries, and she is sarcastic not to mention
touching in her weaker states where she starts to lose what she had. It is a
brave, risky performance by Birch that embellishes the promise she showed in
"American Beauty."  
Also noteworth is Scarlett Johansson as Rebecca, also ironic in her own way but
also looking ahead in the future - she does not wish to stay in the same town
forever. Her dry, low monotone voice is in direct contrast to Birch's
occasionally high-pitched delivery. Johansson first came to prominence in the
sweet film "Manny and Lo" and here, she is maturing into a fine actress. 
Finally, there is Steve Buscemi in one of his best roles as the lonesome
Seymour. He connects with Enid but also wants to move on in his own station in
life. The tragedy of his character is that he can't despite trying to. Buscemi
is as restrained as ever and gives measured poignance to Seymour's downfall. 
"Ghost World" is directed by Terry Zwigoff, who helmed the fabulous, disturbing
documentary "Crumb" a few years go (there's even a nod to Crumb's rock band).
This is Zwigoff's first non-documentary film and it is a great, poetic
masterwork - his restraint and static camera style are perfect for the
observations of this ghostly world as seen through Enid's eyes. And the
ambiguous ending will haunt you for days as to where Enid's future lies. It is
as moving and poetic as any film you will see this year. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust668@aol.com

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "GHOST WORLD" (United Artists/MGM)
    Unless you're familiar with Daniel Clowes' adult comic books, you
might think this black comedy is about the supernatural. It isn't. It's about
those plain, often-unnoticed folk who function out-of-the-mainstream. Thora
Birch ("American Beauty") stars as Enid, a recent high-school grad who's decided
to skip college, find a job and get an apartment with her best-friend, Rebecca
(Scarlett Johansson). But when she discovers she has to take a summer remedial
art course to get her diploma, Enid's plans get derailed. The chaos begins when
the girls wickedly fake a response to a personals ad and lure a lonely loser
named Seymour to a diner, thinking he's going to meet the girl of his dreams.
Since he knows he can't relate to 99% of humanity, Seymour shows no outward
indignation, sipping a vanilla milkshake, patiently waiting. Peering through
horned-rimmed glasses, utterly intrigued, Enid stalks him. "He's such a clueless
dork, he's almost cool," she muses. She discovers he's obsessed with collecting
vintage 78 rpm records and, significantly, that they have a lot in common. At
the same time, her single father decides to move his girl-friend in, her
relationship with Rebecca deteriorates, her "racist" art class project turns
into a local scandal, and she's deeply conflicted about her strange feelings for
thirtysomething Seymour. Co-written by Daniel Clowes and director Terry Zwigoff
("Crumb"), the poignant, pessimistic cynicism fairly drips off the screen as
Thora Birch glides into the kind of rebellious role that Christina Ricci has
vacated. As the hypersensitive dork, Steve Buscemi is perfect, as is Illeana
Douglas, Scarlett Johansson, Bob Balaban and Brad Renfro. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Ghost World" is a weird, satirical 8. It's an intriguing
coming-of-age story that haunts.

Author
Robin Clifford
Enid (Thora Birch) and Rebecca (Scarlet Johansson) are two malcontented
teenage girls on the brink of graduation from high school and the very
threshold of adulthood. Outsiders to their parents and peers, the girls
carry on an almost non-stop caustic commentary that spares no one. When
Enid points her poisoned wit in the direction of a hapless, alienated
grouch, Seymour (Steve Buscemi), she realizes the he is much like her and
an unusual friendship develops in "Ghost World."
Director Terry Zwigoff hit the big-time with his much-awarded 1995
documentary, "Crumb," about the life and family of cartoonist Robert Crumb
(of "Keep On Truckin'" fame). Zwigoff, a close friend to the artist,
created an evocative, sympathetic look into a truly bizarre genius. With
"Ghost World," he joins with Daniel Clowes as they adapt the graphic
novelist's comic book creation for the big screen. The story begins with
Enid and Rebecca as a pair of intellectual sophisticates who know they are
too cool and smart for words. Their outsider status gives them the right,
they think, to whatever they damn well please for their own amusement.
One day, while going through the personals, Enid stumbles upon a plaintive
ad by a lonely guy looking for a woman in a yellow dress that he,
literally, bumped into at the airport weeks before. The girls decide to
have some fun and call the guy, pretending to be "the woman," and leave a
message setting up a meet. As they watch, from a distance, the poor schmuck
sit and wait - for nothing - at a local diner, Enid has the first stirrings
that, maybe, this wasn't such a funny idea. She begins a personal campaign
to get to know the man, Seymour, who, oddly, holds much in common with the
troubled teen.
Meanwhile, Rebecca has graduated high school (Enid has to go to summer
school to finish her art class), secured a job and is saving for an
apartment that she and Enid have always talked of sharing. Becky is sorting
out her plans for the future while her friend rejects, outright, any notion
of conventionality. The two begin a parting of the ways as Enid grows
closer to Seymour, especially when her sad sack father (Bob Balaban) makes
noises about getting back together with his ex-wife, Maxine (Teri Garr),
whom the teenager can't stand. Enid makes it her goal to help Seymour find
the lady in the yellow dress, but this decision, and the separation from
Rebecca, leaves her to confront her coming of age alone.
Zwigoff performs the leap from documentary to feature films in a seamless
manner that makes "Ghost World" not seem like a freshman fiction flick.
There is some initial comparison to another teen angst film, "Heathers"
(1989), but where the older film, especially the violence, was fantasy
based, the comic book-inspired tale is firmly rooted in teen reality. Enid
and Becky aren't out to kill the popular people here, but are not beyond
using a sharp tongue to cut down "normal" people. The girls are not unique
in their views. Even I remember, as a teenager, knowing 10 times more than
any adult, holding the older folk in a benign, superior contempt. Enid,
especially, puts forth this teen philosophy when you don't quite fit in -
when in doubt, attack.
Thora Birch and Scarlett Johansson are co-billed in "Ghost World," but the
veteran Birch takes over early on and is the real star of the film. The
young actress has over a decade of experience under her belt, starting, at
age six in "The Purple People Eater" and made the leap to more adult roles
with her work in the Oscar-winning "American Beauty." As Enid, she's a
little over-weight and cloaks herself in Gothic-inspired costumes that
ensure that she hides her inherent prettiness. As she singles out Seymour
for her own brand of amusement, she begins to make the first, unconscious,
moves to maturity. Birch is solid in the role and puts a firm imprint on
the complexity and sometimes confusion that make up Enid.
In a brilliant bit of casting, Steve Buscemi is nothing less than terrific
as Seymour. The actor has a talent for playing the hapless misfit and can
be counted on to put a unique spin on each character. Seymour may be a
loser but, with his love for old jazz music and dedication to his old
78-rpm record collection, he has something that he believes in. Enid sees
that his geek world may not be much to look at, but it is his own. The
relationship and physical attraction that bond Enid and Seymour is frank,
believable and, sometimes, touching. Buscemi should get attention at year's
end for this gem of a performance.
Scarlett Johansson ("The Horse Whispered") starts off strong but, as
Rebecca starts to find herself, she sets what are, to Enid, conventional
goals and aspirations. As Becky gets "normal" she grows more and more
distant from her friend, eventually fading from the picture, both in screen
time and with her character's importance to the story. Johansson does a
solid job in the diminished role. The veteran actors that help to flesh out
the background are an odd, not always successful, mix. Illeana Douglas
gives a dead on perf as Enid's summer school art teacher, Roberta. The
woman is in a  position to help her wards, but is so inured in her own
vision of art that she is unable to recognize the talent behind Enid's
caricature drawings. Bob Balaban plays Enid's dad as a clueless dolt who
doesn't understand anything about his daughter. Teri Garr's cameo
appearance as Enid's soon-to-be-again stepmom does nothing for the film.
Brad Renfro, as the girls' friend, object of desire and target for teen
torment, gets little air time and less to do.
Techs are sharp, especially the outfitting of Thora Birch by Mary Zophres
("Fargo"). The music, especially, has a place as a character in "Ghost
World." Vintage jazz and blues tunes abound with particular attention paid
to the 1931 Skip James song, "Devil Got My Woman." Of course, contemporary
music is amply supplied, but the blues rules. Artwork, especially Seymour's
Cook's Chicken scrapbook and Enid's portfolio of drawing, are a nice
addition by Sophie Crumb, daughter of Robert.
"Ghost World" is a true teen movie, not just for girls. The angst,
confusion and growing pains depicted are not aimed at one sex or the other
and has a lot to say for both. I give it a B.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Terry Zwigoff. 
Cast: Thora Birch, Scarlett Johansson, Steve Buscemi, Illeana Douglas, Bob 
Balaban, Stacey Travis, Brad Renfro, Teri Garr, Ashley Peldon. 
2001 - 111 minutes 
Rated R (for profanity). 
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, August 5, 2001. 
When you graduate from high school and have absolutely no intention of going 
to college, and little interest in getting a nine-to-five job, where do you 
go from there? 18-year-old Enid (Thora Birch) isn't quite sure. An offbeat, 
"tell-it-like-it-is" kind of girl with a best friend in Rebecca (Scarlett 
Johansson), they leave their graduation ceremony by stomping on their caps 
and giving the school the middle finger, never looking back. But there's a 
little sadness on Enid's part in leaving a place where, although she realizes 
she wasted her time at, at least had a sense of security in knowing what she 
was supposed to be doing with her time. 
"Ghost World," directed by Terry Zwigoff (1995's award-winning documentary, 
"Crumb"), is a bleak comedy filled with both humor and deep-seeded 
insecurities. Based on the cult comic book by Daniel Clowes, the movie is a 
perceptive and darkly funny look at post-adolescent bewilderment, a time 
between being a child and an adult when you simply don't know where you 
should be going, and what your goals should be. Capturing this stage of 
development with just the right amount of pathos and thoughtfulness, director 
Zwigoff has created a rich, one-of-a-kind character study that proves 
difficult to shake. 
Enid and Rebecca do have some sort of future goal, which is to move into an 
apartment together. Rebecca diligently garners a job at a local Starbucks 
(she realizes money is a necessity in moving out on your own), while Enid 
doesn't seem to have the gumption to do much of anything but while away her 
hours on her own terms. Required to take a summer art class with an 
unconventional feminist teacher (Illeana Douglas) in order to officially 
receive her diploma, Enid spends the rest of her time running around with 
Rebecca, stopping at coffee shops to "people-watch," and dropping by a 
convenience store to bug one of their classmates, Josh (Brad Renfro). 
Just for kicks, Enid and Rebecca jokingly answer a personals ad, only to spy 
on the terribly shy and dorky Seymour (Steve Buscemi) waiting listlessly for 
a woman who is not going to show up. Enid is surprised to find herself 
sympathizing with Seymour all of a sudden, and ends up striking up a 
friendship with him when she starts drifting away from the more ambitious 
Rebecca. 
"Ghost World" is the type of motion picture that isn't as much concerned 
about its eventual destination as it is about the path that our heroine, 
Enid, will take in order to get there. Enid can be a little cruel and 
stubborn at times, but she does have a good heart, and as her life progresses 
throughout the summer, she finds what little plans she used to have slowly 
drift away. Enid is one of the most purely original character creations in 
years, and turns out to also be one of the most likable. She may be overly 
honest and opinionated, but that is just more reason to fall in love with 
her--a young woman who plays by her own rules, other people, be damned! 
As the unorthodox Enid, Thora Birch (1999's "American Beauty") is a 
revelation. Having to more or less carry the entire film on her shoulders, 
Birch jumps at the chance of making Enid her own, and doesn't shy away from 
presenting her as an occasionally difficult and admittedly flawed human 
being. Birch strikes every note to perfection, and manages to be both 
astoundingly funny and accurately heartbreaking in her quest to find her true 
self. 
The other roles in the picture are filled by an ensemble of marvelous 
character actors, each of which could not have been better. Scarlett 
Johansson (1998's "The Horse Whisperer") has the less showy of the two 
central roles, but in many ways, her Rebecca is every bit as poignant as that 
of Enid. Johansson auspiciously paints Rebecca as a girl who feels both 
obligated and frustrated by her friendship with Enid, as what their looking 
for in life eventually becomes quite different. As the hopelessly nerdy 
Seymour, Steve Buscemi (2000's "28 Days") is equally touching. Buscemi has 
decided not to make Seymour someone to be pitied, but to almost admire for 
both his kindness and his unadulterated love for music and records, and this 
was definitely the correct choice. Finally, Illeana Douglas (1999's "Stir of 
Echoes") is a downright hoot as the groovy art teacher who encourages her 
students to express themselves in any way they know how. 
"Ghost World" is uncompromisingly dark, to be sure, but much natural humor 
that comes out of the characters and situations allows it to also stand as a 
comic delight. When Enid finally does get a job, for example, it is to work 
at a movie theater, but she is fired on the first day. When one customer asks 
if they serve alcohol at the concession stand, Enid's response is, "I wish! 
Actually, you should wish, because after seeing this movie you're gonna wish 
you had ten beers!" And when another customer orders a buttered popcorn, Enid 
presents it to her by saying, "Here's your yellow chemical sludge." 
The ending of "Ghost World" does not wrap things up in any conventional way, 
but that is in staying with the spirit of Enid, who wishes to be different in 
every way from other people sucked into manipulative commercialism. The final 
scene is thought-provoking and open-ended, to say the least, but it lacks 
that final close-up of our heroine that would have given it all the closure 
it needed. As is, the finale isn't entirely successful, but it is undoubtedly 
appropriate. 
In a summer filled with the usual, countless explosions and special effects, 
here is a remarkably assured, "smaller" feature that is a far more satisfying 
experience than, say, "Planet of the Apes." With "Ghost World," 
writer-director Terry Zwigoff has crafted one of the best films of the year, 
a movie that takes a painstakingly realistic look at the difficulties of 
growing up. 
