Title
Review for Hussard sur le toit, Le (1995)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Christopher Null
     You heard it here first:  1996 will be the year that puts French
cinema back on the map, at long last.  With both PURPLE NOON's re-release
and the arrival of THE VISITORS (the highest-grossing French film of all
time) later this year, we're guaranteed a couple of hits.  But the first of
these French delicacies to arrive will be THE HORSEMAN ON THE ROOF.
     Rumored to be the most expensive film ever shot in France, THE
HORSEMAN ON THE ROOF is the film adaptation of Jean Giono's popular novel
of the same name.  Directed by CYRANO DE BERGERAC's Jean-Paul Rappeneau,
this tale of love and tragedy in 1830's France is an exquisite period
piece, full of settings and photography as lush as its story line.
     This story involves an Italian revolutionary named Angelo (Olivier
Martinez), on the run from the law as well as the cholera epidemic that was
sweeping Europe at the time.  Forced into France to try to find his
compatriots, Angelo takes refuge in the home of the mysterious Pauline
(Juliette Binoche), and the two begin to grow close.
     As the cholera sweeps across France as well, Angelo finds himself
hunted by the locals, who fear him as a carrier of the disease.  Together
with Pauline, the two strike out across the countryside, each in search of
their own peace.
     The film, full of spectacular action scenes as well as touching or
romantic moments between the two principals, is a careful blend of the two
genres that works very well.  Special kudos to the actors, especially
Binoche, who plays her role as the noble woman with a cryptic goal (I won't
give it away) superbly.  The enormous cast of both speaking parts and
extras is handled well, and the scenes are perfectly choreographed.
     HORSEMAN's one flaw is its tendency to fall into what I call French
Movie Syndrome, with the characters spending long stretches of time in
monologues, reminiscing about characters and places we've never met or
never seen.  It's here that the viewer tends to doze off in hopes of a
swordfight or a fire.
     Otherwise, I have few complaints.  THE HORSEMAN ON THE ROOF should be
accessible to the same audience that made THE POSTMAN a success, and can be
enjoyed by a wide range of viewers.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com
-Screenwriter-Producer  /  Novelist-Publisher
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and e-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Olivier Martinez, Juliette Binoche, Pierre Arditi, Carlo Cecchi
Director: Jean-Paul Rappeneau
Screenplay: Jean-Paul Rappeneau, Nina Cornpaneez, and Jean-Claude
Carriere
There is something exciting about sex, when the players get to keep
their clothes on right till the end; and if there is a reason for
nudity, it is not to display the prowess of fantastic love making, but
for purpose and reason. The sexual tension, is so beautifully mounted in
this movie, that a gentle breath on the nape, can be as allegorically
erotic as a thousand kisses on the skin. This is a style that more
directors should learn to adopt. Being a French film, it also shows
commendable self-restraint.
The talented French cast includes Oliver Martinez, who plays Angelo
Pardi, an Italian of noble descent who is now living in exile. He is so
chivalrous, that he will brave the cholera plague to help a damsel in
distress. Hollywood, if not the world, needs more dashing gentleman like
this, to breathtakingly rapture the hearts of women who have lost faith
in the opposite sex. Then there is the beautiful Countess Pauline,
played by the stylish Juliette Binoche. Together, the duo, ride the wind
on stallions, shunning greedy soldiers and fleeing death.
This movie is set during the early 1800's, when the cholera plague
ravished towns in the south of France. Decaying corpses fill houses and
streets, as crows feed on the eyes of the dead. This is an unusual
setting for a love story, but the isolation and panic helps create a
breeding ground for respect to develop between the countess and her
champion. Although the ending comes too abruptly, it is easily forgiven
because of the overall lyrical style of the movie. When young lovers
meet, not even the world can stop them.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Olivier Martinez, Juliette Binoche, Pierre Arditi, Carlo Cecchi
Director: Jean-Paul Rappeneau
Producer: Rene Cleitman
Screenplay: Jean-Paul Rappeneau, Nina Cornpaneez, and 
      Jean-Claude Carriere
Cinematography: Thierry Arbogast
Music: Jean-Claude Petit
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Zoe
In French with English subtitles
     The year is 1832.  Napoleon has fallen, leaving behind a vacuum of 
power.  The Austrian empire is attempting a takeover of Italy, and many 
Italian patriots have fled to France to continue the fight from there.  
Meanwhile, a devastating cholera epidemic sweeps across France like 
wildfire, wiping out entire towns and generating widespread a fear of 
all strangers.  Soldiers patrol the countryside, enforcing quarantines 
by lethal means.  It's a grim era, and many superstitious folk think 
that God's judgment of the world has finally come.
     This is the setting for Jean-Paul Rappeneau's THE HORSEMAN ON THE 
ROOF, an old fashioned, historical, epic romance in the same vein as 
recent films like THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS, LEGENDS OF THE FALL, and 
QUEEN MARGOT.  These movies have certain common characteristics: a love 
affair involving two attractive protagonists; sweeping, beautifully-
photographed backgrounds; and a tragic, tumultuous plot.  Replete with 
heaving bosoms, thundering horses, energetic swordfights, and glorious 
widescreen cinematography, THE HORSEMAN ON THE ROOF delivers what's 
expected.  Like any good summer film, it's fun to watch while not 
offering a serious intellectual challenge. (Presumably, Miramax is 
offering THE HORSEMAN as an alternative for anyone seeking something 
with more substance than TWISTER or MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE.)
     The two protagonists in THE HORSEMAN ON THE ROOF are Angelo Pardi 
(played by a hunky Olivier Martinez), an Italian Carbonaro in exile, and 
Pauline de Theus (Juliette Binoche), a married French noblewoman.  Their 
relationship is surprisingly chaste, primarily because Pauline is 
determined to remain faithful to her husband.  Other than a few pregnant 
glances, these two don't share much in the way of intimacy.  They don't 
even kiss.  A little extra heat might have made for a more powerful 
romance -- at times, THE HORSEMAN ON THE ROOF takes restraint too far.
     Love and emotion aside, this is a wonderful spectacle, and, with 
all the action and adventure, it's an undeniably enjoyable romp.  Even 
those who typically shun France's more artistic fare will be entertained 
by this big-budget feature.  Not counting the subtitles, it's the kind 
of thing that Hollywood would be proud of.  There's nothing in this film 
that American audiences can't relate to.
     The story opens with Angelo dodging a trio of Austrian assassins 
sent to Aix-en-Provence to murder him.  With the killers hot on his 
trail, he flees to the city of Manosque.  Before he can join up with a 
group of Italian refugees, he is accused of poisoning a water supply, 
and has to run from an angry mob.  Angelo takes to the rooftops as riots 
break out in the streets below.  When a thunderstorm strikes, he 
shelters in a house.  The woman living there is Pauline, and, upon 
encountering Angelo, she reacts with unexpected calmness, inviting him 
to warm up and have some tea.  Soon after, the two are paired in a 
flight across France to reunite Pauline with her husband and send Angelo 
back to Italy.
     Although much of THE HORSEMAN ON THE ROOF is more lighthearted than 
many sweeping melodramas, there are moments of stark, horrifying power.  
Most deal with the effects of cholera on France's unprepared populace.  
Early in the film, there is a scene where Angelo stumbles into an 
abandoned house to find a flock of crows gorging themselves on the 
pasty, decaying corpses of the former human occupants.  It's a 
chillingly memorable moment.
     This is one of the most lavish, recent French exports, and the 
production values are top-notch.  Rappeneau (CYRANO DE BERGERAC) directs 
with a sure hand, Martinez and Binoche do credible (if not spectacular) 
jobs, and cameos by Francois Cluzet and the ubiquitous Gerard Depardieu 
add a few brief moments of "star power".  Despite all of this, however, 
THE HORSEMAN ON THE ROOF is not a transcendent experience.  But, while 
it doesn't have the power to get eyes misty and hearts aflutter, it's 
still entertaining enough to make the two hours pass quickly.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE HORSEMAN ON THE ROOF (LE HUSSARD SUR LE TOIT) is an exercise
in style.  It is a fast action tale of a devastating 1832 cholera
epidemic in the south of France.  Secondarily, it is both a romance and
a horror show.  It is billed as a romance because it has two beautiful
stars who hang out together in the show, but no more.  Equally well, it
is macabre since it has more needlessly gruesome dead bodies than any
morgue.  In close-ups the characters vomit a lot, usually all over
themselves, and after the hundredth corpse, you may feel like throwing
up as well.
     The local doctor tells us, that this is the "worse epidemic ever"
and shortly thereafter he dies.  Let me warn the squeamish again that
if you go to this show, you will see scores and scores of dead bodies.
I am not talking about removed shots from fifty feet away.  These are
close-ups of pale white people with congealed blood on them and the
look of absolute terror on their faces.  In one scene a large black
bird begins to peck the eye out of one of the corpses.
     When the director (Jean-Paul Rappeneau) is able to get away from
pestilence and death, his picture is gorgeous.  The cinematography by
Thierry Arbogast is full of steel blues and grays.  Especially lovely
are the sequences of the towns at night and of the mountains.  If you
are a fan of swashbuckling sort of tales, you may like the hectic pace
and all of the little adventures the director puts his stars through.
The costumes (Franca Squarciapino) and the music (Jean-Claude Petit)
are both lush and beautiful.  The sound (Pierre Gamet and Jean
Gouldier) is particularly impressive in the huge noise created by a
group of cavalry rushing from out of nowhere in a dense forest.
     The plot of the show is that Angelo (Olivier Martinez) is a 25
year old Italian army colonel and would be revolutionary.  He is being
hunted by the Austrian secret police.  He meets a beautiful young woman
named Pauline de Theus (Juliette Binoche).  Together they search for
Pauline's husband.
     Angelo writes frequently to his mother who "is a duchess that
talks only of revolution."  In one letter he tells her, "Mother, you
always wanted me to be more reckless.  Today, you would have been proud
of me."  She would not be so proud of his acting which is non-existent.
Olivier Martinez is a man handsome enough to be a model, but I saw no
evidence of any acting talent.  He has a striking pretty brown tabby
cat who does know how to act.  I liked the cat better than any of the
actors or actresses in the film.
     Juliette Binoche can be a wonderful actress, see for example,
DAMAGE, THREE COLORS: BLUE, and THE UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS OF BEING among
others.  Here, she gets poor guidance from the director I guess because
she shows little emotion and spends most of her time in vacuous smiles.
The chemistry between the two leads, who theoretically are falling in
love, is not believable.  For that matter, neither are the action
sequences.  In one, Angelo fights off twenty soldiers merely by making
sure the sun gets in their eyes.
     Overall, the script (Jean-Claude Carriere, Nina Companeez and
Jean-Paul Rappeneau based on the novel by Jean Giono) is a mess.  There
are fist fights, fighting armies, murders, plague, fires,
revolutionaries, lost husbands, romances, and lots of people whom it is
hard to figure why they are there at all.  If you were watching the
show at home, you would be constantly rewinding the tape in vain to try
to figure out what is happening.  Confusion is this show's middle name.
To make it worse, everyone in the picture moves with such a high
nervous energy that it leaves you exhausted.
     Finally, one piece of trivia.  They had only one way to treat
cholera back then.  They poured alcohol all over the body and rubbed
vigorously in order to stimulate the circulation.
     THE HORSEMAN ON THE ROOF runs way too long at 2:10.  I saw all of
it, but it is so repetitious that if I had left after only thirty
minutes, I would not have missed anything.  The picture is in French
with English subtitles.  The film is rated R.  There is brief nudity,
no sex, but lots of extremely horrific pictures of people dead or
dying.  This is a very intense show that is only for people with strong
stomachs.  If teenagers want to see it, make sure they can handle the
gore.  I liked the pretty parts of the picture, but otherwise it left
me cold so I can not recommend it and can only give it * 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: A tale of adventure and love in the time of
     cholera.  An Italian revolutionary and a beautiful and
     wealthy French woman, each with a mission, repeatedly
     encounter and help each other in 1832 France.  Jean-Paul
     Rappeneau gives us a high-spirited, yet solid historical
     adventure that excites but never goes over the top into
     swashbuckling.  Beautifully filmed and nicely acted.
     Rating: +2 (-4 to +4)
     It is 1832 and the threat of Napoleon is over.  Still Italy knows
no peace.  Twelve years earlier, inspired by a revolt in Spain, the
Neapolitans arose and forced King Ferdinand I to give the country a
constitution.  A congress of European governments, meeting at Troppau
and Laibach, decided it must discourage all such revolutions, which
might, after all, spread to other countries.  The Congress gave Austria
a mandate to march into Italy and to restore things to the way they had
been before the constitution.  Their rule was marred by uprisings, not
surprisingly, including a 1821 Piedmont revolution put down in less
than a month by forces of royalists and Austrians.  The 1831 uprisings
in Modena and Parma met a similar fate.  But uprisings against the
royalist government and especially the invading Austrians continue.
Many ranking officers in the various rebellions find things a bit hot
for them in Italy and find sanctuary in France.  They were also finding
support from like-minded Frenchmen, disillusioned with their own king
Louis Philippe.  He had been chosen as King in part for his liberal
viewpoints.  The reality disappointed the people, however, after the
new king had ruthlessly put down a workers rebellion in Lyon the
previous year.
     Angelo Pardi (played by Olivier Martinez), an officer in the
Revolutionary Army, is in France with gold collected there that will
help finance revolution ... if he can get it back to his country
intact.  Austrian agents are also in France, hunting down the enemies
of the Italian royalist government.  The French are generally
sympathetic, but just now they have an even more frightening and
implacable enemy.  One that can strike at anyone, highborn or commoner
equally.  An epidemic of cholera haunts the land.  And making the
situation even more dangerous, the people hold any number of strange
ideas of what causes and what prevents the disease.  Any stranger might
be accused of being a well-poisoner and hung by angry mobs anxious to
do anything that has any chance of protecting them from the disease.
Pardi faces a double threat from the Austrians specifically looking for
him and from the French who in their ignorance are looking to kill any
strangers who may possibly be visiting this disease on them.  On the
run Pardi finds himself in the house of a beautiful aristocrat Pauline
de Theu (Juliette Binoche).  She hides him and helps him, little
knowing that their paths would cross again multiple times.  A good deal
of what makes this film engrossing is its view of the medicine of the
period.  While that is not the primary focus of the story, it figures
heavily in the plot, not unlike RESTORATION earlier this year.
     Jean-Paul Rappeneau, who five years ago gave us his terrific
adaptation of CYRANO DE BERGERAC gives us another delightful historical
excursion, beautifully acted and photographed.  Like CYRANO, HORSEMAN
has a clever wit that shows itself at odd and unexpected moments.
There are a few enjoyable digs at the aristocracy of France.  One
particularly enjoyable scene involves the reactions at a dinner party
to Pauline's recent past.  It should be noted that this film takes
place in a France that the previous year had produced the novel NOTRE
DAME DE PARIS (bearing little similarity to an animated film to be
based on it near the end of the next century) and the film even makes
some mention of Victor Hugo.  The cast will be mostly unfamiliar to
American audiences, though Juliette Binoche will be familiar for roles
in THE UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS OF BEING and BLUE.  Binoche has the sort of
exquisite demure beauty that seems to be a staple of French films.
However her role rarely calls for her to show much versatility.
Martinez is moderately the more interesting of the two actors lead
actors, but perhaps because his role is better written.  There is also
a small role for Gerard Depardieu who also does not get a chance to
show much range.  Martinez has the greatest opportunity to act except
for a sequence for Binoche toward the end of the film.
     With the exception of a modest resurrection of the Western it has
become very rare to see American films set prior to World War II.  Most
serious historical films these days are coming from Europe.  The same
Hollywood that made great films like QUEEN CHRISTINA and THE SCARLET
EMPRESS back in the 1930s now seems to shy away from historical
settings, perhaps for fear of lack of interest.  In any case, for those
with no fear of subtitles, this may well be the most rewarding film of
the summer.  I give it a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
