Title
Review for Jacknife (1989)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Vince Deehan
Director: David Jones
Screenplay: Stephen Metcalfe, based on his play "Strange Snow".
Cast: Robert De Niro, Ed Harris, Kathy Baker.
I first saw this film about six years ago and it left such a deep impression 
on me that I was pleased to be able to see it again recently.  JACKNIFE tells 
the story of two Vietnam veterans, David (Ed Harris) and Megs/Jacknife 
(Robert De Niro).  David is living with his high school-teacher sister,
Martha (Kathy Baker), and is drinking heavily, trying to blot out the pain 
of his traumatic war experiences.  He works as a truck driver but has no life 
outside his job, other than his daily ritual of drinking himself into a 
drunken stupor each night in the local bar.
The film begins with the arrival of Megs, an old buddy who Dave served 
alongside in Vietnam, in the early hours of the morning at Martha and 
Dave's house to take Dave fishing on the first day of the season.  Martha
has never met Megs before, and although her first impressions of him are not 
favourable, she quickly gets caught up in his enthusiasm and decides to join 
the boys on their fishing trip.
It turns out that Megs is involved with a veterans support group and is 
trying to reach out to his old friend to help him get through his pain and 
torment. Whilst in Vietnam, Megs and David were close friends with another 
soldier called Bobby (Tom Isbell, who we see in flashbacks).  They were a 
tightly knit trio of pals, but Bobby was killed trying to save Megs and 
this loss of his friend has caused David incredible guilt and pain ever 
since. 
Alongside the story of Megs and David is the touching romance that blossoms 
between Megs and the shy Martha.  This cause alot of problems for David who 
knows how violent and crazy Megs has been in the past, and fears still is.  
When David warns Martha away from Megs, David also admits that he is scared
of losing his sister who has, effectively, looked after him and kept him 
company all these years.  
The romance between Megs and Martha is very well written and played by 
De Niro and Baker.  Megs is clearly a bit of a wild, untamed sort of bloke 
who appears to have as little experience of women, as Martha has of men.  
The scene where they go out for a meal together early in the film is a gem.  
Megs clumsily tries to compliment Martha but says it in a ham-fisted and 
foul-mouthed way and is genuinely shocked when Martha doesn't take it too 
kindly.  Only when they both admit to being very nervous do they manage to 
clearly communicate with each other.
Stephen Metcalfe's wonderful script is brilliantly brought to life by the 
first-class acting of De Niro, Baker and Harris.  Ed Harris as the 
traumatised David is simply perfect, and it is his deeply haunting 
performance that has been burned in my memory since I first saw the film 
six years ago.  The pain is clear in his eyes throughout the film.  The 
most powerful scene occurs when David goes to visit Bobby's 
parents and asks them to let him look after their lawn.  From the minute 
he walks in their door, it is as if part of their own son Bobby has 
returned and although their son is not mentioned in the scene his presence 
in the room is powerfully felt.  The acting here by Harris, and Walter 
Massey and Elizabeth Franz as Bobby's parents, is incredible.  The power 
lies in what they don't say, and in the expressions on all of their faces.
The only disappointments in the film lie in the Vietnam flashbacks.  They 
really are nowhere near as powerful and as effective as they should be. 
Since the whole film pivots around the death of their friend Bobby, it was 
a shame that I was left unmoved by these scenes.  
As a film showing the way past traumas can affect peoples lives, the film 
is very successful.  The suffering of war veterans should never be 
underestimated or forgotten and any film that brings this to our attention 
is to be commended.
Review written on Sat 9 March 1996 by Vince Deehan
(vince@deehan.demon.co.uk)

Author
David N. Butterworth
     The issues raised in JACKNIFE are not new.  Neither is the film's
approach.  If you really want to watch a provocative film which examines the
effects the Vietnam War had on those who served in the offensive, and those who
waited for them back home, check out the likes of THE DEER HUNTER or, better
still, COMING HOME.  The fine performances in JACKNIFE are worth the price of
admission, but the story and screenplay fall short.
     Three men serve in the same platoon in Vietnam and become the best of
buddies.  One is crazy, one is smart, and one is scared.  Robert De Niro,
naturally enough, plays the crazy one, Joseph Megassy, or "Megs."  The scared
one is played by Ed Harris (THE RIGHT STUFF), almost unrecognizable in his
role as David Flanagan, a burned out, beer-guzzling truck driver.  Ironically,
the smart one never returns home, a victim of a Vietcong bullet.
     Remembrance of the friend left behind becomes the central theme in this
story.  His death haunts David with frightening regularity.  We are treated to
occasional flashbacks of combat sequences which do little to further the drama.
They are all too familiar in a story about coming to terms with oneself after
the horrors of war.
     David lives with his beleaguered sister, Martha (played by Kathy Baker).
Their relationship is the only thing of any stability in his life.  She is his
comfort and his companion, but cannot ease his conscience.  Latent fears are
stirred in David when Megs shows up on the scene, acting on a promise that the
two of them go trout fishing together.
     Predictably, De Niro is attracted to his buddy's sister and the drama
begins to unfold in damp suburban disharmony.  The bleak Connecticut background
provides a peaceful contrast to that which both men were subjected to a month
previously.
     Sporting facial hair last seen in THE MISSION, De Niro walks through his
role with ease.  He gets all the good one-liners (his idea of an "elegant
cocktail" is a Bud!)  and lives life in the fast lane -- literally, from
speeding in his friend's truck to smashing his fist through windows when he
gets perturbed.  Perhaps in an attempt to attract moviegoers, the producers
gave the film a snappy title.  All that JACKNIFE actually refers to is the
wartime nickname De Niro's character was given because he used to crash big
rigs when he was younger.  All in all it's a pretty shoddy marketing ploy.
     Harris, on the other hand, has a much more difficult role, yet it is hard
to feel sympathetic towards him.  He plays what has sadly become a
stereotypical Vietnam veteran role -- psychologically scarred, tortured by
guilt, a little bit responsible, full of denial.  He drinks to forget.
     But the real star of the film is Kathy Baker.  She is a jewel in an
otherwise ordinary production.  Her part motherly spinster, part shy, retiring
violet of a Biology teacher is so well developed, so fine-tuned, that it's hard
to tell where her character ends and the actress begins.
     Director David Jones is no stranger to acting threesomes.  His 1983 film
BETRAYAL brought together Jeremy Irons, Ben Kingsley and Patricia Hodge in a
powerhouse drama of infidelity.  In JACKNIFE, Jones once again manages to milk
fine performances from his three leading players, but what's at fault here is
the material itself.  You can't help feeling that, with a better script, this
too could have been a formidable drama.  Instead, the film disappoints.  The
able cast tries its best but the writing just isn't there, and that fact soon
begins to take its toll on the proceedings.
     Stephen Metcalfe adapted his stage play, STRANGE SNOW, for the screen.
On stage, this might have worked better as the plot would no doubt have taken a
back seat to the actors' presence and vibrancy.  On screen, however, the story
and its mundane treatment wear pretty thin pretty fast.
     Admittedly, the film appears to be full of good intentions, but all too
often it comes awfully close to being stuffy and self-righteous.  We have,
after all, seen and heard all this before.  No one is denying the reality that
was Vietnam, but this movie paints its after-effects in an inappropriately pat
and self-effacing style.
     JACKNIFE is not a bad film -- it simply fails to say anything new about
the post-Vietnam experience.
