Title
Review for Smoke (1995)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Let me tell you, SMOKE gets in your eyes. I don't know what 
that means, but I imagine at least two-thirds of the movie reviewers on 
the planet made that connection in their SMOKE review, so I had to 
take the opportunity too... SMOKE isn't about smoking, although the 
one thing all its characters have in common is an affinity for inhaling 
poison into their lungs. Harvey Keitel plays the owner of a cigar / 
cigarette store, with various plots and subplots connected to patrons 
like author Paul Benjamin (William Hurt) and an ex-girlfriend (?).
        Hurt's story begins as a 17-year-old black kid named Rashid 
(or Thomas or Paul) pushes him out of the way of an oncoming truck, 
saving his life. Hurt insists on retribution and, upon learning Rashid is 
running from some tough guys, lets him stay at his place for a few 
days. This has all the makings of a "Fresh Prince of Brooklyn" sitcom 
(or an underground porno flick), but instead leads to another subplot, 
where Rashid finally locates his real father, who befriends him without 
knowing his true identity (millionaire Bruce Wayne). Keitel, 
meanwhile, is told of a daughter he never knew he never knew, a 
pregnant, 18-year-old crack addict (Ashley Judd). She pleads him to 
talk sense into Ashley, so she'll mend her crazy ways and stop 
recording all that crappy country music.
        These subplots eventually collide in a few ways, with Keitel 
sharing a truly compelling Christmas story with Hurt and Rashid 
working at the cigar store. I find it hard to believe, even in a movie, 
that any black teenager would hang out with fifty-year-old white guys. 
That has about the same statistical probability as Newt Gingrich and 
Bill Clinton teaming up to cruise for chicks at a topless bar. Then 
again, several Washington insiders have told me that's happened on 
more than one occasion, so what do I know? But I do know this -- 
SMOKE is a masterpiece in plot and dialogue. It may be a low-budget, 
low-action movie, but it's definitely worth watching.
        An aside -- SMOKE almost threw a monkey wrench into my 
Keitel Postulate, which states that Harvey Keitel only plays cops and 
criminals in the movies. Here, he seems to be neither, but notice how 
one of the plot points involves his illegal smuggling of Cuban cigars 
into the country. That's criminal activity, my friend, and it once again 
saves my Keitel Postulate from being thrown out the window.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Christopher Null
     When you sit in the theater, staring up at the big screen, during
the first few minutes of SMOKE, you *know* you're watching an "Art
Movie."  SMOKE obviously has no misgivings about its place in the film
chain, being perhaps the best example of a pure character-driven drama
to come along in ages.
     The sketchy plotline defies explanation.  Basically, SMOKE is the
lazy, drawn-out story of a smoke shop owner, Auggie (Harvey Keitel),
his estranged lover (Stockard Channing), a favorite patron/novelist,
Paul (William Hurt), and the young man who saves his life (newcomer
Harold Perrineau).  As $5,000 is kicked around among these characters,
their lives interact in unpredictable ways.  Sometimes this is
interesting, often it's just tiresome.
     Director Wayne Wang (of THE JOY LUCK CLUB) has taken a story in
the vein of TWENTY BUCKS and basically dragged the comedy out of it in
favor of giving us a talky melodrama.  The slow and deliberate pacing
of this film can't be stressed enough.  Auggie himself points this out
as Paul flips through his photo album:  a series of pictures of the
same street corner, one taken each morning at 8 AM.  Paul says he
doesn't "get it."  Auggie replies, "You'll never get it if you don't
slow down."  Wang himself explains that this scene is "the heart of the
film."
     That's a fine sentiment for an art gallery, but the last time I
checked, variable-speed movie projectors were still not in heavy use.
You can't slow down a film.  It has a natural pace, and Wang has
imposed an impossible gait on what could have been a memorable movie.
     It's a shame too, because at the heart of SMOKE are some genuine
characters with excellent actors behind them.  SMOKE is not only a
reference to the cigar store, but it's a metaphor for the fleetness of
life, happiness, and prosperity.  (You have to see one scene--the
world's most dysfunctional picnic--to really digest this fully.)
     In the end, sitting around, pontificating, smoking, and acting
cool can only carry a movie so far.  Maybe if Wang worked on
entertaining the audience instead of experimenting with format, this
film would have been a smoother smoke.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: 6/9/95 
Running Length: 1:51 
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, mature themes, implied violence) 
     SMOKE, the latest feature from JOY LUCK CLUB director Wayne Wang, 
tells five interconnected stories, each of which deals with a 
parent/child (or surrogate parent/child) relationship.   There are no 
healthy, happy families here, however:  this is about being a father or 
mother in the modern world, where single parenthood is becoming 
increasingly familiar, where too many teenagers are pregnant or involved 
in crime, and where shared experiences often bind people more closely 
than blood-ties. 
     This film opens in 1990 New York City at the Brooklyn Cigar Co., on  
the corner of Third Street and Seventh Avenue.  The proprietor of the 
little shop is Auggie Wren (Harvey Keitel), a likable sort of guy who 
chats with the customers about such diverse topics as baseball and the 
vagaries of chance.  Auggie has a series of regular customers, one of 
whom is Paul Benjamin (William Hurt), a down-on-his-luck writer who 
hasn't shown a glimmer of life since his wife was killed several years 
ago.  
     After leaving the shop with his day's supply of smokes, a 
preoccupied Paul steps in the path of an oncoming bus.  His life is 
saved by a sixteen-year old boy who calls himself Rashid Cole (Harold 
Perrineau Jr.).  As an expression of gratitude, Paul invites Rashid to 
crash at his place for "a  couple of nights", if he has nowhere else to 
go.  When his young savior accepts the offer, Paul gets more than he 
bargained for.  Eventually, however, Rashid is off in search of his 
long-lost father (Forest Whitaker), but he's not gone for good. 
Meanwhile, Auggie is about to get an unexpected visit from an old flame, 
Ruby McNutt (Stockard Channing), who has come to see him after eighteen 
years to inform him that he's the father of a crack-addicted, pregnant 
daughter named Felicity (Ashley Judd). 
     At one point during this movie, Paul comments to Auggie that "to 
make up a good story, you have to know how to push all the right 
buttons."  SMOKE follows its own advice, but without laying it on too 
thick.  If there was an obvious fault with Wang's JOY LUCK CLUB, it's 
that the director tried too hard to coax tears.  SMOKE is much more 
honest in the way it represents its characters and their relationships 
with each other.  Whether we're watching a father and son who haven't 
seen each other in years, a father and daughter who have never met, or 
an unrelated man and boy (who don't even have the same skin color) 
learning what it means to be a family, we're given real-seeming people 
in plausible situations. 
     The dialogue, written by Paul Auster, sparkles.  Each conversation 
has at least one memorable line, and it's always delivered in such a 
casual manner that it blends right in.  Auster's creations speak and act 
like real people, and that helps us identify with them.  The script has 
not "dumbed up" what the characters say simply to appeal to a wider 
audience.   
     One of the most fascinating moments of SMOKE occurs when Auggie 
talks about a project that has consumed him for the last eleven years:  
every morning at the same hour, he goes across the street from his shop 
and takes a single picture with his 35 mm camera.  Over time, he has 
accumulated more than 4000 photographs, each of which tells a story.  As 
Paul flips through Auggie's photo albums, he is startled to see a shot 
of his dead wife.  The power of an image -- any image -- is reinforced, 
much as in BEFORE THE RAIN. 
     Fine, understated performances abound.  William Hurt, who hasn't 
done much memorable work in about a decade, finds the right niche for 
Paul.  Harvey Keitel puts aside his Tarantino-inspired gangster image to 
play a cigar shop owner with the soul of a philosopher.  Stockard 
Channing is marvelous as one-eyed Ruby, Forest Whitaker is as steady as 
ever, and Harold Perrineau Jr. is likely to open some eyes.  The most 
striking performance, however, belongs to Ashley Judd, who, in a small 
role, reaffirms why she drew so much praise for her RUBY IN PARADISE 
debut. 
     SMOKE, in addition to being the movie's title, is also a recurring 
device.  It seems that everyone in this film smokes.  Puffing on a 
cigarette or cigar is a way to relax and relate to one another.  It's a 
conversation-starter or stopper, depending on the situation.  It 
motivates two unselfish transfers of money, each of which costs more in 
emotional currency than in actual cash.  No matter what's happening in 
this film, smoke is always there, swirling through the air. 
     Small, character-based films like this are easily lost in the press 
of mainstream summer movies.  Yet for those seeking an alternative to 
Bruce Willis dying hard, Mel Gibson displaying his brave heart, Drew 
Barrymore and Chris O'Donnell going mad with love, or a bunch of people 
getting dressed up in costumes to prove that Batman is forever, SMOKE is 
the perfect choice.  Its warm, pleasant glow may remind you of just how 
relaxing some summer experiences can be. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: William Hurt, Harvey Keitel, Stockard Channing, Harold Perrineau
Jr., Forest Whitaker, Ashley Judd Director: Wayne Wang Screenplay: Paul
Auster
Smoking is a carcinogen, and it also hardens your blood vessels causing
coronary artery disease, peripheral vascular disease and cerebrovascular
accidents. In short you either die of lung cancer, a heart attack or
become an invalid, that is, unless, you die of old age first....and
everyone in this movie smokes.
Imagine taking out the garbage, making dinner, getting groceries or
buying a newspaper. This is what this movie feels like .very ordinary.
Strangely enough, being ordinary is its greatest strength.
Wayne Wang in his lapse-a-dasical manner, goes the long way about
telling a story about a grocery store owner (Keitel) who likes to take
photos, and smoke; who has an ex-girlfriend (Channing) needing money and
help, who also smokes; they have a illegitimate daughter who is drug
addicted and has an abusive boyfriend, who probably smokes; a regular
customer (Hurt), is an author, who chain smokes; he befriends a runaway
teenager, who learns to smoke; the kid is searching for his father
(Whitaker), who smokes expensive cigars. They all end up at a family
picnic smoking.
This is a very slow, non-involving movie, which has it's moments, but is
best left for nights when one is suffering from insomnia.
Comment: Where's the warning label that says smoking can be hazardous to
your health?!

Author
Steve Rhodes
     SMOKE is a touching set of interrelated stories somewhat
reminiscent of SHORT CUTS.  The central theme in the movie is taking
life slow enough to get to know your fellow man.  The title and the
foci of the movie is the smoke shop in Brooklyn owned by Auggie Wren
(Harvey Keitel).  The visual link of all of the characters is the
casual smoking among them as they take the time to get to know each
other.  The exquisite direction is by Wayne Wang who was responsible
for THE JOY LUCK CLUB and DIM SUM.
     I want to state my prejudice up front.  I am violently antismoking
having never had a cigarette touch my lips, but having lived with
parents who smoked like chimneys rotting out their lungs until they
gave it up 10 years ago.  I complain frequently in my reviews about how
Hollywood shows more smoking that happens in the real world and how
they have too much gratuitous smoking in the movies.  Nevertheless, the
smoking in this almost documentary feeling movie was natural, and I had
no problem with any scene in it.
     The smoke shop is frequented by Paul Benjamin (William Hurt) plus
many excellent minor characters.  They spend a lot of time in talk
fests a la MY DINNER WITH ANDRE.  Unlike that film, the camera work in
this movie is a central part of its success.  The camera frequently
will linger at the end of a scene with a close up of a character's
face.  In the scene with Auggie's putative daughter Felicity (Ashley
Judd), it ends with Felicity giving a silent and yet so emotive and
natural series of expressions that several people in the audience burst
into tears.  Similarly the camera angles enhanced Auggie's telling of
his strange Christmas story.  In this scene, the camera slowly moved in
closer and closer until we saw every pore on Auggie's face and his nose
was about 6 feet tall on the screen.  This gave the scene great
poignancy and drama.
     The script by Paul Auster was the equal to Wang's direction.
Although the Christmas story was the best scene, the picture book one
was a close second.  Auggie shows Paul a picture book that has exactly
one picture of the smoke shop made everyday at 8:00am from the same
vantage point.  At first Paul is not impressed, but then Auggie points
out that each picture is the same yet if you take the time and look
close enough, you can see that they are all different.  This is one of
the key messages of the movie.  To further emphasize the point, the
background music is a slow piano playing a beautiful tone consisting
only of single staccato notes serving as a metaphor of the single
pictures.  Highly effective.
     William Hurt's acting in the movie may drive you crazy.  His
speech rhythm and his overall pace is one half or less of that of the
other actors.  I tried to accept it as yet another symbol of the taking
the time to smell the flowers theme.  The acting by Keitel, Keitel's
ex-girlfriend, Ruby (Stockard Channing), the young man, Rashid/Thomas
Cole  (Harold Perrineau Jr.), that Hurt befriends, and the young man's
father, Cyrus Cole (Forest Whitaker), was all top notch, but again, I
would give much of the credit to the director.  This was a movie with a
strong director's stamp.  He probably suggested Hurt adopt his slow and
methodic pace which was my only real problem with the movie.
     The cinematography (Adam Holender) and the Brooklyn sets (Kalina
Ivanov) gave the movie a classic low budget feel.  The script
frequently referred to "The Projects".  The enunciation of the words
provoked sadness and desperation without Wang ever having to show us
the locales discussed.  Many of the scenes and themes reminded me of
other wonderful movies I have seen.  The theme of chance encounters
changing your whole life and spurring lifetime friendships was lifted
straight out of that great film, GRAND CANYON.
     Finally, stay to the end as this movie features something I have
never seen before.  After the credits start to roll, the movie
continues and the best series of scenes in the entire show occur.
Moreover, it provides a perfect ending and extremely upbeat mood for
you as you exit the theater.
     SMOKE runs a surprising 2:05 since it feels much shorter.  Somehow
the lingering editing by Maysie Hoy and Christopher Tellefsen manages
to make the picture seem shorter rather than longer, perhaps because it
captures your imagination so well.  The movie is rated R, but it is the
softest R I have seen in quite a while.  Other than a few uses of the F
word, the language is pretty clean, there is no violence or sex, and
the movie is extremely life affirming.  Any teenager would be fine at
this movie.  I recommend this delightful and sweet movie to you and
award it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Martin Rich
In 1990 the novelist Paul Auster was stuck with a creative block.  The 
piece which broke that block was a brief Christmas story, about the 
proprietor of a tobacco shop in Brooklyn.  Now that story has spawned two 
films, 'Smoke', and its rather different follow-up 'Blue in the Face'.  
'Smoke', though dated 1994 in the credits, opened in the UK in mid-April 
this year.  Both films are credited to Auster and to the director Wayne 
Wang.
'Smoke' is built from a series of carefully thought out, intricately 
intertwined, stories.  The stories document a series of coincidences, and 
some intertwined lives, based around the people who pass through that 
tobacco shop.  Interestingly, the film is specifically set in 1990, the 
year when the Christmas story was published.
How autobiographical is it?  How much does the film play tricks on our 
imagination, by showing a writer and his character in conversation?  
Where Harvey Keitel's tobacconist tells William Hurt's author a story, is 
it a metaphor for the writer's creative process?  Does Paul Auster create 
his characters first, and then think about what might happen in their 
lives?
One, compelling, theme is the depth that can exist in everyday life.  
This is best illustrated by the series of photographs taken every 
morning: at first sight each street scene is the same, but a closer look 
reveals all sorts of differences from day to day.  The same is true of 
the stories in the film - all of them repay more than a cursory glance.  
Harold Perrineau Jr's Rashid (at least he's called Rashid in the credits) 
personifies this uncertainty, changing his name, his personality, how he 
fills his days according to whose company he is in.
But the greatest achievement of 'Smoke' is that it manages to be a warm, 
upbeat film without straying into blandness.  And its characters are 
optimistic and likeable without being part of any fictional, idealised, 
happy family; in fact there is deception and dishonesty galore.  It's 
well worth seeing.
One word of warning: don't leave the second that the first credits 
appear, because a significant part of the story is told over the first 
few credits.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     All is not what it seems with SMOKE.  This is not a film that is
about the people who know Auggie Wren, though one could be fooled into
thinking that really was the subject of the film.  Really this is a
film about story-telling and what makes a good story.  Like SHORT CUTS,
SMOKE is a collection of short stories.  It has no main plot but rather
several subplots unfolding at the same time, mostly revolving around
the wise and worldly Auggie Wren, operator of the Brooklyn Cigar
Company, a small smoke shop.  Auggie runs into a broad cross-section of
humanity while running the shop and he is a natural-born story-teller.
One has the feeling, though the film never says it, that we are seeing
not reality but Auggie's enhanced versions of the stories.  Each story
seems a little too much like a polished Auggie story to be taken
literally.  Only as we get toward the end of the film do we get an
inkling about why that is and while it is open to interpretation, in my
opinion it is probably that we are one more level removed from the
characters than we are in most films.  Auggie is telling us these
stories in his own style.  And we might expect that sort of subtle
playfulness from a screenplay by Paul Auster, the author of the
enigmatic novel THE MUSIC OF CHANCE, recently adapted to film.  Auster
is also the author of "Auggie Wren's Christmas Story," which actually
appears in the film, though there it is written by the character Paul
Benjamin (a penname Auster has used).  So apparently Auster has written
himself into the story or perhaps he is just subtly playing with us
again.
     The film has a complex chain of simple stories.  Auggie (played
casually with open shirt by Harvey Keitel) has a favorite customer Paul
(William Hurt), a once-good writer who has not been able to get his
life together since the loss of his wife.  His life is saved by
troubled black teenager Rashid (Harold Perrineau, Jr.) who later sets
out to find his (Rashid's) missing father Cyrus (Forest Whitaker).
Meanwhile Auggie's ex-lover Ruby (Stockard Channing) shows up with
demands on Auggie.
     Auster has a hypnotic story telling style that makes the viewer
want to just go along for the ride, though after the fact the stories
seem more contrived than they originally seemed.  There are certain
symmetries in the stories, reminiscent of those that director Wayne
Wang had in his previous film THE JOY LUCK CLUB.  Certain plot elements
show up repeatedly in the stories.  Parent-child relationships seem to
show up in many different forms.  Stolen goods that end up going for a
good purpose is another repeated plot element.
     Adam Holender's camerawork manages to capture a certain charm to
the streets of what could have been a tense area of New York.  And
Wang's style combines with Auster's style and Rachel Portman's music to
make this a warm, if somewhat paradoxical film.  I give it a high +1 on
the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
*** 1/2
Directed by Wayne Wang.
Written by Paul Auster, 
Photography, Adam Holender.
Editing, Maysie Hoy.
Production design, Kalina Ivanova.
Costumes, Claudia Brown, Music, Rachel Portman.
Cast: Harvey Keitel (Auggie Wren ),William Hurt (Paul Benjamin),
      Harold Perrineau (Rashid Cole), Forest Whitaker (Cyrus Cole),
      Stockard Channing (Ruby McNutt), Ashley Judd (Felicity),
      Giancarlo Esposito, Jose Zuniga, Steven Gevedon (OTB men),
      Daniel Auster (book thief), et al.
A Miramax release.
112 minutes.
Rated R (language).
     Plain talk.  Barring a surprise, SMOKE, at the Art for two weeks,
is the best film in town and one of the top movies of the year.  While
directed by Wayne Wang (CHAN IS MISSING, DIM SUM, EAT A BOWL OF TEA,
THE JOY LUCK CLUB) it is presented as "A Film by Wayne Wang and Paul
Auster."  Rightly so, as the script (his first) by novelist Auster is
crucial to the movie.
     The title must be taken both literally and figuratively.
Literally as an anachronistic conceit: nearly everyone smokes in the
film, which is something of a challenge today, when smokers are treated
like the persecuted early Christians.  Figuratively as, to quote Auster
" A lot of talk in the movie is a smoke screen, the smoke that obscures
vision, that obscures understanding.  The film is about how people talk
to each other and listen to each other--or don't."
     SMOKE has a GHQ, the cigar store run by Harvey Keitel at a
Brooklyn corner.  It's a pa and ma store, without ma.  The people who
come in it and those around it catalyze a series of interlocking
events.  These involve Auggie (Keitel), who, among other endeavors, for
many years has been setting every single day a camera at the same spot
and the same hour outside the store, and photographing life as it goes
by.
     When writer Paul (Hurt) flips through photos that all look about
the same to him, Auggie admonishes him: "You'll never get it if you
don't slow down."  That's when Paul finds of his wife who, later, while
pregnant, was killed by a stray gang bullet.  Look and learn, learn the
differences, learn what's behind the surface.
     The movie pioneer D. W . Griffith said: "I want you to see."
Decades later, in Antonioni's BLOWUP, looking closely at a photograph
leads to a major revelation.  SMOKE however, adds listening to looking,
like one of those old railroad crossing signs: "Stop, Look and Listen."
     Seldom has an actor's name been more apt that here.  William Hurt,
whose first book was a success, is hurt by the death of his wife and
by the resulting new abstraction and inability to write.  He might have
been fatally hurt by a truck had a 1-year young black, Rashid, saved
him.  Later, Hurt is physically hurt too, but without lasting effects.
     Rashid, complex, confused, cool (in the old sense) yet simpatico
and mysterious, eventually becomes the temporary guest of Paul.  Rashid
is but one of the young man's names.  He is, like his host, a
myth-maker.  He invents facts about himself.  A mix of truth and lies
will later involve $5,000 in Rashid's possession and, separately, a
father who disappeared twelve years ago after his wife had died.
     It would be a disservice to the viewer to get into specifics, as
the movie, in addition to rich character studies, relationships,
atmosphere and tale-spinning, is also something of a suspense tale, not
in the thriller mode, but gently ironical.
     All this involves Auggie's semi-legal importing of Cuban cigars
for connoisseurs; the odd fate of those cigars; a visit to Auggie by
his old flame of 18-1/2 years ago, Ruby (a surprising Stockard
Channing); some hoodlums; Ruby's perhaps true perhaps false tale about
Auggie's grownup, crack-addicted daughter (a wonderfully vituperative
Ashley Judd); a one-armed garage owner (Forest Whitaker in a superbly
quiet performance); and colorful peripheral types.
     The inspiration for the film was "Auggie Wren's Christmas Story"
which Paul Auster published in the New York Times of Christmas Day
1990.  The film goes well beyond it, but is nonetheless incorporated as
a fascinating yarn told by Auggie to Paul, about how he came to own his
first camera.  It is a warm story, like all others in this
affectionate, intelligent movie that is both cinematic and literary.
It celebrates, in many ways, the power and beauty of the word along
with friendship, bonding, and generosity, which makes it a distant
kissin' cousin of the recent THE POSTMAN.  And it used its tales both
as stories and as metaphors.
     One of them, told to Rashid by Paul, is about a young man who
finds, many years later, the frozen body of his father buried in Alpine
snows.  The father, at his death, was younger than the son.  In the
film this leads symbolically to a subtle yet clear connection with
Rashid and his father.  Another deals with a World War soldier, a
writer who used up all the pages of his book to roll cigarettes in the
trenches.
     SMOKE is an entirely original movie, yet not without connections
to the yet unnamed genre of films with no traditional plot-line, but
with coincidences or simultaneous events, with several characters who
criss-cross, affect each other (or not), pick up the story, talk a
lot.  Among them Whit Stillman's METROPOLITAN and BARCELONA; several
Jim Jarmusch movies, notably NIGHT ON EARTH; CLERKS (and its
convenience store); Richard Linklater's SLACKER, all excellent
pictures.
     There is also some ancestry to one aspect of SMOKE, that of the
$5,000 that keep changing hands.  A 1993 sleeper, TWENTY BUCKS with
that smaller sum going from person to person, comes from a script of
the 1930s.  Frenchman-in-Hollywood Julien Duvivier made in 1942 TALES
OF MANHATTAN, about a tail coat that has successive owners.  But the
technique in SMOKE feels looser, truer and more improvised.
     Technically too the film is superior.  The photography is (without
oxymoron) carefully spontaneous, with a camera that's always on the
move, following its subjects as though we were scanning them.  In
contrast to the stillness and "mise en scene" approach of Auggie's
black and white photos, the various rhythms of the color camera and the
editing use "montage" but neither pointedly nor exhaustingly.  This is
buttressed by the topnotch work by the four women who acted as editor,
production designer, costume designer and composer.
     The direction by Wayne Wang is impressive and never obvious.  It
is "invisible direction."  You feel that Wang harmonizes and supervises
the actors rather than give them orders.  And that between Wang and
Auster there are delicate touches of making Auster-the-person into both
the Keitel and the Hurt characters, and bits of others too.
     All the performers are exceptionally good as well as (in the main
roles) likable.  Newcomer Harold Perrineau (Rashid) has, for me, the
most touching and effective presence and, perhaps more than Keitel and
Hurt, turns out to be the film's epicenter.

Author
Long Che Chan
Smoke is a necklace of stories: each pearl different in its own way, but
all of them united by a string of thread.  Directed with a sedate
simplicity by The Joy Luck Club's Wayne Wang and written by novelist
Paul Auster, this motion picture is not exceptional, but it is
effective.  I would certainly recommend many titles over this small
Miramax film, but it is undeniable that there was much thought behind
its creation and the writer has woven philosophy into these Big Apple
tales.
The cast of acclaimed actors includes Harvey Keitel (who is always
interesting), William Hurt, Stockard Channing, Ashley Judd, and Forest
Whitaker.  Newcomer Harold Perrineau, Jr. joins the mix and together
Wang, Auster, and the cast tell these thoughtful, if not compelling,
stories to get across the simple message that People affect people.  The
thread that unites these stories is a small cigar shop owned by Auggie
Wren (Keitel), a man with a simple life, a few friends, and
philosophical "life" tidbits in his numerous stories.  His friend and
regular customer, a writer named Paul (Hurt) is one day affected by a
young man named Rashid (Perrineau) who saves his life near the cigar
shop.  Of course, Paul offers Rashid anything he wants in return for
saving his life.  Rashid decides on a lemonade, then on moving in with
Paul.  He has, we later learn, run away from his home from his aunt and
uncle to find his father who abandoned him years ago who someone has
seen alive.  He is also running away from the robbers who stole five
thousand dollars- the money which he now has.
Rashid finds who he believes to be his father- Cyrus, an owner of a
small town gas station who has a bitter past that has left him with a
fake arm.  While their relationship is on the verge of being discovered,
someone enters Auggie Wren's life.  It is his ex-girlfriend from several
years ago (Stockard Channing) who comes to the cigar shop claiming that
her daughter, Felicity, who may be his is strung out on drugs in the
projects with a moronic beast.  He is reluctant to believe her but does
not want to leave a girl who may be his daughter on drugs in the
projects with a freak boyfriend when he hears that she is pregnant.
Rashid's five thousand dollars will affect their lives.
As you can see, it is a tangled web of lost souls and wise men, all of
them with a story to tell.  They are, directly or indirectly, affected
by the other "pearls" on the string, most of the time by small details.
In a matter of seconds, Rashid walks into Paul's life.  The money from a
robbery is able to be put into good use.  Smoke is a portrait of the
difficulties and poignancy of life.
Here are the flaws: Smoke sometimes feels so contrived it doesn't seem
worth watching.  Whitaker's performance is frail- his scenes of
outbursts are so mechanical, so choreographed all the passion from them
are leeched out.  The entire cast doesn't show anything for the big
names it includes- most of the performances are acceptable, some have
many moments of tenderness and wisdom, but all of them lack the
"something" that makes you think - "Good acting!"  Ashley Judd's turn as
Felicity is short but has its emotionally-charged moments.  It is too
brief, though, and the character is too underdeveloped to regulate what
the film could have been- wonderful.
Smoke does have a very heartwarming ending, though.  It concludes this
melting pot of soap operas of a few New Yorkers.  The film has several
gems of pleasure hidden in its soft, gentle theme and watching it is not
painful or a waste of time.  Rachel Portman's score is put to good use,
as all of her great scores are, and creates a nice, simple atmosphere
for these simple tales.  What is wrong with Smoke is not its message,
but the fabricated way in which it is decorated.

Author
Joan Ellis
     SMOKE is a small jewel nestled in a field of rocks.  Paul Auster's
beautiful set of interlocking stories is directed with affecting
subtlety by Wayne Wang and acted by a notable cast that creates an
extraordinary feeling of life as it is really lived.
     Auggie (Harvey Keitel) presides with humility over the cigar shop
that has become a small culture within the Brooklyn neighborhood that
surrounds it.  At the moment we join them, writer Paul Benjamin
(William Hurt) is expounding on the subject of how to weigh smoke--a
conversational contribution both weightless and typical of the
atmosphere that draws the regulars.  Chatter is the medium of their
connection.
     The smoke shop offers its customers both diversion and
friendship.  It is there that all the stories connect:  Augie and Bill,
Bill and Rashid, Augie and Ruby, Bill and April.  They walk through
each other's lives with gentle manners and decent intentions.  Each, in
some particular way of his own, takes care of the other.  Each gives a
gift that changes another's life.
     The tone is set early on by a sublime scene that shakes the
audience by the shoulders and says, "If you want to understand this
film, slow down and listen."  Augie's real life, it turns out, lies in
the 4000 pictures he has taken over the years at precisely 8:00 a.m. at
the corner of 3rd Street and 7th Avenue.  On the night he shows his
albums to Bill, Bill responds, "They're all the same."  Only when Augie
urges him to really look, does Bill slow down enough to see that his
friend's life's work has been to capture the life of the corner outside
his shop.
     In 4000 photographs of the same spot, Augie shows him how to tell
the seasons from the way the light hits the earth, how to tell the
weather from the clothes people are wearing.  In a metaphor for the
film itself, Bill finally sinks peacefully into the process just as we
sink slowly into the unusual rhythm of the story.  It is a tale of
unarticulated caring, and by the end of it, we know everyone very
well.
     This is a story not of events but of daily life.  A son searches
for his father; a man does a good Christmas deed; an ex-wife turns up
after 18 years.  All of this pedestrian stuff passes, somehow, through
the orbit of Augie, who makes people feel good without their ever
knowing he is doing it.  As a matter of fact, even Augie doesn't know
he's doing it.
     The players in this graceful movie are all, it seems, in thrall to
the mood of author Auster and director Wang.  Harvey Keitel, William
Hurt, Forest Whitaker, Stockard Channing, and Harold Perrineau Jr. take
great care not to strike a loud note in this gentle movie.  This is
what real actors do when a good writer hands them a fine script.

