Title
Review for Fair Game (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring William Baldwin; Cindy Crawford & Steven Berkoff
All right, the first problem that Fair Game has is the casting of supermodel
Cindy Crawford in the lead role. Not that Cindy does that bad, it's just
that anyone who watches this film knows from moment one that that little bit
of casting was not done because of Cindy's extraordinary acting skills, but
for her extraordinary ability to look drop dead gorgeous in any situation.
And in Fair Game most situations tend to find Cindy either soaking wet or
very hot and sweaty, but I'm sure that that is just a coincidence, no doubt
that these situations were essential to the plot and the fact that Cindy
looks great wet, well, that's just a happy coincidence. Sure. William
Baldwin isn't a bad actor. Unfortunately, he just doesn't demonstrate it at
all in this movie. I'm not sure if that's because most of his lines were
just so hokey, or if he was trying to make Cindy's acting look good. If it
was the latter, it worked. Cindy does a surprisingly good job here in her
first movie. Which is not to say that she doesn't have room for improvement.
Although to be fair to Cindy, her lines were kinda cheesy in places.
So right about now you are no doubt asking yourself what sort of movie does
Cindy Crawford, arguably the most beautiful woman on the planet, chose for
her foray into the world of cinema? Well, I'm glad you asked that question.
Cindy plays a lawyer who by some convoluted plot twists becomes a target for
former elite KGB agents. Why woud they target someone as likable as Cindy,
you ask? By the end of the movie you won't care. The story is so contrived
it isn't funny. Anyway after Cindy gets blown out of the window of her
house, without getting so much as a scratch I might add, she is placed into
protective police custody under the watchful eve of William Baldwin. Who's
character, Max Kilpatric, a police detective, seems to possess the skills of
some sort of fighting machine (my guess is that the writers have seen way
too many of Steven Seagal's early films). The point is that the idea of the
Crawford and Baldwin's characters of the run from these killer Russians
isn't all that bad of an idea, it's just everything around that basic idea
which kinda stinks out loud.
The supporting cast members are nothing more that over acted stereotypes. If
I was Baldwin, I'd hope this film disappears. As for Crawford, she may
indeed have some acting ability. Unfortunately, any she does have is
obscured by writing that goes beyond bad.
This movie was obviously written with Cindy in mind, since the writers spend
most of their time finding ways to capitalize off of her looks. It's too bad
they hadn't spent more time on a half decent plot, since Ms. Crawford is
more than capable of looking just fine all by herself thank you very much.
Unless you are a huge fan of either Baldwin or Crawford this is a movie that
will only disappoint you.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
**
Directed by Andrew Sipes.
Written by Charlie Fletcher, from a novel by Paula Gosling.
Photography, Richard Bowen.
Editing, David Finfer, Christian Wagner, Steven Kemper.
Production design, James Spencer.
Music, Mark Mancina.
Cast: William Baldwin, Cindy Crawford, Steven Berkoff, Salma Hayek,
      Christopher McDonald, A (Joel) Silver 
Production distributed by Warners.
89 minutes.
Rated R (mayhem, killings, language). 
Q: Why did you go to see FAIR GAME?
A: Because there was nothing else to review.
Q: Come now, you wanted to ogle supermodel Cindy Crawford in her screen 
   debut, right?
A: No.  Prurient ocular tendencies are disappointed in any case, since 
   there is a single, fleeting glimpse of Crawford's bust "au naturel." She 
   is, however,  in tight tops most of the time.  And I expected no display
   of acting in this kind of movie.  It is unfair to judge anyone who is
   mostly in fast-moving evasive actions.  Garbo couldn't have acted in that
   part, nor Lombard, Streep, Lange, or you-name-her.  Also, when it comes
   to looks, I think that the Mexican beauty Salma Hayek (DESPERADO) is the
   real winner.  To my taste anyway. 
Q: Okay, what's it all about?
A: Dade County, Florida lawyer Kate is the target of mysterious
   people--for reasons one cannot fathom.  There's an explanation near the
   end, but it's still a silly muddle.  What's at stake is over 800 million 
   dollars.  The Kate-hunters are ex-KGB men plus one woman deadlier than 
   Lotte Lenya in FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE. 
Q: Whom does Baldwin play?
A: Aw, c'mon.  Whom else than the 
   super-duper-heroic-fast-invincible-unscathable police detective Max who 
   meets cute with Kate in the interrogation room (not a bad scene) and 
   joins his fate to hers.  This is a one-theme movie, except for about 
   three diversions.  Rita (Hayek), Max's ex-girlfriend, makes a scene at 
   the police station, later unloads Max's junk on the street below.  Quite 
   funny.  At the station, too, a man in jail suit gets a gun and endangers 
   all --until Max tackles him.
Q: I've a feeling I saw this just days ago.  But where?
A: In COPYCAT, also a Warner Bros. release.  Call it a studio system.  
Q: Tell me more about the action.
A: It has all the things you expect, plus more.  Shootings, corpses, 
   unending bullets from Max's gun, chases, a helicopter, more chases, 
   attacks, counterattacks, derring-do...  Typical of 
   producer-Schlockmeister Joel Silver.
Q: You mean there's this horrible violence that's destroying our 
   country?
A: Are you kidding? No one can take any of this seriously.  The audience 
   kept laughing.  Imagine  Max jumping into a swimming pool, in slow-motion 
   no less, during which he gets off several shots from his handgun!  
   Imagine the good guys being chased by the killers who drive three black, 
   electronics-laden Jeep Wagoneers that feel like three Darth Vaders on 
   wheels. 
Q: Electronics you said?
A: Yes, the most important aspect of the whole movie is that the bad 
   ones are computer geniuses, and I mean geniuses.  Ah, that KGB training! 
   Their machines do things my computer couldn't even start thinking of, 
   and they do it with the speed of light.  No waiting for little screen 
   clocks to finish spinning their hands. 
Q: Do the electronic marvels  impress you?
A: Here and in other movies they remind me of the Greek mathematician 
   Archimedes (he of "Eureka!" fame), referring to the lever and exclaiming 
   "Give me where to stand , and I will move the earth."  Now we can say 
   "Give me such equipment and I can get my next-door neighbor elected 
   President of the United States." 
Q: Are these techno-miracles superior to others in films?
A: The villains and their gizmos beat all hollow the C.I.A machines that 
   progressively enlarge satellite photos in PATRIOT GAMES.  They hear and 
   see everything, with sophisticated heat-sensors too.  They get 
   information on people faster than in THE NET.  To trap Crawford and 
   Baldwin in a hotel that uses electronic room keys, by remote control the 
   KBGers cut off the current there, lock all the rooms.  But our heroes 
   somehow get out.  The sinister ones can also falsify documents and create 
   anything they please in a flash.  That's why, the moment an FBI man shows 
   up to help, you know he's a fake.
Q: Who are those former KGBers?
A: Only Allah in his wisdom knows.  Kazak (the arch-monster) is played by 
   Steven Berkoff.  Most of the time his accent is American.  Then he tries 
   what someone with a dead hearing-aid battery must have told him is a 
   Russian accent.  Toward the end he lamely attempts a British accent.  
Q: Any other goofs?
A: Lots.  Aside from the plot not making sense, there are constantly 
   impossible heroics and acrobatics.  Max puts his car in cruise control 
   and jumps onto a moving train; as the car crashes, Max lands in the 
   wagon without a scratch.  A screenful of bank names includes "Union de 
   Bancs Suisses" instead of "Banques," which makes it the "Swiss Union of 
   Benches."  There's more. 
Q: What's the most spectacular side of the movie?
A: Its explosions of everything.  They invariably become huge fireballs 
   which, added together, would rival the fiery napalm ending of 
   APOCALYPSE NOW.  Our lovely couple is of course always a step ahead of 
   the blasts.
Q: Do Baldwin and Crawford make love?
A: Please! Don't you take it for granted? Don't you know that on TV and 
   in movies cops are always handsome, bright and able, and that both male 
   and female leads are unattached? 
Q: Any more funny bits?
A: The whole movie is so outrageous that it can be funny up to the time  
   viewer fatigue sets in.  There's an amusing scene of Kate (who catches on 
   fast) going  to a computer store and vamping a young nerd into letting 
   her use his machine.  That's where the sexual allusions come in.  When 
   the young man's glasses steam up and he says things like "I was playing 
   with my joystick" or "hardware," Kate's ironical-sexy expression, 
   facial and spoken, is perfect.  Crawford may deserve a comic role.  
Q: You normally rate movies severely, like recent ones that were more 
   ambitious than FAIR GAME.  How come you give  it two stars?
A: Because it is unambitious and unpretentious.  It is honest in its 
   dumb, cartoonish, boom-boom lack of depth.  When the video comes out, if 
   you watch it from your bed, the film is so undemanding that it can be 
   restful. 

Author
Andrew Hicks
        This is the movie that could single-handedly bring "Mystery 
Science Theater 3000" out of cancellation. It's one of those movies 
that's so bad it's absolutely hilarious, due in no small part to its big 
star, supermodel Cindy Crawford. If you only remember one thing 
about FAIR GAME, it should be that it singlehandedly proves 
Crawford should stick to the Sports Illustrated swimsuit issues. If you 
thought Kathy Ireland was laughable in ALIEN FROM L.A., you'll 
change your mind when you see FAIR GAME. Ireland would win 
handfuls of Oscars if this was her only competition.
        In a real casting coup, Crawford plays a super-intelligent 
lawyer (in a jogging bra, of course). We all know this is a stretch, the 
only legal opinion Crawford has ever put forth being that she favors 
the death penalty for anyone who wears white after Labor Day. 
Nonetheless, someone out there thought she'd make a good lawyer, but 
we're reminded of her true function in the movie when she takes two 
showers in a period of twenty minutes. And for you horny teenage boys 
out there, you actually get to see her topless for two seconds in the 
dark... Come to think of it, that may have been a body double. Cindy 
Crawford isn't black, is she?
        Like I said, Crawford is a lawyer with a bunch of Russians 
after her. Billy Baldwin (or is it Stephen? Alec? Adam? Kim 
Basinger?) is the police detective who has to save her life, time after 
time, chase after chase, explosion after explosion. There's absolutely 
nothing original about this movie. It's every cop show of the 70's 
mixed with every action thriller of the 80's and every technology-
exploitation movie of the 90's. Three decades of crap all in one place, 
driven further into the ground by Crawford's complete lack of acting 
talent. And it's all completely predictable. You know the mistakes 
Baldwin and Crawford are going to make before they make them, you 
know when the "sexual tension" will finally end up in them 
consummating the relationship, you know when the villains will 
capture Crawford so Baldwin has to rescue her in the climax and you 
know the movie's going to suck from the first scene.
        The plot isn't really explained until the end. All we know is 
these Russians have every detail about Crawford in their computer. In 
the words of one of the villains, "We even know what size pantyhose 
she wears." (Yeah, you and every 14-year-old boy in America.) He 
goes on to add, "We know more about her than she does." (_That_ I 
find very easy to believe.) I hope you enjoyed those two sample 
dialogue quotes, because I wrote down plenty of other bad ones 
("If it weren't for me, you'd still be pulling bananas out of your ass in 
Cuba!") because, you see, FAIR GAME is not only a showcase for 
recycled action cliches and terrible acting, but also some seriously bad 
dialogue.
        It all adds up to a really terrible movie that made me laugh in 
plenty of places I wasn't supposed to and grimace in places I was 
supposed to laugh. One more thing FAIR GAME has against it is some 
awful comic relief. Would you laugh at a scene where Crawford 
tortures a computer nerd with double entendres like "I'm very 
interested in _hard_ware" and other crap about playing with his 
joystick? I wouldn't, but not because I'm a computer nerd. It's just not 
funny. Crawford's only contribution to the Information Age are a few 
GIF files floating around with her head on a nude Traci Lords' body... 
or was it Jack Lord's body?
        I'll leave you with the final line of dialogue in the movie. The 
boat with all the Russians has just blown up and Baldwin and 
Crawford are floating on a life raft. Crawford says woodenly, "That 
was my client's boat you just blew up. I'm filing a lawsuit against you. 
You're in big trouble," or something to that effect, and Baldwin replies 
smugly, "What do I have to do to get out of it?" They of course begin 
making out and the credits roll. I'm not going to talk about how stupid 
the line is or how, if they'd really wanted to go for a bad closing line 
they would have had Baldwin say, "You think I could settle out of 
court?" but I will tell you that, if anyone ever suggests you watch 
FAIR GAME with him or her, you quote the final line of the movie to 
that person: "What do I have to do to get out of it?"
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America for over 1/50th of a century!
