Title
Review for Demolitionist, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1996. Director - Robert Kurzman, Screenplay - Brian DiMuccio & Dino 
Vindeni, Story - Anne & Robert Kurzman, Producer - Donald P. Borchers, 
Photography - Marcus Hahn, Music - Shawn Patterson, Visual Effects - 
Flash Film Works (Supervisor - William Mesa), Special Effects - Ultimate 
Effects (Supervisor - John Hartigan), Makeup Effects/Demolitionist 
Costume - K.N.B. EFX Group Inc, Production Design - Charley Cabrera. 
Production Company - Le Monde Entertainment/A-Pix Entertainment.
Nicole Eggert (Alyssa Lloyd/The Demolitionist), Richard Grieco (Mad Dog 
Burns), Bruce Abbott (Professor Jack Crowley), Susan Tyrrell (Mayor 
Eleanor Grimbaum), Peter Jason (Higgins), Tom Savini (Roland)
Plot: In the future undercover police officer Alyssa Lloyd is discovered 
trying to infiltrate the gang activities of escaped gang leader Mad Dog 
Burns. Mad Dog leaves her crucified as a warning in his ongoing campaign 
to destroy Mayor Eleanor Grimbaum for banning all guns. However Mayor 
Grimbaum authorizes Alyssa to be used as the first subject for Professor 
Jack Crowley's Lazarus Project, where her blood is replaced by nantotech 
plasma and she rebuilt as an enhanced human fighting machine. Using a 
hi-tech motorcycle and a masked bodysuit she takes on Mad Dog's gang and 
is quickly nicknamed The Demolitionist in the media. But Mad Dog 
retaliates by using his influences in the council to have The Lazarus 
Project stopped by showing Alyssa as unstable.
Robert Kurtzman is best known as the K in the KNB EFX Group makeup 
effects workshop, who of course have provided work for films `The Evil 
Dead' sequels, `Lord of Illusions' and `Spawn' to name but a handful. 
Kurtzman earlier provided the story for `From Dusk Till Dawn'. And with 
`The Demolitionist' Kurtzman joins an increasing number of makeup 
effects artists who have also branched out as directors (Kurtzman having 
since has gone on to direct `Wishmaster' (1997)). Although the sad truth 
is that the body of makeup effects artist-directed films - which so far 
include Stan Winston's `Pumpkinhead' aka `Vengenace: The Demon' (1987) 
and `Upworld' aka `A Gnome Gnamed Gnorm' (1991), Screaming Mad George's 
`The Guyver' (1991), James Cummins' `The Boneyard' (1991), John Carl 
Buechler with `Troll' (1986), `Friday the 13th Part VII: The New Blood' 
(1987) and sundry Charles Band productions, Chris Walas's `The Fly II' 
(1989) and `The Vagrant' (1992), Bob Keen's `Proteus' (1996) and Gary J. 
Tunnicliffe's `Within the Rock' (1996) - has failed to yet produce a 
single memorable or even worthwhile film. The most watchable to emerge 
has perhaps been Tom Savini's `Night of the Living Dead' remake (1990) 
but that was still a pallid shadow of its predecessor. One might think 
that when these creative talents get behind the camera they might be 
capable of producing some really way-out makeup effects that no other 
director has yet been capable of but even in their own specialist 
regard, these films remain remarkably routine.
And sadly `The Demolitionist' proves no different to any of these 
others. The plot has been shamelessly stolen from `RoboCop' (1987) - a 
frontline police officer is brutally killed by a gang then resurrected 
as a law enforcement cyborg where they  must fight official 
interference/corruption to finally despatch the gang. Although as much 
as`RoboCop', `The Demolitionist' reminds of `Barb Wire' made the same 
year as this which likewise featured a `Baywatch' bimbo in a anarchic 
near future action setting. In both cases the films' seemed to have some 
sort of fetish with seeing their lead actresses' pneumatic bodies 
encased in black leather. Both `Barb Wire' and `The Demolitionist' want 
to be comic-books of films, although only really `Barb Wire' achieved 
this to any kind of absurdly unreal regard.
`The Demolitionist' has its odd moments - like one scene where Richard 
Grieco introduces his "negotiator" - a Doberman which spends the 
duration of the "negotiation"  barking its head off at leash length from 
the cowering opposing party. But mostly the film is really bad. Some of 
the dialogue is appalling - a line like "After you're cooked, shall I 
serve you with potatoes or stuffing ?" falls utterly flat. Bruce Abbott 
introduces his resurrection device, "In the age of bio-molecular 
mechanics, this [chair] is God." Richard Grieco overacts badly in the 
villain part, although in the awful acting stakes has the honours stolen 
out from under him by Susan Tyrrell who gives the appearance that most 
days she turned up for shooting drunk. The film's low budget tends to 
get in the way of any effectiveness - the city of the future is 
represented by a single night skyline, and the action stunts look 
threadbare and cheap where they should have given the film a real 
kinetic charge.

