Title
Review for Cousins (1989)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Neal Weidenhofer
     Well, I just saw the best film I've seen in a LONG time and since I've not
seen it mentioned here, I'll pass on my impressions.  I'm giving it a good
solid +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.  The name of this marvel is COUSINS and I wish
I had seen it when it first came out so I could have gone back tonight instead
of seeing it for the first time.
     The key word to describe this movie is "pure."  In the first place, it's a
pure romance--it even has a happy ending--which works.  The characters are also
pure in the sense of being archetypes.
     First we have our hero, a pure romantic whose father says he "failed at
everything except life."  The horrendous miscasting that gave this role to Ted
Danson is the only factor that keeps this from being a +4 movie.  I liked
CHEERS and I can even tolerate some of his other movies but a romantic lead in
a role that requires a modicum of sensitivity and depth--not a chance.
     Next comes the leading lady magnificently played by Isabelle Rossallini
(who almost makes up for Danson.)  She is a pure "good woman" who is ready to
abandon her own happiness because her husband and daughter need her.  Inside
her is another pure romantic trying to get out.
     Married to them are Sean Young playing a purely vapid career girl who
doesn't have a clue what she wants out of life and William Petersen, the purest
*ssh*le it's been my pleasure to watch in as long as I can remember.  Got a
problem?  Use your fists.
     And last but not by a damn sight least is Lloyd Bridges playing the most
delightfully pure dirty old man I have ever seen.  Would *your* grandfather
share his porno magazines with *you*?
     It's the screenplay though that makes this movie a pure delight.  It's a
purely brilliant adaptation of COUSIN, COUSINE--almost a pure translation.  A
very witty story of two people whose spouses are having an affair and begin
seeing each other, purely as friends, for consolation and a certain amount of
revenge and end up, almost against their wills, actually falling in love.
     Mix these ingredients with direction that's adequate with occasional
flashes of brilliance and camera work that includes some truly awesome Canadian
scenery and you get a movie that's bound to appeal to the pure romantic in you.
Take him or her to see it.

Author
Randy Parker
        The dramatic comedy COUSINS has all the necessary ingredients: a
witty and whimsical script, inspired performances, a great sense of humor,
a large and wonderful cast, and the beautiful scenery of Vancouver.  It's a
movie of weddings, marriage, family, infidelity, and--oh yes--love.
        Like 3 MEN AND A BABY, COUSINS is an Americanized version of a
French film: 1975's COUSIN, COUSINE.  The plot is complicated, but it goes
something like this.  Larry and Tom are cousins, each of whom is
not-so-happily-married.  Tom starts an affair with Larry's wife, Tish, and
to get even, Larry and Tom's wife, Maria, pretend to have an affair of
their own.  Soon the pretending turns to love and COUSINS is off and
running.
        COUSINS is populated by a wide assortment of interesting characters
and caricatures.  The acting is first rate down to even the smallest
supporting role, and virtually every performance deserves mention.  Ted
Danson (in his first starring film role) finally gets to play a character
with some depth and sensitivity.  While Larry may be confident and charming
like Sam Malone on "Cheers," he is also complex and vulnerable, with more
between his ears than empty space.  As Maria, Isabella Rossellini is a joy
to watch; she is shy, sensuous, and immensely alluring.  Sean Young is
perfectly cast as Larry's picture perfect wife, Tish, a superficial and
trendy make-up consultant.  Keith Coogan, from ADVENTURES IN BABYSITTING,
is wonderfully weird and eccentric as Larry's rebellious son, Mitch.  And
finally, Lloyd Bridges in a tour de force performance is Mitch's
rambunctious grandfather; he provides some of COUSINS' best lines and
laughs.
        Like MOONSTRUCK, COUSINS is a mix of drama and comedy.  The film is
larger than life and has a keen sense of the absurd.  It understands human
nature extremely well and milks it for every possible laugh and heart-tug.
How often do you see a movie where you believe that two characters truly
and sincerely care for and love each other, as friends and as lovers?
Well, to its credit, COUSINS is just such a movie.  Let's hope the French
continue to provide us with the inspiration to make films like COUSINS
