Title
Review for Amazon (1990)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
The unfortunate thing about most rain forest films, is that there can be no
poetic justice done to that world. The fortunate thing, is that the jungle
has staying power, and puts up a good fight, and hopefully will survive the
battles, and win the war.
And the odd thing, is that some film maker in Finland, cares about it much
more than we might like to admit, and create a film that is unusual, not at
all sentimental, and besides a little positiveness, there still is a force
that has to be dealt with.
It is the story of a man and his two daughters, running away from his wife's
accidental death, ending up in Rio de Janeiro, in the hope of a new life.
His new hope ends up in despair, and takes him towards the Amazon, where
there is a rush for diamonds, and precious stones, in a few parts, specially
in the  higher plains, near the Peruvian, Colombian, and Venezuelan borders.
And there, on the barren Trans-Atlantic road, he meets an American pilot,
who does much running of anything between villages to pay for his habit,
cachaca and women, and of course, a hope of finding some diamonds in order
to get himself a living.
In the course of making a new friend, he gets caught up in the gold rush,
and with the American set off to fix a caterpillar tractor, which they hope
would help the mining of the precious stones, where they want to go.  The
problem is that the dead tractor is abandoned some 300 kilometers away.  On
their last trip, the plane crashes in the middle of nowhere, and the
American dies.  The finish man, is found by the Indians, and nursed back to
reasonable health, until he decides to leave.  On his trip up river on a
small canoe, he happens to eventually meet up with the village where his
daughters are still being cared by the woman he has befriended.  As the film
ends, he is thankful for the miraculous ways, and decides that to live in
that paradise is good enough for him...... as the sound of a helicopter
thunders away and it rises to bring into the area a brand new tractor.
It's a strong image, and one which the film shows, as starting out of
individual dreams of grandeur and riches.  This man has survived the rigors
of an old life and jungle.  Can he survive the rigors of the society he left
behind???
With music by the Brazilian percussionist NANA VASCONCELLOS, whose music is
well known in that area of Europe, due to his work with Jan Garbarek, Kjell
Johansen, and several other jazz world names, this film has an air of
Brazilian-ness which many other slick productions do not.  Unlike some
productions, the Indians here are strict by standers, and interact as they
feel, without a script, thus stripping away the usual cinematic styled
stereotype.  It is as authentic as it comes.
