Title
Review for Ten Commandments, The (1956)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Cheng-Jih Chen

I have this vague sense that I should have many of the big,
significant, epic, important, well-loved, etc., movies on hand in my
DVD collection.  While I may turn to, say, "It's a Wonderful Life"
infrequently, knowing it's there grants some peace of mind.  It's
similar to living in Manhattan, where you know you can get a roast beef
with Russian dressing at 3AM, but you may only do it once or twice
after school.
So, I recently got the 1956 version of "The Ten Commandments",
self-styled "Greatest Event In Motion Picture History", so big it takes
two RSDL DVDs and still has almost no room left for DVD extras beyond
three trailers.  I watched this in two sittings -- the intermission is
where the disks are split, and, even with the overacting and the
earnestness made all the more glaring by our irony-laden times, it's
still a fantastic movie.  It's held up well over the decades.  I
believe this is also the first time I've seen the film in a theatrical,
widescreen format.  All the previous viewings were on TV, during the
annual Passover/Easter showing of the film on ABC.  I don't quite
remember how it looked on these occasions, but I kept imagining Moses
waving his staff at an offscreen Pharoh.  Actually, the aspect ratio
was at 1:66, so it couldn't have been that bad.
I'm not sure what to say about the film.  Yes, it diverges widely from
Exodus, with three lines of Biblical verse extrapolated into three
hours of movie.  The plot and its more famous scenes have seeped in
through cultural osmosis.  The robed and bearded Charlton Heston
holding the Commandments is referenced and parodied, from Mel Brooks to
the Simpsons.  Even if you've never actually sat down to watch the
movie, these images drift in our collective subconscious.
In this sense, it's difficult if not impossible to watch the film
without some amount of self-reference and cultural commentary.  The
MST3K-style thought bubble above Heston's head, while God is inscribing
the Commandments, asking, "Hey, God, what about the right to bear
arms?" is the most obvious.  The notion that Moses should have stuck
around to become Pharoh and then freed the slaves -- changing the
system from within -- is the most post-1960s.  An notion that Joshua
could really have used some project management software during the
Exodus is perhaps the most late 1990s.  And, really, why did people
continue to listen to Dathan after each of his suggestions proves
somewhat unsound by a series of literal acts of God?  Such thoughts and
audience commentary makes for a more rolicking film.  And our
sensibilities about how films should look has changed, letting in
chuckles at the most inappropriate moments.  The most wince-worthy
moment is when the Red Sea parts, and there are these three women on a
rock, looking across the screen in windswept, forearm-to-forehead awe.
Actually, I'm sure this scene looked ridiculous and wince-worthy in the
1950s.
The political context of the film is somewhat ambiguous to me.  They
talk about freedom from slavery, and the freedom of God's law.  The
introduction by Cecil B. DeMille makes it feel like there's an
anti-Communist slant to things, which is not surprising given the time
it was made.  There are other parts here and there which almost suggest
the Civil Rights movement, which was getting underway at the time.
It's not clear how conscious Hollywood would have been of such,
though.  I suppose it's because the film's main topic, the release from
bondage and oppression, is simply resonant for America.
I should touch on the special effects.  While they're not quite
believable nowadays, they do well in the test of invoking a bit of
awe.  I guess it's all in how they're used in conjunction with the
writing and music.  Perhaps even more impressive to a fin-de-millennium
audience are the scenes done without computer effects.  In particular,
there are those moments when you go, oh, my god, there are thousands of
extras there.  The craft of filmmaking simply awes in different
ways.
As for the rest of the DVD, we only get three trailers to the film.
These trailers span decades, actually, ranging from the original
trailer, to a 1960s rerelease, to one for the 1980s rerelease.
Subsequent trailers have gotten shorter and shorter.  Interestingly,
the first trailer doesn't really look like what we'd think of as a
trailer.  Instead, it feels like a mini-documentary, where someone
talks to you about how the film was partially shot on location, how all
these Biblical scholars and historians were consulted to insure
"historical accuracy" in the script (contrast this to the recent
"Noah's Ark", which had a Hercules-Legendary-Journeys style subplot
with Lot coming at Noah as a patch-eyed pirate, or so I've been told),
to the props of the Commandments used in the film.  I didn't actually
see the end of it:  it's over fifteen minutes long, far greater than
anything that would appear on, say, Entertainment Tonight these days.
I suppose I should at least briefly talk about DVD quality.  The
picture is very good, but my television sucks, so this isn't going to
be liek the usual DVD review which rates picture quality.  I can only
tell if the image really, really blows (e.g., The Last Emperor) and
nothing else.  There is the standard stereo soundtrack, and a
remastered Dolby 5.1 one, so you can hear, say, the Hebrew slaves
shuffling around and making bricks out of your surround sound
speakers.

Author
Stian M. Landgaard
Starring Charlton Heston, Yul Brynner, Anne Baxter, Yvonne De Carlo
Directed and produced by Cecil B. DeMille
"The Ten Commandments" was a great epic when made in the fifties, and it
continues to enthrall the audience today. I saw it on a small TV-screen, and
most certainly wished I could have watched it on the big screen.
The script follows the Bible to some extent, but also draws in non-biblical
material, such as novels, which enhances the overall movie. (The Bible is a
bit secretive about Moses' life until he reached 30.)
The old-fashioned epic style, impressive and visually stunning as it may be,
isn't always as appealing to the modern movie-goer. Firstly, the movie is
well too long and moves a bit slow at times. Then there is a lot of
over-stylized acting, and although Charlton Heston is brilliant as Moses, he
may be a little pompous at times. But he is a more powerful and impressive
Moses than the animated character of the recent release "Prince of Egypt".
Except for the snake scene at Pharaoh's Court, the effects are enjoyable.
"Prince of Egypt" does a more 'realistic' Red Sea parting with modern
computer-generated animation, but "The Ten Commandments" did it the best way
possible in those days, and it's still impressive to watch.
As mentioned, the acting tends to be overdramatized, and this is a left-over
bone from the days when silent movies ruled the cinemas. It must however be
noted that Anne Baxter as Nefretiri and Yul Brynner as Rameses both do
excellent performances, and Cedric Hardwicke as Pharaoh Sethi is convincing,
and even humorous (his belated death scene).
Some of the love scenes, which function merely as subplots, do little more
than wear out the audience, as we all are very anxious to get Moses going.
After all, we do know the story. The ending is better than that of "Prince
of Egypt"; we are here getting to the point where Moses appoints Joshua to
lead his people into the promised land.
Stian M. Landgaard, February 3rd, 1999
