Title
Review for Mia aiwniothta kai mia mera (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
akiva@excite.com
not rated
Artistic License/Merchant Ivory Films
in Greek with English subtitles
starring Bruno Ganz, Isabelle Renauld, Achileas Skevis, Despina
Bebedeli, Iris Chatziantoniou, Helene Gerasimidou, Fabrizio
Bentivoglio, Vassilis Seimenis written by Theo Angelopolous, Tonino
Guerra, Petros Markaris and Giorgio Silvagni
directed by Theo Angelopolous
Theo Angelopolous is considered by some critics to be an excellent
filmmaker. Maybe they see something I don't see, but I absolutely
can't stand the guy. I recently rented "Ulysses' Gaze" --Angelopolous'
best-known film-- and it was just awful. The film was three hours long
and starred Harvey Keitel in multiple roles which he would change back
and forth from without a hint(sometimes he would change characters in
the middle of a scene). Overall, it was a meandering, confusing
"experience". But Angelopolous' trademark is his long, pointless shots
of nothing that he mistakenly calls art. There are a lot of these
shots in the slow, weak, and ambiguously titled "Eternity And A Day".
I say that it's ambiguously titled because apart from its meaning that
pertains to the film it also shows us something about Theo
Angelopolous' filmmaking style. The film seems to last an "eternity",
while the film is supposed to take place in a "day". Please take this
hint, Mr.  Angelopolous.
"Eternity And A Day", which somehow won the Palme D'Or at last year's
Cannes Film Festival, documents a day in the life of Alexander(Bruno
Ganz), an older, Greek man who is "leaving" tomorrow. We never truly
know where he is going, but he keeps reminiscing about a former lover
named Anna(Isabelle Renauld). Their story never really makes much
sense, but it's supposed to blur the lines between pain and
desire. You see, Alexander is a writer/poet who kept his work separate
from his lover and his daughter. But he chose to work on his poetry
and pushed away his family and his love.
The more conventional storyline of the film involves Alexander's
travels with a little, soft-spoken boy whom he has saved from the
hands of the law. The boy is an illegal immigrant from Albania and
Alexander feels that it is his duty to return him to his home. Things
work out a little differently, however.
Also intertwined is the story of a 19th-century Italian poet who came
to Greece and "bought" words so that he would be able to speak their
language. This subplot doesn't seem to have much relevance to the
film, but it takes up some time, which is what Angelopolous really
seems to strive for.
It surprises me that a film with so few words could use four writers...
"Eternity And A Day" is easier to follow than "Ulysses' Gaze"(which
isn't saying much), but it still lacks the quality needed to hold a
picture together. There is absolutely no movement in the film, and no
intrigue either. "Ulysses' Gaze" was partly a political film, but
"Eternity" has nothing to prove, and gives little insight into the
recent turmoil in the Balkan region.
This film won the Palme D'Or at Cannes in 1998 over films such as
"Life Is Beautiful", but it is only now rolling out into a few
theatres in Los Angeles and New York. The Merchant Ivory production
team has added their name to the film, but no major distributor tried
to pick up the film. Theo Angelopolous definitely has stories to tell,
but he needs to learn how to weave his stories into an involving
film.. Otherwise, he should keep them to himself.
Note: "Pulp Fiction" also won the Palme D'Or at Cannes. I didn't find
too many similarities between the two films. Hmm...
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://teenagemoviecritic.8m.com 


Author
Dennis Schwartz

ETERNITY AND A DAY (Mia Eoniotita Ke Mia Mera) (director/writer: Theo
Angelopoulos; screenwriters: Giorgio Silvagni/Tonino Guerra/Petros
Markaris; cinematographer: Georges Arvanitis/Andreas Sinanos; editor:
Yannis Tsitsopoulos; cast: Bruno Ganz (Alexander), Isabelle Renauld
(Anna), Achileas Skevis (Albanian Boy), Despina Bebedeli (Mother),
Fabrizio Bentivoglio (The Poet), Iris Chatziantoniou (Daughter), Eleni
Gerasimidou (Urania), Vassilis Seimenis (Son-In-Law); Runtime: 134;
1998-Greece/France/Italy)
Theo Angelopoulos (The Travelling Players) directed this 1998 Cannes
Film Festival Palme d'Or winner about a renown poet who is dying. There
was something too elegant and stagy about this sobering study of
Alexander (Ganz) leaving his home for the last time, for it to be
heartfelt, as he is supposedly going to the hospital to die from a
terminal illness, but by meeting an Albanian 8-year-old illegal
immigrant, he gets reinvigorated about life.
The film is stunningly beautiful, as visually, it is a masterpiece. The
film's Thessaloniki landscapes are monumental, but at times, the story
was pretentious and much too tedious. The poet is still searching in
this 24-hour period, trying to find his roots and resolve his moral
dilemma, trying to be no longer scared of dying, which is the same theme
Tarkovsky used for "Nostalgia." The other evident influences on the
Greek filmmaker are Bergman's somber look at family life and Antonioni's
picturesque and quirky photography.
The film's title comes from when his attractive wife Anna (Renauld), who
is deceased, but is seen in flashback as she was when she was his young
wife. She answers her husband's question of how long tomorrow lasts, by
saying it last for eternity and a day! This comes back to him when he is
alone by the sea at his journey's end, and he jumps for joy thinking
that he will meet his eternally youthful wife on the other side.
The poet's search starts mundanely when he visits the modern but cold
apartment of his daughter to say goodbye he is going on a trip, and he
has her read a letter he just found that her mother wrote to him at the
time she was born. This is used as an excuse for Alexander to think back
to the happy times in that house and the birth of his daughter. Her cold
fish of a husband then comes out of the bath and gruffly tells the poet
they sold the old house by the sea, where the poet had so many lovely
memories, and the poet can only look disappointed, and doesn't even ask
his son-in-law, who hates dogs, to watch his dog while he goes on his
trip. Instead he will interrupt the wedding of his servant Urania's son,
to get her to take the dog. There wasn't much point to that, except to
watch the bride and groom stylishly dance through the streets of this
small northern Greek town.
The film raises two nagging but specious philosophical questions, that
will haunt him on his last journey, one he says aloud to himself after
buying words for his poetry: "Why am I always a stranger in exile?" The
other he asks of his ghostlike mother he visits in a hospital-like
setting: " Why didn't we know how to love?"
The poet is on a bum trip, as he acts as if he were in a dazed
dreamworld, thinking glumly about his death. At a red light he feels
sorry for one of the traffic kids cleaning his window with a squeegee,
who is suddenly being chased by the police. He decides to give the kid a
ride, and finds out he is Albanian (Skevis), and is used by a ring that
does scam adoptions to wealthy Greeks who can't adopt legally.
The difference in their journey's is: the boy's exile is political,
while the poet's is spiritual.
The poet has rekindled hope when riding with the young orphan, he
decides that he wants to help take the tight-lipped kid back to Albania.
But the kid lied to him about having a grandmother there, and they
trudge for nothing through the snowy border road along the misty
mountain passes, amid the barrenness in which Angelopoulos shoots best,
evoking a sense of being lost and alienated from the world, as they come
to the border and end up running away from the border guard.
Out of his compassion for the child, he takes a deep interest in his
problems, but that relationship is strangely unmoving, as the kid has no
personality. The relationship is fueled only because of what they both
have in common: they are afraid to be on their perilous journeys,
inspite of their smiling faces they put on for show. But their bonding
never seemed real, it was like a dance where they kept stepping on the
other's foot, and they were never seen dancing gracefully together.
Ganz spoke in German when performing, which was later dubbed into Greek.
But the little dialogue there was seems too supercilious anyway to
really matter, as the weight of this film is captured only in its
photography. As the film's spiritual guide, Ganz brings some authority
to this desperate man searching for meaning to his incomplete life, who
has worked, since his wife's death, on a 19th century unfinished poem.
But the story seems too symbolic and arty to make a direct impact, every
thought, no matter how banal,  has to be philosophically scrutinized,
which becomes unnerving.
We get to hear all of the poet's thoughts, his regrets, to see his
visions of the past, and how his life is shaped by his thoughts and the
words he has paid dearly to put into his work. The film is a slow
meditation on his life memories, where every stop he makes, gives him a
chance to recapture his life again. This film is a conspicuous art film
(get a load of that overworked bus scene, on its spiritual route, where
every passenger is used as a symbol--a poet in 19th century dress gets
aboard, symbolizing that we still have not learned our lesson of virtue
from the past).
To its credit, the film has certain scenes that stay with you the way a
meditation exercise does, that may even alleviate some of the dullness
the film generated, but it falls far short of a film that is great. The
66-year-old director has made an accessible film despite its ambiguity,
but it was lacking fluidity in its overstated symbolism and its
idiosyncratic statement was not that deep for all its huffing and
puffing, and pouring out of philosophical thoughts. The film could have
ended forty minutes sooner and still would have said what it ended up
saying.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
ETERNITY AND A DAY (MIA EONIOTITA KE MIA MERA)
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Merchant Ivory Films
 Director:  Theo Angelopoulos
 Writer:  Theo Angelopoulos, Tonino Guerra
 Cast: Bruno Ganz, Isabelle Renauld, Achileas Skevis,
Despina Bebedeli, Iris Chatziantoniou, Helene Gerasmidou,
Fabrizio, Bentivoglio, Vassilis Seimenis
   Not too many great directors are sitll working in the
cinema.  Lovers of good film would doubtless know men like
Godard, Bertolucci (whose latest "Besieged" takes him into
personal waters he had not previously charted), of course
Martin Scorcese, and maybe Zhang Yimou.  But few in
America are familiar with the films of the 62-year-old Greek
master Theo Angelopoulos, whose earlier works were
politically on the left (in the days of the Greek military junta)
and which include, recently, "Ulysses' Gaze" starring Harvey
Keitel, about the downfall of Communism in Eastern Europe. 
Now that Greece is again a democracy, Angelopoulos has
turned--like Bertolucci--to making more personal films,
perhaps even more poetic than before with the occasional
burst of melodrama.  He is best known for the unique use to
which he puts his camera, the very opposite of MTV style. 
He tends to track his subjects slowly, eschewing the fancy
editing that Bertolucci freshly used to capture various
expressions on the face of that remarkable new actress,
Thandie Newton, in "Besieged." Yet he is no fan of
naturalism.  As his camera slowly pans, he may throw in a
sequence of magic realism, placing his hero effortlessly into
time travel--which is perhaps the most fascinating aspect of
his latest work, "Eternity and a Day."
    Known in Greek as "Mia eoniotita ke mia mera," this
Palme D'Or winner at the 1998 Cannes Film Festival is a
deeply felt character study highlighting a dying poet named
Alexandre (Bruno Ganz).  He has been diagnosed with a
terminal illness.  We see him on his final day before he is to
check into a hospital, an eventful day that leads him into one
high adventure which, in turn, helps him to reminisce about
his some of his better times with his late, lovely wife Anna
(Isabelle Renauld).  As he shifts back and forth in time from
the seaside home in which he spent many happy days,
Angelopoulos's cameraman, Girgos Arvanitis, appropriates
both the coastal beauty of the country and the craggy rocks
which give off a desolate, wintry feeling.  Two events cause
Alexandre to drift off into Proustian memories: one, the
discovery of several letters which his departed wife had left
for him; the other, his sheltering of an Albanian orphan boy of
Greek ethnicity (Achilleas Skevis), who is at first chased by
police while washing auto windshields with a gang of other
abandoned kids and later abducted by band of brigands to be
sold to rich tourists as illegal adoptions.
   The present-day scenes are the more compelling ones,
particularly one which takes place at a deteriorating, vacated
hotel, where tourists stop, look at the boys who are lined up
in a rogue's gallery, and make their selections.  By helping
the boy run away and befriending him, Alexandre, now facing
death, is able to restore his own spirit while protecting the
lad.  His strong identity with the boy is fed by his own view of
himself as an outsider.  At an earlier time, his parents took
him to Italy, where he lost not only his sense of place but his
language.  Upon his return to Greece, the alienated writer
found that he had actually to purchase words from others--a
situation which he dramatizes for us by having his new
disciple literally go up to people, carry back Greek words to
Alexandre, and gain the reward of a few drachmas.
   At 132 minutes, "Eternity and a Day" may feel like just that
to the MTV generation (who would not likely be seen in the
Angelopoulous' audience) but despite the director's
inadequacy fully to capture the character of Anna, the film is
quite worth viewing particularly for the scenes between
Alexandre and the boy he has saved.  We see elements here
of "Voyage to Cythera," which deals with a filmmaker who
wants to make a movie about an elderly political refugee, who
watches the old man and follows him, until the old man's life
takes on the elements of story.  In this case the refugee is a
kid, who acts as catalyst for the poet's own meditative
journey.  We're not clear whether the remarkable Bruno Ganz
is actually speaking Greek through the film.  If so, the
dubbing is remarkable as is the English translation--which
appears to capture the poetry of the spoken Greek.  For a
specialized audience, especially attuned to this director's
previous political works like "The Travelling Players," the
current, more personal film is a fine reflection on the life of a
man who felt himself an outsider for a good deal of his days
but has begun the process of healing through his memories
and through his existential commitment to an orphan boy.
