Title
Review for Thomas est amoureux (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   If you get The New Yorker, you probably saw this cartoon not
long ago: guy stands in front of an audience at one of those 12-
steps addiction centers and reports: "Hi, my name is John and I
check my e-mail 350 times a day."  This may sound like an
exaggeration, but in the imagination of writer-director Pierre-Paul
Renders, it's probably true--for some people.  "Thomas in Love"
focuses on its title character but we never see him. What he
checks every day is not exactly e-mail: instead, he is
psychologically tied to his computer which he operates at least
eight hours daily and he never goes outside.  He is agoraphobic,
which is to say, he fears not only the outdoors but human
contact.  He has not left his apartment for eight years, gets three
months' supply of food delivered to him at a stretch, has
maintenance people come to his apartment door and then leaves
whatever he need repaired outside for pickup, consults regularly
with a psychoanalyst, and talks weekly with his mom.  All is
covered by insurance.  In short, he is materially prosperous, he
seems happy enough, but something is missing--something of
which he is only vaguely aware since he actually revels in his
phobia.  He is missing love; real love, that is, not sex because
that is taken care of by his computer which allows him and a
visualized partner of his choice to don special cybersex suits and
to have fun.
   In the case of "Thomas in Love," the principal responsibility for
our entertainment and insight rests not with director Pierre-Paul
Renders or on the principal actor.  The former is almost
unnecessary because of the essentially static nature of the film,
the latter is utilized only for his droning voice.  Philippe
Blasband's script is what gives the story its satiric edge, since the
movie is obviously about the increasing reliance that the human
species in the industrialized world places on machines. 
Blasband sees us as increasingly reliant on mechanized
relationships.  Kids play video games--together with other young
people, but still--the accent is on the game and not on the
interrelationship of human beings.  People walk on the street and
(did you ever notice this?) couples and foursomes walk together
but instead of relating to one another they talk on their separate
cell phones!  TV has long dominated after-dinner living-room
activity and business meetings are conducted via
teleconferencing.  We can't talk to human beings even when we
use the telephone!  Phone a business and what do you hear? 
"Your call is very important to us" says a computerized
message...after which we are encouraged to go to the company
web site rather than bother a human being.
   How effectively "Thomas in Love"  parodies this situation is
another story. Because of the endless chatter between Thomas
(Benoit Verhaert) and each of the people with which he
communicates via computer, e.g. Melody (Migali Pinglaut), his
mother Nathalie (Micheline Hardy), an insurance agent
(Alexandre von Sivers), his shrink (Frederic Topart), a prostitute
Eva (Aylin Yay) and others--the story becomes redundant and
overly wordy despite the frequent changes of personalities that
cross the screen.  The character of Melody is the most
interesting as she, who is a member of the dating club for which
Thomas's psychologist signed him up, desperately wants to meet
him, actually thinks she has fallen in love with the man, and
consents to a session of cybersex with him.  (Cybersex in
Thomas's world is more advanced than it is in our own world of
2001 since the partners fit themselves into suits and actually
grope each other somehow via the screen.)
   "Thomas est amoureux"--as this Belgian-French production is
named--takes off where the scripter's previous screenplay, "A
Pornographic Affair," left off.  In Blasband's previous work, a
couple arranges a transaction through a sex club and try to make
the limited relationship expand into something broader, more
humane.  But because we see just one character at a time in
"Thomas," with Virginie Saint Martin's video camera remaining
almost stationary, we in the audience cannot be blamed for
feeling as claustrophobic as would anyone in the title character's
shoes.  Perhaps that proves that Renders and Blasband's movie
succeeded.  Still, even at 97 minutes, the closed-in feeling
outlasts its welcome.  Intriguing idea, though.
Not Rated.  Running time: 97 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
THOMAS IN LOVE (THOMAS EST AMOUREUX) is rather like a reality TV version of
Aldous Huxley's "Brave New World," updated for a high bandwidth Internet future.
 Although it overstays its welcome a bit, it is an intriguing film about an
agoraphobic, Thomas Thomas (Benoît Verhaert), who obtains sex and companionship
only through his computer.  Although he gets both, neither provides a very
satisfying substitute for real flesh-and-blood encounters.  Thomas hasn't left
his apartment in eight years and hasn't let anyone in either.  We see only what
he sees on his monitor, and it's not clear whether we'll ever see him.   
The film, set in some indefinite time in the future, manages to find insightful
things to say about everything from the importance of relationships to the need
for real sex to the scary consequences of a nanny state.  It even skewers
insurance companies by pointing out that too much care can sometimes be a bad
thing.  The film is funny, sad and frequently downright weird with the bizarre
facial paint that people in the future wear.  Of course, how would metal spikes
through someone's nose, lip or eyebrow have been thought of by someone in the
nineteenth century?  Tastes change and not always for the better.
Although the movie starts as Thomas, in his cybersex suit, has sex in zero
gravity with his long-time virtual companion Clara, the movie spends most of the
time in conversation mode as Thomas tries to cope with his illness.  Clara, a
"sextoon," doesn't appear again until late in the picture when he plays her in a
game of strip poker.  She conveniently deals him four jacks.
Thomas gets everything he needs with his visiophone.  Sometimes he is connected
to a real person, and other times he reaches a canned video.  His psychologist
(Frédéric Topart) is authorized by his insurance agency to arrange for him to
have a companion from a dating club called Catch-a-Heart.  These "dates,"
however, are really nothing more than prostitutes.  The film gives us a glimpse
at how the women come to join such a service.  
Much like watching "The Dating Game," we keep wondering whether Thomas will
choose bachelorette number one, the tearful and mysteriously sad Eva (Aylin
Yay), or bachelorette number two, the immature but exuberant Melodie (Magali
Pinglaut).  Another possibility is that he might go nuts and blow his brains out
before ever coming to a final decision.  He might even do something more
frightening still.  He just might leave his apartment.  This much is certain,
there's incredible profit to be made if some entrepreneur could just come up
with the right product tie-in for the movie.
THOMAS IN LOVE runs a little long at 1:37.  The film is in French with English
subtitles.  It is not rated but would be an R for animated sex, language and
mature themes and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, August 3, 2001.  In
the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the Camera Cinemas.  
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
