Title
Review for Clay Pigeons (1998)
Number of Reviews
14

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: A non-murderer who broke the law avoiding a possible
murder charge finds himself deeper and deeper in trouble.  The plot is
tightly written and reminiscent of Hitchcock's FRENZY.  Tightly paced
and well acted.  Only the very last sequence rings false.  Rating:  8
(0 to 10), high +2 (-4 to +4)
   - Nice vicious murder mystery with a patsy caught in the middle.
   - Should appeal to the same audience that liked RED ROCK WEST.
   - The viewer (almost always) knows what is going on, but the web of
     events becomes tighter and tighter around the neck of Clay
     (Joaquin Phoenix).
   - Great little suspense thriller set in Montana (though filmed in
     Utah).  Having caught Clay fooling around with his wife Amanda
     (Georgina Cates), one guy commits suicide, framing Clay for
     murder.  Clay decides to cover up the suicide starting a bigger
     and bigger chain of events linking him with other murders.
   - Vince Vaughn steals the film as Lester Long.  Vaughn is very
     natural in front of a camera with an easy charm and grace.  (P.S.
     He also was good in RETURN TO PARADISE and is going to play Norman
     Bates in the new version of PSYCHO.)
   - Sarcastic FBI agent played by Janeane Garofalo.  "A murder scene
     is not crowd-appropriate." (That sounds a lot like Garofalo's own
     style of humor and may well have been ad-libbed.)  She makes fun
     of deputy named Barney.
   - Sound editing has loud noises on soundtrack, made this audience
     jump.
   - Final scene does not make sense logically.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Clay Birdwell is certainly unlucky in love.  One lover's husband
commits suicide in a way implicating Clay, and another lover gets shot
while having sex with Clay.  And those are only a few of the dead bodies
that show up in director David Dobkin's little film noir called CLAY
PIGEONS.
     Written by Matthew L. Healy, the offbeat story follows a standard
but satisfying formula of the serial killer who is being hunted by a
dogged FBI agent.  The movie is set in a sleepy, little western town.
The sheriff's deputy, for example, is aptly named Barney.  Like Barney
Fife, he is a walking disaster, that is, when he isn't sleeping on the
job.
     Joaquin Phoenix, known as Leaf Phoenix when he acted in PARENTHOOD,
plays Clay.  Bringing little to the role, Joaquin's deadpan acting style
is used by the director as the background canvas upon which to sketch
the story.
     As the always-horny wife Amanda, whose husband kills himself in the
story's opening, Georgina Cates gives a convincing portrayal of a
deceitful and sleazy blonde without an excess of brainpower.
     Vince Vaughn steals the show as the handsome but conceited stranger
named Lester Long.  The happy-go-lucky Lester oozes so much charm that
women almost drool over him.  "I'm like a big fireworks show," he
declares with his usual big smile and slightly nervous, hearty laughter.
"I'm very bright."  Lester takes Clay fishing but the only thing they
catch is a dead body that happens to float by rather inopportunely.
     The film's producer, Scott Wilson, plays Sheriff Mooney.  He's a
friendly sort who likes Clay and isn't much on detective work.  Luckily
for him and the audience, Janeane Garofalo shows up about midway through
the picture and immediately enlivens it.  She plays a supporting part as
a veteran FBI agent on the trail of a serial killer.
     Although there is not a lot to recommend the film, there isn't
anything much to criticize either.  It is an enjoyable enough little
movie, and Garofalo is always fun to watch.
     CLAY PIGEONS runs about 1:45.  It is rated R for violence, sex,
nudity and profanity and would be fine for older teenagers.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   As a dark comedy that takes place in a small Montana
town--the sort of site an urban traveler avoids even if he
needs gas--"Clay Pigeons" recalls the crazy antics of "Fargo." 
Yet it's a work of considerable originality that has been made,
surprisingly, by a first-time director and by a screenwriter who
is making a debut in his field as well.  Breaking with the
typical SmallTownUSA picture, helmer David Dobkin and
scripter Matt Healy do not concern themselves a heck of a lot
with exposition.  Scant minutes into its opening, a guy is
pointing a gun at his best friend, whom he accuses of having
a torrid affair with his wife, and pulls the trigger.  But the
fellow on the ground is not the author of the bedroom intrigue
but the shooter himself.
   The the stick-in-your-throat laughs and unanticipated
incidents continue from there without interlude in "Clay
Pigeons," an innovative program which manages to lampoon
the American pueblo while taking an easygoing, Pulp Fiction
attitude toward a captivating murderer.
   Like "Fargo," this movie commutes easily among the genres
of satire, comedy, and melodrama, giving the scoundrel the
best lines and keenest temperament in the story.  Only one of
the residents of Mercer, Montana (actually filmed in various
hamlets of the beautiful state of Utah) is a bumpkin, the
others acting as prototypes for stable scout, slatternly slut,
laid-back law-officer, magnetic malefactor and caustic cop. 
The acting is so aw-shucks convincing, backed up by such a
bounteous sound-track of 70s country-style music that "Clay
Pigeons" delights throughout.  But be advised: if you're the
kind who shocks easily when you see callous killings treated
with a down-home posture, you'll consider this sort of film the
sort that's causing the decline and fall of American civilization.
   The story opens on a shooting match as best friends Earl
(Fregory Sporleder) and Clay (Joaquin Phoenix) test their
skills at shattering beer bottles.  Earl suddenly turns on Clay,
accusing him of having an affair with his wife.  In the
conventional picture, Earl would either blow his friend away or
lose his chance in some hand-to-hand combat.  But just about
everything in this yarn turns out the converse of what you
expect.  Clay returns to the newly widowed but conspicuously
unconcerned Amanda (Georgina Cates), is disgusted by her
lack of distress, and after shifting his libidinous intent to
another Montana enchantress is plunged into an ambivalent
fellowship with the engaging visitor, Lester Long (Vince
Vaughn), whose swollen cowboy Panama matches his
towering personality.  
   If Mercer, Montana is ethnically homogeneous and surely
no New York, NY, it is nonetheless filled with characters as
varied as those in a large metropolis.  The gorgeous, British-
born Georgina Cates turns in a muscular baby-doll
performance as a hard, chain-smoking trollop who sets her
sights on everyone except the guy she married, and Joaquin
Phoenix is again reliable, as in "Return to Paradise" as
bewildered guy who gets more than he envisioned--
considering his career as a jockey in a dilapidated gas station. 
He finds himself confronted with the sardonically deadpanned
Janeane Garofalo as federal agent Shelby who, unamused at
an attempt to pick her up in the village bar assures the lusty
cowboy that the seat next to her is taken: "for the first person
not wearing denim."
   Best of all is Vince Vaughn, who worked together with Mr.
Phoenix in a more forthright role in "Return to Paradise," and
who shows his depth in a wholly distinct performance.  His
Lester Long is clap-on-your back clamorous, his congeniality
covering a penchant for slashing young women--his contempt
excited by the ease with which his victims flock to his all-
American allure.  Changing easily and frequently from hale-
fellow to inflamed slayer, he attacks his unsuspecting prey
with a calmness that belies each operation.  Also cleverly
drawn is Sheriff Mooney (Scott Wilson), an unexcitable peace
officer who can fool people into thinking he'd rather build
model boats--while prying essential information from suspects
and witnesses.
   Being the sort of movie in which everything turns out the
contrary of what you'd expect, it is also one of the few stories
featuring a cigarette that saves lives instead of ruining them. 
Director Dobkin skillfully retains a light touch, giving the
twenty-five songs their chance to be heard.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and trivia, visit http://surf.to/joblo
This film is like U-TURN (8/10) without the big name cast, like RED
ROCK WEST (8/10) without the John Dahl touch of noir, and like BLOOD
SIMPLE (8/10) without the Coen brothers' overly stylish caress.
Director David Dobkin tackles this black comedy about a mysterious
small town killer in his feature film debut.
PLOT:
Small town America is the setting. Joaquin Phoenix is the innocent
young man who gets raveled in a tale of two suspicious deaths in his
town. He finds both dead bodies, and suddenly develops an instant
following within the FBI. Lester Long is the stranger in town who
befriends Joaquin, and oozes enigmatic. Dead bodies, twists, turns and
bitingly dark comedy ensues.   
CRITIQUE:
Quirky little small town murder mystery film, generates enough style,
plot and original characters to stand out among the umpteen other
movies that blazed its trail before it. This film also has an eclectic
little soundtrack, with several well-chosen Elvis tunes blaring during
some of the most gratifying scenes, but lacks the absolute
believability in its so-so ending. Some people may have a bigger
problem with its conclusion, but I bought it for the most part, because
of the way that the characters had been built up during the entire
film.
Vince Vaughn pulls off another dynamic performance as Lester the
self-proclaimed "molester", and spices his character up with one of the
honkiest laughs this side of Fran Dresher. Joaquin Phoenix also
delivers a solid performance as the naďve country bumpkin caught in a
situation highly beyond his limited resourcefulness, and the female
vixen in this tale, actress Mary Lou, pulls off a great femme fatale
whose only reasons for living seem drenched in sex, cigarettes and
booze (did I mention sex?). Speaking of cigarettes, I don't think there
is one character in this film that doesn't smoke (except the clueless
deputy Barney, of course), but then again, I guess that's to be
expected from this genre.
The movie also starts off with a really cool tete-a-tete scene and ends
with a unique, unbelievable to some, but mostly Hollywoodian
conclusion. Overall, I thought the movie worked on most fronts,
delivering the ripped off stylish flair from various Coen and Oliver
Stone based films (But who doesn't rip off the greats anyway), great
performances by all of the main actors and their offspring, an
interesting plot involving murders galore, plenty of sexcapades, goofy
country folk, and a bizarre yet effective soundtrack to blend it all
together. If you liked any of the three films that I mentioned in my
introduction, you will most probably enjoy this fable as well,
especially if you dig any of the lead actors. Either way, a
nacho-chompin' treat indeed!
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Scott Free is the production company that produced this film. It is
operated by the Scott brothers, better known as directors Ridley Scott
and Tony Scott. An obvious wink to themselves in this film, comes by
the way of a scene where actress Janeane Garofalo is watching a movie
in her hotel room, while enjoying some pot and pizza. The film is ALIEN
(8/10)- directed by said Ridley Scott, and next to the television set
lie two other video tapes entitled: TRUE ROMANCE (9/10)- directed by
brother Tony Scott, and SWINGERS (8.5/10)- the classic Vince Vaughn
film that launched his career back in 1996. Nice touch, guys!
Director Dobkin acknowledged the influence of the Coen brothers' BLOOD
SIMPLE film, but also claimed that he was equally moved by the
adaptation of Truman Capote's IN COLD BLOOD. Dobkin, a native of
Washington D.C., comes from a commercials and rock-music video
background. He's directed videos for Elton John, John Lee Hooker,
Coolio and Tupac Shakur.
Janeane Garofalo originally passed on this script because she thought
there was a misogynist tone to it, but eventually folded, and loved
shooting the flick in wonderfully shot Utah. That's where she found her
dog, Dew. She prepped for her role by watching "a lot of cop TV" and
visiting a shooting range. 
This film was previously titled IN TOO DEEP.

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1998. Director - David Dobkin, Screenplay - Matt Healy, Producers - 
Ridley Scott & Chris Zarpas, Photography - Eric Edwards, Music - John 
Lurie, Music Supervisors - Michelle Kuznetsky & May Ramos, Special 
Effects - Ultimate Effects (Supervisor - David Wayne), Makeup Effects - 
Kate Morgan Biscoe, Dead Body Effects - Image Animation, Production 
Design - Clark Hunter. Production Company - Scott Free/Polygram Filmed 
Entertainment/Intermedia Films.
Joaquin Phoenix (Clay), Vince Vaughn (Lester Long), Janeane Garofalo 
(Agent Dale Shelby), Georgina Cates (Amanda), Scott Wilson (Sheriff Dan 
Moody), Phil Morris (Agent Renard), Vince Vieluf (Deputy Barney), 
Gregory Sporleder (Earl), Nikki Allyn (Gloria Collins)
Plot: In a small Montana town Clay's best friend Earl shoots himself 
after he discovers that Clay has been having an affair with his wife 
Amanda and deliberately does so to make it appear that Clay shot him. 
Clay is forced to cover up the suicide by faking an accident. However 
the calculating Amanda still wants Clay and continues to harass him to 
have sex with her. She then shoots a girl Clay goes out with, forcing 
him to dispose of that body in the lake. But then while Clay and his new 
friend Lester Long are fishing on the lake, the body turns up - only 
when Clay reports it to the police, it turns out to be a different body. 
Clay realizes that Lester is really a serial killer who has been 
slaughtering women in the area. But as the FBI arrive to investigate, 
the evidence begins to point to Clay as the killer.
The surprise about this essentially indie production is that it is 
produced by such usually commercially-minded directors as brothers 
Ridley and Tony Scott. The film starts in rather well with a plot filled 
with some deliciously black twists and turns - Sporleder shooting 
himself in order to leave the blame on Phoenix; Cates's blackmailing 
bitcheries and her shock shooting of Allyn during sex; and then a 
marvellously about-face twist as Phoenix and Vaughn drag the body out of 
the lake - only for Phoenix to find it is the wrong body. But after such 
a promising buildup the film somehow thereafter loses it all. The latter 
half of the film falls into something dreadfully predictable - the 
familiar device of the wrong man finding himself framed for the crimes 
and the psycho continuing to toy with him. Despite its desire to achieve 
an indie attitude there is something dreadfully predictable about the 
way the film plays itself out. Indeed the only real surprise it holds in 
store in its latter half is its failure to throw any twists on plot 
denouements one can see coming off way in advance.
What does however hold it together in the second half is its cast. 
Joaquin Phoenix gives an okay central performance, although he is 
essentially typecast in the same role he played in 'To Die For' (1995) - 
that of the not-terribly intellectually endowed smalltown yokel who is 
enwrapped in a murder plot and manipulated by a scheming bitch. Vince 
Vaughn though is the one having all the fun. Vaughn can present 
considerable charms on screen - most notably in 'Swingers' (1996) - and 
the twist here is that Vaughn remains the most charismatic character on 
screen while also playing a complete psychopath. And, although the 
beaming smile and the cowboy pose gets somewhat overplayed, it is fun to 
watch the charm being ployed and working on people. The film also has 
Janeane Garofalo who is, in this author's estimation, one of the most 
intelligent and underrated actresses around at the moment. This gives 
her a part that lifts her free of the typecasting she has acquired of 
late in light romantic comedies ever since her breakthrough in 'The 
Truth About Cats and Dogs' (1996). Her FBI agent holds attention with 
her cool deliberated composure and detached patience. (There is 
considerable play in the film between her FBI training and the town's 
more laidback ways). There is a fabulous encounter between she and 
Vaughn in a bar where she cynically deflates his persistent attempts to 
charm her but then when he turns away to the girl he was waiting to 
meet, we momentarily see her annoyance and get a glimpse of just how 
much she was starting to fall for his line. It's a marvellous piece of 
momentary character insight on director Dobkin's part.


Author
Dennis Schwartz

CLAY PIGEONS (director: David Dobkin; screenwriter: Matt L. Healy;
cinematographer:Eric Edwards; cast: Joaquin Phoenix (Clay Birdwell),
Vince Vaughn (Lester Long), Janeane Garofalo (Dale Shelby), Georgina
Cates (Amanda ), Gregory Sporleder (Earl), Scott Wilson (Sheriff
Mooney), Vince Vieluf (Deputy Barney), Monica Moench (Kimberly), Phil
Morris (Agent Reynard), Nikki Arlyn (Gloria), 1998)
"Clay Pigeons" tried hard to be a pleasant comedy/suspense story about a
serial killer and a character study of some small town denizens and the
outsider FBI agents. It worked reasonably well for part of the film, as
dead bodies came popping up unexpectedly in this sleepy Montana town,
but then the story ran out of tricks and everything about the film fell
apart and the psychopathic woman hating slasher, Lester Long (Vaughn),
became a tiresome charge, his maniacal charm just wore out his welcome
on screen, and the film's conclusion lacked tension or purpose and
seemed to be a wasted effort, as it just simply ran out of gas after
about an hour into it.
Since it's a story about clay pigeons- with the singular dictionary
meaning for that slang term, a person in a situation where he can be
taken advantage of by others- the clay pigeon is the town's auto
mechanic, Clay Birdwell (Phoenix), considered by the locals to be a nice
guy, who is out target shooting with his best friend Earl (Sporleder)
when Earl confronts him with the news that his wife Amanda (Coates) told
him she is making love to him, and Earl tells him I can't live with
that. Earl comes up with this crazy idea of shooting himself in the leg
and then killing himself, while framing it so that Clay would be accused
of the crime and have to serve prison time. Clay tells this to the sexy
Amanda, after Earl carries out his plan, as we see her dressed in a see-
through-nightgown, wearing only red panties. But she tells Clay he's on
his own, she wants no one to know about her relationship with him. Our
flawed hero then tows Earl's pickup with him in it and has it go down a
hill to explode, and when his friend, the unassuming Sheriff Mooney
(Scott) comes to investigate, he fails to tell him the whole truth.
While playing a mean game of pool, in a place aptly named Doc Holiday's,
Clay meets an enigmatic and garrulous cowboy, clad in full cowboy gear,
including a fancy stetson. The cowboy, Lester Long, is a stranger in
town and is impressed that Clay slapped Amanda when she tried to seduce
him by the pool table. A friendship between the two develops, leading to
a fishing expedition, where a woman's body, stabbed 7 times, is
discovered floating in the water.
A fatal friendship also develops between Lester and Amanda, as she will
later on be killed  by the psychopath.
But, first the story gets more twisted and unbelievable when Clay
refuses to see Amanda anymore and has sex with a waitress (Nikki) he
picks-up. She is shot while in the middle of her sexual climax with him,
by the jealous and deranged Amanda, knowing Clay is not in a position to
squeal. He is forced to also dispose of this body, which he dumps in the
local lake.
Into the picture comes the FBI, led by the wry-humored agent Dale Shelby
(Janeane Garofalo) and the efficient-looking agent Reynard (Morris), who
are looking at Clay as a possible serial killer. There have been seven
other dead bodies turning up all over Montana that the FBI believes to
be the work of one serial killer. What Garofalo brought to the film at
this point, was some welcomed comic relief, much needed because this
film was exhausted from all the contrivances and lack of adequate
character study it provided. It was only through Garofolo's sense of
black comedy, that the film was still bearable; and, at that, it was
only barely bearable.
Clay is somewhat of an innocent, at least, as far as the murders go, but
he certainly can't be commended for being a truthful person.
Everything gets resolved in the film's anticlimax, that mercifully ends
in an arrest, though some 30 minutes too late, as far as I'm concerned.
What might be likable about this film, to viewers not that discerning
about plot or character study, is that this film was user friendly and
brought about a hearty guffaw or two. None of the actors was bad, bad,
but none were memorable. It's one of those films that is easily
forgotten.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus'  World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Jamie Peck
CLAY PIGEONS
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
The story at least gets off to an interesting start, as dim gas station 
attendant Clay (Joaquin Phoenix) finds himself in hot water with his 
married sexpot lover (British actress Georgina Cates, doing great 
Midwestern trash) - her husband learned of their secret hanky-panky and 
killed himself, but not before making it look like murder and 
implicating Clay. "Pigeons" takes a turn for the worse, however, around 
the time the body count eerily starts to rise, a mystery that may or may 
not be related to a mysterious cowboy named Lester Long (Vince Vaughn) 
who drifts into the sleepy Montana burg and quickly befriends Clay. The 
FBI shows up hot on the trail of a serial killer, and it's then - quite 
late in the game - when the movie finally comes alive.
These flickers of greatness probably have something to do with Janeane 
Garofalo, whose turn as the cynical agent in charge of the 
investigation, at first doubting Clay and later helping him, is the best 
thing about "Pigeons." The precise moment she shows up, you can actually 
_hear_ the film improving; Garofalo may be her usual acidic, deadpan 
self, but her talents fit the role snugly and serve as a sardonic 
contrast when things get too silly. And things get too silly too often - 
as "Clay Pigeons" chugs towards its conclusion (which is completely 
ludicrous, by the way), a series of distracting plot holes and 
contrivances attempt to wrap things up, but all they really do is turn 
what once was a wildly unpredictable movie into a wildly convoluted 
mess. 
Vaughn and Phoenix don't fare as well as their female co-star, though 
it's not their fault. Vaughn gives a vibrant performance, but no amount 
of animation could ever hide that Lester Long is a two-dimensional 
cartoon. Talk about not knowing what you have - this guy can create 
fireworks with a role that's up to his juicy comedic rhythms (see 
"Swingers"). Phoenix plays the straight man to Vaughn's court jester; 
he's supposed to be our tour guide through this topsy-turvy world, the 
guy we root for and sympathize with in spite of his flaws. If only David 
Healy's script hadn't made his flaws so glaring, that might've been 
possible. "Clay" the movie and Clay the man, then, are too much alike - 
dumb nogoodniks that just barely scrape by thanks to the aid of one 
sarcastic little lady.

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "CLAY PIGEONS" (Gramercy Pictures)
 To call this a creepy black comedy is a serious
understatement.  This debut feature from director/producers Ridley and
Tony Scott's new Scott Free production company is about as "noir" as
film gets, this side of "Fargo." The story begins on a sweltering
summer day as two buddies, Gregory Sporleder and Joaquin Phoenix
("Return to Paradise"), are shooting at empty beer bottles in a canyon
near the sleepy town of Mercer, Montana. Suddenly, Gregory turns on
Joaquin, accusing him of having an affair with his wife (Georgina
Cates). Admitting the truth of the accusation, Joaquin tries to talk
him into lowering the gun but, instead, Gregory kills himself, making
it look as if Joaquin murdered him. That's just the beginning of this
twisted tale. Terrified, Joaquin covers up the killing and discovers
the hot-to-trot wife doesn't much care, since she soon takes up with a
swaggering cowboy, Vince Vaughn. This lusty, mysterious stranger also
befriends Joaquin. Then Janeane Garofalo shows up as an FBI agent
tracking a serial killer on the loose in the region. And more people
keep turning up dead. "I usually say, 'The more the merrier', but a
murder scene is not really crowd appropriate," she mutters
sardonically, criticizing the sheriff's penchant for allowing anyone
and everyone to mill around, inspecting evidence. Since he's sleeping
with one victim, dating another, and found a third, Joaquin becomes
the bewildered prime suspect, but writer Matt Healey and director
David Dobkin soon convince us that things are not always what they
seem. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Clay Pigeons" is a
silly, slick, surreal 6. It's more of the madness, mayhem, and murder
flooding the screens today.

Author
Joy Wyse
Starring:        Vince Vaughn, Joaquin Phoenix, Janeane Garofalo, Georgina Cates
Directed by:        David Dobkin
        When I first heard about Clay Pigeons, I wasn't looking
forward to it.  When the movie began, I was certain that I wouldn't
like it.  I changed my mind.
        The first scene has Clay and his buddy out in the middle of
the desert, drinking beer, shooting at the empty bottles, and using
every four-letter word that they can think of.  Next, there's a
violent, fatal shooting, followed quickly by a very erotic sex scene.
This is all in the first 10 minutes.  But there is actually a plot to
this movie and it's very involved.
        It unsure who is the real star of this movie.  All of the cast
turn in excellent performances.  Vince Vaughn is such a character that
he's hard to describe, much less to understand.  You really start
to feel for Joaquin Phoenix as Clay.  He finds himself so completely
wrapped in the web of circumstances begun by his shooting buddy.  Now
Clay isn't completely innocent.  After all, he did sleep with his
buddy's wife, but who didn't.  Does Clay really deserve all that
happens to him?
        The two females in the cast are totally different.  Georgina
Cates plays the nymphomaniac to perfection.  Janeane Garofalo plays
another female Federal agent.  She was more believable than others
have been.
        It's a movie that will stay with you for a while.  It
definitely deserves its R rating, but it deserves an A for screenplay.
Adding everything together, I give it a B-.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Clay Pigeons (1998) 
Vince Vaughn (Lester Long), Janeane Garofalo (Dale Shelby), Joaquin 
Phoenix (Clay Bidwell), Scott Wilson (Sheriff Mooney), Georgina Cates 
(Amanda), Phil Morris (Reynard), Vince Vieluf (Deputy Barney), Nikki 
Arlyn (Gloria), Monica Moench (Kimberly), Joseph D. Reitman (Glen), 
Gregory Sporleder (Earl). Music by John Lurie. Cinematography by Eric 
Edwards. Produced by Ridley Scott, Chris Zarpas. Screenplay by Matt Healy.
 Directed by David Dobkin. 104 minutes.
Rated R, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
When trying to determine how best to describe "Clay Pigeons," the image 
of a Dennis Miller performance comes to mind. Generally, Miller makes his 
stage entrance displaying supreme confidence, half ambling and half 
swaggering his way to the microphone. Then he lets rip with a torrent of 
dazzling verbal creativity. Adroitly juggling observations and 
indictments, with accents from his vast personal warehouse of arcane pop 
references, Miller's presentation style announces "I'm smart, hip and 
right, and so are you, if you're able to keep up with me." 
After a few minutes of watching Miller, though, you begin to notice other 
things. He's extremely mannered, without a hint of spontaneity. He's self 
satisfied and arrogant. And, beneath his exalted moral righteousness, 
he's often just as mean as the villains against which he rails so 
mightily. Typically, Miller ends his rants by saying "Or maybe it's just 
me," but he's only being facetious, using the catch-phrase as an easy way 
to wrap up the show. As much as I enjoy Dennis Miller, his performances 
usually leave me with a bad taste in my mouth.
Which brings us to "Clay Pigeons." This darkly humorous tale about murder 
in a small Montana town starts off with a knockout punch, daring to take 
a classic film noir storyline and place it outdoors in bright sunlight. 
Combining bold camerawork, brazen situations and a terrific soundtrack, 
the film quickly establishes its stance as smart and hip, aiming for that 
post-modern cinematic playground occupied by the likes of the Coen 
brothers.
It all rolls along smoothly for a while, but then you begin to notice 
things. When a woman gets backhanded early in the story, the filmmakers 
make sure we understand that she deserved it. Later, a woman gets stabbed 
to death in a scene filmed so stylishly that the violence seems almost 
pornographic. Like most noir thrillers, our hero is a hapless type whose 
poor judgment lands him in a heap of trouble, but these filmmakers 
clearly have far more affection for the villain than the victims. 
Ultimately, this mannered, disdainful work rewards viewers with an lazy 
ending and a bitter aftertaste.
The story begins when Clay Bidwell (Joaquin Phoenix) goes out shooting 
with his best friend Earl (Gregory Sporleder). In a burst of emotion, 
Earl angrily informs Clay that he's aware of his friend's ongoing affair 
with his wife, Amanda (Georgina Cates). Abruptly, Earl turns the gun on 
himself, intending to exact revenge by framing Clay for his "murder." A 
stunned Clay disposes of Earl's body and tries to break off contact with 
Amanda, but the sultry widow, totally unfazed by her husband's death, is 
determined to continue the affair. When Clay resists her advances and 
takes up with another woman, he soon finds himself with an additional 
corpse to dispose of. 
In-between fatalities, Clay makes friends with the charismatic Lester 
Long (Vince Vaughn), a drifter hanging around the sleepy Montana town. 
They take off for a fishing trip on the lake where Clay dumped corpse 
number two and, to the ominous strains of "Dueling Banjos" from the film 
"Deliverance," a body rises from the murky depths. Enter the FBI, led by 
bright-eyed, sharp-tongued agent Dale Shelby (Janeane Garofalo), on the 
trail of a serial killer who specializes in women. Suddenly, Clay finds 
himself the prime suspect in a string of murders. 
In addition to its clever presentation style, "Clay Pigeons" boasts a 
number of stand-out performances. Vince Vaughn is electric as Lester Long,
 an imposing figure comfortable even when striding in public wearing only 
his briefs. Lester is a man who leans in a little too close while talking 
and relishes being overly familiar with anyone he meets. You'll remember 
him and his nervous giggle long after leaving the theater.
Janeane Garofalo is wonderful as the caustic, but deeply humane Agent 
Shelby, brightening the grim proceedings with her understated wit. Phil 
Morris is effective as her stoic co-worker, a man of few words whose 
facial expressions more than make up for his relative silence, and Scott 
Wilson (one of the killers from "In Cold Blood") scores as the laconic 
Sheriff Mooney. In the lead role, Joaquin Phoenix is adequate, if overly 
flat in his delivery. 
After a great beginning, "Clay Pigeons" grows more forced with each new 
outlandish twist, as the film's carefully crafted tension slowly unravels.
 The story eventually sputters to an unsatisfying end with a denouement 
that feels perfunctory at best.
The bottom line is that sadism and death are punchlines in "Clay Pigeons" 
and we're expected to play along, else we jeopardize our status as smart, 
hip filmgoers. While the production offers sharply drawn characters, a 
powerhouse cast, some great deadpan one-liners, exceptional music and 
robust visuals, there is an underlying nastiness that becomes 
increasingly difficult to tolerate as the film goes on. "Clay Pigeons" is 
hip at the expense of its humanity, and that's more nihilism than I'm 
willing to embrace.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     For what it's worth, Matt Healy's script for CLAY PIGEONS is
remarkably unpredictable as film scripts go.  It opens in a Montana field,
where buddies Clay (Joaquin Phoenix) and Earl (Gregory Sporleder) are
drunkenly firing away at empty bottles of Bud.  The friendliness ends,
however, when Earl reveals to Clay that he's aware of Clay's afair with
Earl's wife Amanda (Georgina Cates).  The humiliated Earl kills himself,
having set up Clay to take the fall.  It looks for all the world like CLAY
PIGEONS is about to become a TROUBLE WITH HARRY-style black comedy, with
Clay desperately trying to hide dead bodies while scorned woman Amanda
makes his life more complicated by the moment.
     Suddenly, the film takes a hard right turn with the arrival in town
of Lester Long (Vince Vaughn), a jovially vulgar truck driver who bonds
with Clay over brews and a game of pool.  The two go fishing together,
only to discover a floating corpse.  Lester seems particularly keen to
avoid any connection with the body, which makes more sense when another
dead body turns up in town.  What begins to look like a twisted battle of
wills between Clay and Lester then takes another sharp turn with the
arrival of FBI agents to investigate the dead body, led by Special Agent
Dale Shelby (Janeane Garofolo).  Big-city Shelby doesn't by Clay's folksy
protestations of innocence, leading to culture clash.  Is it a serial
killer thriller, a dark comedy, or a Tarantino-era spin on small-town
stagnation -- THE LAST PICTURE SHOW with stab wounds and copious use of a
certain "f-word?"
     I didn't mind not knowing from one moment to the next where CLAY
PIGEONS might take me.  I did mind that by the time I got where it was
taking me, I didn't much care.  Joaquin Phoenix brings his wounded,
sensitive demeanor to Clay, making him a sympathetic enough protagonist in
spite of his flaws.  Director David Dobkin, on the other hand, doesn't
seem nearly as interested in investing us in Clay's plight, or the hints
that Clay's learning something about himself through it all.  He's going
for Atmosphere with a capital "A," lingering on drifting clouds and
slow-motion inserts.  Just when he should be trying for some hook into the
story -- whether emotional or comedic -- Dobkin lets the narrative get
progressively grimmer, chillier and more remote.  It's a tic-and-flourish
film in search of a solid center.
     It's a shame he couldn't have done more with an intriguing, eccentric
cast.  Vince Vaughn, perhaps using Lester as a dry run for his turn as
Norman Bates in the upcoming PSYCHO re-make, gives his amiable drifter an
unsettling edge to go with his hollow laugh.  Janeane Garofolo tries to
give her ironic observations on small-town ways some bite, but her
character always seems to belong in a slightly different movie.  Elements
like the town's dim-witted deputy never mesh with the sinister undertones
of Vaughn's mysterious drifter.  A film that could have been a quirky
original instead feels merely off-putting, as though the director is
daring the audience to find something to enjoy.  Unpredictability can only
carry a film so far; CLAY PIGEONS makes you feel like a sucker for coming
along for the ride.

Author
Bob Bloom
  Nothing is more infuriating than a scriptwriter who is sloppy or lazy.
Taking short cuts or devising preposterous or illogical contrivances merely
to further a plot shows contempt for the viewer.
  Such was the case with Armageddon in which the asteroid that threatened
the Earth wasn't discovered until 18 days before the scheduled calamity.
  And such is the case with Clay Pigeons, a murder-comedy that tries to
mine the quirky field already claimed by the Coen Brothers in such works as
Blood Simple and Fargo. Clay Pigeons, set in Montana, is the story of a
not-to-bright, garage mechanic named Clay (Joaquin Phoenix) and his
relationship with a good ole boy cowboy named Lester (Vince Vaughn).
  What sets the story in motion, though, is the suicide of Clay's best
friend, Earl. Clay and Earl are in the middle of nowhere drinking beers and
using the bottles for target practice.
  Earl takes Clay's handgun and threatens to use him as a bulls-eye because
he knows that Clay and his wife are having an affair. Clay at first denies
it, but is forced to confess after Earl reveals his wife had taunted him
with the information.
  Earl says he will get even not by killing Clay, but by committing suicide
and making it look like murder, specifically one committed by Clay.
 And how is he going to do this? Easy. He's going to shoot himself with
Clay's gun.
 Now, here's where the story falls apart. Didn't either of these bozos ever
hear of fingerprints. Earl's are all over the gun. He's not wearing gloves.
He's stupid, and Clay is just as dim-witted for not just running to the law
and telling the easy-going, but sly sheriff (the veteran Scott Wilson) what
has happened.
 Instead, after Earl's self-inflicted demise, Clay runs to Earl's wife,
Amanda (Georgina Cates), a self-absorbed, hedonistic, tramp, who refuses to
aid Clay because she doesn't want it known all over town that she was
cheating on her husband.
 Not only that, she wants to continue the hot and heavy affair, but Clay no
longer wants anything to do with her.
 So, Clay makes Earl's death look accidential.
 Later, at a bar, Clay meets Lester and the two strike up a friendship.
Lester is duly impressed after Clay slaps Amanda in the bar.
 Unbeknownst to Clay, Lester is a woman-hating serial killer being hunted
by the FBI, and Lester is setting up Clay to take the fall for his crimes.
 Of course, everything works out all right by the finale, despite the fact
that bodies keep turning up in Clay's vicinity.
 But the first five minutes of David Dobkin's film drags the rest of the
proceedings down with it because of one silly script glitch that could have
been corrected with a simple rewrite.
 Phoenix is hunky, but dim as Clay. His character is merely a puppet being
manipulated by events.
 Vaughn, with his big smile and nervous giggle, makes a fine psychotic.
Released before the remake of Psycho, Clay Pigeons could almost serve as
Vaughn's screen test for his Norman Bates portrayal.
 Jeanne Garafolo is a bity swarmy and condescending as the FBI agent
tracking Vaughn. Her remarks and asides to the small-town sheriff and his
deputy are meant to serve as the film's humor, but come off as
mean-spirited instead.
 None of the characters in Clay Pigeons are worth a hoot. You can't feel
any compassion for Clay or his predicament because he is too dense, too
self-absorbed to care about.
 Only Wilson's sheriff offers a respite from the murderous proceedings. His
reserve and small-town manners mask an active mind and a humanistic outlook
that compensates a bit for the flotsam surrounding him.
 Clay Pigeons is an interesting effort that a bit of script polishing could
have saved.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com

Author
Matt Williams
Clay Pigeons is the sort of wacky dark comedy that tries to be
irreverent right off the bat.  But, unfortunately, it's about halfway
through before it settles into a good comedic groove.  Luckily, if you
stick it out, there's something worth waiting for.
In a small Montana town, there's trouble brewing.  And poor Clay
(Joaquin Phoenix) finds himself in the center of it.  He gets into the
unfortunate habit of discovering dead bodies.  Soon, Sheriff Mooney
(Scott Wilson) begins to suspect Clay of murder.
Clay's acquaintances don't help things out.  His best friend, Earl
(Gregory Sporleder) has gone a little gun crazy.  It doesn't help that
Clay is having an affair with Earl's oversexed wife, Amanda (Georgina
Cates).  But it's the new guy in town, Lester Long (Vince Vaughn) who
offers the most help to Clay...but can anyone who prides himself on the
nickname "Lester the Molester" truly be trusted???
As Clay finds himself deeper and deeper in trouble, soon the FBI is
called in to investigate.  Under the thorough scrutiny of Agent Shelby
(Janeane Garofalo), certainly the FBI will find the truth.  Or has Clay
simply been set up as a clay pigeon in a target shoot?
This dark comedy takes a little while to warm up.  It's not until you've
gotten past the first couple of twists that things start to ignite. The
first character who gets things started is Vince Vaughn's Lester Long.
His presence in the film enlivens the atmosphere with is bizarrely
idiosyncratic ways.
Another welcome presence is Janeane Garofalo.  Though her FBI character
is hardly unique, she brings a breath of fresh air to the proceedings.
An efficient outsider, she easily represents the audience as a person
incredulous to the happenings in this small town.
Joaquin Phoenix does a good job at playing the hapless everyman. But he
can't compare to the other, better written characters.  When he's on the
screen, you're constantly hoping one of the other actors will appear to
spice things up.
The plot of Clay Pigeons tends to stretch credulity, even when viewed as
a comedy.  The endless string of dead body "discoveries" seems a little
forced.  It's not until Lester Long pops up that you're distracted
enough to take everything in stride.
In short, it's more the cast that makes things work in Clay Pigeons than
the story.  It certainly could have been a stronger picture, but it's
one that grows on you.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Nick Amado
Starring: Joaquin Phoenix, Vince Vaughn, Janeane Garofalo
Clay Pigeons is trendy not only in its casting of three budding stars,
but in it's flashy-to-a-fault construction. Dobkin interjects small
bits of MTV flair into what is otherwise a traditionally told story.
The film starts off rather originally. Phoenix plays Clay, an auto
mechanic who has an affair with his friend's wife. Clay's friend kills
himself and Clay disposes of the body. After another unfortunate
situation arises later in the film, Clay once again makes the corpse
disappear. Lester (Vaughn) pops up as a new fishing buddy, and they
encounter another corpse. The mystery (as well as some of the
screenplay's wit) drives the film for a good 40 minutes. But once the
FBI shows up, Clay Pigeons becomes extremely formulaic. The wrong man
accused, the dumb cop, the good guy, bad guy showdown; all is done as
a matter of routine, Screenwriting 101.
Perhaps one of the major faults lies with Lester. Vaughn (prepping for
his upcoming role as a psyschotic in the Psycho remake) overacts
throughout. Though he is frequently amusing, he is nothing more than a
bad guy. Screenwriters these days seem to know that bad guys are
needed, but they seldom have depth. There is nothing behind Lester,
nothing to let us know why he is who he is. Garofalo is also a bit
unbelieveable as an FBI agent. She isn't as compelling as Foster's
agent in Silence of the Lambs, nor as funny as McDormand's cop in
Fargo. But she can't be completely faulted either, for the character
she has to work with is not very robust.
Clay Pigeons is undoubtedly a dark comedy with some extermely macabre
elements. The film is paced very well, and one scene in particular is
as tense as any in a top-notch suspense film. But some flat
performances and a unique script turned ordinary make this an average
production. One interesting note, famed director Ridley Scott produced
it, and his director brother Tony executive produced it. Keep an eye
out for some self-serving references.
