Title
Review for How Stella Got Her Groove Back (1998)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
James Sanford
HOW STELLA GOT HER GROOVE BACK (Twentieth-Century Fox)
Sitting through "How Stella Got Her Groove Back," adapted from the
novel by Terry McMillan, is like listening to the private fantasies of any
number of young women -- black, white, Asian, etc. -- who feel dissatisfied
with their lives but too timid to make major changes. The movie, two hours
of sumptuous-looking wish-fulfillment, should appeal greatly to this
audience, provided they're willing to overlook some substantial problems in
the material.
Stella, the ostensibly grooveless heroine, is played by the
stunning Angela Bassett, who couldn't look out-of-sorts even if she went
without sleep for a week. Although Stella has a prime position as an
investment banker, an almost eerily polite pre-teen son Quincy (Michael J.
Pagan) and a magnificent San Francisco home, she's been sleeping single in a
double bed for many moons. During an impromptu journey to Jamaica with her
ribald best friend Delilah (Whoopi Goldberg), 40-year-old Stella slips into
the arms of the improbably named Winston Shakespeare (Taye Diggs), a
20-year-old dreamboat debating over whether or not to attend medical school.
This is the kind of film that has to go to great lengths to tell us Winston
is very intelligent, since his behavior throughout the story suggests
otherwise.
Although the duo seem to have nothing in common except a penchant
for making love in rooms bathed in the glorious glow of a sunset or doing it
in the shower while warm water outlines their magnificently chieseled
bodies, Stella finds it difficult to walk away from her casual fling,
especially since she returns home to find her gossipy sisters (Regina King
and Suzzanne Douglas) want to speak of nothing else. The age difference
seems to shock most everyone in Stella's circle to no end, although one of
the curious flaws of "Stella" is that Bassett and Diggs don't look like
they're a generation removed from each other; it's not exactly Anne Bancroft
and Dustin Hoffman.
The Jamaica sojourn -- easily the best and most enjoyable portion
of the movie -- gives way to multiple conversations and debates over the
wisdom of pursuing a hot young lover. Winston eventually comes to visit
Stella and ends up spending more time playing video games with Quincy than
seeking out a career. When Stella and Winston go to the movies, they end up
seeing what looks like a sex comedy rather than the more sophisticated
entertainment she prefers, and Stella admits to Delilah Winston has been
messing up the bed with, of all things, Cocoa Puffs.
Is Stella robbing the cradle? Is Winston robbing the grave? Will
the movie ever include a single scene that doesn't feel wholly manufactured?
"Stella" comes straight from the "designer problems" school of
screenwriting, a genre in which stories are built around wealthy, gorgeous
people who have to create their own miseries in order for anything remotely
dramatic to occur. Like designer clothes, these kinds of worries are far
above the means of most of us.
Stella, for example, loses her job even though she appears to be
the only one in her office who ever works and she's certainly the only
African-American woman in the place; can you say "instant lawsuit"? Most of
us, faced with unemployment, would immediately begin a job hunt and avoid
unnecessary expenses. But our gal Stella wings to Jamaica, lives it up,
flies back to the islands again, jumps on a plane to New York at the drop of
a hat, moves Quincy and Winston into the Waldorf, and then hires a limo to
take her home from the airport. Yet she somehow finds time to fret over how
she's going to make next month's mortgage payment as she and Winston dine
out at an elegant-looking bistro.
In the midst of so much glittering cotton candy, Bassett comes
across as a pillar of strength and credibility, even if you can't imagine
such a terrific woman would ever spend a night alone or waste time listening
to the disapproval of friends and family. Diggs has a great smile but
Winston exists primarily as a concept rather than a a character. Goldberg
and King contribute refreshing sass, although Whoopi should think twice
about any future projects that call upon her to die with dewey eyes and a
tremble in her voice.
James Sanford

Author
Matt Williams
In 1995, Terry McMillan's novel Waiting to Exhale opened up a new,
untapped, genre of film, the black women's movie.  Now, she and Exhale
co-writer Ron Bass have teamed up once again to adapt her novel, How
Stella Got Her Groove Back.  And with an excellent performance from
Angela Bassett, and some competent direction by Kevin Rodney Sullivan,
they've managed to create a thoroughly enjoyable romantic drama.
The Stella of the title is Stella Payne (Angela Bassett), a high-powered
wall street deal maker.  We never quite learn how she lost her groove,
except by her employment in the soulless money market.  However, she
begins to take steps toward her recovery when she goes on a Jamaican
holiday with her best friend Delilah (Whoopi Goldberg).
There, she meets Winston Shakespeare (Taye Diggs), a resort employee who
is literally half her age.  Attracted to him at first on a purely
physical basis, and later on, well, a purely physical basis, Stella gets
romantically involved with the kid.
As the relationship continues, Stella must cope with her family (who
disapproves... her son (Michael J. Pagan) is closer to Winston's age
than she is), as well as difficulties at her job.  Will the love of this
pair of starcrossed lovers survive?
At least Stella and Winston make a cute, if slightly unbelievable,
couple. And the delightful performance of Angela Bassett makes you want
to root for anything which will make her happy.
The movie does get a bit excessive with a few unnecessary melodramatic
touches, and runs a bit longer than it should, but for the most part it
is  charming and endearing.
The supporting cast does well, with a strong performance by Whoopi, and
humorous turns from Regina King and Suzzanne Douglas as Stella's wayward
sisters. But the best supporting player has to be the island of Jamaica,
which steals every scene it is in with its stunning vistas.  The tourist
bureau couldn't ask for a better advertisement.
As a light romantic drama, How Stella Got Her Groove Back works
surprisingly well. And, as long as you ignore its attempts at being
deeper than it really is, you'll have a good time.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Luke Buckmaster
REVIEW: How Stella Hot Her Groove Back
By Luke Buckmaster (bucky@alphalink.com.au)
Cast: Angela Bassett, Taye Diggs, Whoopi Goldberg, Regina King, Suzzanne
Douglas, Michael J. Pagan
Director: Kevin Rodney Sullivan
Producer: Deborah Schindler
Screenplay: Ron Bass and Terry McMillan based on the novel by Terry
McMillan
Cinematography: Jeffrey Jur
Music: Michael Columbier
Australian distributor: Twentieth Century Fox
Australian theatrical release date: November 26
When their initial thoughts and ideas have been developed, scriptwriters
are often faced with the well-known problem of what to do next.  From
previous examples, we've discovered that writers can introduce new
characters, change the setting drastically or yield an unexpected
scenario - anything except lay down their guns and die.  But in the case
of How Stella Got Her Groove Back, no innovative artillery was ever
loaded.  And around half way through the film, I was left open-jawed as
I witnessed a horribly under written first half transform into a
horribly over written second.
The first example of how badly under written the beginning of Terry
McMillan's script is lies in the title of the film.  When it reads How
Stella Got Her Groove Back, one must pose the question of whether she
lost it in the first place.  Stella (Angela Bassett) is an amazingly
attractive 40-year-old who has a respectable job, which rakes in the
dollars.  When she takes a much-needed holiday, Stella picks up a
21-year-old Jamaican man, Winston (Taye Diggs), and eventually takes him
back home.  This in itself is not too much to digest, as the notion of
suspending disbelief is welcomed in a romantic fantasy of this sort.
But McMillan expects us to believe that Stella's "groove" is gone by
simply piecing together a few scenes of her at work, and quoting a few
lines of dialogue about her having to get out more.  A major oversight
aren't the words I'm looking for - a half assed job, perhaps, are
better.
By the time the second half begins, we're already more than just a
little fed up.  Stella and Winston sing a boring chorus of "should we or
should we not stay together", and that ultimately lasts for the rest of
the ordeal.
The fact that I saw one of the first prints of this film in Australia is
nothing for me to gloat about.  Of the thirteen or so viewers in the
cinema, only four - including me - were left seated for its final
moments. And who can blame them, since this punishing ordeal never
relents from butt numbing boredom.
To demonstrate the weaknesses in McMillan's screenplay, the film's gags
are simply not funny, and its most serious moments are way too funny.
An ambulance driver casually talking on a phone whilst a patient suffers
inside is not my idea of humor, and my idea of a serious moment does not
involve two adults arguing about whether or not they should stay
together for the tenth time.  That's why I can easily imagine why
McMillan's novel (of the same name) would be a much more pleasurable
experience.  At least, you could probably take it seriously.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com for any
inquiries or feedback
Read more of my reviews at Movie Zone: http://moviezone.alphalink.com.au

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
How Stella Got Her Groove Back (1998)
Angela Bassett, Taye Diggs, Suzzanne Douglas, Whoopi Goldberg, Regina 
King, Michael Pagan. Written by Ron Bass and Terry McMillan, from the 
novel by Terry McMillan. Directed by Kevin Rodney Sullivan. 
Rated R, 3.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com 
What a pleasant way to wrap up the summer film season. Leisurely and 
smart, "How Stella Got Her Groove Back" is the cinematic equivalent of 
sipping an umbrella drink on a warm, breezy evening. There's no meteors 
racing towards Earth here, no wisecracking cops, evil spies or government 
conspiracies. There's not a single explosion in the film. "How Stella Got 
Her Groove Back" is the kind of movie that invites you to relax, ease 
back in your seat and simply enjoy spending a couple of lazy hours with a 
group of likable, extremely well-drawn characters. 
Based on the novel by Terry McMillan (who co-wrote the film with Ron 
Bass), "Stella" is a laid-back, intelligent and often funny love story, 
gently examining how pursuing financial security and adhering to social 
rules can divert a person from the things that really matter. Some 
critics dismissed the novel, stating that in contrast to her other books 
("Mama," "Disappearing Acts" and "Waiting to Exhale"), "Stella" was just 
a trifle. Having not read any of her work, all I can say is that this 
"trifle" certainly translates wonderfully to the screen.
Stella (Angela Bassett) is 40 years old and settled in her ways. A single 
mother, she juggles a highly successful career as an investment analyst 
with caring for her bright young son. Her friends repeatedly urge her to 
take a break from her heavy workload, but Stella ignores them until one 
day, while her son is away with relatives, she gets a whim and takes off 
with her best friend Delilah (Whoopi Goldberg) for a vacation in Jamaica.
Once on the Caribbean island, the movie finds its groove, even while 
Stella struggles to locate hers. Brimming with beautiful landscapes, 
gorgeous sunsets and happy tourists, the playful, almost giddy mood is 
infectious. Bassett delivers a smoky, multi-layered performance and 
Goldberg is delightful as the outspoken, horny Delilah, who divides her 
time between trying to help Stella loosen up and trying to get herself 
laid. 
Soon enough, Stella meets Winston (Taye Diggs), a charming, great-looking 
Jamaican man 20 years her junior. Sparks fly, and the two quickly end up 
playing out the kind of magical love affair most vacationers only dream 
of. But what will they do when the vacation is over? Their social, 
cultural and financial worlds are as different as their countries and, of 
course, there's that age-difference business.
Choices are weighed, decisions made, and before you know it, Winston is 
in San Francisco, trying to adjust to life with Stella and her son. 
Naturally, there's complications galore, but while their fates are 
uncertain, it's clear to the viewer that these people were made for each 
other.
If it all sounds too good to be true, try this out for size. The story is 
loosely based on McMillan's real-life affair with a younger Jamaican man, 
who currently lives with her in California. Whether it's sheer writing 
skill, knowledge based on experience or, more likely, a combination of 
the two, McMillan's characters have a depth and resonance uncommon for 
players in such frothy fare. 
The cast has a great time with those characters. Angela Bassett was 
sensational in "What's Love Got To Do With It" and it's nice to see her 
get another major showcase for her skills. After great turns here and in 
"Ghost," Whoopi Goldberg should seriously consider skipping the starring 
roles and focusing her talents on supporting characters. And watch out 
for Taye Diggs. Sexy with an assured, but sweet presence, this 
charismatic young actor has a big future ahead of him.
>From the title alone, it's easy to predict how a film like this will end, 
but getting there is such a pleasure, thanks to fine acting, characters 
you can relate to, and a number of finely spun vignettes. A nice example 
is a scene where Winston meets Stella's ex at a barbecue. When the older 
man sees the young buck with Stella, what does he do? He shares a beer 
with the kid and give him some sage advice. McMillan has a knack for 
taking conventional scenes and zigging where most writers zag, adding a 
fresh feeling to the proceedings. 
Unfortunately, the proceedings go on a bit too long. At roughly two hours,
 "Stella" is about 30 minutes longer than it needs to be. Where, oh where,
 are the editors when we really need them? Why can't they realize that 
with elegant, eloquent films like "Stella" and "The Horse Whisperer," 
there definitely can be too much of a good thing?
Despite being overly long, "How Stella Got Her Groove Back" remains one 
of the most gratifying films of the summer. After months of enduring 
overblown event movies that failed to deliver on their promises, a warm, 
winning confection like "Stella" serves as a welcome mini-vacation from 
the Hollywood hype merchants.

Author
Scott Renshaw
HOW STELLA GOT HER GROOVE BACK
(20th Century Fox)
Starring:  Angela Bassett, Taye Diggs, Whoopi Goldberg, Regina King.
Screenplay:  Terry McMillan and Ron Bass, based on the novel by McMillan.
Producer:  Deborah Schindler.
Director:  Kevin Rodney Sullivan.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, sexual situations, adult themes, nudity)
Running Time:  121 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     A lesson in short-term benefit vs. long-term detriment, courtesy of
screenwriters Ron Bass and Terry McMillan:  in the course of adapting
McMillan's novel HOW STELLA GOT HER GROOVE BACK, the pair make a decision
which gives the first half a real kick, then kicks the second half into
oblivion.  The heroine of the title is Stella Payne (Angela Bassett), a
40-year-old San Francisco investment banker with a gorgeous house, an
11-year-old son (Michael J. Pagan), an ex-husband and no man in her life.
Itching for a change of pace while her son is visiting his father, Stella
calls up her New York-based best pal Delilah (Whoopi Goldberg) and
suggests a week-long vacation in Jamaica.  Stella expects little more than
an uncomplicated island holiday, but instead finds complications galore
when she falls for 20-year-old Winston Shakespeare (Taye Diggs), and he in
turn falls for her.
     The significant change involves Stella's companion on her Jamaican
adventure.  In McMillan's novel, Delilah does not join Stella on her trip;
in fact, Stella's life-long best friend is nearly two years dead.  Adding
Delilah to the mix certainly adds some spice to the second-chance romance
story line, particularly with Goldberg in the role.  Sure, Goldberg is
doing little more than an extended funky-sassy Miss Thang riff, but she's
always fun to watch, timing her salacious or sarcastic comments
impeccably.  Initially, it looks like a brilliant idea to give the staid
Stella a free-spirited foil.  Instead of the novel's hyper-introspective
first person narrative, STELLA on screen offers a bit more interplay, and
a bit more fun.
     So much for the short-term benefit.  The problem, as it turns out, is
that Delilah is phased out of the story fairly early on, leaving an energy
vacuum for Regina King (as Stella's hopelessly irresponsible sister) to
fill with only moderate success.  We're left with Stella fussing and
fretting over the age difference between her and Winston, and we're left
with a lot more questions regarding why Stella does what she does.
Delilah's absence in the novel becomes part of Stella's loneliness,
helping explain both her initial attraction to anyone who would fill the
void, and her doubts over how serious the relationship could possibly be.
As talented and forceful an actor as Angela Bassett can be, she plays
Stella with too much exuberant confidence.  Delilah's influence is
pervasive as the relationship blossoms; the bump-n-grind Stella we see in
Jamaica appears to have far too much groove still in her to need getting
any of it back.
     The combination of unfocused motivations and little comic relief
proves fatal in the film's final 45 minutes, when it becomes a genuine
butt-numbing ordeal.  The story simply has nowhere left to go but around
in circles:  there's some relationship talk, a bit of romance, tense
moments, and more relationship talk, all of it surrounding a relationship
with not nearly enough chemistry to be involving.  Newcomer Taye Diggs,
doing a barely serviceable Jamaican accent, has all the boyish charm the
role needs with about a tenth of the mature-beyond-his-years wisdom it
requires.  That leaves a whole lot of grating will-they-or-won't-they
vacillation over a pairing that, on screen, doesn't make much sense.  
     Bass and McMillan seemed to realize that the very internalized
nature of HOW STELLA GOT HER GROOVE BACK required something different to
work as a film.  The big change they made had it heading in the right
direction, but it only emphasized how truly un-cinematic the rest of the
story could be.  Whoopi Goldberg may chew up the lovely island scenery,
but at least she presents something worth holding your attention for an
hour or so.  She also makes the rest of the film look like it's about a
different kind of groove:  the run-out groove.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Twentieth Century Fox
 Director: Kevin Rodney Sullivan
 Writer: Ron Bass & Terry McMillan, novel by McMillan
 Cast: Angela Bassett, Taye Diggs, Suzzanne Douglas,
Whoopi Goldberg, Regina King, Michael Pagan.
   In one happy scene of Kevin Rodney Sullivan's movie "How
Stella Got Her Groove Back," Stella's ex-husband sits back,
shares a beer with her upcoming mate, and gives him advice
that he doesn't need.  He counsels the much younger man
that Stella has a long list of rules; that her new man must
have the strength to fight against and surmount them.  Played
by Angela Bassett, Stella is indeed a hardy, intelligent and
determined woman albeit one who gladly meets her match. 
The film, based on a frothy novel by Terry McMillan, focuses
more on society's list of rules than her own, and we all know
how strong the forces of community can be.  Can Stella
overcome these dictates and, in fact, should Stella contest
them at all?  This is the theme of a movie which despite its
predictability makes a clear statement.  Everyone should have
fun in life, McMillan says through one of life's funniest
characters, Whoopi Goldberg, and if the greater culture
stands in the way, it's the greater culture that's got to go.  If
you're an older man, feel free to scan the scene for young
and sexy babes, we seem to believe.  You'll be clapped on
the back by your buddies for your success.  But if you're a
woman who has attracted the attention of a much younger
man, stay back.  You'll be censured for cradle-robbing, you'll
be invited to be ashamed of yourself.  No matter that through
this sensual and inexperienced youth you've found your
groove, that you're suddenly seeing colors more vividly and
the world as a wonderful place to be.  If you're slightly
seasoned, let him go.
   This is a terrific theme to work with, given the scarcity of
movies that center on October women going out with April
men.  An affair between the 60-year-old Warren Beatty and
the 32-year-old Halle Berry ("Bulworth) is praiseworthy; an
attraction between the 56-year-old Harrison Ford and the 30-
something Anne Heche is fine.  With some sharper editing
and more believable dialogue, the film could have been a
milestone, nudging society toward a better understanding of
Stella's need to break the rules.  Unfortunately, Sullivan's
version tries our patience with slugging direction, excessive
length, and cartoonish characters that you'd more
appropriately find in a film featuring the charming Larenz
Tate.
   Yet another story that proves you can be rich and unhappy,
"Stella" hones in on the 40-year-old title character (Angela
Bassett) who is assured in her job as a high-powered
securities analyst, has a gorgeous home outside San
Francisco, and enjoys the affection of a bright 11-year-old
son, Quincy (Michael J. Pagan).  The house is too large for
her and she's lonely.  On an impulse after watching a TV
commercial for Jamaica (she makes a mental substitution of
her own face for the blond visage on the screen), she invites
her best friend Delilah (Whoopi Goldberg) to join her on the
island paradise.  Over a glass of orange juice in the posh
hotel dining room, she is approached by a 20-year-old man
described by some in a screening audience as an Adonis,
Winston Shakespeare (Taye Diggs).  Responding with the
obvious line that she is old enough to be his mother, Stella is
nonetheless flattered by his attention.  When her initial
surprise gives way to a suspicion that this is going to be the
best vacation of her life, she is faced with a dilemma.  How to
carry the liaison a step further?  If she hooks up with the
fetching lad, she will have to introduce him to her family and
friends and, given the almost certain disapproval of her little
world, how will she manage?
   For comic relief the script, adaptated by Ron Bass and
Terry McMillan from the novel of the same name relies on the
extraodinary Whoopi Goldberg.  As Delilah she has no
difficulty latching on to two hale and hearty guys, enjoying
them with her accustomed abandon.  But here the scripters
break a film industry rule of their own, one which makes a
good deal of sense: do not inflict tragedy on the story's comic
relief.  Delilah's serious illness is pumped for pathos in an
unnecessary sequence, which seems to have been appended
only because the novelist lost her own best friend during an
actual affair with a Jamaican man.  Moreover, Stella comes
across as awkward by repeatedly tacking on the colloquial
"girl" at the end of many sentences, an unlikely idiom for
someone of her age, class, and level of education.  Her kid
sister Vanessa (Regina King) is annoyingly stereotypical, but
her middle sib, Angela (Suzzanne Douglas), best conveys the
mood of an upper-middle-class married woman who is
concerned about appearance above all else.  
   A scene that could have been milked further for poignance,
even comedy, involves Stella's surprise meeting with
Winston's parents.  While Winston's dad, a surgeon, has no
role to play, her haughty mother has the temerity to insult
Stella directly, stating that she should be ashamed of herself
for encouraging a relationship with the young man.  Rather
than accept this criticism without a whimper, a more acerbic
Stella might have said, "If you were more of a mother, maybe
he would not now be looking for one."
   Island photography took place on location in Montego Bay
with a series of southern California locales simulating the San
Francisco Bay area.  A strong cast and solid tech credits fail
to make the relationship believable, but not because of the
age difference per se.  Stella is a woman of the world, a high-
powered investment counselor considering a salary offer of
$275,000 plus incentives as executive V-P of a large
securities firm.  For all his sensuality, broad smile, and politely
forward manner, Winston has been nowhere and has only a
vague notion at age 20 of what he is to become.  What
movies will they see together?  In this story, he opts for an
adolescent pick of the "animal house" variety which has him
in stitches while his woman friend sits with a dour look
throughout.  What music will they enjoy?  What will they talk
about when they get over discussions of the 20-year contrast
in their ages?  As 11-year-old Annie says to her divorced
folks in "The Parent Trap," "Sex isn't everything."  If this
movie wants us to accept the fact that one of society's rules is
irrational, it achieves only the opposite.  Stella has every right
to do what she likes within the law to get her groove back, to
have more fun in life.  The trouble is that Winston will not
provide her with that.
