Title
Review for McCabe & Mrs. Miller (1971)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ron Small
 A young gunslinger stands on one end of a suspension bridge. On the other end,
a kind, young man (Keith Carradine) who simply wants to cross the bridge. The
gunslinger won't let him; he obstructs, badgering the poor fellow. The young
man has revealed his weakness; he doesn't want any trouble. Though the
gunslinger is eager to test him, and push him so he could kill him, which he
does.
"Let me see your gun," the gunslinger demands.
The young man stammers slightly before reluctantly pulling it out, with no
intention of using it. The gunslinger shoots the young man dead, as the
denizens of the town look on. The moment is directed with such casualness that
it feels more authentic than any kinetic gun battle Peknipah staged. Both of
the actors chosen for the minor parts add additional layers to the scene. The
kid who plays the gunslinger has harmless, cherubic features, resembling a
younger, chubbier Leonardo Di Caprio. This makes his actions appear much more
disturbing than if a more macho actor had played him. We get the feeling that
this kid has been raised in a culture where killers are lionized, and cowardice
is despised. He has found a prey that is weaker than him; therefore it would be
foolish not to attack. He's like a child playing COWBOYS AND INDIANS, only for
real. Keith Carradine acts so kind, and endearingly, it's dismaying to see him
die because of those very qualities. I think the scene's ultimate effectiveness
lies in its jarring placement. It happens mid-way through the film, and has
nothing to do with the "story". But it also has everything to do with it.
McCABE AND MRS.MILLER is a Western, though unlike most. Its "hero" is indeed a
mysterious stranger who rides into town as mysterious strangers often do in
Westerns. He's also a drunk, and a gambler, with little honor; he's not above
shooting an enemy in the back. Julie Christie plays his "love interest", a
surreptitious, drug-addicted madam with an incentive towards cash that
supersedes everything else. She is a hooker, and one with a heart of coal.
These cleverly employed details (details that turn the usual cliches upside
down and inside out) are trademarks of a director partial to deconstructing a
genre rather than perpetuating it. Robert Altman does just that, exploding
Western myths and putting his own in there place. This was a common practice of
directors in the mid-1970's. Speilberg did a similar deconstruction of the
action-adventure genre with JAWS.
The setting of McCABE is a dilapidated frontier town blanketed with mud and
snow. Interiors are dully lit by gas lamps, illuminating dirty faces with a
vague, red-yellow hue. Nothing is idealized in Altman's vision, not even the
hookers, who look just as dirty as the town.
The film was based on a conventional Western novel, written by Edmund Naughton.
Altman lobotomized the novel, taking it's basic story and improvising his way
through it, as is his style. This particular method has produced some
masterpieces (M*A*S*H, SHORT CUTS), and just as many abysmal failures (QUINTET,
READY TO WEAR). True to Altman's form, much of the speech is purposely muddied,
and occasionally words are drowned out by other words. The dialogue is
conversational (one man asks another if he should trim his facial hair), and
often amusingly so; we're not used to seeing characters make small talk in a
Western. This is the antithesis of a generic Sergio Leone flick; it's like
viewing a slice of life that just happens to take place in a Western setting.
Because of this, the plot points seem to come informally and not always when
expected.
Warren Beatty plays McCabe as a stubborn anti-hero with an unflappable cool the
actor can't seem to shake. Beatty's persona is an intermittent parody of a
traditional leading man, and a rendering of one. He speaks in a fearlessly
controlled tone, conveying his self-righteousness. And that self-righteousness
is his characters' inevitable downfall.
Julie Christie plays the madam (McCabe's business partner), Mrs.Miller. When
the two meet, they immediately dislike each other, trading insults as most
future lovers often do in the movies. We naturally expect them soften up, and
fall in love. That never happens, though they do have cold, calculated sex.
They're relationship doesn't go were it is "supposed" to, and I am forever
thankful for both of they're fates. Altman closes his film with some
understated, lyrically profound shots that are haunting and poignant.
To call McCABE a simple exercise in genre deconstruction would be a
misrepresentation. It's a work that is alive with emotion and lyricism.
Altman's greatest films have much in common; they rely on naturalistic,
meandering encounters, languidly building to a substantial close. And it works
the best when the characters are fascinating and multifaceted. That is the case
with this film. The seemingly inconsequential moments add up to something very
consequential.
 http://www.geocities.com/incongruity98 (Ron's Movie Reviews)

Author
Dennis Schwartz

McCABE AND MRS. MILLER (director/writer: Robert Altman; screenplay:
Brian McKay; cinematographer: Vilmos Zsigmond;cast: Warren Beatty (John
Q. McCabe), Julie Christie (Constance Miller), Rene Auberjonois
(Sheehan), Hugh Millais (Butler), Shelley Duvall (Mrs. Ida Coyle), Bert
Remsen (Bart Coyle), William Devane (Lawyer), John Schuck (Smalley),
Corey Fischer (Mr. Elliot), Keith Carradine (Cowboy), Jackie Crossland
(Lily), Elizabeth Murphy (Kate), Michael Murphy (Sears), Antony Holland
(Hollander), Manfred Schulz (Kid), Jace Van Der Veen (Breed), Rodney
Gage (Sumner Washington), Jeremy Newson (Jeremy Berg), 1971)
John McCabe (Beatty) cuts a nifty businessman's pose, dressed in a derby
and a suit, as he wanders through the rain on horseback into this
half-built, muddy wasteland mining town, Presbyterian Church, in the
mountainous hinterlands of Washington. In the background Leonard Cohen
sings his prophetic ballad, with the poetical refrain, "It is hard to
hold the hand of anyone who is just reaching for the sky to surrender."
Cohen's song will pop up continuously throughout, giving the film an
arty flavor to it, as it also adds to the explanation of the film's
despondent theme of a small capitalist against the big capitalist.
It is the kind of town where it easy for everyone to think they know one
another, as one of the patrons in Sheehan's saloon thinks McCabe is a
gunfighter by the nickname of Pudgy, who once shot a man in a card game.
It is a dark place that McCabe has entered, where it either rains or
snows, there is very little sunlight in town. The stranger anxiously
cases the saloon he enters, until he gets to feel at home in this rough
atmosphere and goes out to his saddlebags and soon comes back and puts a
tablecloth on the table and start a card game.
"McCabe & Mrs. Miller" is an antiwestern western, whose themes of love,
gambling, alienation, suffering, death, and capitalism, are as haunting
as the cinematography of Vilmos Zsigmond' beautifully colorful Pacific
Northwest territory is, and as haunting as Leonard Cohen's ballad is,
and as haunting as the moody atmosphere of this winter wonderland of
desolation is.
McCabe, is a two-bit gambler, who thinks of himself as more important
than what he really is, and who has the romantic notion to dream the
American dream of financial success, and decides to open a saloon and a
whorehouse here, after winning at cards. He thereby  purchases three
unrefined "chippies" to get his business started, figuring on the 100 or
so horny men working in the area as likely customers.
Mrs. Miller (Julie), a drifter and a whore, soon comes to this town and
offers McCabe a business proposal, that they become partners and she
will become the madame, bringing in classier prostitutes from the big
city and taking care of the girls, something she declares that she knows
more about than him. She also tells him that this partnership will raise
his profits.
The harshness of life, drives the crafty businesswoman, Mrs. Miller, to
prefer her opium pipe fantasy world to anything else in town, and that
includes McCabe, who is taken with her but doesn't know quite how to
love this disconnected woman. Their sexual contact comes, when he pays
for her services like any other customer. Though she soon recognizes he
isn't operating on all cylinders and feels sorry for this lost soul,
still it doesn't bring her any closer to him.
For Mrs. Miller, marriage is compared to prostitution, as a mail-order
bride Ida (Duvall), married to a lame older man, finds herself a widow
when her husband takes umbrage at a street ruffian who treats his wife
as a whore, and the other fellow reacts violently to being reprimanded
by cracking his head open. Upon his death, in order to get room and
board, Ida becomes one of Mrs. Miller's working girls.
The drunken McCabe succeeds by luck: by being at the right spot, at the
right time, and not by any skills he might possess. But his success
catches the interest of the big mining company and they sent out
representatives to buy him out. But he foolishly turns down their offer,
thinking he could outsmart them. He suddenly realizes when they are not
there the next morning to bargain with him, that it's all over for him,
that they will send someone to kill him, as is their custom to do when
dealing with small businessmen they want to gobble up.
The final scene, shot in a snow storm, of the three hired gunmen for the
mining company tracking him down, is an emotionally sad scene played
against the glacial beauty of the natural surroundings, as the hapless
McCabe has gotten into a mess that is way over his head, not quite
understanding the life and death struggle inherent in American
capitalism.
The town has a church, but when he comes calling in the church for
shelter, he is forced out of there by the reverend and is forced to face
off with the hired guns looking for him. The point made, is that there
is no help forthcoming from anywhere, from the law or from God, man is
on his own here, struggling against nature, his own fears, and the
coldness of the citizens around him.
Altman's film is strikingly lyrical and perfect in mood; it is a
dreamlike film that is hauntingly memorable, that is magical in scope
and sadly touches McCabe's yearnings to find love and a place to put
down roots. The result is a poetical Western without heroes, that is
pathetically witty, where McCabe and Mrs. Miller's wishful dreams are
seen as either foolish romantic notions or drug induced inspirations,
ones that never had a chance of coming true.
Dennis Schwartz: " Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
