Title
Review for Mad Love (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Ben Hoffman
     The big shocker in MAD LOVE is not that it is so bad (which it is)
but that it was directed by the same Antonia Bird who made the
wonderful film PRIEST.  How a talented director could sink so rapidly
from one film to the next is difficult to comprehend.  From the taut
PRIEST to this nonsense is quite a leap.
     Ever since I saw Chris O'Donnell in SCENT OF A WOMAN, I knew he
was destined to greater roles.  In MAD LOVE, it is not his acting that
is at fault, it is the ridiculous story.
     Matt (O'Donnell) is a bright high school senior who falls madly in
love with a cookie young woman, Casey (Drew Barrymore).  He is so madly
in love with her that he gives up his intention of going to college and
instead takes off with her for parts unknown.
     When Casey steals a car and they ride off together he begins to
have  some small thoughts that she may not be right in the head.  But
other things should have warned him much earlier;  he would have to
have been an idiot not to have noticed.  However it is not until almost
the film's end that her parents tell him she needs psychiatric help and
asylum confinement until she cane be "cured."

Author
Steve Rhodes
     MAD LOVE is a troubled teen movie starting two people in their
twenties playing a couple of high schoolers.  Drew Barrymore as Casey
plays another disaffected teen as she has done so many times before
("The Amy Fisher Story" (TV), POISON IVY, GUNCRAZY, etc.).  Chris
O'Donnell plays Matt, an All American boy who hitches up with the wrong
girl and goes astray.  O'Donnell, who is usually much smarter in
choosing his roles, has a wide repertoire for such a short career
including FRIED GREEN TOMATOES, SCENT OF A WOMAN, and CIRCLE OF
FRIENDS.  I actually liked him best in a small movie called SCHOOL
TIES.
     Casey is a troubled teen because she has a strict father.  This
causes her to become, in the vernacular of the 50s, a juvenile
delinquent.  Now, this show, especially the cinematography by Fred
Tammes, is sympathetic to and trivializes her actions.  The motivation
for her behavior is never developed and hence her actions are not
believable.
     Matt, on the other hand, has an idyllic childhood and is an honor
student and an amateur astronomer.  The script by, apparently first
time, screenwriter Paula Milne is so full of holes, unexplained
rationales, and unbelievability, that one wishes she would flunked her
college writing exams and taken up any other occupation.  Matt is one
minute an A student and the next minute off getting into trouble in a
big way with Casey.  Even worse, the director (Antonia Bird) is unable
to develop any genuine chemistry between the two leads.  This means
Matt's actions seem totally off the wall.
     The director may have realized what a dog she had on her hands,
because she released it with a mind numbing rock music background.
Whenever the show gets particularly boring, she cranks up the volume to
anesthetize the audience from their pain of watching such drivel.
     Perhaps the worst part of the show is the dangerous stunts the
movie has the teenagers get involved in.  MAD LOVE seems to be saying
to them, try this, it is really cool and hey, you won't get hurt.
     The acting is all of the understated variety.  The parents,
especially the dads, are portrayed as evil in some unknown way that the
movie only hints at but never describes.
     MAD LOVE runs too long at 1:39.  It is rated PG-13 for criminal
behavior, a hint of nudity, underage drinking and smoking, and some
profanity.  It manages subtly to teach teenagers, who are the only
possible audience for this movie, some bad morals and dubious lessons
about life.  Avoid this picture.  I award it 1/2 of a star because it
did not quite reach the threshold of pain that I reserve for zero
stars.  On the whole it is much more soporific than painful.  Vote with
your feet and leave if you accidentally buy a ticket.  I wish had left.
I wanted to demand my time back when I left the theater.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1995 
U.S. Availability: wide release 5/26/95 
Running Length: 1:39 
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Profanity, sex, mature themes) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1 
     MAD LOVE is a flawed movie that can't decide whether it wants to be  
a drama about mental illness, a tale of teen romance and rebellion, or a  
road picture.  It's not that these three are necessarily mutually  
exclusive, but MAD LOVE's agenda makes them so.  Because the movie is so  
concerned about not alienating its youthful target audience, it doesn't  
take risks.  Everything has been watered down to maintain the PG-13  
rating that will allow 15 and 16-year olds into theaters without their  
parents.   
     Why call it MAD LOVE?  Well, the film is about madness and love,  
but, more importantly, the cheap, shallow image conjured by putting  
those two ideas together fits the picture.  A name like this clues the  
viewer in not to expect a hard-edged, thought-provoking drama.  There is  
some substance here, but it's largely overlooked.  Directing for a  
different audience from a more mature script, Antonia Bird might have  
created a film of similar depth to her previous effort, PRIEST.  As it  
is, all she ends up with is a near-miss that too often seems more like a  
music video than a dramatic feature.  Do we really need all that grunge  
rock to get us in tune with the characters' emotional states?  When  
utilized sparingly, music can be an effective tool.  However, overused  
like this, it becomes intrusive. 
     The two main characters are lifted directly off the shelf where  
stock romantic leads are kept.  Chris O'Donnell plays Matt, your typical  
clean-cut, ultra-responsible high school senior whose biggest challenge  
in life is getting a good score on the SATs.  Casey (Drew Barrymore) is  
the new face in Seattle -- a tempestuous free spirit from Chicago who  
drives a neon yellow VW and does basically whatever she wants.  It's  
only natural that such complete opposites should attract each other, and  
nothing can stop them from being together except, perhaps, Casey's  
apparent death wish.  
     After taking a few too many sleeping pills, Casey is placed in a  
psychiatric care hospital by her concerned parents (Joan Allen and Jude  
Ciccolella in thankless roles).  Of course, these two are set up as the  
"bad guys", because adults never really understand the younger  
generation in this sort of movie.  So Matt, acting the part of a modern- 
day "white knight", frees Casey from what she views as a prison, and  
together the pair heads for Mexico, pursued only by their personal  
demons. 
     After a few narrative hiccups resulting from a meandering script  
that never figures out what it really wants to be, MAD LOVE finally gets  
it right near the end, in a chilling sequence where we're afforded an  
opportunity to see the impact of Casey's imbalance.  Bird directs this  
scene with style, but it's so close to the finale that the arrival of  
the credits, coming soon after, makes the viewer feel cheated.   
     Teenagers will probably appreciate the movie, if only for its  
appealing leads and relatively undemanding story.  Chris O'Donnell looks  
like he does in BATMAN FOREVER, but acts more like his character from  
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS.  Barrymore radiates the wanton sexuality of the  
prototypical bad girl.  There aren't many sparks between these two, but  
each is hot in their own right.  Nevertheless, while such screen  
presence certainly helps, it can't completely obscure MAD LOVE's too- 
obvious inadequacies. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 
