Title
Review for Repulsion (1965)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Harvey S. Karten
REPULSION
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Compton Productions 
 Director: Roman Polanski  
 Writer:  Roman Polanski and Gerard Brach
 Cast: Catherine Deneuve, Ian Hendry, John Fraser, Patrick
Wymark, Yvonne Furneaux, James Villiers
  At: New York's Film Forum, 209 W. Houston Street 
  If you want to know how well a woman will get on with a
man, or whether she will make a suitable wife, try to find out
something about her relationship with her dad.  In
"Repulsion," a look at an old photo of the principal character,
Carol, would be worth a thousand words, but since that photo
figures strongly in the dramatic final seconds of the film, its
contents will not be revealed here.
  "Repulsion," a film which receives revivals several times in
any given year, is now enjoying a run at New York's Film
Forum.  The black-and-white work made in 1965 when
Roman Polanski was 32 years old has not been restored,
revitalized or colored.  Presumably its return 32 years after its
production is motivated by its qualities.  For want of a better
terminology "Repulsion" could be called a work of horror, a
grand guignol, though by today's Craven standards it is too
subtle to hold the interest of the typical targeted audience for
the category, the 16-25-year-old set.  For adults able to
appreciate its caliber, "Repulsion" still packs a wallop.  The
horror emerges not from outside threats but within the mind of
its protagonist, and watching the picture, you can't help
thinking that Polanski himself might have had episodes of
schizophrenia--Mental deterioration has rarely been so
convincingly portrayed and by so lovely a star.
   The story takes place in a seedy London flat where Carol
(Catherine Deneuve), a resident of Brussels, is now living with
her sister Kate (Yvonne Furneaux).  When Kate tells her
sister that she is taking some time off with her boy friend
(John Fraser) to visit Italy, Carol is terrified, and like a lost
puppy begs Kate not to go.  Left alone perhaps for the first
time in her life, her fragile mind slowly unwinds.  She begins
to see the walls crack and, at one point, when she turns on
the light, a huge gap seems immediately to materialize as
though London were hit by an earthquake. In her
hallucinations, men three times succeed in raping her.  When
she touches the walls, her hand leaves a deep imprint. 
These symptoms do not appear from nowhere: Carol is
repelled by men.  When a handsome young guy (Ian Hendry),
obsessed with her beauty, kisses her ever so faintly, she runs
to her room and brushes her teeth frantically.  As you might
guess this repulsion toward the opposite sex will lead to no
good.
   Polanski's violence is rarely prominent.  He exploits brutality
in more subtle ways than Sam Peckinpah and Arthur Penn,
being more concerned with how savagery arises from
solitariness, from people cut off, unsupported by any shared
view of life and society. His direction is slow and deliberate,
exhibiting Carol's change in her London tenement from
marginal functioning to withdrawal to ferocity with English
patience.  And he makes sure to add just the right amount of
humor, coming mostly from his depiction of others who are
also odd but in harmless ways.  There's the old woman with
the dog who is a neighbor, who stands for quite a while
outside Carol's open door to view a conversation between
Carol and her would-be boy friend.  An old man with a cane
enters her apartment, looks around at the overturned couch,
and slowly creeps out.  Still another eccentric, seeing Carol
lying unconscious, asks with his broad Scottish accent, "Can I
get her some brandy?"  And the rich old lady, Mrs. Walsh,
can drive her beauticians up the wall with her banal but quite
comical statements about men: "There's only one thing men
want and I don't know why they make such a fuss about it."
   As for Catherine Deneuve, who appears in virtually every
scene, is it possible for any in the audience not to fall in love
with such beauty?  No matter that she scarcely utters a word,
and that when she does she is anything but encouraging or
warm.  It's simply not possible to be unaffected by her
loveliness.  We need wonder not at all how she could beckon
a cornucopia of male attention simply walking down the street,
eyes down, unsmiling.   She is well supported by her sister
Kate, a thoroughly modern Millie whose man sleeps with her
next door, her moans driving Carol bananas.
   A contemporary audience might find the horror in
"Repulsion" occurring too little, too late, but the fun of the
movie is in the details, the careful etching of the mind of a
woman cracking under the strain of her alienation. Rated R. 
Running Time: 105 minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey Karten

Author
Dennis Schwartz

 REPULSION (director/writer: Roman Polanski; screenwriter: Gérard
 Brach; cinematographer: Gilbert Taylor; editor: Alastair McIntyre;
 cast: Catherine Deneuve (Carol Ledoux), Ian Hendry (Michael), John
 Fraser (Colin), Patrick Wymark (Landlord), Yvonne Furneaux (Helen
 Ledoux), Renee Houston (Miss Balch), Valerie Taylor (Mme. Denise),
 Helen Fraser (Bridget), James Villiers (John); Runtime: 104;
 Compton-Cameo; 1965-UK)
Roman Polanski sets up a tense atmosphere for this macabre tale, where
every black-and-white shot is subjectively motivated by the deranged
character played with quiet brilliance by Catherine Deneuve, until the
final shot becomes one of objective reality.
Carol Ledoux (Deneuve) is from Belgium. She's a very attractive blonde
but a timid young soul, working in an upscale hairdresser' salon as a
manicurist, and is sharing a dreary flat in London's Kensington section
with her sexually liberated older sister Helen (Yvonne Furneaux). She
always seems depressed, repulsed by everything she comes across. She
looks repulsed at an elderly, wealthy salon customer getting a mudpack
who is spouting her cynical opinions of men, at eating a fish and chips
lunch, at seeing a would-be pushy boyfriend, Colin (Fraser), who tries
unsuccessfully to date her, and when she comes home, she is repulsed by
her sister's nervy boyfriend Michael (Ian Hendry). That evening, she
lies awake in her bed and is repulsed by her sister's intimate moans and
groans during lovemaking, which she hears from her adjoining bedroom.
Carol's world comes apart when her sister goes off on a holiday to Italy
with her boyfriend and leaves her alone in the apartment. She starts
hallucinating and having nightmares, which show her loneliness and
sexual repressions. She watches as cracks in the wall appear to widen,
hands come out of the wall groping her, and she imagines being raped.
Unable to get her mind in order, she appears unfit at work and is sent
home, and this is after three days of staying home from work without
calling in.
When her would-be boyfriend goes into a rage that she wouldn't see him
or answer the phone, he breaks into her apartment and Carol responds to
his sexual advances by fatally bopping him over the head and dumping his
body in the bathtub. When the landlord (Patrick Wymark) comes by for the
late rent and then calls the flat a pig sty, observing the deteriorating
cooked rabbit carcass still uneaten on her dinner plate which is
attracting flies. Nevertheless, he finds himself attracted to her and
tells her if you look after me, you can forget the rent. She will also
brutally murder him when he makes a sexual advance towards her. The only
thing to be said in favor of these ghastly murders are that these men
were not nice and were extremely pushy, wanting to use her and not
caring that she didn't even show the slightest interest in them.
This is an austere and timeless Grand Guignol work, one with little
dialogue. This is the first of Roman Polansky's English language film's
and his second feature (the first was "Knife in the Water"-1962), and
this one might be his best work. It is eerie, unsettling and
intelligently created, showing Deneuve's emotional breakdown in an
impactful way, by showing it in psychological terms of deterioration and
not as a creation of special effects. This is a scary film, one of the
best in the world of horror films.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
