Title
Review for Licence to Kill (1989)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Jeff Meyer
     Pity me: I began going to see James Bond pictures right when Roger Moore
took over the part.  I didn't find out quite what I'd been missing until the
Guild Theater in Portland began running the entire series twice a year (one of
the few theaters with class enough to serve Vanilla Cokes), and I got a chance
to see DR. NO, FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE, and GOLDFINGER.  I would admit that
there were other non-Connery Bond films I enjoyed (ON HER MAJESTY'S SECRET
SERVICE is a favorite, for Diana Rigg if nothing else, and FOR YOUR EYES ONLY
seemed to *want* to go back to an espionage storyline), but in general, trips
to a new Bond picture were saved until everything else of interest had been
seen, accompanied by an air of resignation that was usually fully justified.
When Timothy Dalton took over as the new Bond, I couldn't have been more
pleased; while THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS dragged a bit at the end and had
exceptionally weak villains, the first half was everything I could want from a
Bond picture.  When I heard that LICENCE TO KILL would have a script written
for specifically for Dalton (THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS had been written with Moore
in mind), I was even more hopeful that we were heading back towards the good
ol' Bonds.
     Well, we've still got a ways to go, but things continue to look up.
LICENCE TO KILL has several strong points: some depth to Bond, some interesting
companions, a strong villain, some *real* suspense (find some of *that* in a
Moore Bonder!), and some opportunities for Dalton to stretch in the role.  The
problems with the film can generally be summed up by changing the instances of
"some" in the last sentence to "more."  There's still too much emphasis on
stunts and not enough on characterization, suspense and movie espionage.  (As
opposed to "real espionage," e.g., LeCarre.)   LICENCE TO KILL is a tantalizing
film, because you can hear the motor revving up during its entire length --
it's just that the engine never seems to catch.
     The film concentrates on Bond on a mission of revenge, and Dalton does a
good job with this: his obsessive drive to avenge a murder occasionally clouds
his normally cool judgment, and he has to depend on the help of several friends
to survive (a very nice touch).  Dalton continues to play Bond as the
professional of DAYLIGHTS (this is a Bond who is an assassin, and he works like
one -- the double-oh licence is not for show); unfortunately, the script
centers on Bond's obsession so completely that he's still fairly one-note.  I
kept feeling that John Glen, Michael Wilson and Richard Maibaum needed to be
violently jarred during this film and told to tone down the stunts and keep the
plot beefed up.  Things get too loose before the final stunt/battle sequence
(which is admittedly a doozy).
     Other actors: Robert Davi, who's played villains for years, seems to
really be picking only the cream of the crop for Bad Guy roles these days:
Sanchez in LICENCE, and the Jersey don in the current WISEGUY arc.  He's not a
Gert Frobe or a Klaus Maria Brandauer, but he does a nice job with it.  (I
really wished the script filled in his character a bit.)  It's a bit much to
swallow underground cities of SPECTRE agents and island retreats with private
armies these days; a South American drug kingpin has the same general
capabilities, and a touch of realism to boot.  Carey Lowell is excellent as
Bond's lover/accomplice; it's a little much to see her get teary when someone
else kisses James after she's held her own in a bar fight, but that's why the
phrase "artistic license" was invented (also "Bond Women").  Anthony Zerbe
plays a variation of all those flunky roles he used to play in Quinn-Martin TV
series.  David Hedison makes Bond movie history as the only man to play Felix
Leiter twice -- a real first.  (He also played Leiter in LIVE AND LET DIE.)
Too bad he didn't have the Flying Sub in the opening sequence....  The rest of
the actors are no great shakes, with the exception of Q, who doesn't overplay
the role too badly this time.  (Ah, hell, all of us engineers love him anyway.
We'd all like his job.)  And while we're at it, whose idea was it to stick
Wayne Newton in here?  "Bless your heart," my ass....
     Overall, I found LICENCE TO KILL to be a good deal like THE LIVING
DAYLIGHTS: strong start, but weak towards the end.  Fully entertaining enough,
though, and better than any of the Moore Bonds.  Keep Glen & company under
tighter control next time out, and let's have some more meat to the plot; these
guys show promise for producing a Classic Bond in the future that could stand
up to the Big Three.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  More action, less campy self-parody is
     the by-word of the latest Bond film.  There is almost too
     little humor in this hard-edged adventure film involving
     Bond's vendetta against a Panamanian drug lord.  Rating: +2.
     Operative 007 had been getting older and softer as the series
progressed.  The series had lost its hard edge.  In the early days, Bond was
a sort of all-purpose thug for the good guys fighting people who were
basically grandiose hoods toppling missiles or holding cities for ransom.
Later he lost the hard edge and became a sort of fop.  His foes were people
wanting to start nuclear wars and/or kill everyone in the world.  And the
stories became more campy and more silly, with more idiotic special
equipment and more and more obvious product placements.  Around the time
they made MOONRAKER, the series hit bottom.  After MOONRAKER, somebody must
have seen that the series needed rethinking.  Since then the plots have been
better constructed, but there has been an uneasy blend of the tongue-in-
cheek with some tighter storylines.  The choice of Timothy Dalton, with a
face like a Swiss Army knife and a sharp edge to match fueled speculation
that the series was going back to hard adventure.  LICENSE TO KILL is the
least fanciful Bond film ever made.  James Bond is no longer the lucky but
greying fop; he is young and vital and angry.  But for a couple of stagey
stunts toward the end of the film, this is a surprisingly serious action
film.
     There is a lot of story in this 133-minute film.  Even the pre-credit
action sequence advances the main story.  It is rare that it ever does and
this time it really is an integral part of the plot.  Bond is helping old
friend Felix Leiter(played by David Hedison, who becomes the first actor to
play the role twice) catch Sanchez, a Central American drug lord.  Things go
extremely wrong and Bond finds he has a serious vendetta against Sanchez
(played by Robert Davi, whose pockmarked face adds a touch of realism).
Bond must track the drug lord to Panama (thinly disguised under the name
Isthmus) where Sanchez ruthlessly holds his own empire through schemes
involving drug-running, evangelists, and Contras.
     The credit sequence is once again stunning in spite of the instantly
forgettable credit song by Gladys Knight.  Michael Kamen's score is not up
to the classic John Barry efforts, but it gets the job done.  Some aerial
stunts are impressive though driving stunts tend to be a weak point in the
film.  The characters lack some of the interest value of those in FROM
RUSSIA WITH LOVE, the only other Bond film with any credibility.  LICENSE TO
KILL is a sign that the Bond series is improving.  I give it a +2 on the -4
to +4 scale.

Author
Robert Dorsett
     Timothy Dalton's back as James Bond, in what appears to be a mixture of
many plot elements from the *book* LIVE AND LET DIE, the movie THUNDERBALL, and
various "Miami Vice" episodes.
     The plot: Tragedy strikes Felix Leiter, the CIA agent who's helped out
Bond many a time (and who's undergone yet another facelift :-)).  The culprit
is a drug czar.  Bond goes on a revenge trip, accumulating an impressive body 
count along the way (remember, Bond has the license to *kill*, and he uses it 
liberally in this one).  In the process of his vendetta, the Secret Service 
disowns him, which makes for a renegade secret agent, and, for the first time
in the series' history, a plausible cover story.
     Story: mostly sound, almost even believable.
     Dialogue: I saw this at a college preview.  The audience appreciated some
intentionally corny lines.  I'm not sure how well the same lines would come
across in "real life."  "I love James so much"--this from a girl who barely
knows him...  :-)  (That particular scene was a throw-away.)  There are a lot
of very good wisecracks, as well as self-deprecating humor.
     Special effects: some pretty good ones, some very complex.  Unfortunately,
there are continuity problems on some of the more complex effects.
     Stunts: likewise, some very complex ones....
     Gore count: still cartoonland violence, but this flick has the highest 
casualty count in years.
     Characterization: Bond's drifting closer to the "book Bond" than even
Connery did.  He gets really bashed up in this one (although, unlike many a
Bond book, he doesn't end up in the hospital).  The villain's a suitable match
for him,  this time around.
     Product placement: didn't seem very conspicuous.  Of course, a Coast Guard
Dauphin II had a big "Aerospatiale" logo on the side of it, which I didn't
notice when I examined one fairly closely six weeks ago.... :-)  
     Gadgets: a few.  I get the impression that the gadgets were only
introduced to bring Q on the screen, who's an audience favorite.  It isn't
really a gadget movie, but they do use everyday household appliances (spear 
guns, lighters, airplanes, Stingers) in interesting ways...
     Overall review: one of the best adventure films this summer, and the best
Bond since THE SPY WHO LOVED ME.  Easily on a par with INDY III, and much
better than the summer disappointments (GHOSTBUSTERS II, STAR TREK V, BATMAN).
3 stars (out of four), or a 7.5/10 on the genre-sensitive scale.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        No, that's not a typo, that's how they spell the word "license" 
in England. Leave it to the British to be snobby enough to reject the 
letter "s" in all its forms. It doesn't make sense, but neither do any of 
the movies in the James Bond series. How can one man have sex with 
three beautiful women and defuse an atomic bomb in every movie? 
Even the most suave amongst us would have sex with an atomic bomb 
and defuse three beautiful women by mistake every once in awhile.
        This was Timothy Dalton's second and final appearance as 
007 and good riddance to him, I say. Sure, he's not a bad Bond, but 
he's got a certain sliminess about him I just don't like. Dalton 
outstayed his welcome after only two movies, whereas I didn't start to 
get sick of Roger Moore until the OCTOPUSSY period. Let's face it, 
though. Any rugged-looking white guy with dark hair could do a 
decent James Bond. Hell, people would even pay to see Regis Philbin 
in the role. And Kathie Lee could play Octocody. Just a thought...
        Even with Dalton at the helm, LICENCE TO KILL is still a 
good Bond outing, for the fact that it so drastically departs from the 
tried-and-true 007 formula used in the seventeen movies before it. 
Here, Bond is on a personal mission to avenge the murder of a CIA 
friend and his wife. Bond is all alone this time, his "licence" to kill 
having been revoked by the British secret service, and must track 
down the Mexican drug lord who ordered the double execution.
        Locating the villain in a Bond movie is never hard. Just look 
for the biggest exotic mansion around. Bond finds the place and, as 
usual, is held captive for a considerable percentage of the movie 
(something like 22.7%, but don't quote me on that). He also invites the 
drug lord's girlfriend to a fiesta in his pantalones. That's one of 
Dalton's two conquests in LICENCE TO KILL... See, that right there 
is how you know he wasn't meant to play James Bond. The other 
Bonds get at least a trio of ladies per movie, even George Lazenby in 
ON HER MAJESTY'S SECRET SERVICE.
        LICENCE TO KILL clocks in as one of the better entries in 
the series, with a visually-stimulating-yet-down-to-earth climax, a 
more gritty feel to it and an entirely new direction for the Bond series. 
Bond is self-motivated and independent, with a little help from his 
friend Q. (who actually joins Bond in the mission toward the end) and 
his unusually competent girlfriend Pam (who also functions as a low-
calorie cooking spray). It also reminds us what the 80's were all about 
by throwing in cocaine and Wayne Newton. You have to have the 
cocaine to tolerate Newton.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     The second and last picture to have Timothy Dalton as a cold as
ice James Bond is 1989's LICENCE TO KILL.  If you like your 007s as dry
as a dry martini, this may be the Bond for you.  Otherwise, you may
feel Dalton belongs with George Lazenby (ON HER MAJESTY'S SECRET
SERVICE) as one of the actors who disgraced the Bond name.
     LICENCE TO KILL features Robert Davi as a drug smuggler named
Franz Sanchez, a sadomasochist who likes to whip his women when they
don't obey.  Sanchez's band of drug runners use maggots to camouflage
their stash and sharks to munch on any drug enforcement officers who
get too close.  CIA agent Felix Leiter (David Hedison) reappears from
1973's LIVE AND LET DIE, and promptly gets severely munched.  Bond, who
wants to go after the mutilators of his old friend Leiter, gets his
"licence to kill" revoked by M when he refuses to give up the hunt.
     Although set on Key West and on a Caribbean island, the
cinematography by Alec Mills and the sets by Peter Lamont have none of
the usual lovely travelogue aspect of Bond pictures.  The mundane
visuals fit right in with the bland storyline.
     Where are the signature chase scenes, the sexual humor and the
romantic trysts that we come to Bond films for in the first place?
Here the chase scenes are mainly saved until the end.
     In the perfect Bond setup, he runs out of gas in a speedboat on a
romantic evening with a beautiful woman, Pam Bouvier (Carey Lowell).
Dalton's reaction?  He is miffed about the delay.  Although his Bond
finally agrees to a sexual encounter with her, it is only because she
pressures him.  The old James sought out such opportunities without
being coerced.  The only genuinely erotic scene occurs later when Bond
sticks his hand up Pam's skirt, but he's just going for her hidden gun.
Dalton is dead serious, having little time to waste on women or humor.
     (LICENCE TO KILL is the first Bond film to be rated PG-13 - they
since have all had this rating - which is partly because of the
addition in the early 1980s of the PG-13 rating and partly because of
the increased amount of blood and profanity in LICENCE TO KILL.)
     A white-suited Wayne Newton, providing some much needed humor,
appears in a cameo as a televangelist on the prowl for donations.  His
real purpose is to convey the wholesale price of drugs and negotiate
drug deals on the air in secret.
     After a languid and completely formulaic movie, the pace finally
picks up at the end in a long chase scene using large gasoline trucks.
When the only memorable visual is a semi doing a wheelie, you know the
picture is in trouble.
     LICENCE TO KILL runs too long at 2:13.  It is rated PG-13 for
profanity and violence and would be fine for kids around 9 and up.
     My son Jeffrey, age 9, thought the movie was just okay.  He gave
it ** and complained that it was too bloody.

Author
David N. Butterworth
     See: A man eaten alive by a shark!  See: A man impaled on the jaws of an
earthmover!  See: A man's head decompressed beyond recognition!
     No, this is not an ad for one of those so-called video nasties, but what
you can expect to see in LICENSE TO KILL, the latest James Bond film and second
to star Timothy Dalton as 007.
     Bond is back all right -- bigger and bolder, perhaps, but (children under
thirteen take note) certainly bloodier than ever.  Audiences have learned to
expect girls, gadgets and great stunts from these films, but gore?  No thank
you, Mr. Bond.
     LICENSE TO KILL is the sixteenth installment in the seemingly endless
series of James Bond films which began back in the 1962 with DR. NO.  Back
then, Bond pictures could be considered more or less family entertainment.
Irrespective of the sex and violence inherent in the films, they were never
sordid or nasty.  They were never unpleasant.  Times, indeed, are a-changin'.
     In the ensuing twenty-seven years, Bond has battled his way through
several guises, a good number of dry martinis, and more than his fair share of
women (an advocate for safe sex this guy is not!).  But in all those years,
Bond -- the man as well as the series -- has kept killing above board and
respectable.  In LICENSE TO KILL, however, the producers have prostituted good
clean fun for explicit violence.  The bloodletting is jarring, and needlessly
so.
     This time around, the globe-trotting Bond touches down in such exotic
locales as the Florida Keys, Bimini, and the fictional city of Isthmus.  On
their way to the wedding of CIA friend Felix Leiter (David Hedison, in a
reprisal of his role in LIVE AND LET DIE), Bond and Leiter are alerted to the
fact that nefarious drug magnate Franz Sanchez (menacingly played by Robert
Davi) is within striking distance, and the proceedings are quickly curtailed.
     However, Sanchez quickly escapes and does the dirty on Felix, turning him
into shark bait.  This scene is about as uncomfortable to watch as the chainsaw
sequence in Brian DePalma's SCARFACE.  As the bad guy, Davi is certainly one
of the most formidable villains Bond has come up against, at least in recent
years.  He makes SCARFACE's Tony Montana look like Mr. Rogers.
     Bond swears revenge but M (Robert Brown), fearing that Bond will turn
this into a personal vendetta, insists that he take on another assignment.
Bond cannot and resigns, thereby having his "license revoked," the film's
original title.
     Carey Lowell and Talisa Soto play the Bond girls.  In keeping with Bond's
new found monogamy and 1980s image, ex-CIA operative Pam Bouvier (Lowell) is
portrayed as a tough cookie, and not just another bit of fluff.  However, it
isn't long before she hauls herself out of her military garb and parades around
in her underwear for a scene or two.  Cute, Carey, but no Oscar nod this year,
okay?  Soto plays Sanchez's girlfriend-on-the-make Lupe Lamora and gets to wear
a lot of red outfits, hussy that she is.
     The usual wisecracks are very much in evidence -- a bloodied Felix shows up
with a sign around his neck which reads "He disagreed with something that ate
him."  But this time the one-liners are in bad taste because they invariably
follow scenes of overt violence.
     In THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS, Dalton's first venture into the role of British
agent extraordinaire, there was on-screen nudity for the first time in a Bond
movie, albeit brief nudity.  Now we have an occasional profanity stirred --
sorry, shaken -- into the proceedings.  Some might call it keeping up with the
times, others a lowering of standards.
     Gladys Knight performs the snappy GOLDFINGER-inspired title song and
it's the best musical motif in the film.  In earlier films, John Barry's score
was as much a character as the villain or the Bond girls themselves, and it is
sorely missed in this picture.  Michael Kamen, who appears to be scoring every
other movie release this summer, steps in for Barry on LICENSE TO KILL, but his
contribution is mostly flat and hopelessly derivative.
     The Bond films have always tried to top each other in terms of spectacular
stunts, and LICENSE TO KILL is no exception.  In fact, the film's memorable
conclusion is probably one of the most explosive action sequences ever put on
celluloid.
     But the problem with the film is the tone, plain and simple.  Over the
years the character of James Bond has slowly, imperceptively segued from secret
agent to super-hero.  He has, in his own way, become an indestructible force in
the movies, a caricature of sorts.  Nowadays, Bond is much like Freddie Krueger
or Jason Voorhees, whose wheelings and dealings this film often seems to
imitate.
     Moviegoers will have to wait a little longer for the latest incarnations
of those familiar faces this summer, but if your appetite for that kind of
murder and mayhem needs to be whetted sooner than that, you might want to check
out LICENSE TO KILL first.  You won't be disappointed.
