Title
Review for Rampo (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Craig Good
"If I could say it, I wouldn't have to dance it." -- Isadora Duncan
"If you can talk about it, you're not using cinema." -- David Lynch
Authors, at least the good ones, sometimes have the experience of
watching their characters come to life. They stop being words on a page
and start dictating their own lines and actions. For Rampo Edogawa in
"The Mystery of Rampo" this comes literally true. His novel of a young
wife killing her husband is banned by the government censors, and then
he sees a newspaper account of an identical killing. More, when he goes
to spy out the woman, she looks exactly like the character he
visualized in his book. As he is drawn toward her the line between fact
and fantasy, between dreams and reality, bends, blurs and then
shatters.
"Rampo" is a hard movie to pidgeonhole, which is its greatest strength.
It's not "Carlos Saura's Carmen" meets "The Twilight Zone", and it's
not really what would happen if David Lynch had been born Japanese. It
does have a palpable and convincing dreamlike quality mixed with linear
storytelling.
I'm a sucker for films which blur the dream line such as "The Last
Wave", "Altered States" and "Carlos Saura's Carmen". But I don't know
if I should really review this movie because it touched me at such a
deeply personal level that to learn that others see it differently
might make me feel that I have exposed something too private.
For one thing, the woman in the film, played by former model Michiko
Hada, is so beautiful that she literally wrung tears from my eyes. It
wasn't until the morning after I saw the movie that I recognized the
emotion. They were exactly the same tears I cried when looking at the
sculpture of an incosolable woman on a tomb in Florence, Italy. The
deep, anguished sadness and sense of loss on that perfect marble face
generated in me one of the most powerful experiences I have ever had
while beholding a work of art. And here was a walking, breathing figure
equally as beautiful and touching -- at least to me.
For another, the film is so *cinematic* that to try to write about it
seems as futile as trying to photograph the Grand Canyon. "The Mystery
of Rampo" is filmed poetry. It operates at an emotional level which
makes a strong undercurrent beneath the surface story. It is visually
rich and unusually crafted, carried along in a torrent of excellent
sound design and Akira Senju's lush, romantic symphonic score.
The performances by Naoto Takenaka as Rampo, Masahiro Motoki as his
detective alter ego, and Michiko Hada as Shizuku the mysterious woman
who may be a murderer, a victim, or merely a figment of the
imagination, are all subtle and heart felt. Takenaka's smooth baritone
in effect harmonizes beautifully with the flower-delicate voice of Hada
as each character seems weighed down and crushed by every external
force in their lives except each other.  The resignation of Rampo after
being rebuffed by the censor and then having to go to a superficial
party to celebrate one of his mystery novels being turned into a B
action movie reads in every quiet gesture. And Shizuku needs merely
cast an empty gaze at the floor to convey her sadness. The magnetism
drawing their characters together may be obsession, salvation,
destruction, or all three.
"The Mystery of Rampo" is a strange movie, no doubt about it. It is
unlikely to appeal to those who think that "Twister" is destined to be
the best movie of the year. But if you're inclined to seek out
something a little different, I think you could do far worse. I have no
idea if it got any theatrical distribution in the US in 1994, but it is
at least available now on laserdisc.
