Title
Review for Mondo (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ben Hoffman
No one knows where the 11-years-old Gypsy boy, Mondo,
came from (Ovidiu Balan, a real-life Rumanian gypsy  who
lived in a Gypsy camp in France with his mother and
grandmother and about to be deported when tapped by the
director, himself of Gypsy heritage, to play the part).
We first see him running through the streets of Nice
looking, seeking, contemplating his surroundings and all
the time on the run.  If he sees someone he likes, he
asks with an endearing smile if they will adopt him.
The film is about his life, what he sees, how he
survives, the friends he makes and, always avoiding the
police.  It is based on a short story by J.M.G. Le Clezio
(Mondo et autres Histoires)..
Many interesting characters cross the screen as Mondo
makes his rounds. There is the magician (Philippe Petit)
and his friend (Schaia Aalam) who, too, look after him a
bit.  She is a Turkish Kurd singer who has taken refuge
in Nice..  There is the woman, Thi Chin, a Vietnamese
(Pierrette Fesch)  who worries about this homeless boy.
And then there is the homeless man, Dadi (Jerry Smith),
a Scotsman who had been brought up with British Nobility
but abandoned it to live in the streets of Nice under a
bridge.  There is Giordan, the fisherman (Maurice
Maurin) who is a gardener in Menton but on Sundays can
be found fishing.  He wants to teach Mondo to fish and
to learn to read and write.    The mailman (Ange Gobbi)
(in real life a postman). who Mondo always asks if there
is any mail for him as if anyone knew his whereabouts. .
. . and the postman sadly says there is none today.
Despite the uncertainties of his life and where will
his next meal come from (a bakery lady gives him
bread), Mondo appears to be enjoying the freedom.
Blend these characters together with humor and pathos,
throw in the Gypsy Mondo, and we have a charming,
heartwarming film.
After the film's completion, Ovidiu Balan, his mother
and grandmother were deported to Rumania..

Author
Edwin Jahiel
MONDO (France,1996) *** 3/4.  Directed by Tony Gatlif. Written by
Jean-Marie Le Clezio  from his short story. Produced by Michčle Ray-Gavras.
Cast: Ovidiu Balan, Pierette Fesch, Philippe Petit, Jerry Smith, et al. A
Shadow release. In French with subtitles.77 min. Not rated.
First things first. I would give "Mondo" a rating of G while stressing that
adults will find this wonderful, warm realistic-poetic work totally
engrossing. Mondo is  a handsome gypsy boy who cannot read, does not know
his age (he must be 10 or 11), whose provenance is unexplained and whom we
meet wandering about Nice, that picturesque city  of 350,000 people on the
French Riviera, close to Monte-Carlo and the Italian border.
In 1929, Jean Vigo who was  called "The Rimbaud of cinema" and died at age
29, made an experimental, classic short called "A Propos de Nice," in which
he treated slices of life in that city, juxtaposing with irony the wealthy,
mostly old, tourists and with affection, the locals. In a sense, "Mondo" is
the inheritor of that film. It is about the meanderings of its young
protagonist, explorations that are put in the context of the city and
several Nicois (Nice dwellers). All , like Mondo, are treated with immense
sympathy and not a hint of mockery. And none of them reacts to the
youngster in the standard way, i.e. "Gypsies are undesirables, thieving and
smelly."
All the performers are amateurs. Mondo is played by Ovidiu Balan, a
Rumanian gypsy about whom I know nothing (I am writing this review without
benefit of press information) except that after the movie was made he and
his family were deported back to Rumania.  He lives by what is commonly
known as "his wits, " but without  all the tricks and illegalities this
expression may imply.
First he is seen at one of those great farmer markets where he scrounges
for discards. He sleeps outdoors on the grass. (In a surreal sequences, he
is near statues of famous men and there's a voice-off commentary. One of
the busts is Balzac's)  \
One of the first locals he meets is a man on a bench, reading Flaubert .
Out of a blue sky the kid asks him "Will you adopt me?" It's a brief,
heart-rending moment that will be repeated later to a passerby. (In both
cases the boy runs off). Mondo is curious, friendly, lovable. His smile is
infectious, irresistible. I would adopt that boy without thinking twice
about it.
He then encounters a kindly ex-sailor who is fishing, teaches the child,
discusses exotic ports with him, and later teaches him the alphabet in the
most ingenious way. In succession, Mondo also meets  aged Dadi (aka Dove
Man, as he keeps two birds) who is played by real homeless Scot; a magician
played by  famous tighrope walker Philippe Petit; an older woman, Thi Chin
in her big house and garden (of Eden?) who cares for him when he has a
fever and befriends him. Seeing her garb he asks  "Are you Vietnamese?"
"No, I am a Jew born in Vietnam and I came here years ago." The cast
includes a Turkish Kurd woman, a political refugee, who sings
beautifullyand adds to the splendid variety of music here;  a postman who
is areal postman; and other "real people."
As Mondo explores the world around him, looks and listens, asks questions,
tries his first elevator, gets soaked in rain and still scrounges for food,
the persons he comes in contact with are just about all kind, including a
bakery lady who repeatedly offers him bread. There'something both subtle
and obvious as Mondo is placed in an environment of enticing French foods,
supermarkets, fresh fruit and  vegetables--yet at times has to get his
sustenance from nature.
J.M. Le Clezio, one of France's best writers, has found an ideal director
in Mr. Gatlif. Their collaboration results in something entirely fresh,
novel, yet in the great French tradition of films in which children are
seen with undertsanding, love, realism but also imagination. As in the
classic "Zero for Conduct" by the same Jean Vigo mentioned above. As in the
films of Francois Truffaut and several filmmakers of all periods.
Is it an accident that a welfare officer says that Mondo is "a wild child,"
the title of a Truffaut movie? Or that in Truffaut's "The 400 Blows" the
child hero worships Balzac whose statue we see and who is also the author
of "Colonel Chabert," a name that appears on a prospectus that the postman
hands Mondo as "mail for you"?
The appeal, the warmth of the boy Mondo and of the movie "Mondo" cannot be
described. Tony Gatlif, the filmmaker of Rom (Gypsy) lineage who made,
among other Rom-themed movies, "Latcho Drom," combines in with much talent
and in credible ways, fact and imagination, emotion without sentimental
schlock, selective realism --extremely well photographed and edited
--without cheating.
Mondo disappears as mysteriously as he had appeared. His absence, like
Gypsy magic, causes odd perturbances. The last  words of the film's are
voice-off: "We looked for Mondo everywhere. Then we forgot a little."
