Title
Review for Beverly Hillbillies, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Perhaps the clearest evidence of the dearth of original ideas in 
Hollywood is the constant need to regurgitate old, worn-out television 
series.  While there is an occasional exception to this rule (STAR TREK 
being an illustration), the endless plundering of old programs is proof 
that it's easier to rely on something tried-but-true than to attempt 
something new.  THE BEVERLY HILLBILLIES, following in the wake of the 
unfortunate revival of THE ADDAMS FAMILY, is an example of something that 
should have stayed in re-runs.
When Jed Clampett (Jim Varney) discovers oil on his Arkansas property, he 
becomes a very rich man.  Wanting to make his daughter Elly May (Erika 
Eleniak) into a "sophisticated woman", he decides to move the clan to 
Beverly Hills.  There, in a place filled with strange and unusual 
customs, he is greeted by the fawning bank manager in charge of his 
billion dollars (Dabney Coleman) and the assistant manager, Miss Hathaway 
(Lily Tomlin).  When Jed expresses a desire to re-marry, everyone gets 
involved in the matchmaking, but the woman who emerges as the leading 
candidate to be the next Mrs. Clampett is actually a scheming fortune-
hunter (Lea Thompson).
Those who loved the television series (which served as light comedy, at 
best) will probably be pleased by the motion picture, which stays rigidly 
faithful to the spirit of its predecessor.  This is a farce, pure and 
simple, with all the depth and intelligence (or lack thereof) that marked 
TV's THE BEVERLY HILLBILLIES.  In fact, the most clever moment of the 
movie comes when Miss Hathaway, searching for a private investigator, is 
sent to the offices of Barnaby Jones (Buddy Ebson).  Ebson, as many 
viewers will doubtless recall, was responsible not only for creating the 
role of Jones, but also portrayed the original Jed Clampett.
Those sitting through this film will experience a few guffaws and 
chuckles, but much of the humor is surprisingly unfunny.  There's some 
serviceable slapstick, and a couple of amusing moments made possible by 
the country-meets-city mentality (such as the Clampetts mistaking obscene 
hand gestures for a "Californy greeting"), but these pretty much vanish 
by the end of the first thirty minutes.  After that, it's a long and 
uninspired wait for the end-credits (which are shown over various out-
takes and "bloopers").  
The producers of THE FUGITIVE knew what they were doing when they 
accomplished their TV-to-movie transformation:  give the audience 
something fresh.  The idea worked, as proven by generally-favorable 
reviews and a high box-office gross.  THE BEVERLY HILLBILLIES disdains 
this method, however, and suffers greatly because of it.  If I want to 
see ninety minutes of the television series, I'll sit at home and watch 
three back-to-back episodes.
While the storyline may be dull, and the jokes lacking in humor, at least 
the casting is on-the-money.  None of the performances are examples of 
great acting, but for the movie that they've been placed in, the actors 
are perfect.  Jim Varney is no Buddy Ebson, but he gives the new Jed 
Clampett a certain air of dignity not expected from a guy who's most 
famous line is "Hey Vern!"  Erika Eleniak, although probably cast for 
attributes other than her acting skill, gives a decent (and somewhat 
airheaded) rendition of Elly May.  Cloris Leachman is perfect as Granny.  
I was among those unimpressed by director Penelope Spheeris' previous 
effort, the overly-smug WAYNE'S WORLD (another television-derivative).  
This time, however, the few sparks of originality shown there are mostly 
absent.  Most of the attempts at irreverent parody ring false.
My advice is to wait and see this version of THE BEVERLY HILLBILLIES the 
same way that you've seen all that's gone before - on the small screen.  
And let's hope that when the closing song chimes in with the familiar 
"Y'all come back now, hear?", it's not a reference to a sequel.  
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Jim Varney, Erika Eleniak, Lily Tomlin, Cloris Leachman,
           Lea Thompson, Diedrich Bader, Dabney Coleman.
Screenplay:  Lawrence Konner & Mark Rosenthal and Jim Fisher & Jim Stahl.
Director:  Penelope Spheeris.
     I knew I was in trouble in THE BEVERLY HILLBILLIES when Joke #1
involved stomping a bear in the groin.  Joke #2 covered the expulsion
of bodily gasses.  The portion of the audience that was 8-12 years old,
either chronologically or intellectually, howled with delight.  I
merely sat in astonished silence and prepared for a very long ninety
minutes.
     The film version of THE BEVERLY HILLBILLIES doesn't stray far from
the premise of the 1962-1971 television series.  Jed Clampett (Jim
Varney) stumbles upon a billion dollar reservoir of crude oil while
hunting in Arkansas, then decides to move to California with spunky
daughter Elly May (Erika Eleniak), irrascible Granny (Cloris Leachman)
and lunkhead nephew Jethro (Diedrich Bader).  The reason for the move:
widower Jed wants to find a new wife and educate tomboyish Elly May in
the ways of a refined woman.  In Beverly Hills, Jed entrusts his
fortune to bank president Milburn Drysdale (Dabney Coleman) and his
unctuous assistant Miss Jane Hathaway (Lily Tomlin).  Meanwhile, bank
toady Tyler (Rob Schneider) and his gold-digging girlfriend Laura (Lea
Thompson) hatch a plan to have Laura pose as a French governess for
Elly May, insinuating herself into the Clampetts' good graces as well
as their checkbook.
     The real star of THE BEVERLY HILLBILLIES is casting director Glenn
Daniels, who has put together about as perfect a physical match for the
cast of the series as I could imagine.  Simply admiring Cloris
Leachman's remarkable resemblance to the late Irene Ryan was enough to
inspire me to grant HILLBILLIES about ten minutes of good will.
Unfortunately, that turned out to be nine minutes too much.  As eager
as the performers seem to be to throw themselves into their roles,
they're just not given anything remotely interesting to do.
     Congratulate Lawrence Konner and Mark Rosenthal, who receive story
and co-screenwriting credit, for pulling off a challenging task:
coming up with a script even more pedestrian than their work in FOR
LOVE OR MONEY.  They aim their jokes so far below the belt that they
usually end up somewhere around the ankles.  The ADDAMS FAMILY approach
is clearly in evidence here, namely to come up with a gauze-thin story,
then turn the characters loose to ham it up in comic strip fashion.
THE BEVERLY HILLBILLIES maintains a fairly consistent pattern of
setup-setup-gag, setup-setup-gag, where you can see, hear and smell
every one coming from several miles away.  The series ran for ten
years; there's just not much new ground to cover in the "rednecks among
the ritzy" department.  It's therefore not much of a surprise that the
few really fresh and funny moments don't involve the Hillbillies at
all; watch instead (if watch you must) for some sharp jabs at Beverly
Hills high school students.  These laughs are so rare, I won't spoil
them by name.
     As in her hit WAYNE'S WORLD, director Penelope Spheeris seems to
wallow in intertextuality.  We get references to "Jeopardy," "People's
Court," "Barnaby Jones," and DELIVERANCE, just to name a few, and none
of them are funny.  Spheeris seems to be making the mistaken assumption
that referentiality is funny in its own right, regardless of context,
forgetting that WAYNE'S WORLD worked because it was *about* the pop
culture awareness of the twentysomethings.  There's none of that goofy
self-awareness in THE BEVERLY HILLBILLIES, just a plodding, almost smug
conviction that it will be a hit no matter what kind of garbage they
throw at the audience.  It would be nice to see them proved wrong.
     Sadly, THE BEVERLY HILLBILLIES seems destined to attract the same
audience that made THE ADDAMS FAMILY a hit, a combination of nostalgic
parents and easily-amused kids.  For nostalgia, watch the series in
syndicated reruns for free; for the kids, just give them a good book.
They'll thank you for it later.
