Title
Review for Men with Guns (1997/II)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Eric Lurio
The film begins with a Mother(Iguandili Lopez) and Daughter(Nandi Luna
Ramirez) making tortillas in the jungle. They are discussing the impending
arrival of a doctor. This a very alien jungle, and this is a very alien movie.
The doctor is Humberto Fuentes(Federico Luppi), a white haired widower who's
in need of a vacation. Usually he and his wife would go to the beach, but this
year, the first on his own, he decides to visit some students of his who he
thinks are in the mountains. Their training was paid for by the `progress for
peace' program from the USA. 
Everyone he knows tells him not to do it. There are rumors of atrocities he
does not belive. Then he sees an ex-student(Roberto Sosa) in the street and
follows him. He confirms the rumor.
But the good doctor still refuses to belive, and heads off into the bush.
The quest for the other students begin.
John Sayles is a great but perverse writer. He begins the journey with the
comic relief. Andrew (Mandy Patinkin) and Harriet(Kathryn Grody) are  two
lefty tourists who keep popping up at the weirdest times. They also get some
of the best lines [how do you say fajita in spanish?].
But most of the rest of the movie isn't at all funny. At his first stop, the
people are all afraid of him except a blind woman(Lolo Navarro), who tells him
that the second of his students has gone off to ‘school.' 
A young boy named Conejo(Dan Rivera Gonzalez) agrees, for a fee, to show him
where the school is. And tell him what really happened.
Through a series of adventures, Conejo and the Doctor collect more companions:
Domingo, the soldier(Damian Delgado), who originally stole the doctors tires,
then his money, and needs him to tend his wound, Padre Portillo, (Damian
Alcazar) a priest on the run from the men in the title, and finally,
Graciela(Tania Cruz) rendered mute since she was raped by Domingo.
Each has a story, told either out loud or in flashback. All are interesting. 
The ending is a revelation. Don't mind the subtitles, they work.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Federico Luppi, Dan Rivera Gonzalez, Damian Delgado, Tania Cruz, 
      Damian Alcazar, Mandy Patinkin, Kathryn Grody
Director: John Sayles
Producers: Maggie Renzi, R. Paul Miller
Screenplay: John Sayles
Cinematography: Slawomir Idziak 
Music: Mason Daring
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Classics
In Spanish with subtitles
     John Sayles is arguably the most ambitious American independent 
film maker working today.  His films -- those that he writes, directs, 
and edits -- are made entirely outside of the studio system.  Sayles 
fashions them on his own, because he demands the right of final cut.  
Only when a film is done does he seek out a distributor.  During his 18-
year career behind the camera, he has always been a maverick.  While 
most other directors make a few successful indie pictures, then sign a 
deal with a studio, Sayles continues to work as he always has, using the 
proceeds from the artistically limited screenplays he pens for the 
Hollywood behemoths (PIRANHA and CLAN OF THE CAVE BEAR have Sayles 
scripts) to fund his more personal work.  
     Sayles broke onto the scene in 1980 with his directorial debut, 
RETURN OF THE SECAUCUS SEVEN, the movie that inspired the better-known 
THE BIG CHILL.  His films since then have been remarkably diverse, from 
the lesbian drama, LIANNA, to the comic fantasy, THE BROTHER FROM 
ANOTHER PLANET, to the baseball movie, EIGHT MEN OUT, to the Scottish 
fairy tale, THE SECRET OF ROAN INISH, to the magnificently-textured LONE 
STAR.  Now, two years after his most critically-acclaimed effort to 
date, Sayles is ready to release MEN WITH GUNS, a film that breaks new 
ground (again).  Not only was this Central American-based tale filmed 
entirely outside of the United States, but the final script (after being 
translated from the English version that Sayles wrote) was in Spanish.  
     While perhaps not as masterful as LONE STAR, MEN WITH GUNS is 
nevertheless a very good film.  It stars Argentinean actor Federico 
Luppi (CRONOS) as Dr. Fuentes, an aging medical practitioner in an 
unnamed Central American country.  With retirement upon him, Fuentes is 
determined that some part of his teaching will outlast him.  He believes 
that his legacy lies in the contribution he made to a project that 
trained young men and women to be doctors before sending them out as 
"ambassadors of health" to remote Indian villages.  It has been years 
since Fuentes has heard from any of his former students, and he decides 
to take a trip out of the city to look for a few of them.  The deeper he 
gets into the wilderness, the more horrified he becomes by what he finds 
in different Indian villages.  Poverty and lawlessness are the chief 
characteristics of life.  Fear lies heavily in the air.  Politics are 
meaningless.  To the common farmer eking out a living, there's no 
difference between guerrillas and soldiers -- they're all men with guns 
who steal and kill.  
     Along the way, Fuentes assembles an unusual group of traveling 
companions.  The first to join him is an orphaned young boy (Dan Rivera 
Gonzalez), who knows the way of the back roads that the doctor must 
traverse.  The next member of the group is a solider who has deserted 
(Damian Delgado) and whose prized possession, a revolver, has no 
bullets.  Later, the band is enlarged by a priest who has lost his faith 
(Damian Alcazar) and a mute woman (Tania Cruz) who is in search of 
solace.  
     One of the most vociferous arguments to develop against MEN WITH 
GUNS focuses on the setting.  Sayles has placed all of the action in a 
fictitious Latin American country, declining to indict any particular 
government for the travesties that are shown (guerrillas killing men for 
helping soldiers; soldiers killing men for helping guerrillas).  And, 
while there is a legitimate argument for "naming names", Sayles' point 
is that the themes and issues he addresses are universal in nature, and 
that there's no reason to pin down a specific country.  These kinds of 
human rights abuses have happened throughout history and are still 
taking place all across the world wherever oppressors with superior 
technology use their position of strength to dispossess and suppress the 
indigenous population.  
     Sayles presents MEN WITH GUNS from Fuentes' perspective -- the 
doctor represents the audience.  At first, he is cocooned by ignorance, 
but the further he proceeds from civilization, the more he realizes how 
frail his legacy is.  His vaunted program has failed because of his own 
hubris.  Fuentes believed he was preparing men and women to face the 
real challenges of the wilderness, but his lessons proved to be woefully 
inadequate.  At one point, a former student says to him, "You're the 
most learned man I've ever met, but also the most ignorant."  Our eyes 
are opened along with Fuentes'.  As he learns, so do we.  
     Each of Fuentes' companions has a story.  The boy has lived with 
poverty and death his entire life.  He has learned to endure hunger, 
because no one in his village has much to eat.  He is blasé about murder 
and torture -- those are common aspects of his day-to-day existence.  
The deserter starts out by robbing Fuentes, but fate conspires to put 
his life in the doctor's hands.  Sayles gradually peels back the layers 
of his personality until we discover the real reason why he left the 
army.  The priest, like Fuentes, has lost his faith as a result of being 
in the wilderness.  He has seen and learned things that have reduced his 
doctrines to meaningless words.  And the mute woman, who has not spoken 
since she was raped two years ago, needs to find a reason to live.
     It is a credit to Sayles that he creates five vivid, three-
dimensional characters in two hours.  In actuality, the film runs a 
little long (this often happens when a director edits his own material, 
since he can be reluctant to cut certain potentially unnecessary 
scenes).  The performances are all good, and, although the acting in 
many Spanish-language films tends towards over-the-top melodrama, Sayles 
keeps his actors focused so that their work is relatively low-key.  Two 
Americans, Mandy Patinkin and Kathryn Grody, have small-but-important 
parts.  Their characters serve a dual purpose -- to provide much-needed 
comic relief and to illustrate how it's possible to be focused on the 
past but oblivious to the present.
     Reduced to broad generalizations, MEN WITH GUNS is an adventure 
story -- a sort of DON QUIXOTE meets HEARTS OF DARKNESS.  What marks 
this film as special isn't just that the surface details are believable, 
but that there is great richness and breadth to the issues addressed 
within.  Where does innocence end and ignorance begin?  How much 
responsibility do we bear for circumstances when we hide from them?  
And, if we learn the truth, how do we respond when all roads lead to 
desperation, futility, and failure?  While MEN WITH GUNS ends on an 
artificially uplifting note, the prevailing tone is one of bleak 
hopelessness.  This is a thought-provoking motion picture that, like 
many of Sayles' other efforts, demands that we ponder complex questions.  
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Edwin Jahiel
MEN WITH GUNS (HOMBRES ARMADOS) (1997) *** 1/2.  Written, directed, and
edited by John Sayles. Photography, Slawomir Idziak. Production design,
Felipe Fernandez Del Paso. Costumes, Mayes C. Ribeo. Original music,Mason
Daring. Music supervision, Tom Schnabel. Cast: Federico Luppi (Dr.
Fuentes), Damian Delgado (Domingo, the soldier), Dan Rivera Gonzalez
(Conejo,the boy), Damian Alcazar (Padre Portillo,the priest), Mandy
Patinkin (Andrew), and Kathryn Grody (Harriet), et al. A Sony Pictures
Classics release.In Spanish, English and Indian languages. 128
minutes.Rated R (violence)
That prince of independent writer-directors, John Sayles, has created a
Latin American country. In cinema, imaginary lands are common and generally
located in central-to-eastern Europe. Like the kingdom of the much-remade
swashbuckling romance "The Prisoner of Zenda"; like the kingdom of
"Ruritania" in mostly operettas or comedies.
More rare, more important and far less fanciful are the anonymous countries
of reality-based political films. The master of this is the Greek-born
French director Costa Gavras. His powerful "Z" and "State of Siege" were,
respectively (and most transparently), Greece and Uruguay. The first was
filmed in Algeria, the second in Chile.
"Men with Guns" was made in Mexico, with a large majority of Latino crew
and cast, including some players who had never seen a movie. Unlike the
Ruritanian flicks, the unnamed country is all too believable. Sayles made a
composite of several Latin American countries, with a stress of Central
America -- El Salvador and Guatemala. But beyond the New World, the
substance of "MWG" can apply to other continents from Europe (e.g. Bosnia)
to Africa or Asia, to any land where there are men with guns.
In the capital, Dr. Fuentes, recently widowed and suffering from a tricky
heart, is thinking of retirement. Played by Argentinean star Federico
Luppi, the serious, distinguished, white-haired doctor kept reminding me of
John Thaw, the Inspector Morse of television.
Upper-class Fuentes is not too politically informed, partly, says the
subtext, because like many a good person, he did not go the extra mile of
wanting to know. What the aging man wanted is to leave a legacy. This took
the shape of training a select group of his students who have now gone to
bring health to remote, Indian-populated places.
The doctor toys with taking a vacation by visiting those students. His
decision is firmed up by a chance meeting, in the city, with one of his
alumni  who gives him bad news and calls him the smartest (read:
professionally) yet dumbest (read: politically) person he has ever known.
To find out what dire things happened (or may have happened) to his
protégés, Fuentes, exchanging his Mercedes for his son's four-wheel-drive,
takes off on a search that becomes one of shocking discoveries. One after
the other, he meets Indian people who survive in terrible conditions,
suffer from acute malnutrition, starvation, diseases -- and execution by
men with guns, the army. There are other men with guns, small groups of
guerrillas, who (for just reasons) fight the soldiers. It's as vicious and
deadly a circle as can be. The army will execute villagers who may have
aided the guerrillas, not necessarily by being sympathizers but, say,
merely for feeding them (one wonders, with what?), even at gun point. In
turn some guerillas can retaliate. There's no end to this.
Ironically, the bad guys in uniform, are also Indians, and they do the
dirty work of the white Establishment. Something here reminds me of North
American labor riots in the 1930s when companies such as Ford would pay
desperate, unemployed workers to become strike-breaking goons against
strikers, their "brothers."
Dr. Fuentes's journey is a road-movie of odd encounters  and unsuspected
revelations. It is an adventure in strange places where, to borrow the
title of another John Sayles movie, Fuentes is like a Brother from Another
Planet. Not that the Indians see him for what he is.
Each village has a specialty. They call themselves the Coffee People, the
Corn People, the Sugar or Banana or Salt People --which underlines their
awful plight and dependence on a single crop. This creates divisions which
the geographically isolated peasants are also separated other groups. Few
natives know Spanish. Four different local languages are spoken in the film.
English is limited to three encounters with a couple of American "Teflon
tourists," as Sayles calls them. Mandy Patinkin and his real-life wife are
enthusiastic about architectural ruins but deaf and blind to the plight of
the Indians. They are not Ugly Americans but very real samples of millions
of strangers in strange lands, whom Fuentes resembled before his Odyssey.
At each place the doctor is met by locals who hide when he shows up and who
will  not talk to him. Fuentes learns somehow of disasters, including the
killing of his students. He does not remain not alone,however. Conejo
("Rabbit") a Spanish-speaking boy of about 10, becomes his guide. The
product of a rape by a soldier, Conejo is a pariah.
The film is realistic, also symbolic, mystical and magical. Conejo becomes
like a version of Ovid leading Dante in his descent to Hell. He calmly
tells of catastrophes, takes Fuentes to a cemetery that doubled as a
killing field, helps open Fuentes's eyes to grim truths.
Those two are joined by other characters. First Domingo, a deserter who
initially robs Fuentes then joins him. Through flashbacks we learn
frightening things about Domingo as well about the second newcomer, Padre
Portillo, a priest who has defrocked himself and has terrible problems of
conscience. (His is the best portrait  of the kind since Graham Greene).
Then comes a girl, whose rape by the military has rendered her mute.
The saga of Dr. Fuentes is a most touching, vivid excursion into awareness
of others and into self-awareness. Both are inseparable from the
denunciation of a regime in which the Indians hardly count as humans, of
governments which fear that education of any kind will raise the
consciousness of the lowly and cause them to go against privileged
oligarchies.
Yet there is no accusatory rhetoric, no finger-pointing, no didacticism.
The images and events speak  louder than diatribes. Sayles is an
intelligent, socially-conscious, caring filmmaker. (He is also a much
praised writer of fiction and was the recipient of a MacArthur Foundation
"genius grant.') He is a liberal in the widest sense, not a bleeding heart.
There is no romanticizing of the Indians. But there is nobility allied with
fatalism, especially in a scene where villagers calmly vote to accept the
army's diabolical bargain: "Let a group of you accept to be executed and we
won't kill the whole village." The yes-voters include the doomed group.
Sayles makes pictures on tiny budgets. This one cost him an extravagant 2.5
million, about one-fortieth of a Hollywood blockbuster. The money was well
spent. The filming took the crew to some 40 or 50 locations. Professionals
and non-professional actors are perfect. The photography is by a Polish
master, the music is superb, whether composed for the film or from extant
Latin American tunes.
Rather than oblige his native performers to speak artificial English, Sails
used subtitles that are extremely clear, both in their look and because of
the sparse use of dialogue, something  natural among unloquacious people.
There are just two puzzles. When Fuentes drives around in the wilds without
touching the closest town, how does he get his gas? And about young Conejo
who acts so well, how is it that he is hungry yet looks healthy and wears
acceptable clothes rather than  ags? How did he, the pariah, survive? How
did he learn his fluent Spanish while the others around him can hardly
speak it?  The latter might just be because he was, for a while, the
soldiers's mascot. Anyway, I won't lose any sleep over it.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     One of the most respected names in American independent filmmaking
is John Sayles.  He has built a strong reputation with films like
MATEWAN and THE SECRET OF ROAN INISH, and one of his best was his last
film, LONE STAR.  After Sayles gave us this complex and unconventional
look at ethnic tensions on the US-Mexico border, expectation ran high
for his next film.  Unfortunately, his MEN WITH GUNS is not the film
anyone was hoping for.  We are essentially told in the first reel where
the film is going to go and what it is going to do.  Then the film does
exactly what it promised, a painful as that is.  The plot of MEN WITH
GUNS can be summarized "In a Central or South American country things
are really bad for everybody in the mountains where the army clashes
with the guerrillas.  Dr. Fuentes did not believe how bad things were
so he went.  And he found out again and again and again."  Of course it
is perfectly true that in many places in that region armed conflicts
have turned life into a living hell.  A guerrilla war is always bad for
civilians.  But the film talks down to the viewer.
     Dr. Fuentes (played by Federico Luppi) teaches medicine in the
capital city of his country.  He has, as a great humanitarian gesture,
trained and inspired some of his best students to go into the mountains
and make the world a little better for the poor Indios.  Fuentes
believe the students to be up there doing humanitarian service.  Then
he discovers one of his best students has instead returned to the city
and runs a squalid private pharmacy.  In shame and disappointment
Fuentes asks the student what has happened to the others. The student
tells him the others are still in the mountains, but suggests that it
may not be a good place to be. Fuentes goes off to find and visit the
doctors, ignoring the advice of his family and a patient who happens to
be an army general.  The results are little different than one would
expect.
     Dr. Fuentes starts out incredibly naive.  Even some American
tourists, present in the film mostly for comic relief, seem to know
better than Dr. Fuentes that things have gotten pretty bad in the
mountains.  But Fuentes has to go from one scene of barbarity to
another and discover how wrong he was.  Sayles certainly could have
used 126 minute of screen time to tell us something more profound than
that nasty things are happening down there and most of the worst
happens to the unarmed civilians.
     The cast is mostly unknowns to American audiences.  Federico Luppi
is the good Mexican actor who played the antique dealer torn by
mysterious forces in CRONOS.  Damian Delgado makes a late appearance as
an army deserter.  Mandy Patinkin has a small role made to look bigger
in the trailer.

Author
Scott Renshaw
MEN WITH GUNS
(Sony Classics)
Starring:  Federico Jose Luppi, Damian Delgado, Dan Rivera Gonzalez,
Damian Alcazar, Mandy Patinkin, Kathryn Grody.
Screenplay:  John Sayles.
Producers:  R. Paul Miller and Maggiel Renzi.
Director:  John Sayles.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, adult themes, violence)
Running Time:  125 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     If the term "independent film" means anything in an era when Disney
owns Miramax, it means the work of John Sayles.  Nothing Sayles has done
through nearly twenty years of film-making has been done the easy way, or
the predictable way.  Just when it looked like he was "going studio" after
EIGHT MEN OUT, he made the sprawling and ambitious CITY OF HOPE; the
intimate adult drama PASSION FISH was followed by the lyrical family
fantasy THE SECRET OF ROAN INISH.  So it only stands to reason that Sayles
would capitalize on the critically-acclaimed, Oscar-nominated LONE STAR by
making his next film a tale of Latin American politics told almost
entirely in Spanish.
     MEN WITH GUNS is classic John Sayles, which is to say that it will
reward most fully the viewer willing to think about it for a while
afterwards.  The principal protagonist is an elderly, recently widowed
doctor named Humberto Fuentes (Federico Jose Luppi) who works and lives a
comfortable life in the capital of an unnamed Latin American country.  His
mind turned to thoughts of his legacy with the passing of his wife,
Fuentes decides to take his vacation in the interior jungles, planning to
visit former medical students who had gone to work with the native Indian
communities.  What he discovers is a world far-removed from his own, where
government troops and rebel guerrillas carry on a war which as claimed
many of the doctors as casualties.
     This discovery initially baffles Fuentes, who can't make sense of why
doctors would be a threat to anyone.  It is the mad "logic" of this kind
of war which becomes one of Sayles main themes in MEN WITH GUNS.  To the
rebels, the educated doctors are threats because they have been trained
with the financial assistance of the government; to the government, they
are threats because they could actually get the Indians thinking about
their plight.  If the doctors aid wounded government soldiers, they are
killed by the guerrillas; if they _don't_ assist the government soldiers,
their lives are forfeit as well.  The natives can't even tell the
difference between the two battling factions.  To them, they are all just
"men with guns" who aribtrarily turn the world upside down because of the
power they hold at their fingertips.
     Fuentes' journey through the jungles becomes a road to realizing all
that has been going on, all of the suffering he conveniently had never
noticed.  Sayles develops this notion of accepting responsibility for
one's actions -- or lack of action -- as Fuentes picks up a number of
passengers along his way.  One is a former government soldier (Damian
Alcazar) haunted by the violence to which he had been a party; another is
a former priest (Damian Delgado) who loses his faith when he abandons his
village to save his own life.  He even takes a poke at Americans' blissful
ignorance of the world in the characters of two adventurous tourists
(Mandy Patinkin and Kathryn Grody), while simultaneously suggesting the
Americans know a bit more about Fuentes' country than the doctor himself.
With his typical novelistic style, Sayles richly develops his characters
into souls seeking redemption, doing their small part to be part of the
solution where they had once been part of the problem.
     Like many of Sayles' films, MEN WITH GUNS stumbles only because
Sayles never met a two hour plus running time he didn't like.  The side
plots, including the inclusion of a streetwise youngster and a traumatized
woman in Fuentes' traveling party, don't bear the same kind of fruit as
the intertwined stories in LONE STAR.  Often, they simply feel like
padding in a singularly sedate war story.  Still, Sayles working at less
than the height of his powers is still a more provocative story-teller --
and an ever-more-mature visual film-maker -- than the vast majority of his
contemporaries.  He is willing to talk to his audiences rather than
shout at them, to allow his films to sneak up on you with their thoughtful
confidence.  In 1998, that above all else makes John Sayles a truly
independent film-maker.

Author
Matt Williams
John Sayles tackles his next subject in his new film Men With Guns.  The
trouble is, I'm not sure what his subject is...and I'm not sure he
knows, either.
Dr. Fuentes (Federico Luppi) is a city doctor in an unnamed Latin
American country.  His wife has recently died, and he is coping with the
issue of his legacy.  The one thing he has done which gives him the
greatest pride is a program he started to bring medicine to the Indians.
He taught several medical students and then sent them out to the Indian
villages in the mountains.  However, he hasn't heard from them, and so
he begins a quest to track them down.
The journey takes him into the remote regions of his country, where
people are tryannically ruled by Men With Guns:  be they soldiers,
guerrillas, or thieves. Along the way, he is joined by several fellow
travelers:  a parentless young boy (Dan Rivera Gonzalez), an outcast
soldier (Damian Delgado), a priest (Damian Alcazar), and a mute girl
(Tania Cruz).  They are all searching for something, yet none quite know
what it is.
With all of these characters searching for a common unnamed goal, the
film has a strong allegorical feel.  But what is the film trying to
represent?  The movie's message is clouded by its lack of specificity.
Is it yearning for simpler times?  Crying out against the use of
violence?  Deploring the conditions in Latin America?  Pointing out the
futility of altruism against chaos? All of the above?  None of the
above?  The movie is so vague and open to interpretation, the message
could be any or none of these. Somehow the message of the film seems as
pointless as the hero's quest.
Men With Guns is at its strongest during its flashback sequences.  The
appropriately haunting sections are more moving and tragic than the
central quest plotline.
Mandy Patinkin and Kathryn Grody make a few brief, but amusing,
appearances as an American tourist couple who effortlessly bounce along
on a parallel journey to Dr. Fuentes, visiting ruins in a never-ending
search for atrocities.
Overall, watching the film, I get the feeling that Sayles was more
interested in creating the moods and textures involved in the film than
in telling any particular story.  The end result is detachedly
interesting, but could have been strung together to be a much more
interesting movie.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Steve Rhodes
     As he looks wistfully at the photograph taken just three years
ago, the doctor puts his thumb on each smiling face.  The picture has
the men and one woman surrounding him like a father at a reunion of his
grown children.  They were all young doctors at the time, and he had
just finished training them in a well-intentioned plan to treat
tapeworms among the poor Indians of an unnamed Latin American country,
where the story takes place.  But he had recently begun to realize that
most of them had been murdered, and he covers their happy expressions
to remind himself that they have probably perished.  His sense of loss
becomes palpable in this moving drama and mystery, aptly called MEN
WITH GUNS.
     It wasn't as if he hadn't tried to report the tragedy to the
authorities.  When he found that the first doctor had been killed, he
went promptly to the local police to inform them of the tragedy.  And
the officer was indeed concerned.  He wanted to hear all about it so he
could go speak to those Indians immediately and stop these rumors.  Oh
yes, and could the doctor please show him his medical card to prove
that he was not a journalist.
     In MEN WITH GUNS John Sayles, one of our preeminent storytellers,
tackles another subject ignored by most other filmmakers.  He received
Oscar nominations for the scripts of LONE STAR and PASSION FISH, and he
has made movies ranging from dramas about baseball scandals (EIGHT MEN
OUT) to mystical tales about remote Scottish Islands (THE SECRET OF
ROAN INISH) to ones about union busting (MATEWAN).  One thing sure and
certain about Sayles's movies is that they will be highly intelligent
and worth a second or even a third viewing to savor the rich tapestry
he arrays in front of us.  He even bankrolls his own movies lest some
studio head dare suggest how he should approach his craft.
     Sayles, who taught himself Spanish, wrote the script directly in
Spanish and then had a Latin American native translate it into an
appropriate dialect.  Besides the Spanish, and a little English, many
of the actors speak in their native tongues of Nahuatl, Tzotzil, Maya
and Kuna.  The resulting tower of Babel, with easy to follow subtitles,
shows how hard it is for the country's people to communicate among
themselves.
     As MEN WITH GUNS starts, the upper-middle class Dr. Fuentes is
attending to his well-heeled clients.  When he sees one of his student
doctors back in the city rather than the village where he was sent, Dr.
Fuentes is nonplussed.  The nervous young man flees and, when trapped,
complains about how Dr. Fuentes is both the smartest and the most
ignorant man he knows.  The student alludes obliquely to some horrors
out in the jungle where the students were sent.
     This sets the doctor off on an allegorical journey, both to solve
the mystery and to seek his legacy.  Although sad, this poignantly
moving tale is never less than engrossing, not so much as a big mystery
but in its almost spiritual exploration along the way.
     Federico Luppi gives an impressive portrayal of Dr. Fuentes.  With
his highly polished look, he brings a commanding presence to the role.
And when the entire world as he thought he knew it begins imploding on
him, his fear and concern are never less than completely believable.  A
strong man, but a vulnerable one, the doctor faces a crisis of such
proportions he could never have dreamt of them in his worst nightmares.
     The word village does not adequately capture the spirit of these
obscure clusters of poor people living in the wilderness.  Many of the
places where they live can only be reached on foot, they are so far
removed from civilization.  At the first of this little hamlets, Dr.
Fuentes first learns of the murder of one of his students.  A poor
blind woman explains that the "Men with Guns" killed him.  Why?
"Because they had guns, and we didn't."  And in a story that takes no
political sides, the doctor comes to learn of atrocities committed by
the military, staffed by Indians from other villages, and the guerillas
alike.
     On his journey through more and more remote terrain, the doctor is
robbed repeatedly but picks up three unlikely traveling companions
along the way.  In a powerful performance rivaling Luppi's, Damian
Delgado plays a soldier named Domingo, who has gone AWOL from the army
since he became sick of being forced to perform unspeakable acts of
horror.  Domingo is no saint himself as his actions as well as the
scenes in flashback demonstrate, and one could argue that his quest is
for the redemption of his soul.
     As the boy Conejo, Dan Rivera Gonzalez delivers a performance so
natural that it sometimes seems he isn't acting at all.  Finally, the
most troubled person in the movie is a man who refers to himself as a
ghost, a priest named Damian Alcazar, who feels he is no longer a
priest.
     As the four travel through the wilderness, trying to avoid the Men
with Guns at every turn but usually failing, they become increasingly
frightened but resolved to carry on.  Along the way they come upon the
home in ruins of people known only as the Banana People, the Coffee
People and the Salt People, named for the single commodity they can
harvest to sell for food.
     (In a blessed relief from the show's tension, Mandy Patinkin and
Kathryn Grody play American tourists with laughably bad Spanish, who
have a blast touring the local ruins during all of this commotion.
Never realizing what is happening, they sum up their feelings to Dr.
Fuentes, whom they keep running into, as "It is 'so' peaceful here.")
     Typical of the locals the doctor meets along the way is a man
getting a haircut.  He sums up the situation succinctly as, "Nobody
refuses the men with guns."
     MEN WITH GUNS runs 2:08.  It is rated R for language and some
violent images and would be an excellent choice for teenagers as well
as adults.

Author
Jon Popick
Can indie film God John Sayles actually get more independent?  After the
critical and commercial success and a Best Original Screenplay Oscar
nomination for 1996's Lone Star, Sayles has made a slower, richer film
about Central American politics with no big stars, that is predominantly
voiced in Spanish, Nahuatl, Mayan and Kuna.  Is he trying to keep people
at home or what?
Sayles has cast Argentine acting great Federico Luppi (Cronos) to play
Fuentes, a well to do doctor in a fictitious country who spends him time
training future doctors to bring modern medicine to the surrounding
`inaccessible' jungle areas.  When Fuentes happens upon a promising
former student running stolen stereo equipment, the out of touch doctor
becomes afraid that his pet project might not be doing as well as he had
thought.
Fuentes decides to take a holiday from his private practice to see if
his other students have fallen from medical grace as well.  Armed with
only a freshly pressed dress shirt, snow-white hair and a shiny
four-wheel drive vehicle, he drives deeper and deeper into both the
tangled jungle and an intriguing mystery.  It seems that some of the
villages are either completely deserted or only inhabited by a few
people who refuse to speak to Fuentes.  The mass genocide has apparently
made them leery of any outsider.  Of course, the government blames
guerillas for wiping out the small villages, while the guerillas blame
rogue bands of government troops for doing the same.
The interaction between Fuentes and the cast of characters he meets on
his journey are fascinating. Rounding out a fine international ensemble
is Kathryn Grody (The Lemon Sisters) and Chicago Hope star Mandy
Patinkin, who play an annoying American tourist couple.  Their lines are
the only English spoken in the film.
The script has a similar slow-handed pace to Lone Star and was
magnificently shot by Slawomir Idziak (Gattaca).  Sayles, who also
edited the film, has again crafted a phenomenal story that shows his
diverse tastes.  A sample of his past work reveals films featuring black
aliens, baseball gambling, coal mining, crippled soap opera stars and
Irish folklore.  You can't get a better medley that that and Sayles has
shown that he is definitely at the top of his game with Hombres Armados
(Men With Guns).

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  John Sayles
Cast:  Federico Luppi, Damian Delgado, Dan Rivera Gonzalez, Tania Cruz,
Damian Alcazar, Mandy Patinkin, Kathryn Grody
Screenplay:  John Sayles
Producers:  R. Paul Miller, Maggie Renzi
Runtime:  127 min.
US Distribution:  Sony Pictures Classics
Rated R:  language, violence
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
John Sayles' Men With Guns is a film that has received immense critical
acclaim, and, having finally seen it, I think I understand why.  Sayles
is a unique film maker:  he writes, directs, and edits all of his films
outside of any studio system, beyond distribution rights and the usual
Hollywood bureaucracy.  When I watch his films (the most recent being
Lone Star, which I loved), I get the feeling that I'm seeing his exact
vision, the way he wants it presented.  I imagine him as an independent
James Cameron (although the glaring difference in budget needs between
the two men is striking).
Sayles tackles "issues" in his films.  He doesn't just tell stories--he
has far-reaching themes and agendas.  Men With Guns centers around Dr.
Fuentes (Federico Luppi), an older gentleman unhappy with his life.  He
decides to take a vacation to see former students who are helping the
sick in impoverished villages in the countryside.  Not long into his
journey, he runs into one of his students.  This young man was a very
promising doctor when Fuentes knew him, but now he's selling illegal
drugs and merchandise to get by.  
Fuentes is alarmed by this encounter, and he expedites his quest to
find the rest of his students.  He journeys further into the country,
and meets travelling companions in a few places.  He finds a young boy
(Dan Rivera Gonzalez) whose parents have apparently been killed by
guerillas.  It's about this time that the big picture of the situation
becomes clearer:  the men with guns described in the title are two
distinct groups of people--the military and the guerillas.
With each village that Fuentes visits, he finds that his students have
been executed in torturous ways.  Some of them were executed by the
military for helping the guerillas; some were killed for the opposite. 
The point is that these men with guns roam the countryside and brandish
their power on the unarmed masses, who are all so frightened that they
don't speak to strangers, regardless of how non-threatening the
strangers appear.  Also during his journey, Fuentes encounters a couple
of American tourists (Mandy Patinkin and Kathryn Grody) who are
oblivious to the truly awful things going on around them.
Sayles does an incredible job of developing the several characters that
he introduces in his film.  Fuentes, played with conviction and grace by
Luppi, is a fascinating person--he's a man who has recently lost his
wife, and is now seeking absolution in finding his students, to see how
they are making their lives important.  Fuentes also meets a former army
soldier (Damian Delgado), who is now a frail, paranoid man without
pride.  One of the most poignant subplots involves a former priest
(Damian Alcazar) who has lost his faith.
The framework of the story is direct, very well-organized, and simple
to follow.  Much of the scenery is lush with a rich emerald green
overtone, and the film is always appeasing to the eye.  Sayles' dialogue
(in Spanish with English subtitles) is sharp, and often subtly funny. 
I'd also like to point out that this is an American film--recent
American films about foreign cultures (Kundun, for example) have the
characters speaking English, which greatly takes away from the
authenticity of the film.  It's nice to see that Sayles was willing to
sacrifice a lot of box office attention to make his film as realistic as
possible.
Sayles is not a director who bogs down his audience in sentimentality. 
Although the themes and issues in Men With Guns are heavy, and often
very sad, Sayles completely avoids the usual treatment of sappy music
and elaborate camera work to heighten the emotions.  The result is not
dryness, but material that is more thought-provoking than emotional. 
The issues here, centering a great deal around oppression and mindless
war-mentality, seem, at first glance, only relevant to the country in
which the film takes place (which is an unnamed Central American
country).  
But this is a film, I imagine, that gathers strength the more times you
see it.  It takes multiple viewings to understand the full significance
of the story in relation to the setting.  As I watched Men With Guns, I
was always interested, but I never found myself wrapped up in the
story.  I was only marginally moved by the conclusion, and only one or
two scenes throughout truly grabbed me.  I wanted to be more exhilarated
when the film was over, but I almost felt indifferent.
The reason for this is simple:  there is so much going on in Men With
Guns.  There are many round characters, a developed story, and themes so
powerful they almost outshine the rest of the film.  I think I was too
caught up in my thoughts to be moved by the story, which is why I
believe that a second and third viewing of the film is necessary to
truly understand everything that Sayles is doing.  I admire this film,
and appreciate it for its intelligence and completeness in its
exploration of its themes.  John Sayles is a poetic film maker, and,
like most poems, this film needs to be experienced more than once.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Sony Pictures Classics
 Director: John Sayles  
 Writer:  John Sayles
 Cast: Federico Luppi, Damian Delgado, Dan Rivera
Gonzalez, Tania Cruz, Damian Alcazar, Mandy Patinkin,
Kathryn Grody, Iguandilli Lopez, Nandy Luna Ramirez, Rafael
De Quevedo, Roverto Sosa
   Who are the world's bad guys?  Are they the folks from the
industrialized world who rape and plunder the weaker
nations?  Are they the world's white guys who exploit those of
color?  The down-and-out guerrillas who commit atrocities
against seemingly innocent villagers?  The rich?  The poor? 
The liberals?  The conservatives?  Inspired by stories from
the novelist Francisco Goldman, who wrote of an uncle who
administered medicine to poor communities in Guatemala,
John Sayles has written, directed and edited a road movie of
mythic proportions to expound on this question.  His answer
to the riddle?  The title gives it all away.  Men with guns are
the abhorrent of the earth.  No matter whether you're white or
black, rich or poor, western or developing: if you've got the
weaponry, you'll use it, and the power which you get from
superior military might will corrupt you.  You will use the
authority of the gun to rape, plunder, and decide arbitrarily
who is guilty and deserving of punishment.
   "Men with Guns" will not enjoy the commercial power that a
Costa-Gavras film like "Z" possessed, largely because it is
almost totally in Spanish and Indian dialects (with subtitles)
and because the editing--which Sayles insists on doing
himself rather than hiring a professional--is pedestrian.  Nor
does "Men With Guns" have the complexity of his world-class
movie, "Lone Star,"  or a single name recognizable (save
Mandy Patinkin) by a potentially large market.  Yet there is
not a single dull moment in the picture even as it trudges
along from one destination to another, each stop on the road
adding to the political wisdom of its central character.
   The movie focuses on an elderly white doctor of liberal
persuasion living in a fictitious Latin American country. 
Filmed entirely in Mexico, Sayles fixes his camera on Dr.
Fuentes (Federico Luppi), who had recently lost his wife, is on
the verge of retirement, and is determined to find out first-
hand whether the legacy he has willed to the world is
successful.  Having trained a group of bright young doctors to
go barefoot--so to speak--into the poor Indian villages of his
country to bring them the medicine they so desperately need
but cannot afford, he sets out from his well-appointed
suburban home to track his students down.  Though his now-
ailing heart is in the right place, Humberto Fuentes is
politically naive, refusing to believe that outside the big cities
looms disastrous instability.  He is to discover first-hand that
his is not the best of all possible worlds.  His first adventure
graphically symbolizes the disillusionment he will face on his
political, emotional, moral and, indeed, metaphoric journey, as
he discovers his brightest student Bravo (Roverto Sosa)
operating a drug market in a slum neighborhood on the
outskirts of the city.  
   Though police officers assure him that there are no
guerrillas in the areas under their command, they warn him to
return to the capital, but their advice simply drives Fuentes on
as he barrels into the mountain with his rugged vehicle
picking up a hodgepodge of unusual, deeply flawed people. 
These include an abandoned, streetwise boy, Conejo (Dan
Rivera Gonzalez), an army deserted Domingo (Damian
Delgado) who robs him and later begs him to remove a bullet
from his rib, a defrocked priest (Damian Alcazar), and a
comical couple of clueless American tourists played by Mandy
Patinkin and Kathryn Grody.
   If the movie were made by Costa-Gavras, the doctor would
conclude that the army, backed up by a right-wing
government, is the source of all evil.  But Sayles spreads the
guilt around.  True, the members of the armed forces have
been killing doctors and other intellectuals, assuming that
anyone helping the poor Indians must be subversive.  But the
guerrillas have been terrorizing the local populations as well,
executing those whom they believe are assisting the army. 
The Indians, ignorant and superstitious, for the most part
refuse to talk to the white stranger.
   Sayles seems to say that despite the doctor's excellent
intentions he has spent his life in deliberate ignorance, so
dedicated to his comfortable, bourgeois lifestyle that he
refuses to believe that the people of his country could be
murderers and rapists.  In that regard, Sayles shares the
stage with playwright Bertolt Brecht, who naively believed that
his plays could awaken his middle-class audience to the
wickedness to which they have closed their eyes and ears.  
   Sayles reaches far and wide.  We leave the film aware that
he is not talking about any specific country: that Latin
American dictatorships are surely not afflicted with the very
worst forms of rule.  In one case, for example, he has the
defrocked priest tell an obviously autobiographical story of
how guerrillas ordered the people of a village to execute six
of their own people, failing which the terrorists would kill every
member of the community.  This can be taken as a reference
to the practice in Nazi concentration camps in which capos
were occasionally asked to make the selections themselves of
those who should be sent immediately to their deaths lest
entire groups be wiped out by the SS themselves.  On the
broadest scale, the film makes its point loud and clear that
those with the superior firepower will inflict their will by force
on those with more modest defenses, and have done so time
and again throughout the centuries.
   The MTV crowd is not Sayles's targeted audience for this
movie.  Despite the theme that life's tragedies are circular,
that they endure time and again whether or not we "know"
about them, the movie will win no prizes for visual
pyrodynamics but seems a throwback to a time that movie-
makers were content to tell solid, linear narratives.  That said,
the right audience will find much that is appealing in the film,
not the least attribute being the sincere, earthy acting of the
entire cast of relative unknowns.  Rated R.  Running Time:
126 minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey Karten

Author
James Kendrick
Director: John Sayles || Screenplay: John Sayles || Stars: Federico Luppi (Dr.
Fuentes), Damián Delgado (Domingo, the Soldier), Dan Rivera González (Conejo,
the Boy), Tania Cruz (Graciela, the Mute Girl), Damián Alcázar (Padre Portillo,
the Priest), Mandy Patinkin (Andrew), Kathryn Grody (Harriet), Iguandili López
(Mother), Nandi Luna Ramírez (Daughter), Rafael de Quevedo (General) || MPAA
Rating: R
John Sayles' "Men With Guns" is about what happens to a society when brute force
and constant threat of violence are the only means of gaining and maintaining
power.
The film takes place in an unnamed Central American country, where the men with
guns are the rulers. Most of the country is divided into tiny segments - some
are controlled by guerrillas with guns, some are controlled by Army soldiers
with guns, and all the spaces in-between are controlled by thieves, bandits, and
terrorists. All people not fitting one of those descriptions are defined only by
their powerlessness.
However, like so many Central American countries, this one also features
modernity. There is an unnamed capital city that bears all the hallmarks of
contemporary civilization: skyscrapers, hospitals, televisions, highways, etc.
But, it might as well be in another country because those who live in the
comforts of the city have either decided to ignore the violence ravaging the
rest of the land, or else they are simply ignorant of it.
The film's main character, Dr. Fuentes (Federico Luppi) falls into the latter
category. One of his patients, an Army general, describes him as the most
educated man he has ever met, and also the most naive. Fuentes is a true
liberal, a caring man who thinks he can cure the ills of his country by fighting
bacteria and ignorance among the indigenous Indians. With government assistance,
he has trained a large group of eager young medical students and sent them into
the rainforest to cure and educate. This program was to be his legacy, and he
repeats over and over that it was a good idea.
However, when he ventures into that same rainforest to visit his protégés, he
finds that things have not turned out as he has envisioned. As he travels deeper
into the forest, going from village to village, the story is always the same:
the doctors were all killed by either the guerrillas or the Army soldiers,
usually for helping the other. When Dr. Fuentes asks a village woman why the
Army killed one of the doctors, she replies simply, "Because they had guns, and
we didn't." Rational science and all its attempts to cure have been wiped out by
the men with guns, because others' sickness and ignorance helps them maintain
power.
Dr. Fuentes picks up several companions during his journey, all of whom are
characterized by their loss. First, there is a young boy named Conejo (Dan
Rivera González), who has neither a mother nor a father. Next, Fuentes crosses
paths with a thief named Domingo (Damián Delgado), who deserted the Army because
he was tired of being jeered into committing murderous atrocities. Through his
ordeal in the Army, Domingo has lost most of his self-respect, and defines
himself only by his pistol.
Along the way, the group also picks up Padre Portillo (Damián Alcázar), a priest
who has lost his faith. As Domingo is running from the Army, so is Portillo - he
has been labeled a guerrilla sympathizer, and ran away from the village in which
he was preaching. Last, the group takes on a mute girl named Graciela (Tania
Cruz), who hasn't spoken since she was raped two years earlier, her innocence
and even her will to live forcefully taken from her.
Sayles two major strengths as a director - characters and setting - are
abundantly evident in "Men With Guns." (Like many of his films, Sayles might
have tightened this one somewhat in the editing room, but a
longer-than-necessary running time is a sin almost always committed when the
director is also the editor.) He creates fascinating, complex characters,
especially Dr. Fuentes and Domingo. Their uneasy relationship is also somewhat
humorous in context of the film's overarching theme of violence as power -
Domingo's attempts to control Fuentes with his revolver are constantly
undermined by Fuentes' belief that the revolver is unloaded (at first it is, but
later is isn't).
The setting is also as thick with detail as the rainforest itself. Sayles knows
how to bring a location to life, whether it be an early twentieth-century coal
mining town in "Matewan" (1987) or a contemporary Texas/Mexico bordertown in
"Lone Star" (1996). Sayles is not a particularly inventive director - he likes
to let his actors do most of the work - but he and cinematographer Slavomir
Idziak ("Gattaca") successfully evoke both the beauty and the danger of the
Central American terrain.
Sayles also maintains a strong sense of authenticity by filming everything on
location in Mexico, using all Latin American actors, and having all the dialogue
spoken in either Spanish or native Indian dialects. The one exception is a
couple of bumbling American tourists who work not only as comic relief, but as
evidence of just how clueless the United States is about what is going on a few
hundred miles south of the Texas border.
It would not be a stretch to say that "Men With Guns" is a depressing film. In
fact, the two feelings it evokes most are hopelessness and failure. In addition
to loss, the main characters are also failures at something, whether that be Dr.
Fuentes failure to change anything through medicine, or Padre Portillo's
inability to stand up and be the martyr he always dreamed of being.
Nevertheless, it is bleak material Sayles has chosen, and he deals with it
accordingly. The last shot of the film does offer a hint of hope, even in a
world where, as one character puts it, "Nobody refuses the men with guns."

