Title
Review for Santa Clause, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Tim Allen of "Home Improvement" stars in this winter's 
big family Christmas movie. At the beginning, jolly old St. Nick 
falls off Allen's roof on Christmas Eve. Santa agrees not to sue if 
Allen tries on his clothes and jumps in his sleigh. Sound like 
innocent family fun to you or a night at the all-male cinema? Just 
asking. Allen puts on the suit and is whisked away to the North 
Pole, where he meets the elves, who are actually just a bunch of 
kids who never grew up. In other words, the Hollywood script-
writers responsible for this childish movie.
        After a night of toy delivery, he turns up back in his own 
bed, convinced the whole thing was a dream brought on by some 
bad eggnog. However, he soons beginning gaining weight rapidly 
and sporting a thick gray mane and beard (so is this guy supposed to 
be metamorphosing into Santa Claus or Kenny Rogers?). The people 
around him think maybe it's a little weird that he's gained sixty 
pounds in a week and it doesn't help matters much when Allen's 
kid starts telling everyone his dad is the big S.
        But Allen eventually comes to grips with his Santahood 
and convinces his ex-wife and her live-in psychiatrist boyfriend (this 
may be the first Disney movie where two characters are "shacked 
up," if you don't count those dwarves from SNOW WHITES, also 
reminiscent of a night at the all-male cinema) that he's not really 
insane. Sure, people ride around in sleighs driven by flying reindeer 
and slide down people's chimneys all the time. What, don't tell me 
I'm the only one!
        At least in this movie the writers try to explain exactly 
how fat old Santa gets down all those chimneys and delivers all 
those toys in one night... even if it is a really stupid explanation. 
Thrown in a typical formulaic sappy and happy Michael Eisner 
ending and you've got a decent Christmas movie for the entire 
(dysfunctional) family.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/33rd of a Century!

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Should you see this movie?  Probably not--not unless you're under
the age of ten.  Based on the (de)merits of story mechanics alone, THE
SANTA CLAUSE should be unwatchable.  The trouble is the star.  Tim
Allen, of TV's "Home Improvement," has leaped to the big screen with
his talent intact.  He's witty, he's charming and, thanks to a
*fantastic* make-up job, he's the life-presever for a movie that should
sink.  Plot holes can't swallow him, sentiment can't drown him; the
comic even gets away with a decade-old ZZ Top gag.
     The other cast members should be so lucky.  Two child actors are
good--Eric Lloyd and David Krumholtz--but the rest of the rest are
bargain-basement at best.  What can you say about a film where neither
Judge Reinhold nor Peter Boyle are funny?
     THE SANTA CLAUSE looks like a made-for-TV movie and that's no
good.  With the exception of Allen's exceptional make-up, the special
effects consist almost entirely of blue screens and flying wires.  Both
of which can be tolerated, but avert thine eyes at the cheesy arctic
soundstage.  Shudder.
     The story is sanitized--thank you, Mr. Disney--so most of the gags
are of the warm, fuzzy variety.  The tone is tame, but a divorce
subplot a la MRS. DOUBTFIRE provides a slight reality check.  What's
really needed, though, is a narrative device to help chart the passage
of time.
     THE SANTA CLAUSE chronicles one year in the life of Scott Calvin
(Allen), a busy businessman who just happens to be the big guy.  Over
the year his weight increases, his hair turns grey, and he develops a
taste for cookies and milk.  Because there's no framing device to count
down to the big day, the entire midsection sags.  Does dad gain all his
weight in one week?  Does his beard appear in July?  Sigh.
     The film wraps with a super-silly finale that should've been left
on the cutting room floor.  Who wants to see Santa and a SWAT team in
the same frame?  Oh, what John Hughes could've done here.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Tim Allen, Eric Lloyd, Wendy Crewson, Judge Reinhold, 
          Peter Boyle, David Krumholtz 
Director: John Pasquin 
Producers:  Brian Reilly, Jeffrey Silver, and Robert Newmyer 
Screenplay: Leo Benvenuti and Steve Rudnick 
Cinematography: Walt Lloyd 
Music: Michael Convertino 
Released by Walt Disney Pictures 
     This is what happens when someone takes what might have been a
moderately-entertaining television Christmas special and tries to adapt
it for the big screen.  THE SANTA CLAUSE isn't an unmitigated disaster,
but it's also a whole lot less impressive than it could be.  The
release date--six weeks in advance of the actual holiday--should be
reason enough for skepticism.  Was this perhaps an attempt to beat John
Hughes' MIRACLE ON 34TH STREET to the theaters?
     The previews would lead the average viewer to expect a funny romp
through the misadventures of an average man trying to cope with his
unexpected transformation into Santa Claus.  Take away the "funny"
part, and that describes roughly half of the movie.  The rest deals
with custody hearings, police chases, and other assorted nonsense which
serves only to bog down a story that is thin to begin with.
     On Christmas Eve, Scott Calvin (Tim Allen) hears a noise on the
roof.  Suspecting a prowler, he goes outside, only to surprise Santa
"in the act."  Losing his balance, the big man falls off the roof and
ends up dead at Scott's feet.  The significance of the moment isn't
lost on young Charlie Calvin (Eric Lloyd), who accuses his father of
killing Santa.
     Following the unfortunate turn of events, Santa's body disappears,
leaving behind his suit and a calling card: "If anything happens to
me, put on the suit."  So, with a little prodding from Charlie, Scott
complies, and finds the rest of his night spent doing Santa's yearly
rounds.  It isn't until he gets to the North Pole that he learns there
was some small print on the card:  "In putting on this suit and
entering the sleigh, the wearer waives any and all rights to previous
identity, real or implied and fully accepts the duties and
responsibilities of Santa Claus until such time that wearer becomes
unable to do so either by accident or design."  In effect, Scott Calvin
has become Santa Claus.
     THE SANTA CLAUSE is a low brow version of A CHRISTMAS CAROL meets
MIRACLE AT 34TH STREET, a children's movie that a portion of the adult
population will find tolerable.  The scenes depicting Scott's
metamorphosis are often clever, but they get swamped by extraneous
subplots and dumb jokes.  The special effects are good enough to hold
the story together, but there's nothing innovative or eye-opening.  A
similar comment can be made about the makeup job which transforms the
lanky toy designer into his corpulent alter ego.
     Tim Allen is more of a personality than an actor, and it shows
frequently during the course of THE SANTA CLAUSE.  While he may be
funny in a half-hour sitcom, Allen doesn't do nearly as well without
the laugh track.  This film is also not blessed with a particularly
effective child actor in Eric Lloyd, who whines his way unconvincingly
through the role.
     There's nothing offensive or especially mean-spirited about THE
SANTA CLAUSE, as might be expected from a Disney release.  However,
there should be more to a family movie than these "wholesome"
qualities--and this film isn't able to deliver them.  Tim Allen's movie
is in need of something his TV show is very familiar with:
improvement.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "Not too hot.  Extra chocolate.  Shaken, not stirred," is how
Santa likes his favorite drink.  This is one of the details we learn in
the expanded Santa legend known as THE SANTA CLAUSE.
     Released by Walt Disney in time for Christmas in 1994, THE SANTA
CLAUSE covers much of the same ground as the MIRACLE ON 34TH STREET
films.  In both plots there is a man who claims to be St. Nick, but who
is not believed except by some of the children.  Although not as good
as the others, THE SANTA CLAUSE is a charming little picture in its own
right.
     As is a popular theme in Hollywood, the parents in the story are
divorced.  The ex's are fighting over the proper treatment of the
existence of Santa Claus.  The dad, Scott Calvin, notice the initials,
is played by Tim Allen, who was the voice of Buzz Lightyear in TOY
STORY.  The mom, Laura, is acted by Wendy Crewson, who was the blind
date Kevin Danford in TO GILLIAN ON HER 37TH BIRTHDAY.  Their son,
Charlie, is done by Eric Lloyd, who was Kyle in DUNSTON CHECKS IN.
     After a disastrous Christmas Eve with his Dad, where his Dad has
to use the fire extinguisher on their flaming dinner, Charlie is awaken
that night by a noise.  Santa has fallen off their roof and died.
Scott wants to know who this dead kook is in their front yard.
     Scott pulls a card out of Santa's coat that has a "clause" that
says to put on the jacket and the reindeer will know what to do.  Scott
does this, and the next thing they know, Scott and Charlie are flying
through town finishing up the gift giving.  This is all done in a
spirit of fun and high adventure.  My son's eyes were glowing watching
it all.
     When they finally get to the North Pole, lead elf Bernard (David
Krumholtz) wants to know what happened to the old Santa.  Scott
explains, "The other guy fell.  It was an accident.  I've got good home
owner's insurance."
     All the elves are children, which provides a special bond with the
young viewers of the movie.  Later, Charlie's teacher, however, will
correct him with, "We don't say elves.  We say little people."
     The elves are all precious.  Best is a sweet one named Judy (Paige
Tamada).  She has an infectious smile.  Just looking at her makes you
happy for inexplicable reasons.  My favorite line of hers is when she
explains to Scott, "Seeing isn't believing.  Believing is seeing."  A
better summary of the spirit of Santa Claus, I have not heard.
     The bright and humorous script is by half of the four writers from
SPACE JAM, Leonardo Benvenuti and Steve Rudnick.  When Scott worries
about the return trip, he asks, "Can we take a direct flight back to
reality or do we have to change places in Denver?"
     When Scott does get back to reality, his body starts changing.  He
puts on 45 pounds in a week, and his beard turns white and grows at a
prodigious rate.  His boss, Mr. Whittle (Peter Boyle), suggests, "You
should see a doctor, a shrink, a dietitian, anything."
     His "fantasies" that he is Santa Claus get him in big trouble
south of the North Pole.  After the inevitable capture by the
authorities, his elves send out a flying squad, elf commandos if you
will, to save the chief.  In my son's favorite piece of dialog, the
head of the liberation forces tells his boss's jailer, "We're your
worst nightmare.  Elves with attitude."
     There is a potential problem for this as a family show, and it is
the duality of the belief about Santa Claus.  Children will have
certain assumptions about Santa, and this film could be viewed as
presenting another set of possibilities.  We worried about this a bit,
but decided to let our son see it anyway.  He was able to take the film
as fiction without causing him to reexamine his theories about Jolly
Olde St. Nick.  Whether this could prove troubling to other and
especially to younger kids remains problematic.
     The two leads, Tim Allen and Eric Lloyd, give solid performances,
and John Pasquin directs with careful precision.  THE SANTA CLAUSE is a
pleasant little fable.  A good choice to kick back and enjoy during the
holiday season.
     THE SANTA CLAUSE runs a fast 1:37.  It is rated PG for reasons
that escape me.  There is no sex, nudity, violence or bad language.
Yes, someone dies, but that happens too in many kid's movies from THE
WIZARD OF OZ to BAMBI.  Perhaps death is enough to get a PG, but except
for the Santa legend already discussed, the film is fine for kids of
all ages.  Jeffrey, age 7 1/2, said that the movie was "really good.  I
loved it!"  He kept rewinding the tape to see his favorite scenes again
and again.  I recommend this family fare to you and give it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
