Title
Review for Yellow Submarine (1968)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Shane Burridge
One-of-a-kind animated fantasy by the Beatles - well not exactly: they 
contributed the music, but the story and voice acting was done without their 
involvement.  The animated Fab Four are asked to help save Pepperland, a 
musical paradise, from occupation by the music-hating Blue Meanies.  It's a 
magical world, and so can be reached only by magical means, viz. the 
submarine of the title.  Consider the year of the production, the recently 
released 'Sgt Pepper' album's flirtation with the drug culture, and the 
basic concept of a dimension-traveling submarine, and you'll see why the 
"trip" takes up most of the story.  The submarine image dominates the film's 
psychedelic world so comfortably that you may forget that it was originally 
derived from a children's song.  The Beatles may have suspected this 
juvenile treatment for the cartoon early on, which explains why one of their 
songs written specifically for the movie was a children's chant ('All 
Together Now').  While it's great to see animated sequences to classic 
Beatle songs - like prototypical music video clips - it's the newer material 
that synthesizes best with the look that the film-makers were striving for.  
'Only A Northern Song' and 'It's All Too Much' point the way to SUBMARINE's 
potentially wilder side; and while the script throws in 'Lucy in the Sky 
with Diamonds' the rest of the Beatles extant catalogue just doesn't have 
the 'acid' sensibility to promote a complete head trip.
It's probably a good thing, however.  Nothing dates more badly than an era, 
and while YELLOW SUBMARINE is recognizably the product of the late 60s it is 
not dependent on it.  There are the prerequisite acknowledgements to 
flowers, butterflies, and love but this is saturated with so much visual 
innovation and wall-to-wall puns that the entire film could just as easily 
be a contemporary construct paying a postmodern homage to the era (in fact 
YELLOW SUBMARINE has already been emulated in video clips by Michael Jackson 
and Oasis).  The entertainment value of the film is probably unquestionable 
if you're a Beatles fan, or an animation fan, or ideally both.  Children 
raised on cartoon slapstick and rocket-paced visuals may be a little 
bewildered by the film's reliance of wit over action, but it'll do them 
good.  Adults will find more to enjoy in the script's many conundrums and 
wall-to-wall puns, many of which refer to Beatles lyrics.  Film starts to 
wind down near the end - the Chief Blue Meanie gets really tiresome - but at 
least you know it's all bound to finish with a song.  It's a credit to the 
art direction by Heinz Edelmann that this feature has retained its entirely 
distinctive look decades later.  The soundtrack was digitally overhauled on 
the film's 30th anniversary and re-introduced in cinemas to stunning effect 
- now awash in an ocean of huge, crystal-clear sound, SUBMARINE's voyage is 
truly complete.
sburridge@hotmail.comGet Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
Yellow Submarine is the spirit of the '60s compressed into ninety
minutes of movie magic. I can't think of any other film, before or
since, that so completely encapsulates the era in which it was made.
For that reason alone, George Dunning's animated musical odyssey would
be worth seeing even if it didn't happen to be utterly charming in its
own right--a rock and roll Fantasia, if you will. 
The plot is ridiculous enough to suit the story's offbeat narrative
style. When the benevolent citizens of Pepperland find themselves
threatened with impending invasion by the Blue Meanies, a force
determined to destroy all joy and music, they send the bumbling
Captain Fred (voiced by Lance Percival) away in a magical submarine to
find help. Fred, a kindly but incompetent soul, manages to convince
Britain's greatest band, the Beatles, to come to Pepperland and help
save his beloved utopia from extinction. Along the way, lots of
groanably bad puns will be spoken, much silliness will ensue, and some
of pop music's loveliest melodies will tumble forth from your
speakers. 
The entire review can be found at:
http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/cc101.htm
