Title
Review for Heart of Darkness (1994) (TV)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dragan Antulov
The author of this review belong to those heretics who don't
think that Coppola's APOCALYPSE NOW represents cinematic
masterpiece. However, although Coppola's film has some other
flaws, the greatest of them all is the disservice done to
the legacy of James Conrad, great English writer who wrote
HEART OF DARKNESS, novel on which APOCALYPSE is based. From
that day, almost any filmmaker who tries to tackle that
novel would have to face comparisons with Coppola's Vietnam
film. However, in 1993, Turner Pictures decided to make
television version of the novel, this time more faithful to
the book.
The plot is, instead of Vietnam in 1960s, set in jungles of
Central Africa in the second half of 19th Century. Greedy
European colonisers are brutally exploiting the natural
resources of Dark Continent, especially ivory. One of
companies specialised in ivory trade hires Captain Marlowe
(played by Tim Roth) for the dangerous mission deep in the
heart of jungle, to the farthest trade station. His task is
to find out why Kurz (John Malkovich), ivory merchant
stationed there, doesn't send ivory any more. Some vicious
rumours are describing Kurz as madman who turned into
charismatic and bloodthirsty leader of the natives.
This film was directed by Nicolas Roeg, well-respected
avant-garde director of the 1970s, and it was probably very
wise decision, because Roeg's specific visual style was
required to make HEART OF DARKNESS as different from
APOCALYPSE as possible. Unfortunately, the script by
Benedict Fitzgerald, although more faithful to the novel
than APOCALYPSE, still fails to avoid similarities. And
Roeg's directing style is hardly the substitute for the lack
of spectacle and sometimes it produces confusion for the
viewers. The atmosphere of absolute horror in the heart of
the jungle was well done, though. The acting is more than
superb. Tim Roth is excellent in the role of Marlowe, and
John Malkovich is also great as Kurz, although nothing can
top Brando's appearance in Coppola's film. More faithful to
the novel, and deprived of Vietnam connotations, HEART OF
DARKNESS is more depressing, because of its pessimism, so
universal for all ages and all dark corners of the world.
HEART OF DARKNESS is good film, but only those who didn't
watch Coppola before could appreciate it fully.

Author
Ralph Benner
        Factoids about Joseph Conrad and his HEART OF DARKNESS, the 
famous tale first published in a collection entitled "Youth" in 1902:  
Born in Russian-occupied Poland in 1857, Conrad acquired a wide-eyed 
fascination with the sea from his father; orphaned b 12 (both parents 
died of hardship), he left Poland at 16 and headed to Marseille, from 
where, for four years, he sailed on French vessels, dabbled with 
"legitimiste" causes of certain French and Spanish pretenders, flopped at 
financial enterprises, and  en had a love affair that brought to him the 
brink of suicide. Needing to escape France for these and other reasons, 
he hopped aboard an English freighter -- The Mavis -- without much 
knowledge of the English language but in short time he conquered it,  
came a master mariner, and a naturalized British subject by 1886. Until 
1894, when he retired from his travels and married an Englishwoman (and 
went on to become the father of two boys), Conrad sailed the entire 
Mediterranean, and onto Australia, the In an Ocean, Singapore, Borneo, 
the China seas, South America, the South Pacific, South Africa, and, 
places to be featured prominently in his writings, to the Malay 
Archipelago and up the Congo River, where he was stricken (and never 
fully recovered) from  ver and dysentery. Conrad didn't start writing 
until he was 37; his writing was done in English -- his fourth language, 
after Russian, Polish and French. Though he had received extraordinary 
praise from other writers like H. G. Wells and Henry James for is early 
works -- "Almayer's Folly" (1895), "An Outcast of the Islands" (1896), 
"The Nigger of the 'Narcissus'" (1897), "Tales  of Unrest" (1898) and 
"Lord Jim" (1900) -- he never made much money from his writings. (Two 
novels -- "The Inheritors" and "R ance" -- were collaborations with 
editor-critic Ford Madox Ford, who would later break down to famed 
muckraker George Seldes over publishers re-issuing editions of both books 
without his name appearing as co-writer.)
        Conrad had a physically torturous time getting his prose on 
paper: when his masterwork "Nostromo" was published in 1904, he said that 
it was "an achievement upon which my friends may congratulate me as upon 
recovery from a dangerous illness." The analog is neither false nor 
exaggerated: while in the process of writing, and often at a work's 
completion, he'd suffer severe flare-ups of rheumatic gout. Some critics 
suspect his illnesses were psychosomaticly induced: as writer, Conrad, 
like James, was atte ting to dive into the unexplored darkness of 
psychology, fictionalizing the craze of Freud but through their own 
experiences. Unlike James, and unlike Melville, to whom he's sometimes 
been compared, Conrad's visions of the human condition -- the complex 
ies, pessimism of his characters' consciences and souls, the estrangement 
brought on by isolation, guilts, fears and sometimes courage -- are 
literature derived from the challenge of a foreign language. While it's 
true that the mazey chronology of his s ries can be off-putting, 
sometimes irritatingly because, as in HEART OF DARKNESS, supporting 
characters are unnamed, and often the florid prose is thicker than our 
palettes are used to, almost a hundred years later we're still in awe of 
how his command   English narrative blooms of mystery and psycho and 
moral perceptions. HEART OF DARKNESS has the beauty of language 
comparable to Joyce's "The Dead" and Dylan Thomas's "Under Milk Wood" -- 
that is, a language of beauty for voices. 
        For many more years than movie makers have wanted to bring 
Malcolm Lowry's "Under the Volcano" and Paul Bowles' "The Sheltering Sky" 
to the screen they've wanted to film HEART OF DARKNESS. The late John 
Huston managed to make both UNDER THE VOLCANO and THE DEAD; in the case 
of the former, he was only able to bring a safe literal translation to 
Lowry's sloshed, toxic voluminosity, and in the latter he seemed to 
impress a whole lot of Kaelettes with what looked like an invitation to 
an Eveni  of "Amateur Hour" Finals, until the very ending, when Donal 
McCann, off screen to boot, brings Joyce to glorious life. (Only 83 
minutes in length, it seems three times that long.) Bernardo Bertolucci 
seemed to be having a Mass for the Dysenterics said  ring his version of 
THE SHELTERING SKY, when perhaps what might have been celebrated was one 
for sexual obfuscation. And, as most everyone knows, Francis Ford Coppola 
used Conrad's Kurtz in HEART to moralize against the American 
intervention in Vietnam   APOCALYSE NOW. Despite the expensive, 
impressive panoramas, Coppola couldn't make the kind of connection 
between what Conrad was cautioning about and the Vietnam War. As I see 
it, Conrad's Kurtz, the ivory hunter turned jungle Messiah, is -- and it 
nee 't be the author's intentions -- paralleling the Cortes expedition 
into Mexico: awaiting Kurtz was a tribe of black Montezumas, who, like 
the Aztec emperor, believed as destiny that a God was to come. The 
Vietnamese were never looking for a "White God t rule over the dark 
hordes." 
        Directors who wanted to make HEART OF DARKNESS had two obstacles: 
getting the financing and producing a filmable script. No major movie 
company saw audience interest in a gloomy, diseased-mind horror story, 
and they readily backed up their fears by pointing out the dismal box 
office of other Conrad-based movies: AN OUTCAST OF THE ISLANDS, thought 
to be the best of his stories on screen; the bummer LORD JIM, starring 
Peter O'Toole; and Ridley Scott's THE DUELLISTS, based on Conrad's 
mini-novella "T  Duel," its only virtue being how it looks. The larger 
problem is in getting a coherent, playable adaptation, because, despite 
the persistent acclaim for the story, and all the scholarly 
interpretation, Conrad creates in Kurtz an astonishingly weak, vag  
megalomaniac -- a mouse. Academicians have been remiss in not pointing 
out that according to Marlow's first person narrative, he saw that 
Kurtz's "soul was mad. Being alone in the wilderness, it had looked 
within itself, and by heavens! I tell you, it  d gone mad...I saw the 
inconceivable mystery of a soul that knew no restraint, no faith, and no 
fear." Eleven paragraphs later, Marlow says Kurtz "was an impenetrable 
darkness. I looked down at him as you peer down at a man who is lying at 
the bottom of  precipice where the sun never shines." Oh, really? How can 
we the readers "peer" at what Marlow is describing when what he's 
describing isn't there? As shrewdness, a literary and psychological 
construct, Conrad turns the tables on his own promise of an vil vision by 
not delivering; this journey into a blackened soul is all in the 
imagination. This the major frustration of the multitude of directors and 
screenwriters who have attempted to conjure up movie imagery worthy of 
Kurtz's psychosis, of Conrad' nebulousness. The late Orson Welles had the 
most intriguing concept: he wanted to voice over an unseen Marlow and 
play Kurtz.
        The risk-takers over at TNT-Turner Pictures believed they could 
get a version of HEART OF DARKNESS made, and, perhaps on the strength of 
his abilities at occult and visual decay in DON'T LOOK NOW, and his 
CASTAWAY, which is something like an English Couple Robinson, accepted 
Nicolas Roeg as director. For what was accomplished, we have to call 
Roeg's version respectable, and though I would resist it as full praise, 
faithful. One immediate success: Captain Charlie Marlow, pl ed by Tim 
Roth, and for the reason we wouldn't have thought possible: in spite what 
seems everyone's obsession with the madman, in the written tale as well 
as the movie, Marlow does not get overshadowed by the demented Kurtz. 
With a voice at the beginni 's narration that suggests Daniel Day-Lewis's 
Fryer in THE BOUNTY, and confirming that this is indeed a play for 
articulation, Roth is what keeps us watching; his thin frame, large nose 
and sun-bleached hair combine to give his performance a strength th  
oughtn't be there, because Roeg's direction is, elsewhere, soft as 
room-temperature butter. More to the point: we as viewers sometimes don't 
know exactly what Marlow's doing up that river, in that everyone else 
suspects -- probably knows -- that Kurtz  s gone bonkers. (More than one, 
overly-attired White Man confirms "there have been rumors, rumors...") 
But Roth's curiosity holds us to him: maybe as actor he needed to see 
what was in store for him as much as wanted to see how Roeg would visual 
Kurtz's emonic craziness. In fact, the movie was filmed in exact 
sequence, to help build the dread, the fear, the encroaching evil. (Only 
there isn't any persuasive dread, fear, evil.) Watching Roth's Marlow, 
especially when he smears blood on his face, I thoug  of Werner Herzog's 
anguish in the documentary on the making of his FITZCARRALDO entitled 
BURDEN OF DREAMS, which would be a fine subtitle to the years-long quest 
to make HEART. And the maxi-thin FITZCARRALDO seeps into our thoughts 
even before this, wh  we see Marlow and the village blacks retrieve the 
sunken boat that will be used to seek out Kurtz. 
        Conrad knew, of course, that our curiosities would be aroused by 
what is a tease of a look into (at the time unchartered) depths of 
psychology, and don't we all know that literary classes spend most of 
their time discussing Kurtz. And since APOCALYPSE  W, which unfortunately 
TNT used as a come-on in their ads, Marlon Brando has become so 
identified with the character that not only do students "see" Kurtz 
"Brandofied," actors who might play the character probably do as well. 
Hence, we get John Malkovic  wrapped in what looks like a raw silk 
curtain, reduced to a half-tub version of an idol. Though Brando's voice, 
which seems to be getting weaker and more whiny as the years pass, has 
its semi-deranged effects, what's mesmerizing is his piggish grotesqu 
ess; it's scary, all right, but not Conrad-scary. (Marlow describes Kurtz 
as "not much heavier than a child.") Malkovich's voice doesn't have any 
resonance, either, and without that, he doesn't have anything else to 
fall back on, he can't get Kurtz to e n visually penetrate. All said and 
done, the only depth Conrad could supply about how power corrupts, how it 
infects with psychological horror, is through his stylishly arched prose 
-- and it's Marlow's verbal account that supplies whatever depth there   
because Kurtz speaks less than two hundred words. So it's no surprise -- 
may even be Conrad's Revenge -- that this is where Roeg and screen 
adapter Benedict Fitzgerald get trapped: excepting four lines, nothing 
they've given Malkovich to say is in the  vella; they've written for him 
such phonied up mediocrity that we might believe they've borrowed whole 
sentences from introductions published in various editions of the story, 
pedantry about "light, darkness, the abyss." In trying to pin Kurtz down, 
we  t this: "There is no more detestable creature in nature than the one 
who runs away from his demons" -- not once but twice. There might have 
been the chance that this Conrad-like fakery could have been forceful had 
Malkovich "discoursed" with a voice tha Marlow recalls "rang deep to the 
very last. It survived his strength to hide in the magnificent folds of 
eloquence the barren darkness of his heart." Malkovich's doesn't; and 
he's limp, soggy -- as if the humidity is more the disease that kills him 
inst d of the illness which inevitably does. The way he baby-shuffles 
around his thatched, ornate hut, you'd swear he wasn't so much dying as 
recuperating from his Camilled Port in THE SHELTERING SKY. But the larger 
mistake is putting an American actor into  e part: this is a role for 
searing craziness, for the kind of actor who can rattle our moral cages, 
something we don't train our own actors to do. (Unlike the Brits, ours 
either go flat, weary, or do a lot of screaming.) Malkovich can get by 
with his ma uerades in an Eastwood picture like IN THE LINE OF FIRE and 
he somehow worked commanding magic against his own unattractiveness in 
DANGEROUS LIAISONS, and brought a pleasing surliness to his photographer 
in THE KILLING FIELDS. Physically at least, he sh ld have been able to 
mirror "the ivory face, the expression of sombre pride, ruthless power, 
(the) craven terror" of Kurtz. Instead, he's become a master at measured 
prostitution, as seen in that gagger PLACES OF THE HEART; he grants his 
favors arbitrar y. He's not Conradian here, he's Capotesque.
        After Roth, there's a second, albeit easier success -- the use of 
Belize as a substitute for the Congo. You don't have to be anything more 
than an armchair traveller to know that Belize isn't Africa, and some 
will point out that tropical settings pract ally film themselves, as 
we've seen in APOCALYSE NOW, THE AFRICAN QUEEN and THE MOSQUITO COAST, 
but Roeg and photographer Anthony Richmond come very close to Marlow's 
view: "Going up that river was like travelling back to the earliest 
beginnings of the  rld, when vegetation rioted on the earth and the big 
trees were kings. A great silence, an impenetrable forest. The air was 
warm, thick, heavy, sluggish. There was no joy in the brilliance of 
sunshine. The long stretches of the water-way ran on, deserte  into the 
gloom of over-shadowed distances." About the only things they don't get 
-- the avoidance of which is right -- are the "silvery sand-banks hippos 
and alligators." The substitution is most effective when, drenched in a 
twilight fog, the boat is  ing closed in on by the warrior-clad tribe, 
some of whom wear headdresses that could be out of THE CREATURE FROM THE 
BLACK LAGOON and PREDATOR. Roeg succeeds in getting the beautiful Iman to 
look like "a wild and gorgeous apparition" whose "face had a t gic and 
fierce aspect of wild sorrow and of dumb pain mingled with the fear of 
some struggling, half-shaped resolve." The only fun: The actor who plays 
"Alphonse Degrief," a name that's perhaps a planted joke about the 
difficulties encountered while mak g the movie, wears what appears to be 
a Napoleon-like nightshirt. 
        Purists have insisted that HEART OF DARKNESS is intrinsically 
unfilmable, that there's no way to visually record Conrad's inner sanctum 
of dementia. They've said the same about UNDER THE VOLCANO and THE 
SHELTERING SKY, and, in looking over the results, they may be right. 
Arguably movies are, for the most part, intrinsic common denominators -- 
by their very nature they dumb down original source material. This 
process can be exacerbated by movie makers wanting to secure the largest 
possible aud nce, and even if they don't, their backers do. And it's 
often compounded by the movie makers inaccurately weighing an audience's 
interest in the source. These are some of the reasons why UNDER THE 
VOLCANO doesn't work as movie as it might as opera; the  dience is 
pre-judged not to be as interested in Lowry's hallucinatory verbiage as 
it would be about a literal story that doesn't make one damned bit of 
sense. As opera,the torrent of psycheboozydelic words could be showcased 
by a Greek chorus and we wou  have been able to accept the central 
character's dumb-dumb wife as operatic convention. And yes, HEART OF 
DARKNESS has strong possibilities as opera: it may be the only medium to 
give credence to Kurtz's megalomania, allowing for a show-stopping aria a 
political and psycho caveat. Where but in opera can you turn a mouse into 
a giant?

Author
Pedro Sena
It's been a long while since Nicholas Roeg has done a film that suits his
ability.... that is, a film that is psychological, that is complicated, that
is hard to define, something that his work has not shown since the days of
PERFORMANCE, WALKABOUT, THE MAN WHO FELL TO EARTH, and to some extent
INSIGNIFICANCE.  This QUALITY adaptation of Joseph Conrad's novella stands
out as the directors finest piece in several years, and shows that he is
(still) quite a capable director.
HEART OF DARKNESS has been a well read story.  It also has been adapted in
many forms to the screen, the most famous of which is APPOCALYPSE NOW, by
Frank Ford Coppola.  But none of these adaptations, had ever been faithful
and close to the novella as this one has been.  The story is  in Africa
where the jungle was once considered a living hell, where the white man
could not survive the various diseases and the indigenous black people's.
As such, these jungle hells, were at one time considered the part of the
earth that associated with the horrors of man's mind, which had to be
conquered, and delivered from evil.  In the 60's, this kind of thought was
taken to Vietnam.  Today, it may be Bosnia, and  the former Yugoslav
republics.  Tomorrow it will be somewhere else, like South Africa.  But 100
years ago, Africa had it all.
And amidst the colonials that are out to make a fortune on ivory by killing
the elephant population, is a group that has mingled with the indigenous
cultures for various reasons.  Some for greed, some  because they got
stranded, and some for spiritual reasons. The story of the Commander Kurtz,
is one of a spiritual evolution, and one
that leaves behind its mark.  It is a dedicated attack on the mind of
everything that the industrial revolution has become.... a symbiotic evil,
where anything is killed in the name of progress, and greed. The English had
become the symbol of this type of people.  Their ruthlessness for adventure,
in the search for riches, took them to every corner on the face of the
earth.  And in every corner, there is a Kurtz, waiting to tell you his
story...... have we listened for the past 100 years...???? likely not... we
still rape, plunder, and plunge ahead, thinking our idealism is the law of
the land, and the mercy of the weak.  But the horrors will plague us as long
as this happens.... the horrors, repeats Kurtz, as he is dying.
The film has many of the bits and pieces which helped the story and defined
the Coppola film.  The fears which turn the characters into scared men, the
jungle diseases at the time, and of course, the enemy that stalks their
victims at every turn.  The enemy
always knows what is going on when we don't.  The enemy is powerful and we
are weak.  And Nicholas Roeg uses this, with close, tight angles of camera
work, to help define the novel even better... at every turn there is
something which can be seen,
but can not be defined.  And to those who are fearful, this can be a deadly
thing.  To those who have purpose and courage, this is a challenge for
life....... but as the novel tells us so well, a challenge of what....????
Outstanding set of performances, specially Tim Roth as Marlowe, the
adventurous captain, and John Malkovich as Kurtz.  The film was done in the
jungle'd places of Belize, and is nicely done.  It was originally done for
television, and later released on video. It is a very well done, and
faithful adaptation, of a master novelist, whose work still is of importance
today, still quite visible as the decaying industrial society still rapes
and plunders.
