Title
Review for Malice (1993)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Sarah M. Elkins
     I have to compliment whoever made the TV ads for MALICE.  For
once, you get an accurate taste of the movie without the plot being
given away.  I would advise those intrigued by the ads to go ahead and
see it before reading a review which gives away more than mine -- even
reviewers like me who avoid giving spoilers without warning would be
hard-pressed to review MALICE without at least hinting at some of the
generous number of twists.
MALICE --  1993, original, complex thriller
PLOT/KICK-OFF:  A serial killer stalks a quiet college town.
Meanwhile, one of the college profs meets the new hotshot surgeon and
realizes that they knew each other in high school.  Meanwhile, his wife
suffers sharp abdominal pains from time to time.  What will be the
connections between these threads?  Not what I thought!
CHARACTERS/ACTING:  Alec Baldwin as the doctor, Bill Pullman as the
college professor, Nicole Kidman as his wife, Bebe Neuwirth (Lillian on
CHEERS) as the police detective.  With the exception of Bebe's valiant
attempt at some urban accent (Boston? Brooklyn? the Bronx? the fault
could be mine in simply not being familiar enough with the locale), the
acting is excellent, with a wide range demanded from Baldwin, Kidman,
and Pullman.
CINEMATOGRAPHY/FX:  Unobtrusive but sharp photography makes the cast
and scenery look beautiful, antiseptic, or gritty as the plot demands.
There's no one outstanding shot I can call to mind, but the look and
feel will suffer a bit on the small screen.
SCORE/SOUND:  Fine.  Some pop & rock, and "mood" music.
VIOLENCE/GORE/LANGUAGE:  Operating room scenes are a bit bloody but not
the worst I've seen.  Some obscenities and bullets thrown around.  A
nasty close-range fight (heads slammed into walls, objects swung at and
hitting bodies).
SKIN/SITUATIONS:  If you saw NYPD BLUES's opening night, expect a
similar amount of female skin.  More of Alec Baldwin than has been
shown before, though various nekkid women on top of him (not at the
same time or even in the same evening) barely cover certain
essentials.
ANALYSIS:  The movie is not a let-down compared to the ads.  It is not
a standard "main-character-in-jeopardy" thriller, either.  There is one
plot twist which seemed unlikely to me, but I can't think how they
could have fixed it without major re-writes, and it wasn't major enough
to get in the way of my enjoying the movie.  The pacing is good, though
it demands a few leaps of intuition on some of the characters' parts
(rather than slower periods of discovery).  Most of the pleasure I got
from this movie was from the many twists, most of which I had not
guessed beforehand.  There were also, though, some nice moments of
character interaction not required for what could have been just a taut
thriller.  I liked the way events and characters were developed in this
movie.  With the names involved, I was a little afraid of it just being
a vehicle, but this movie was a pleasant surprise.
- Sarah Elkins (elkins.wbst139@xerox.com)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Alec Baldwin, Nicole Kidman, Bill Pullman.
Screenplay:  Aaron Sorkin and Scott Frank.
Director:  Harold Becker.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     It has long been my belief that the best movie mysteries are those
after which you can say to yourself, "I should have figured that out."
I loathe Joe Eszterhas-style thrillers which make me feel as though
I've been had; nothing that can change the "whodunnit" by shooting five
new minutes of footage is constructed tightly enough.  Almost equally
annoying are those which seem to twist and turn just for the sake of
twisting and turning, forcing you to engage in a two-hour discussion
with your fellow moviegoers just to figure out what the heck you just
saw.  MALICE avoids all these pitfalls.  This is a sharp,
artfully-constructed thriller, a snappy entertainment that does
everything I ask a film in its genre to do:  keep me guessing without
manipulating me.
     Andy Safien (Bill Pullman) is a student dean at Westerly College,
a picturesque New England campus plagued by a string of serial rapes.
While following up on the latest assault, Andy meets Dr. Jed Hill (Alec
Baldwin), a cocky new thoracic surgeon who turns out to be an old high
school classmate of Andy's.  Andy soon invites Jed to move into the
house being remodeled by Andy and his wife Tracy (Nicole Kidman) in an
attempt to defray expenses.  Tracy is none-too-pleased by Jed's playboy
manner, an added burden to the chronic abdominal pain she is
experiencing.  However, life in the Safien household will soon go from
bad to worse.  Andy becomes a suspect in the rapes, and Tracy suffers a
severe medical emergency, forcing Jed to make a decision which will set
in motion a serpentine chain of danger and deceptions.
     This is the point where reviewing a film like MALICE gets tricky.
Comment on the plot is next to impossible, particularly on those few
points where I felt credibility is stretched.  All I can really say is
that the script by Aaron Sorkin (A FEW GOOD MEN) and Scott Frank (DEAD
AGAIN) is intelligent and impressive in its plausible intricacy.  There
is an ingenious red herring crafted into the story which successfully
diverts attention from other key elements.  There were moments when I
sensed the entire audience realizing the same thing at the same time.
I saw very little of that telltale sign of a confusing mystery:  people
leaning over to friends and spouses to ask what just happened.  Every
explanation was clear and smooth, if not always perfectly believable.
     If there's one problem with the plot-heavy script, it's that
certain character developments are shallow.  Bill Pullman is very good
as the pleasant Everyman with a streak of jealousy, but his character
would have benefited from some early evidence to make his later
behavior more believable.  Ditto Nicole Kidman, who has the most
challenging role.  I found Bebe Neuwirth basically annoying as a police
detective sporting an accent that appeared to be a mutant hybrid of
Boston Brahmin and Brooklyn Italian.  On the plus side, Anne Bancroft
has a showy bit part as a loony mentor a la Robin Williams in DEAD
AGAIN (apparently a Scott Frank trademark).  Alec Baldwin is perfect as
Jed, delivering a great speech about his "God complex" with utter
conviction.  Baldwin should stick to roles such as this which require
colossal displays of hubris.
     Director Harold Becker showed his talent for atmospheric suspense
in SEA OF LOVE, and surpasses that effort with MALICE.  While never
spectacularly tense, MALICE is always gripping, thanks to a methodical
unfolding of the story with something important happening in almost
every scene.  Becker even cleverly undercuts genre expectations,
particularly in an ominously underscored shot of a big dark house ...
on a cliff ... overlooking crashing surf ... during a thunderstorm.
The audience was in hysterics.  This is a smart, deft directing job,
and one that establishes Becker as a name to watch for.
     I think I can get away with saying that you shouldn't go into
MALICE expecting a scream-out-loud suspense film.  It's more subtle
than that, but never less than thoroughly intriguing.  This is a
mystery for mystery lovers.

Author
Vijay Ramanujan
Cast: Alec Baldwin; Nicole Kidman; Bill Pullman and appearances by
      George C. Scott and Anne Bancroft
Plot: There's a serial rapist/murderer running amok on campus, and Andy
Safien (Pullman) is the unfortunate Dean of Student Affairs who knows
all the victims.  Meanwhile, his wife has abdominal pains, and an
arrogant doctor he "knew" in high school moves into his house.  How does
it all tie in?
     Well, it doesn't.  Once in a while, you come across a movie so bad
that the writers should have their licenses revoked.  This is one of
those.  This movie was very well acted.  The individual scenes were well
scripted and directed, but the movie was incoherent.  For me to enjoy a
plot twist, I have to be grounded first, I have to have a frame of
reference with which to see the twists.  This movie was twisting so
often and so wildly that you never get a chance to see what it is
becoming or what it no longer is.  The basic problem with the movie
seems to have been this: The writers wrote half the movie, and then
decided, "Hey, what if ...?"  So they put some twist in.  They never
bothered to go back and see if it makes sense with the rest of the
movie.  Often times, it not only doesn't fit in, but it contradicts
things that have already been said and seen.  And the ending is so
predictable that it made me laugh.  In fact, there were at least three
high tension scenes in the movie during which the audience I saw it
with started laughing out loud. (One involving a big, climactic fight
between the hero and the villain.)  The highlight of the film was a man
in the third row screaming "Put that bitch in her place" when Baldwin
slapped Kidman.  Sad comment.
So, examples of those incoherencies that I said were so prevalent:
1) Tracy Safien has been seeing a doctor for two years about a serious
medical problem.  His husband has never even talked to the doctor, let
alone met with him.
2) Hill is willing to throw away a practice in Cardio-thorassic surgery
for five million dollars.  That is ridiculous when you consider how much
such surgeons make yearly.
3) The blind kid across the street definitely  makes an effort, early in
the movie, to stare out the window at the Safiens.  Why?
4) How did Tracy Safien know that the surgeon who would operate on her
would be Dr. Hill? Is there only one surgeon on duty? And why call a
Thorassic surgeon to do an operation on ovaries? Hardly his speciality.
5) Why spend thirty minutes on the serial rapist scenes when the only
apparent purpose of said scenes was to establish that Andy was sterile?
6) Jed and Tracy have to have been planning this from before Hill moved
in.  (I assume that's why she suggested taking in boarders.) So why does
she seem so nervous around Hill, as in the bathroom scene?
7) Lillianfield is a front for Hill, apparently.  At least, we are led to
believe so.  But how can Lillianfield practice? His speciality is not the
same as Hill's, and there is no way a doctor can "double major" without
anyone knowing.  And if Lillianfield doesn't have a legit practice, why
have an answering service?
1) Hill and others talk, in the bar, about how the starting tailback for
the team on the television is out after failing a drug test.  One person
asks why he can't stay off drugs for a million a year.  Unfortunately, the
team being shown is USC, and there are no million dollar college players
who undergo drug tests.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Alec Baldwin, Nicole Kidman, Bill Pullman, Bebe Neuwirth, 
           Anne Bancroft, George C. Scott
Director:  Harold Becker
Producers:  Harold Becker, Rachel Pfeffer, and Charles Mulvehill
Screenplay:  Aaron Sorkin and Scott Frank
Music:  Jerry Goldsmith
Released by Columbia Pictures
     Dr. Jed Hill (Alec Baldwin) is the hot new trauma specialist on
the block.  His first night on duty, he saves the life of a patient
another doctor gives up for dead.  Looking for a place to stay while he
gets his feet under him, he takes up the offer of an old schoolmate,
Andy Safian (Bill Pullman), who is renovating an old house along with
his wife Tracy (Nicole Kidman).  Tracy and Jed don't hit it off well,
and it's only with reluctance that she agrees to rent out the third
floor of their house.  Then, as if things aren't tense enough at home
as a result of Jed's arrival, Andy has to deal with the problem of a
serial rapist at the college where he's an assistant dean--a case in
which he has unexpectedly become a suspect.  That situation is only
beginning to resolve itself when Tracy collapses and has to be rushed
to the emergency room with internal bleeding.  The attending surgeon
turns out to be Jed Hill, and one of his judgment calls during the
operation could be a huge mistake....
     MALICE is a well-crafted, intelligently-scripted thriller that is
perhaps a bit too slick to be considered film noire, but is
nevertheless Hitchcockian in intent.  The movie breaks free of the mold
that so many of its genre have lately fallen into, that of a
seemingly-helpful friend/neighbor/nanny/police officer/whatever turning
out to be a wacko.  MALICE has a little more class than that.
     There are quite a few twists and turns in the plot, some of which
aren't that difficult to figure out, but a few that are likely to take
the viewer unawares.  Make no mistake:  the intent of this movie is to
surprise the audience, and it succeeds fairly well at that.  While it's
true that in the aftermath of MALICE, careful thought will reveal some
logical flaws in the script, these aren't nearly as noticeable during
the action.
     The plot has some structural problems resulting from trying to do
a bit too much for the running time.  By not concentrating on one
primary storyline (there's the serial rapist and the doctor with a god
complex), it dilutes both.  There are also several scenes and plot
threads that, while interesting, ultimately have nothing to do with the
story.  The inclusion of these is more odd than frustrating, however.
     The unusual genesis of the script might have something to do with
the irrelevance of some of what appears.  Writer Aaron Sorkin was
initially approached by creative consultant William Goldman to flesh
out a premise of Goldman's.  This was before A FEW GOOD MEN had made
the transition from play to film.  Sorkin wrote the first two drafts of
MALICE (then called DAMAGES--the title was subsequently changed to
avoid confusion with the 1992 Louis Malle product), then had to leave
to work on MEN.  At this point, DEAD AGAIN writer Scott Frank was
brought in to continue the job, and drafts three and four were his.
When Sorkin again became available, Frank was let go.  So, although the
shooting script came from Sorkin's pen, it included numerous elements
of both his own and Frank's versions.  Considering the number of cooks
involved in this broth, it's amazing that the final product is so
polished.
     Scott Frank's involvement immediately makes one think of DEAD
AGAIN, but this movie is closer to SHATTERED in execution--the plot
twists aren't nearly as well-camouflaged as in the Kenneth
Branagh-directed thriller.  Sorkin's literate contributions are in
evidence, and include a wonderful speech given by Alec Baldwin as he
describes the nature of his supposed "god complex."  That is only one
of a few standout scenes, all but one of which feature Baldwin.
     The acting is uniformly good, with appearances by Anne Bancroft
(who is wonderful) and George C. Scott (who is solid, but nothing to
write home about).  Baldwin loves this kind of role, and Nicole Kidman
shows that she's capable of being more than Tom Cruise's on- and
off-screen love interest.  Her performance harkens back to the one she
gave in DEAD CALM.  Bill Pullman is the weakest of the trio, but he
gets better as the film progresses.  It's apparent that his "nice guy"
image dogs his tracks, however.
     Jerry Goldsmith turns in a surprisingly spare score, more
reminiscent of Bernard Hermann's Hitchcock material than his own
overblown BASIC INSTINCT music.  It's a pleasure not to be bombarded by
blasts of music any time something dramatic is about to happen.
Goldsmith deserves credit for this.  There are movies that demand loud,
bombastic themes, but this is not one of them, and the composer
recognized this.
     Over the past several years, I've become increasingly
disillusioned with thrillers.  Occasionally there's a diamond in the
rough like DEAD AGAIN, but mostly these films are dreary, predictable,
and utterly uninteresting--entirely the opposite of what the word
"thriller" means.  While MALICE won't win any awards, it's a cut above
the average.  Yes, there are Hollywood conventions in it, but the movie
also keeps the intelligent viewer in mind.  While the final result is
something of a curious mixture, it's ultimately one that provides a
source of entertainment.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Jason John Seaver
     Whatever you do, don't see this movie twice.  It's not a bad way
to spend an afternoon, and it will keep you guessing, but a lot of time
it doesn't play fair with the audience.  You may not notice it at the
time, but fifteen minutes out of the theater, max, and the flaws will
become readily apparent.
     Bill Pullman plays the Dean of Student Affairs at Smith College, a
(real) all-female school in Massachusetts.  A serial rapist has been
stalking and mutilating his students, and he's understandably upset.
The detective assigned to the case (Bebe Neuwirth) hasn't had any
success in tracking the criminal down, and finds circumstantial
evidence that he may actually be the culprit.
     One of the girls manages to live through the experience, thanks to
a brilliant surgeon (Alec Baldwin).  The surgeon, it turns out, went to
the same high school with the dean, and is new in town, and looking for
a place to stay.  His classmate has an apartment on the third floor of
his house he can rent out, although his wife Tracy (Nicole Kidman) is
none too thrilled by this arrangement, even though it was originally
her idea to rent the apartment out.
     Point one in Malice's favor:  All four of the identified actors
give excellent performances; I was especially impressed with Pullman,
whom I had previously seen only in Mel Brooks's SPACEBALLS.  Neuwirth
actually did a little too well--I could have easily done without the
central Mass. accent, which in my opinion borders on one of the most
obnoxious modes of speech in existence (and I go to school and have
family here).
     Point two:  The situation absolutely screams that Baldwin's
character will be revealed to be the rapist, and that the movie will
culminate in a confrontation between him and Pullman that leads to the
former's demise.  Happily, that resolution doesn't come to pass.
     Point three:  The police are actually portrayed as efficient,
trustworthy, and effective.  This seems to be an extremely rare event
and should be noted.
     Taking away from MALICE, though, is that the situation that does
come to pass is unlikely in the extreme, with plot holes big enough to
drive a tank through comfortably.  The plot twists and turns like a New
England road, surprising at every opportunity.  The plot twists create
a terrific sense of paranoia, an atmosphere where no-one can be
trusted.
     They also suffer from seeming to be made up by the writers as they
went along.  Oftentimes a new revelation will have only a tenuous
connection to the story set out at the beginning of the movie, and by
the end several facts about the real situation are flat-out
contradictory.
     I've tried to reveal as little as possible about the movie because
it is, despite the writing flaws, an enjoyable (if ephemerally so)
movie.  The dialogue is well-done, the basic idea behind the plot is
good enough to make up for the missteps in execution.  Someone else
mentioned that a quirky mentor seems to be a Scott Frank trademark
(remember Robin Williams's role in DEAD AGAIN); Anne Bancroft is
excellent in her scene.
     I'd put it in the 6.0-6.5 range.  See it once, preferably at
matinee prices, and enjoy it for its plusses, rather than its fault.
