Title
Review for Blue Sky (1994)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Ben Hoffman
     The plus side of BLUE SKY is that both principals have roles in
with which they have not been previously associated.  Hank Marshall
(Tommy Lee Jones) is a military scientist who loves his work as a
nuclear engineer.  He also is a kind, tolerant family man whose wife,
Carly, (Jessica Lange) is the sexiest woman on the military base.
Jones as a reserved husband dedicated to both his work and his family,
is a switch from the intense obsessive character he was in The
Fugitive.
     The beautiful Jessica Lange who, in THE MUSIC BOX, was the
attorney who defended her father accused of being a Nazi criminal, is
here a most delightful, uninhibited wife who likes to dress like
Marilyn Monroe and have her hair done like Elizabeth Taylor, does a
sexy dance with Colonel Vince Johnson (Powers Boothe) that makes the
famous dance scene in THE SCENT OF A WOMAN seem like kid stuff.   One
moment she is Bardot, another she is Hayworth.
     So why is the movie not as good as it could have been?  Mostly
because it has a sub-plot about a cover up by the military when they
allow a nuclear explosion to send radiation to people from nearby
locations.   The two stories, the Marshall family and the nuclear cover
up do not blend well together.   The film should have concentrated on
Lange and Jones or the nuclear underground testing (leaving the sky
blue ... as in the film's title) or it should have had more about
nuclear testing. Instead, both are short-changed.
     Fine acting by Jones, Lange and Boothe ... and do not forget the
dance.   Others in the cast are Carrie Snodgrass, Amy Locane, and Chris
O'Donnell.

Author
Maria Vitale
     The year is 1962 and the military is conducting nuclear testings.
Involved in these tests is Hank Marshall (Jones), an army colonel who
is critical of the above-ground tests that are being done.  He urges
below-ground tests which no one will consider at the time until it is
learned that the Soviets have conducted underground tests of their
own.
     Marshall is also troubled by a turbulent marriage to Carly (Lange)
who is topless on the base's beach in full view of the entire
personnel.  Hank's reaction is one of amusement.  He's been here before
and he deals with it in the only way he knows how.  The problem is
Carly is a manic-depressive and when she isn't flirting with any man
who happens to be near her, she's fantasizing about a fictious world
where she'd rather be.  Typical of the mental illness, she also is
promiscuous and foul-tempered.  The mood swings are quick and violent
and the torment she puts her husband and their two daughters is
considerable.
     From Hank's reports which state his opposition to the
Army's methods of testing, he is transferred from Hawaii to Alabama.
Carly patterns herself after movie stars and tries to become Marilyn
Monroe, bleach-blond and all.  The new home in Alabama is pretty
run-down and depressing and sets Carly off on a violent tantrum.  After
meeting his new commanding officer (Booth), Hank sees an all too
familiar pattern begin to repeat.  Carly openly flirts with the CO.
Hank tries to deal with the situation, but his only resort is to carry
her off and throw her into a nearby pool.  Arguments ensue.  The family
becomes even more alienated.
     The CO is very interested in pursuing an encounter with Carly and
sends Hank off to observe an underground test which causes the
irradiation of two local ranchers, much to the vocal objections of
Hank, who spots them but is unable to cancel the detonation of the
bomb.
     Back at home, the two girls try to hold things together but they
wonder why their father can't deal with their mother's problems.  One
daughter says, "He's blind and she's crazy." The other answers,
"They're perfect for each other." It reaches the breaking point when
the older girl (Locane) and a boy, the CO's son (O'Donnell) see her
mother and the CO making love in an abandoned shed.  She forces her
mother to tell Hank and get it all out into the open.
     Hank returns home and finds his wife in the middle of a musical
put on by the military wives, including the CO's wife (Snodgress).  He
confronts the c.o. but not about Carly.  He is upset over the coverup
surrounding the accident during the testing.  A fight breaks out
between the two when the CO accuses Hank of not being able to satisfy
his wife.  Hank is arrested.  What follows is manipulation and revenge
on the part of the CO.  He convinces Carly to commit Hank to a hospital
for observation.  Instead, they fill him with so many drugs that he can
barely cope.  He foams at the mouth and cannot even finish sewing a
leather wallet as presents for his daughters.
     Carly is determined to free her husband from the clutches of the
Army and succeeds in doing so only by being the strong one in the
family for the first time.  The film has an upbeat ending with hope
that the family has found a way to deal with its problems.
     The performances are solid throughout.  Jones is sympathetic and
loving and is most effective in those quiet moments when he tries to
deal with his wife's rage.  He comforts her and offers protection.
Lange gives a strong and spirited portrayal of a woman on the edge who
draws up the courage to try and put things right for her family.  Amy
Locane is very good as she fights to keep her family together while
struggling with her own doubts as to whether she even should.
     BLUE SKY is based on the story of the Stagner family.  The
screenplay was written by Rama Laurie Stagner (with Arlene Sarner and
Jerry Leichtling).  The film marks the final work of Tony Richardson
who died shortly after its completion in 1991.  He had made such
classics as LOOK BACK IN ANGER (1958) and TOM JONES (1963).  Orion
Pictures underwent bankruptcy and caused the film to sit on a shelf for
three years.  The film joins an alread promising fall line-up of films
and is well worth catching for the performances alone.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Jessica Lange, Tommy Lee Jones, Powers Boothe, 
           Carrie Snodgrass, Amy Locane, Anna Klemp, Chris O'Donnell 
Director:  Tony Richardson 
Producer:  Robert H. Solo 
Screenplay:  Rama Laurie Stagner and Arlene Sarner & Jerry Leichtling 
Cinematography:  Steve Yaconelli 
Music:  Jack Nitzsche 
Released by Orion Pictures 
     Once again, Orion Pictures has gone to the shelves to dust off a
print for distribution.  This time, it's the last feature of the late
director Tony Richardson--a muddled melodrama wrapped around a
cautionary tale about the dangers of nuclear fallout.  The 1991 film
shows its age with shots of Chris O'Donnell and Amy Locane looking
significantly less mature than in some of their more recent screen
appearances.
     BLUE SKY is a dreary, disjointed affair that tries to tie together
an anti-nuclear message with a family-in-crisis melodrama.  The most
significant problem is that the script is more dysfunctional than the
Marshall clan.  At no time is there a clear sense that this movie is
going in any particular direction.  It lurches along until stumbling
upon something that passes for a conclusion.
     Set in the early Sixties, BLUE SKY approaches the issue of
underground nuclear testing and fallout as if it was a timely subject
for today.  Had the story been compelling, the approach might have
worked, but this part of the tale--about a United States Army officer
with a conscience (Major Hank Marshall, played by Tommy Lee Jones)--is
heavyhanded, contrived, and cliched.
     The dissection of Marshall's home life is potentially more
interesting.  He has a manic-depressive wife (Jessica Lange) and a pair
of teenage daughters (Amy Locane and Anna Klemp) who long for
stability.  However, a resolutely downbeat tone (not necessarily a bad
thing in itself) coupled with an agonizing example of over-the-top
acting by Lange (reminiscent of the quality of her "work" in 1976's
KING KONG) conspire to ruin these portions of BLUE SKY.
     The ubiquitous Tommy Lee Jones gives a surprisingly bland
performance.  Maybe it's the character, but there isn't much here for
the audience to latch on to or care about.  Powers Boothe, playing a
stereotyped nasty commanding officer with an inflexible mindset, is
lifeless.  Despite being one of several obvious villains, his Vince
Johnson is too dull to actively dislike.
     For those who crave originality, there's very little of value in
BLUE SKY.  This is unfortunate, considering that the film was the final
effort of a respected director.  Since their Chapter 11 filing, it
seems that every time Orion Pictures gropes for something to release,
it comes up with a dud.  (Remember such "classics" as ROBOCOP 3 and
MARRIED TO IT?)  I suppose the library of undistributed movies must be
as bankrupt as the company itself.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Joan Ellis
     BLUE SKY has an uninspired script enlivened by two extraordinary
actors.  Tommy Lee Jones plays U.S. Army nuclear engineer Hank
Marshall, a man whose flinty, capable exterior melts every time he
looks at his wife Carly (Jessica Lange).  He radiates love and passion
through his eyes and a smile, and we wait hopefully for the smile,
knowing he may, and probably should, head for the door at any moment.
Carly is a handful.
     Jessica Lange's Carly is a stick of dynamite about to blow, a
fragile creature who lives in fantasy to avoid the crushing reality of
being an Army wife. Her volatility is perfect counterpoint to Jones'
moving, subtle performance.  Don't skip this one.
     Hank's insistence that the military make an honest, moral response
to a nuclear accident earns him a transfer from paradisal Hawaii to the
grim nowhere of a military base in Alabama.  Assigned to a filthy
house, Carly takes one look at "this litter box" and flies into a rage
that is rooted in the deeper inner fury at being erased, controlled and
confined by the U.S. Army.  "It's the same as Washington and Germany
and all the other places, only we're ten years older."
     Anyone who ever experienced the tyranny of the Army, a
corporation, a hospital or academia, 1950s style, will recoil.
Director Tony Richardson captures the excruciating feel of the awful
competition that is fostered by an institution with total power over
its own.  Forty years ago, institutionalized erasure was pervasive.
Carly's despair in 1954, Tailhook today.  Score zero on progress for
the patriarchy.
     Richardson uses the early scenes to evoke the awful contrast
between the Hawaiian nirvana and a post at the end of the world.
Striding naked and waist deep in the gentle surf against a brilliant
blue sky, Carly waves her floating scarf in sensual joy and invitation
to the helicopter that hovers above her.  Aboard and looking down
proudly and adoringly is husband Hank.  He revels in her love of the
grand gesture.
     A Roman candle one moment, a pile of ashes the next, Carly
disintegrates in Alabama.  She is every organization woman's worst
nightmare: the one who wins the attention of the boss.  Hank's efforts
at damage control fail, and he has a nearly fatal flaw: he simply
can't resist his wife beyond a sentence or two of reprimand.
     When Hank is hospitalized and drugged by the Army to ensure his
silence, Carly devises a grand gesture that will bring the Army to its
knees.  It is ridiculous and entirely fitting.  Subplots abound, and
all of them showcase the abundant talent of the two leads, who get fine
support from Powers Boothe and Carrie Snodgress as the commanding
officer and his Stepford wife.  Tommy Lee Jones and Jessica Lange lift
the movie beyond its script and deliver a beautifully acted comment on
the staying power of troubled love.


Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The year is 1962 and Major Hank Marshall (Tommy Lee Jones), a
nuclear engineer, is advising the U.S. Army on nuclear testing.
Meanwhile his wife Carly (Jessica Lange), a sexually precocious child
in the body of an adult woman, is doing everything she can to embarrass
him.  She sees herself as a Marilyn Monroe type and flirts with
reckless abandon.  She is the main reason Hank has been reassigned from
a pleasant posting in Hawaii to a disagreeable one on an ugly Army base
in Alabama.  Hank tries to keep a lid on the family problems in public
and to keep the two daughters happy, but it is clear their mom needs
more care and is more of a child than the children are.  Hank has
problems at home and with his work.  Hank advocates nuclear underground
testing when his commanders and the Atomic Energy Commission want to
continue atmospheric testing.  At first this seems an odd pairing of
plots.  One plot concerns a family disintegrating because of the wife's
childish behavior and her husband's vain attempts to cover for her and
to maintain an even keel.  The other plot deals with national nuclear
policy.  And it is well into the film before the viewer has much of an
idea where the story could possibly be going with two such diverse
strands of plot.  Eventually they will come together in a story about,
of all things, character.
     This was the last film directed by Tony Richardson, who is best
known for his 1963 TOM JONES and who died three years ago.  It may well
also be the last film we will see from the now long defunct Orion
Pictures.  It is easy to see why this film waited so long for a release
given the intelligence of the scripting and the originality of the
plot.  BLUE SKY was also a little lucky in that like CHINA SYNDROME and
MAROONED, the subject matter happened to become considerably more
topical after the film's completion than at the time the film was made.
     Jessica Lange gets top billing, though her acting shows more than
a little of her character in FRANCES.  She is fleshy and sensual.  But
at the same time she is annoyingly like a spoiled child given to
tantrums, not unlike the character's idol, Marilyn Monroe.  Tommy Lee
Jones gives his character just the right blend of military
officiousness and occasional tenderness.  Powers Boothe, always good,
plays Hank's commanding officer who mixes into Hank's personal life as
well as his professional life.
     Richardson shows a visual sense in some of his more interesting
scene segues.  He takes us from the paradise of a Hawaiian beach to a
nuclear-devastated landscape.  His recreation of the early 60s has just
about the right look, particularly the army base with its rundown
post-war housing.  In short his final film is one of his best in years.
Lange's and Jones's performances and the originality of the story give
this one a low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     BLUE SKY is about an Army family in the early 60s and is set
mainly on the Army base especially in the family housing area.  It
stars Tommy Lee Jones as Major Marshall.  His wife is played by Jessica
Lange.  They have two teenage daughters.  The colonel of the base is
played by Powers Booth and his wife by Carrie Snodgress, whose only
good role ever was in DIARY OF A MAD HOUSEWIFE (1970).
     BLUE SKY is an engaging movie because of the two leads and of the
family in trouble theme it deals with so honestly.  Sad to say that it
also has a needless conspiratorial parallel plot, but more on that
later.
     Okay, when I said Tommy Lee Jones, you already have an image of
his part.  Right?  He is tough as nails, smart as can be, totally
inĘcontrol, invulnerable, and self-confidence personified.  Wrong,
wrong, wrong, wrong, wrong.  This is a character like I have never seen
Jones attempt before.  Major Marshall is unsure of himself and a
pushover, when it comes to his wife, very vulnerable, and full of self
doubts.  He manages to pull all of this off and be believable albeit I
would rather have seen Jones in another movie in his more traditional
role.
     Jessica Lange is his ever unfaithful wife.  They fight all of the
time since she is pretty crazy and mercurial.  She starts off with
serious fantasies of being Brigitte Bardot and Marilyn Monroe.  Later
she wants to be other people.  She lies all of the time, flirts with
every good looking man over 18, and is a total free spirit.  Being a
wife or a mother, is not something that is ever high on her priority
list.  I have seen Jessica Lange play fairly similar parts before, and
she was again excellent at it.
     The kids in the movie, the two girls and the teenage son of the
colonel, are a real treat.  I would have given anything if their parts
were written larger.  The conversations of the two girls talking about
the problems in the family, especially the temper and the unreliability
of their mother, were extremely real and insightful.  The romance
between the boy and the older girl was so natural and sweet.  I just
wish the kids' story were not such a small subplot.
     Powers Booth is his usual quintessential slimeball.  It is a part
he plays in almost every show he is in, and he does it fine.  Snodgress
gives a pedestrian performance.
     The major problem with the movie was that the scriptwriters felt a
need to introduce a long parallel plot about underground testing of
nuclear weapons and how Jones was fighting his own evil government.
This was the only part of the show where Jones had a backbone which was
out of character in this role.  I think Oliver Stone's brother must
have been a co-writer of the script.
     Many small aspects of the movie were noteworthy.  The sound
editing was unusual.  The actors talked quite low to each other in many
scenes and the background noise was also kept low so that the movie
sometimes had the feeling of a stage play.
     In the end, I gave it ** 1/2 and a mild thumbs up.  If they had
stuck to the family and its problems, this could have been an ORDINARY
PEOPLE class show along with a very high rating, but alas, it was not
to be.  If you look at the credits, you will see that the movie was
made in 1991 and has been on the shelf ever since because Orion studies
went into bankruptcy about the time for its release and so the courts
held it up.
     The movie runs a kind of long 1:41.  It is rated correctly PG-13
for a tiny amount of female nudity and for the adult themes.  Teenagers
would be fine at this movie.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: September 16, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Raymond Johnston
Dir: Tony Richardson
Starring: Tommy Lee Jones, Jessica Lange, Powers Booth, Carrie Snodgrass
     After sitting on the shelf for several years due to Orion's
financial difficulties, British director Tony Richardson's final film
has gotten released.  Richardson was once one of the "angry young men"
of British cinema.  His work includes LOOK BACK IN ANGER, THE LOVED ONE,
TOM JONES, and the occasional Hollywood project like THE BORDER.
     Richardson always tried to find the human element to his stories,
tried to tell compassionate tales of middle-class struggle.  When the ad
campaign for BLUE SKY described a "Manchurian-Candidate" type
conspiracy film, I thought that Richardson was a poor choice for such a
story.  Again, though, it is a case of a distributor trying to mislead
the audience.  BLUE SKY is not a paranoid cold war conspiracy film.
There is a minor subplot near the end that has been edited into a neat
ad campaign, but the film is really about a dysfunctional military
family trying to get things together.
     Once you stop waiting for the conspiracy to turn up, the film is
quite enjoyable for what it is.  It has flaws to be sure.  The concept of
a dysfunctional military family is fairly much of a film cliche, but
Richardson manages to show some things that have not been seen before,
and make the characters at least seem human.
     Tommy Lee Jones is a military nuclear scientist, whose less than
right wing stance has hindered his career, and Jessica Lange is his
movie star wanna-be wife, whose open exhibitionism has also caused its
share of scandals.  Lange gets a chance to develop a full blooded
character, a woman who seems so full of anger at her lost dreams that
she is bent on self destruction.  Jones, in relatively laid back
performance, juggles his waning career and two adolescent daughters as
he tries to also deal with his marriage and the Atomic Energy
Commission.  It is out of this last element that the conspiracy ad
campaign has been cobbled.  Forget that angle.  As a conspiracy film,
BLUE SKY is second-rate.  As a family drama, BLUE SKY scores much
better, with some fresh scenes and excellent performances.
     Cris O'Donnell, the student from SCENT OF A WOMAN plays Power
Boothe's son.  BLUE SKY was filmed before, and he appears younger than
in his previous role.  The inevitable teenage love story has some sweet
and one explosively funny scene.
       If conspiracy films are your bag, rent Abel Ferrara's
BODYSNATCHERS, Alan J. Pakula's PARALLAX VIEW, or Sydney Pollack's
THREE DAYS OF THE CONDOR.  They deliver what the ads for this film
promise.  If you like good actors in a decent enough drama, give BLUE
SKY a shot.

Author
Dragan Antulov
"Better late than never" is the phrase that could be applied
to BLUE SKY, 1994 drama directed by Tony Richardson. Shot in
1991, but not released due to the bankruptcy of Orion
Pictures, this movie was finally unearthed three years
later. It was too late for its director Richardson who had
died from AIDS shortly after the end of shooting, but not
for the rest of cast and crew, especially Jessica Lange who
surprised many by getting an "Oscar" for the role in this
film.
The plot of this film is set in the year 1962, during the
most intense period of Cold War. Major Hank Marshall (played
by Tommy Lee Jones) is a scientist assigned to help
conducting nuclear bomb tests. Being a radiation expert, he
is too aware of the effects those tests may have on the
environment and civilian population so he wants to abandon
atmospheric tests in favour of much safer, subterranean
tests. The military higher-ups don't particularly like his
heretical views, but most of the Hank's problems come from
his family, namely his wife Carly (played by Jessica Lange).
She is very attractive yet emotionally unstable and her
manic phases tend to manifest in public outbursts of
scandalous behaviour and open flirting with other men. Hanks
nevertheless loves his wife and he is always able to forgive
her, but not the military authorities who handle this
perpetual scandal by relocating Marshall, his wife and two
daughters from one base after another. The latest relocation
brought them from Hawaii to the ugly, run-down Army base in
Alabama. The base commander Vince Johnson (played by Powers
Boothe) is soon attracted to the glamorous scientist's wife.
The plot for BLUE SKY consists of two stories, each of them
suitable for feature film of its own. One depicts the
struggle of lone individual against all-powerful
organisation and it could serve as an excellent history
lesson for post-Chernobyl generations, showing them the
mentality of Cold War, which sacrificed environment,
individual lives, basic morality and common sense for the
sake of nuclear supremacy. This Strangelovian story is
followed by more intimate yet equally fascinating love story
between Mr. and Mrs. Marshall. Unlike most of Hollywood love
stories, this one shows the often very painful sacrifices
people must make in order to have something resembling a
good relationship. Mixing those two stories into one plot
could have looked like a recipe for disaster, but screenplay
Rama Laurie Stagner, Arlene Sarner and Jerry Leichting
succeeds in that. The script has some of the cliches,
including melodramatic, predictable and not very convincing
finale, but the characters and their interactions are
well-drawn and the story in general engaging from start to
finish. The best job was done by actors. Jessica Lange truly
deserved her "Oscar" - her portrayal of Carly is wonderful,
both on the outside (especially in scenes where she brings
touch of Monroesque Hollywood glamour and sexuality to the
dreary and dull setting of early 1960s US military) and
inside, when she makes us understand why her husband loves
her so much despite the endless series of humiliation and
embarrassment. Tommy Lee Jones is also very good in the role
of a man whose love is stronger than machistic pride, and
whose stoicism in matters of heart manifests as virtue in
matters of military ethics. Amy Locane, who was very young
during the production of this film, is very remarkable in
the role of Marshalls' older daughter Alexandra. All in all,
BLUE SKY, despite some flaws, is an interesting and touching
drama that deserves more attention than its single "Oscar"
might indicate.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
Movie Reviews by Drax
http://www.purger.com/users/drax/reviews.htm
Movie Reviews on IMDb
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dragan+Antulov 
