Title
Review for Broadway Damage (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Harvey S. Karten
  Toward the end of this picture, Cynthia (Mara
Hobel), a young, would-be journalist who is rooming
in Greenwich Village with recent college graduates,
has a breakdown.  "I want to go home," she wails--
which is no wonder considering that her parents live in
Long Island palatial splendor while she walks up half
a dozen flights of stairs.  Now, there's nothing wrong
with "Broadway Damage" that an adjustment in timing
could not fix.  Simply have Cynthia articulate her
magic words at the very beginning, send her packing,
and concentrate for the next 100 minutes on the other
characters.  "Broadway Bound" is not likely to be
considered even by its writer-director, Victor Mignati, to be a
major offering, but without its lead female it might
have redeeming albeit modest virtues.  But the obese Ms.
Hobel, who hardly has a smidgen of the comic sensibility of a
Bette Midler, a Chuck Farley or a Roseanne, is difficult to
watch, given her charmlessness and the character she
portrays--a shopaholic sponging on her daddy's credit cards
who is apparently too exalted to do wash her own dishes. 
Though some of her problems are resolved during the course
of the story, a typical patron in the audience could hardly
care.
   Might we care about the others in the cast?  Perhaps.  But
Marc (Michael Shawn Lucas), Robert (Aaron Williams) and
David (Hugh Panaro) are too wet behind the ears, too lacking
in mature qualities at this stage of their lives to warrant
concern or empathy--though, heaven knows, no critic can
speak for all or even necessarily a large segment of the
audience.
   This sentimental little romantic comedy could have been
inspired by that mushy song, "The Boy Next Door"-- from
Hugh Martin and Ralph Blane's song for the 1960 musical
"Meet Me in St. Louis," the first two lines of which is "How
Can I Ignore/ The Boy Next Door."  The handsome, struggling
actor Marc seeks stable lovers everywhere but in his own
apartment, drooling over David, the musician he spots in the
flat just below his.  Little does he realize that his own
roommate Robert, a writer of musical comedy tunes, is ga ga
for him, but is simply too shy to confess his love.  Oh, yes,
"Broadway Damage" is of the gay genre, featuring a few "in"
jokes which, judging by a recent critics' screening, just might
be appreciated by one portion of its audience while unlikely to
possess crossover appeal.
   Director Magnatti's cameraman, Michael Mayers, takes his
camera inside an actual building in Greenwich Village and to
various areas around Manhattan including Central Park, the
blocks surrounding the Empire State Building, Bloomingdale's,
and other on-site areas exploiting 16mm lensing. And while
it's good to see the Big Apple increasingly used as locales by
the movie industry, it's sad to report that this trivial story is
lacking in genuine humor, wit and originality.  Marc meets
David, is disappointed, takes a couple of auditions, is
discouraged.  Cynthia seeks an interview with high-profile
magazine editor Tina Brown, is disheartened when her calls
are not returned, continues to bomb Ms. Brown's office with
resumes and ultimately a catchy collage, is dismayed.  David
has a relationship with Chuck (Jonathan Walker), the
relationship goes awry, he's discouraged, he can't pay the
rent, he becomes downright melancholy.  What this means in
the tradition of formulaic writing is: Resolution is on its way.
   When you consider that Marc is an actor and Robert a
writer of musical comedies, you might be surprised that the
Broadway of the title is woefully underutilized, coming to the
fore in spots, as when Marc auditions, and even here,
unconvincingly.  Not Rated.  Running time: 109 minutes.  (C)
Harvey Karten 1998

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen 30 May 1998 for $8 with Andrea at the Quad Cinema
"Greetings from Greenwich Village" is the subtitle to this bubbly little
independent film, written, edited, and directed by Victor Mignatti.
Considering it's practically a one-man show, it can be forgiven its flaws.
In fact, it's lucky it got made at all,
 in all likelihood. 
*Broadway Damage* presents us with two young people starting out. Marc
(Michael Lucas)  is a cute young gay man, would-be actor, and Cynthia
(Mara Hobel) is his fabulous female friend who does not let more than a
few extra pounds get in the way of self-esteem or her dream to work for
New Yorker editor Tina Brown. She thinks she's better than entry level,
and doesn't try too hard to do anything but try getting an interview with
Ms. Brown in a variety of inventive methods. 
"Broadway damage" is acting jargon I didn't fully understand, but I think
it refers to those would-be actors who are particularly stuck on the idea
of performing live on stage. Throughout the film we see Marc and his
friend Robert (Aaron Williams) getting feedback from a drama coach as
they recite lines or sing. Robert is stuck on Marc and with his goofy
Gilligan-style hat and glasses he is the "nerd" role in the movie. While
pining away for Marc, he attempts to woo a hunky, bespectacled,
Monet-loving, Zola-reading clerk in a kitschy card store. 
Meanwhile, Marc falls in love with neighbor David (Hugh Panaro), whom he
spots in a backing building visible from his fire escape. Hearing him sing
a song helps him fall a bit harder. But David is involved in a
relationship, and as the story progresses, David turns out not to be at
all what he seems. 
*Broadway Damage* is light, fluffy entertainment; it provides a lot of
amusing little moments and more than a few stereotypes along the way. But
the audience (98% gay) seemed to love it nonetheless. Mara Hobel, best
known for playing the Christina Crawford as a child role in Mommie
Dearest, is the stereotypical fat girl fag hag; Marc is a "ten" but
doesn't think so--"my arms aren't big enough"; Robert loves Sondheim, of
course. The movie has a curious throwback quality. Finding an dilapidated
apartment via obituaries is something straight out of a 1970s sitcom.
Didn't Oscar and Felix have to do this once? Nary a mention of AIDS. Just
frivolous amusement all the way. Costumes and interior design are more
important here than cinematography, which is rather basic. 
I could go on about "why are these people friends?" but why? Yes, it's odd
that they are friends but no one knows the clothes hound Cynthia comes
from a family that's stinkin' rich. But it's all so amusing--at least at
the time. Broadway Damage shows young people starting out in life and
love. Mostly gay. Hearts broken and rebuilt along the way. Possibly the
biggest problem they have in life is a mouse and rat problem in their
hovel. It doesn't take itself too seriously and neither should you. Go and
enjoy it. Class dismissed.
TOILET NOTE: There were just three women in this audience, and they were
thrilled to discover that for once, there was no long line at the Ladies'
Room. A once-in-a-lifetime event.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Michael Dequina
Aspiring Broadway composer Robert (Aaron Williams) secretly carries a
torch for his best friend, struggling actor Marc (Michael Shawn Lucas).
The problem is, Marc only has eyes for "perfect 10s," which the geeky,
insecure Robert certainly is not.  Meanwhile, Marc's spoiled (hetero)
female roommate, Cynthia (Mara Hobel), spends her days lying about their
apartment and harrassing magazine editor Tina Brown.
Writer-director Victor Mignatti's "very romantic comedy" (as the ad
campaign states) is supposed to be (pardon the pun) a gay ol' romp, but
it's hard to have much fun with these annoying, self-absorbed characters
and their shallow personal problems: Marc and Cynthia have sitcom-level
domestic "crises" (such as trying to kill bugs--how hilarious); Robert and
Marc go to acting class (how riveting); the zaftig Cynthia goes on eating
binges (how original).  But more than anything else, the three whine.
Constantly.  Marc whines about his turbulent romance with an apparent "10,"
David (Hugh Panaro), the hunky musician from across the way; Robert whines
about not being able to find the right guy; Cynthia whines about having to
find a job (horrors).  The terrible trio whine their way to a happy ending
that is wholly undeserved.  Add in overly broad performances and some
laughable lipsynching by Panaro, and you're left with one astonishing piece
of cinematic damage.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
