Title
Review for Boot, Das (1981)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Steve Kong
Many movies use a submarine as a setting to confine characters in order to
drive a movie, such as Crimson Tide and The Hunt for Red October. But, most
of these films never use the actual life aboard a submarine as the story.
These films use a larger point of view as the story - in Crimson Tide it
was about a nuclear attack, and in The Hunt for Red October it was about a
defecting skipper. Das Boot is a movie that shows us just how grueling life
was aboard a U-boat in World War II.
Wolfgang Petersen made the brilliant Das Boot before he made In the Line of
Fire, Outbreak, and Air Force One. His last three films are mediocre, all
of them falling in the stock action films department. I enjoyed them all,
but any director could have done them. I did not know Petersen's full
potential till I saw his first big hit, Das Boot.
Das Boot takes place about a German U-boat. This is where the film really
shines. Because it's a German U-boat in the middle of World War II, the
audience is not about to cheer for the crew. We are left gripped by the
story and their mission, instead of the hurrah of the "American Navy going
out and kicking enemy butt." 
Das Boot follows a reporter (Herbert Grönemeyer) who goes on a tour of duty
with a U-boat. The U-boat is captained by a man only known as Captain
(Jürgen Prochnow). Though the captain is the eldest and strongest of all
the men aboard the U-boat, he is only in his mid-thirties. He is serving on
a boat full of young men, all of whom need strong leadership. The Captain
is the source of the leadership.
The Captain is not a real supporter of Hitler or the Nazis. He's just doing
his job. This is shown early on in the film.
Das Boot goes one step further; it shows us what life is like on a tin can
like the U-boat. The U-boat is truly a tin can - its dimensions barely
wider than a man with his arms outstretched and its height almost as tall
as a man. Das Boot goes to show that a submariner's life during a war is
truly 90% sheer boredom and 10% pure terror. We experience life at the pace
that the crew does - slow as molasses and repetitive, or quiet and
sweat-filled as the boat lays dormant trying to avoid depth charges. 
Petersen and cinematographer Jost Vacano chose an ingenious way of
conveying the cramped conditions of a U-boat to the audience by shooting
the whole movie from within a real replica of a U-boat. This meant shooting
with a specially designed camera that could be used to follow crewmembers
from one end of the U-boat to the other. This makes for a movie that looks
and feels cramped.
There are moments in Das Boot that will make you sweat with the sailors.
The attack on a convoy is one. After the attack, destroyers criss-cross the
ocean above hunting the hunter. The terror from this moment comes not from
what we see but from what we hear the bolts popping, the slight creak, the
groan of the boat, and the hum of a near silent engine. Another moment
comes when the ship is sinking - again it's the sound that conveys the
terror, not the sights.
The version that I watched is the director's cut of the film, which spans
about 60 minutes more than the original cut. This puts the running time at
about three and a half hours. I have not seen the original cut, so I cannot
tell you what the differences are. The sound in this version has also been
digitally redone from the top down. And I congratulate the sound editing
team for putting together a wonderful soundtrack to the film.
A few weeks ago, I saw Saving Private Ryan, which I thought was a great
anti-war movie. Das Boot is of the same stature of Saving Private Ryan. It
is a movie of both technical brilliance and of great storytelling. And in
the end we are left wondering, why do humans fight wars? Don't Miss Das Boot.
Das Boot is available on videocassette and DVD. The video cassette version
is a subtitled version. The DVD version - which I viewed for this review -
contains both English dubbed, Spanish dubbed, and a German soundtrack. The
DVD version also has Spanish, French, and English subtitles.

Author
Chad Polenz
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1981, R, 150 minutes [2 hours, 30 minutes]
[drama/war]
starring: Jurgen Prochnow (The captain), Herbert Gronemeyer (Lieutenant
Werner), Klaus Wennemann (Chief Engineer), Erwin Leder (Johann), produced by
Gunter Rohrback, Michael Bittins, written and directed by Wolfgang Petersen,
based on the novel by Lothar-Guenther Buchheim.
"Das Boot" is both excellent and mediocre at the same time. It works as a
triumph in production design and superb cinematography. However, the premise
is rooted in our interest in the characters and their mission. But we don't
get good characterization nor an interesting plot, and this is why the film
falls short of greatness.
In the tradition of the war genre, the story is of a single military troop,
their mission, daily activities, and struggle to survive. The setting is
World War II, but what is so unique about this situation is its perspective.
Instead of a glamorous, romantic story of the righteous Allies, here we get a
realistic and somewhat sympathetic story that just happens to be about the
crew of a German U-Boat (submarine).
Most of the film takes place inside a 10-foot by 150-foot submarine. The
cinematography and intricate detail and design  of the vessel work together
to make for a sense of claustrophobia. The actual camera work is impressive
considering the small space with which to work.
The first hour goes through the necessary steps to lay down the basics for
the more important elements. We see soldiers having a great time at a going
away party and then their fears of not coming back. When they are inside the
sub, attempts to make for comradery and humanism are only hinted at. For
example, a seaman has a picture of his fiancee and tells of the problems they
will face when (or if) he comes home. There are also card games, discussions
about sex, and shots of everyone working together. The problem is they are
told in a blatantly plugged-in manner. 
The officers are only a bit more sympathetic. The captain (Prochnow) is
smart but he doesn't seem to care much about anything. Lieutenant Werner
(Gronemeyer) doesn't seem to have a purpose other than listening to the
others and missing home. There is also the chief engineer (Wennemann), and
another officer named Johann (Leder), who are somewhat interesting, but not
as much as they could be.
 Little happens in terms of plot and conflict. The first act makes an
attempt at characterization, but the middle act suddenly becomes a series of
confusing naval battles. The battle scenes are, at first, told with detail
and are visually impressive. The submarine is bombarded with depth charges
and seems to be slowly falling apart. After a while, it doesn't seem
believable that such a crude ship could survive the amount of damage it
takes.
The final act is a bit much. The submarine is nearly destroyed and the
officers and crew become deathly afraid for their lives. The ending itself
should be classic, poetic irony, but I didn't see it that way.
The main reason "Das Boot" is not the grim, realistic portrayal of war it
aims to be is because it is too technical and frigid. Perhaps it works this
way to keep with its theme, but the story is basically about the characters.
They obviously represent the pawns of war, but don't necessarily seem
innocent because we never get to know them that well.
[Note: the subtitles were not done well. I often found myself missing pieces
of dialogue because they disappeared very quickly. Also, there were many
spelling, capitalization, and usage errors.]
please visit Chad'z Movie page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
Jason Cline
łDas Boot˛ (Directoršs Cut)
West German, 1981 - In German with English subtitles
210 minutes (3 hours 30 minutes)
Rated R (for language,  brief nudity, and mild violence)
Director: Wolfgang Petersen
Writer: Wolfgang Petersen (based on Lothar-Guenther Buchheimšs novel)
Cast:     Jurgen Prochnow (Captain) - Herbert Gronemeyer (Correspondent Werner)
     Klaus Wennemann (Cheif) - Hubertus Bengsch (1st Lieutenant)
     łDas Boot˛ is a thrilling war film about a German U-boat during the
last stages of World War II.  The painstaking life of a young,
inexperienced crew aboard a tiny submarine is presented expertly by
director Wolfgang Petersen (In The Line of Fire, Air Force One).  From
merry banter and numbing boredom, to incredible excitement and total panic,
all of the emotions of what it mustšve been like to be cramped up in one of
those small submarines is thoroughly explored.
     The plot is rather straight-forward.  A war-weary captain (Prochnow)
leads his fresh crew on a dangerous sea mission that could be their last. 
The captain has little faith in his Nazi superiors and seems to follow
their orders simply for the old thrill of the action, rather than the
ideology of the war.  This is obvious in many early scenes where he is seen
frowning at his 1st Lieutenantšs (Bengsch) stiff, Nazi protocol.
     A naive naval correspondent named Werner (Gronemeyer) provides a
central character to the story, and we see the events unfold from his point
of view.  From the opening scenes of a night-before party with drunken
officers, to the terrifying danger of later undersea dogfights, it is
through Werneršs eyes that we gauge the effects of the war.
     The fact that the setting is a German submarine (instead of a British
or American boat) is one of the interesting things about the film.  When
all is said and done, you realize that it doesnšt matter what country is
fighting for what cause, these are all young men going off to a strange
land (or sea) to fight, and very likely die.  To these men it seems nothing
more than a job, not a profound purpose, that drives them to survive.  At
least thatšs the way itšs looked at in this film.
     The battle scenes are as intense as they come; łThe Hunt for Red
Octoberšs˛ got nothing on this.  Mainly because of the technology of World
War II submarines, it was much easier to get killed than to survive.  It
makes all the more effective those long, silent pauses of waiting and
floating in the blackness of sea, waiting to see if that British Destroyer
is coming back around to drop a depth charge.  But the captain is amazed at
the durability of his U-boat, and seems hungry to test it again and again.
     łDas Boot˛ works on just about every level.  The acting is top-notch
across the board, even in the smaller roles like Klaus Wennemann as the
Chief Engineer.  The undubbed directoršs cut is really the only way to see
the film.  The subtitles are done fairly well and the German language lends
a special significance when the young German soldiers are heard singing a
British song; this effect would be lost if the film were seen entirely in
English.  
     Jost Vacanošs cinematography is also magnificent.  This is one of the
most skillfully photographed films you will ever see.  How the camera moves
so smoothly and captures all that it does in a 10 by 150 foot submarine is
a mystery to me.  How it makes it so aesthetically pleasing in that
environment is an even bigger mystery.  If there is a flaw to this film
itšs the music.  The composition is adequate and itšs used well, but I felt
that real strings wouldšve added so much more than synthesizers imitating
real strings. Although music can augment a film so profoundly, it doesnšt
take away too much here.  At any rate, itšs a tiny flaw in a giant
masterpiece.
[ Note: This is my first shot at a review.  I apologize if itšs a little
rough. Išd love some comments, suggestions, advice, etc. ]

Author
Steve Rhodes
     You and several dozen of your co-workers have been confined to a
narrow metal casket that lies 150 meters below the ocean's surface.
Your competition is exploding bombs all around you with the firm
expectation that you will soon be blown to Kingdom come.  Welcome to a
hard day at work aboard a German U-boat in World War II.
     In 1982 Wolfgang Petersen was nominated for an Academy Award for
his depiction of life aboard a submarine.  Called DAS BOOT, it was, at
the time, the most popular foreign language film ever released in the
United States.  Even today, it remains a popular video rental in this
country.  For the fifteenth anniversary, there is a new director's cut
and a new theatrical release.
     The press kit likens its restoration work to that for the hugely
popular STAR WARS SPECIAL EDITION series.  The work on DAS BOOT,
however, has several significant differences.  Rather than add visuals
to existing scenes as Lucas did, Petersen includes much more already
existing footage.  The original release of DAS BOOT ran 2:29.  The
director's cut adds a full hour, and the rumor is that the director
originally wanted to add two hours.
     What is similar to the STAR WARS restoration is the treatment of
the sound.  Petersen and company completely redesigned and re-recorded
new sound effects.  The result is impressive.  The original sound
received one of the film's five Oscar nominations so the foundation for
the digital remastering is substantial.  There is no question that the
changed sound improves the picture.  Toward the end of the review, I'll
compare the original with the remake in terms of the material added.
     In many films the director does not play a dominant role; LIAR
LIAR was one recent example.  In others, such as last year's SECRETS &
LIES, the director takes total control and molds the film into his
vision.  DAS BOOT has a strong director's stamp on it, making it a
prime candidate for a director's cut.
     Most German directors continue making their films in German after
they become internationally successful, but not Wolfgang Petersen.  He
went on to Hollywood where he came up with several thrillers -- the
best being IN THE LINE OF FIRE with Clint Eastwood, John Malkovich, and
Rene Russo.  I've seen the trailers for Petersen's upcoming summer
release of AIR FORCE ONE with Harrison Ford, Glenn Close, Gary Oldman,
and the star of DAS BOOT, Jurgen Prochnow.  The trailers look quite
promising.
     DAS BOOT starts in the autumn of 1941 when the British convoys,
with their stronger escorts, had turned the tide against the German
U-boats.  Hitler's answer was to build U-boats faster and staff them
with young crews.  Prochnow gives a brilliant performance as the stoic
Captain who takes a cynical view of the war and his role in it.  "I
feel ancient around these kids," he confesses.  "Like I'm on a
Children's Crusade."
     Herbert Gronemeyer plays a war correspondent named Werner.  The
Captain wants Werner to take the pictures of the crew on the way home
instead of on the way out since they will have beards then to cover
their babyish faces.  The Captain does not hide his embarrassment that
the war has come to this robbing of the cradle.
     Even with a large cast, the director manages to make the
characters distinguishable and engaging.  Hubertus Bengsch plays the
new spit-and-polish 1st Lieutenant, whom the rest of the officers
belittle.  Martin Semmelrogge is a baby-faced 2nd Lieutenant, who looks
and acts like one of the kids from a Gen X comedy.  Bernd Tauber plays
the ever-resourceful Chief Quartermaster.  Erwin Leder is the
hard-driving but arguably crazy diesel engine operator named Johann.
     The director received an Academy Award nomination for his script,
which he based on a novel by Lothar-Guenther Buchheim.  The story is
based on actual incidents from World War II.  The simple but chillingly
realistic script succeeds not through its memorable lines, of which
there are precious few, but because of the situations it creates.  The
ensemble cast does the rest.  Remember, a submarine is like library.
There is no talking allowed when it is open for business.  Instead of
dialog we have some of the most complex and emotive facial expressions
in any film.  Mental anguish causes men's sweat to pour and they look
like they will crack under the pressure long before the ship's hull
does.
     Petersen says his vision for the film was, "to show the gritty and
terrible reality of war AND to combine it with a highly entertaining
story and fast-paced action style that would pull audiences into the
experience of these young men."  He succeeds.  No matter whose side you
were on in WW II, these actors earn your empathy.  Moreover, Petersen's
engrossing storytelling abilities will have you on the edge of your
seat for the entire picture.  During the battle scenes I found my mouth
kept hanging open as I wondered if this was going to be the depth
charge that would blow them to smithereens.
     In 1982 DAS BOOT was the most expensive German film ever made up
to that time.  The result aimed for realism, not flash.  The chief
criticism of the picture stems from its main attribute: It is,
arguably, the most claustrophobic film ever constructed.  And yet, many
small scenes, such as the one of the crew singing their favorite song,
"It's a Long Way to Tipperary," illustrates the crew's humanity.
Although certainly a technical tour de force, the film occupies a much
more important place in cinematic history.  It shows up on many best
films of all times lists, and other directors like Steven Spielberg
cite its influence on their work.
     In one of the best anti-war films ever, there is no preaching
against war.  The film makes its powerful statement without needing to
proclaim its message.  There are no macho heroes in DAS BOOT, just a
dedicated group of would-be survivors.
     When the movie was originally released I saw it first with
subtitles and then in a dubbed version.  Although the dubbing was well
done, the subtitled version is much better.  And, I am thankful to
report, the director's cut is subtitled.
     One of the beauties of it having been fifteen years since I saw
the movie is that I had forgotten most of the details and remembered
only the impressions it made on me.  I will not reveal the ending in
the hopes that you either have forgotten it or have never seen it.  I
found the ending surprising, but perfect.
     I promised to tell you which version I preferred -- the original
or the director's cut.  First, let me say that I cannot imagine your
not wanting to see this director's cut if you have any serious interest
in film.  It is an expansive vision of a seminal picture that demands
to be seen.  I loved the director's cut and give it my highest rating.
All of this notwithstanding, the original version with its tighter
focus is the better of the two.  The restoration, however, does have
the improved soundtrack, and the original can no longer be seen in
theaters.  Although DAS BOOT is a picture that can work on a small
screen, its impact can only be fully felt in a theater.  See it before
it moves to video.  I suspect its theatrical run will be brief so act
now or you may never again have the chance.
     The director's cut of DAS BOOT runs about 3:30.  It is rated R for
war violence, rear male nudity and some profanity.  It would be fine
for teenagers.  I give the film my strongest recommendation and top
rating of ****.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

DAS BOOT (Director/writer: Wolfgang Petersen; screenwriter: based on a
novel by Lothar-Gunther Buchheim; cinematographer: Jost Vacano; editor:
Hannes Nikel; cast: Jurgen Prochnow (The Captain), Erwin Leder (Johann),
Herbert Gronemeyer (Lt. Werner/Correspondent), Klaus Wennemann (Chief
Engineer), Hubertus Bengsch (First Lt. /Number One), Otto Sander
(Thomsen), Martin May (Ullman), Martin Semmelrogge (2nd Lieutenant);
Runtime: 210; 1981-W. Germany)
This updated 210-minute version of Wolfgang Petersen's Das Boot WW11
U-boat thriller, adapted from the semi-autobiography of someone who
served on a submarine during the war, Lothar-Gunther Buchheim, humanizes
the Germans and shows the sweaty conditions that they had to fight
under. This is the director's cut, where he added 65 minutes to the the
most expensive German film ever made at the time ($40 million is the
reputed pricetag), which was originally a six-hour TV miniseries. It
sets a high standard for submarine films, as a well-crafted, serious
work, that created a lot of nail-biting tension and evoked a suspenseful
atmosphere, and might very well be the best submarine film ever made.
Wolfgang Petersen was nominated but did not win an Oscar for his
directing. It also gave the director a chance to come to Hollywood to
show off his ability to shoot action films, where he made "In the Line
of Fire"/"Air Force One"/ "Perfect Storm." Das Boot was one of the most
popular foreign films in America at the time, and is still doing very
well in its video rentals.
There were 40,000 Germans who served on U-boats during the war and
30,000 of them never returned. It was the U-boats mission to guard the
North Atlantic and make sure no boats got through. The British
supply-ships were trying to get through the German blockades, as the 12
German U-boats on patrol tried to stop them. The ships were escorted by
destroyers and were sometimes protected by airplanes. Winston Churchill
was mocked by the Nazi propaganda machine as a paralytic drunkard, but
those who fought the British knew better and respected their efficiency
on the sea.
The film is about U-96's mission in 1941 and its veteran, stoic captain
(Jurgen Prochnow), who is a career military man and is none too pleased
with Hitler's battle plans or with the wet-behind-the-ears youngsters
who make up his crew. He feels Hitler is sending him out on a
"Children's Crusade." The tone of the film is more antiestablishment
than antiwar, as the captain bitches with his other officers about the
stupidity of the war effort by the German High Command. When an
eager-beaver Lieutenant (Hubertus Bengsch), with a rigid jaw, spouts the
Nazi beliefs, the captain ridicules his blind devotion to such ideals,
saying he's the type who would march to hell for the Fuehrer.
The film opens with the boat refueling at the French base of La Rochelle
used by the Nazis as their submarine station. The captain escorts, Lt.
Werner (Gronemeyer), a young naval war correspondent just assigned to
his boat to write public relations stories about the crew, making them
into heroes for the Germans to read about back home, as they head to
where the bar the men on shore leave are at. They are letting off steam,
getting drunk, taking up with whores, and hiding their fear with false
bravado and loud songs. The captain engages another veteran U-boat
captain (Otto Sander), who has just been militarily honored, but is too
drunk to make a coherent speech at the bar. There seems to be an
understanding between these two about what the war means: that they do a
good job and not get caught up in the politics. These two crusty seamen
are not Nazis, but are German patriots and professional military men.
Aboard the cramped ship, that is so claustrophobic, that when the men
have to pass an officer, they must say, "permission to pass," as they
squeeze by the narrow opening. The quarters are very tight, as the men
sleep crowded together; it seems as if they are trapped in a prison. The
film exploits their discomfort and their boredom to show that war is a
dreary life for the submarine crew and not filled with excitement. The
crew seems anxious to get some action just to break up the boredom. They
all have different ways of relieving their tension. One of the men
(Martin May) writes letters to a French girl he met in Paris, whom he
got secretly engaged to and is worried that she is pregnant, and that
the Partisans will kill the child. The Chief Engineer (Klaus Wennemann)
keeps the submarine running as best as he can. The 2nd Lieutenant
(Martin Semmelrogge) is the comic in the group, which comes mostly at
the expense of the captain.
The war correspondent is told by the captain to take pictures of the
men, not now when they are baby-faced but when they return as men with
beards. The journalist forms a bond with the captain, who explains to
him what he is doing and thusly clues us in to how the submarine
operates.
The main action takes place when the U-boat attacks a British convoy of
five and torpedoes three of its ships. The tension on the boat is
intense, as the dark ship becomes completely quiet, as they are being
hunted by a destroyer above them, which drops depth charges and the men
anxiously wait below to see if they will survive. It is a matter of luck
that their boat escapes.
The most eerie scene, is when the U-boat surfaces and the beautiful sky
looks darkly serene, but the tankers they hit are on fire and we could
hear the screams of the sailors for help, as they go diving into the
water with their body's covered in flames. But the captain orders
another torpedo at them and ignores their pleas. His only reaction, was
one of surprise that they were still on board, that no one rescued them.
That was an amazing scene. I couldn't imagine a Hollywood film showing
Americans not rescuing drowning seamen, even if their submarine had no
room for the prisoners.
What this excellently told story fails to do, is come to terms with the
political situation or the moral implications of the war. It is seen
best as a film that is technically superb, drawing out the reality of
what it is like to be on the submarine and showing how terrible it is to
go to war. The boat constructed by Rolf Zehetbauer and Götz Weidner,
which duplicates the cramped boat down to its grimy details, and
provides the film with the proper setting for its intense realism.
The superb use of sound, helped elevate this film above all other
submarine films, as every sound in the quiet of the submarine is heard:
the splashing against a destroyer's propellers, the eerie ping sounds,
the bellowing roar of a depth charge, and the creaks of a hull.
Jurgen Prochnow's sterling performance gave the film the quiet hero it
needed to anchor its story, as his will to fight, his intelligent
leadership, and his quiet determinism to fight a glorious war, were
nobly shown, as the men under him completely respected him. The crew was
made up of sympathetic figures and not cardboard Nazis most WW11 films
seen from an American perspective portray onscreen for the Germans.
In one scene the captain is disappointed that his man in the galley
(Erwin Leder), who is a diesel engine operator, a veteran of nine battle
campaigns, has an attack of nerves and cracks, refusing to report to his
battle station. When the man recovers the next day, he begs the captain
not to court-martial him. The pain on the captain's face is clear, as he
tells the seaman to go get some rest. What the film seemed to be aiming
at, was not a big statement against war, but how the captain was a
professional and treated his men accordingly, expecting them to do their
best no matter what. As for the German leaders, he openly showed a
disdain, not for their politics, but because they didn't know how to run
a war.
The film ends as the damaged U-boat escapes by running silent after a
deep dive in the Straits of Gibraltar, as the men must put on their
oxygen masks to survive in their damaged boat. There is also an ironical
ending for the men as they come back to port. The film succeeds in
humanizing the men in this mostly true story, as it highlights the crew
when it is singing their favorite song, "It's a Long Way to Tipperary,"
and that's the most vocal this very quiet, very emotionally gripping,
and very entertaining film will get about anything. The captain and his
crew know that the odds weigh heavily against them returning from a
mission alive, and such life and death missions have their psychological
consequences.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Ben Hoffman
Ever wondered what it is like to be in a submarine during wartime?
This film brings it home like none other.
During World War II, only one out of 10 of the 40,000 German
submariners survived. The film shows the terror, the claustrophobia of
those in the submarines as the depth charges drop all around them.  It
also shows the sailors as young human beings, not as Nazis Storm
Troopers; young kids in a most miserable situation.
A tense, magnificent film, ranking with some of the best movies ever
made.
Available in dubbed English but try to get the German version with
English subtitles.

Author
Ben Hoffman
This review is about the new (1997) Director's Cut but will of
necessity be mostly about the original film which we saw in 1982.
Originally, the 1982 film was shown on German TV in a six-hour
mini-series.  It was then released in about a 2-hour version and
arrived in the United States . . . but not without a lot of trepidation
on the part of director and producers.  Here was a film with German
subtitles. Subtitles take a beating with the U.S. public.  Even more
worrisome the film was about German submariners, the enemy that
torpedoed many an Allied ship and convoy.  How would that be received?
It turned out to be THE all-time biggest box office hit of any foreign
language film.
To those of us who saw the original, that was not a surprise.  I cannot
recall a more intense film ever among the thousands of films I have
attended.  The acting was superb, the claustrophobia was palpable, the
fear that these young, mostly 17 to 18-year-old sailors would drown was
immense.  Who would have expected that any film could make us root for
the survival of German submariners on a mission to blow up Allied
ships?  That is proof of the strength of this most powerfully emotional
film.
It is 1941 when the Allies have finally gotten the upper hand in the
air and in reversing the havoc their ships had experienced until now.
Germany now had few planes, and few ships.  In a bar in port, there
are many sailors enjoying their last night before sailing.  Everything
goes.  Drunkenness and women.  Tomorrow, who knows?
A Captain of a sub enters, almost dead drunk.  He makes a speech and
toast to "our wonderful Fuehrer who knows everything including all
about submarines."  This is obviously sarcasm.  In the film, there is
only one officer who is political and believes that Hitler is right.
The rest are there because they were drafted.  They want to do their
tours of duty and then get back home to their loved ones.
The film is about the submarine U-96, its Captain (played heroically by
Jyrgen Prochnow), and his crew.  They are on a mission to sink British
ships but the Captain knows that the British destroyers are now
equipped with Sonar devices that can locate with deadly accuracy the
whereabouts of submarines and when they drop their depth charges, they
know how deep they must go before exploding and destroying the subs.
Almost everything that can happen to a submarine takes place on this
one and it is nail-biting time almost from the start until its
surprising finish.
Which brings us back to the Director's Cut.  The film has had better
sound added (digital) and extra footage. This additional footage
lingers more on the sailors and tries to show more of what they are
experiencing.  There is no question that the new sound and footage are
beneficial, although the original was itself sheer perfection.
Now then, the down side.  The original DAS BOOT kept us in a sweat
precisely because we did not know what was going to happen next.  Could
the bolts that were popping from the severe pressure be replaced so the
water could be stopped from drowning the ship and crew?  Could the
ship be raised when it dives way down to avoid the depth charges?  How
will they make out when the ship is ordered to pass thru the narrow
Straits of Gibraltar where there are hundreds of Allied ships on the
lookout?
That is what gets lost in this new version if you have seen the
original.  If you have, you know what happens next, you know how the
film ends, so I would question if there is a real value in seeing the
3-hour-plus Director's Cut.  If, of course, you have NOT seen the
original, you had better get to this one; a most marvelous, exciting
film, ranking with THE most anti-war films ever made.
The cast of supporting actors, all wonderful, consists among others, of
Herbert Grshemeyer, Klaus Wennemann.

Author
James Berardinelli
West Germany, 1981
U.S. Re-release Date: beginning 3/28/97 (limited)
Running Length: 3:30 (original 2:29)
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Jurgen Prochnow, Herbert Gronemeyer, Klaus Wennemann,
      Hubertus Bengsch, Martin Semmelrogge, Bernd Tauber, Erwin Leder,
      Martin May
Director: Wolfgang Petersen
Producer: Gunter Rohrbach
Screenplay: Wolfgang Petersen based on the novel by Lothar-G. Buchheim
Cinematography: Jost Vacano
Music: Klaus Doldinger
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
In German with subtitles
     DAS BOOT, Wolfgang Petersen's 1981 international sensation, has
become the latest motion picture to be remastered for a major re-
release.  Unlike a certain space trilogy, there aren't any "optically
enhanced" scenes, but the 1997 version of DAS BOOT is significantly
different from the first cut.  More than sixty minutes of footage from
the original German TV mini-series has been seamlessly woven back into
the movie's tapestry.  Jarring transitions have been smoothed out and
character development has been greatly enhanced.  The result is a more
complete viewing experience.  DAS BOOT, universally recognized as the
best submarine movie of all time and one of the most heart-pounding
thrillers ever filmed, is even better this time around than it was in
its initial release.
     During World War II in Germany, submarine duty was considered a
"glamour job."  It was nearly every young man's dream to be granted the
privilege of serving the Fatherland aboard one of the sleek, glorious U-
boats.  As is often the case, the grim truth proved to be radically
different from the shining fiction.  Submarine service was a grueling,
debilitating, dehumanizing experience, and DAS BOOT was the first motion
picture to de-mythologize it completely. 
     The bulk of the film takes place within the boat, and follows a
group of characters as they are transformed from the clean-shaven,
energetic individuals who enter to the scraggly, dispirited men who
eventually emerge.  We see the story through the eyes of a German war
correspondent (Herbert Gronemeyer) who is on board the boat for a single
tour.  The men are presented as he views them -- a cadre of competent
sailors united by bonds stronger than family or blood.  The Captain
(Jurgen Prochnow), an officer of great intelligence, experience, and
compassion, has earned the respect of every man under his command. 
However, unlike in many war movies, this leader is not a tactical
genius.  He can, and does, make mistakes -- some of which are costly. 
The crew is comprised of a diverse group of individuals, including a
party member, a chief engineer on the verge of a breakdown, and a young
man who longs for a reunion with his French fiancee. 
     The strength of the director's cut of DAS BOOT is that some of
these secondary characters, who were realized only sketchily in the
original film, have been fleshed out this time around.  Many are no
longer just familiar faces lurking in the background; they are fully
formed men with histories, hopes, and dreams for the future.  By
developing so many characters this well, Petersen adds greater depth and
urgency to the action scenes, and increases the poignancy of the
bitterly ironic final sequence.
     Since this is a story about human beings, not politics, it's not
difficult or ethically troubling for audiences to find themselves in
sympathy with DAS BOOT's characters even if, during the time period
represented, they were the enemy.  Within the bowels of the submarine,
there's no room for Nazi philosophizing or cheerleading.  In fact, the
Captain expresses disdain for the Fuhrer and his minions.  Although this
was made as a German film about a uniquely German experience during a
painful episode in German history, DAS BOOT possesses an acute insight
that allows it to be understood and enjoyed by viewers all around the
world.
     When it comes to action, DAS BOOT is at the top of the class, and
it's no wonder that, following its initial release, Wolfgang Petersen
became a sought-after director (his later credits include ENEMY MINE,
SHATTERED, IN THE LINE OF FIRE, and 1997's AIR FORCE ONE).  From the
moment the crew first descends into the sub and we are given a tour of
its innards, the sense of claustrophobia is suffocating.  This feeling
builds alongside the tension until the two, in concert, are almost
unbearable.  In later scenes, when the air supply is running out, we can
feel ourselves gasping alongside the men, as if the oxygen is being
siphoned out of the theater.
     The battle scenes are superbly executed, not so much from a special
effects perspective, but in the way that Petersen keeps us on the edge
of our seats.  The two standout sequences occur when the boat attacks a
British caravan and when it attempts to wend its way through the
treacherous straits of Gibraltar.  Both are intense, nerve-wracking
pieces of film making that are apt to elevate the heart rate of even the
most blase viewer.  These aspects of DAS BOOT are so well-crafted, in
fact, that they lose little impact on a second or third viewing.  Even
knowing exactly what's going to occur, and how it's going to happen,
does little to diminish the experience.
     In addition to being a great thriller, DAS BOOT also makes pointed
statements about human nature and war, and the visceral eloquence with
which they are expressed highlights the film's power.  War is one of the
great dehumanizing experiences -- it becomes "us" against "them."  The
objective is victory, simply because that's the only path to survival. 
This is true whether the battle is in the sky, on the land, on the sea,
or under the surface.  In DAS BOOT, the victims of the U-boat's attacks
remain faceless entities until one wrenching scene when the crew is
forced to confront the terrible ramifications of their actions.  Naval
battles often seems like the cleanest sort of warfare, with targets
distanced from their attackers by fathoms of water and hits registered
as blips on a screen.  DAS BOOT effectively dispels that illusion when
the men aboard the submarine are forced to look on helplessly while the
survivors of a ship they destroyed die by fire and water.
     I have often said that PATTON is the greatest war movie, but DAS
BOOT comes in a close second.  The battle scenes don't define either
film; superlative acting, top-notch writing, and exceptional direction
do.  Throughout the history of motion pictures, there have been many
fine movies set in the cramped confines of the submarine -- 1957's ENEMY
BELOW, 1958's RUN SILENT, RUN DEEP, 1990's THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, and
1995's CRIMSON TIDE -- but none approaches the impact achieved by DAS
BOOT.  This film takes all of the drama and suspense inherent in a
submarine-based story and delivers it in a near-perfect package,
establishing DAS BOOT as not just a terrific adrenaline rush, but one of
the best movies ever made.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     The director's cut of DAS BOOT is playing in Chapel Hill and I work
in Cary, which isn't even halfway between Graceland East and the
Chelsea.  So, I opt to forgo my ritual Friday afternoon matinee-- not a
difficult decision, given that the only choice is the poorly reviewed
SPRUNG-- and head in the general direction of that college town.  Over
three hours until an over three-hour movie and I don't even get to go
home.  It's going to be a long night.  With Megadeth in the tape deck
("Hidden Treasures," a compilation of compilation cuts and other B-
sides), the first stop is Durham, to a mall, to a department store, to
buy jeans, which I don't, because I don't care for the colors.  Instead,
what catches my wallet's attention is a row of weed whackers.  (Three
months into home ownership and I'm *still* buying stuff.) I choose a
low-end model:  17", 31 cc, one-year warranty, extra spool of cutting
cord, all for $99.99, plus a gallon gas can and a teeny-tiny bottle of
2-cycle engine oil.  (The enterprising salesperson attempts to sell me a
six pack of said substance *and* an extended warranty.  I roll up my
right sleeve and point to a tattooed right shoulder that reads "not.")
     In the parking deck, later, an off-duty police officer watches in
passing as I struggle to get the gargantuan box into the Elvismobile.
(Success on the second try, this time from the passenger side.  Duh.)
Departing the deck, I happen upon an outdoor display of city vehicles,
including the nearly departed (it's 5 p.m.) Durham Fire Department
Tactical Rescue Team.  I pause to talk and take a last-minute tour of
their equipment truck.  (The captain proudly notes that all cribbing and
shoring materials are handmade.) We leave together, with Engine 5 on my
ass all the way up to the I-85 exchange.  (I secretly hope that they'll
get a call, even though they have electronic sirens, which are never as
much fun as the mechanical ones.) The next stop is still up for grabs.
Do I have enough time to make a Best Buy/Barnes and Noble run?  No, I
decide, and set my sights on downtown Chapel Hill and Franklin Street,
my favorite few blocks in all of the Triangle.
    Changing tapes to a Judas Priest tribute-- the European version:
twenty-five artists on two volumes, dude-- I start my way south, down
15-501, so I can admire the recent road construction and see if they've
opened the new exit ramp to the Martin Luther King Jr.  Parkway, where
the Wynnsong lives.  (They haven't.) Rush hour hits on the other side of
I-40.  I pass the time by playing heavy beats on my car horn.  In
another ten, I'm scouting parking meters in the downtown proper.  (And
only one pass is required!  Wohoo!) I secure a spot near the planet-
arium and, after claiming some quarters from a corner coffee shop, I'm
hoofing it to a hole-in-the-wall pizza parlor, where I down a double
dose of pepperoni, read a weekly newspaper that I've already read, and
try to figure out just how in the Hell this place makes any money with
at least fifteen people working behind the counter.
    With an hour to go until show time, I take a hike, breezing over to
the main fire station (apparatus count:  two pumpers, one reserve), and
then to a used bookstore, where I acquire a collection of quotations
about the King ("just send me a million dollars, never mind the script,
and Elvis will do the picture," Colonel Tom Parker) and a 1982 biography
of Jerry Lee Lewis.  ("You've been married five times now.  Do you know
any more about women now then you did the first time you got married?"
"Yeah.  Pu**y is pu**y.") Back to the car and, regrettably, without the
time to stroll across campus and admire the young ladies in ponytails
and jogging shorts.  (This being Franklin Street, I have to settle for
orange hair and baggy pants.) I arrive at the Chelsea with twenty min-
utes to spare.  The tiny theater doesn't smell too fresh.  ("Like the
inside of a submarine," notes a fellow whiffer.) Through the walls,
Randy Travis is singing "King of the Road." I ain't got no cigarettes,
or even a decent seat.  As soon as the show starts, sure enough, some
big-headed fool sits directly in front of me.
     Expectedly, the director's cut of DAS BOOT is a long sit.  Yeah,
it's remarkable.  Yeah, it's powerful.  Yeah, it's probably the most
[choose one: realistic/unglamorous/warts-and-all] war movie ever made.
But with an hour of extra footage added to the original 150-minute
running time, this cut is just too damn long.  The expanded story of a
U-boat that waits and waits and waits for some action is more monotonous
than I suspect was ever intended.  Nor did I care for the episodic
nature of the narrative.  Granted, this was originally a six-hour German
mini-series, but one scene transition is so abrupt that I thought we'd
stumbled upon a dream sequence!  Finally, there are the inferior
exteriors.  While the camera work *inside* of the sub is breathtakingly
breathtaking, the exterior, above-water shots are largely yawn-inducing.
Perhaps writer/director Wolfgang Petersen (OUTBREAK, IN THE LINE OF
FIRE) could contact George Lucas, for a little help with those never-
quite-convincing blue-screen and miniature effects.
