Title
Review for Jack Frost (1998)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Ssg722@aol.com
Just when career-obsessed, hip blues musician Jack Frost
(Michael Keaton) is about to achieve his lifelong dream of success, he
dies in a car wreck, leaving a devastated wife (Kelly Preston) and
young son (Joseph Cross). On the first anniversary of his father's
death, the lonely, still-grieving 12 year-old builds a snowman, just
like he did with his dad, and tops it with his dad's old hat, red
scarf, and gloves. Then, before he falls asleep that night, he plays
the old harmonica his dad gave him, remembering his father's promise:
"If you play this, I will always hear you, no matter where I am."
Magically, father and son are reunited in a way neither thought
possible.  Although loosely based on the children's tune "Frosty the
Snowman," credit director Troy Miller for diluting the heavily
emotional dialogue by allowing the camera to tell the story. So, with
the exception of a few digital shots, the "special effects" are
achieved through an incredible animatron from Jim Henson's Creature
Shop, a snowm an who can win snowball fights, go sledding, and
snow-boarding. Michael Keaton brings a goofy appeal, muttering "It's
bad enough that my ticket got punch but to come back like this is
embarrassing!" While not typical holiday fare, it's a contemporary
fantasy with thoughts to contemplate. For workaholic fathers, "I was
so busy trying to make my mark on the world, I didn't understand you
are my mark on the world." And for kids: "Life is full of setbacks,"
"Everybody deserves a second chance," and "As long as you hold someone
in your heart, you can never lose 'em."  (And don't confuse this "Jack
Frost" with a direct-to-video horror clunker about a vicious killer
snowman.) On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Jack Frost" is a
cool 7, a sentimental story with an icy edge.

Author
Michael Dequina
This family fantasy can best be described as a cross between
_Frosty_the_Snowman_ and _Ghost_, with a bit of _Wide_Awake_ thrown in.
The young star of _Wide_Awake_, Joseph Cross, appears to have the "family
film about death" market cornered with this film, in which he plays
Charlie, a young boy learning to cope with the year-ago death of his loving
but neglectful blues musician father (Michael Keaton, who does his own
singing) named Jack Frost.  That name is a bit too apropos, for when
Charlie wishes for his father to come back, he does--in the form of a snowman.
Thus sets the stage for kid-snowman bonding antics that will certainly
delight the kids.  Adults will be delighted by the snowman effects, which
seamlessly mixes computer animation and puppetry.  (Some clumsy compositing
on certain matte shots are easy to forgive.)  However, the novelty of the
snowman effects wears thin after a while, and the older ones in the
audience may find their attention wavering; mine was.  Nonetheless, the
able cast (which also includes Mark Addy and Kelly Preston) keeps the
affair interesting, and the requisite emotional conclusion plucks the
heartstrings with an admirable--and most welcome--dose of restraint.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com


Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Jack Frost (1998)
Michael Keaton, Kelly Preston, Mark Addy, Joseph Cross, Scott Kraft, Eli 
Marienthal, Henry Rollins, Dweezil Zappa. Written by Mark Steven Johnson 
and Steven Bloom & Jonathan Roberts and Jeff Cesario. Directed by Troy 
Miller.
Rated PG, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
I went into "Jack Frost" expecting the worst. The trailers for the 
fantasy, about a father who returns from the dead as a snowman, looked 
absolutely awful, promising a mawkish comedy with exceptionally cheesy 
special effects. The actual movie certainly lived up (or down, if you 
wish) to its ads, but I was moved anyway. Beneath the many mistakes in 
"Jack Frost" lies a sweet story with a kind spirit and a nice message. If 
you're willing to suffer through the bad stuff, the film actually offers 
some rewards.  
Michael Keaton stars as Jack Frost, a musician in a small Colorado town 
who wants to be a good father and husband, but keeps screwing up, 
repeatedly missing important family events while trying to hit it big in 
show business. His wife Gabby (Kelly Preston) and son Charlie (Joseph 
Cross) recognize his good intentions, but are often hurt by his actions. 
While traveling towards a Christmas Day audition, he has an epiphany and 
turns around, heading for home to be with his loved ones. Then a 
snowstorm hits and Jack dies in a car wreck.
A year later, young Charlie is still a mess. He's quit the school hockey 
team and trudges through his days, sad and uncommunicative. Then it 
happens. Charlie wistfully blows on a harmonica that his father told him 
was magic ("No matter where I am, I'll hear it") and that night, the 
snowman in the front yard comes to life, inhabited by the soul of Jack 
Frost.
The results are predictable. Fear and disbelief, followed by wacky madcap 
adventures leading to a sentimental finale. The film is poorly executed, 
both visually and structurally. The machine-made snow throughout the town 
looks almost as phony as the instant mashed potato flakes often used as a 
snow substitute in movies. The snowman itself is unconvincing, resembling 
white felt more than snow, and the computer animation is very hokey. 
The script is as bad as the special effects. Kelly Preston and Mark Addy 
(playing a former band-mate and family friend) are given passive, 
woefully underwritten characters with little to do. Henry Rollins oozes 
testosterone as Charlie's coach, who spots the snowman in action and 
becomes the laughing stock of the town when he tells what he saw. 
Rollins' blustery character seems bound for a major comic payoff, but the 
punchline never comes. 
In fact, a lot of punchlines never come. For a comedy, there aren't 
nearly enough gags in "Jack Frost." The physical humor is more frenetic 
than funny, with poor camera angles undercutting the laughs. The jokes 
are standard-issue kid's stuff; one-liners about butts, a kid getting 
whacked in the testicles, etc.
On the sentimental side, the film strains mightily for a Frank Capra feel.
 Aside from the off-screen car wreck and the aforementioned shot to the 
crotch, unusually spirited snowball fights are about as violent as the 
story gets. Every character is essentially a decent human being, a nice 
change from the parade of creeps who populate so many movies. Even the 
school bully eventually comes around, in one of the tale's most agreeable 
scenes. 
While the tearjerker elements of "Jack Frost" sometimes become 
excessively gooey, particularly in one cloying scene that rips-off the 
climax of "Ghost," the film has moments that are honestly touching. 
Despite the ludicrous spectacle of a boy hugging a snowman, the 
relationship between Jack and Charlie feels genuine. I enjoyed the 
heartfelt father and son bonding, and thought the gentle lessons on 
dealing with the death of a loved one were poignant. To be fair, I should 
mention that I recently lost one of my parents, which may render me more 
susceptible to overt sentiment than usual.   
"Jack Frost" is a sloppy, manipulative film, just another holiday trifle. 
But credit should be given to the filmmakers. Underneath the bells and 
whistles, and despite flubbing many opportunities, they have crafted a 
Christmas movie in the cynical late '90s that actually has a heart.

Author
Scott Renshaw
JACK FROST
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Michael Keaton, Kelly Preston, Joseph Cross, Mark Addy.
Screenplay:  Mark Steven Johnson and Steve Bloom & Jonathan Roberts and
Jeff Cesario.
Producers:  Mark Canton and Irving Azoff.
Director:  Troy Miller.
MPAA Rating:  PG (profanity, mild vulgar innuendo)
Running Time:  95 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     On a snowy Christmas Eve, Jack Frost (Michael Keaton) reaches a
life-changing decision.  A small-time blues musician, Jack consistently
puts attention to his wife Gabby (Kelly Preston) and 11-year-old son 
Charlie (Joseph Cross) on the back burner when a gig or recording session
calls.  It looks like this year will be no different, with Jack dropping
plans for a family holiday when a record company exec schedules a 
Christmas day audition, but before he reaches the audition Jack realizes
what he's missing and turns around to head home.  That's when an icy road
and broken windshield wipers intervene, and Jack is killed in a car
accident.
     At the half-hour mark of the family fantasy JACK FROST, the titular
character has not yet been reborn as a walking, talking snowman a year
after his death thanks to a magic harmonica tune.  He has, however,
already been reborn in the only way that matters dramatically.  Jack
doesn't die as a vaguely selfish flake who needs to learn What Really
Matters; he dies repentant, on his way back home to make things right.
What follows the appearance of Jack-as-snowman is not an experience which
allows Jack to head to eternity with his priorities straight, but a
collection of special effects-enhanced buddy-bonding moments.  It's cute,
yet utterly weightless.
     There are worse things, I suppose, than a harmless bit of family
shmaltz for the holiday season.  Keaton is engaging enough as the
hustling, slightly immature human Jack, goofing with Charlie in a way that
suggests he's more interested in being a playmate than being a father.
There's at least one very lively chase sequence which will charm the young
ones, as well as a welcome paucity of inappropriately sniggering content.
And it's true that the snowman (courtesy Jim Henson's Creature Shop) is a
nifty creation, just the right combination of classic look and human
expressiveness.  There are enough giggles and guffaws in JACK FROST to
make it fun for youngsters without either embarrassing parents or boring
them entirely to sleep.
     What makes it hard to swallow is that it's utterly inconsequential
while pretending to be both hipper and more emotional than it really is.
Self-aware dialogue has the newly-snowy Jack pondering the cosmic purpose
for his state, wondering "Is it the name?  'Cause if it is, that's not
even very clever."  Another scene has Jack shaking his head ironically
when Charlie flips past the animated "Frosty the Snowman" on television.
Yet despite attempts to show that the film is a bit above its cutesy
premise, it's rarely anything more than a syrupy trifle, sentimental
without being resonant (from a story by Mark Steven Johnson, who made the
sentimental, resonance-free SIMON BIRCH).
     One could argue that JACK FROST isn't really about Jack at all, but
about Charlie (a generally understated performance by Joseph Cross), in
need of closure after the loss of a father he barely knew.  Even that take
on the story doesn't give it any added pull, not when the script keeps
adding simplistic touches like a bully who abruptly drops his bullying and
helps Charlie because he too understands what it's like to be without a
dad.  Eventually it's hard to identify any significant story at all as
JACK FROST becomes more derivative and rushed towards its climax, complete
with a final vision of the human Jack so reminiscent of GHOST I expected
"Unchained Melody" to burst out on the soundtrack.  JACK FROST isn't so
much a story as it is a diverting bit of special effects silliness leading
up to a sob cue.  It taught me something important about What Really
Matters in a film script:  a character arc for the protagonist that's not
complete before the first plot point.

Author
Steve Rhodes
It's war out there.  The seventh graders control the prized high ground
and are raining snowballs down on their younger classmates.  Brave
11-year-old Charlie Frost (Joseph Cross) is leading an insurrection from
the field of battle below.  With an audacious strategy, he goes mano a
mano with the biggest bully in the class and wins.
After this promising opening, director Troy Miller's JACK FROST proceeds
to go nowhere.  Most of the time it wants to be a poignant story of a
boy and his reincarnated father.  Sometimes it thinks its mission is as
a slapstick comedy.  The weak script by Mark Steven Johnson and Steven
Bloom succeeds at neither.  Although its hero, a snowman, cries, the
audience is unlikely to shed any tears, and the comedy provides no more
than a few modest laughs.  A project with a good idea but nothing more,
the movie needs a complete rewrite.
During the long and dull first half-hour, we are introduced to the
characters.  A completely wasted Michael Keaton plays Charlie's dad,
Jack Frost.  Jack's desire to be a famous musician makes him into an
absentee father.  He's the type who will promise to be at his son's
important hockey game but will forget as soon as he gets involved with
his work.  Kelly Preston plays Charlie's mom, Gabby.
When Jack dies, you may feel like applauding silently in hope that his
transformation into three frozen balls will finally get the movie going.
You will be wrong.  Keaton, who is a great comedian, gets lines so lame
that even he can't do much with them.  The writers think the word "butt"
is funny so they proceed to go for the world record for the maximum uses
in a single movie.  Suffice it to say that few of the uses are humorous.
After cutting to a year later, Jack does come back as a snowman.  With
two branches for arms and what looks like a Halloween costume of a
snowman for the torso, he comes alive.  Between the scenes that attempt
to manipulate our emotions, the movie becomes a buddy picture with Dad
and son employing snowballs to take on the school bullies.  Filled with
long chase scenes on snowboards and sleds, the movie tries hard to gain
some momentum but fails.
With a schmaltzy finale, the movie finally decides to give up.
Don't be surprised if you end up thinking of the old Samuel Goldwyn
quote: "Why should people go out and pay to see bad movies when they can
stay at home and see bad television for nothing?"  Why indeed.
JACK FROST is rated PG for sexuality and bathroom humor and would be
acceptable for kids 8 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 9, was bored stiff.  He said he thought the film
"stunk," especially the long, first part.  He thought there was nothing
to the plot.  A normally generous grader, he gave the movie just a
single *.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
When Jack Frost (**) was in its development stages, it sounded like a
potentially great film.  The title role wasn't yet cast, but John
Travolta, George Clooney and Billy Bob Thornton were rumored to be the
top contenders for the coveted part.  Gloomy director Sam Raimi (Evil
Dead, A Simple Plan) was tentatively attached to direct the story of a
lousy father who, after dying, gets a second chance to be a good dad
when he comes back to life – as a snowman.
The finished product, however, is drastically different than the dark
and quirky film that I expected.  Michael Keaton won the lead and Troy
Miller replaced Raimi at the helm, so, on paper, it still didn't sound
too bad.  Keaton has done dark (Batman) and quirky (Beetlejuice) while
first-time director Miller has done both as a member of HBO's wickedly
fantastic Mr. Show comedy troupe.  But there are still problems with
Frost.
Problem #1 is that Frost has turned out to be a kid-flick.  Not that
kid-flicks are inherently bad (see current releases Babe: Pig in the
City and A Bug's Life for proof), but the ray of hope grew somewhat
dimmer.  I remained optimistic as the credited screenwriters were Mark
Steven Johnson (writer/director of the terrific Simon Birch) and Steven
Bloom (James & the Giant Peach).
Problem #2 is the snow.  They must have filmed this during the sunniest
part of August in southern California.  The snow is so fake-looking that
it's actually distracting.  At one point, the family dog trods through
the fluffy white stuff, which comes up to his belly, but doesn't leave
any kind of trail.  Granted, this is a pretty minor issue, but if you're
going to pay Jim Henson's Creatureshop to animate the snowman, why not
go the extra yard and have realistic snow?
Problem #3 is that Keaton's father, leader of the struggling bluesy Jack
Frost Band, isn't really that bad of a dad at all.  Being a traveling
musician, Jack isn't always there to see his kid Charlie (Joseph Cross)
play hockey or congratulate him for an exemplary report card.  He
doesn't beat his wife (Kelly Preston), nor does he snuff out his
cigarettes on Charlie's arms.  If anything, Charlie comes off as a bit
whiny.
The last straw for Charlie is when Jack's band gets their first big
break, but must play a show on Christmas to get signed to a major label
(perhaps Charlie thought his pop was selling out).  On the way to the
show, Jack decides to turn around and spend the holiday with his
family.  But he crashes the car and dies instead.  This setup takes
about forty minutes.
Flash forward one year to a bitter, fatherless Charlie struggling in
both school and social life.  One night, he wishes Jack back to life
with a magic harmonica, and when the snowman in the front yard channels
the spirit of his dead dad, the two are reunited at last.  Of course at
first, everyone in the sleepy Colorado town thinks that Charlie's grief
is causing him to crack up.  They see him arguing with the snowman.
They see him dragging the snowman through the center of town on a sled.
We had a kid like that in our neighborhood, but my mom always made me
come inside when he was loose.
Anyway, Frozen Pop teaches Charlie the `J' shot in hockey and helps him
get even with Rory Buck, the evil school bully (who appears to be the
grandson of A Christmas Story's yellow-eyed Scut Farcas), and -
blah-blah-blah - everyone goes home happy.
Despite dumbing the story down to the level of a second grader, the
movie is still enjoyable for adults for three reasons.  The first is the
fun of picking out Frank Zappa's three kids (Dweezil, Moon and Ahmet all
appear).  The second is spotting the cast members of TV's Mr. Show (I
counted three, plus one voice-over).  The third is trying to figure out
why Mark Addy (the fat guy from The Full Monty) was cast as a hardware
store employee and why screaming poet Henry Rollins played a suburban
hockey dad.
The kids will love the snowball fight, which is second in intensity this
year only to the storming of the beaches at Normandy in Saving Private
Ryan.  They'll also love the unexplainable snowboard/sled chase scene
down what must be the biggest hill on the planet.  This rivals The
French Connection in terms of elapsed time and sheer square mileage
covered.  In real life, the participants would have ended up somewhere
in Idaho.
While not an instant holiday classic, Frost is still the best Christmas
film of the year (sure, the only other one is Jonathan Taylor-Thomas'
awful I'll Be Home for Christmas, but who's counting).  Now, if I were
some big, high-falutin' film critic, they would cut that first sentence
up and use it for promotion by blaring `The Best…Film of the Year!' in
television and newspaper ads.  It ain't, but it ain't too bad, either.
Jack Frost (1:38) is rated PG for mild profanity, cartoonish violence,
some light sexual innuendo and talk of `frozen balls'

Author
James Sanford

 As a sort of litmus test to see whether or not "Jack Frost" is the movie
for you, consider your response to this bit of information: It includes
Hanson performing covers of the Spencer Davis Group's "Gimme Some Lovin'"
and the Rascals' "Good Lovin'," as well as a Spice Girls' rendition of
"Sleigh Ride."
 Still intrigued? Then consider the title character in "Frost" is a would-be
musician and that he's played by Michael Keaton, who sings as if he was the
honors graduate of the Bruce Willis School of Blues. His rocked-up version
of "Frosty the Snowman" isn't easily intelligible, although, like the
Kingsmen's "Louie Louie," it sounds vaguely dirty.
 The rest of "Jack Frost," however, is almost as pure as snow. Jack dies in
a car crash, leaving behind lonely widow Gabby (Kelly Preston) and young son
Charlie (Joseph Cross). But before any tears can be shed, Jack's back,
reincarnated as a snowman and brought to life by a magic harmonica. There's
frollicking a-plenty before the movie gets around to delivering an unsubtle
sermon about how ambitious parents should forsake their own dreams of glory
and pay more attention to their offspring, a message kids in the audience
are sure to validate.
  Though as tacky-looking as a plastic tree bedecked in ornaments from the
dollar store, "Jack Frost" probably has enough action and pre-pubescent
humor (the snowman checks himself out to see if he's anatomically correct)
to please grade-schoolers, and, though it deals with death and grief, it
does so in the glossiest, most cheerful way possible, a far cry from the
moodiness of "Babe: Pig in the City." You also have to have a certain
appreciation for any family flick that can somehow reel in Dweezil Zappa and
Henry Rollins.
 The performances are better than the silly material deserves. Keaton is his
usual casual self, Cross avoids becoming too cloying and "The Full Monty"'s
Mark Addy provides a bit of extra warmth as an understanding friend of the
family.
James Sanford

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Troy Miller.
Cast: Joseph Cross, Michael Keaton, Kelly Preston, Mark Addy, Henry 
Rollins, Andrew Lawrence.
1998 - 95 minutes.
Rated PG (for sexual situations, mild profanity, and mature themes).
Reviewed December 13, 1998.
By Dustin Putman 
Dustin Putman's Film Reviews ">Http://members.aol.com/filmfan16/index.html>
"Jack Frost," is one of those dumb, corny concoctions that attempts to 
be a heartwarming family film, but is too muddled in its own cliches and 
predictability to be the least bit touching. This does not come as a 
surprise, since the studio that made it is Warner Brothers, who is on a 
current streak of one bad film after the other.
Jack Frost (Michael Keaton) is a struggling middle-aged rock musician 
who loves his wife, Gabby (Kelly Preston), and 11-year-old son, Charlie 
(Joseph Cross), but doesn't spend nearly enough time with them. When he 
receives a call from a music label that wants to hear him play, he has 
to cancel his planned family outing up in the mountains for Christmas. 
Halfway there, Jack has second thoughts, but on his way back home, is in 
a car accident and dies. Switch forward a year, Christmas is approaching 
once again, and Charlie and Gabby are still having a difficult time 
coming to terms with Jack's death. When Charlie begins to play the 
harmonica his father gave him the night before he died, the snowman 
outside the house is taken over by Jack's spirit. Jack wants to spend 
some time with his son before the upcoming warm front melts him, but 
Charlie desperately tries to prevent his melting demise.
"Frosty the Snowman," is a classic cartoon, and the idea of a snowman 
that is alive works splendidly when animated, but as a live-action film, 
it doesn't work at all. After a somewhat promising prologue in which the 
Frost family is established, "Jack Frost," quickly goes downhill, 
especially once the snowman comes into play. Since Jack has been 
deceased for a whole year, you would think there would be many questions 
to ask him, such as, "what happens after you die?" or, "how does it feel 
to be a snowman?" but instead, the film focuses on a snowball fight 
subplot and an inevitably oversentimental climax that could be 
telegraphed before I even sat down to watch the movie.
The performances are respectable enough, but no one deserves to be 
punished by appearing in a silly film like this. Michael Keaton at least 
got off easy, since he disappears after the first twenty minutes, but 
what exactly does he think he is doing with his career here? I have 
always liked Kelly Preston. She is clearly a talented, charismatic 
actress, but has never been given a good role in her life, usually 
having to settle for a one-dimensional supporting character, as in, 
1997's, "Nothing to Lose," and, "Addicted to Love." Joseph Cross was 
probably the highlight in the cast, since he believably portrayed a boy 
suffering the loss of a parent. In one of the only subplots that 
actually works, due to its wittiness, Henry Rollins is highly amusing as 
a hockey coach who becomes terrified and paranoid after seeing the live 
snowman.
This brief hint of cleverness is pushed to the side, however, by the 
tried-and-true main plot at hand, which is the sappy story of a father 
and son. Since I knew what was going to happen by the time the 
conclusion came around, I had no choice but to sit there and listen to 
painfully insipid, cringe-inducing lines of dialogue. Some of my 
favorites was an interaction between the son and father: "You da man," 
says Charlie. "No, I da snowman," replies Jack. Or how about this little 
zinger, coming from a school bully that miraculously becomes friendly 
towards Charlie and tries to help him out: "Snowdad is better than no 
dad." Do people really get paid in Hollywood for writing pieces of trash 
like this?
The snowman, created by John Henson's Creature Shop, is more believable 
than the snowman from last year's unintentionally hilarious 
direct-to-video horror flick, also called, "Jack Frost," but it still 
was difficult to tell if it was a person in a suit or computer effects. 
Either way, it was an awful lot of work to go through, just to come up 
with a final product as featherbrained as this project.
As a seasonal Holiday picture, "Jack Frost," is pretty much a clunker. A 
better Christmas film from this year is, "I'll Be Home For Christmas." 
Better yet, my suggestion would be to stay home and watch a quality 
film, such as, "It's a Wonderful Life," "A Christmas Story," or, 
"Prancer." "Jack Frost," is an earnest, but severely misguided film, and 
children, as well as adults, deserve better. I doubt they would want to 
see a movie about the death of a parent, anyway. 

Author
Matt Williams
It's hard to imagine the idea even looked good on paper.  Mixing a live
action Frosty-the-snowman adventure with a tragic father and son bonding
story, Jack Frost is even more unappealing on screen.
Michael Keaton plays a blues musician by the unlikely name of Jack
Frost.  Jack selfishly places his career ahead of his wife, Gabby (Kelly
Preston), and child, Charlie (Joseph Cross).  But before this neglectful
father has a chance to repent, he dies in a tragic Christmas Eve car
crash.
One year later, young Charlie still hasn't recovered from the loss of
his dad.  His fervent Christmas wish is to spend one more Christmas with
his father.  And, strangely enough, Charlie's wish is granted.
But Jack doesn't return to earth in the same form in which he left it.
Instead, due to some cosmic comic streak, he returns as a walking,
talking, magical snowman.  But, any second chance is better than none,
right?
The living snowman effects are handled with a mixture of puppets and
computer animation.  The result is much less than satisfactory.  Too
often, the snowman appears to be made of felt and styrofoam rather than
snow.  But even when the snowman is semi-realistic the result is an
unintentionally creepy character, much more disturbing than lovable.
Michael Keaton, whose role is mainly devoted to voice-over work,  at
least tries to give the snowman as much life as possible. But, even
Keaton can't give life to Jack Frost's frozen dialogue.
The plot somehow manages to include just about every snow-and-ice bound
activity imaginable (excepting the luge).  There are more snowball
fights, snow forts, snow skiing, hockey games, ice skating,
snowboarding, etc., than you'd likely see at the Winter Olympics.  The
trouble is, very little of these activities add anything of import to
the plot.
One thing the film never quite gets around to explaining is why Jack is
forced to return as a snowman.  Is it some sort of karmic punishment for
being a poor father?  A cruel twist of nature? A bad joke?  It was
probably just a lazy screenwriter.
It's difficult to comprehend the intended target audience for Jack
Frost.  Those old enough not to be terrified by its title creature are
likely already too sophisticated for a movie of this caliber.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 650 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases
