Title
Review for Mississippi Masala (1991)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Brian L. Johnson
     Indian (from India) Sarita Chudhury, who moved from Africa to
Mississippi with her family 18 years before, meets Denzel Washington, a
Black who owns his own rug cleaning business.  The two fall in love, but
their relationship is threatened by Sarita Chudhury's father, who
dislikes Blacks.
     MISSISSIPPI MASALA is by the director of SALAAM BOMBAY!, and I feel
that it is a very good film, and definitely worth seeing.   I almost
didn't go to see this film, because the title, at least to me, sounded
boring, and I had only seen one preview for the film and it didn't tell
too much.  I give MISSISSIPPI MASALA a four on a scale of zero to five.
MISSISSIPPI MASALA is rated R for explicit language, adult situations,
and mild violence.
     When I saw the advertisements for MISSISSIPPI MASALA I wasn't quite
sure of what it was going to be about.  It looked like it was either
going to be a remake of ROMEO AND JULIET or an immigrant drama.  It was
more of a remake of ROMEO AND JULIET than an immigrant drama, but it
really wasn't either.
     Denzel Washington gave a great performance, along with the rest of
the cast.  What I think that I liked most about the film, was the
screenplay.  It was very well crafted and it held my interest throughout
the film.  Also the locations for the film were well-picked.  I don't
think that the film would have been nearly as good if the film was set
in a rich neighborhood.  
     I think that MISSISSIPPI MASALA deserved a better release than it
got, at least in my area.  My local art/import theater picked it up and
played it for four days.  If given the chance, I think that the film
would have done very well in a real movie theater, and gotten a bigger
audience.

Author
sunil ramchandani
Starring Denzel Washington, Sarita Choudhury, Roshan Seth,
         Sharmila Tagore, and Charles Dutton
Directed by: Mira Nair
Music: L. Subramanium
     To call Mira Nair's latest film a heavy handed social commentary, 
would, in my opinion, be doing great injustice to this lady and her
film.  A message it does carry, but that is definitely not the intent of
the film.  For if it were, then the whole premise is wrong, the
situations are uncalled for, and the characters are too cliched.  This
is a very unpretentious, earthy, and simplistic collage of varied
characters.
     The main protagonist of the film Jai (Roshan Seth) is an Indian (as
in from India) African, very idealistic by nature, who forever harbors
dreams of his native homeland--Uganda, after being expelled (along with
all the Indian expatriates) from there in 1972.  Normally, it would be
easy to dismiss Jai off as a hypocrite.  But hypocrite he is not, rather
a man with good intentions, albeit his hard experiences have embittered
him to the point of being detestful of the black-skinned.  Still, is he
really that resentful of the black race?  No, rather it is just an
outlet to vent his frustrations, for he was after all a victim of
circumstances beyond his control.
     It is really this feeling which comes into play after he hears
about the relationship of his only daughter and child Mina (Sarita
Choudhury) with the local carpet cleaner Dimitrius (Denzel Washington),
even though he rationalizes to Washington otherwise.  Drawing upon his
own experiences he tries to explain to Washington, why he is not willing
to let his daughter go through similar situations he experienced as one
of the minority when in Uganda.  
     His realization is late in coming, though nonetheless is very
welcome, and in a scene remarkably done as he embraces a black African
baby while watching a dance in a street square in Kampala, Uganda.  The
whole scene is so much significant of the world as it is today, a world
in transition, a much closer and smaller world.
     The movie on the whole is very appealing and entertaining.  The
smalltown ambience of Greenwood definitely adds to the unique flavor.
Also the characters of the Indian motel owners albeit cliched, add good
humor to a movie which in any case has a strong undercurrent of being
funny.  
     Of the cast, both Choudhury and Washington are a match made for
each other.  The chemistry between them is terrific, the scenes
involving them have a spontaneity and freshness erstwhile seldom
witnessed.  As proof, you have a scene where they are taking a walk in
the scenic environs of Greenwood, when he very hesitantly asks if he
could kiss her.  The whole shot is so well handled, it is very difficult
not to break out into a smile.  Kinu (played by Sharmila Tagore) as the
mother is very adequate,she appears emotionally distraught and very
vulnerable for most part, a typical Indian wife would best characterize
her role.  Charles Dutton (from the Fox TV show ROC) is delightful in
a cameo as Tyronne--business partner of Washington.  Of the Indian
cast, Anil (Ranjit Chowdhury) as the motel owner, and his friend Pontiac
(Mohan Gokhale) are brilliant.  And finally Roshan Seth who seems very
effective as the morose and yet hopeful Jai still pining for his
homeland.  If you've seen GANDHI, you'd recognize Roshan Seth (plays the
role of Nehru) as a terrific actor.
     The film does include some breathtaking shots of the countryside in
Kampala, the green rolling hills, and Lake Victoria (?) as seen from
Jai's house.  In her second major attempt after SALAAM BOMBAY Mira
Nair maintains her effort, not superlative, but good nonetheless.  In
any case this Harvard film school product seems destined to go places.
Her next motion picture which she is doing for Warner Bros. is about
the life of Buddha.  
     I recommend this film unequivocally; you'll leave the movie theater
with a smile.  As Sarita tells Denzel in one of the scenes from the
film, that she is essentially a 'Masala' (mixture of spices) having
lived in different countries and having experienced different cultures,
this film is also loaded with all the Masala for an evening of
entertainment.

Author
Frank Maloney
     MISSISSIPPI MASALA is a film by Mira Nair.  The script was written
by Sooni Toraparevala.  The film stars Denzel Washington, Roshan Seth,
Sarita Choudhury, Sharmila Tagore.  It is rated R for sexual situations.
     MISSISSIPPI MASALA is the creation of the same director who gave us
SALAAM BOMBAY! (1988), one of my favorite films of all time.  MASALA
does not have the visceral impact as the film about Bombay's street
kids, but it does have the same sweetness and affection for its
characters.  This film is a variation on Romeo and Juliet, for all
intents and purposes, wherein the opposing families are
African-Americans and transplanted African-Indians, coexisting in
Greenwood, Mississippi, superficially peaceful until Demetrius (Denzel
Washington), the self-starter with his own carpet-cleaning business,
crosses the invisible line and finds himself in a situation with the
dark-skinned Mina.  Mina (Sarita Choudhury) is the 24-year-old daughter
of a former lawyer (Roshan Seth) who is consumed with getting back his
Ugandan citizenship, lost when Idi Amin expelled all the Indians in his
country in 1972.  Her mother (Sharmila Tagore) runs a liquor store and
tries to run Mina's life and marry her off to slightly slimey Hari.  
     Like EUROPA, EUROPA, another film about racism and displacement, 
MASALA is concerned first with the characters' quest for identity, for
finding a place that is home.  The Indians seem to take India with them
whether they are in Kampala or Greenwood (Mina herself has never been to
India).  The Indians, especially a trio of men, seem to be somewhat
stock characters, figures of satire, on whom little love is wasted; the
most sympathetic of the three is played by Ranjit Chowdry (LONELY IN
AMERICA, 1991) as a motel owner.  The black characters are treated
overall more affectionately.  However, it is Nair's skill with the major
actors that makes MASALA worthy of your attention.  Certainly the story
itself is familiar and predictable.
     Denzel Washington is just as charming and handsome as ever,
obviously having a great time playing a homeboy.  Sarita Choudhury is
innocently sensual, fiercely determined to become her own person; the
actress grew up in Jamaica--look for her Bob Marley T-shirt.  Sharmila
Tagore, a regular in the films of Indian master Satyajit Ray, is
strong-willed, loving, frightened for her daughter and her husband, the
sole support of the family while the father is lost in his dreams of
return.  He is played by Roshan Seth, who played Nehru in GANDHI (1982);
he is deeply sympathetic, and infuriating at the same time.  It is his
personal discoveries that are the backbone of the movie.  
     MISSISSIPPI MASALA (masala is explained in the movie as being mixed
up, like spices) satirizes the rivalries of two oppressed races in the
former heartland of racial oppression.  It says racial bigotry is not
only irrational, but doomed to die.  The final scene, at Entebbe
Airport, involving Seth and an black African baby is deeply moving and
emotional, a symbol that passes beyond explication and says it all at
the same time.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  What could have been prosaic Romeo-
     and-Juliet material has more interest when the communities
     are Indian and black and the woman's father is an Indian
     exile from Uganda who dreams of returning.  Rating: +2 (-4 to
     +4).
The advance publicity made MISSISSIPPI MASALA look like another Romeo and
Juliet story told on the backdrop of a  cultural clash.  In a way that us
what it is, but it also rises above that to tell the more interesting story
of a man who has lost his country because of the color of his skin and how
he must decide whether he is willing to pay the price to get it back.  It is
a story of Indian-black racial tensions on two continents in the 1970s and
the 1990s.
     In 1972 Idi Amin's reign of terror is reaching out to all non-black
residents of Uganda.  Jay (played by Roshan Seth) is a liberal Indian lawyer
practicing in Uganda.  After having given too frank an interview to the BBC,
Jay is thrown in jail.  A friend bribes Jay's way out of prison but, like
all non-blacks, Jay is thrown out of Uganda together with his wife and his
young daughter Mina.  He flees first to England, but finally settles down
with an Indian community in Mississippi.  There he does little but dream of
getting the new Ugandan government to restore his lands.  His wife supports
the family by running a liquor store in a black neighborhood.  Mina (played
by Sarita Choudhury), now grown up, becomes romantically involved with a
black man, Demetrius (played by Denzel Washington), who runs a  carpet
cleaning company.  There are the predictable repercussions in the two
communities.
     There are several nice ironies in the resulting conflict.  Demetrius
believes that the Indians behave too much like the whites.  Yet what we see
of Demetriius's family shows them living very much the standard white
American lifestyle.  They look a lot like the All-American family.  Joe
Seneca, incidentally, gives a stand-out performance as Demetrius's father.
It is Mina's family that lives int he squalid Motel Monte Cristo and
maintains their traditional customs.  It is the Indian Jay who wants to go
back to Africa to live, not the blacks.  One black does toy with the idea,
but it is clear the black family has roots too deeply set in the United
States.  There are some nice character portraits and vignettes of the Indian
community.  In one amusing scene we see a motel clerk practicing his bicycle
riding and his phone answering at the same time.
     Director Mira Nair previously did SALAAM BOMBAY which was popular with
the critics, but this is the more entertaining film.  I rate it a +2 on the
-4 to +4 scale.

Author
Jules Damji
     Many East-Indian Americans of first (or even second) generation
will identify with Mina's character, played by Sarita Choudry, the
London-born actress, in this movie.  Her need to assert her freedom and
individuality, her curious desire to explore and engage with other
people and cultures, her eagerness to be accepted by the society around
her, beside her own community, and her social discomfort with
exaggerated religious and social rituals with the extended family, is an
inevitable aspect of all immigrant-children's "Americaness," whatever
that means.  
     But her identity crises, though not deeply explored in the movie,
were even more complex; she was a true "masala": born and partly raised
in Kampala, Uganda, where her childhood suffered an indelible trauma of
uprootedness which marked her psyche, she was then raised in England, 
and finally in Greenwood, Miss.  Her early childhood in African country
exposed her to people of other colour, other races -- people of darker
complexion than hers: Africans.  Like her father, she did not subscribe 
to "colour attitudes" that are so pervasive in India and among Indian 
immigrants in this country.  So having an affair (or even being
attracted to) African-American was not a taboo for her, as it was for
the Indian community in Miss.
     Ms. Nair could have developed Mina's complex character to reveal
some of these deep anxieties that arise and grip children of such
up-bringing and up-rootedness and dis-placement.  That aspect of Mina's
psyche would have been valuable or of worthy to this group, and any
young immigrant in general.  But the "identity crises" was not the sole
theme of this movie, only one of many.  To Ms.  Nair, other themes --
"prejudice" and "homelessness" and "dispossession" -- were more
important, needed in-depth analysis and portrayal through other
characters in the movie.
     The ramifications of inter-racial romance between Demeritus, played
by handsome and charming Denzel Washington, and Mina explore the racial
prejudice of Indians in Greenwood against African-Americans.  And the
rude awakenings of Asians in Uganda (and East Africa in general) is
another form of prejudice based on skin colour is examined in the movie.
     As a couple, Denzel and Sarita are absolutely gorgeous -- a match
made in heaven.  They both exude what the papers on this side of U.S.
scream: "sweet sexuality."  And no doubt about that!
     But far more important, at least for me, was the theme of
"homelessness," of the notion of "home," a plot or patch of land,
landscape that one identifies with, one proudly calls his "home."  That
theme, undoubtedly, was driven home quite forcefully and vividly by the
character Jay, Mina's father, a Ugandan Indian lawyer, played by Roshan
Seth.  It touched and moved me profoundly.  His (and Demeritus) was the
only character fully developed in the movie.  Nair takes us into his
life in Uganda, where his forefathers came from India as indentured
workers to build the railways from the coast to the interior for the
British; she relays to us -- through flashbacks -- his obsession with
Uganda, his "home," his country of birth, to which he had dedicated his
life as a prominent lawyer; his anger and bitterness of being uprooted
and expelled penniless from his "home"; his relationship with his
African brother Okello; his identification with people and landscape of
Uganda; and finally his helplessness and despair as an exile in
Greenwood, always subject to subtle taunts by the extended Indian family
of motel owners.  All this was superbly and intensely acted by Seth.
For those who have seen MY BEAUTIFUL LAUNDERETTE, he played Omar's (the
British-Asian boy and Daniel Day-Lewis's lover) bed-ridden,
vodka-drinking, embittered father.
     Coming from the same part of world, I could identify with Jay very
much, and also with Mina's affinity towards African-Americans (or Black
people in general).  The lengthy prologue to the movie of Uganda brought
back some tearful and heart-wrenching memories of African landscape and
people left behind.  For Indian-Africans who have immigrated to this
country, after having leaved in Africa for more than three generations,
the battle for their children's identity problems takes on even more
complicated turn.  Mina is a case in point!  
     (By the way, Mira Nair is married to a Ugandan Indian named
Mahmoud, who is a professor of political science at the Makerere
University in Kampala.  Many aspects of Jay's character and experience
in Uganda and in exile in Greenwood were extracted from her husband's
book "From Citizen to Refugee."  And the serene and beautiful house on
the green-rolling hills in Kampala, the site of Mina's childhood, is
their present home of residence.  
     I have met Mahmoud on more than one occasion in Tanzania (my
birthplace), where he was in exile, teaching at the university.  He is a
formidable spokesman).
     The movie did indeed portray the stereo-types of Indian motel
owners in this country and their prejudice and "narrow-mindedness" about
other cultures and people.  There are some caustic and bitting true
elements in this portrayal; some funny, some rather damaging.
     Notwithstanding that, I think she did a good job in delivering her
intended themes.  The end is touching, from Jay's perspective:"home is
where love is."  
     [Not a little patch of landscape in some remote part of the world, 
but something closer to heart].  
     But for Mina, the whole open world is out there waiting for her to 
explore and find her niche, along with Demeritus, of course.  Like her
father, who found his "home" in his wife's unrelenting support and
love, she too finds her "home" in Demeritus's love -- at least one so
infers from the ending.  
