Title
Review for Winstanley (1975)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz

WINSTANLEY (directors/writers: Kevin Brownlow/Andrew Mollo;
screenwriter: from novel "Comrade Jacob" by David Caute;
cinematographer: Ernest Vincze; cast: Miles Halliwell (Gerrard
Winstanley), Jerome Willis (General Fairfax), David Bramley (Parson
Platt), Dawson France (Capt. Gladman), Phil Dunn (Commune member), Terry
Higgins (Tom Haydon), Alison Halliwell (Mrs. Platt), Phil Oliver
(William Everard), Sid Rawle (Ranter), 1975-UK)
Winstanley is a truly amazing and painstaking account of misery, as it
depicts those whose cause is righteous and nonviolent. Winstanley evokes
the civil war mood of the mid-1600s - where Cromwell's parliamentary
forces defeat and behead the king and only there is a second bloody
civil war where the levellers, those who wanted a share in the land, are
crushed by Cromwell, thereby ending a shortlived optimism abounding that
things for the poor will change for the better. The narrative is taken
from the pamphlet writings of Gerrard Winstanley, a gentle, Christian
radical. He sort of resembles a hippie of the 1970s. The film is based
on the book by David Caute, "Comrade Jacob," but has been thoroughly
reworked by co-directors Brownlow and Mollo.
In April 1649, at St. George's Hill in Surrey, England, a
Reformation-era religious sect of about 40 called the Diggers form a
commune and till the soil on "common land," which by law permits grazing
- but not settlement and cultivation. Gerrard Winstanley (Miles
Halliwell), the leader of the Diggers, wanted to reclaim the land for
the poor who had been dispossessed by Oliver Cromwell's recent civil
war. Unfortunately, the local landowners saw the Diggers as a threat to
their livelihood and way of life and, led by the stern Presbyterian
parson, John Platt (Bramley), use local thugs and government troops to
violently uproot the Digger commune.
Brownlow is by no means a great filmmaker, he is more known for his
books: "The Parade's Gone By"/"Behind the Mask of Innocence," and for
his English TV series on the silent-era: Hollywood, Unknown Chaplin,
Buster Keaton: A Hard Act to Follow, Harold Lloyd: The Third Genius. His
unique filming style, his penchant for austerity, his demand for
authenticity, his equalizing of all scenes in importance so that no
event sticks out from the others, and his inspired devotion toward
looking at the past, perhaps hoping to unearth some missing piece in the
puzzle of mankind that keeps the modern world from advancing on the past
tragedies, gives this film an air of adventure. Lacking the necessary
dramatics of films that are more accessible to the general public, this
film is nonetheless a work of great intrigue and visual beauty. Despite
being filmed without the benefit of professional actors, the only
professional being Jerome Willis who played General Fairfax, this film
has a certain solemnity about it that forces its truths to be seen in
the face of the actors. It is Brownlow's way of filming such misery, a
way that records the Diggers' sufferings as if it were the official
record of what happened, and probably could pass for what is official.
This sense of reality is what gives the film its raw power. It's a
lesson in history that is re-created from the words of a journal that
allows the directors to look back at the past with a sense of reverence.
This film acts as a vehicle to understand what the Diggers believed and
how they lived, and how they justly thought that the earth was made
common property for everyone. That everyone born on earth shall be fed
by it and that all are equals in the Creation. So when Winstanley says,
"Our life is a hard one," we can see for ourselves what he meant. In
real life the actor who played Winstanley, Miles Halliwell, was a
teacher. He read Caute's book and recommended it to Brownlow, thereby
securing the part. His performance was beautiful.
Most of the nonprofessionals actors were locals hired because of their
17th century look. Sid Rawle plays a Ranter, they upset the Diggers with
their contempt for the Bible and made them feel uncomfortable when they
entered their commune. He is from the New Diggers, a modern day commune
that is interested in squatter's rights. Andrew Mollo, a military
historian, was asked to help with the costumes and then collaborated on
the script and direction. His father donated the land where the filming
took place.
The Diggers no longer exist, having evolved into the modern day Quakers.
There is no question, this low budget project, the BFI put up seventeen
thousand pounds, achieved the maximum in having an authentic look, even
showing the rare breeds of animals, of the time. It showed breeds of
pigs and chickens that don't exist today but did during the 17th
century. The film took 8 years to finish, but the actual shooting was
done in 7 weeks. The cast had day jobs and therefore the filming had to
be done over an extended period of time. The film's cost is about the
same as a James Bond film's title scene would cost. The film's
cinematographer, Ernest Vincze, like almost everyone in the film,
including the directors, worked for nothing. He would often be gone to
take high paying jobs in another film before returning.
This little known event in English history, the first "communist" revolt
in history, was re-created in a straight-forward fashion, telling what
went wrong and why it failed by 1651. It doesn't pretend to have the
answers, but the questions it raises about the ability of mankind to
live and work together, is one worth asking.
The message of the film might seem naive or confrontational to many,
including the Marxists, the bourgeoisie, the film critics looking for a
more recognizable kind of film to evaluate, and the common man, bored by
what he doesn't want to know. But to others, perhaps the more restless
in society, not afraid of ideas, there is a freshness in this work that
you can't easily shrug off by pointing to the filmmaker's refusal to be
more melodramatic. The scenes were acted with conviction and its lack of
Hollywood type of poshness actually played to its favor, making the
action seem more pertinent.
The Diggers' song attests to the idealism they sought: "You poor take
courage, you rich take care, This Earth was made a Common Treasury for
everyone to share, All things in common, all people one."
The Diggers worked the rough soil, they were amid a hostile surrounding,
unprotected and harassed by the followers of the law. Their story is not
something you can easily forget in the black-and- white framed shots,
taken by a hand-held camera, and in their uncompromising idealism
squaring off against self-righteous forces that wanted to crush them,
afraid of their new visions for mankind. Try comparing Winstanley to
other period films of the commercial variety, and it is hard not to see
how much more real and meaningful this film is. If nothing else, at
least, it is a hard film to forget. For the poetic dream of Winstanley,
for an equitable and more reasonable world, one that is not forged by
malice and greed: that is a vision the world is still waiting to see
actually happen.
This film is available on video by Milestone.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
David Gardiner
You poor take courage, you rich take care,
This Earth was made a Common Treasury for everyone to share,
All things in common, all people one.
"But everyone shall put their hands to till the earth and bring up cattle,
and the blessing of the earth shall be common to all; when a man hath need
of any corn or cattle, take from the next store-house he meets with. There
shall be no buying and selling, no fairs or markets, but the whole earth
shall be the common Treasury for every man"
We don't really live in an age of idealism any more. There is a cycle to the
comings and goings of such things. But many of us are old enough to remember
the posters of Che Guevera that bedecked the wall of every student bedsit
through the late 60s and early 70s, and the passionate all-night student
arguments, with stained and chipped mugs filled with black coffee on the
floor beside us and Bob Dylan wailing softly in the background, when we
worked-out all those definitive blueprints for human society:  characterised
typically in terms of what society would not contain, such as governments,
armies, money, possessive sexual relationships, private property, national
boundaries, social classes, privilege, end of term exams, nagging
parents........   One thing we knew for certain: when our turn came, we
would not be the same.  We would not participate in and recreate the world
into which we had been born.  Sometimes I still wonder where it all went
wrong.
We were not the first generation to feel these things and to dream these
dreams. Very far from it. Since the days of Plato and Socrates and long
before people have looked at the way their societies worked and dreamed of
fundamental changes. And of course it didn't always stop at theory. Most of
the present-day nations of the West and many of those of the Third World and
the East have emerged from social revolutions and civil wars: America,
Russia, China, France, Viet Nam, South Africa and Ireland to name but a few.
It might surprise a lot of educated British people to be told that our
nation too belongs on this list, but such is the case. In the middle of the
17th Century we executed our king and fought a bloody civil war to determine
what kind of a society our children were going to live in.  Not only
soldiers and gather-up armies battled against one another, ideas did too.
It was an age of great and largely forgotten visionaries: men and women who
believed that they could see a way forward to a new and better form of
social organisation, some principle whereby we could share the wealth of the
earth more equitably and live our lives in peace without hurting one
another, some way to smash the "mind-forged manacles" that held all the
different strata of society equally in bondage.
One of the foremost of these visionaries was Gerrard Winstanley. He argued
that the ordinary people of Britain had been enslaved ever since the Norman
invasion, by the control of the land, the most fundamental of all "means of
production", by the Lords of Manors, and he suggested in the most peaceful
possible terms,  how the earth, our common Treasury, might be shared out
again.
In April 1649 a band of about 40 Diggers, inspired by Gerrard Winstanley and
William Everard began to dig uncultivated common land on Saint George's Hill
in Cobham, Surrey, building simple houses in which to live, sharing all
their goods and produce in common. As word spread, and the privileged woke
up to the implications of this tiny token action, the authorities turned
hostile. The commune was dispersed by government troops, Everard and
Winstanley arrested, tried, and heavily fined. Each new attempt to get the
community started was crushed, by violence, harassment and intimidation.
Nevertheless, despite all government opposition to the experiment, the
Cobham colony lasted until 1651. The Diggers inspired other colonies in
other parts of England also, but ultimately none of them could stand up to
the forces mobilized against them. Winstanley's dream was a wonderful,
humanitarian vision of a gentler, more just and happy world; a dream that
came again to other people in succeeding centuries, but for whose
realization we are still waiting.
The film "Winstanley" attempts to paint a portrait of this extraordinary
man, his personality and motivations and the times in which he lived. There
are no compromises. It was created by the same team who, twelve years
earlier, produced "It Happened Here", a chilling fantasy of a wartime
England under German occupation. Andrew Mollo, the Artistic Director and
Co-Director on both projects, is simply incapable of compromise where
historical accuracy is concerned. From the agricultural tools that the
people use, to the breeds of pigs and chickens that they tend, to the willow
from which the walls of the poor peoples' houses are woven, to the stitching
in their tunics  -  wherever you look, everything is simply right. This is
the closest to 17th Century England that you are going to get, short of
time-travel. The film deserves to be seen for that alone.
But in addition to the sheer treat of the perfection of the costumes and
sets, the film also contains some of the most harrowing emotional content of
any historical drama of which I am aware. There are no crude "good guys" or
"bad guys" in "Winstanley", nobody is demonized or trivialized or
one-dimensional. It is a story almost entirely of well-intentioned people
who are either inspired by or profoundly threatened by the idea of a whole
new human order, and who react accordingly. This could not be further
removed from a simple-minded political tract. It is a serious attempt to
understand the social and individual psychology of idealism. More simply, it
is an examination of the way people hurt one another without wanting to in
the pursuit of  what they genuinely believe to be the best. Idealists are
never easy to cope with, never comfortable people to know.
Winstanley himself is played by a teacher and amateur actor, Miles
Halliwell, who played the Nazi lecturer in "It Happened Here". He is a very
fine choice for the role, having enormous screen presence, a compelling
single-mindedness and total integrity about his personality, and exactly the
right quality of being "a man apart". He is just as convincing as Winstanley
as he was when he played the smooth apologist for Fascism in the earlier
film: an arresting thought in itself! The only professional actor in the
cast is Jerome Willis, who gives a powerful but never aloof performance as
General Fairfax, radiating the confidence of noble birth in every scene in
which he appears. He epitomizes the system of  social class and privilege in
the face of which the Diggers seem puny adversaries indeed.
The film, like the novel on which it is based, is shot through with a sense
of inevitable tragedy. From its opening scene on a windswept hillside where
Parson Platt (David Bramley) and Winstanley try vainly to communicate with
one another, their voices almost drowned-out by the roaring gale, to the
heart-rending close-up of Winstanley's  face in his final despair, seen
through the pouring rain in the film's closing moments, we know that this
bright socialist vision is not to be. At least not yet. And this is the
thought with which the film leaves us, stated like all of the narration, in
Winstanley's own words. Social visions do not in fact die with their
creators, they are merely set down like burdens carried a certain distance
along the roadway, to be taken up by other fresh young travelers and carried
a little further on another day.
There are not many books, or films, to which one can  honestly attach a
description like "inspirational". This is one of them.
(Note on availability:  The video of `Winstanley', which includes Eric
Mival's documentary of the making of  both this and the earlier
Brownlow/Mollo film, can be obtained from the BFI  at 10a Stephen Mews,
London W1P 0AX.  Their website is at http://www.bfi.org.uk/home.htm >.  It
is rumored that Milestone Films in New York will be re-releasing both of the
Brownlow/Mollo films for limited theatre runs early in 1999.)
