Title
Review for Gong pu II (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ralph Beard
Or under the Cantonese title Gong Pu II
Michael 'Rambo' Chow as Michael 'Rambo' Chow
Danny Lee as Inspector Lee (Do you see a pattern here?)
Rating: 7.5 out of ten or ** 1/2 stars out of 5 (You decide)
PLOT SYNOPSIS: Two cops of contrasting ages and policing styles are 
partnered up to catch a ruthless Jewel heist gang. Much zaniness ensues
There's something strangely heart warming about finding out that cop 
movie cliches can apply anywhere, all over the world. Hotheaded cops are 
always teamed with by-the book veterans, they will grudgingly become 
friends and when a chase scene comes, some poor street vendor will 
always have his cart or boxes in the way. It's a given, and, let me 
point this out now, City Cop does not stray from this tried and true 
formula. Of course, there is the wonderful Hong Kong exception to the 
worldwide rules of action flicks, that allows us the uncertainty of 
whether our hero(s) will survive past the final scenes. And, without 
giving too much away, this does fall into that category too. Yet for 
some reason, I just don't feel like I'm doing this flick justice by 
calling it well made, but unexceptional.
Just about everyone does a better than average job, the exceptions? 
Well, Michael "Rambo" Chow doesn't live up to his nickname. He just 
doesn't have the kind of screen charisma to pull off the hotheaded cop. 
When his character does his life endangering stunts, it doesn't come 
across as something his character would do naturally. Ironically, the 
guy with the charisma to play that role is City Cop's villain, the 
ruthless and brazen jewellery store robber Brother Ng (Ben Ng). When Ng 
appears on screen, you take notice. When he interrupts his getaway from 
one heist so he can go back and shoot the guy calling for help, you know 
that's something he'd do. It's a dynamite performance, and I'm looking 
forward to watching Ng in some other flicks soon.
As for the others, Parkman Wong is fine as the by the book cop. But 
unsurprisingly it's Danny Lee (Who is also the producer) who's the 
scene-stealer. He and Wong's scenes together are far more interesting, 
and better written, than those between Wong and Chow.20
Technically, the film is okay, apart from a score that seems to be made 
up of production cd tracks, and, what at one point seems to be the music 
from Duke 3D. Director Herman Yow keeps things moving along nicely, 
(Though he does seem to be overly fond of doing a left to right tracking 
shot while two characters talk to each other) and the action scenes have 
a chaotic quality that is miles away from the vicious ballet of John 
Woo. Even when a main character dies, he spends little time focusing on 
it, and gets on with the action, good move. What Yow has working against 
him is the unremarkable plotline and paint by number characters, but 
hell, I'm not going to penalise anyone for unoriginality. I'd rather watch 
a well-made formula movie, than an original piece of crap any day.
The Verdict? City Cop is better than average Lethal Weapon-style flick 
that I would gladly pick up again.
