Title
Review for Hope Floats (1998)
Number of Reviews
20

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
In Waiting to Exhale, his previous directorial effort, Forest Whitaker
struck a chord with female audiences and elicited millions of `You Go
Girl!' interjections by showing a revengeful Angela Bassett torching her
cheating husband's personal belongings.  Not more than ten minutes into
Hope Floats, Sandra Bullock is cutting up her ex's dress shirts.  I
guess these revenge scenes must score through the roof with test
audiences.
Bullock plays Birdee Pruitt, who in the opening scene finds out that her
high school sweetheart/husband has been tupping her best friend for over
a year.  Tail between her legs, Birdee scurries back home to her
ancestral birthplace with daughter Bernice in tow.  The two runaways
shack up with Mom (Gena Rowlands) in Smithville, home of Birdee's glory
years.
In her heyday, Birdee was everything I despise  beautiful, popular, a
cheerleader and something called `The Queen of Corn'.  This apparently
means something completely different is Smithville than it did where I
grew up (see `Back Door Beauty' in Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas).
Post-separation, life finds Birdee on the low side of life's Sine
curve.  She sleeps all day, never leaves the house and seems confined to
ratty bathrobes.  Like any woman, she runs cold-hot-cold-hot toward her
family and her potential suitors.  As an added flaw, Birdee also appears
as motherly as a jar of angry scorpions, but I think that's just because
of the amazing acting stylings of Ms. Bullock.  I mean, what does this
girl do after headlining two of the biggest bombs (Speed 2:Cruise
Control and Two If by Sea) of recent memory?  She stars and executive
produces this bothersome bore of a picture. Plus, in Hope Floats she
delivers her best lines into the toilet during an implied vomiting
scene.  Implied vomiting  do us a favor and show the phlegmy stew-like
chunks, for Christ's sake.  Up next for Bullock, a remake of Pillow Talk
with Carrot Top in the male lead.  Way to go Sandra!
More disturbing than Bullock is musician-turned-actor Harry Connick, Jr.
as Justin Matisse, the boy who has always loved Birdee but was too shy
to tell her how he really felt in high school.  Is it just me or is this
guy horribly disfigured?  It looks like someone shot him face-first out
of a cannon into a cement wall.  Do women actually find him attractive?
It seems to me that he could just snap at any second and turn into his
character in Copycat.  His acting style and accent remind me of Spike
Lee, and that ain't good, G.
And don't get me started on the stupid kid.  Can there be movie like
this without the token Jonathan Lipnicki character?  Sweet fancy Moses,
I can't take it anymore.  Is one original thought or idea too much to
ask for?
At the end of the picture, Birdee explains to her daughter that every
story has a difficult beginning and a sad end, but it's the middle that
counts.  Ironic since the middle of Hope Floats made my eyes roll back
into my skull.  Then Birdee said that hope always floats to the top, not
unlike a rancid turd in the festering bowl of conventional romance
pics.  FYI - if you have trouble getting it down, the trick is to cover
it up with toilet paper and then flush it.

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        Not long ago I read a fascinating book on Jack the Ripper, a
subject which has always intrigued me: the images of dark London streets,
draped in the glow of gaslights and a damp blanket of fog, embody a
certain romance for me.  But the thing that struck me most about this
particular volume was the cold, blunt way in which it described the
ferociousness of the killer, with statements like "The victim was stabbed
fifty-three times, with twelve of the wounds being fatal in and of
themselves."  The horrific image this conjures up in my mind, of a
Victorian woman desperately trying to free herself while knowing she's
going to die, actually gave me nightmares when I began researching the
subject for a report several years ago.
        "Hope Floats," the new film starring Sandra Bullock, is similar
to Saucy Jack's victims in one respect: it knows it's dying, but continues
to struggle.  As screenwriter Steven Rogers stabs his script with the
most cliched dialogue and situations I've seen all year, the story still
valiantly attempts to break free.  Unfortunately, like the Ripper's
victims, we know it will never escape: any number of its wounds are also
fatal in and of themselves.
        In our opening scene, we meet the lovely Birdee (Bullock), a
former Texas beauty queen who's been invited onto a Jerry Springer-type
talk show by her best friend, Connie (Rosanna Arquette).  The sweet but
naive Birdee thinks she's there to get a free makeover, but Connie just
wants to reveal that she (Connie) has been having an affair with Birdee's
husband, Bill.  Zoom in on Birdee's shocked and hurt expression.
        Humiliated and angry, Birdee and her daughter Bernice promptly
move back in with Birdee's mom, Ramona (Gina Rowlands).  Birdee must now
come to terms with being back in the same sleepy town in which she grew
up, a place she's been trying to put behind her for years.  Along the way,
if we're to believe the script, she rediscovers herself, puts the past
behind her, and quickly learns to love again.
        The film wastes no time: mere moments after she returns home,
Birdee meets Justin Matisse (Harry Connick Jr.), a local handyman.  Thanks
to the Laws of Hollywood Cliches, we know that he'll become the new love
interest in her life because (1) he's attractive, (2) Bernice hates him,
and (3) he's pretty much the only guy in the entire town.  I could forgive
all of the above if only the two of them had any screen chemistry
together; sadly, there's nothing there.  Bullock and Connick have both
done fine work in other films ("Speed" and "While You Were Sleeping" for
Bullock, "Memphis Belle" for Connick), but this isn't a great pairing.
One of the reasons I thought "Titanic" worked so well was because I
believed the passion that DiCaprio and Winslet had together; in "Hope
Floats," our two romantic leads seem like just what they are: two actors
reciting memorized dialogue to each other.  Affection never really touches
either character's eyes, and Connick in particular seems to be thinking
about other things most of the time.
        After a bit, a ridiculous subplot develops involving Bernice's
torment at the hands of "Big Delores," the school bully.  (We know Delores
is evil, because she's not beautiful.)  This subplot is not so much
resolved as forgotten: one moment Bernice is scared for her life... then
suddenly, all is well and Delores is never mentioned again.  This type of
unfocused quality is typical of the film's construction.  What happened
to Justin while he was in California?  What's the fate of Travis (Cameron
Finley), the little boy that Ramona is watching while his mother (Birdee's
unseen sister) is out of state?  Does Birdee's father, who recently had a
stroke, ever recover?  We don't find out.  The run-of-the-mill dialogue
adds no surprises or insight.
        The film is so formulatic that the plot becomes little more than
a paint-by-numbers exercise.  It's the sort of movie where, after seeing
the first scene, you can predict the rest of the story without even
bothering to watch it.  Each scene sets up the next so obviously that
actually watching it seems redundant.  Just like this paragraph.
        "Hope Floats" also hits upon one of my big pet-peeves: beautiful
actresses playing characters who think they're ugly.  The lovely Janeane
Girafalo began this unfortunate trend in "The Truth About Cats and Dogs";
"Hope Floats" takes things one step further with Birdee's belief that
she's ugly and worthless.  Ugly... despite the fact that Sandra Bullock
is beautiful.  Despite the fact that all the other women in the story
envy Birdee's good looks.  Despite the fact that the film tells us quite
clearly that Birdee was the most beautiful girl in school, even winning
the local beauty padget three years in a row.  Despite the fact that all
the women in town marvel at how Birdee hasn't aged since high school (and
is therefore still beautiful).
        One bright spot in the film is the performance by young Mae
Whitman, who plays Birdee's daughter.  She's absolutely flawless: awkward
in her new surroundings, angry at her mother, hurt by her father's
behavior, aloof from her new schoolmates, Whitman plays the role like her
salvation depends upon it.  (The scene in which Bernice tries to get her
father to take her away with him is one of the most heartbreaking
performances I've ever seen from a child actor.)  Keep an eye on young
Ms. Whitman: she may very well turn out to be the next Christina Ricci.
        There's little point of seeing this film, though.  "Hope Floats"
is by-the-book screenwriting, created strictly for the lowest common
denominator, and I can't imagine anyone even remotely film-savvy enjoying
it.  The biggest flaw: in a story that's so clearly character-centric,
we never really get to know any of these people.  Justin is just as big
a mystery to us at the film's conclusion as he is at the outset, the
young Travis seems to have no purpose in the story other than failed
attempts at comic relief, and Ramona is the kind of mother we all love
to hate.  The film commits drama's worst sin: it remains boring right up
to the final shot, in which all the characters join hands and walk into
the house, while holiday fireworks cheerfully explode overhead.
Puh-lease.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please write
to the above address and ask to be put on my mailing list.

Author
Steve Kong
Hope Floats is a paint-by-the-numbers film, but what a picture it paints.
Birdee (Sandra Bullock) Pruit is about to get the surprise of her life, on
national TV. Her husband is having an affair with her best friend. Birdee
was the "Queen of Corn" in the small town of Smithville, Texas. She married
her high school sweetheart, the quarterback of the high school football
team, and moved out of Smithville - heading for a big city.
With the breakup between Birdee and her husband, she returns to Smithville,
taking her daughter, Bernice (Mae Whitman) with her. Birdee moves in with
her mother, Ramona (Gena Rowlands). She also meets an old high school mate,
Justin (Harry Connick Jr.) with whom she starts a romance.
Hope Floats relies not on creativity but on cliches to move the story along
and to try to tug at our hearts and tears. In the case of the latter, it
did not produce any tears, but it did tug at my heart. The movie does move
along at a good pace.
Sandra Bullock returns to the genre that kicked off her stardom: the
romantic film. Bullock has shown in the past that she has a limited range
in her acting skills, and with Hope Floats she doesn't change that
standing. This is fine though because Bullock has a very down to earth,
girl-next-door, look and we feel at home with her onscreen presence.
Harry Connick Jr. hasn't really had any memorable large roles. The two
roles that I remember him by are his small role as a fighter pilot in
Independence Day and his somewhat larger role as the creepy killer in
CopyCat. Here in Hope Floats Connick does a decent job, but it is all but a
forgettable role and performance.
It is not Bullock's performance that sticks out in Hope Floats. It is the
performances of the child actors and the performance of Gena Rowlands as
Birdee's mom that stand out. Mae Whitman gives a good performance as
Birdee's daughter, though I had a hard time believing that the geeky
looking Whitman would be a product of Bullock and the quarterback husband.
The other child actor, Cameron Finley, as Birdee's nephew, is very
memorable. This kid has talent and it really shows onscreen. Gena Rowlands
as the animal-stuffing mother is the funniest role of the film.
Worth mentioning is the beautiful cinematography by Caleb Deschanel and the
bright production design by Larry Fulton. The combinations of these two
talents make what might be a drab film stand out. I loved the way Deschanel
shot Fulton's dance hall; look for this in the film.
The script by Steven Rogers works, but is not as good as it should have
been. Forrest Whitaker does a good job at keeping the movie moving along. I
found myself looking at my watch once during the film, but not much after
that.
My friend Theresa Perez, who caught an early preview of Hope Floats,
describes the film best: "It's a chick-flick." Hope Floats might not be the
perfect movie, but it is a beautiful movie and a good date film. I
recommend Hope Floats.

Author
Bob Bloom
 On a nationally televised daytime talk show, she learns that for the past
year her high-school sweetheart husband has been having an affair with
Birdee's best friend.
 Shattered and humiliated, Birdee packs up her belongings and her daughter,
Bernice, and flees for home - Smithville, Texas.
 Here, the former high school beauty queen seeks escape and solace, but
finds neither. Instead, her life grows even more complicated as she has to
deal with an eccentric mother whom she never really took the time to know,
a daughter who desperately misses her father and the prospect of a new
romance.
 These are the paddles that turn the plot wheel of Hope Floats, a
two-hankie tearjerker, ably directed by Forest Whitaker and starring Sandra
Bullock, trying to make amends for Speed 2: Cruise Control.
 Whitaker has a wonderful eye for composition, keeping his camera close to
the protagonists, giving the viewer an intimate picture of their
interactions.
 Where Hope Floats goes wrong is in Bullock's interpretation of Birdee.
Bullock, who is also one of the movie's executive producer's portrays
Birdee as a wounded bird afraid of trying to fly from the nest.
 Birdee spends most of the film moping about and complaining, dwelling on
the shambles that once was her life.
 Birdee is a one-woman pity party, so much so that instead of feeling any
empathy for her, you want to grap her by the neck, give her and good shake
and berate her into moving on with her life.
 Yet by the time Birdee does change course, spurred on by a family tragedy,
the movie is almost over.
 Bullock makes a valiant attempt to elicit sympathy for Birdee. She
sprinkles humor throughout, but it's not enough to compensate for all that
comes before.
 Whitaker, however, has surrounded Bullock with a fine cast and it is these
people, especially Mae Whitman as Bernice and the timeless Gena Rowlands as
Birdee's mother, who help carry the picture.
 Whitman is a delight as the confused little girl forced into a situation
beyond her control or comprehension. She continually switches from berating
and sassing her mother to displaying her need for love and affection from
the parent who did not desert her.
 Whitman's best scene is a heartbreaking encounter with her visiting father.
 Rowlands has made eccentricity an artform. Her Ramona is a flamboyant,
Auntie Mame-like, larger-than-life Texan. Yet she is wise enough to see the
pain and suffering Birdee's continued wallowing is inflicting not only on
her daughter but on her granddaughter as well.
 Harry Connick Jr. as Justin, the quiet man who wants to become part of
Birdee's life, gives a low-key performance. Without being pushy, he gently
tries to glide Birdee onto a new path through continual support and
displays of affection.
 Hope Floats, at a little under two hours, moves gracefully, thanks to
Whitaker's wonderful eye for composition and detail. The director, as he
showed in Waiting to Exhale, has an affinity for actresses.
 He elicits a textured performance from Bullock. She is the antithesis of
the usual perky characters she has played on screen. But in Hope Floats,
she goes a bit too far in the other direction, nearly becoming one of the
walking dead.
 Still, amidst a summer of rampaging lizards and calamitous comets, Hope
Floats is a nice quiet respite.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Luke Buckmaster
Cast: Sandra Bullock, Harry Connick Jr., Gena Rowlands, Mae Whitman,
Michael Pare, Cameron Finley
Director: Forest Whitaker
Screenplay: Steven Rogers
Australian distributor: Twentieth Century Fox
Australian theatrical release date: October 8, 1998
I'll admit my prejudice against modern dramas the day that Sandra
Bullock chooses a decent role.  I'll tell you about hundreds of these
awful films that have come and gone, the minute I block them out of my
memory.  And I'll write a write a better screenplay than that of Hope
Floats the second someone puts pen and paper in my hands.
As if A Thousand Acres and How Stella Got Her Groove Back weren't bad
enough, here is yet another film which tries to please everyone, and
ultimately pleases very few.  The screenplay by Steven Rogers is
harmless and innocent - and has good intentions - but is far too
harmless, and far too innocent.  At its worst, it is so afraid to insult
anyone that it ended up insulting me for sitting through it.
On a national TV talk show, Birdee Pruitt (Sandra Bullock) is humiliated
when her best friend reveals that she is having an affair with Birdee's
husband.  Birdee runs away from her problems with her young daughter
Bernice (Mae Whitman), and starts over in the town where she grew up,
located somewhere in Texas.  There she lands a job at the local photo
development shop, and awkwardly reunites with an old flame (Harry
Connick Jr.).
Sandra Bullock's last three films are proof that she is terrible at
choosing her roles - In Love and War, Two if by Sea and Speed 2: Cruise
Control were all box office flops.  Now with Hope Floats added to the
list of disasters, this promising young actress is definitely having a
hard time lifting her feet off the ground.  As for Harry Connick Jr.,
well, he looks a little out of place in a sissy film, as he has
previously left a vivid mark from Independence Day and Copycat.
At the risk of labeling Hope Floats as simply a "chick flick," lets just
say that only a small crowd would like it.  Whatever opportunity the
film has to jump into an engaging moment is avoided - sometimes
narrowly - but avoided none the less.  Give me pen and paper any day.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com.for any
inquiries or feedback

Author
Matt Williams
Sandra Bullock rebounds from Speed 2 with a romantic drama that's
routine, but enjoyable.
Birdee Pruitt (Sandra Bullock) was the most popular girl in high school.
She was cheerleader, prom queen, and married the quarterback, Bill
(Michael Paré). Everything was perfect...and then it changed.  One day,
she's invited to be a guest on the Toni Post show (ostensibly to receive
a free makeover), only to have her best friend and her husband reveal
their affair on national television.
Birdee swallows her pride, takes her daughter Bernice (Mae Whitman), and
moves back to her small Texas hometown.  There she finds more changes.
Her beloved father is now suffering from Alzheimer's and a stroke.  The
losers she derided when she was class queen have changed for the better,
and take delight in Birdee's reversal of fortune.
But Birdee's mother, Ramona (Gena Rowlands), hasn't changed much.  She's
still meddlesome and eccentric (her hobby is taxidermy).  And she tries
to set Birdee's life straight by hooking her up with town handyman
Justin Matisse (Harry Connick Jr).
The problem with this sort of setup is that everyone knows what's best
for Birdee, but you have to wait through the whole film for her to
finally realize what's been obvious all along.  This can be a nuisance
if it is the only dramatic wellspring in a film, but luckily, in Hope
Floats, there is one other source of drama:  social status.
A crucial character flaw of Birdee is her refusal to accept change.  She
was on the top of the world during high school, and any change will only
lead downhill. What she doesn't realize is that the rest of the world
has moved on while she remained in the past, and now the very qualities
which made her the most popular girl in school are a liability rather
than an asset.  The film nicely parallels her story with that of
Bernice, who is just starting to establish her place in the formative
social strata of school.
And, of course, while all these social observations are going on, the
romance is a necessary evil. Bullock and Connick Jr. make an attractive
couple, even if they are a bit heavy on the saccharine.  Bullock tackles
her first meaty role in quite a while, and carries it off nicely. In his
first leading role, Connick proves he can pull his own weight. (However,
the question still remains whether he can portray something besides the
down-home guy he typically plays.)
Director Forest Whitaker indulges himself by allowing one too many
"cutesy" moments to pervade the film (such as an all too exuberant
"cheer-up" song, or "awww"-inspiring closeups of little kids dancing).
But, aside from that, he does a good job of shepherding the mostly
straightforward story.
Hope Floats isn't a perfect romance, and it's not a perfect drama.  But,
as the message of the movie goes, being ordinary isn't all that bad.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
me@alanine.ram.org
/Hope Floats/ has some interesting scenes, but is a boring
groan-inducing movie for the most part.  The opening scene, perhaps
the best one in the movie, starts off as a talk show audience delight
in the misery of Birdie Pruitt (Sandra Bullock) who has just learned
that her husband has been cheating with her best friend.
Devastated, Birdie leaves the fast Chicago life and heads back to
Smithville Texas, her home town, with her young daughter Bernice (Mae
Whitman).  Birdie, once elected Queen of Corn three years in a row (an
unparalleled achievement in the history of Smithville), finds single
life difficult to adjust to, particularly when the people she knew in
high school feel free to rub salt in her wounds.
The one exception who appears to treat Birdie normally is Justin
Matisse (Harry Conick, Jr.) who had a crush on her as teen.  If the
story hasn't yet started sounding familiar to you, it should: the
relationship between Birdie and Justin ploddingly progresses to its
obvious end, without any real resolution of issues between Birdie and
her former husband, her daughter, and her high school acquaintances.
The best part in /Hope Floats/ is the presence of young Travis
(Cameron Finley) who mimics animals which makes for some
humour. Other than that, this movie is a total dud.


Author
Brian Takeshita
Imagine yourself invited to a talk show because you think you've won a free
makeover.  Then imagine that on the show, for all the world to see, you find
out your best friend is having an affair with your husband.  At the rate
trash television shows do things like this these days, you might not have to
imagine it; it might have happened to you already.  For the rest of us,
we're given HOPE FLOATS, in which Birdee Pruitt (Sandra Bullock) is
humiliated in just such a way on national television.  Birdee loads up the
station wagon with her possessions and her daughter and leaves her
unfaithful husband in Chicago to move back to her hometown of Smithville, Texas.
In trying to start her life over again, Birdee is faced with several
obstacles.  For one thing, just about everyone in the small town has seen
her infamous television appearance.  "We have a satellite dish," says one of
her high school classmates, "and so we got to see it twice."  Another
problem is that her daughter Bernice (Mae Whitman) doesn't quite get the
idea of separation - she still thinks her father will be coming to get them.
Birdee's overbearing mother (Gena Rowlands), with whom Birdee and Bernice
have come to live, isn't much help either.  "You look terrible.  Have you
taken up drinking?" is the way she greets Birdie at her door.
The first half of HOPE FLOATS is devoted to Birdee trying to reincorporate
herself into life in Smithville.  There are some nice scenes where she meets
different classmates who never left the small town.  Some are happy to see
her, while others revel in the fact that she has been made a fool of and has
come crawling back home.  Here the movie shows promise, but then something
happens about midway through.  It begins to lose direction and drag....and
drag....and drag.
One direction the film tries to take is love story.  Birdee's mother tries
to set her up with Justin Matisse (Harry Connick, Jr.), who left Smithville
for California years ago, but then came back.  Justin used to have a crush
on Birdee, who was less than sympathetic, and it seems nothing has changed.
Justin is still very interested, and Birdee is still very stand-offish
toward him.  Now, you'd expect that there will be sparks as the movie
progresses, but there aren't.  The whole film is peppered with instances
where Justin gets close, but Birdee soon turns cold.  It's really no matter,
since there isn't any chemistry between them, and when they finally do get
together, it's totally forced.
Another direction taken is the reconciliation Birdee must make with her
past.  Birdee has issues with her mother, with her father, with herself, and
with half the townsfolk.  There are plenty of scenes where we see Birdee
deep in thought, and an image of her going through the same thing, but at a
younger age, is superimposed.  Two problems exist here.  First, we never get
the feeling how these instances fit in with the rest of the movie.  When
they appear, they seem isolated and disjointed.  There's hardly much of a
resolution for many of them.  Second, when the past images are displayed,
they are so vague that it's really mostly guesswork as to what they're
supposed to show.  In most of them, I could barely make out the image of a
young girl, so I assumed it was supposed to be Birdee.
There's also a subplot involving Birdee's daughter and how she doesn't have
any friends at school.  In fact, she makes an enemy of the school bully, Big
Dolores (Rachel Lena Snow) by accidentally hitting her in the face with a
volleyball.  There's this big buildup to an after-school fight.  Bernice is
scared.  The fight occurs with kids shouting and screaming and eerie music
playing and the whole thing looks like some kind of nightmare.  Then Bernice
gets up and goes home, unscratched.  I suppose director Forrest Whitaker
didn't think anybody wanted to see a kid actually all beaten up, but by
giving her only a bruised ego, we don't see the significance of the whole
thing.  Worse, Bernice's family then cheers her up by lip-synching to a song
by the Temptations in a scene which was so obviously put there just to break
up the monotony.  Too bad it wasn't very funny.  In fact, it was kind of
embarrassing.
Whitaker engages in a severe overuse of devices which are supposed to
provoke emotions.  He has Bullock cry too often, he includes too many slow
motion sequences, and he puts in too many musical montages, only serving to
trivialize each supposedly dramatic moment and drag the pacing even further.
There are even scenes which are in the movie for no apparent reason except
to mislead us into thinking there will be some kind of payoff down the road.
I guess they are there just to fill time.  Someone should remind him that
sometimes, the saying "less is more" is actually true.
You find the performances in HOPE FLOATS are pretty good when you can
concentrate long enough to pay attention to the screen.  Gena Rowlands is
fine as Birdee's unflappable mother, and young Mae Whitman does a nice job
playing Bernice, the typical precocious movie child.  Her part is actually
hampered by the script, however, which at first gives her the usual
older-than-her-years conversation, but then quickly gives her lines which
are not just unrealistic, they are nearly impossible to take from someone so
young.  You wonder if the screenwriter had actually taken the time to say
the sentences out loud.  Harry Connick, Jr. delivers some of the corniest
lines I've ever heard, my favorite being when he's at the local saloon,
trying to get Birdee to cut a rug with him.  "Dancing is like a conversation
between two people," he says.  "Talk to me."  I had to control my laughter.
Sandra Bullock clocks in with her most mature performance to date.  She is
strong, tender, vulnerable, and funny.  There's a scene where Birdee is
trying to get a job through an employment agency headed by a classmate she
didn't treat very well in high school, and the classmate, enjoying the turn
of the tables, decides to put Birdee in her place.  Bullock delivers a short
monologue which simultaneously shows all four of the qualities I have
mentioned.  The movie is almost worth seeing for those few spoken lines.
Just grit your teeth at the rest.

Author
Kleszczewski, Nicholas
        A friend invites you to a movie.  This film would evade the
explosions and special effects of standard summer fare, and be grounded
in reality.  The plot is as follows: after a terrifying incident, a
mother and her independent daughter separate from the father and move
away from the city.  They need fresh air to get some perspective, maybe
to start over.  Romance begins to brew, however, as one of the locals,
played by an international superstar in rugged clothing, sparks things
up, (especially at a country-western slow dance).  It stars a rising
young starlet, helms a good cast, and is directed by one of the better
actor-turned-directors in Hollywood.
You accept.  You jump at the opportunity to see, what you
believe to be, _The Horse Whisperer_.  But, poor moviegoer, you have
been conned.  Alas, you find yourself watching, incredulously, _Hope
Floats_.  Oh, woe.  Your hope has sunk.
Why was this movie made?  Why was it released?  It is a travesty
on nearly every level, and has the authority to sink the careers of
nearly everyone involved.  At the hands of a better script, the film
could have been a gem.  But it is clueless as to what it is about, and
only succeeds in transferring same cluelessness to us poor viewers.
_Hope Floats_ stars Sandra Bullock as Birdy, who, after
discovering her husband has been cheating on her with her best friend
(on national television no less), takes her daughter and drives back to
her home, helmed by a countryish bumpkin eccentric played by Gena
Rowlands, (she decorates with stuffed wildlife).  Birdy's nephew, Travis
(played by _Leave it to Beaver_'s Cameron Finley), is under her custody,
and in one of the film's many failed in-jokes, is always seen wearing a
different Halloween costume.
What is the point of this?  Does it make any sense?  Is it
supposed to be funny?  The point of the film is to show that the family
is eccentric, but I was convinced that the grandma should have been
locked up for endangering the mental welfare of a child.
All of this undercuts the plot, of which there is none.  There
are only many scenes that are supposed to register emotion.  There's the
scene where Birdy, who used to be the prom queen, is humbled by
approaching a peer she once mocked, for a job.  There's the scene where
Birdy dances with her father, in the hospital for Alzheimer's.  And then
there's the sentimental scenes with Justin, played by Harry Connick Jr.,
who is taking a liking to her again, showing her a beautiful pad that he
built from scratch.
And during each of these scenes, I was sidetracked by my earlier
question.  What sort of eccentric grandmother go through such great
pains as to provide a dog costume, a Kermit costume, a cowboy costume
(with whip), and a full furred Barney costume for her grandson to wear
during dinner? What sort of warped ramifications would this lead for the
rest of his life? 
Outside of this, there are other sure signs of screenwriters
block.  When the daughter stands up to the bully at school.  When Birdy
almost loses her job.  When the family pulls in a goofy lip-synch to
cheer someone up.  When someone dies.  When the daughter cries, (no,
wails) in exasperation that her father is not coming back.  In a movie
like this, you notice the strings being pushed, and you sit there,
comatose, hoping it will end.
Who can survive such a debacle?  I worry for Bullock's career,
which has been running on auto-pilot for the last few years.  She has an
attitude, a solid perkiness, and can drive a bus--but she can't handle
the emotional scenes, much less hold a Southern accent.  Harry Connick,
Jr. is worse--stick with singing, or get some acting lessons, please!
Gena Rowlands is the best part of the film.  But she's such a
good actress, that it staggers the mind that she's weighed down by such
lukewarm material here.  It would be a severe tragedy if the recurring
star of John Cassavettes' great films is known for this film.
Two notes to Forest Whittaker:  (1) Cut the slow-motion
sequences.  There are twelve times where you undercut your own direction
by such a failed trick.  Have you done so, you could have shaved off
ten-minutes of this almost unbearable debacle.  (2) You've had to know
something was wrong if your cinematographer's filter makes the
candlelight appear like little "x"s.  You're not a bad director, but you
can't change a terrible script.
There's a recurring scene where Birdy, working at the
neighborhood Fotomat, finds the machine go wrong, and image after
destroyed, warped, dark image appear.  Think about it.  A succession of
destroyed images may have been more entertaining than this movie.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     I envy Forest Whitaker, because he's one man who doesn't have to hear
that accusation most men hear when it comes to "women's films":  that he
"just doesn't get it."  Black women seemed to think he got it when he made
the surprise hit WAITING TO EXHALE, and Whitaker himself seemed to think
he could continue getting it when he chose HOPE FLOATS as his follow-up
project.  Women and men, mothers and daughters, girls and their
girlfriends...yep, Whitaker has thrown his y chromosome into the fray with
a blissful disregard for the conventional wisdom that men can't do justice
to the trials of women.
     I'm sure someone somewhere will accuse me of "just not getting" HOPE
FLOATS.  What I really didn't get was how Whitaker could take a fairly
simple story and make it so ragged and unfocused.  It opens promisingly
enough, with a clever sequence in which a devastated Birdee Pruitt (Sandra
Bullock) learns on a nationally televised daytime talk show that her
husband Bill (Michael Pare) is having an affair with her best friend (an
unbilled Rosanna Arquette).  Birdee promptly packs up her things and her
young daughter Bernice (Mae Whitman) and drives from Chicago back to her
hometown of Smithville, Texas where her mother (Gena Rowlands) still lives
and where all her high school classmates still remember her as the
cheerleader and homecoming queen who seemed to have it all.
     HOPE FLOATS might have worked if it had explored its unique premise
for all its dramatic and comedic possibilities.  Surrounding an
emotionally wounded housewife with people who knew her as a teen beauty
queen -- and who most likely harbor a secret delight at her failure --
would be a fascinating way to to watch her grow up and come to terms with
the unreasonable expectations of her youth.  Instead, HOPE FLOATS
relegates that context to a few isolates snippets, opting instead to focus
on plastic relationship dynamics.  Harry Connick Jr. plays the role of the
nice guy with such obvious puppy dog likeabilty that there's never a
moment's tension in the romance between him and Bullock.  The
mother-daughter relationship between Bullock and Rowlands is similarly
tepid, despite a pleasant performance by Rowlands in the role of
conspicuous eccentric (she practices home taxidermy).  The film never
feels like anyone knows exactly where it should go, what we should be
learning about Birdee, and why her story should matter to us at all.
     Part of the problem -- perhaps a very large part -- is the casting of
Bullock in the lead role.  Bullock is a charming actress with a killer
smile, but she doesn't appear to have the faintest idea how to play this
character.  So what she does is smile, and smile constantly, in every
possible context to display every possible emotion.  She smiles radiantly
while dancing with Connick; she smiles pleasantly while accepting the
barbs of her former classmates; she smiles ruefully when she turns down
Connick's request for a date; she smiles drunkenly at a bar.  It makes
a certain sense that the one-time Miss Congeniality would be an inveterate
smiler, but her smile is used as substitute for characterization, as
though it won't matter that we don't understand her at all as long as we
find her so darned nice.
     This generally scattered approach to the material carries through
Whitaker's direction -- in cross-cutting which blunts emotional impact, in 
abrupt changes of focus, in an over-dependence on Caleb Deschanel's silky
cinematography.  The best result of his lack of focus is the amount of
time spent following Bernice and her cousin Travis (LEAVE IT TO BEAVER's
Cameron Finley), the nearly-abandoned son of Birdee's flighty would-be
actress sister.  Both young actors are wonderful, Whitman coping with
taunting classmates and the absence of her father, Travis living in a
perpetual fantasy world dressed up as a frog or a cowboy or a dog.  Their
story -- the story of how absentee parents affect children's lives -- is
infinitely more involving than Birdee's rather mundane and inevitable trip
to "finding herself" (i.e. hooking up with a nice guy).  Sure there are
a few sniffles and chuckles along the way, but nothing nearly as potent as
Bernice howling in pain as her father leaves her behind.  Maybe Forest
Whitaker will end up demonstrating a knack for "getting" the stories of
children.  As for whether he "gets" women's stories...well, maybe he'll
have to face that accusation after all.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
The best scene in Hope Floats is the first one, and I somehow knew that
the rest of the film wouldn't live up to this scene even as I was
watching it.  We are introduced to Birdee Pruitt (Sandra Bullock), who
is on a talk show thinking that she's getting a free makeover with her
best friend.  What Birdee actually learns on national television is that
her best friend is having an affair with her husband.  This is a funny
scene, but it's also moving, and director Forest Whitaker does something
that is not easily done -- he makes the character sympathetic before we
know her.
It's also an interesting and unusual way to begin a really sentimental
and formulaic bundle of schtick.  After this beginning (which,
unfortunately, belongs in a different film), Bridee leaves her husband
and takes their daughter, Bernice (Mae Whitman), with her.  She goes to
stay with her mother, Ramona (Gena Rowlands), in Smithville, Texas. 
There, she drowns in her own self pity.  She was once the most admired
girl in the town (she was prom queen for three out of the four years of
high school), but now that her peers have seen her emotionally
disemboweled on a scummy talk show, she's little more than a town joke.
I'm sure that screenwriter Steven Rogers thought it necessary to add a
love interest to this mix of ideas, so he did that.  We learn of the
existence of Justin Matisse (Harry Connick, Jr.), who, of course, has
always had a crush on Birdee (but he detests the word "crush" and
insists that it's only used in high school).  Most of the conflict
arises through the mother-daughter relationships, for young Bernice is
not happy with her mother, and wants to believe that her father is going
to come and save her from this awful little hick town.
I don't typically like movies like these because they only have one
agenda -- to make you cry.  I didn't cry at any point during Hope
Floats, and I don't think I was more than a little bit moved by any of
the scenes.  There's a very significant problem in this, though, because
the audience is supposed to care when good and bad things happen to
characters in films.  It's not really that the characters don't have
enough development (because they do).  I think the main problem is that
every situation here is something that we've all seen in so many
formulaic dramas just like this one.
Take, for instance, everything that has to do with Bernice.  The child
is upset because she needs to be upset because it works for the story. 
But the film never gives her much of a reason to be upset, and any child
that age could probably understand the fact that her father was the one
doing the bad stuff in the relationship.  And if she has a deep,
inexplicable resentment for her mother (which seems to be the only
possibility that the film allows), then the entire story should be
dedicated to that theme.  In the end, though, the situation is concluded
with an easy and unconvincing talk between Birdee and Bernice.
I know, I know, this is a "chick flick," right?  It's supposed to be a
little predictable, and just pretty safe all around, right?  Well, why
does it have to be?  Why can't a film be engineered to appeal to people
wanting lighter films and still surprise you with a few interesting
turns in story and characterization?  You can still have the obligatory
happy ending and not make everything work out so perfectly well at the
end.  The biggest problem I have with movies like this is that the only
reason things happen and characters exist is to get the story from point
A to point B (I would elaborate on one particularly annoying element,
but that would take the surprise out of it). 
Still, Hope Floats isn't unbearable or even that difficult to sit
through -- the actors all make the film watchable.  Bullock is, in my
humble opinion, a fantastic actress with a lot of strength.  She holds
this film together beyond Whitaker's sappy, heavy-handed direction, and
keeps my interest in her strong.  Also good is Connick, who gives a nice
low-tone performance here.  Rowlands is a pro, and handles this part
like a pro.  I didn't much care for young Mae Whitman, but that's mostly
because the screenplay makes her such an annoying child.  I did,
however, greatly enjoy Cameron Finley, who plays the oddly eccentric
young nephew of Birdee.
There are good things to be said about this film, but for the most part
it doesn't have the sweeping emotional resonance that dramas need in
order to be successful and moving.  The pieces are in place for a good
story, but Hope Floats instead relies on the good old formula, and the
result is a picture that will show you a lot of things that you've
probably seen a few times before. 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     HOPE FLOATS - but just barely.  As directed by WAITING TO EXHALE's
director, Forest Whitaker, the latest attempt by Sandra Bullock to find
another movie to display her talents is at best a partial success.  The
imminently forgettable HOPE FLOATS is a gossamer movie that is filled
with pleasant but insubstantial little romantic dramas.
     Harry Connick Jr., who plays opposite Bullock, is given a series
of recycled scenes.  Typical of these is the one in which he gets her
to smile by using the age-old technique of taunting her with a "Don't
smile now!"
     The story opens strongly with one of those confrontational talk
shows.  Birdee Pruitt (Bullock) is blindfolded and in an isolation
booth as in the old television quiz shows like "Twenty-One" or "The
$64,000 Question."  Once she and her husband, played blandly by Michael
Pare, are released from their confinement, her "best" friend, played in
a cameo by an uncredited Rosanna Arquette, confesses that she is having
an affair with Birdee's husband.
     An embarrassed Birdee leaves Chicago to head for her hometown of
Smithville, Texas, where she was the "Queen of Corn" three years
running.  Accompanying Birdee is her shy 9-year-old daughter Bernice,
played charmingly by Mae Whitman from ONE FINE DAY.  Bernice is a
daddy's girl, who spends most of the movie wanting to return to her
favorite parent.  A subplot has her accidentally hitting a mean, tubby
girl with a volleyball and then living in fear of retribution.
     Birdee and Bernice live with Birdee's crazy mother Ramona Calvert
(Gena Rowlands), who has a house filled with dead but properly stuffed
animals, ranging from cats to armadillos to bears.  Equally quirky is
Birdee's nephew Travis, played by Cameron Finley, seen last year as the
Beaver in LEAVE IT TO BEAVER.  Travis lives his life in one fantasy
role after another.
     Although Birdee claims to be reconciled to her new situation -
"People fall in love.  They fall right back out.  It happens all the
time." - she mopes around the house in her robe.  Her mother offers
trite consolation.  "Look at me," she points out.  "My life has no
meaning or direction, and I'm happy."  The locals, who all saw Birdee
mortified on national TV, treat her as though she were the one with the
scarlet letter.
     Since Birdee's has no work experience and her only talents are
keeping house and photography, she gets a job as a one-hour photo shop
technician.  As her love interest, a good old boy with a toothy grin
named Justin Matisse (Connick) comes a courting.   Justin, who had a
crush on Birdee in high school, has recently returned from California
where he lost his great job because "he wouldn't work fast enough."
(Another victim of those slave-driving, California employers.)
     In one of movie's many funny scenes, Birdee relates how Justin
shocked her with a kiss when she was a girl.  When he stuck his tongue
in her mouth, she thought he might have had a stroke or something.
     Too often Whitaker's staging amounts to a series of lost
opportunities.  When Birdee first gets her photo shop job, for example,
the owner explains that they keep a copy of all risque photos in a
special drawer and that she is free to look at them but not to remove
them.  The payoff scene, in which she sneaks a peak and then guiltily
slams the drawer shut, never occurs.
     The show's lone tragedy of any real import is handled with
touching delicacy, but it may be hard to take for those who may have
recently lost a loved one.
     Even if there is little genuine chemistry between the leads, it is
refreshing to see an old fashioned picture in which two lovers, who
"sleep" with each other, seem to do exactly that and nothing more.
They also go parking in his pickup, and he remarks that he feels like a
16-year-old again.  Ah, nostalgia.
     Whitaker should be ashamed of the child exploitation scenes that
he uses to bracket the story.  In the opening humiliation sequence,
little Bernice is made to sit in the front row as her mom is disgraced
on live television.  The scene ends with the camera shamelessly framing
her as she gushes with tears.  An even more sickening scene with the
girl occurs toward the end of the picture.
     Even if the movie is shallow and uneven, it has its charms, not
that you'll remember any of them by the next day.  And if Bullock isn't
as good as she was in WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING, at least she is
infinitely better than in her insipid performance in IN LOVE AND WAR.
Perhaps Bullock needs just the right role in order to shine.  HOPE
FLOATS makes her appealing but rarely compelling.  Hopefully Bullock
will strike cinematic pay dirt in her next outing.  She's such a
likable person that we're rooting for her.
     HOPE FLOATS runs 1:50.  It is rated PG-13 for thematic elements
and would be fine for kids around 10 and up.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
HOPE FLOATS (director: Forest Whitaker; cast: Sandra Bullock (Birdee
Pruitt), Harry Connick Jr. (Justin Matisse), Gena Rowlands (Ramona
Calvert), Mae Whitman (Bernice Pruitt), Michael Pare (Bill Pruitt),
Kathy Najimy (Toni Post), Rosanna Arquette (Friend), 1998)
Sandra Bullock as Birdee Pruitt, is the prom queen who learns on a
national tv talk show that her husband Bill (Pare) is having an affair
with her best friend (Arquette). She had been suckered into appearing
on the show thinking she was getting a makeover, and is startled to
see her friend and her husband blare it all out on the tube.This
crushes her. So she takes her daughter Bernice (Mae) and moves back in
with her eccentric mother Ramona Calvert (Gena) in a small town in
Texas. Birdee is pictured as the loyal and true wife, who married her
high school sweetheart and is left psychologically scarred by that
incident. She has lost the boldness she once had, and seems unsure of
herself for the first time in her life, as she is filled with
self-pity.  This very ordinary story is related in soap opera style,
evoking heart tugging sympathy for the victim. How could you not feel
sorry for her?
The Steven Rogers's script adds a bit of conflict to the story by
having the mother-daughter relationship be strained. But the conflict
is one-sided, as the daughter is just a brat and the mother is just
perfect. All the daughter moans throughout the film is that she wants
her father back. When the father does come back, he asks for a
divorce, but he fails to take her back with him. That took care of
that little conflict.
A romance was introduced by way of the Harry Connick
Jr. character. He's Justin Matisse, someone who always had a crush on
the very pretty all-American girl, but never had the nerve to pursue
the popular cheerleader. He conveniently pops up wherever she is; and,
comes across as a handsome cowboy and real nice guy, who would be
ideally suited for her. At least, that's what mamma Ramona thinks, as
she tries to push them together. At this point of the film, I was
hoping for some comedy or music to break out, like someone singing:
Matchmaker, Matchmaker, make me a match...
This film just couldn't move me with this familiar storyline; its
purpose was to try and get me so misty eyed for these two nice people
who can't find romance together.  But by the film's conclusion, there
is the predictable happy ending, with the virtues of a nuclear family
back in tack. The last shot is of the couple out on a family style
date, supposedly on their way to future marital bliss. I guess this is
ok, because you really can't root against them, and the way this film
was slowly moving along, with lots of wasted artistic shots of the
small-town that had no impact on the story; at least, it satisfied an
audience who would appreciate seeing such a clean-cut and prosaic
romance. It was truely a woman's picture.
The nicest thing about this film was that it made for pleasant
viewing.  There was nothing to really get upset about. Sandra Bullock
is very pretty and very nice. She has the best line in the film about
her husband: "The harder I tried to be what he wanted me to be, the
less I saw in his eyes. And then one day I looked and I was gone."
Her new suitor wants to be independent and live out the American dream
without conforming to society's wishes. That is also commendable.  He
is following his own dreams, building an interesting house out of
stained glass and antique Texas pine.The daughter, who was the most
annoying one in the film, is upset that her father is no longer living
at home, something lots of children at her young age experience, but
can't do anything about. No one tells her how to behave properly, so
she continues to be a pest. The problem with all this, is that these
topics are very similar to the real life situations of many Americans,
but this film adds no new insights to the problems or any kind of
humanity to it. It just ends on an uninspired happy note. It,
therefore, was unable to rise to the emotional level needed to sustain
a sense of drama. The result is: that there is nothing special about
this film to recommend it, nor is there anything particularly horrid
about it to urge you to avoid it.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Berardinelli
     Have you ever felt that you should be sobbing uncontrollably during 
a movie, but can't find the motivation or energy to shed a single tear?  
That's the way it is with HOPE FLOATS, an insipid, stillborn drama that 
drags its viewers through a ghetto of despair before finally, 
unexpectedly plopping them down in the midst of a happy ending.  This 
isn't just a tearjerker, it's an inept tearjerker, and only the most 
undiscriminating audience members will be suckered in by its obviously 
manipulative methods, which include the breakup of a marriage, tension 
between mothers and daughters, and a death that brings everyone 
together.
     For my part, I sat dry-eyed through all 115 minutes of HOPE FLOATS, 
since its calculated, by-the-numbers methods of plot development failed 
to generate any kind of emotional response.  But that's not the film's 
worst failing, because, beyond all the attempts to sell Kleenexes, HOPE 
FLOATS is boring.  This is typical of a motion picture that favors stock 
melodramatic situations over genuine character-building moments.  
Despite the presence of a clear protagonist, it's hard to connect with 
anyone, because there's so little substance to grab onto.  Throughout 
HOPE FLOATS, I found the situations to be predictable and the people to 
be lifeless.  
     The story centers around Birdee Pruitt (Sandra Bullock), the one-
time Corn Queen of Smithville, Texas, who, after marrying her high-
school sweetheart, Bill (Michael Pare), moved to Chicago where she had a 
daughter, Bernice (Mae Whitman), and spent her days keeping house.  One 
day, Birdee agrees to appear on the Toni Post Show, a TV talkshow in the 
Jerry Springer mold.  There, in front of a national audience, Birdee's 
best friend tells the unsuspecting housewife that she has been having an 
affair with Bill and that the two of them love each other.  Days later, 
Birdee leaves her husband, and, with Bernice in tow, returns to the 
small town where she grew up.  She moves back in with her mother, Ramona 
(Gena Rowlands), and kindles a romance with Justin (Harry Connick Jr.), 
a one-time schoolmate who used to have a crush on her.  During the 
course of the proceedings, we are treated to numerous cliches of the 
genre, including a depressed person who shows the depth of her 
despondency by walking around aimlessly in a downpour and an elderly 
lady who cures all of her granddaughter's woes with one wise bedtime 
story.
     Despite the generic plot, HOPE FLOATS actually allows a few 
worthwhile ideas to bob to the surface, although it never does much with 
them.  The first, and most prominent, is the concept that people who 
pursue what they love to do for a living often make so many compromises 
that they end up hating their career choice (this is why Justin gave up 
a lucrative job designing houses and now does it only as a hobby).  Then 
there's the issue of how a person who changes to please someone else 
often loses himself or herself (and the things the other person loved 
about them) in the process.  Had HOPE FLOATS paid more than token lip 
service to these story elements, the script might have offered something 
more memorable.
     Sandra Bullock's stay on the A-list of actresses lasted about two 
years and four films.  Following her disastrous cruise into money with 
SPEED 2, she has been largely forgotten about.  HOPE FLOATS isn't likely 
to help her regain lost ground.  As she already proved in Richard 
Attenborough's IN LOVE AND WAR, her dramatic range is limited, and it 
shows here, where she's required to play a drab, depressed woman who has 
lost all self-respect.  To give her credit, Bullock is actually better 
in this role than I expected, but she's still miscast.  Part of the 
problem is that her undisputed strength lies in a blend of light drama 
and comedy, but this overwrought production doesn't offer her much 
opportunity to play to that.  To make matters worse, she isn't abetted 
by the supporting cast.  Harry Connick Jr. may be pleasing to the eye 
and ear, but his emoting is wooden.  Gena Rowlands, who has given 
countless memorable performances in past outings, is strangely muted.  
And young Mae Whitman is unappealingly strident.
     Based on his admittedly-limited resume behind the camera, actor-
turned-film maker Forest Whitaker seems to prefer this kinds of 
manipulative tale -- his directorial debut, 1995's surprise hit, WAITING 
TO EXHALE, displays many of the same traits.  HOPE FLOATS is rambling, 
uneven, and inexcusably long for a motion picture that develops such a 
poor emotional connection with the lead character.  After a while, the 
film, which offers an occasional worthwhile moment to keep it from 
becoming unwatchable, turns into something of an endurance contest.  In 
the end, HOPE FLOATS sinks.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Michael Dequina
The latest weepy chick flick from actor-director Forest Whitaker
(_Waiting_to_Exhale_) demonstrates all too well the limitations of good
acting.  Sandra Bullock, Harry Connick Jr., Gena Rowlands, and young Mae
Whitman turn in strong performances, but they can't make Steven Rogers's
soggy script float (yeah, bad pun) above the level of made-for-TV movie.
After being dumped by her husband (Michael Pare) on a national TV talk show
(by far the film's most entertaining scene) Birdee Pruitt (a radiant
Bullock) and her daughter Bernice (Whitman) moves back in with her
taxidermist mother (Rowlands) in backwater Smithville, Texas.
>From this point on, everything belongs on the small screen.  Birdee is
aggressively wooed by a nice guy (Connick) who's had a crush on her since
high school, but she and especially Bernice can't overcome the hope that
her hubby will come back to her.  There is also the obligatory
disease-stricken older relative: in this case, Birdee's father, who's been
staying in a rest home since having a stroke and coming down with
Alzheimer's.  I'm not spoiling anything by revealing Birdee eventually
stops feeling sorry for herself and starts living again, but, of course,
not before a number of tears are shed, people lovingly embrace, and the de
rigueur death of a loved one.  Nothing spells dull and saccharine quite
like the two dreaded Hs--hugs and healing.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
DeWyNGaLe
Sandra Bullock was once a great, well-known actress.  For a while, she was one
of the best ones around.  Lately, she hasn't been doing all that well.  The
only movie she has done in awhile is Speed 2: Cruise Control, which was a huge
mistake for her career.  Now, she shapes up with Hope Floats, the story of a
woman and the many problems she goes through.  Harry Connick Jr, Gena Rowlands,
and Mae Whitman co-star as the people closest to Birdee, played by Sandra
Bullock.  Birdee was the most popular girl at her school.  She was prom queen,
everyone looked up to her, and she was truly happy.  A few years after high
school, she got married to a friend from high school, Bill Pruitt, played by
Michael Pare.  On a national talk show, Birdee's best friend Connie, played by
Rosanna Arquette, reveals that she has been having an affair with Bill,
Birdee's husband.  They have been having the affair for over a year.  Bill
wants to marry Connie now.
Birdee and her daughter Bernice, played by Mae Whitman, are extremely saddened.
 They move to Smithville, Texas, where Birdee went to high school.  They go to
live with Birdee's mother, Ramona Calvert, played by Gena Rowlands.  Ramona is
there to help Birdee with her feelings and the problems she is going through. 
It is kind of nice for Birdee to be back in the town that she grew up in.  She
is greeted by many people that she has no idea who they are as she walks along
the streets of Smithville.  She goes to the employment agency to get a job, and
runs into two more people that she knew in high school.  She gets a job as a
worker at a one hour photo store.  She runs into even more people there as they
come in and out of the store to get their pictures developed.  She messes up a
lot of pictures, and she almost loses her job.
Justin Matisse, played by Harry Connick Jr, was very close to Birdee in high
school.  Justin has been helping out Ramona around the house for a number of
years.  Birdee and Justin are reunited at the house.  At first, Birdee is
uncomfortable seeing him, but she gets used to him and they become close
friends once again.  Bernice does not like Justin at all, and is determined to
get back with her real dad.  Bernice is now starting school, and everyone makes
fun of her because of her glasses.  She even gets beaten up.  She is extremely
upset by the whole thing, and wants to go back to leaving with her dad.
Justin and Birdee become closer throughout the movie, and they start to date. 
Ramona hooks them up as good as she can, and she succeeds.  Birdee is still
very upset about the entire episode with Bill, and isn't quite ready to start a
new relationship.  Justin is becoming frustrated with Birdee, because she is
not willing to move on from the man that betrayed her.  She is finally willing
to move on, and for once things are starting to go right in her life.  She is
becoming very happy with Justin, but there is a problem.  Bernice is not very
pleasant any more due to Justin.  She is extremely angry at her mother for the
break up with Bill.  Bernice blames the entire thing on Birdee.  
Hope Floats is a realistic tale of what one can go through throughout their
lives.  Birdee goes through tragedy after tragedy, and finally becomes happy
because she keeps her hopes high.  Sandra Bullock does a great job of acting,
and you could really believe the pain that she was going through.  Gena
Rowlands does an outstanding job as her mother, and deserves on Oscar
nomination for Best Supporting Actress.  Mae Whitman gives a powerful
performance.  She was stuck in a tough spot, and didn't know how to deal with
it.  Harry Connick Jr. is the movie's only problem.  He makes it so it is more
of a fairy tale than a real life experience.  The film is still good with him,
but the role of Justin Matisse could have beem cut down a little bit.  All in
all, hope still floats for Sandra Bullock's career after this film.   

Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
Imagine, if you will, the embarrassment of participating in a tabloid
t.v. talk show, believing you are going to get a free makeover and
instead your best friend reveals that that she is having an affair with
your husband.  Shocking?  Yes, of course.  Or is it?  Welcome to life in
the 90's.  We have been trained through the tabloid media (and in some
cases, the mainstream media) in our society whether its print, t.v.,
radio, Internet access, etc., to be less shocked at the outrageous than
at any other time this century; to accept the decadent behaviour of
others and laugh it off as if it were nothing.  Yet some are still
shocked by what happens to them in life.
In 'Hope Floats', Sandra Bullock stars as an average, everyday person
who gets duped by the situation described in the opening paragraph.  She
then leaves Chicago and travels to her hometown of Smithville, Texas,
and moves back in with her mother (Gena Rowlands).  She brings her
daughter with her (Mae Whitman).  Her little girl is about 8 and is at
that very impressionable age where observations can direct the course of
her life and disappointment can be difficult to deal with.  She begins
to re-unite with members of the community with whom she went to high
school and gets a job working in a photo shop.  Bullock was the "corn
queen" in her youth in the small town, a type of beauty or prom queen if
you will who still looks very good.  One of the people that she meets is
an old flame (Harry Connick Jr.) and while she isn't over the loss of
her husband, a little spark of romantic history between her and Connick
is visible.
In the first hour of the film, most of the best lines, written by Steven
Rogers, are delivered by the cast and while all the elements in the film
are obvious and predictable, I never get tired of watching ordinary
people living ordinary lives and I refuse to give in to the cynicism of
criticizing a film like this because of simple elements and there are
some very clever moments in 'Hope Floats' where dialogue floats like
spice and has a sugar coated core.
Directed Forest Whitaker has used his camera quite eloquently to capture
the hum drum (that's meant as a compliment) and likable elements of
small town life and guides his cast through the realities of life with
traditional elements of characterization developed in relating to the
everyday problems, joys and surprises of life's unpredictable path.
The film's strongest moments are when Gena Rowlands is on screen.  An
actress of vast experience and motherly charm in this film, she is the
rock of stability for her daughter and grand daughter and is the best
member of the cast.  The most under written member of the cast is Harry
Connick Jr.  His character isn't used to its full potential and this is
a disappointment.  At one point over dinner, Bullock refers to him using
her husband's name and this drew gasps of shock from some female members
of the audience with whom I viewed this film.
'Hope Floats' is a wonderful date movie, produced in part by Sandra
Bullock and despite its unoriginal story and overall presentation, I
can't disregard a movie that makes me feel good because that would be a
sin.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Sandra Bullock, Harry Connick Jr., Gena Rowlands, Mae Whitman,
Michael Pare, Cameron Finley
Director: Forest Whitaker
Producer: Linda Obst
Screenplay: Steven Rogers
Sandra has finally found a movie of substance, after such disappointing
efforts like SPEED 2 and IN LOVE AND WAR. These epic disasters were
rather unfortunate in view of previous successes like SPEED and WHILE
YOU WERE SLEEPING. This otherwise, likeable, always charming, bankable
star, has decided to dig deeper this time round, and found something
that is unlikely to stink or sink. From this aspect itself, we can
literally say that yes, HOPE does FLOAT, even though your last two
movies were big box office duds.
In an age when divorce and separation is on the rise, comes a movie
about surviving the holocaust of family break-ups. This is a story of an
ex-beauty queen, Birdee Pruit (Bullock), who is dumped by her spineless
husband for her best friend. The point hits home when all is revealed on
a talk show, unbeknownst to the victim. Carrying wounded pride, Birdee
wanders home to her mother to nurse her wounds. This is a journey of a
woman who initially wallows in self-pity and depression, only to survive
the crisis by reclaiming her dignity and more importantly, retaining the
love of her daughter.
Yes, this deep and mushy stuff, but at least it makes a valiant attempt
to address the issues at hand. Sandra will not lose fans by smiling,
crying and laughing through problems relating to difficult mothers,
angry daughters and unfaithful husbands. Harry Connick Jr is affable
enough to be an old beau, who is still single and vies for her
affections. Whilst Michael Pare takes a break from C grade pics and
appears likeable as the unfaithful husband.
Overall, a thoughtful movie, that says that HOPE FLOATS when you are
holding on to the last straw. Things tend to get better even when you're
hurting badly on the inside. Don't mope about, don't blame yourself and
don't keep hoping your unfaithful husband will come back to you. Take
the remains of the day and do something worthwhile. Somehow you will
survive the awful mess of a marriage breakup.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   "Hope Floats" is a surprisingly conventional romance, a
throwback to the old-fashioned, well-constructed, fable of boy
meets girl, boy loses girl, boy wins girl.  The genders are
changed around so that the woman is abandoned and feels
without hope, but otherwise one wonders what director Forest
Whitaker must have been thinking this time around.  Whitaker,
who turned in an edgy performance as a hostage in the
sharply-focused "The Crying Game" and evoked spiked
effectiveness from the vindictive women in "Waiting to
Exhale," makes a pit stop with "Hope Floats"--a picture
designed to offend nobody.
   There is some aspiration for satire and contemporary
relevance in the opening scene, one which highlights the
vulgarity of current daytime talk shows and especially the
senselessness of those who agree to appear on them.  On
the Tony Post (Kathy Najimy) program, Tony introduces a
young woman (in an uncredited role) who tells a nationwide
TV audience that she is having an affair with her best friend's
husband.  Why she chooses the media to make the
announcement is anybody's guess.  We meet husband Bill
Pruitt (Michael Pere) and his wife Birdee (Sandra Bullock) on
the TV set, and at that point Whitaker inexplicably cuts away
from what could have been an opportunity for productive
lampoon.
   Birdee and her small daughter Bernice (Mae Whitman)
move to the small-town home of Birdee's mother, Ramona
Calvert (Gena Rowlands), and the backdrop is formed for
Ramona's bid to match her depressed daughter up with a
handsome builder, Justin Matisse (Harry Connick, Jr.), whose
attentions, she believes, will heal her daughter's ennui.
  The theme of "Hope Floats" is, as the title suggests, the
idea that the sun comes out tomorrow, that every cloud has a
silver lining, so pack up your troubles in your old kit bag. 
Small-town life is glorified: it's where the soul can heal, far
from the neurotic pressures of the metropolis.  The story's
development is as hackneyed as its themes.
   The movie's chief attribute is a stellar performance by Mae
Whitman in the role of angry, isolated little girl who holds out
for her father's return and who blames her mom for turning
away her dad's love.  Obviously no feminist, Bernice pouts
throughout the film, making faces at Birdee's suitor, Justin,
and cries her eyes out when her dad seems unwilling to
return to the fold.  This is really Bernice's movie: for her, a
heartbreaking story of a gifted child who is picked on the
school's bully, Orange Julia (Sydney Berry) and who, like her
mother, gains an early lesson about the meaning of life.  As
her mom ultimately teaches her, youth is not the golden years
of unalloyed bliss but rather "childhood is what we try to
overcome."
   A sentimental touch is thrown in from left field, as we meet
Birdee's dad, Harry (James N. Harrell), who is afflicted with
Alzheimer's and cannot recall the faces of his own family and
appears unable event to speak.  
   The picture's dialogue is of this nature:
   Grandma Ramona, in pushing her daughter to get back into
circulation: "Do you think behind every change there's another
change and another change and another change?"
   Husband Bill: "People grow: they change."
   With elements of soap, sitcom and seasoned surroundings,
"Hope Floats" is redeemed only by the opening scenes
burlesquing the talk shows and those featuring young Bernice
anguishing over the loss of her daddy's attentions.
Rated PG-13.  Running Time: 110 minutes.  (C) 1998
Harvey Karten

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Hope Floats (1998)
Sandra Bullock, Harry Connick Jr., Gena Rowlands, Mae Whitman, Michael 
Pare, Cameron Finley. Directed by Forest Whitaker. 115 minutes.
PG, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
"Hope Floats" is a pretty good movie for a chick flick. Now, before you 
start yelling about sexism, read a little further. The term "chick flick" 
is used, often derisively, to describe a certain type of romantic movie. 
Aimed at female audiences, chick flicks are tearjerkers featuring noble 
women who suffer, usually due to an insensitive male or a horrible 
disease. When not busy agonizing or looking wistfully into the distance, 
the women bond with each other and learn important lessons about life. 
More often than not, chick flicks include one dance scene with a hunky 
guy, three angry confrontations where hurtful words are exchanged, a 
speech about forgiveness, and the death of at least one pivotal character.
 The films invariably end with our plucky heroine, bruised, but wiser, 
taking the first tentative steps into the next phase of her life.
As anyone who has seen "Field of Dreams" or "Good Will Hunting" knows, 
there are male versions of chick flicks. In these, the main guy mopes 
around a lot while his buddies fret about him (in a very masculine way, 
of course.) After a few angry confrontations and lots of cussing or 
spitting, the leading man has an emotional breakthrough and hugs his 
father, or a father figure, while sobbing. Embarrassed but wiser, the 
guys exchange mock insults, then our hero takes the first tentative steps 
into the next phase of his life, while the men in the audience quickly 
dry their eyes before the lights come up.
See, it all balances out. 
Everyone enjoys a good cry and there's nothing inherently wrong with 
either the male or female versions of chick flicks, as long as the 
material is handled well. Despite its downbeat storyline, "Hope Floats" 
works more often than not, thanks to Sandra Bullock's charisma and 
director Forest Whitaker's sense of style and attention to detail.
The film begins on a Jerry Springer style talk show, where Bullock's 
character has come to receive a makeover. Instead, the naďve Chicago 
housewife is ambushed by her best friend and husband, who inform her that 
they are having an affair. Heartbroken and humiliated in front of a 
national audience, she packs up her daughter and heads home to Smithville,
 Texas, where she was once the Corn Queen.  
The bulk of the film deals with adjustments, as Bullock licks her wounds 
and tries to figure out what to do next while dealing with her 
traumatized daughter, crusty mother and a handsome ex-schoolmate who has 
a crush on her.
Sandra Bullock has laid low since her natural charm was snuffed in last 
years megabomb, "Speed 2: Cruise Control," which even she conceded was a 
"stinker." Bullock doesn't have a great deal of range as an actor, but 
"Hope Floats" plays to her strengths and she comes off smelling like a 
rose. Harry Connick Jr., another actor with limited range, is well-cast 
as the resident studmuffin and young Mae Whitman does fine as Bullock's 
daughter. Playing the earthy Texas matriarch, Gena Rowlands has a number 
of effective scenes, although her character, who trots out ghoulish 
stuffed animals along with her homilies, is overly reminiscent of Barnard 
Hughes' taxidermist grandpa in "The Lost Boys."
What keeps "Hope Floats" from playing like just another Lifetime Channel 
movie is Bullock's effervescence and Forest Whitaker's direction. 
Whitaker, one of America's finest actors, hit big as a director with 
"Waiting To Exhale," and exhibits great assurance here, using imaginative 
camera work to add flair to the low-key storyline. Whitaker establishes 
an easygoing pace, then explores the details of this small town, from a 
playful lip-sync scene to a beautiful dissolve from a real landscape to 
the figures inside of a glass snow globe. He provides the film with a 
sense of grace that makes even the more mawkish scenes tolerable.
The best moments in "Hope Floats" are the little ones; a showdown between 
the daughter and a pudgy school bully, a gentle, but frank discussion 
with a spiteful employment agent, and a very nice moment when Connick 
explains why he does woodworking as a hobby instead of a full-time job. 
"You find something you love," he says, "then you twist and turn it 
trying to find a way to make money from it. By the time you're finished, 
you can't even remember what it was you loved." Thanks goodness that 
doesn't hold true to film criticism.
In the vast realm of chick flicks, "Hope Floats" is a minor pleasure. 
Sure, it's no "Terms of Endearment," but it's light years better than 
fare like "A Thousand Acres." Whitaker has crafted a film of small truths 
and lyrical moments. He's also given Sandra Bullock a chance to get her 
career back in motion. As long as she steers clear of cruise ships, she 
should do just fine.
