Title
Review for Fabuleux destin d'Amélie Poulain, Le (2001)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
JoBlo
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A peculiar French girl grows up lonely with her father and doesn't quite know
what she wants out of life. One day, she falls upon something, and believes that
her ticket to happiness may be in helping others. She starts with the people
around her, but when she suddenly falls for her own guy, she can't act strongly
enough because of her shy and dreamy nature.
CRITIQUE:
A clever, quirky, original French flick set in a picturesque Paris, featuring an
endearing lead with a giant imagination, much loneliness and a little bit of
love for everyone. This is a "feel-good" kind of movie, a fairy tale for
grown-ups who are bummed out about life. It doesn't pretend to be deep, it
doesn't weigh itself down with long expositions or intricate studies of its
characters, it's basically just a "cute movie" in the same vein as CHOCOLAT and
PAY IT FORWARD, with some amazing visuals and incredibly nice intentions (and if
CHOCOLAT was somehow able to nab an Oscar nomination for Best Picture last year
(a sham on so many different levels), you might as well slap this film up for
consideration also, since it's quite a bit better and much more original than
the former). One thing that this film isn't though, at least according to me, is
the best film of the year (it was bestowed the honor of "best" in at least 3
different film festivals so far this year). It actually managed to stagnate a
little bit about halfway through and it just went on for way too long (it's a
little over two hours but it felt even longer), with much of the second half of
the movie devoted to many different characters, all of whom weren't as
interesting as the lead, and a lot of indecisiveness from Ms. Amelie herself,
which got frustrating. Thankfully, this film doesn't bog itself down with too
much of that stuff, and actually goes out of its way to invent new ways to shoot
scenes, to integrate moments of fantasy into its fabric and to transport the
audience inside the imagination of this kind-hearted French girl.
On the whole, it's a lot of fun and it carries a beautiful message of love and
support for your fellow man. The lead, Audrey Tautou, is perfect for the role,
and gives you enough moments of truth to develop her character into someone that
you care about by the end of the film. Unfortunately, the rest of the cast isn't
as well-developed, and even though most of them are pretty appealing, a couple
could've been left out to save time and at least one was left stranded
plot-wise, by the film's end (what happened to the guy in the café who was
spying on his ex-girlfriend the whole movie?). Now I haven't seen too many
recent French films, I will admit, but if this is the kind of "scene" that
they're developing over in "le pays du vin", I wouldn't mind catching more of
their flicks in the future (CRIMSON RIVERS was another French film that I saw
earlier this year, which I really liked- ironically, that film was directed by
Mathieu Kassovitz, who is the co-star in this film). Granted, the English
subtitles got a little tough to keep up with at times (I speak and understand
French also, but some of the local colloquialisms went over my head), especially
since the film's visuals were so intriguing that you just couldn't help but
constantly gawk at them, but the general idea, the background music, the nifty
French neighborhoods, the very creative way of enveloping the audience into the
story-line from the start, were all very easy to appreciate, and I for one was
especially glad to have seen this movie during these trying times in the world.
In fact, I'd recommend it to anyone looking for a jolly ol' time at the movie
house, with a particular emphasis on folks with a lot of imagination, a little
loneliness in their lives and many dreams in their hearts. And this guy directed
ALIEN: RESURRECTION? Get outta here!!
Note: I especially loved the way that the script detailed and showed the
loves/hates of everyone with exact mentions in the film. It was very original,
very well shot and very nostalgic, as many of us were able to relate to the
behaviors described. Good stuff!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Chocolat (6/10) - Crimson Rivers (8/10) - Ghost World (9/10) - Like Water For
Chocolate (8/10) - O Brother, Where Art Thou (7/10) - Pay It Forward (5/10) -
Rushmore (9/10) - Woman on Top (7/10)

Author
Harvey S. Karten
AMELIE (Le fabuleux destin d'Amelie Poulain)
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Miramax Films 
 Director: Jean-Pierre Jeunet
 Writer:  Jean-Pierre Jeunet, Guillaume Laurant
 Cast: Audrey Tautou, Mathieu Kassovitz, Rufus, Yolande
Moreau, Artus de Penguern, Urbain Cancelier, Dominique Pinon,
Maurice Benichou, Claude Perron, Michael Robin
   There may be quite a few reasons that some people turn out to
be Mother Theresa types, or at least do-gooders who think more
of the happiness of others than they do of their own felicity.  Jean-
Pierre Jeunet, who directs Amelie from his own script which is co-
written by Guillaume Laurant, posits one theory that I think we call
agree with.  People who are outsiders, those who never seem to
be accepted by others and who are therefore shy and introverted,
may identify with those who share that condition, or at least that's
the condition of the title character of Jeunet's latest movie.  
   Jeunet, who is nothing if not a stylist, is responsible for such
independent fare as "Delicatessen" (about a landlord who dices
human beings into cutlets for non-vegetarian tenants) and, four
years later, "The City of Lost Children" (about a scientist unable to
dream who invades the dreams of children).  Unfortunately
"Amelie" is in no way as meaty as the former work or provocative
as the latter.  While the Jeunet style is present in virtually every
scene--the sumptuous visuals and painstaking invention--"Amelie"
centers on a character who soon becomes irritating and the
picture itself if afflicted with so  many film-school excess that it
overstays its welcome long before its absurdly long two-hour
tenure.  Jeunet could be on the downward spiral that began with
his clumsy, illogical "Alient Resurrection" which wasted Sigourney
Weaver in the starring role.
   The central figure of Amelie (Audrey Tautou), who affects an
Audrey Hepburn demeanor, is thought by her father (Rufus) to
have a weak heart, a diagnosis that could have been made even
in the U.S. today by the typical HMO physician.  The faulty
reading on the stethoscope is caused by her excitement at being
touched by her father as a little girl in this once-a-month
examination ritual: her dad is undemonstrative and denies his
daughter the kind of normal contact on which every little girl
thrives.  Her neurotic mother, who has educated her at home,
commits suicide.  Amelie becomes an unhappy loner indeed,
giving her a particular sympathy for those who, in her eyes, share
her torment.  Those people include an artist who paints the same
Renoir "Luncheon of the Boating Party" over and over, the son of
a greengrocer who is verbally abused by his dad who publicly
denouncing him as retarded (simply because he treats every
eggplant with love), and a handsome man, Nino Quicampoix
(Mathieu Kassovitz) who collects pictures from a Coney-Island
style photo booth.  
   She does her best to serve as matchmaker for a chap who
hangs out daily at a cafe, a man who has been rejected and sits
around spying on his lost love.  She helps a blind man across the
street, describing in detail what activities are in progress.  
   Audrey Tautou is, I suppose, ideally cast for what comes across
as a fable, filled with magic realism.  Her eyes focus like those of
Kliban's cats, her hair is short, giving her a perky look, and Bruno
Delbonnel's camera lets us see the eccentric Parisians as Amelie
herself perceives them.  "Amelie" is filled to the brim with too
many people and therefore too many stories, to be embraced by a
single motion picture. The result is a hodgepodge which depends
too much on techique, on style over substance, to make for an
engrossing comedy.
Not Rated.  Running time: 120 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
