Title
Review for Hsiao chuan yi chao (1979)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Christopher E. Meadows
MPAA: Not rated (Though I expect it would get a PG, for martial arts
violence and language)
Long before Jackie Chan rumbled through the Bronx, he was rumbling
through ancient China in low-budget kung-fu movies from the 1970s and
80s.  Sometimes referred to derisively as "chop sockey" films, films in
this genre often featured most of the same plots, most of the same
settings, most of the same actors...in short, they were mostly the same
movies, and most of them weren't all that great. 
Still, when done well, these films are enjoyable and fun to watch.  Even
the badly-dubbed versions for sale in Wal-Marts and video stores across
the land for under $10 have their redeeming selections.  One such film,
which bad dubbing doesn't completely manage to ruin, is "The Fearless
Hyena". 
In "Fearless Hyena", Jackie Chan plays a cocky, lazy kung-fu student,
who is in hiding with his grandfather from the chief of a clan who all
but wiped his grandfather's clan out.  Despite his grandfather's
warnings not to show his kung-fu to anyone, Jackie starts fighting for
money at a martial arts school...which soon draws the evil clan chief's
attention. 
The story is nothing unique--in a sense, it's a reiteration of almost
every other kung-fu movie of its day, including a better Jackie Chan
film also from 1979, "The Drunken Master".  In some ways, the so-called
plots from these films are little more than excuses to string comedy and
fight scenes together.  Still...the comedy and fight scenes are good
enough that a little plot flimsiness can be overlooked.  After all, you
know going into it that you're not exactly watching "Casablanca". 
In "Fearless Hyena", as in most Jackie movies of the period, Jackie Chan
was the fight director and choreographer.  However, Jackie also wrote
and directed the picture as a whole.  In both cases, it shows.  Jackie's
sense of humor is quite evident, in scenes where he takes humiliating
beatings at the hands of his martial arts masters, or hands out beatings
dressed as a mentally-deficient drudge or even as a woman (predicting
the scene in "City Hunter" thirteen years later where he appears briefly
as Chun Li from the "Street Fighter II" video game).  There's one
particularly humorous scene in a coffinmaker's shop, where Jackie has
gone to seek employment, finds the coffin seller...isn't the most honest
of people, and accidentally upends a heavy coffin onto him. 
The hilarity of these scenes, and of similar scenes that pop up in other
Jackie movies, is what sets Jackie Chan's pictures apart from other
kung-fu movies of the era.  Why see martial arts alone when you can see
martial arts and comedy together?  Jackie's sense of humor is one of the
things that have made his movies constant top box-office draws in Hong
Kong, even in an era when Hong Kong's other movies aren't doing so well. 
The other big draw is the fight choreography.  Jackie Chan is a master
of the fighting art, and was so even back then.  Seldom is this so
evident as in "Fearless Hyena".  Fairly early in the movie, Jackie bests
three street thugs with his kung-fu, making utter fools out of them
while barely even breaking a sweat.  Then he goes to work for their
master, defeating tough opponents for money in the best fight scenes of
the entire film, comparable to those in "Drunken Master" and easily
better than anything Jean-Claude Van-Damme's ever done. 
Dressed as a kitchen drudge, Jackie Chan uses his surroundings (most
notably, the small benches used in place of chairs at the eating
tables--also used in fight scenes in "Drunken Master" and "Drunken
Master II") to devastating effect.  He soundly thrashes a swordsman,
first with his bare hands and then with a staff, and goes on to defeat a
big bruiser of a thug while dressed as a woman. 
Toward the end of the film, Jackie learns a secret new kung-fu technique
based on playing on the opponent's emotions, and, after fighting his way
through three henchmen armed with naginata-style sword-staves, uses it
in his final fight against the film's main villain.  These fights are,
of course, everything you'd expect from the final fight scenes of a
martial arts picture, but they don't have as much of the "use your
environment" fun that runs through those earlier scenes. 
On the negative side, the cinematography isn't particularly great, the
film is shot on inferior-quality stock, the story is kind of slow and
drawn-out (you may get bored a few times while you watch it), and the
dubbing is pretty bad.  Still, this movie is a lot of fun to watch, even
with its bad dubbing, and it's cheap enough--you can get it in a 2-pack
along with its sequel, "Fearless Hyena II", for just $10.  At the price,
and for the entertainment value you'll get from it, I recommend this
film.  For great humor and amazing martial arts, I give it a 7 out of
10. 
This review is copyright 1997 by Christopher E. Meadows.  Permission
granted for free distribution over Usenet and associated archival, and
for archival and display associated with the Internet Movie Database
(http://www.imdb.com).  All other distribution requires permission from
the author.
-- 
Chris Meadows aka  | Author, Team M.E.C.H.A., Crapshoot & Co.
Robotech_Master    | on the Superguy Listserv (bit.listserv.superguy)
robotech@jurai.net | With a World Wide Web homepage located at
robotech@eyrie.org | http://www.jurai.net/~robotech/index.html

Author
John Daily
     I don't understand the meaning of the title of the movie as it
relates to the film itself. Actually, I'm not even sure that I
understand the film itself.
          Fearless Hyena is yet another attempt to cash in on the
success of Drunken Master and, while this is not bad, it doesn't have
enough unique qualities to allow it to stand on its own. Jackie plays
another disobedient boy. more adept at mischief than he is at the Kung
Fu he should be learning. In this one his grandfather (in some reviews
I have heard him referred to as his father; this may be the case in a
subtitled version) forbids him to use their family's Kung Fu in front
of anyone, afraid that they will learn it. Jackie gets other ideas
though, when a local man reopens a gym and asks Jackie to be the
Master - paying him well, of course. This is set up rather early, and
for the next thirty to forty minutes the fighting never lets up...sort
of. You see, Jackie is afraid of being seen, so he must fight in
disguise. While this is funny the first time (and it is definitely
played for laughs), it is not as funny the third. There is some
interesting choreography in these sequences, but not enough to carry
it through. Later on in the film, something significant happens that
forces Jackie to become a serious fighter, and the film changes tone a
bit for the better. The training sequences here are almost as good as
those in Drunken Master: Jackie does alternating push ups and sit ups
against a wooden plank - while hanging upside down from a tree. Jackie
pulls a load big enough for a horse - with his Master on top no less,
and every muscle chords outward with strain; I don't think I've seen
him look as good onscreen before or since.
          It's hard not to compare Fearless Hyena to Drunken Master
with this being such an obvious carbon copy.  Unfortunately, the film
never seems to achieve the same level of humor or intensity that its
predecessor did.  It's certainly not his worst work - that distinction
belongs to Killer Meteors on In Eagle Shadow Fist - but if you've
already seen Drunken Master, there's really no need to watch this.
           Midway through the third or forth fight, Jackie removes a
sword from between his thighs and declares "This is not funny."
          Maybe that's the problem. 
