Title
Review for Down with America 3: Moldy Kitten (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Brundage
Written by Danielle Ervin, Richard Ferrando, Grant Goodman, Joe Kaczkowski,
Karen Mester, Justin Mickley, Aaron Miller
Based on `Down with America' by Mary Hornbacher
Starring Joe Kaczkowski, Aaron Miller, Karen Mester, Josh Raab, and Meri
Stevens
     This is a multi-faceted job.  I wrote, in a review of Firestorm, that
being a film critic is like having a doctorate in theology: people are
always asking you `why?'  I revise this.  Most people don't bother asking
you `why' as much as they bother asking you about the trends.  They think
that you have some mystic knowledge of whats trendy.  That you know what's
hot and what's not.
     The truth is that being a movie critic is something akin to Number
Theory.  It is your job to observe patterns in the current fabric of the
universe of celluloid.  You pick up paradoxes, learn the exceptions to the
rules, and try to make sense of it all.  As in theology and mathematics, it
rarely works.
     An interesting paradox I have run across in my studies is one of
originality.  Just last night, I trashed the Anthony Hopkins/Cuba Gooding,
Jr. collaboration Instinct on the account of it not having an ounce of
originality.  However, sitting at the keyboard typing my review of Moldy
Kitten, I think only of how unoriginal it is, which poses a question to me:
 Is the lack of originality just an excuse a critic uses as a measure of
their personal distaste for a film?
     I wonder if these years I have been doing this job, this quasi-rubric
that I grade films on, is really worth anything.  Have I been lying to
myself this entire time, seeing as I am able to like a film like Moldy
Kitten: a movie with a terrible plot, and dislike Instinct: another movie
with a terrible plot?
     The question to ponder is what makes good and bad.  Seeing as this
question fringes on morals and is thus not at all the business of the movie
critic, who does not bear a nation's moral responsibility on his or her
shoulders (we'll leave that to Jerry Falwell to worry about), I think I'd
better leave that alone and get on with my review of Moldy Kitten.
     Moldy Kitten follows Brian Ferrell (Aaron Miller), a cliché character
that we have never been able to help but like.  His life has been destroyed
after he was implicated in the murder of his fiancée (whom he still loves)
and, three years later; he is just now getting back into the game by dating
Ellen McMurphy (Karen Mester).  This hardly sounds like the previous two
parts of the trilogy.
     Let's throw in the fact that Aaron was the fiancée of the librarian
offed in the first film and is dating a woman who lives two doors down from
the Mystery Man (Joe Kaczkowski) and a series of bloody murders are taking
place in the background.  We throw in alien abductions and conspiracies to
cover up the existence of The Book, the very item which has haunted the
entire trilogy of films.
     Being a veteran of movies, I can safely say that the plot is nothing
new.  Like many plots, it is a mix and mash of dozens of movies and thus not
original at all or is it.
     Originality, the magic ingredient to a film that everyone wants and
almost no one has, comes in two forms.  One form is in the story itself.
The other is in the method in which the story is done.  The entire genre of
dark comedy has made a career out of thanatological comedy: the same gag
done on a live man is much funnier when the person is dead (at least
sometimes).  Seeing something new does not always come in the form of
complete originality, but in styles we haven't seen before.
     Moldy Kitten does this.  It incorporates a Western style showdown and
an X-Files class abduction with a strange ditty of a romance.  When we mix
and match plots in film, they are usually conventional, which is what Moldy
Kitten refuses to do.
