Title
Review for Blues Brothers 2000 (1998)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Matt Williams
The Blues Brothers was a wonderful film, a hilarious comedy packed with
good music.  It cried out for a sequel, but John Belushi's untimely
death seemed to eliminate the idea.  However, eighteen years have
passed, and the long dormant sequel has finally emerged.  Unfortunately,
it's a sequel not worthy of the original.
The film starts exactly eighteen years after the first one ended.
Elwood Blues (Dan Aykroyd) is just getting out of jail, his brother Jake
having recently died.  As in the first film, he first visits Mother Mary
Stigmata (Kathleen Freeman) and then sets about getting the band back
together.
John Belushi's absence leaves a terrible hole in the film, and although
three new characters are created to fill the void, it is still very
noticeable.  First, there's Cabel (Joe Morton) the illegitimate son of
Elwood's stepfather (played by Cab Calloway in the first movie).  Cabel
is reluctant to join his destiny, and spends most of the movie as an
Illinois sheriff, chasing the Blues Brothers Band.  Next, there's Mighty
Mack (John Goodman), a bartender who becomes the new lead singer of the
band.  Finally, there's Buster (J. Evan Bonifant), a ten year old orphan
who tags along with Elwood and eventually joins the band.
The plotting of the film is hardly original...it seems to be almost a
clone of the original.  Elwood has to go to reluctantly retrieve each
member of the band, they then travel, while being pursued by the police,
and perform at several odd stops until they finally reach the big
concert finale.  The first film had Neo-Nazis as the random element,
this time around, the Russian Mafia and a militia group fill their role.
In fact, the duplication of the plot is so ridiculously complete that
certain scenes are practically identical to the original. Remember the
classic performance at Country Bob's (where they like both types of
music: Country AND Western) from the first movie? Well, this movie has a
performance at a country fair, where the band is expected to play
bluegrass music.  There's the massive police car pileup, although this
time the gag falls completely flat. There's even an exact replica of the
conversion scene in the church of Reverend Cleophus (James Brown).
There are plenty of recurring characters too.  In addition to Mother
Stigmata and Reverend Cleophus, Aretha Franklin reprises her role as
Mrs. Murphy.  Frank Oz, a prison guard in the first film, makes an
appearance here as the prison warden.
As the stars, the new Blues Brothers don't live up to their legacy.
Aykroyd is more loquacious, yet much flatter as Elwood.  John Goodman
barely has a character as Mighty Mack.  Joe Morton has the deepest
character, but not a terribly interesting one, as Cab.  And what's the
deal with the orphan?  It plays like a desperate gimmick that doesn't
mesh at all with the rest of the film.  At least Bonifant isn't as
precocious as he could have been in the role.
But the true star, and the only saving grace, of the film is the music.
And the film is packed with it (even during and after the ending
credits). Although there are no brilliant mergers of comedy and song as
in the original's Rawhide/Stand By Your Man medley, the music is very
much enjoyable.  To top it off, the film is packed to the gills with
cameo musician appearances.  B.B. King, Blues Traveler, Eric Clapton,
Travis Tritt, Wilson Pickett, Erykah Badu, Bo Diddley and Steve Winwood
are just a sampling of the multitude of stars that make an appearance
here and there.
Unfortunately, the music pauses here and there to allow in the familiar
plot.  If simply copying the original Blues Brothers wasn't bad enough,
writers Aykroyd and John Landis dumb it down, removing any memorable
characters, and replacing them with flashy, but unbelievable, magical
gimmicks.  It's a shame.  Buy the soundtrack and avoid the film. Better
yet, rewatch the original...you'll have a much better time.
- Matt Williams (matt@shreck.com)
Reviewer for Shreck's Cinema: http://www.shreck.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Scott Renshaw
BLUES BROTHERS 2000
(Universal)
Starring:  Dan Aykroyd, John Goodman, Joe Morton, J. Evan Bonifant.
Screenplay:  Dan Aykroyd and John Landis.
Producers:  Dan Aykroyd, John Landis and Leslie Belzberg.
Director:  John Landis.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, violence, adult themes).
Running Time:  123 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     For 18 years, THE BLUES BROTHERS has occupied a unique position as
perhaps the only action-musical in film history.  The adventures of Jake
(John Belushi) and Elwood Blues (Dan Aykroyd) on their "mission from God"
somehow managed to mix production numbers and car chases into a ridiculous
cocktail of over-the-top absurdity and musical showmanship.  Much of the
film's unlikely success was attributed to the chemistry between Belushi
and Aykroyd, but the primary responsibility of the two stars was to
maintain a stoic demeanor behind their dark glasses.  No, I think THE
BLUES BROTHERS worked because it really _was_ like a mission for those
involved.  Belushi, Aykroyd and director John Landis became proselytizers
for soul, prepared to do absolutely anything to bring their musical
message to the people.  If that meant juxtaposing the Godfather of Soul
and vehicular chaos, so be it.  It was an insane film powered by the
fervor of true believers.
     If BLUES BROTHERS 2000 leaves a viewer feeling less than satisfied,
it's not necessarily due to the absence of the late Belushi, though John
Goodman does frequently seem unsure exactly what to do with himself.  The
main problem is the absence of a similar focus on the music, replaced by a
more cynical attempt to re-create the past.  The story is an over-plotted
collection of gimmicks, sending Elwood back into the world after nearly
two decades in prison to discover that brother Jake and surrogate father
Curtis (Cab Calloway in the original film) have both passed on.  In a
quest to re-connect with some sort of family, Elwood a) seeks out Curtis's
illegitimate son Cabel (Joe Morton), an Illinois State Police commander;
b) brings a meek bartender named Mack McTeer (Goodman) along to help
re-unite the Blues Brothers Band; and c) hooks up with troubled orphan
Buster (J. Evan Bonifant), who serves the essential purpose of looking
cute in a miniature black suit, hat and shades.
     I'm not suggesting that THE BLUES BROTHERS was anybody's idea of a
streamlined narrative.  It had cops in pursuit, cartoonish hate-mongers, a
gun-wielding psycho, switch-wielding nun Sister Mary Stigmata (Kathleen
Freeman), Aretha Franklin singing, James Brown preaching, and carnage
galore.  BLUES BROTHERS 2000, on the other hand, has...well, every one of
those things, _plus_ items a-c above.  The pointed effort to recreate
every situation from the original -- recruiting the band members from new
vocations, playing a gig for a crowd expecting a different musical style,
etc. -- draws attention to the structure in a way which makes it feel
muddled rather than original, tired, rather than inspired.  Even Aykroyd's
performance draws unnecessary attention to itself, fooling with the notion
that Elwood is a three-dimensional character in need of growth.  Those who
remember him speaking about two dozen words in THE BLUES BROTHERS may be
startled to find that prison life has turned him into a loquacious sort
given to deconstructing the malevolence of Russian gangstersss or the
iconography of the Brothers' distinctive look.  They may also be quite
disappointed at how the loss of his deadpan reactions takes the edge off
the absurdist comedy.
     For all its flaws, however, there's almost enough energy in the
musical numbers alone to make BLUES BROTHERS 2000 worth watching.  In
addition to return players Franklin and Brown, the performers include Sam
Moore, Wilson Pickett and Eddie Floyd (sharing vocals with teen bluesman
Jonny Lang on "634-5789"), and an all-star blues jam for the finale in
which spotting the familiar faces is half the fun, and drooling over the
epic collection of talent is the other half.  Between the high-spirited
production numbers and one spectacular hundred-police-car pile-up -- a
hilarious non-stop parade of soaring, crashing metal -- there is enough
fun to satisfy most viewers, particularly if the familiarity is exactly
what they're looking for.  It's too bad that the much of the film feels
rushed, flattened and processed, like a knock-off sequel cranked out in 18
months instead of 18 years, to be sold with a marketing-friendly
abbreviation like BB2K.  Even with all the retail destruction and
collapsing buildings in THE BLUES BROTHERS, it used to be about the
_music_, man.

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1998. Director - John Landis, Screenplay - Landis & Dan Aykroyd, 
Producers - Aykroyd, Landis & Leslie Belzberg, Photography - David 
Herrington, Music - Paul Shaffer, Visual Effects - Available Light Inc 
(Supervisor - John Van Vliet) & Optical Illusions, Special Effects 
Supervisor - Martin Malvoire, Ghost Rider Effects - Steve Johnson's XFX 
Inc, Production Design - Bill Brodie. Production Company - Universal.
Dan Aykroyd (Elwood Blues), John Goodman (Mighty Mack McTeer), J. Evan 
Bonifant (Buster), Joe Morton (Commander Cabel Chamberlain), Nia Peeples 
(Lieutenant Elizondo), Kathleen Freeman (Mother Mary Stigmata), Erykah 
Badu (Queen Mousette), Steve Cropper (Steve `The Colonel' Cropper), 
Donald Dunn (Donald `Duck' Dunn), Murphy Dunne (Murph), Willie Hall 
(Willie `Too Big' Hall), Lou Marini (Blue Lou), Tom Malone (Tom `Bones' 
Malone), Alan Rubin (Mr Fabulous), Matt Murphy (Matt `Guitar' Murphy), 
Aretha Franklin (Mrs Murphy), James Brown (Reverend Cleophus James), 
B.B. King (Malvern Gasperon)
Plot: Elwood Blues is released from jail only to find his brother Jake 
has died in incarceration. Forming a new band along with a bartender, a 
juvenile delinquent, and a police chief whose personality is 
miraculously transformed, he sets out to reunite the remaining members 
of the backup band and play a new gig, a journey which turns into a 
massive cross-country chase as they are pursued by police, Russian mafia 
and right-wing militia groups.
The original `The Blues Brothers' (1980), although disliked by most 
critics at the time of its release, became a cult classic. Borderline 
fantasy at most, its enduring appeal lay somewhere between a great blues 
soundtrack, its anarchically surreal parody of a car chase movie and the 
laconically cool duo of Dan Aykroyd and John Belushi. This sequel, made 
fifteen years on, reunites one half of the title duo, Aykroyd, and 
original director John Landis, who has really failed to make anything 
that has the freshness of `The Blues Brothers' in the time in between. 
And despite replacement by three other characters, the absence of 
Belushi, who of course died of a heroin overdose in an LA motel room in 
1982, hangs over the whole reunion exercise and leaves it with a kind of 
odour of bad judgement. Indeed not unlike the various reunion concerts 
performed in recent years by bands like Kiss, The Eagles and The Sex 
Pistols, the reunion smacks of a cynicism - of former creative forces 
sunken into a flabby and not too becoming middle-age whose get-together 
has been motivated less by a desire to explore new creative directions 
than it has of a desire to milk fans' nostalgia for more money.
And sadly `Blues Brothers 2000' is all of these things. It lacks any 
original ideas. The plot simply rehashes that of the first film - Blues 
Brothers(s) get out of jail and sets about reuniting the band, a quest 
which, as the film progresses, escalates into a surreally overblown 
chase with the police and various terrorist groups. The plot just 
flabbily plods from one incident to the next without, it seems, really 
anything except the musical numbers to hold it together. Indeed the end 
seems to peter out of plot altogether and just anti-climactically ends 
by trying to get as many famous blues legends as possible on stage for a 
massive jam session. This one even lacks the original's deadpan 
anarchism - there's one sequence with about fifty cop cars all piling 
into one another which goes on for about five minutes in a deadeningly 
excessive way and seems merely overblown. This film is a good deal more 
fantastic than its predecessor - miraculous personality changes in the 
midst of a gospel number; the Blues Brothers transformed into 
green-skinned zombies for a calypso number by a voodoo priestess; an 
appearance of the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse above the stage during 
one performance. Why, one might ask. One might indeed ask but to do so 
might serve as much purpose as asking what the `2000' in the title 
refers to. And the only real answer appears to be the same sense of 
haphazardness with which the rest of the film appears to have been slung 
together.


Author
Jason Bacon
 While that was the catchphrase of the original film, its sequel, Blues
Brothers 2000, has a new one: "The Lord works in mysterious ways." if
only we could have had some sort of storyline with our movie.
 Anyway, Blues Brothers 2000, once again scrioted by Dan Aykroyd and
John Landis(who, of course also directed ths and the first one), stars
Aykroyd as Elwood J. Blues. He's released from prison 18 years after the
first film, and immediately sets out to find family.
 He learns that both his brother Jake (the talented late John Belushi)
and his stepfather Curtis (the late Cab Calloway) are now deceased from
Mother Mary Stigmata (Kathleen Freeman). Not only does she still whack
him when he misbehaves, but she asks him to mentor Buster (J. Evan
Bonifant), ten-year-orphan. Elwood is reluctant, but agrees to anyway.
 Soon, he meets Mighty Mack (John Goodman), a bartender at the strip
club his former drummer owns. Elwood seeks to, like in the original
film, put the band back together, but is pursued by his stepfather's
illegitamate son Cabel Chamberlain (Joe Morton), the no-nonsense
commander of the Illinois police, a right-wing militia group, and the
Chicago affiliate of the Moscow mafia.
 This all culminates in a "Battle of The Bands" contest held in New
Orleans at a voodoo queen's (R+B star Erykah Badu) mansion between The
Blues Brothers Band and The Louisiana Gator Boys (B.B King, Eric
Clapton, the list goes on and on.).
 In between what should be a plot is instead wonderful musical
production numbers (634-5879 by Wilson Pickett and Eddie Flyod, Turn On
Your Love Light, R-E-S-P-E-C-T by Aretha Franklin, Maybe I'm Wrong by
Blues Traveler, and many, many more).All in all, even though this sequel
didn't have the plot or comedy of its predecessor (and NO ENDING?!), the
music makes one forget about the film's many shortcomings. Nowhere near
as good as the first, but the music, choreography (especially by
Bonifant!), and songs make up for that.
 Ultimately, Blues Brothers 2000, while nothing like the first film, is
a car-crashing, toe-tapping classic that is a wonderful follow-up and a
unique, hilarious, and outrageously wonderful cult classic.

Author
Doug Skiles
Starring: Dan Aykroyd (Elwood Blues), John Goodman (Mack McTeer/Mighty
Mack Blues), Joe Morton (Cabel Chamberlain), J. Evan Bonifant (Buster),
and just about every blues artist you can think of, both past and
present
Directed by: John Landis, Written by: Dan Aykroyd and John Landis
Everybody... needs somebody... everybody...
THE BLUES BROTHERS.  It's a classic.  It's John Landis.  It's John
Belushi.  It's Dan Aykroyd.  It's blues music.  It's great comedy.
Now it's 18 years later.  Now it's BLUES BROTHERS 2000.  It's John
Landis.  It's Dan Aykroyd.  It's John Goodman.  It's Joe Morton.  It's
J. Evan Bonifant.  It's blues music.  It's good comedy.
BLUES BROTHERS 2000 starts off just the way you'd want it to - with a
card that says "for" followed by the names of John Candy, Cab Calloway,
and John Belushi.  Then, with "John the Revelator" playing over the
soundtrack, we watch Elwood Blues emerge from prison.  He stands and
waits for his brother Jake (originally played by John Belushi), until
the prison warden (Frank Oz, who was the corrections officer in the
original film) approaches him, puts his hand on Elwood's shoulder, and
says, simply, "I'm sorry."  Elwood understands.  He bows his head,
silently, in grief.  It's a moment that reminds us that these
characters, as screwball as they may seem, still have a heart and soul.
Elwood recieves a letter from Sister Mary Stigmata - now Mother Stigmata
- asking him to come see her.  He does, and when he arrives, he learns
that his surrogate father, Curtis (Cab Calloway in the first film), has
also passed on.  It's then that Elwood realizes that he's lost his
family, and, left yearning for his old friends, he decides that it's
time, once again, to get the band back together.
But Mother Stigmata wants him to a mentor to a young troublemaker,
Buster.  And Elwood wants his sort-of step-brother (the sort-of gets
explained by Stigmata and Elwood through a couple of dialogue
sequences), Cabel, who happens to be an Illinois state police captain,
to join the band.  And pretty soon Elwood meets a bartender who can
actually sing pretty well, Mack McTeer.  And of course, Mack joins the
band.
And pretty soon, also, the police are after the band, as are the Russian
mafia, a group of white supremacists, and a collection of orphanage
workers who fear Elwood's kidnapped Buster.  And they're all chasing the
newly reassembled Blues Brothers Band across state after state as they
head to a "Battle Of The Bands" contest in New Orleans.  Naturally this
results in lots of wacky chase scenes and the like.  It's a Blues
Brothers speciality.  
The comedy here is good.  It's fun.  But it's not on the same level as
the hilarious, classic stuff from the first film.  It does, however,
recreate the feel of the first film, and that's important.  The city
backdrops that line all the scenes as Elwood travels through Chicago
during the first half of the movie add to that feeling, too.
The music, though, IS pretty much on the same level, and offers a wider
variety of blues acts from both today and yesterday, ranging from Aretha
Franklin to Blues Traveler.  It's great fun, very exhilerating, and is
sure to get you moving to the beat with some area of your person.  It's
probably the film's strongest aspect.
As far as annoying aspects, well, the fantasy in this film is heavier
than in the first.  Both films ignore the laws of physics in favor of
wild comedy, but this one also tosses magic into the mix periodically. 
Of course, that's not too hard to accept, really - this is the Blues
Brothers, you weren't expecting something serious, were you?
But in all of this, the movie still has an underlying heart and soul to
it.  In the original, it was about getting the money to save the
orphanage.  Now, it's about Elwood getting a new structure for his
life.  Even if this isn't a major theme, there remains something
satisfying about seeing Elwood build himself a new family to hold his
life together, out of old friends from the band, plus new friends like
the large-yet-shy Mack and the lovable Buster, who feels the blues in
him even at age 10, and steals a lot of scenes.  Out of the four major
players, Cabel is the least characterized, but it doesn't really matter,
because Joe Morton always holds a presence on the screen.
The sign that, even if it isn't a classic, this is still a good movie,
is that it leaves you wanting more.  Does that mean there should be
another sequel?  I'm not sure about that.  I don't know where else the
band could go from here.  Even this one borrows a number of elements
from the first movie.  And while that's not a serious problem for this
sequel, as it still takes those elements in new directions, one has to
note that, if these elements were used a third time, they most likely
wouldn't be able to hold up.
So, see BLUES BROTHERS 2000.  Enjoy it.  It's fun, and the music is
great.  Maybe it's not nearly as hilarious as the classic first one, but
it still manages to be funny, and it's just likable.  Most importantly,
even though John Belushi's wild antics are obviously missed, this
manages to be a respectable, well-done follow-up to THE BLUES BROTHERS,
despite what many naysayers feared.  To have that be pulled off, after
18 years, is something to be proud of.  John Landis has made his best
movie in a long time, and it looks that, perhaps, Dan Aykroyd, thanks to
this and his memorable-yet-smaller role in GROSSE POINTE BLANK (1997),
may be entering into his renaissance after a long dry period.    

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Dan Aykroyd, John Goodman, Joe Morton, J. Evan Bonifant, Nia
Peeples, Aretha Franklin, James Brown, B.B. King
Director: John Landis
Screenplay: Dan Aykroyd and John Landis
Music: Paul Shaffer U.S.
No sequel, can hope to bare, an inherent a cult classic as THE BLUES
BROTHERS, as brilliant a heir. There was something unique about the time
it was made, in the era of the early 80's, when the world was crying out
for something loud, original and immensely destructive to hit the
screens. The reply to this call of the wild was of course, THE BLUES
BROTHERS.
It is almost 20 years since the original hit the screens, but the world
is not howling for the likes of BLUES BROTHERS 2000. Why? Maybe it's
just the way of the times. This isn't an awful movie by any means, it
just lacks that cheeky sparkle of John Belushi. Dan Ackroyd is back, a
lean-n-mean, slim-n-trim, Elwood Blues. He's good and this is probably
his best role for some time, but he cannot carry this movie alone. John
Goodman, is Mighty Mack who sings the blues true, but even he cannot
fill the shoes of the missing Belushi. The other newcomer is a
twelve-year-old orphan, Buster Blues (J. Bonifant), who plays the
harmonica like mother's milk, but really he should be sucking on a
breast instead of hanging with the dudes.
Look, if you're here to listen to the music, then you've come to the
right cinema. Let's face it, there's no one who sings, plays, thinks
blues better than the likes of Aretha, James, Eric, Stevie, Charlie,
Billy, Lou, Joshua, Travis, Jimmie, Wylie, Grover, Paul, Steve, Donald,
Murphy, Lou, Tom, Allan, Matt and the BLUES BROTHERS, all jamming
together for a grand finale. Well, that's a dream come true for lovers
of soul.  However, for the rest of the world, this is not the ecstatic
reunion of home coming queens. So perhaps in another twenty years, there
may be a more successful resurrection of BLUES BROTHERS 2020  something
more in keeping with Beverly Hills 90210?

Author
Jeff Pidgeon
Almost twenty years ago, John Landis directed a feature-length "Road Runner"
cartoon called "The Blues Brothers", a delightfully anarchic introduction to
various and sundry musical forms that were all a part of what has come to be 
known as Rhythm and Blues.  The plot was simple enough -- the orphanage where
Jake and Elwood were raised needs money.  Jake and Elwood want to help.  Since
Sister Mary Stigmata (Kathleen Freeman) opposes many of the ways that the duo
could potentially raise the money, they decide to get their old band back to-
gether and hold a benefit concert.  This they do, but in the process they make
many enemies, some of which were in pursuit before the film begins.  Evading
said enemies, Jake and Elwood throw a successful concert, sign a recording con-
tract and repay the orphanage's debt -- all this while barely evading the teem-
ing hordes that would see them destroyed.  The original film had terrific comic
timing (from both the performers and the director), great musical numbers and
insanley excessive stunt work (which contributed much to its correspondingly
then-large $40 million price tag).  The film did well enough (despite a less-
than-warm critical reception) that a sequel, "The Blues Brothers meet the Zom-
bie Queen", was in the works.  The death of John Belushi, however, seemed to 
end any possibility of future films.
Aykroyd and Landis have now re-teamed to create a sequel, but much of the ori-
ginal energy seems missing.  The film starts well with a gag (Elwood waiting 
outside for hours after being released from prison) that turns a bit somber as
we learn that he was waiting for Jake to return.  The film soon loses focus,
though, and it's not all that clear why this trip is being taken -- the only 
conflict seems to be that Elwood doesn't have any money himself.   Many seq-
els feel unmotivated, and this one is no exception.  One begins to wonder why
any of the band members want to join Elwood in his goal of winning the "Battle
of the Bands" in New Orleans.  Little is made of the careers of the various
characters -- Elwood, Mighty Max (the bartender from Willie's strip club -- a
particularly gratuitous skin display -- who soon joins up) and Buster (an orph-
an who tags along with Elwood after being introduced to him by Mother Mary)
simply show up, a musical number ensues, and everyone continues on their way.
The new numbers -- Aretha Franklin performs "R-E-S-P-E-C-T", Wilson Pickett 
sings "634-5789" -- are fine, but the enviroments -- a Mercedes-Benz dealer-
ship, a phone-sex establishment -- while intended to be as incongruous as 
those in the first film, simply come off as awkward film sets.  Few of the new
locations feel like the places that they're supposed to represent in the 
story, nor are they effective stylizations (like Cab Calloway's "Minnie The 
Moocher" performance).  The original film has a grittiness that is sorely miss-
ed here; often the performing extras felt like passersby who happned to know 
how to dance and sing perfectly; in "2000", however, everything feels contri-
ved, an attempt at reviving a potential franchise property.
This new film is additionally weakened by an attempt to atone for any slights
that the first film might have caused.  Performers are piled on, but in neglec-
ting fewer artists, everyone winds up with extended cameos.  Few of the new
numbers equal Ray Charles' or James Brown's solo pieces in the original film.
A piece by the group Blues Traveler is one of the best in the film, but it has
the least to do with the narrative, and (as I recall) isn't complete.  Having
four Blues Brothers means everyone gets less to do here, as well.  Joe Morton's
character is particularly unappealing and not terribly funny, while John Good-
man is given even less to do -- most of his jokes stem from how "un-hip" he is.
J. Evan Bonifant plays the orphan Buster, and while his addition is superfici-
ally the least defendable (none of the characters that I knew in the first film
would have been seen anywhere near a child), he earns his keep with some great
dancing and singing, which was also severely truncated in the final cut.
Other returning characters -- Steve Lawrence, Frank Oz, Kathleen Freeman --
mainly come off as grace nods to their original roles.
It's amazing how unfamiliar the original writers and director seem to be with
their own creations.  Elwood is transformed into a chatty, warmhearted fellow
-- his Jack Webb quality has almost entirely vanished.  One would think that 
with three new characters to potentially speak for him, Elwood could have re-
mained his old taciturn self, but times have definately changed.
It's difficult to imagine this new Elwood capable of provoking anyone.
A group of Russian assassins are here for this go-around, and a group of
Southern militant survivalists replace the Illinois Nazis, both to lesser ef-
fect.  Talkiness, regrettably, is throughout the new film, replacing the empha-
sis on the pair as deadpan reactors to the insanity around them.  Everyone sits
about and spews exposition, then tosses off some disarming one-liner to let us 
know they're in on the joke.  Landis has a few choice moments -- the background
music stops as the characters pause for a red light; a frenzied police car 
pile-up that rivals one of the best sequences in the original -- but overall,
it's a slack, unfocused film, with little of the enthusiasm of the original.
Many touches -- a gaggle of cowboy-skeletons materialize during "Ghost Riders 
in the Sky", for example -- feel random and indulgent.
By the time we arrive at the "Battle of the Bands" -- one song each from two
bands -- and our heroes lose to their more experienced predecessors, one hardly
notices.  It's sad to see a pale sequel to a highly entertaining film, but to
see one this confused and poorly motivated is sadder still.  If you do wind up
going to see this after all that I've said, be sure to stick around until it's
entirely finished -- James Brown has (what appears to be) a cut scene that's a
lot of fun.  Not Recommended.

Author
Andrew Cunningham
**** out of *****
A big surprise to me.  The good trailer had hinted that they pulled the
impossible off, but making a Blues Brothers movie without Jake Blues (John
Belushi) is such a dumb idea I really had no hope.  They replaced him just
fine.  Not with John Goodman, he didn't do much of anything, but with the
brilliant actor Joe Morton, who can REALLY sing.  The fourth Blues Brother
is J Evan Bonifant, who's ten.  This was another of my fears for the film,
but he's a really good dancer, and plays a mean harmonica (although he may
have been dubbed).  Things that intellectually had bothered me before, like
no mission from God, everyone being richer, it not being filmed in Chicago
-- gave me no problems at all.  I'm quite pleased that there were less car
pile-ups, because they meant less music, and John Landis seems to have lost
interest in the whole thing.  There's a few early crashes, and then one
huge pile-up, but after that it all stops.  It's just the music.  One of my
problems with the first is that Cab Calloway's song is so good the actually
Blues Brothers look dull after him, but there's no problems with this.  the
music is all as good as ever, tons of great musicians showing up -- with
the exception of Johnny Lang, who can't sing, all the musicians do a great
job.  The only real problems I had was the special effects.  These were
superfluous and a waste of money.  Since the film isn't doing very well,
they could mean we have no possibility of another sequel, which I want to
see.  The bluegrass version of Riders in the Sky is even better than
Rawhide.
-- 
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Academy/8034/
Remove no spam to reply. 
"Drive carefully but recklessly", Mama,  Child's Toy
"The only excercise I take is walking behind the coffins of friends who
took exercise." Peter O'Toole

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
A movie laced with a good blend of action, comedy, and a heavy dose of musical
celebrity guest appearances sounds pretty gourmet, but even the best
ingredients can be thrown together in the wrong way, creating a dismal and
unsatisfactory product. Eighteen years after THE BLUES BROTHERS hit theaters,
BLUES BROTHERS 2000 is being unleashed, minus half of its original duo (the
late John Belushi) and nearly all of its original charm.
Dan Aykroyd reprises his role (as well as his co-writing credit) as Elwood
Blues, the sharp dressed con man who wreaked havoc on a self-proclaimed
"mission from God" along with his brother Jake and their Blues Brothers Band
nearly eighteen years ago. As we begin, Elwood is being released from a state
penitentiary along with the news of his brother's death in prison years ago.
Completely on his own, Elwood decides to trace his roots back to the orphanage
where he spent his childhood, only to discover that everyone he has ever known
has passed away. But Elwood isn't completely without family. It seems he has a
half-brother of sorts - not a real brother mind you, just the illegitimate
child of his bluesman pseudo-father Curtis (Cab Calloway from the first film),
who has also passed on. Despite inklings from Mother Superior Mary Stigmata
(Kathleen Freeman) to do otherwise, Elwood seeks out his only remaining family
in an effort to start up an all new Blues Brothers Band.
Working as a police commander, Cabel Chamberlain (Joe Morton), has an
immediate disliking for Elwood, who nonchalantly fills Cab in on his mother's
affair years ago and then goes on to steal his wallet. Following Elwood around
is the lonely orphan Buster (J. Evan Bonifant), who quickly learns to become a
mini-Elwood. When bartender Mighty Mack McTeer (John Goodman) joins the group,
the Blues Brothers Band is complete, and once again, the group travels the
country, crashing cars, blowing things up, and obstructing peace with more
than just solid blues rock. Meanwhile, Cab's personal vendetta against Elwood
leads him on an impassioned manhunt for his next-to-next-of-kin.
>From this point, the movie turns into a series of music videos with a few bits
of acting in between. Those hoping for an interesting and/or funny yarn are
given too many musical interludes while those heavily interested in the music
are given too much of a story. Only the extremely avid blues fans should
attempt getting thru these two hours. For those people, it may be worth it,
for luckily there is much more music than shoddy attempts at acting, but when
the story does intrude upon the festivities, the film is heavily bogged down
with unfunny jokes, musicians turned stiff actors, and the pointless 10-year-
old Buster attempting to add some sort of HOME ALONE cuteness to the whole
thing. Appearances by musical legends such as Aretha Franklin, James Brown,
Eric Clapton, and a whole slew of others are the high points of the film, but
they also confirm why these people are musicians and not actors.
BLUES BROTHERS 2000 is deserving of one whole star simply because if you
really, really love this kind of music, you might kind of, sort of like this
movie. Many, many scenes are nauseatingly unfunny, and if you don't have a
passion for very deep blues/rock, you'll be bored out of your skull. Much of
this film seems nothing more than Aykroyd's self-serving vanity project, but
no matter how much fun Aykroyd may be having with this, none of the excitement
is passed on to the audience. And seeing three guys in three-piece suits
goofily dancing around with poker faces can only be funny for so long.
Unfortunately, those two seconds are over about fifteen minutes into the film.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Dan Aykroyd, John Goodman, Joe Morton, J. Evan Bonifant, 
      Nia Peeples, Aretha Franklin, James Brown, B.B. King
Director: John Landis
Producers: John Landis, Dan Aykroyd, Leslie Belzberg
Screenplay: Dan Aykroyd and John Landis
Cinematography: David Herrington
Music: Paul Shaffer
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures
     They're back, and this time they're not on a mission from God.  
Strictly speaking, however, only one of the original Blues Brothers has 
returned -- Dan Aykroyd's Elwood.  His partner, Jake (played by the late 
John Belushi), died in prison, so now it's up to the survivor to find a 
new lead singer, re-form the group, hit the road, run from the police, 
and end up in a band competition to end all band competitions.  Any 
similarities between the sequel and its classic inspiration are entirely 
intentional.  In fact, in many ways, BLUES BROTHERS 2000 is as much a 
remake as it is a follow-up.  The familiar elements are certainly all 
there. 
     The difference between the two Blues Brothers movies can be summed 
up simply:  the original 1980 release worked as a musical and a comedy; 
the 1998 installment functions as a musical masquerading as a comedy.  
That is to say, the songs are still great fun, but the level of humor 
has dropped off considerably.  BLUES BROTHERS 2000 is rarely funny.  
Fortunately, after a rather tedious first half-hour, the music kicks 
into high gear, and that gives the film enough energy to bulldoze over 
its numerous shortcomings.  BLUES BROTHERS 2000 isn't anywhere close to 
the landmark its predecessor was, but it's still enjoyable.
     BLUES BROTHERS 2000 appears to have set out with two primary 
objectives:  re-create the feel of the first movie and crash even more 
cars.  The colossal smash-up sequence in BLUES BROTHERS 2000 not only 
tops anything in the original, but it garners the picture's biggest 
laughs.  It's an amazing piece of over-the-top entertainment, and proves 
that director John Landis (who also helmed THE BLUES BROTHERS) is still 
capable of creating a cinematic moment with an edge.
     This time around, there are four men in black.  Aykroyd plays 
Elwood much the same as he did eighteen years ago.  In fact, with the 
hat, suit, and sunglasses covering up the most obvious signs of aging, 
it's hard to believe that so much time has passed.  Taking over for John 
Belushi is John Goodman as the surprisingly timid Mighty Mack.  
Initially, this role was earmarked for Jim Belushi, but scheduling 
conflicts prevented him from appearing.  Joe Morton joins the group as a 
cop who undergoes a conversion to the blues.  Then there's ten-year old 
Buster (played by J. Evan Bonifant), who specializes in stealing scenes.
     If the tag line in the original was "We're on a mission from God," 
this time it's "The Lord works in mysterious ways."  Many members of the 
supporting cast have returned, including Aretha Franklin, James Brown, 
Kathleen Freeman (as Sister Mary Stigmata), Frank Oz, Steve Lawrence, 
and the members of the band.  As expected, there's a powerful lineup of 
guest performers.  The roster numbers about two dozen, half of whom 
appear as members of the Louisiana Gator Boys, the band that challenges 
the Blues Brothers during the film's goosepimple-generating musical 
finale.  Familiar faces (and voices) include Eric Clapton, B.B. King, 
Isaac Hayes, Bo Diddley, Dr. John, Erykah Badu, Lou Rawls, Travis Tritt, 
Jonny Lang, Grover Washington Jr., Steve Winwood, Wilson Pickett, and 
Junior Wells.  (Apologies to those I have forgotten -- and there are a 
lot.)  Playing everything from familiar standards to new songs, BLUES 
BROTHERS 2000 has something for viewers of almost any musical persuasion 
(standout numbers include "How Blue Can You Get" and "New Orleans").  On 
more than one occasion, it's hard to keep from at least tapping a foot.
     BLUES BROTHERS 2000 is the kind of movie that needs to be seen with 
an audience to be fully appreciated.  Almost like a live concert, the 
energy of the viewers adds to the atmosphere.  The experience wouldn't 
be nearly the same alone, at home, on video.  The film also has the good 
sense to build to something, leaving the dullest, least-invigorating 
elements for the first two reels.  By the time the end credits arrive, 
the production is on a roll.  And it's nice to see film makers come up 
with a way to keep most members of the audience in their seats until the 
house lights go on.  In the final analysis, despite the cries of 
"sacrilege" by some BLUES BROTHERS and SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE (where the 
Belushi/Aykroyd act started) die-hards, BLUES BROTHERS 2000 represents a 
respectable follow-up to a uniquely American classic.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Walter Frith
Usually I don't compare sequels to their original.  This is an exception
to the rule because 18 years have passed between two films and you
instinctively will draw comparisons this time.  It's unavoidable.
You can't go home again.  Not true for all sequels but certainly for the
ones that try and top an established classic, especially when the
original classic has 18 years to gain status.  Jack Nicholson waited 16
years to make 'The Two Jakes', the sequel to 1974's 'Chinatown'.  It
failed.  James Cameron, currently riding high with the eventual Best
Picture Oscar winner for 1997, 'Titanic', made 'Aliens' in 1986 and it
topped the rather cerebral original 'Alien' from 1979.  The 'Star Wars'
franchise only had three years between all three films and the films
that followed the original 'Star Wars' weren't as good but they were
very close.
1980's 'The Blues Brothers' still defines itself as a cult classic with
a nutty blend of music, action, humour and cleverness and while that
film was original in its big screen concept, based of course on the
'Saturday Night Live' sketch, it still has a watchable presence which is
timeless.
'Blues Brothers 2000' doesn't understand that in order to make a sequel
work, you have to offer the same feeling of the original with a
different story.  This film couldn't be more different than the
original.  The film is almost totally lacking in action, it has TOO MUCH
music and not enough laughs, excitement, and it feels like a paper
weight laying still.
Why it's called 'Blues Brothers 2000' is a mystery to me.  Nobody in the
film is related and putting their band back together this time serves no
purpose.  The original had them putting the band back together to raise
money for the taxes due on a Catholic orphanage, but this time, there's
no reason to put it back together and no one cares.  This is a story
that didn't need to be told.  The original had all you could ask for.
Jake and Elwood were pursued by all the enemies you didn't want.  The
police, the army, rednecks, Nazis and even a scorned woman.  The premise
was so absurd that the way the films characteristics were shaped, it all
worked.
Jake Blues (John Belushi) is dead, in real life of course but also in
the story.  His brother Elwood (Dan Aykroyd) has been released from
prison after 18 years (remember the end of the original?) and he
searches for something to do with his life.  He visits 'The Penguin'
(Kathleen Freeman), the nun who raised him years ago in her orphanage.
She insists that Elwood be a mentor to 10 year old Buster (J. Evan
Bonifant) and later in the film, Elwood takes on two other members of
the band he will put together (John Goodman and Joe Morton).  Morton is
a commander with the Illinois State Police but later becomes a Blues
Brother when he "sees the light", literally.  Elwood also tracks down
other members of the band from the first film and they do it all again.
The film's music is by Paul Shaffer.  How did David Letterman's barely
passable sidekick get this assignment?  The film must have had a limited
budget which explains its lack of action and lack of memorable songs.
'Blues Brothers 2000' was directed by John Landis, who made the first
one and the picture is written by Dan Aykroyd and John Landis.  The two
of them wrote the original.
Many appearances made by celebrities and original cast members here have
far less bite than the original and the characters are reduced to
caricatures, especially in the case of John Goodman and it's actually
embarrassing at times.  So much so that the film's 122 minutes seem much
longer.
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: John Landis
Cast: Dan Aykroyd, John Goodman, Joe Morton, J. Evan Bonifant, Aretha
Franklin, James Brown, B.B. King
Rated PG-13: Exotic dancing, language
by Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
    Lots of movies suck, but few movies suck the way Blues Brothers 2000
sucks. I usually don't resort to using the work "suck," but in this
case, it is so vastly appropriate. I hate this movie. It is two
unbearable hours of meandering pointlessness. Well, no, "meandering"
implies movement, and Blues Brothers 2000 contains no movement. It's a
stagnant, dead-feeling motion picture containing absolutely nothing of
interest. It's highlighted by hundreds of cameos, car chases, gun fire,
and irritating stereotypes.
    Now, I have to be at least partially fair: it's been a long time
since I saw the original, so I wasn't sure what to expect from this.
Also, I have no affinity to the Music that the characters in this film
cherish so much. Maybe I should have rented the original film before
subjecting myself to this; at least then I would not have been
blindsided by the pure, toxic awfulness of this movie. But I didn't. I
watched it cold turkey, and I was blindsided. I was shocked not only by
how bad the film is in general, but how intensely boring it is from
start to finish. Thirty minutes into the film, I felt like I had seen
enough black suits and sunglasses to hold me over into the next
millenium.
    Dan Aykroyd stars as Elwood Blues. Upon getting released from prison
in the beginning of the film, he learns that his brother is dead. So,
the story of Blues Brothers 2000 contains scene after scene in which
Elwood tries to reassemble his old band. There are like thirty people in
this silly band, so there are a lot of scenes in which Elwood has to
convince wary musicians that dodging bullets really is worth the rewards
they get from playing their music. Notable members of the band include
Mac (John Goodman) and Buster the kid (J. Evan Bonifant).
    I'll not bother with the subplots. Like all truly hideous films,
there are countless subplots that clog the film and suffocate the
viewer. I'll just mention that some of them contain nuns, while others
showcase Russian mobsters, Confederate militia men, and a police chase
led by Joe Morton.
    Even though I'm not a fan of the Music, I think I could have enjoyed
the film, had it been made well. Even though I'm not familiar with the
characters, the movie could have still drawn me in and made me
interested. All the best sequels I've ever seen are accessible even to
viewers who haven't seen the originals. I simply saw no point to make
this movie. Well, I take that back--there are two scenes in which Dan
Aykroyd makes anti-drug messages. Knowing Aykroyd's history and the fate
of John Belushi, I can understand why these were included. And I can
respect that. But it doesn't make the film good.
    Each scene plods along and slumps into the next with absolutely no
feeling of progression. Musicals, when done poorly, come across as dull
and contrived, as if there's no reason to have the music at all. I don't
watch musicals often, but I can tell when they feel smooth. This one
doesn't feel smooth. When the characters break out into song, I just
want them to stop and be silenced.
    There was, however one scene that had me laughing--towards the end,
there is a two-minute pileup of police cars. The cars go flying through
the air at ridiculous heights and speeds, and it is entertaining (most
of the car stunts, actually, are so exaggerated that they are
entertaining). I also like John Goodman, though he doesn't do much in
this film. Unfortunately, these two elements don't amount to a hill of
beans when compared to the flat-out wretchedness portrayed in every
other scene.
    I suppose the worst moment is when the Brothers stumble across the
militia men meeting. I don't know if there are really people like this
in the world, but I didn't think it was funny to see them in this film,
and I didn't think it was funny when the Brothers accidentally blow them
up with their own explosives. And the film has no rules--penned by
Aykroyd and director John Landis, the script is a dark creation,
displaying characteristics of musicals, comedies, and farces; but with
each passing scene, the ridiculous factor increases exponentially until
finally there are hordes of people undergoing magical transformations
into rats.
    This is the kind of film that I hate the most. It's a horribly dull,
limp, and insipid attempt at an entertaining and energetic film. I can
see how, if you love the first movie or you just love this Music, that
you might find this entertaining. Like I said before, I don't know much
about blues music. And, because of Blues Brothers 2000, I have no
interest to ever learn anything about it.
