Title
Review for North by Northwest (1959)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Rick Pali
Roger Thornhill (Cary Grant) is a Madison Avenue advertising executive.
He's mistaken for someone else and a pair of thugs kidnap him right in the
middle of a meeting. What follows is a suspenseful roller-coaster ride as
we follow Thornhill in his attempts to escape this nightmare and get his
own life back. Be ready for lots of surprises because nothing, and no one,
is what they first seem.
In some reading I've done, I've seen this film referred to as a first James
Bond film, but without gadgets. It was released just three years before the
first Bond film, Dr. No. I see what they were trying to say but I don't
completely agree. What this is rather, is a Bond film without gadgets or
Bond. Thornhill is a regular guy, not an international spy! Sheesh, his
mother (Jessie Royce Landis) nags at him every chance she gets. When's the
last time you saw Bond in that situation? And I think that the film is all
the more interesting and entertaining because of Thornhill's more domestic
origins.
Of course, Grant is great in this film. He can really play a character that
knows what he's doing, and he can really play a character that doesn't.
Rarely has any actor done both so well with the same character in the same
film. What's not to like? Eve Kendall is the main female character (played
by Eva Marie Saint), but she doesn't come off nearly as well. I found her
performance cold and emotionless. One could argue that's exactly how that
character should be played, but it was a little extreme for me. James Mason
is the wonderfully sinister mastermind villain, and the ridiculously skinny
Martin Landau is not one to tangle with as the villain's right-hand-man.
North by Northwest stands very tall among the grand-scale action thrillers
of the 50s/60s in my books. It's simply a classic. If you haven't seen it,
you'd best correct that oversight.

Author
Brian Koller
"North By Northwest" is one of Alfred Hitchcock's most
famous and heavily praised films.  It is a very good film,
full of suspense and action, but it is not among his
best films.  The romance between Cary Grant and Eva
Marie Saint is unintentionally amusing, and several
of the action scenes lack credibility.
Grant is a business executive who is mistaken
for a government agent by henchmen working for suave
bad-guy James Mason.  Grant survives a murder attempt,
then is accused of murder himself.  While on the
run, Grant romances double-agent Marie Saint.  Gradually,
Grant becomes the agent that for the first half of the
film he claims not to be.
"North by Northwest" is admittedly fun to watch.
Something is always happening, and if you pretend that
the events are plausible, the film might live up
to its reputation.
"North by Northwest" has several problems with
casting and credibility.  There are spoilers in the
following analysis.
Cary Grant is one of my favorite actors, but he was about
fifteen years too old for this part.  The actress playing
his mother, Jessie Royce Landis, looks younger than Grant
and in fact is.  The romance between Grant and Marie Saint
begins with laughably too-clever dialogue.  Later, Grant
becomes as jealous as a schoolboy over her behaviour, at
a time when both their lives, and national security, are
in danger.
The film's most famous scene has Grant being hunted
by a crop duster's plane.  This scene ends with Grant
getting knocked down by a large truck, immediately followed
by the plane flying into the truck and bursting into
flames.  Why would the plane do this?  Wouldn't the pilot
have seen the truck?  Even more surprising, Grant runs
away without a scratch.
Why does Grant follow Marie Saint to the auction,
and then confront Mason there?  He is risking his and
her neck for no reason except to pick petty arguments.
I know that people dressed more formally back in the
1950s, but Grant seems bent on wearing a particular
gray flannel suit throughout most of the film.  Even
when it becomes soiled, and even when there is a nationwide
manhunt for him.
Grant's transition from businessman to spy and action
hero, without any training, isn't plausible.  He is able
to break into Mason's house, and the minute he arrives,
he overhears a conversation that deals with a murder plot
and where the microfilm is hidden.
In his earlier film "Saboteur", the finale involved
the hero, the bad guy, a life-risking rescue attempt,
a spectacular fall and the Statue of Liberty.  "North by
Northwest" repeats the formula, only substituting Mount
Rushmore for the Statue of Liberty.
I fully admit that I am being very picky, and that
"North By Northwest" is a very good (and certainly
suspenseful and entertaining) film.  I am making these
negative comments only to support my position that it
is not the outstanding film that most consider it to be.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Dragan Antulov
Rating Hitchcock's film can be rather difficult task,
especially since British director made plenty of truly
exceptional films during his golden period from 1950s to
early 1960s. Many of those films are very distinctive from
each other, but the difference in quality is microscopic.
So, the scholars and critics must apply different sets of
criteria when they rate Hitchcock's films. The author of
this review is therefore unable to name Hitchcock's film
that is, in his view, the best. But, on the other hand, I
can name Hitchcock's film that provides the best viewing
experience. That film is NORTH BY NORTHWEST, 1959 comedic
thriller that is often mentioned as the cornerstone of that
particular genre.
The plot, based on the original script by Ernest Lehman,
begins in New York, where Roger O. Thornhill (played by Cary
Grant) successful middle-aged advertising executive,
prepares for business lunch in Plaza hotel. There he is
mistaken for "Roger Chaplain" and immediately kidnapped by
two sinister-looking men who take him to country house in
Long Island. There he is confronted by their leader (played
by James Mason), who doesn't believe Thornhill's claims of
mistaken identity and decides to kill Thornhill by getting
him drunk and arranging the traffic accident. Thornhill,
while drunk, manages to escape his captors but he is soon
arrested and charged for driving under influence.
Authorities view his abduction story as alcoholic fantasy,
especially since they find no evidence of foul play in the
house allegedly used by captors. Thornhill, on the other
hand, decided to settle this matter so he goes to UN
building where he is supposed to meet the owner of the
house, UN diplomat Lester Townsend (played by Philip Ober).
The meeting ends with disaster for Thornhill - assassins not
only kill the diplomat, but Thornhill himself is seen as the
perpetrator in front of dozens of witnesses. Thornhill is
now forced to flee both from assassins and police, and the
only way for him to clear his name is to find the real Roger
Caplan. The trail leads him to Chicago so he boards the
train where he would receive assistance from Eve Kendall
(played by Eva Marie Saint), attractive industrial designer
who seems to fall for handsome fugitive and whose presence
on the train might not be accidental.
Versatility as one of the ingredients for cinema genius
could be clearly observed during Hitchcock's golden phase.
NORTH BY NORTHWEST represents another brilliant example of
such versatility, especially when we compare this film to
Hitchcock's previous masterpiece. NORTH BY NORTHWEST in many
ways provides sharp contrast to VERTIGO made one year
earlier. Instead of extremely dark and unrelentingly
depressive psychological drama we are now presented with
light- hearted, almost farcical comedy of errors. Instead of
the film that sacrifices tempo and action for the sake of
establishing deep characters, we are here introduced to
rollercoaster plot full of breath-taking scenes. Instead of
dysfunctional characters on the verge of psychosis NORTH BY
NORTHWEST gives us one of the clearest examples of
Hitchcockian "ordinary man in extraordinary situation"
formula.
On this particular occasion, "ordinary man" is played by
Cary Grant, extraordinary actor who had great previous
experience with Hitchcock, usually playing suave characters.
This time character of Roger O. Thornhill represented quite
a challenge, because protagonist of this film was supposed
to be "normal", ordinary person. Unable to brush off his
already iconic looks and mannerism, Grant had to rely on
some interesting character quirks that would make this
character closer to the perception of Joe Average. So, his
character of Thornhill is given some rather unflattering
baggage - two failed marriages, boozing and lying habits
plus and image of mamma's boy that doesn't quite corresponds
with his greying hair. Ironic dimension of the last element
was recognised by Hitchcock and he accordingly gave the role
of Thornhill's mother to Jessie Royce Landis, actress
younger than Grant. Many critics often like to see Thornhill
in NORTH BY NORTHWEST as the precursor to the movie
character of James Bond, but they usually ignore the fact
that suaveness is the only thing Thornhill and Bond have in
common. Actually, Thornhill is anything but ordinary hero -
in the beginning of the film he is only passive participant
in the plot beyond his comprehension. While Bond has some
abilities and training to deal with extraordinary
situations, Thornhill must more than often rely on luck or
other people to get him out of trouble. In many instances
those people are women, and in one occasion it results with
rather humiliating experiences when Thornhill leaves the
elevator being ridiculed as "mamma's boy". Thornhill also in
many occasions makes mistakes, some of them bordering on
common stupidity, and only through the rather far-fetched
set of circumstances fulfils the role of the hero, still
suffering setback until the very end of film.
Icy blonde - another important element of Hitchcock's
formula - is this time played by Eva Marie Saint, actress
who is relatively unknown compared to other Hitchcock's
blondes. This is partly because reputation of Eva Marie
Saint has rather tough competition in the forms of Grace
Kelly, Kim Novice, Janet Leigh and Tippi Hedren, but the
real reason is the fact that character of Eve Kendall
doesn't exactly fit Hitchcock's stereotypes. This character
is more complex and multilayered, but Saint, despite looking
supernaturally glamorous in her role of femme fatale still
retains some down-to-earth qualities of girl-next-door,
making her character even more charming. Because of that,
Saint's performance in this film is one of the most
convincing female role in Hitchcock's opus and definitely
the most underrated of them all.
Hitchcock in NORTH BY NORTHWEST keeps heroes and heroines
within the boundaries of his formulas, but strays away from
his principles when it comes to the depiction of villains.
In this case, they are less interesting than protagonists.
James Mason as the chief villain is suave but menacing, yet
somehow his manners are too mechanical. Young Martin Landau
as his creepy, but intelligent sidekick Leonard, is more
impressive. Some villainous traits are even reserved for the
characters usually associated with the forces of good, and
Leo G. Carroll, long-time associate of Hitchcock, provides
impressive performance as chillingly cynical Professor.
Hitchcock's trademarks are not only visible in the realm of
characterisation, but also in the way he constructed the
film. His method of building the movie on the single yet
effective scene is here enriched with the excellent script
that provided not one great scene but many. And all those
scenes make perfect sense by gradually changing the
environment and general atmosphere of the film, starting
with the noisy, overpopulated streets of New York and ending
in a empty, natural state of Mount Rushmore (and culminating
in almost too obvious Freudian comment in the very last shot
of the film). In order to achieve that effect, Hitchcock
heavily relied on photography by Robert Burke and music by
always reliable Bernard Herrmann. The choice of the latter
is superb, especially in the scenes where Hitchcock
deliberately decides not to have music in the soundtrack and
thus allow that atmosphere develops through much more
effective silence. Choice of locations - New York, UN
Building, Mount Rushmore - is also very good, same as rather
impressive architecture and interior design of Vandamm's
house.
NORTH BY NORTHWEST, although probably the most beloved of
all Hitchcock's films, had its share of critics, always
ready to rip it to shreds by nit-picks. There are some
elements in this film that might be seen as flaws, namely
when it comes to the plausibility of certain scenes. For
example, in the scene that takes place in UN building,
Thornhill acts like no sane man would act in similar
circumstances. The finale is marred by somewhat too
convenient dues ex machine. And, finally, even the most
cherished of all Hitchcockian moments - crop-dusting scene -
might be perfect from the technical point of view, but it
nevertheless features the most idiotic method of
assassination in the cinema history. However, by the time
this happens, the audience was already exposed to the
farcical nature of this film in which nothing on screen can
be taken too seriously. Viewers who bother with such details
make the same mistake as those who are ready to ponder long
about the true nature of "MacGuffin" in NORTH BY NORTHWEST.
They should simply sit, relax and enjoy watching this as the
one of the best films ever made.
Review written on September 25th 2000
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
LeRoy Miller
North By Northwest (1959) 136m. *****  D: Alfred Hitchcock.  Hitchcock
matched, but never topped this grand tale of mistaken identity and
political intrigue.  Cary Grant stars as Roger Thornhill, a Madison
Avenue ad executive who is mistaken for a spy by the spies' rivals.
After escaping an attempt at his life, Thornhill begins a cross-country
chase in search of his alter-ego.  Along the way he meets the mysterious
Eve, who may be more invovled than she appears.
While the film's final half hour can't match the frenetic pace of the
beginning (what could?), the total package is extraordinary.  Hitchcock
utilizes familiar themes (mistaken identity, domineering mother, the icy
blond woman), and crafts them into a film possibly equaled, but
unsurpassed before or after in sheer entertainment value.  Cary Grant is
at his deadpan best as Thornhill, the harrowed yet poised everyman.  He
gets to deliver some of the bestlines in cinema: "These men , they
poured a bottle of bourbon down my throat - no mother they didn't give me
a chaser."  Eve St. Marie  is equally adept as the cold, sexy Eve. The
rest of the cast, including Martin Landau and James Mason all do fine
work in small roles.
North By Northwest is a timeless film from a lost era of filmmaking.
Time is taken to develop character, to give motivation and give the
audience reason to care for or dislike them.  Today's filmmakers would
do well to study NBNW.  The plot never drags, but time is taken to let
Grant woo St. Marie on a train, or to let Grant ham it up while playing
drunk.  While not the  deepest, or most disturbing of Hitchcock, NBNW
might be the most fun.
