Title
Review for Closer You Get, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
The blarney's back in Aileen Ritchie's Irish comedy, THE CLOSER YOU GET.
With accents as thick as the dark Irish brew that they drink, the men in
a remote town in the northwest Irish county of Donegal lust for some
real women, believing the locals are not worth their time.  Actually,
neither the men nor the women of the village look exactly like prizes.
In an attempt to get an answer to their dreams, the single men put an
advertisement in the Miami Herald to lure some American women "in the
age range of 20 to 21."  After that they wait daily at the bus stop for
the loads of women to arrive.  Needless to say -- you guessed it -- they
don't show up.
Meanwhile, the women outsmart the men by going after their own
foreigners -- a group of Spanish fishermen who are already in town.
Typical of the town's inhabitants is Kieran (Ian Hart), it's alcoholic
butcher.  Kieran, who constantly scratches his crotch while conversing
with women, thinks that all he needs to do is bleach his hair blonde in
order to be irresistible to the American women soon to arrive.
Described in voice-over as a man with "the constitution of an ox and the
wits to match," he has the social graces of a farm animal.  And he is
the leader of the local bachelors.
The village priest (Risteard Cooper) kind of likes the idea of the ad.
As one of the parishioners points out to him, he has performed lots of
funerals but not a single marriage.  He assures the men that he knows
the wedding ceremony.
The admittedly good-spirited story rambles like a guy telling a long
joke that doesn't have a punch line.  As you watch the film, you're
likely to feel that you've seen it all before but that it was better
last time.
The predictable message of the movie is straight from the WIZARD OF OZ:
"There's no place like home."
THE CLOSER YOU GET runs 1:30.  It is rated PG-13 for brief language and
some sexual material and would be fine for kids around 10 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE CLOSER YOU GET" (Fox Searchlight)
        After producer Umberto Pasolini made The Full Monty about four
unemployed Englishmen, he turned his attention to Ireland, where five
frustrated, Guinness-guzzling bachelors feel they're sorely in need of
spicy female companionship. Every night, they meet at the pub and
bemoan the lack of eligible women around.  To that end, they place an
ad in The Miami Herald, inviting any and every adventurous "fit and
healthy" American woman to visit their remote, rustic fishing village
on the west coast. Object: matrimony.  It's an action that
precipitates much consternation among the local Irish womenfolk. Of
course, the romantic fantasy is a lot of blarney because you know
exactly what's going to happen long before it does in William Ivory's
whimsical script which is based on a story by Herbie Wave. Ian Hart,
who played John Lennon in Backbeat and the detective in The End of the
Affair, is the ring-leader, Kieran O'Donnagh, a butcher who doesn't
seem to notice that his feisty female assistant Siobhan (Cathleen
Bradley) secretly adores him. His sheep-farming brother Ian (Sean
McGinley) also doesn't seem to notice that the right woman for him is
pouring drinks just across the bar. And so it goes. Is this another
Waking Ned Devine? No - but first-time film director Aileen Ritchie
keeps it frothy, particularly when Bo Derek's 10 unspools at the
church's movie night instead of The Ten Commandments. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, The Closer You Get is an engaging, amusing 7,
proving "the closer you get to something, the harder it is to see."

Author
Jon Popick
It seems there are three routes a film can take if said picture is a
whimsical, ninety-minute comedy set in the British Isles.  There's the
Full Monty course, which leads to critical acclaim, multiple Oscar
nominations and a healthy box office take.  There's the Waking Ned
Devine path, which results in mixed reviews but fantastic audience
response and strong word of mouth.  And, of course, there is least
desirable road previously traveled by The Matchmaker, which was widely
panned and even more widely unseen.
The Closer You Get has elements of each of these films – it's produced
by Monty's Uberto Pasolini, set in a wee Irish town like Devine, and its
romantic theme is similar to that of The Matchmaker.  And like the other
three, Closer's story is an unbelievably lightweight but somewhat
charming fable.  But in terms of overall execution, the picture ends up
taking the unfortunate route of The Matchmaker. It's not bad, but the
film definitely seems amateurish (it's the first for director Aileen
Ritchie and screenwriter William Ivory).
Set in the Irish coastal town of Donegal, Closer is narrated by a
teenager named Sean (Sean McDonagh, in his film debut).  A dead-ringer
for American Pie's Jason Biggs (he even asks a friend what sex feels
like, but doesn't actually assault any pastries), Sean tells the viewers
how tired he is of taking the rowboat into town, drinking at the pub and
then rowing home every night.  His repetitive exploits mimic the daily
grind of every other single man in Donegal, including butcher Kieran
O'Donnell (Ian Hart, The End of the Affair), sheep farmer Ian O'Donnell
(Sean McGinley, The General) and rubber-valve fetishist Ollie (Pat
Shortt).
One night, these lads cook up a crazy, alcohol-fueled idea – place a
personal ad in the Miami Herald and entice hot American babes to
accompany them to their town's annual St. Martha's Day dance, and
presumably much, much more (read: hot Irish luvin').  Their crass ad
targets fit and trim women between the ages of twenty and twenty-one who
seek outdoorsmen with an ample supply of meats and fish.  Basically,
they have a better chance of find a winning lottery ticket in the hand
of a local dead man.
When the women in Donegal learn of the men's scheme, they become
understandably upset, but that doesn't stop the chaps from venturing
into previously unknown realms of hygiene, haircuts, fitness and heavy
oyster consumption.  Of course, at the end, most of the men predictably
end up paired with local gals, despite their wish for broads from
abroad.  Toward Closer's end, a character explains that `Sometimes the
closer you get to something, the further away it seems.'  I think the
driver's side mirror on my car imparts the same sort of wisdom.
The whole thing plays out like an extra-long episode of television's
Emmy Award-winning Northern Exposure, with its far-fetched plot and a
zany cast of isolated small-town irregulars.  Like NX, characters
include `the woman that runs the grocery store/post office' (Ruth
McCabe, Circle of Friends), `the cute local girl' (Cathleen Bradley, in
her film debut), `the guy that runs the business where everyone hangs
out' (Ewan Stewart, Titanic), and even `the guy with the leather jacket
and long black hair' (Pat Laffan).
Speaking of hair, Hart is almost unrecognizable (again…I'm not even sure
what he's supposed to look like at this point) and has a strange, floppy
hair-do like Gary Oldman from The Fifth Element.  Then, to prepare for
the onslaught of American beauties, Hart's Kieran bleaches his locks,
which makes him look like a cross between Oldman and rock ‘n' roll ghoul
Johnny Winter.  Even though this butcher runs around singing the
Bernstein/Sondheim hit `America' and is constantly readjusting his meats
(the bits in his pants, not in his shop's display case), you know he's a
perfect match for his lovely co-worker Siobhan (Bradley).  The ending is
even more predictable than Rachel Portman's (recent Oscar nominee for
The Cider House Rules) repetitive score.
1:30 - PG-13 for adult language and some sexual content

Author
James Brundage
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member James Brundage.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/3390af25a2a02f61882568a50018f2bd?OpenDocument
Starring Nimah Cusack, Sean McGinley, Ian Hart, Ewan Stewart, Ruth
McCabe, Sean McDonagh, Cathleen Bradley, and Deborah Barnett
 In Angela's Ashes, we got the impression that growing up a kid in
Ireland really sucks.  In The Closer You Get, we are made to believe
that Irish adulthood doesn't get much better.
 All right… so we don't have to wait till the sequel to see Emily Watson
be cremated and we don't have to sit through two hours and twenty
minutes of a film that make a suicidal lemming seem like a happy chump,
but The Closer You Get isn't exactly a movie that sketches the Irish as
progressing far into their adulthood.  In store for Irish men in
adulthood is a simple life of multiple pints of flat Guinness combined
with a sexual desperation so great that the Irish men take out a want ad
in the Miami Herald.
 Don't worry…  The movie is about twenty times better than its plot.
 Despite some initial mulling over the woman at the Post Office over
whether or not to even send the advertisement, the ad does get sent
through and does end up in the Miami Herald.  In between then and the
time when the American women are to arrive (an annual dance at the end
of May), the Irish men predictably find exactly what they were looking
for all along at home.
 So how does this manage to take up 97 minutes?  Well, it's love… Irish
style.  As in almost all Irish comedies, we see two very good traits
coupled with one very bad one.  The good traits are a predilection
towards running jokes and a tendency towards a comedy of errors.  The
bad trait is the incredibly slow pace at which small town Celtic
comedies proceed.
 The Closer You Get is one of those movies that is funny as hell when it
tries to make a joke, but it is also one of those movies that goes along
at the speed of a Delaware driver in the Route one corridor of New
Jersey.  As a result, I found myself alternating between two states as I
watched this movie… laughing very hard and damn near asleep.
 There are a few scenes in which The Closer You Get really borders on a
cure for insomnia.  There are more scenes in which The Closer You Get is
downright funny.  And, after seeing it, you'll never think of window
shopping the same way again.  But overall, The Closer You Get gets by as
mediocre.
 Thus I pass the same advice to The Closer You Get as I have passed on
to other small town Celtic comedies such as The Matchmaker.  Nice try,
but you would need an intern for a humidor just yet.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
