Title
Review for Benny & Joon (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     There is a sort of film that works really well for a very narrow
audience and will leave almost everybody else wondering, "What was that all
about?"  It is a film with a narrow band of powerful appeal.  One of the
films that I thought really spoke to me was HAROLD AND MAUDE (1972).  Other
were JOHNNY GOT HIS GUN (1971) and KNIGHTRIDERS (1981).  One that missed me
entirely was BIRDY (1984).  I think I can see what others like about BIRDY,
but the film does not work very well for me.  Another film that just does
not do it for me is BENNY & JOON.
     Benny (played by Aidan Quinn) has no time for a life of his own.
Benny's life is split between his auto repair business and taking care of
his sister Joon (played by Mary Stuart Masterson).  Joon is ... well, Joon
is somewhat different.  Perhaps writer Barry Berman intended Joon to be
schizophrenic, though it is never actually said that is the case.  Whatever
her problem is, she spends her table passionately painting, setting things
on fire, placing emergency calls to Benny to pick up peanut butter,
directing traffic with ping-pong paddles and snorkel--that sort of thing.
     Then Joon loses a poker game and for Benny to pay off, he has to take
in a second person whose mental processes are different from the norm, Sam,
the cousin of a friend.  Sam (played by Johnny Depp) is barely literate but
has patterned himself on Buster Keaton and Charlie Chaplin.  He dresses like
Keaton and can even mimic Keaton's inventive style of seeing unconventional
uses for everyday objects.  The tension of the story comes from Joon's
doctor wanting to institutionalize Joon, Benny wanting to keep Joon around,
Joon wanting to keep Sam around, and Benny wanting to be rid of Sam.
     Where the story does not work for me is on the contrivance and in the
view of mental illness.  With the exception of short bouts of panic, Joon
appears to be on a perpetual high.  Sam's illness appears to make him a
comic genius--though most, and for all I know, all, of his routines are
borrowed from silent films.  Sam's illness increases his creativity and the
film arranges for the right props to be at the right place and time to be
used.  The film says that mental illness has its positive side and that like
in MANHUNTER and THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, only the mentally ill can
understand the mentally ill.  The film is an interesting attempt but I rate
it only a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
[Viewed at the Hazlet Multiplex Cinemas, Hazlet, NJ.]

Author
James Berardinelli
     Joon (Mary Stuart Masterson) is a young woman inflicted with a
mental illness that occasionally causes bouts of strange and manic
behavior.  Because of this condition, she cannot be left alone, so her
brother Benny (Aidan Quinn), with whom she lives, hires a housekeeper
to look after her while he works.  However, Joon's tendencies drive
away woman after woman in rapid succession until there is no one left.
Enter Sam (Johnny Depp), an illiterate dreamer with an irrational love
of movies.  He proves not only to be excellent at doing housework, but
a perfect companion for Joon.  Until the two of them fall in love, that
is.
     Beyond recognizing that it's a romance, it's difficult to identify
exactly what BENNY & JOON is supposed to be since it is liberally
sprinkled with elements of fantasy, drama, and comedy.  However, no
matter which of those three categories the production team was aiming
for, they missed the mark.  In this case,  the reason why is clear.
While writer Barry Berman infused his script with some clever plot
elements, a few of which go contrary to the expected norms, he lost
sight of two of the three principal characters in the process.  Time
was obviously spent sketching outlines of Sam, Joon, and Benny, but
when it came to putting flesh on the bones, only Benny is given his
due.  Apparently, the assumption that Joon and Sam were off-the-wall
was enough for the writer and director.  Nothing more was necessary -
show them as unusual and the audience will accept them.  For Benny, a
"regular" human being, effort had to be put into giving him substance
lest the viewers identify him as one-dimensional.
     The success or failure of a picture like BENNY & JOON relies
heavily upon the audience's acceptance of the various relationships.  A
lack of strong, believable characters undermines the entire story.  I
never developed a feel or empathy for the coupling of Sam and Joon and,
by the end, I didn't care whether they got together or not.
     A little whimsy doesn't make a story original, and it certainly
doesn't replace solid characterization.  BENNY & JOON's selling point
is that it's a "romance on the brink of reality."  However, the actual
movie isn't nearly as fantastic as the previews lead you to believe.
Aside from some quirks in Sam and Joon's personalities, and few unusual
scenes, BENNY & JOON is pretty much on the straight and narrow.
     The actors, saddled by a marginal script and uninspired direction
(the camera angles and lighting in this film are awful), do the best
they can with the roles.  In the case of Joon, Mary Stuart Masterson
gives a sub-par performance, but this is more likely the result of what
she had to work with than the effort she put into the part.  Whatever
the case, Joon turns out to be unimpressive and too often fades into
the background.  Johnny Depp's Sam fares little better--with one
highly visible exception.  Depp's performances in several scenes of
Chaplinesque physical comedy are standouts.  Aidan Quinn, playing the
"straight man" does a credible job--so credible, in fact, that he
upstages his co-stars, which was obviously not the intent of the
story.
     For the most part, technical details in movies should be invisible
to the audience.  Often, when something stands out, that's because it's
done poorly.  Aside from the aforementioned problems with lighting and
camerawork, the editing was ill-considered, resulting in an
unevenly-paced, disjointed final product.  Also, the soundtrack is
banal (perhaps the only tune of interest is Joe Cocker covering the
Steve Winwood/Blind Faith tune "I Can't Find My Way Home").
     In general, I try to go into a film with as few preconceptions as
I can manage, but I have to admit initially looking forward to BENNY &
JOON.  Needless to say, it came far below the quality level I had hoped
for.  This is yet another case of a movie preview being superior to the
film it represents.  BENNY & JOON is too dark to be a good comedy, too
shallow to be a good drama, and too "real" to be a good fantasy.  As a
result, it's certainly not a sterling example of American cinema.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
