Title
Review for Bal poussičre (1988)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
A wealthy pineapple farmer in a rural village in the Ivory Coast adds a sixth
wife to his harem.  The end result is trouble, for his newest wife is young and
beautiful but also independent and strong willed.  A lighthearted comedy that
pokes fun at the practice of polygamy.  Above average as comedies go, but
nothing special.
Ivory Coast (English subtitles), color, 1989, 95 minutes.
Director/Producer/Writer:  Henri Duparc
     The film is set in the present day, in the Ivory Coast.  The action
centers around Alcaly, a wealthy pineapple farmer in a rural village who is
referred to as Demi-Dieu (Demi-God, or "half-God," because, after God, he is #1
in his village), and Binta, a beautiful, young, and very independent woman.
     As the film begins, Binta is in the capital city (Abidjan), where she is
attending college and living with her Uncle and his family.  Binta is in love
with a musician, and spends her time dancing at a club.  Soon her money runs
out, and she is forced to return home to her rural village.
     There she comes to the attention of Alcaly, and he decides to add her to
his harem.  His logic is simple; with six wives, he can have a different wife
each night Monday-Saturday, with Sunday reserved for the "best"!  After some
effort, Alcaly gets permission from Binta's parents for the wedding.  At first
Binta resists, but she eventually agrees to the marriage.  The story continues
with Binta joining the harem and causing numerous problems with her "Western"
habits and ways (such as wearing dresses and swimming topless).
     On one level, the film presents strong criticism of the practice of
polygamy, which still exists in Africa and many other places.  The film can be
viewed as a statement about the exploitation and degradation of women in
Africa.  On another level, it is a lighthearted, sometimes risque, comedy on
the foibles of human nature and male-female relations.
     However, the film does have certain weaknesses.  As is typical of African
films, the pace of action is very slow, something that may deter some viewers.
The photography (color) is grainy in some shots; whether that is deliberate or
accidental is unknown to me.
     I would recommend the film to people interested in this sort of comedy.
The only negative comment I would make is that I saw this film after seeing
MARQUIS, a deliriously warped and funny film (reviewed previously).  Compared
to MARQUIS, the sexual humor in this film comes across as quite bland.  
However, the film has its charms and should appeal to a broad audience.
Distribution.  Not in general U.S. release at the present time.  Most likely
places to see it are film festivals, societies, or archives.  Print Source:
Imperial Distribution, 6, rue Lincoln, 75008 Paris, France.
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU
