Title
Review for Leon the Pig Farmer (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Rev Dr Phil Herring
Written by Gary Sinyor and Vadim Jean
Directed by Vadim Jean and Gary Sinyor
Actors: Mark Frankel, Janet Suzman, Brian Glover, David de Keyser,
        Maryam d'Abo, Gina Bellman, Connie Booth
     Aren't Jews are inclined to feel guilt, feel sick at the sight of
non-kosher food, and know what every other Jew in the world is up to?
Stereotypes can be damaging, but they do seem to form the basis for a
lot of humour and comic characterisation.
     And the stereotype is the premise of this film.  Leon is Jewish,
born into an upper-middle-class family in Golder's Green, London, son
of a curtain salesman, but alas, too scrupulous to remain in his job as
a real estate agent.  He quits at a bad time--under pressure from his
family to procreate, and more than a little neurotic about women, he
finds himself in a minor crisis when he discovers by accident that he
is the product artificial insemination, and his real father is--he
comes the big joke!--a Yorkshire pig farmer.  So, in a search for his
real roots (whatever they may be), he heads off to visit his new-found
parent.  He turns out to be more than willing to take him in, and
treats him as one of his own, but is far from stereotypical; in fact he
tries to make him more at home by becoming even more Jewish than Leon's
family.
     This is an enjoyable film, but the laughs are not tightly packed
together.  Instead, it's a rather lightweight experience; fun, but not
funny.  There are some genuine "moments" but they tend to be a tad
obvious, being based, as they are, on well-explored ideas.  This is not
helped by the film's use if very Allen-esque details--such as the
strangers offering unasked-for advice, the neurotic mother and father,
and the sweetheart who wants rather more that Leon can provide.
     There are also one or two minor problems (not the least being what
to do with Connie Booth's accent--if she's married to a Yorkshire pig
farmer, why does she have a North American accent?), but hey, I enjoyed
it, and although the basic ideas get pushed rather far than they should
be (at times the film bogs down, usually when dealing with plot logic,
as if the writers were keen to get to the next funny bit and didn't
want to try too hard at that point), they at least have an original
setting.  The film also contains a clear metaphor for Leon's dilemma -
I'll leave you to work out what it is--that serves to inject a bit
more thought into the story than it would otherwise have.
-- Phil.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Mark Frankel, Janet Suzman, Brian Glover, Maryam D'Abo, 
           Gina Bellman, Connie Booth
Directors:  Gary Sinyor and Vadim Jean
Producers:  Gary Sinyor and Vadim Jean
Screenplay:  Gary Sinyor and Michael Normand
Music:  John Murphy and David Hughes
Released by Cinevista
     British humor is often at its peak when it mixes droll wit with
MONTY PYTHONesque weirdness.  This certainly isn't the perfect fare for
mainstream America, but for those who enjoy a touch of the bizarre with
their laughter, LEON THE PIG FARMER makes an excellent one-hundred
minute diversion.
     Leon Geller (Mark Frankel) has reached a crisis point in his
life.  Dissatisfied with the lying and cheating inherent in his job as
a London real estate agent, he quits.  Frustrated with the futility of
establishing a romantic relationship with his best friend Lisa (Gina
Bellman), Leon shocks his very proper Jewish family by engaging in a
torrid affair with the non-Jewish Madeleine (Maryam D'Abo), whom he
meets after nearly running her over with his car.  Then, to cap off his
troubles, Leon learns that he is the product of artificial
insemination, and that the sperm bank mixed up the test tubes.  His
actual father is Brian Chadwick (Brian Glover)--a pig farmer in Lower
Dinthorpe.
     LEON THE PIG FARMER is a singularly entertaining motion picture.
Its co-directors, Gary Sinyor and Vadim Jean, have done an excellent
job pacing the film (until the very end, when everything sputters to an
abrupt halt).  The types of humor are spread around evenly, avoiding
long periods of stagnation between the funny parts.  There are moments
guaranteed to bring on bursts of uncontrolled laughter, but more often,
LEON causes its audience to smile and chuckle--the product of
recognizing the clever wit of a situation.
     There's a substantial dash of the unusual in LEON's humor--the
sort of material that brings to mind MONTY PYTHON or BLACK ADDER.  The
unexpected is often the greatest asset of such comedy--and it's
present in abundance.  How many women will invite a man to their
apartment for a cup of tea after nearly getting run down in the street
by that person?  How many times do strangers approach someone to give
advice on intimate matters?  And how often does the biological father
of a kosher-keeping Jew turn out to be a pig farmer?
     As enjoyable as all this zaniness is, there's a none-to-subtle
message to go along with it about being true to oneself.  The directors
don't have an axe to grind, but they offer this for those who want some
substance amidst the silliness.
     The cast contains a number of well-respected British actors,
including Brian Glover and Janet Suzman.  Known primarily for dramatic
roles, these two give wonderful comic turns, proving that Leslie
Nielsen isn't the only one who can put a staid reputation to good use.
Maryam D'Abo is marvellous as the manic Madeleine, and hers is easily
the standout performance.  Connie Booth, a veteran of BBC comedy,
including MONTY PYTHON and FAWLTY TOWERS (which she co-created with
then-husband John Cleese), has a supporting part.
     Mark Frankel, who plays Leon, sometimes overacts his role
(especially when he's around pigs), but he's generally solid and has a
good knack for comedy.  His performance keeps the film moving, and his
chemistry with his two leading ladies (D'Abo and Bellman) is
effective.
     It's easy to see why LEON has been such a hit on the film festival
circuit over the past year.  It's a thoroughly charming movie in the
same vein as another little-known British comedy, GETTING IT RIGHT
(which is available on video).  I hadn't initially planned to see this
movie (believe it or not), but the positive advance word piqued my
curiosity.  This is one unexpected trip to the theater that I haven't
regretted.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
