Title
Review for Legend (1985)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
[NB: This review is designed to cover the European edition of the film, not
the American version.]
CAPSULE: Gorgeous but leaden fairytale with (literally) a heart of darkness.
LEGEND is a strange example of a lot of energy and effort gone somewhat awry
-- a huge, ambitious production mounted in search of a script that seemed to
only be half there. It's a stunning film to watch, but when it's over, it
leaves nothing behind except an aftertaste.
Ridley Scott, director of ALIEN and BLADE RUNNER, likes to make movies that
enclose the viewer visually, even if they're not spellbinding storytelling
(which those two movies were, but not this one). He gives us a fantasyland
that looks like a Frank Frazetta painting come to life. In it are two
characters: Princess Lili (Mia Sara), lively and innocent, and Jack (Tom
Cruise), a wild-child of the forest. The two of them are in love, and you
know how stupidly people act when they fall in love... and Jack's
transgression is to take Lili to where the unicorns dwell.
They're not the only ones here. There is also Darkness (a very intimidating
Tim Curry). What's interesting is that Darkness is not so much evil as he is
simply an embodiment of lusts -- something everyone has -- so he seems less
like a villain and more like a tragic figure gone horribly wrong. There's
much potential here, but the movie develops it stumblingly.
The plot centers around Darkness's attempts to have the unicorns destroyed,
which will plunge the world back into eternal night once more. Jack winds up
being drafted by a small army of magical creatures to fight Darkness; the
most striking of the gang played by William Bennent, the child actor who
intimidated the audience with his unearthly eyes in THE TIN DRUM. Here he's
also effective, projecting a sense that not all things that enchant are also
neccesarily benevolent. Tom Cruise and Mia Sara are also both fine in the
movie, and they make their characters quick and appealing. 
I didn't hate LEGEND; in fact, it grew on me as I watched it, not only
because of the look and feel, but the psychological undertones of the story.
But at the same time I had to admit that there was not enough of the story
on the screen; I was responding to my own projections and assumptions about
the movie, not the movie itself. Too bad. The movie's also very dark in
places -- it might scare smaller children, and it saddened me to think that
the only person who could really access a fairytale with attempts at
sophisticated undertones was an adult.
LEGEND had a troubled production history. One of the sound stages burned to
the ground during production, and the remainder of the movie was filmed on
hastily constructed sets. It was also savagely re-edited by Universal when
released in the USA, and even the European edition of the movie (which uses
a Jerry Goldsmith score to much better effect than the Tangerine Dream
soundtrack plastered over the US version) is patchy-looking. I suspect a
good deal of the movie's virtues were ruined in the ham-handed editing, but
at the same time, I suspect the movie's basic flaws can only be corrected by
so much.

Author
Shane Burridge
     Forest-dwelling boy (Tom Cruise) takes pure-of-heart princess (Mia
Sara) to see unicorns and then loses them to Dark Lord underground.
With help from faerie folk of the wood, boy mounts rescue attempt.
Slight story is probably why Ridley Scott's 1985 fantasy was dismissed
as an overblown jumble, but that's no reason not to enjoy the sumptuous
vision he brings to the screen.  Some may be spellbound by this
film--others will find it tedious.  You'll be excused for thinking from
the start that Tolkien had hired him to make a TV commercial for
Middle-Earth.
     The thinly-drawn characters of Jack (surely Cruise's oddest role)
and Lili are obvious targets for criticism, but Scott is less
interested in unraveling a plot than he is in capturing the look and
feel of myth.  Lili (a.k.a. Lily, the symbol of virginity) and Jack
(whose name appears most frequently in folk tales and nursery rhymes)
are character types, not character studies.  We are never told what
Lili is the princess of; we have no idea what Jack does in the forest.
Everything is generic, nothing has a definite location in time or
place.  But I'm glad Scott didn't include any phoney-baloney character
development just because he was making a film in the progressive 80's.
He presents LEGEND in exactly the manner that the title would
suggest--as a universally recognized Jungian consciousness, where
archetypes replace personalities.  Unfortunately, this is to the
expense of Tim Curry's Dark Lord, the most memorable character in the
movie, who proves once again that the devil gets all the best lines.
Curry steals the show with his performance--it's a shame he doesn't
get a chance to do more in the picture.  Scott sidesteps his
uninvolving characters by keeping his frame as  busy as possible.
Never in my life have I seen so much "billowing" in a movie
before--leaves, snow, smoke, petals, steam--Scott keeps the air alive
(I think he's going overboard when he introduces soap bubbles) to
remind us that the story is steeped in a magical atmosphere, and also
to highlight the sentience of air as an elemental force.  The other
three elements of ancient cosmology--fire, water, and earth--are
similarly dominant throughout the story: Jack swims underwater, breaks
through ice, is covered by snow, journeys into the earth, battles
through steam and fire, and even harnesses the power of the sun.
     Picture is gorgeously photographed, and invokes a dreamlike
world.  Jerry Goldsmith's score functions so well it's hard to imagine
watching this film without it--yet it was unceremoniously dumped during
re-editing for the U.S. release and replaced by a synthesizer
soundtrack.  Catch the Goldsmith version if you can.  Film was cut
heavily before release, and it shows.
