Title
Review for Dudley Do-Right (1999)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Michael Elliott
Christian Critic's Movie Parables - http://www.christiancritic.com
Brendan Fraser (GEORGE OF THE JUNGLE) continues his string of cartoon
characters by taking on the role of the world's most recognizable Canadian
Royal Mountie.  But he should have gone for the voice.  Seeing DUDLEY
DO-RIGHT without hearing the nasally pompous tones of Bill Scott (who also
did the voice of BULWINKLE) is like trying to listen to ALVIN AND THE
CHIPMUNKS' voices at regular speed.  It just isn't that funny.
With none the wit of Jay Ward's 1969 original animated source, the
filmmakers who bring us the live action DUDLEY DO-RIGHT resort to sight
gags and slapstick.  It sometimes works, it mostly doesn't.  This film's
Do-Right is more of a "doofus."
Dudley, we discover, grew up with the dream of being a Canadian Royal
Mountie.  His boyhood chum, Snidley Whiplash, had a different dream.  He
wanted to be a bad guy so he could have all the bad guy kind of fun.
Living in the Canadian town of Semi-Happy Valley, both Dudley and Snidely
attain their respective goals, opposing as they may be.  Caught in the
middle is the fair Nell Fenwick who must divide her affections betwixt
them.
After Whiplash drives off all the residents of Semi-Happy Valley, he
peppers the rocks and streams with gold buckshot in order to force a phony
"Gold Rush."  Since he now owns the entire town, the onrush of fortune
seekers is making him a fortune, turning him into a "respectable" business
man.  Why, he's even started to add color to his wardrobe.  Dudley, on the
other hand, is losing everything.  His job, his uniform, his horse...
With the spiritual help of Eric Idle (SPLITTING HEIRS), Dudley must learn
to do bad so he can get back to doing right.
The story is a disappointment to anyone who remembers the adult
intelligence and wit of Jay Ward's animated shows which combined with a
childlike innocence that made them very appealing to all ages.  However,
children will probably enjoy this new version with all its the pratfalls
and broad physical humor.  Preceding  the movie is a newly produced
animated FRACTURED FAIRY TALE that is reminiscent of Jay Ward's work.
Written by Bill Scott, it is clever enough for us to yearn for a higher
quality feature film to follow it.
Mr. Fraser has the gentle naiveté needed for the role but there's an
essential quality missing from his characterization and thus from the
movie.  The animated Dudley had a single-mindedness that bordered on the
absurd.  That element wasn't captured here which weakened the integrity of
the character.
Sarah Jessica Parker (MARS ATTACKS) isn't given much to do as Nell
Fenwick.  Hers is a romantic decision rather than a PERILS OF PAULINE
DILEMMA.  Alex Rocco (JUST WRITE) has some funny moments as the chief of a
native tribe of Indians (the Kumquat nation) who perform their cultural
dances (ALA RIVERDANCE) for the tourists.
Alfred Molina's (CELEBRITY) Snidely Whiplash does the memory of Hans
Conried, who originated the voice, proud.  Adopting a sniveling,
cartoon-evil voice and dressed in a black cape, stove pipe hat, and of
course, the trademark curled wax mustache, he looks and sounds like
Hercule Poirot's evil twin brother.  Mr. Molina is having great fun
playing the bad guy.
In fact, as Whiplash says, "Up until the end, being the bad guy is the
best job in the world."  In the end, of course, good triumphs and bad is
vanquished.  It's a bit of an unusual lesson to learn but we can see this
truth reflected all around us.  So often in life, it appears that bad men
prosper.
"Behold, these are the ungodly, who prosper in the world; they increase
in riches.  When I thought to know this, it was too painful for me;  Until
I went into the sanctuary of God; then understood I their end." Psalms
73:12, 16-17 [KJV]
Their end is not pretty.  Regardless of the appearances of prosperity
that evildoers may have attained in this world, they are left with
nothing.  In contrast, those that have lived righteous lives, believing
God to meet their needs and working heartily as unto the Lord, are
rewarded both in this lifetime and in the life that is to come.  Knowing
and believing this makes our decisions between good and evil that much
easier.

Author
Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org
It's difficult to name more than a few successful live-action adaptations of 
cartoons.
Try it.  If you said "The Flintstones" or "Dick Tracy," try again.  They may 
have brought in the change at the box office, but they are not good movies.  
Don't even think about "Mr. Magoo" or "Dennis the Menace."
Hugh Wilson's "Dudley Do-Right" belongs on the long-list of mediocre film 
fare, a mostly failed and random collection of hopeful plot turns and 
clichés.  Because of the premise, which is the inane exploits of Jay Ward's 
dull-witted Canadian Mountie, the story is lightly entertaining.  And in a 
few places we get to belly laugh at twists that have finally gone over the 
top.
The lonesome mounted policeman (Brendan Fraser) is sure his love, Nell 
Fenwick, will never return.  So Dudley busies himself with his duties.  One 
night he spots his childhood companion and nemesis, Snidely Whiplash (Alfred 
Molina).  Snidely is "salting" rocks with gold dust loaded into shotgun 
shells.  Why?  Well, because he wants to create a fake gold rush to this 
part of northern Canada, of course.
Meanwhile, Nell (Sarah Jessica Parker) has returned with her multiple 
graduate degrees.  It seems she and Dudley will resume their relationship, 
until Snidely captures her attention.  This seems all wrong, of course;  as 
a watcher of the original in my childhood, I was expecting Snidely to be 
nothing but the bad guy - a sentiment Snidely himself mentions several times 
in self-reflexive asides.  (I also wanted Nell to kiss Horse, Dudley's 
mount, but no luck!)  What's more odd is that Hugh Wilson shows us an 
opening sequence in which the three main characters assume their roles in 
childhood, Snidely as a boy wearing a black cape and stovepipe hat, already 
sniping at Dudley for Nell's affections.
It turns out that Snidely is successful in his quest for  prospectors:  
Semi-Happy Valley is flooded with their money, and in a wink at marketing 
savvy, we see all types of merchandise with Snidely's image --  a self-hype 
that dives to the depths of money-grubbing.  What will stop Snidely's taking 
over the town  -- which is redubbed "Whiplash City"?  Certainly not Dudley, 
as he has been drummed out of the service by his idol, Inspector Fenwick 
(Robert Prosky).  We really have no idea why Dudley loses his job, except 
that Snidely has connections in Ottawa, and the Inspector never had much use 
for the square-jawed boob anyway.
Enter Eric Idle as a grimy prospector, only slightly removed from a grungy 
Gumby character on "Monty Python."  Kim Darling prospects for gold and finds 
a sizable nugget planted by Snidely.  Although he is catapulted into the 
front of the news about the gold discoveries, Darling serves as a sort of 
goofy mentor to Dudley, training him in the proper ways to fight Snidely's 
brand of evil.  What is original here is that Dudley attempts to be good by 
being bad - namely, by stealing gold from the thieves employed by Snidely!  
Will our hero prevail in his circuitous search for good?
The acting in "Dudley Do-Right" is superior to the plot.  Brendan Fraser is 
passable as the title character, but he was better in Jay Ward's "George of 
the Jungle."  This actor is good at looking surprised and duped, another 
feat he pulled off rather well in Wilson's "Blast From the Past."  (I would 
add that his role in "The Mummy" this past May did not particularly 
distinguish him as an action hero; he was much better as the gardener 
tempted by the fictionalized version of director James Whale in "Gods and 
Monsters.")  Although Fraser's hair should have been died to resemble the 
cartoon character's frizzy locks, he turns in a passing performance.
Underused is a good word to describe the roles of a few other characters.  
First, Robert Prosky is an old pro who is woefully absent from the film.  He 
appears but briefly and speaks in a British accent, his white mustache 
obscuring the British curve of his lips.  What a missed opportunity, having 
such a veteran actor on the set and using him merely as decoration!
Sarah Jessica Parker's part is also underwritten.  She could appear in more 
scenes, although she does a fine job in the ones that made the final cut.
Eric Idle is the one indispensable presence here.  He knows instinctively 
just how much exaggeration to give a comic support role.  His Kim Darling is 
a hilarious blend of silliness and incongruity, especially at the end when 
he meets a sublime fate.
Some of the more pleasurable moments of viewing involve the actual cartoon 
short "The Phox, the Box, and the Lox."  It's a fractured fairy tale, a lot 
like the olds ones narrated by the ivory-voiced Edward Everett Horton.  The 
tale of a wise-cracking, greedy fox and his quest for treasure, the story 
shows some of the same twisted moralizing as its 1960's precursors - except 
that the originals were more comically arch.
On the whole, it would be better to rent "Dudley Do-Right," except if no 
better offerings were available on the weekend for the kiddies.  The 
self-aware jokes - that trademark of Jay Ward's post-modern sense of humor - 
are present to a small degree, and the ending is much more promising than 
what leads to it.  Now, let's hope that Ward's main success, the ingenious 
'The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle," falls into the hands of a more 
wildly creative producer.


Author
Chuck Schwartz
CrankyCriticŽ movie reviews: Dudley Do-Right
Rated [G]
Starring Brendan Fraser, Alfred Molina and Sarah Jessica Parker
Screenplay by Hugh Wilson and Jay Ward
Based on characters developed by Jay Ward
Original Dudley Do-Right theme by Fred Steiner
Directed by Hugh Wilson
website: http://www.dudley-do-right.com
For those of us ancient enough to remember Rocky and Bullwinkle, this
year's big screen revamp of Dudley Do-Right kicks off with a nod to the
past, a "brand new" Fractured Fairy Tale cartoon, entitled The Phox, The
Box and The Lox. It doesn't resemble anything Grimm that I can recall,
but it was a pleasant way to kick off the festivities at a sneak preview
packed with parents and kids. Keith Scott again steps in for the late
and unrelated Bill Scott. June Foray's pipes are still in good form, and
we'll be treated to the lady's return to her best known work in next
summer's The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle, starring Robert De
Niro. If you'll allow me one last indulgence of dropping another name
(and a killer piece of trivia) into this historical reminiscence;
composer Fred Steiner, responsible for teevee themes to Perry Mason,
most of underscore of Star Trek, and The Bullwinkle Show has oft told
his cousin Cranky that of all his work, the Dudley theme is his
favorite. It sounds damned fine coming off the big screen.
Jay Ward's cartoon was a parody of silent movie serials like "The Perils
of Pauline" -- a helpless damsel in distress faced a deadly demise
and/or torture at the hands of a dastardly villain in a black coat,
always waiting for her pure-hearted and always upright Hero to find and
rescue her in the nick of time. Under Ward's direction, Our Hero was
dimmer than a two watt light bulb, the Fair Maiden was not much brighter
and The Villain had all the fun.
Not much has changed in the 1990s. Dudley Do-Right (Brendan Fraser), is
the Royal Canadian Mounted Policeman that he always wanted to be. Love
of his life Nell Fenwick (Sarah Jessica Parker), is off discovering the
world and evil, nefarious and dastardly Snidely K. Whiplash (Alfred
Molina), is having a wonderful time leading and, in turn, double
crossing his Gang of 999 black masked marauders. Their homestead of
Semi-Happy Valley has fallen on hard times. The mines are closed. The
slawdog stand is empty. The only profitable business in the town is the
nightly Indian Corn Festival, a dinner dance extravaganza with fireworks
run by the far from native born Kumquat Nation, headed by The Chief
(Alex Rocco).
Snidely's plan is to take control of the town, rename it after himself,
salt the mines and streams with gold and then reap huge profits from the
gullible prospectors who will descend seeking the nonexistent metal. The
only potential bump in the road is Do-Right, who is easily diverted into
chasing things that go bump in the night. When Nell returns from her
world travels, she must choose between the savior of the town who cheats
at miniature golf or the man in uniform whose beloved Horse has run
away.
Nell may be dim but she ain't stupid. That's about all I need to say,
lest I make Dudley Do-Right sound like a movie with a logical story. The
gags in the original were all slapstick, bad puns and innuendo and only
the first of that list has made it to the big screen. It isn't the
slapstick that got the kids rolling in the aisles, it was the sight of
Do-Right getting slapped around by a stick wielding Prospector (Eric
Idle) in a play on Pat Morita's role in The Karate Kid that did the
trick. Dudley Do-Right also homages Return of the Jedi and Raiders of
the Lost Ark as it weaves unsteadily through the creative minefield that
confronts any 8 minute cartoon expanded to the full 90 minutes. The
basics of the cartoon are still there: The Announcer (Corey Burton) that
explains the action and drops in jokes to fill the gaps; Nell's father
Inspector Fenwick (Robert Prosky), and Do-Right's Horse who supplies all
the brain material our hero is lacking.
Those of us who are old enough to remember the original have kidlets
small enough to enjoy it for the first time. Said kids are the target
for this flick, not us nostalgia bound coots. What little of the plot
I've laid out collapses under the weight of visual gags and a couple of
Indian dance numbers that will confuse the grownups and keep the
youngsters enthralled. A handful of really funny
you've-got-to-be-an-adult-to-get-'em gags come close to saving the day
for us fogeys, as does a terrific performance by Alfred Molina. But
Brendan Fraser's Dudley is so totally off the mark that Cranky doesn't
know where to point his stubby little fingers -- at the actor or at
writer/director Hugh Wilson for taking a two dimensional character to
the big screen and creating an even smaller hero.
The single digit kidlets who don't have years of friendship with the
original won't have much problem with v.1999 but this wasn't "my" Dudley
Do-Right. Saying any more would break my rules about not comparing to
Source Material so Cranky's gonna shut his face and get this over with.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Dudley Do-Right, he would have
paid...
Rental level for the grownups. Dudley Do-Right is one of those movies at
which you can let your kidlets feel like big boys and girls -- you can
let 'em see the flick unsupervised without any worry about anything on
the screen.
And if you're like any of the parents I know, you won't have any problem
in it while you're standing in the back of the theater keeping an eye on
the kidlets from a safe distance. Ain't it great to be a grown up?
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 1999
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
         If there was ever the right actor to bring cartoonist Jay
Ward's brave but clueless Canadian Mountie to life, it's Brendan
Fraser. Like his goofy "George of the Jungle," Fraser embodies the
dim-witted hunk superbly, relishing his obvious mastery of the
physical comedy. The plot - which is designed to appeal to youngsters,
not adults - follows Do-Right as he attempts to foil a scheme
concocted by evil Snidely Whiplash, played broadly by Alfred Molina.
Even as a child, Dudley longed to be a mounted policeman, while his
pal Snidely only wanted to be "a bad guy." Now, Snidely wants to
pollute the town of Semi-Happy Valley by making it the target of a
fake gold rush, setting up a gullible prospector (Eric Idle) who
achieves such fame and fortune that he appears on "Live with Regis and
Kathie Lee." In the meantime, Dudley's in love with Nell - that's "Sex
and the City" girl, Sarah Jessica Parker - but, unfortunately, so is
Snidely. Directed by Hugh Wilson, this cheerful comedy is aimed at
5-10 year-olds, who will thoroughly enjoy it. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Dudley Do-Right" is a downright silly 6. Did you
know there's a Dudley Do-Right Emporium on Sunset Blvd. in Hollywood,
where tourists are greeted by a 15-foot statue of Ward's famous
characters Rocky and Bullwinkle, who are set for the big screen next
summer in a live-action film starring Robert DeNiro, Rene Russo, and
Jason Alexander?

Author
James Brundage
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member James Brundage.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/60e74e041ca9cd6b8625626f0062219f/168141c42ac38421882568580004debb?OpenDocument
 About two years ago I wrote a short story called "Cinemascopia."  The
story envisioned the movie critic's hell as being stuck inside one of
his own reviews.  I revise this.  Hell, for me, would be eternally
watching Dudley Do-Right.
 Dudley Do-Right, a film from Hugh Wilson, the director of Blast from
the Past, is a movie so unbearably stupid that it is an utter insult to
the industry as a whole for it to have even been created.  In Dudley
Do-Right, the title character (Fraser) is pitted against his arch-rival
Snidley Whiplash (Alfred Molina) when the town of Semi-Happy Valley
falls victim to massive consumerism after Whiplash takes over the town
and creates an artificial gold rush by placing gold in the streams.  At
the same time, Whiplash and Do-Right engage in a battle for the
affections of Nell (Sarah Jessica Parker).  This battle includes, but is
not limited to, miniature golf, Indian tribes from Brooklyn, and
paint-by-numbers portraits.
 For those who will say that I should remember the audience of this
film, I will say that I have not grown so old that I have forgotten what
little children laugh at.  Wilson's script tries to be incredibly
highbrow instead of going for the gut jokes that could actually make a
little kid laugh.  Because Hugh Wilson is -- in this critic's opinion --
a gigantic moron, his highbrow material only comes off as pretentious
and unfunny.
It is clear that Hugh Wilson is trying to get parents to laugh with the
entire return of 60s nostalgia which has brought back things like the VW
Bug and George of the Jungle.  It is clear that he is banking that you
will both remember watching the original series and then be overcome by
a massive nostalgia for a television show that you stopped watching
because it was no longer funny.  It is also clear that Hugh Wilson then
will turn around and pander to your four-year-old by inserting several
times where a moose falls down on Do-Right, or a floorboard hits him in
the face.
But what is clear above all about the film is that it is unfunny.  It is
beyond unwatchable.  Dudley Do-Right is the kind of movie that makes me
stop believing in movies.  Dudley Do-Right is the kind of film that
makes you believe that hell is something that could really be torture if
the devil only tried.  Dudley Do-Right is a zero for the genre.
Whatever you do, don't watch Dudley Do-Right.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Choose one of the above and hire a bankable star.  This tired formula is
the essence of many studios' conservative approach to filmmaking.  The
predictably bland results may not excite audiences, but the risk of
financial failure is greatly diminished.  If enough people like the star
and know the story, they will come, no matter how lame the production
and how mediocre the reviews.
Thus it is with Universal's DUDLEY DO-RIGHT, a live-action adaptation of
the old kids' television cartoon.  Starring Brendan Fraser as Dudley
Do-Right, a Royal Canadian Mountie who is one of the world's stupidest
cops, the movie proves that some cartoons are hard to adapt to
live-action.  The grown-ups in DUDLEY DO-RIGHT just end up looking
embarrassingly silly and are only sporadically funny.  The slapstick
humor is heavy on falling-down jokes.  Writer and director Hugh Wilson
believes that, if having Dudley fall out of his chair once can generate
a few laughs, just have him do it again.  Ditto for the loose
floorboards that keep hitting him in the face.
The plot involves suspicion of vampires, wealthy Indians who run a
lavish dinner show and, most of all, a Canadian gold rush that has
"Yuppie wetbacks" storming across the Canadian border to get in on the
action.
Alfred Molina in a by-the-numbers performance plays Snidely Whiplash, an
arch villain and Dudley's long-time nemesis.  Sarah Jessica Parker
brings nothing to her role as Nell Fenwick, Dudley's girlfriend since
childhood.
Although Fraser has some nice moments, the only consistently enjoyable
performance is that by Corey Burton who does the off-screen voice of the
announcer.  Even so, his lines would work much better were the movie
animated.  "Though she had traveled far and wide, Nell had never heard a
confession of love before from a moose," the announcer tells us after a
moose head falls onto Dudley's shoulders as he professes love for his
Nell.
"Not since their all-male revival of 'Little Women' had the Kumquat
Nation faced such a hostile reaction," the announcer explains when the
Indians run into a spot of trouble.  (In a bow to political correctness,
the Indians explain at the end that they weren't really Indians after
all.)
Among the few enjoyable parts of the movie is an Indian dance
extravaganza that looks like a River Dance sequence as choreographed by
Busby Berkeley.  Another nice section has Snidely becoming the hero of
the local inhabitants after he transforms their sleepy little village
into a lucrative, gold rush boomtown.  Finally, in a high-spirited dance
number, Fraser shows, as he did in BLAST FROM THE PAST, that he can
really cut a rug.
"All you have to do is find 599 of the stupidest criminals around and
everything will fall into place," Snidely says about his criminal plans.
The movie takes a similarly simplistic approach.  Dudley's horse, whose
name is Horse, best summarizes the result.  After the movie is over,
Horse's head appears through the screen as he sticks out his tongue to
give it raspberries.  My sentiments exactly.
DUDLEY DO-RIGHT runs just 1:15.  It is rated PG for mild comic action
violence and for brief language and innuendo.  It would be fine for most
kids.
My son Jeffrey, age 10, who gave the move ** 1/2, said, "even though I
didn't laugh, I thought it was kind of funny."  (How's that for tepid
praise?)
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Hugh Wilson.
Cast: Brendan Fraser, Sarah Jessica Parker, Alfred Molina, Eric Idle, Robert 
Prosky, Alex Rocco, Regis Philbin, Kathie Lee Gifford.
1999 - 75 minutes.
Rated PG (for cartoonish violence).
Reviewed August 28, 1999.
"From the director who saw 'George of the Jungle,'" touts the ads for 
Universal's live-action remake of the old cartoon, "Dudley Do-Right." At 
least they aren't afraid to admit it, as "Dudley Do-Right," which features 
Brendan Fraser in the title role, is almost a carbon copy of that 1997 hit, 
right up to the jokey narration (by Corey Burton) over many of the scenes. 
While I wasn't one of the supporters of "George of the Jungle," it at least 
felt like a full-length movie, while the 75-minute "Dudley Do-Right" is so 
fast-paced and determined to push on to the next scene that it never stops 
long enough for you to even grow attached to, or involved in, the characters. 
You're obviously supposed to root for Dudley to triumph, but his character 
remains nothing more than a clumsy, accident-prone doofus.
The simple story goes like this: Dudley Do-Right is a Canadian Mountie for a 
quaint town who must stop his nemesis, Snidely Whiplash (Alfred Molina), from 
stealing his main squeeze, the sprightly Nell (Sarah Jessica Parker), and 
turning Semi-Happy Valley into Whiplash City through an elaborate gold hoax. 
To tell the truth, there's not much more to it than that. Through his fight 
to win Nell over and stop the dastardly villain, Snidely, Dudley is always 
falling off of his office chair, stepping on loose floor boards that fly up 
and hit him in the face, and accidentally smashing through windows. His loyal 
horse, named Horse, is always breaking the wind and sticking out his tongue 
at Dudley, and in a goofy dream sequence, played to the song, "Reunited," 
Dudley runs up a large hill to Horse and lovingly hugs him as they 
are--yep--reunited. As I said before, there's not much story to speak of.
"Dudley Do-Right" is an ideal example of a movie that is perfectly cast, but 
otherwise is a wasted opportunity that has forgotten about its story, written 
by Wilson. It even skips right over its trademark plot point, of Nell being 
tied to the railroad tracks by Snidely as a train is coming towards her. 
Since this would be politically incorrect (insert rolling of eyes here), we 
get a similar scene early on with a banker, and an overblown, creatively 
bankrupt climax that features motorcycle and speedboat chases. I don't recall 
speedboats ever appearing prominently in the cartoon, but why question such 
things when most of today's family films show no interest in quality 
entertainment for children (just look at the easily inferior "Inspector 
Gadget"). It is only when parents show contempt for what their children watch 
("Gadget" has made approximately $85-million to date!) that studios, most 
notably Disney, will start making smart live-action family films
As already mentioned, the cast couldn't get any better than this, and the 
three principles are so very right for their roles that it's almost scary. 
Brendan Fraser, I'm afraid, should branch out a little bit more, as I fear he 
is beginning to make the same types of films over and over again, such as 
blockbusters (1999's "The Mummy"), children movies based on cartoons, and 
"fish-out-of-water" comedies (1992's "Encino Man," 1999's "Blast From the 
Past"). My advice for him is to go back to making more challenging work, such 
as 1992's "School Ties" and 1998's "Gods & Monsters," rather than taking on 
roles that are so familiar he could sleepwalk through them. Alfred Molina, 
clearly having a lot of fun, is outstanding as Snidely Whiplash, capturing 
the exact physical look and speech of his animated counterpart. Sarah Jessica 
Parker is appropriately innocent as Nell, but for someone who is 
characterized as being very intelligent, she's fairly stupid, particularly in 
being smitten by Snidely. Finally, Eric Idle gains a few laughs as the bum 
who "discovers" the gold in the town, and ends up appearing on the Regis and 
Kathie Lee talk show.
With a cast so right, how did director Wilson go so wrong? The movie is 
needlessly empty and uneven, and for every good idea (setting the story in 
the present day, even though it is filled with old-fashioned values), there 
are dozens of bad ones. No effort is made to add much originality to the 
proceedings, or give you a strong sense of Dudley or Nell or their budding 
romance. Instead, we get some action chases more appropriate for "Universal 
Soldier: The Return," and the way Dudley overcomes Snidely is ridiculous. For 
one thing, in the cartoon there's no way Dudley would have been able to 
defeat him so easily, because Snidely would always come back for another 
feud. Think of "Dudley Do-Right" as a failed movie not much longer than a 
one-hour television show, and take the kids to see "Tarzan" for the umpteenth 
time.
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman.
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Frankie Paiva
There are many types of children's films. Some are designed to entertain the
parent while enchanting the child as well, some are targeted straight for the
kiddies and avoid any chance of good entertainment for adults, and there are
some (much like Dudley Do-Right) that manage to turn off both groups because
it's incredibly bad. Sticking straighter to the formula than I thought
possible, Brendan Fraser returns as a 60s cartoon character in the worst remake
of the year.
Dudley (Fraser) has always dreamed of being a Canadian Mountie, the dim-witted
fellow finally gets his wish and begins to govern the sweet mountain town of
Semi-Happy Valley. When Snidley Whiplash (Molina) decides to dump gold that he
stole from a bank, into the town stream and declare a gold rush to help bring
profit to the town, Dudley must step forward and save the day. It's also a
quest for his true love, somehow Nell (Sarah Jessica Parker) has fallen into
the wrong man's arms and it's Dudley's duty to save her.
Confused as Whiplash changes his role from good guy to bad guy (?) Dudley turns
into a bad guy because as the narrator points out, good guys can do bad things
to capture bad people (?.) It all leads to a final showdown between the
Mounties and the Whiplash bunch.
First of all, the film as a star vehicle for Brendan Fraser does not work. Both
him and Sarah Jessica Parker have less screen time than Snidley Whiplash
combined and Dudley says no more than 200 words. The narrator is also annoying,
constantly interacting with the characters (ala George of the Jungle anyone?)
and making stupid comments. The film also manages to be flat out not funny,
none of the jokes made even the nine year old with her Beanie Babies next to me
laugh. Now I could go on and on about how America is being shoveled this
mainstream trash and how the public eats it up, but I'll save some time for us
all by giving Dudley Do-Right no stars whatsoever.
ADDITIONAL NOTE: There is one portion of the film, 8 seconds to be exact that
contains a joke worth seeing, I will now save you the $7.50 admission ticket:
"Scientists report today that Canadian bacon is actually ham."  
The Young-Uns: The film is aimed right at kids and contains mild language and
some bare male chests. Good Age: 5-11
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at: http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic
