Title
Review for Comedian Harmonists (1997)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Dennis Schwartz
HARMONISTS,THE (COMEDIAN HARMONISTS) (director: Joseph Vilsmajer; cast:
Ben Becker (Robert Biberti), Heino Ferch (Roman Cycowski), Ulrich
Noethen (Harry Frommermann), Heinrich Schafmeister (Erich A.Collin), Max
Tidof (Ari Leschnikoff), Kai Wiesinger (Erwin Bootz), Meret Becker (Erna
Eggstein), Katja Riemann (Mary Cycowski), Dana Vavrova (Ursula Bootz),
Susi Nicoletti (Mrs. Grunbaum), Noemi Fischer (Chantal), Otto Sander
(Bruno Levy), 1997-German)
It is 1935, the group called The Comedian Harmonists are at the height
of their popularity, they are world famous, as we see them formally
dressed in tails performing on stage one of their favorite harmonies,
"Veronika."
The film flashes back to Berlin in 1927, the weak Weimar Republic is in
power and will remain so until 1933, when Hitler's Third Reich took over
and put its anti-Semitic policies to work.This will provide the backdrop
for this true story, that is most probably not told in its full
accuracy, as it tells about the rise and fall of the musical group and
their personal lives, and the events in Nazi Germany that made it
impossible for them to exist as they once were, since half of their six
members were Jewish, and Jews were no longer allowed to perform in
Germany under the Nazis.
Harry Frommermann (Ulrich) is the unemployed Jewish actor (and
dead-ringer for Robert Benigni) and self-taught musician and baritone,
who tells his agent that he is a musician not an actor.That his ability
is in arranging music, is met with cynicism by his agent, who tells him
that there are 3 million unemployed Germans on the street who are
arrangers.
Harry runs an ad in the paper, after hearing a record of an American
Negro group called "The Revellers" singing harmony; and, he is also
influenced by the music of the Duke Ellington. He now thinks that he
could put together such music for a German capella group, consisting of
five singers in harmony with a piano accompanist. The first one that he
hires for the group is the very Aryan looking, Robert Biberti (Ben
Becker), the son of an opera singer, with an untrained but beautiful
voice, who then gets the rest of the group together from among his
acquaintances: Roman Cycowski (Heino Ferch), born in Poland, who wants
to perform at the grand opera and will become a cantor in America when
the group is disbanded in the late 30s; Erich Abraham Collin (Heinrich
Schafmeister), has just passed his exam at the conservatory; Ari
Leschnikoff (Max Tidof), a gifted Bulgarian tenor, who is working as a
singing waiter; and, Erwin Bootz (Kai Wiesinger), a barroom pianist,
completes the group, as the non-singing member.Then came long hours of
practice without being paid, as they worked on getting their syncopated
sound together and their full routine of double-entendres, such as their
"asparagus are sprouting" number. Some of the other songs they sing, all
seem to be lighthearted, such as, "Beautiful Isabella From Castile" and
"When Yuba Plays the Rumba on the Tuba."
Their big break comes as they audition for a revue show and get the job,
as Bob, puffs on his big cigar and boldly works out the financial
arrangements for the group. Then recordings follow and sold-out concert
appearances and tours throughout Europe.
The love clash between Harry and Bob is over a music student and
part-time employee at a music store owned by an elderly patriotic Jewish
couple, the very attractive Erna Eggstein (Meret Becker), who,
incidentally, is the real sister of Ben Becker. The romance between
Harry and Erna starts first, as Harry shyly pursues her, encouraged by
her only too willing consent. Harry must first go to the grave site of
his parents and tell them that he has fallen in love with a non-Jewish
woman. When Bob meets her, he also falls for her, having led a wild
bachelor's life, he knows instinctively that this is the one for
him.When he takes her to a boxing match, he finds that Erna is
dissatisfied that Harry doesn't pay her enough attention and does not
take her studies seriously, so when Bob asks her to move in with him,
she does, even though, she still loves Harry.
This is a time of great change and upheaval in Berlin, and there is an
international flavor in the air, as culture is moving in that direction.
Therefore there are great changes in the way people relate to others.
Bootz will live with a Polish Jewish girl, but dump her when the Nazis
are starting to flex their muscle in the mid-thirties. Roman's Aryan
fiancée will convert to Judaism. Collin, the third Jew of the group,
will marry a French prostitute working the red light district of Berlin.
As far as the Nazis, their hatred is very apparent and very gripping
across all levels of society during this time.This film takes, in my
opinion, an erroneous view of their activity, soft peddling it, and
stating that it was only among the lower classes that anti-Semitism was
prevalent, that the upper classes and the cultured classes were
generally supportive of the Jews.This is just not true. It is a
rewriting of history that is not based on the facts. Daniel Goldhagen's
book, "Hitler's Willing Executioners," makes it clear, leaving no doubt,
that anti-Semitism was rampant among all classes.The majority of Germans
were anti-Semites, and there is no getting away from that. And just
because the group continued to have sold-out concerts after it became
known that there were Jews in the group and that the notorious Nazi
Julius Streicher, publisher of Stürmer (a major Nazi newspaper), was
able to grant them special permission to continue performing during this
difficult time, because he admired them and asked for their autographs,
would not indicate that things weren't so bad. That is just ignoring the
truly horrible and pervasive Nazi reign of terror, that really didn't go
into full blast until Kristallnacht in '38, but was certainly more
wide-spread in the early 30s than what was portrayed here. It should
also be noted that Streicher was executed as a Nazi war criminal as a
result of the Nuremberg trials.
There is one scene that shows some of this Nazi S.A. brownshirt hatred
in action, as we see how it is directed against the Jewish music store
owners who can't understand what is happening to their country and why
they are being singled out and why their store is being smeared with
anti-Semitic messages, asserting that their son died fighting for
Germany in the last war. The Holocaust came a few years later, but there
is no doubt that the initial plans for the "Final Solution" was
underway, even back then; and, even if, there were a few Germans who
were not filled with hatred, like Erna, it cannot be denied, they were
still badly outnumbered.
The scene when the group comes to perform in New York on board the USS
Saratoga, gets everything it can about that scene wrong. For one thing,
the Navy was not integrated then, so all those black faces on board were
not on board during the 30s. And, New York never looked so unreal and
artificial. The real problem the group has in New York, is whether they
should return home, as a conflict develops over this matter between Bob
(who doesn't want to leave his elderly mother alone) and Harry, who sees
the handwriting on the wall in Germany, and feels he has nothing left
there. But it is settled when the rest of the group decides to return to
a changing Germany, that is, despite realizing that their country is
being purged of its international and Communistic and bourgeois
influences, in favor of nationalism, by the intolerant Nazis, who have
taken complete control of the arts.
Their final concert is a standing-ovation triumph to their popularity,
as they are forced by Nazi laws to not mingle with the Jews and
therefore must disband the group.There is a crush of people surging
onstage to give them warm support and encouragement. As a result, two
groups are formed, the Jews leave Germany and play in exile (actually
having great success in Australia) and the gentiles stay in Germany;
but, they cannot make it separately, and because of the war the
internationalism of their music loses favor, as both groups disband by
1941.
In an epilogue, it is mentioned how all the members survived WW11: As
all the Jewish members went to America, as did Erna, who married Harry,
and, later on, divorced him in the early 1950s.
There was something emotionally flat and unconvincing about this story,
that not only rubbed me the wrong way, but made me think how apologetic
the filmmaker was to the real events of history, as he tried to force
feed the audience into believing so many untruths about what actually
took place, that it is hard for me to say that this film made up for its
distorted history lessons with its pleasing music and cabaret-like mood
its splendid cinematography presented. Its call for the world to be less
nationalistic and more global minded, had a pleasing ring to it, but
that is simply not enough to counter how tame the film appears as a
whole, as the story does not dig deep enough into the real events; and,
also, the characters are only superficially dealt with, despite the
terrific performances, so that the love story and all the different
personality clashes seem to be glossed over, not making me feel involved
with them as much as I should be. Leaving me with the impression that I
was seeing a good looking and sounding film, but one that did not
ultimately satisfy my need to feel that Germany has learned its lesson
from its most pernicious period of history, as it fails to answer the
question, how can such a cultured people accept the atrocities of the
Nazis so willingly.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Greg King
COMEDIAN HARMONISTS (M).  
(Champion Films/Sharmill Films)
Director: Joseph Vilsmaier
Stars: Ben Becker, Heino Ferch, Ulrich Noethen, Heinrich Schafmeister,
Max Tidof, Kai Wiesenger, Meret Becker, Katja Riemann, Dan Vavrova,
Noemi Fischer, Susi Nicoletti, Rudolf Wessely, Rolf Hoppe, Otto
Sander, Jurgen Scornagel, Gunter Lamprecht
Running time: 125 minutes
(German, with English subtitles).
Like the famous musical von Trapp family, the Comedian
Harmonists were a popular vocal group who were eventually forced to
flee Germany in the 1930's to escape the tyranny of the Nazi regime.
In this epic story, writer/director Joseph Vilsmaier (the
visually lush but dull Brother Of Sleep, etc) traces the rise of this
vocal sextet, one of the most popular bands of the 1920's and 1930's.
This lavishly produced biopic follows the band's history, from its
humble beginnings amid the night-clubs, cafes and brothels of Berlin
to its resounding international success and its eventual break-up,
forced by Hitler's vicious anti-Semitic policies.
This beautifully constructed and provocative musical has vague
echoes of the classic Sound Of Music.  But it also has echoes of the
darker Cabaret, as it explores the more sinister aspects of the rise
of Nazism during the decadent 1920's and economically depressed
1930's.
Comedian Harmonists opens in 1927, with unemployed musician
and arranger Harry Frommermann (Ulrich Noethen) assembling the sextet,
with the help of ambitious singer Robert Biberti (Ben Becker).  The
band drew heavily on the vocal style of US bands like The Revellers,
but injected a touch of humour into their rendition of popular, bawdy
tunes.  A number of important subplots explore the changing political
climate of Germany and detail the growing internal pressures on the
band as racial and sexual tensions surface.  The Jewish Harry and
blond Aryan Robert vie for the attentions of Erna (Meret Becker), a
beautiful young student who works as an assistant in a record shop.
External pressure is also brought to bear on the group, as the
Nazi authorities want the band to either get rid of the three Jewish
members or perform tunes written by more acceptable writers.  The band
thought that their reputation and international fame would protect
them from the intolerant and ignorant racial policies of Hitler's
regime, but they were wrong.
The darker, more troubling events of the film are offset by
some beautifully arranged musical numbers, drawn from re-mastered
versions of the original recordings.  The production values and
staging are all fabulous.  Vilsmaier, who is also the cinematographer,
has an eye for detail, and visually the film is quite sumptuous and
rich.  His recreation of the decadent Berlin of the 1920's is
stunning.  The performances from the superb ensemble cast are all
perfectly pitched at the right level.  A superbly crafted and lavishly
produced film, Comedian Harmonists is an enjoyable, and ultimately
moving cinematic experience.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE HARMONISTS (COMEDIAN HARMONISTS) (Germany,1997) *** 1/2 Directed by
Joseph Vilsmaier. Written by Klaus Richter, based on an idea by Juergen
Buescher; Photography, Joseph Vilsmaier. Editing, Peter R. Adam. Production
design, Rolf Zehetbauer. Music, Harald Kloser. Produced by Hanno Huth,
Reinhard Kloos and Danny Krausz. Cast:  Ben Becker (Robert Biberti), Heino
Ferch (Roman Cycowski), Ulrich Noethen (Harry Frommermann), Heinrich
Schafmeister (Erich A. Collin), Max Tidof (Ari Leschnikoff), Kai Wiesinger
(Erwin Bootz), Meret Becker (Erna Eggstein), Katja Riemann (Mary Cycowski),
Dana Vavrova (Ursula Bootz), Susi Nicoletti (Mrs. Grunbaum), Noemi Fischer
(Chantal), et al. A  Mirama Disney release. In German with subtitles. 114
minutes.  R (racist violence)
A doubly welcome movie. It is very good. And it comes from Germany, a
country whose once glorious past in film took a tumble during the Nazi era,
except for a small number of movies. (Not all was propaganda then, contrary
to popular belief)
In the aftermath of World War II, German film, like much else, lay in ruins
and (always with exceptions) was undistinguished. In the 1960s, partly
influenced by the success of the French New Wave, there was a rebirth of
truly creative, high-quality, audacious productions, loosely labeled The
New German Cinema or The Young German Cinema (Kluge, Fassbinder, Herzog,
many others).But in more recent years (again with exceptions) there has
been a paucity of such works, mostly because the German public has ignored
the avant-garde in favor of commercial movies, predominantly American.
The not-strictly-commercial exceptions that found a public in Germany and
abroad have often dealt with the Nazi era, its preludes and aftermaths.
They are often fact-based too. The Harmonists fills that bill --with a
twist  Its focus is a group of musical performers, their rise and not
exactly their fall --since this would imply artistic disintegration--but
their dissolution within a barbaric political climate.
It  embraces the years from late 1927, during the Weimar Republic
(1919-1933) , through the mid-1930s, during Hitler's Third Reich.
Cinephiles may be glad to learn that the Weimar Republic's first President
was a socialist named Ebert, not Roger but  Friedrich.
It was time of all imaginable turmoil, social, political, of mass
unemployment, the newly  rich and the many newly poor. It was also a time
of amazing creativity in the arts, including the popular ones (see the
movie Cabaret). And a time of night life, daring sexuality, licentiousness
and excitement. For a while Berlin was the artistic the capital of Europe.
The movie tells,with some inventions and poetic license, the "true" story
of a singing/performing ensemble which became a huge hit in Germany and
abroad. Of late there has been a stage and concert revival in Germany and
the USA.
Among the innumerable, work-seeking starving artists is Harry Frommermann,
who is Jewish. This talented, despondent man reacts to the suggestions  of
Mr. Levy, an agent, with  "I'm not an actor, I'm a musician."  And it is as
a musician that he has a revelation on his Road to Damascus, so to speak.
He hears a recording by a black American group, The Revelers. A bulb lights
up in his head. Harry will try a German equivalent of that group. He places
a newspaper ad, selects five candidates (a pianist and four singers,
including a wonderful Bulgarian singing waiter), and forms an ensemble
which delivers German and American pop  and folk tunes in lively, precise,
harmonious and comical ways full of double-entendres and rakish allusions.
(They even have to explain to their Bulgarian member what "a growing
asparagus" stands for).
Call it an a capella group or a Teutonic variant of a barbershop quintet.
Someone eventually has the bright notion of baptizing it, in English
--except for the article-- Die Comedian Harmonists.
The film opens in 1935 Berlin, as the Harmonists, elegant in formal
clothes, now at the peak of their fame, sing on-stage the hit "Veronika" in
a version which includes one real instrument ,the piano, and several others
which the group imitates beautifully.
Flash back to December 1927, Harry's vision, the formation of the group,
their rehearsals, struggles, arguments, dissensions, tensions and all else
that leads to their acquiring their Harmonist identity. They rehearse for
six months, in sequences that are fascinating windows into musicality,
tactics and personalities. After a desperate deadline of an extra month,
the finally hit on the right formula.
Three of the six happen to be Jews. Among the others, the most forceful is
big, blond Robert Biberti. When push come to shove following a critical
audition by the then-nobodies, it is Robert who brazenly states to a
(presumably Jewish) impresario that he, Biberti, represents the financial
interests of the group. He ups the ante of the salary  with imaginary
offers. The impresario is not taken in, but plays along. He knows talent
when he sees  it. Throughout, Bob-the-Aryan's attitude is best described as
chutzpah.
The film is most adroitly edited, knowing exactly when to cut, never
allowing its scenes to overstay their welcome. It has lightness, humor,
effervescence.The singers are excellent. In reality, they do perfect
lip-synching to the sounds of  original  78 rpm recordings, magically
digitalized. It will fool you.
Past the early flashbacks the story continues with the Harmonists'
skyrocketing to fame, private lives and political situations. Bob, shown
living in a palatial suite, phones the concierge to ask for a call-girl in
the matter-of-fact way you ask for breakfast to be brought up. " Not too
voluptuous. She must look like a student trying to make extra money." But
then, there is another, real student, Erna. She works at the music store of
a charming old Jewish couple who remind me a bit of the couple in
Casablanca.
Harry loves Erna. Erna seems sweet on Harry. Then Bob too falls for Erna.
And so on. There are ambiguities about her, as in many other aspects of the
film. To what extent the details are truly biographical, I cannot tell.
However, rather than intrude into the story, those relationships and others
flesh it out and humanize the Harmonists. (The amusing fact is that the
actors who play Bob and Erna are brother and sister in real life).
What intrudes, and with a horrible vengeance, is Adolf Hitler and his
minions. The now renowned Harmonists have to face anti-Semitism, which
raises its monstrous head for the first time at a swimming pool. No doubt
this is a filmic simplification, since awareness of the problem must have
existed already --especially in artistic circles with their huge numbers of
German Jews.
On the other hand, the shock becomes a quake when Bob and Harry arrive at
the music store as S.A. men  (Brownshirts) break the glass (a prelude to
the 1938 Kristallnacht), tear up the place, abuse verbally and bodily Erna
and her bosses. The owners cannot understand this. They are Germans and
patriots, love the country, in the late war lost a son---all this will
pass, no doubt.
The thread of Jewish incomprehension runs throughout the film. I recently
saw the Spielberg-produced, Oscar-winning documentary The Last Days, about
Hungarian Jews. Like the German Jews, the Hungarians were so "assimilated"
that they could not imagine anyone harming them during World War II, and
they hardly believed the rumors of death camps. Until their turn came.
In The Harmonists, no anti-Semitism is shown within the group and their
circle. In fact, one of the men's girls converts to Judaism in order to
marry her lover. The wedding has klezmer music, enormous brio, and none of
the satire that one finds in many such ceremonies in American movies, by
Jewish filmmakers too. (This is no criticism. When you feel free, you can
afford to laugh at yourself).
During Hitler's early reign, Bob and Harry are summoned to the Nazi
Artists' Chamber. A high official points out to them that "half of your
people are non-Aryan," but, given their admirers in high places he'll try
to find a solution. Then he asks them to autograph one of their records.
Clever irony.
Soon after comes the request that the group go to the palatial home of
Gauleiter Julius Streicher, as rabid a Jew-hater as any, if not more (he
was hanged after the Nuremberg War Crimes trials). There, among a host of
uniformed Party members, Streicher requests  a folk song with lyrics by the
great Romantic poet Eichendorff. Harry gets physically sick, the others
say: "We'd be grateful if we don't have to sing this particular song."
I confess that I was baffled.I don't know what the upsetting reference is
here, nor how historically true this Streicher "invitation" was.
Racist tension mounts. An invitation to sing in America arrives. In New
York, on the USS Saratoga and elsewhere the group gives rousing renderings
of American songs and marches. The New World is like Paradise. Though most
Harmonists are tempted to stay there,they do return to Germany. There, the
audience at a sold-out concert is chockfull of Nazi uniforms. An
announcement that comes as a thunderbolt both to the dumbfounded performers
and the audience tells them that the group is now banned after this, their
last concert. The Harmonists deliver  one of their trademark "serious"
kitschy songs (about a bit of heaven, somewhere, sometime). Moved, the
public mobs them. True ? Invented?
The Jewish members, plus Erna, go straight to America. It's an historically
incorrect, simplified finale, but I suppose that their real peregrinations
(in Europe, even in Australia) before settling in the USA, would require
another half-hour of film. Not that it is long at 114 minutes. There are no
dead moments, no dull scenes. The movie has a lot more than meets the eye.
And what meets the ear is enchanting.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
rated R
starring Ulrich Noethen, Ben Becker, Meret Becker, Heino Ferch, Heinrich
Schafmeister, Max Tidof, Kai Wiesinger
in German with English subtitles
written by Klaus Richter and Jurgen Egger
based on the story by Jurgen Buscher
directed by Joseph Vilsmaier
We are now still at the beginning of a year packed full of films, and
we already have our first Holocaust comedy. That is what some people
will say after a first glance at Joseph Vilsmaier's wonderful THE
HARMONISTS, but actually they will find little to be offended by. THE
HARMONISTS, unlike the wildly popular Oscar winner LIFE IS BEAUTIFUL,
is a true story that just happens to occur during an untimely era. THE
HARMONISTS is the more than slightly fictionalized story of the rise
and fall of the Comedian Harmonists, a group that was so popular
worldwide(especially in Europe) that one member was quoted as saying
that they could have been as famous as the Beatles...had they not
broken up.
Yes, the story of the Comedian Harmonists is not an easy one to
tell. It starts with the dreams of a young Jewish man named Harry
Frommermann(Ulrich Noethen, who looks unmistakably like Roberto
Benigni) living in Berlin circa 1927. He is a talented musician, but
he is also a poor man who does not have money to even feed his
bird. He then posts a newspaper ad that says he wants to start a
singing group. The first lock for the group is a monk named Bob
Biberti, and the next 4 singers come rolling along. The 6 begin having
vigorous rehearsals in order to get everything perfect. Then, of
course, there are the cliches of members threatening to leave because
the group isn't any good, etc. And Harry soons begin to realize that
Erna, the girl of his dreams, has taken a liking to Bob, and
eventually moves in with him. But the real twist begins when slowly
the members of the group, 3 Jewish and 3 gentile, begin to realize the
overwhelming anti-semitism in Germany. Soon, it comes to the point
when they are being threatened to no longer be allowed to perform
together, by the same people who are supposed to be their fans.
THE HARMONISTS works very well for the most part, telling an
interesting story and getting great performances from all the
leads. The songs are also all very catchy and well done. Sometimes,
the film's subplots threaten to take away from the story, but the
characters are always interesting enough to follow. It is obvious that
THE HARMONISTS has taken the liberty of changing a few things from the
actual story, but it's hard to care since the film is so vividly
engrossing. THE HARMONISTS is made by Miramax, which is having a lot
of luck with it's other two foreign films, the similar LIFE IS
BEAUTIFUL and CHILDREN OF HEAVEN. I must say once again that Miramax
is still putting out better movies than any movie studio on the
planet.
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://www.angelfire.com/mo/film
watch me on TBS' "Dinner And A Movie" May 21, 8:05pm EST 


Author
Steve Rhodes
Based on the true story of a singing troupe called the "Comedian
Harmonists," THE HARMONISTS starts in Berlin in the late 1920s.
Unemployment is soaring with 3 million out of work, but a failed actor
with a vision, Harry Frommermann, decides his future lies as a musical
"arranger," and singer.  Ulrich Noethen, who looks like LIFE IS
BEAUTIFUL's Roberto Benigni, plays Harry, who hires 4 other singers and
a pianist.  Together they will sing a high-pitched, 5-part harmony.
Their innocent, happy tunes will later prove somewhat of an antidote to
the terror that will grip the nation as the Nazis come to power.
With Joseph Vilsmaier's warm and radiant cinematography and Rolf
Zehetbauer's handsome period sets, post-World War I Germany looks lovely
and inviting.  The relatively light-hearted story is structured into 3
parts.  The first concerns the trials and tribulations of the group's
formation, the second has them living in the lap of luxury, and the
final act covers the oppression they faced because some of them were
Jewish.
Harry's vision, based on the popularity of The Revelers, was for the
group to sing as one, with no individual standing out.  Their memorable
songs are of a type that most of you may not have heard before.  The
lyrics are childlike and silly with occasional and obscure
double-entendre -- one such double-entendre mentions "sprouting
asparagus," for example.  Told you, they were obscure.
The movie's best scenes are its simplest.  One especially charming one
has the group at an impromptu jam session, in which they do an
instrumental blues song with their voices as the instruments.  Their
talents as singers are never in doubt even if their type of music may no
longer have the universal appeal it did then.
The long middle section of the movie has them, along with their
girlfriends, wives, and one-night-stands, living like kings in the best
hotels in Europe -- their rapid rise to musical stardom being roughly
akin to that of the Beatles.  Overwhelmed by their wealth and fame, one
of them remarks propitiously, "My God, what will happen next?"  He was
thinking positively, but the storm clouds were brewing on the continent
At first the group is just harassed as "sissies," but later the same
brash, young men don brown shirts and begin to torture and terrorize
anyone they don't like and they especially do not like Jews.  With their
millions of fans, the Comedian Harmonists figure, naively, that they
will be immune from the anti-Semitism rampant in the land.
The movie, which walks a fine line during the first two acts between
light musical comedy and history, commits itself in the somber last act
to being a message movie.  This last, schmaltzy part is where the film
begins to fall apart.  Carefree entertainment doesn't switch easily into
serious melodrama.  Try as it will, the movie just isn't able to shift
gears properly, despite its good intentions.  The result is an
enjoyable, historical story with a ponderous and sappy SOUND OF
MUSIC-style ending.  Whatever you do, don't leave before the epilogue
that reveals what happened to the members of the group as well as to
their spouses and lovers.
THE HARMONISTS runs 1:55..  The film is in German with English
subtitles.  It is not rated but would be an R for brief nudity,
sexuality, drug usage and mature themes and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Miramax Films
 Director:  Joseph Vilsmaier
 Writer:  Jurgen Buscher, Klaus Richter
 Cast: Ben Becker, Heino Ferch, Ulrich Noethen, Heinrich
Schafmeister, Max Tidof, Kai Wiesinger, Meret Becker, Katja
Riemann, Dana Vavrova, Noemi Fischer, Otto Sander,
Michaela Rosen, Gunter Lamprecht, Gerard Samaan, Rolf
Hoppe
   There must be hundreds of movies that have dealt in some
way with the theme of Nazism, and they're still coming out of
the Hollywood mills and the cameras of the independent
studios as well.  That's OK.  There will always be a need for
more stories of Germany's flight into irrationality, particularly
those which carve out a niche, which study some aspect of
the period which has rarely been exposed to the public.  The
best example this year of such a feat is Roberto Benigni's
"Life is Beautiful," which deals with the efforts of a prisoner to
use humor to conceal the brutality of a concentration camp
from his young, incarcerated son.  Similarly, Volker
Schlondorff's "The Ogre" singles out the training of the Hitler
Youth to cinematic advantage.
   Now comes "The Harmonists," due to open in February '99
and based on the memories of the longest-surviving member
of a popular German group.  It's a heartbreaker.  Few films
have pointed out more effectively the utter absurdity of Nazi
doctrine. Less than two years after the accession of Hitler in
January 1933, the group called The Comedian Harmonists
were forbidden to continue giving concerts despite their
popularity with even a raging anti-Semite like Julius Streicher. 
Why?  Three of their six members were Jewish.  Never mind
that once the group got established, concerts were sold out in
Berlin and Munich.  The Jewish half were apparently polluting
the country, according to the senseless mentality of the Nazi
officials, though one could challenge any of them to point out
which three were of that faith.
   The initial half of the film is less dramatic than the
concluding portion, filling us in on the background of the
organization, portraying how the singing sensations were
organized in a way that could serve as a primer to the
formation of many a similar band of musicians.  During the
hard economic times in Germany in 1927, when the labor
force was swelling with the unemployed, there was a demand
for light entertainment to take the people's minds off their
hardships.  A 20-year-old drama student, Harry
Frommermann (Ulrich Noethen), advertises for fellow
vocalists--who must be under the age of 25--and receives
many applicants.  After hiring Robert Biberti (Ben Becker),
Roman Cycowski (Heino Ferch), Erich Abraham Collin
(Heinrich Schafmeister), Ari Leschnikoff (Max Tidof) and
Erwin Bootz (Kai Wiesinger), they rehearse for long hours,
are belittled by a prospective promoter as being funereal in
tone, and finally capture a syncopated feel that they could
call their own.  While the sextet modeled itself after the
popular American a capella group, "The Revellers" and after
the style of Duke Ellington as well, their adaptation of those
models into a German mold became contagious.  
   Joseph Vilsmaier, who directs the movie, and Klaus
Richter, its scripter, convey the joie de vivre of this fun group
whose backstage antics were not often as heartwarming as
their dressed-up performances.  Harry Frommermann and
Robert Biberti fought over the same girl, Erna Eggstein
(Meret Becker), a student whose heart may have belonged to
Harry but who was enticed by Robert's offer of a spacious
room in his home that she could use for her studies.  
   Director Vilsmaier tiptoes over the Nazi atrocities,
portraying only briefly a scene in which brownshirt thugs
smash up a Jewish-owned store in which Erna worked part-
time.  Since the movie covers only the years 1927-1934, anti-
Jewish policies were only beginning.  In fact one gets the
impression by the unanimous cheers of the concert audience
that only a small percentage of the German people had any
hatred toward the Jews, the antipathy coming exclusively
from lower-middle class and unemployed young people who
took out their frustrations on a convenient scapegoat.  One of
the brownshirts is shown to take part in the smashing of the
Jewish-owned store simply because his girl friend rebuffed
him in favor of Harry.  The viewer must question the accuracy
of this mood, particularly given the recent scholarship that
holds that a majority of German people from all groups were
anti-Semitic.
   Ulrich Noethen is the man to watch here.  Resembling
Robert Benigni in both appearance and gestures, his Harry
Frommermann is a shy lad whose faint heart was failing to
win his fair maiden, but whose enthusiasm is expressed
vibrantly in his promotion of the band.  While the production
design for New York during the early 1930's looks counterfeit,
production designer Rolf Zehetbauer effectively captures the
fashion and spirit of the time, a spirit which resembles that of
the United States with its love for the Charleston, for short
hair, and for a devil-may-care attitude complete with a
swanky big-city brothel.  The Comedian Harmonists became
a household name in Germany during the brief period that the
boys performed, while its music is still quite popular in
Germany and Europe.  Like most other musical groups, they
went through the agonies of forming, of gaining a name, of
prospering, and eventually splitting up.  The difference is that
their separation was caused not so much by internal strife but
by outlandish national politics.
