Title
Review for Christopher Columbus: The Discovery (1992)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Peter Reiher
[Note: It's a pity this didn't get released a week or so earlier--it could have
been r.a.m.r. #1492!  As it is, it will have to settle for 1506, the year of
Columbus's death.  -Moderator]
     Those familiar with the Salkind brothers had good reason to doubt
the quality of their Christopher Columbus film, CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS -
The DISCOVERY.  Their last few ventures have hardly inspired much
confidence.  However, in the past they delivered not only SUPERMAN, but
also THE THREE MUSKETEERS and THE FOUR MUSKETEERS.  While far from a
perfect film, CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS--THE DISCOVERY bears more resemblance
to the Salkind's earlier successes than to their more recent failures.
     CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS--THE DISCOVERY covers Columbus' attempts to
convince someone to finance his journey, and his first voyage.  The
Salkind's decided to ignore his increasingly desperate later attempts to
prove that he had reached the Far East in favor of the great triumph of
his initial discoveries.  That decision is symptomatic of the entire
approach of the film.  While not entirely hagiographic, CHRISTOPHER
COLUMBUS--THE DISCOVERY is basically an adventure film about a great man
who performs a great deed despite determined opposition and tremendous
odds.  Taken purely as such, the film is basically a success.  If one
wants a more studied, intellectual approach to Columbus, perhaps Ridley
Scott's upcoming version will provide satisfaction.  If one is just
interested in a good time at the movies, the Salkind version does just
fine.
     CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS--THE DISCOVERY is a very handsome film.  No
expense has been spared to make the film look good.  The set design, the
costumes, and the photography are all impeccable.  Given the film's
budget, and the past history of the Salkind's, that's not too
surprising.  Much more surprising is that moderate amounts of effort
have been spent on the script and the direction.  Mario Puzo, a Salkind
favorite after SUPERMAN, wrote the story, and receives a partial
screenplay credit.  John Wiley and Cary Bates get the first credit on
the screenplay.  (They apparently wrote most of what got shot.)  They
have created a reasonably paced, reasonably intelligent version of the
story.  Perhaps the script's biggest flaw is that it does not provide
sufficient depth to its central character, at least in the first hour of
the film.  Eventually, Columbus is revealed to be more than a visionary
standing heroically in the prow of his ship, but we aren't given quite
enough preparation for the darker side of the man, which emerges rather
suddenly.  
     Despite this flaw, and a perfunctory love interest, and some silly
lines, and a tendency to make nods in the direction of fashionable views
of history, the script is a success, on the whole.  Even some of the
politically correct touches are made to work.  As the Santa Maria pulls
away from Spain on its voyage, revealed behind it is a ship full of Jews
who are about to be deported from Spain.  The moment was carefully
prepared, the shot was well planned, so it achieves its effect.
     This shot, and some others, show that the director, John Glen, had
a bit more than hackwork in mind.  Glen graduated from being a second
unit director of James Bond films to being the director, and has done
the last four or five of them.  However, he's done little else, and has
gained a reputation as an action specialist.  The few action scenes in
this film show he hasn't lost his touch for staging violence, but he
gets a chance to show a bit more breadth of talent.  He has real
characters who get to speak real dialog to each other in this film, and
he handles it pretty well.  He also does nicely with the big moments of
the film.
     His handling of the actors is another strong point.  There is only
one truly weak performance in CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS--THE DISCOVERY, and
it, fortunately, is in a supporting role.  The leads do quite well.
George Corraface is not well known to film audiences, but he has a
strong theatrical background, and was to play the lead in David Lean's
NOSTROMO.  He provides a good, solid Columbus, here.  He does the best
he can to mask the lack of early development of his character, so that
Columbus' nastier side does not come completely out of the blue.  But he
also manages to convey a sense of true heroism, as the success of the
film definitely required.  
     Marlon Brando, unjustly given top billing in a supporting role,
almost manages to justify it.  His is a superb performance, as
Torquemada, the Grand Inquisitor and confessor to Queen Isabella.  He
subtly underplays the part (not the type of acting choice Brando has
made for many years), and makes us wish that there were more scenes like
the one where he interrogates Columbus about the possibly heretical
aspects of the planned voyage.  Corraface manages not to disappear 
entirely in his scenes with Brando, but Brando confirms that he still
has the talent, when he chooses to show it.  It's an interesting choice
of the screenwriters to deliver a moral judgement on Columbus from
Torquemada's lips, and Brando manages to pull it off, in part because of
the sincerity of faith he has brought to the character earlier.  It
would be easy to play Torquemada as a sadistic, slavering villain, but
Brando's subtlety pays far greater dividends.
     The other major parts are Rachel Ward, as Queen Isabella
(adequate); Tom Selleck, as King Ferdinand (relatively speaking, a
triumph over unlikely casting - Selleck owes his costume maker a good
deal for the success of his performance, but he does bring it off); and
Robert Davi, as Pinzon, one of the captains of the small fleet and an
ambiguous character, part hero, part opportunist.  Davi doesn't quite
succeed in the slightly underwritten part, but doesn't fail utterly,
either.
     Given the limited ambition and goals of CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS--THE
DISCOVERY, the film is just about as good as it could have been.  It's
nice to look at, not entirely devoid of intelligence, pretty
consistently entertaining, and generally well acted.  Its poor
advertising campaign and the mysterious decision by the releasing studio
not to pre-screen it for critics almost certainly doom it to failure at
the box office, but it really is worth seeking out before it disappears,
for those who have any interest in historical epics, at all.

Author
Pedro Sena
While this is not the superb adventure film we would like it to be, it does
have a few good things in it.
Rachel Ward, is not only the most attractive of all, of them, she smoothly
delivers the best performance.  She is not campy, she does not come of
pretentious, and she is feminine enough, though she is a queen.  Aside
from Rachel Ward, there is Marlon Brando, the elder church statesman
Torquemada, upon whose shoulders the whole voyage may have depended. And if
so, the voyage was arranged to get rid of an over zealous Christian who was
getting in their nerves with all the clever rhetoric.  But the well meaning
Torquemada ( he lets everyone choose their own destruction ) also knows that
he has to deal with the fact that the queen happens to
love this genoese.   He does not disapprove of it, and allows the whole
thing to go through.  He blesses it at the departure, as a sign that even if
he doesn't believe the young man, at least he has a heart for the
visit to the unknown.  And Marlon Brando, as this elder is very good, not
jumpy, very quiet, and also smooth.  There is a certain aura of control and
calm when he is on.
Christopher Columbus -- The Discovery, is not a bad film.  If it suffers a
bit, it is that the film has to live with 'every day' Spain, for a while,
and then has to live with insurrections and bad leaders of ships, the only
people the young sea captain could come up with.  These moments in the
script are a bit difficult to recreate, in that the story is limited to
setting things up in the beginning.  Had it just happened, instead of
immediately telling us that this character was going to be a problem might
have made the film more surprising and enjoyable, rather than so
predictable.
But it isn't a bad evening of history, and could be enjoyed for a few
moments, even if it is so darn romantic in the whole thing, which many  of
those sailors had to be anyway....
SEE IT WHEN YOU HAVE NOTHING BETTER TO CHECK OUT.
LET THE KIDS SEE IT BEFORE THEIR HISTORY CLASSES.
3 GIBLOONS

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     One never quite knows what to expect from the Salkind brothers.  Early
films one associates with the Salkind name include a ponderous adaptation of
Kakfa's TRIAL and a not very engaging adventure, THE LIGHT AT THE END OF THE
WORLD.  The brothers hit pay dirt and made a name for themselves with a
terrific double film adaptation of THE THREE MUSKETEERS.  SUPERMAN was
extremely uneven in style and quality, but it had its moments and was an
audience pleaser.  Its sequels and spin-offs went rapidly downhill and their
image became one of flesh without substance.  Their announcement of a film
about Santa Claus more than enhanced that opinion.  Substance and Santa
Claus just do not go together.  And then they announced CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS
and it sounded only marginally better.  A film about Captain Cook might be
interesting.  the Burton and Speke expedition had real dramatic
possibilities and the film Bob Rafelson made did realize some of them.  But
Columbus seems like an elementary school hero and too corny to make into a
real hero.  This was a film that everybody knew would not be good and then
on top of that there were no screenings for critics.  This is a sure sign
that the Salkinds expected a poor reception from the critics.  They were
wrong.  This is certainly the best film the Salkinds have done since THE
THREE MUSKETEERS and, while flawed, is getting a generally positive critical
reception.
     While the film rarely rises to the point of excitement (odd, because it
is directed by James Bond director John Glen), the film does offer
historical spectacle and some adventure.  In the late 1480's Colon (yes,
they get his name right in the film even if not in the title) is trying to
convince the Portuguese court that the great Ocean Sea can be crossed by a
mariner, particularly one who knows a secret.  The Portuguese have sent
explorers who do not know Colon's "secret" and they returned in failure.
The theme of the secret is very nicely handled, incidentally.  It is a
little hard for the audience to realize for itself what Colon's secret could
be.  When the secret is actually revealed, it turns out to be something
non-obvious, something that perhaps a few mariners of Colon's day might have
known, and something that certainly could have made the difference between
success and failure.  Of course, Colon (played by George Corraface of THE
MAHABARATA) goes to Spain and in spite of his original inclinations asks a
laid-back Ferdinand (played by Tom Selleck in a bizarre piece of casting)
and pretty perky Isabella (played by Rachel Ward), looking a decade or two
under her 41 years.  (Is this really the same woman who refused to change
her petticoat until her husband drove the Moors from Spain?)
     While much of the story is familiar there is a fascination in seeing
Spain in its most momentous--albeit regrettable--year.  There is some
reference made to the expulsion of Jews, including a moving scene of Jews
leaving Spain at the same time Colon is, though there is little reference to
how much of Colon's crew was Jewish or to the belief at the Spanish court
that Colon was himself a Jew.  Colon is called before Torquemada (played by
Marlon Brando in this film) not on a question of his religion, but rather
Colon's contradiction of the teachings of St. Augustine, who said there are
no lands before the great Ocean Sea and for whom a city was named in
Florida.  Colon proves himself to be a man who knows his audience and what
sort  of argument will work.  When he argues his case to the Church he uses
scripture; when arguing to tough businessmen he uses clever analogies and
the visual aid of a watermelon and a sharp blade.
     Eventually Colon does get to sea in what by rights should have been the
most exciting chapter but which is, in fact, the least original segment.
Ships at sea looking for land, having to avoid sabotage, mutiny, trying to
find wind--all are fairly familiar plot elements of sea films.  There is
even a sequence involving a bet that seems very unlikely to have had any
basis in fact.  Eventually landfall is made--I hope this is not a spoiler.
Then comes a most interesting dilemma in filmmaking:  should the film
portray Colon as a hero or be politically correct and make him a tyrant?
The solution is to make Colon a man of his time--a time that called for
gold, glory, gospel, and slaves as the indicators of success.  Colon's
ambitions are those of a man from the 15th instead of the 20th Century.
     This is a film of great earnestness with humor only in its ironies,
including a very interesting comment by Torquemada toward the end of the
film.  It does generate interest in a very daring expedition that most of us
take for granted.  In spite of some distortion of history, it does give the
viewer some unconventional insights into the great historical event.  Not
great but easily a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
