Title
Review for Fatal Instinct (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Ned Ravine (Armand Assante) has a duel career.  By night, he's a tough, 
no-nonsense cop who always gets his man.  By day, he's a defense attorney 
who defends most of the guys he catches.  Despite his devotion to his 
cheating wife Lana (Kate Nelligan), Ned finds himself strangely attracted 
to his newest client, the mysterious and sensuous Lola Kane (Sean Young), 
who is determined to lure the lawyer/cop back to her place and into her 
bed.  There's another woman in Ned's life, as well - his shy, innocent 
secretary Laura (Sherilyn Fenn), whose past is about to catch up to her 
in the form of an abusive husband that she ran away from.  And as if Ned 
didn't have enough problems, his arch enemy has just been released from 
jail and is faxing him death threats.
FATAL INSTINCT is the next in a seemingly-endless series of parodies that 
sets its sights on recent blockbusters.  As indicated by the title, the 
primary targets are BASIC INSTINCT and FATAL ATTRACTION.  Thrown in for 
good measure are satires from DOUBLE INDEMNITY, CAPE FEAR, and SLEEPING 
WITH THE ENEMY.  Considering the fertile ground available with no less 
than five films being lampooned, you figure FATAL INSTINCT can't possibly 
miss the mark altogether.  Bad assumption.  This movie is about as stale 
and unfunny as they come.
This style of movie - the "AIRPLANE type" - had gotten old before 1993 
began.  The entries over the past few years have gotten progressively 
weaker, generating fewer laughs and providing more tedium.  Nevertheless, 
Hollywood in its infinite wisdom decided to give us four more this year - 
LOADED WEAPON ONE, HOT SHOTS PART DEUX, ROBIN HOOD:  MEN IN TIGHTS, and 
now FATAL INSTINCT.  
Not only has the genre reached the stage where each new addition 
escalates the continued flogging of a very dead horse, but there's little 
zing to each individual one-liner, pun, or sight gag.  For every joke 
that works in FATAL INSTINCT, there are a dozen that don't.  Rapid-fire 
humor succeeds only when there are enough amusing bits to keep the 
viewer's mind off everything that falls through.  In this film, it's 
painfully evident how unimaginative the script is.
Perhaps the strongest condemnation I can give is that this movie makes 
Mel Brooks' ROBIN HOOD picture look like a classic comedy.  Most of the 
funniest moments in FATAL INSTINCT are shown in the theatrical and 
television trailers, and I didn't laugh a whole lot when I saw them then.  
Needless to say, their impact during the actual film was considerably 
less impressive.  There are countless jokes that rely on sexual innuendo, 
but most of these aren't much more original than the graffiti found in an 
average high school boys' locker room.
Of the actors, only Armand Assante and Sherilyn Fenn give credible 
performances.  Assante isn't as good doing the dead-pan cop as Leslie 
Nielsen, but he does an adequate job, and dances better than expected in 
high heels.  He also has the best single line:  "I don't look as stupid 
as I am."  (If nothing else, that should tell you about the quality of 
humor in FATAL INSTINCT).  Frankly, Sherilyn Fenn is too good to have 
been wasted in this movie.  Kate Nelligan and Sean Young, however, with 
their annoying portrayals of lifeless characters, belong exactly where 
they are.
Personally, if I see another send-up of Sharon Stone's character in BASIC 
INSTINCT, I think I'll walk out of the theater.  It wasn't funny the 
first time it was done, and by now it's gotten downright annoying.  Who 
cares if she uncrossed her legs without any panties on?  Let's move onto 
something new.  Belaboring that issue is like watching this movie or 
continuing this review:  pointless.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Armand Assante, Sean Young, Sherilynn Fenn, Kate Nelligan,
           Christopher McDonald, James Remar.
Screenplay:  David O'Malley.
Director:  Carl Reiner.
     Never underestimate the power of expectations.  In the wake of HOT
SHOTS! PART DEUX, LOADED WEAPON 1 and ROBIN HOOD: MEN IN TIGHTS, I
viewed yet another genre parody as cruel and inhuman punishment, and
awaited FATAL INSTINCT with utter dread.  Then, much to my
astonishment, it didn't stink.  Oh, make no mistake:  FATAL INSTINCT
isn't particularly good.  I simply laughed much more than I expected
to.  How's that for damning with faint praise?
     The "plot" of FATAL INSTINCT is a pastiche of elements from
contemporary sexual thrillers and classic film noir.  Ned Rivera
(Armand Assante) is an L.A. police detective who moonlights as a
defense attorney, or perhaps vice-versa.  He is oblivious to the
attentions of his loyal secretary Laura (Sherilynn Fenn), but finds
himself tempted by the sexy and seductive Lola Cain (Sean Young).
After a one night stand, Ned breaks off with Lola out of marital
guilt.  What Ned doesn't know is that his wife Laura (Kate Nelligan) is
having an affair of her own, and planning with her lover Frank
(Christopher McDonald) to murder Ned in a very specific manner to cash
in on a triple indemnity insurance policy.  Meanwhile, a vindictive
ex-con Ned unsuccessfully defended (James Remar) is paroled, and plots
to kill Ned as well.  Once the jilted Lola is added to the mix, it
seems everyone in L.A. wants Ned Rivera dead.
     The best of the Zucker-Abrahams-Zucker parodies (AIRPLANE!, THE
NAKED GUN) demonstrated sucessful application of a fundamental rule for
the form:  keep the gags coming so fast that you don't have time to
notice the lousy ones.  FATAL INSTINCT owes its successes, small as
they may be, to adherence to this principal.  There are plenty of duds
in FATAL INSTINCT, but the pacing is lively enough that they don't sit
there waiting for an audience reaction that's never going to come.
Director Carl Reiner hasn't shown a consistent talent for comic pacing
in his feature film career; for every WHERE'S POPPA? or ALL OF ME,
there has been a SUMMER SCHOOL or SIBLING RIVALRY.  Fortunately, the
Carl Reiner who helped Steve Martin's early parodies click is at work
here.  He keeps everything moving, avoiding the error that sank MEN IN
TIGHTS.
     Those ZAZ classics had one other important thing going for them,
namely well-known dramatic actors like Leslie Nielsen and Lloyd Bridges
playing a brilliant deadpan mockery of their own B-movie roles.  Armand
Assante is a better dramatic actor than Nielsen or Bridges, but he too
turns in a fine spoof of one of the lowlights on his resume, the dopey
Mike Hammer tale I, THE JURY.  He seems to have a great deal of fun
mocking the image of the sullen detective, and pulls off some
surprisingly deft physical comedy.  It's also a hoot watching Sean
Young play to her reputation as a jealous psycho.  Perhaps half my
enjoyment of FATAL INSTINCT came from appreciating the career subtext
of these two performances.
     Before it seems as though I have nothing but kind words for FATAL
INSTINCT, there is one major thing lacking:  originality.  Its primary
satirical targets are BASIC INSTINCT, FATAL ATTRACTION and CAPE FEAR,
each of which has been done in other recent films or TV's "The
Simpsons."  Granted, the scripts were in production simultaneously, but
much of the freshness is still lost.  There are also some tedious
"lotsies," those sequences of progressively sillier events a la O. J.
Simpson's ill-fated boat investigation at the beginning of THE NAKED
GUN.  They have to be completely over the top to work, and FATAL
INSTINCT's script repeatedly shows a resistance to giving in to
complete anarchy.  There was a moment near the climax when I was
waiting for an almost too-obvious gag which *still* would have been
funny, but screenwriter David O'Malley missed his opportunity.
     In retrospect, I almost feel guilty about some of the places I
laughed.  It's hard to explain how a line like, "I'll try to help you,
Miss Cain, if I'm able," can seem funny, but it did.  Plenty of people
will leave FATAL INSTINCT shaking their heads.  I don't know; maybe
they were expecting too much.

Author
Dragan Antulov
Deluge of so-called psychological and "erotic" thrillers
that started in 1987 with FATAL ATTRACTION and reached its
peak in 1992 with BASIC INSTINCT, simply had to inspire at
least one Hollywood parody. This task was given to Carl
Reiner, director who had done the similar job in his 1982
film-noir parody/homage DEAD MEN DON'T WEAR PLAID. Eleven
years later result of his efforts was comedy FATAL INSTINCT
(which incidentally shares the name with 1991 erotic
thriller starring Michael Madsen).
Protagonist of the film is Ned Ravine (played by Armand
Assante) who works as policeman at day and as defence
attorney at night, often defending the clients he had
arrested himself. He is happily married man, although his
cheating wife Lana (played by Kate Nelligan) plots to kill
him for insurance money. In the same time he must deal with
the romantic advances by seductive blonde Lola Cain (played
by Sean Young) and personal problems of his secretary Laura
Lincolnberry (played by Sherilyn Fenn) who escaped from
abusive husband. Another of his problems is Max Shady
(played by James Remar), ex-convict who wants to settle some
old scores with detective/lawyer.
Reiner definitely knows how to make a comedy, but his
scriptwriter David O'Malley missed the target. FATAL
INSTINCT indeed tried to parody best known late 1980s and
early 1990s thrillers, but those scenes are mixed with the
scenes in which the objects of parody come from classic film
noires of 1940s. This anachronistic combination doesn't look
very believable and only strengthen the impression that
O'Malley and Reiner ran out of ideas. Jokes are mostly lame
and not particularly funny, additionally limited with the
filmmaker's need to tame the humour to PG-13 levels. Actors
are more than fine, including Armand Assante in one of his
rare comedic appearances, and Sean Young again exploits her
psychotic bitch routine. Unfortunately, like many genre
parodies of 1990s Hollywood, FATAL INSTINCT too is rather
forgettable film, totally meaningless to those who were
spared from the objects of its parody.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
