Title
Review for U Turn (1997)
Number of Reviews
18

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1997
U.S. Release Date: 10/3/97 (wide)
Running Length: 2:07
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, profanity, sexual situations)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Sean Penn, Jennifer Lopez, Nick Nolte, Powers Boothe, 
      Claire Danes, Joaquin Phoenix, Billy Bob Thornton, Jon Voight
Director: Oliver Stone
Producers: Dan Halsted, Clayton Townsend
Screenplay: John Ridley based on his book STRAY DOGS
Cinematography: Robert Richardson
Music: Ennio Morricone
U.S. Distributor: TriStar Pictures
     Oliver Stone is perhaps best known for his numerous politically-
influenced motion pictures -- everything from his Vietnam Trilogy to JFK 
and NIXON.  Of course, Stone has also ventured into other motion picture 
arenas:  the world of corrupt, high-pressure financial wheeling and 
dealing in WALL STREET, a biopic of the legendary rock and roller, Jim 
Morrison, in THE DOORS, and a satire of our culture's obsession with 
violence in NATURAL BORN KILLERS.  Now, with his latest audacious 
outing, Stone has set his sights on a genre film.  The result, called U-
TURN, is film noir steeped in excess.  Yet, although Stone has clearly 
made this motion picture with his tongue planted firmly in his cheek, he 
nevertheless manages to capture all of the tension and mystery necessary 
to hold the viewer's interest.  Hence, while Stone may be poking a 
little good-natured fun at the genre, he has also created a highly-
successful entry to it.  
     With U-TURN, Stone made his first foray into this field by 
operating on a relatively low budget ($20 million) and sticking to a 
short shooting schedule (42 days).  But, although much was different 
about the way the movie was put together, it still bears many hallmarks 
of recent Stone productions.  The excesses of the photographic style 
hearken back to NATURAL BORN KILLERS and include black & white inserts, 
numerous hand-held shots, overexposed sequences, hallucinogenic effects, 
and time-lapses.  I'm not a big fan of this sort of camera trickery, 
since it seems designed more to show off a director's pretentiousness 
than to add anything significant to the motion picture.  This approach 
helped sink NATURAL BORN KILLERS; fortunately, it's only occasionally 
distracting here.
     The narrative twists and turns in a serpentine fashion, rarely 
proceeding in a predictable or straightforward manner for more than a 
few minutes at a time (hence, the title).  Film noir aficionados will 
recognize and/or expect many of the plot's contortions, since there are 
various requirements that have to be met by any entry of the genre.  
However, anticipating certain occurrences doesn't necessarily diminish 
our enjoyment, and the film takes so many detours that at least one or 
two of them are bound to surprise even the most jaded movie-goer.
     Film noir is always more plot-conscious than character-focused, and 
this is pretty much the case here.  Stone and writer John Ridley have 
populated U-TURN with a variety of colorful types, only a few of whom 
show the beginnings of multi-dimensionality.  The best-developed 
individual is, not surprisingly, the lead.  Bobby Cooper (Sean Penn) is 
passing through the small town of Superior, Arizona on his way to Las 
Vegas to pay off a gambling debt.  Bobby has already lost two fingers to 
the Russian mob, and he wants to avoid having to give up any more.  
Unfortunately, the radiator hose of his classic 1964 1/2 Mustang chooses 
this moment to give out.  Bobby gets the car to the only garage in the 
area, leaves it with the mechanic (Billy Bob Thornton) to fix, then 
wanders impatiently around town.  
     The denizens of Superior are a strange lot.  There's a blind man 
(Jon Voight, almost unrecognizable beneath all the makeup) who doles out 
nuggets of wisdom, a flirtatious tease (Claire Danes) who enjoys making 
her boyfriend jealous, a local bully with the nickname of TNT (Joaquin 
Phoenix) who's spoiling for a fight, and a sheriff (Powers Boothe) who's 
hardly ever without a bottle in his hand.  But the most bizarre citizens 
of the small, backwards town are Grace McKenna (Jennifer Lopez) and her 
grizzled husband, Jake (Nick Nolte), who lure the unsuspecting Bobby 
into a web of sex, vengeance, and murder.
     Sean Penn and Jennifer Lopez are terrific, whether together or 
apart.  Penn, one of his generation's best actors, makes Bobby into more 
than just a moody loner.  The intensity of his performance brings the 
increasing desperation of the situation home to us.  Meanwhile, the 
sultry Lopez plays up the ambiguities of her character, so we're never 
quite sure whether she's a good girl, a bad girl, or something in 
between.  Rounding out the cast are recognizable names and faces like 
Nick Nolte, Billy Bob Thornton, Jon Voight, and Claire Danes, all of 
whom provide solid support.
     Many viewers will recognize echoes of RED ROCK WEST in U-TURN.  The 
similarities are hard to ignore:  an unwilling hitman trapped within the 
confines of a small Western town playing a pawn in the life-or-death 
struggles of a femme fatale and a wealthy man.  But, as fun and frantic 
as RED ROCK WEST was, U-TURN tops it, adding 30 minutes of running time 
and doubling the number of plot twists.  Plus, Stone's lurid, graphic, 
in-your-face style is far different from John Dahl's homage to '40s and 
'50s movies.  U-TURN is definitely not for everyone -- some viewers will 
find the juxtaposition of offbeat comedy and noir cliches too strange 
and others will be offended by the film's extreme violence.  
Nevertheless, for those who enjoy movies on the edge, U-TURN offers just 
the trajectory you might expect.
The website has moved!!
The new address is: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."

Author
James Sanford
It's a telling sign that "U-Turn" is identified in the opening credits
as "An Oliver Stone Movie" rather than "An Oliver Stone Film." This is
Stone in an apolitcal, even -- dare we say it -- lighthearted
mood. But this time out his bag of tricks is filled with recycled
items: grainy film stock, black-and-white inserts, scorpions, scolding
crows, Indian soothsayers and a non-stop parade of white
trashies. "U-Turn" has some of the style of "Natural Born Killers"
with almost none of its satiric sting or kinetic energy, and the
result is a clunky black comedy with only a few scattered laughs
breaking up a monotonous cruise.
Although the story claims to be based on John Ridley's "Stray Dogs,"
it actually owes more to such modern film-noirs as "Red Rock West" and
"Body Heat." A breakdown strands luckless gambler Sean Penn in a
desert town where everyone seems to be either hot-blooded or
hot-tempered.  Sultry local slut Jennifer Lopez (awkwardly making her
way through a role originally intended for Sharon Stone) would fall in
the first category; her real-estate magnate hubby Nick Nolte belongs
in the latter. Penn gets the opportunity to murder both of them, in
between would-be wacky misadventures straight out of the far superior
Martin Scorsese opus "After Hours."
The only real amusement is provided by the vibrant Claire Danes,
playing a bubble-brained tease who desperately tries to seduce Penn
into helping her escape the town, and Joaquin Phoenix, as her even
dumber boyfriend, who calls himself "T.N.T." Penn can be extremely
funny given the right material, but "U-Turn" affords him few
opportunities to do anything except look put-upon. Nolte growls and
grimaces unmenacingly, and his tawdry sex scene with Lopez should have
been cut: It's an embarassment to both actors. Cameos by everyone from
Laurie Metcalf to Liv Tyler abound, creating only momentary interest.
When "U-Turn" finally comes to its long-delayed ending, you realize
"Donut" would have been a far more suitable title, as your unexciting
two-hour journey has only taken you around in a circle; like its hero,
this show never gets on the road.  James Sanford

Author
Michael Redman
Oliver Stone. Let's get it right up front and out of the way. That's what this
film is about. Oh, it may pretend that it has something to do with a
down-on-his-luck small time gambler running into the weirdest characters this
side of the Pecos, but this is the director's film. It says more about him
than it says about anyone on screen.
Bobby Cooper (Sean Penn) is driving through the Arizona wastelands with a bag
full of $30,000 to repay his gambling debt to Russian mobsters who have
already expressed their displeasure at his tardiness by cutting off two of his
fingers. A blown radiator hose lands him in the town of Superior, a lost
civilization that time forgot and peopled with an grotesque cast of rednecks,
Indians, millionaires and babes.
Pulling into a junkyard masquerading as a gas station, Cooper encounters
proprietor Darrell (Billy Bob Thornton) who reckons that he can fix the
vintage 1964 1/2 Mustang convertible. One look at Darrell's grease-covered
exposed pot belly, coke-bottle glasses and teeth that look as if they belong
in a medical specimen museum convinces you that he's going to fix something,
but it's more likely to be Bobby's wagon than his car. Things aren't made any
better when Cooper makes it clear who belongs where in the hierarchy of hicks
and city slickers.
At this point the gambler's fate is sealed, he just doesn't know it yet. To
kill time he decides to take in the town. When he meets Grace McKenna
(Jennifer Lopez), a sultry femme fatale whose body and lips promise anything
and everything -- but first the price, he quickly accepts her invitation to
come home to help her with some things.
Just as they are about to "hang drapes", Grace's husband Jake (a virtually
unrecognizable Nick Nolte) bursts into the bedroom. After knocking Cooper
around, he offers him a ride back to town.
When he asks him to kill his wife, Cooper replies "I'm not a murderer."
"How do ya know if you haven't tried it?" questions the grizzled millionaire.
His hunger is to do is leave town, but all he gets is trouble. Jake wants him
to kill Grace. Grace wants him to kill Jake. While in a grocery store, he
witnesses a robbery that results in two graphic shotgun killings. His money is
destroyed. A fifties-inspired bimbo (Clare Danes) wants to have his love child
and her equally anachronistic slick cowboy boyfriend TNT (Joaquin Phoenix)
would rather let his fists do the talking. Billy Bob Darrell thinks that a
radiator hose is worth a couple of hundred bucks. The hard-drinkin' sheriff
(Powers Boothe) keeps an open eye on the stranger.
It's not a pleasant community. In a town that looks to have about 500 people,
there are more hidden agendas than in the naked city.
The only almost friendly, albeit no less bizarre, face belongs to a blind
Vietnam vet Native American shaman (an even more unrecognizable Jon Voight)
who hauls around his dead dog and demands Dr. Peppers.
Based on John Ridley's "Stray Dogs", the most obvious aspect of the film is
Robert Richardson's cinematography. Jerky fast zooms and pans combined with
over-exposed grainy film stock work well to create an edgy uncomfortable
feeling in the audience. Although a bit too MTVesque for my tastes, it
certainly does what it is designed to do. It puts you into Cooper's frame of
mind: stark, frantic and desperate for the experience to end.
And that's one of the problems with the movie. It may be art, but it's often
not enjoyable. The quirky filming gets old after a while. There's not one
likable character in the story. The dark violent humor is uncomfortable;
you're unsure if you want to laugh or be disgusted. It's a bloody car wreck
with clowns strewn on the highway.
Stone has been on an eccentric road himself. From his marvelous "Platoon" and
"JFK" to the brutal "Natural Born Killers" and now to this, it's obvious that
he's looking for something. What it is, we can only guess. "U-Turn" is a
sideroad to excess, but hopefully he's gone to the extreme, found his muse and
is on his way back.
With Stone, even the mis-fires are worth experiencing and all we can do is
strap on our seatbelts and brace ourselves for the ride.
(Michael Redman, after over 22 years of writing this column, is probably going
to do it again next week. Email to mredman@bvoice.com will probably find him eventually.)
[This appeared in the 10/9/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
Jamie Peck
TriStar / 2:05 / 1997 / R (language, explicit violence, sex, brief nudity)
Cast: Sean Penn; Jennifer Lopez; Nick Nolte; Powers Boothe; Claire Danes; Jon Voight; 
Billy Bob Thornton; Joaquin Phoenix; Julie Hagerty; Laurie Metcalf 
Director: Oliver Stone 
Screenplay: John Ridley 
Back in 1993, Oliver Stone's "Natural Born Killers" opened to divided
critical response and an even more mixed audience reaction. People
couldn't agree on exactly what they had seen -- a darkly funny
commentary on media extremes or a crass, gratuitous glorification of
violence. The mainstream crowd is likely to sport a warmer feeling
about Stone's new "U-Turn," a black comedy mood piece that boasts a
superb cast and electrifying production values. Undoubtedly bizarre
and unarguably outlandish, "U-Turn" will probably cause people to look
upon it with either strong like or dislike, but likely more of the
former.
"U-Turn" tells the story of drifter Bobby Cooper (Sean Penn), who's
traveling through the desert en route to pay off a hefty gambling debt
in Las Vegas. A busted radiator strands him in Superior, Arizona, a
derelict mining town that seems to be just on the edge of
reality. Bobby comes to said conclusion after a surreal encounter with
shrewd, disgusting mechanic Darrell (Billy Bob Thornton), who sports a
hideous beer gut and runs the only gas station in the
vicinity. Darrell claims it'll take some time to repair the car, so
Bobby decides to pass the time by roaming around Superior.  Superior
is the kind of town where a panhandler keeps his long dead dog at his
side and an aging Mexican convenience store clerk whips out a shotgun
to enact some vigilante law enforcement; Bobby's money is blown to
smithereens in that second incident.
Things get stranger still as Bobby repeatedly runs across a cast of
unsavory locals.  The only normal person he comes across is Grace
McKenna (Jennifer Lopez), a beautiful Native American who immediately
invites Bobby back to her upscale estate and seems to be seducing him
with every look. But before their mutual attraction can be
consummated, Bobby and Grace are interrupted by her husband Jake (Nick
Nolte), an odious real estate salesman who both knocks Bobby out and
then offers him a ride away from the premises in the same breath. On
the way, Jake makes an intriguing proposal: He'll pay Bobby to kill
his wife. Bobby reluctantly accepts, and upon setting out to do so,
receives a counter offer from Grace.
The setup of "U-Turn" is ripe with the many pleasurable elements of a
neo-Western film noir (some of which were most recently put to good
use in "Red Rock West"): Life insurance policies, bloody homicides,
double-crosses aplenty and pitch-black humor.  All of this territory
is predictable genre stuff, but Stone executes each new plot
development with extremely intriguing visuals. "U-Turn" (like every
other Stone movie since "JFK") is ripe with entrancing, audacious
sights, and here, they work well to give the proceedings an edge and
never reach the level of sense-overkill like they did in Natural Born
Killers. Occasionally, Stone's employment of these different film
stocks is out of place -- the initial encounter between Grace and
Bobby could have been steamy and erotic if not for all the jump cuts
and close-ups -- but generally, his stylistic devices work
extraordinarily well.
Another area that "U-Turn" aces is casting. Following a several-year
absence from movie projects, the omnipresent Penn (he can also be seen
currently in "The Game" and "She's So Lovely") is sublime in a tricky
role -- he can never seem too comical or too serious, and deftly
manages just the right mix of both. Lopez is also exceptional as the
film's question-marked object of desire; she's both a good girl and a
bad girl, and we understand why men are alternately lusting after her
or attempting to kill her. Meanwhile, Nolte aces one of his riskiest
parts yet. Underused but priceless are Clare Danes as a doofy hick and
an unrecognizable Jon Voight as a blind Indian vet. And worth the
admission fee alone is the twirly beehive and apparently crack-induced
flirtatious behavior of Julie Hagerty as a greasy spoon waitress named
-- get this -- Flo.
"U-Turn" is similar to last spring's trippy "Lost Highway" in its
bizarre characters, eccentric goings-on and elliptical structure, but
this movie, unlike David Lynch's sloppy tale, at least seems to make
sense when it's all over. And when it is all over, you'll be slapping
yourself in the forehead -- it's a wicked, funny twist that you
realize you should have anticipated beforehand. "U-Turn" is one of
Oliver Stone's more accessible, most enjoyable films, and maybe that
will distinguish it from the glut of other fall movies causing a
seasonal traffic jam of cruddy releases.
Š 1997 Jamie Peck 
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
Shane Burridge
All I need to make me see something at the movies is a reason.  If,
for example, somebody told me that a new film of the Arthurian legends
had just opened, I wouldn't be interested in going to see it.  If
however I learned that it was directed by, say, David Lynch, or
Kathryn Bigelow, or Roman Polanski, I would have no hesitation.  And I
guess this is almost the only reason for me to patronise anything new
now.  Because new movies aren't new.  There was a time when movies
reflected life.  Now all they reflect is other movies: a long chain of
reference points that goes back to the first time a plot device was
used, a camera angle tried out, a technical breakthrough discovered.
There's nothing all that new about U TURN either, another of those
crime thrillers set in a quirky jerkwater town populated with
eccentrics.  It's the closest to a genre picture that director Oliver
Stone has come to in a long while, and it is obvious that he is
enjoying the change of pace (no significant 'An Oliver Stone Film' in
the credits of this pic; rather he makes sure we realise it is 'An
Oliver Stone Movie').  Homage, throwback, send-up, revision, call it
what you will, but now even the subversion of these genres has become
old hat.  So what is the reason to see it?  Oliver Stone.  It's
interesting to see how he works in the domain of film noir: for
starters, he uses high-contrast photography to turn it into film
blanche, otherwise the usual ingredients - the murder plot, the bag
full of money, the femme fatale, the double-crossing, and the low-rent
locations - are all there for us to enjoy.  
>From these elements you could make up your own plot which would be
fair stab at approximating U TURN's actual synopsis: Sean Penn breaks
down in a small Arizona town, gets involved with all the wrong people,
and ends up being a patsy in a murder.  Penn has no easy role to play,
but his performance strikes the right chord - even though we are
uncertain about how he can deal with the tailspin that traps him, his
refusal to cave in gives us some confidence that he will prevail (hey,
the guy was once married to Madonna, right?).  In fact, all the
performances from Stone's motley cast are a delight - Penn's
encounters with mechanic Billy Bob Thornton and town punk Joaquin
Phoenix are hilarious, and the leading players are obviously enjoying
the seediness Stone wants from them.  This includes the town itself -
a wonderland of peeling paint and rusting cars, it knows better than
anyone what is going on around its sultry streets.  Everywhere there
are murals, posters, signs, slogans, books, photographs, billboards;
all of which contribute to the backdrop a kind of subliminal
sentience.  Neither is it any safer outside the town: Stone throws in
several intercuts of animals that revisit the spirit bonding and
desert epiphanies he seems so fond of in his films (THE DOORS, NATURAL
BORN KILLERS).  All of nature seems to be on the game- or is it the
joke?  If the town don't kill you, the desert will.  Ayuh. 
U TURN marks another excursion into violence for Stone, but just as he
used it satirically in KILLERS so again he justifies it this time
around by dint of the prerequisite perversities of classic noir.  I
certainly don't find it as smug as Tarantino's own brand of violence -
talented as he may be he has yet to reach the level of assurance with
which Stone handles the medium so masterfully (personally I found the
wilful damage to the paintwork on a Ford Mustang more distressing than
any of the trauma inflicted upon human characters in the movie).  Once
again he collaborates with cinematographer Robert Richardson (this may
be the longest partnering of director and cinematographer I can
remember), and the flashy editing and switching between different
grades of film stock have become trademarks of theirs this last
decade.  It's fun seeing it all again this time around, but I must
admit to some concern about how much longer the fun will last.  I
wanted to see U TURN precisely for Stone's individual stamp on the
work, and wasn't disappointed.  But still, I wonder if some time soon
it wouldn't be a bad idea for Stone to give me a different reason for
seeing his films.  I seem to have run out of reasons for seeing
Tarantino's.

Author
Walter Frith
When director Oliver Stone made his 1994 statement 'Natural Born Killers', it
was to illustrate a point.  Violent criminals were made out to be celebrities
and heroes by not only the tabloid but mainstream media.  That film was
misunderstood by most who felt it nothing more than a free for all of
violence, coarse language and sexually demeaning innuendo when its real
intention was in fact to bring an anti-violence message.  Make no mistake,
there is no misunderstanding Stone's latest film 'U-Turn' as it is simply a
low key re-hash of 'Natural Born Killers' given a soap opera twist, wretched
characters whom we care nothing about and the film is blatantly pointless.
A hustling drifter (Sean Penn) on his way to California is caught up in the
Arizona desert after the radiator hose on his car bursts and he must take it
to the only garage in the area which is in the real life small town of
Superior, about 50 miles east of Phoenix.  He encounters a frightfully shifty
garage mechanic (Billy Bob Thornton) who is the only memorable character in
the film.  Upon leaving his car to be repaired he journeys into an odyssey of
hell where almost every character is evil.  He encounters a sultry young
woman on a street corner (Jennifer Lopez) and helps her with her parcels all
the way home and upon getting close to each other her husband (Nick Nolte)
walks in the assaults Penn who promptly leaves.  Later Nolte encounters him
again and apologizes and asks Penn if he might be interested in killing his
wife and he'll split the insurance money with him.  Penn at first says no but
finds himself in a position where he needs the money and upon seeing Lopez
again she asks him to kill Nolte !  And more money is involved ! !  If this
sounds like 'Double Indemnity' in the wild west, it just might be.
The town's sheriff (Powers Boothe) isn't what he appears to be and the film
reaches a certain point and just goes on and on way to long for the audience
to care anymore about anybody involved.  There are a couple of pointless
scenes which involve Penn encountering
a blind Vietnam veteran who begs for change on the street (Jon Voight) and
his character is insultingly stereotyped.  There is also a goofy spat between
Penn and a jealous redneck (Joaquin Phoenix) who thinks Penn is trying to
move in on his girl.
Oliver Stone has made some of the most shocking, important, socially aware
and truthful films in recent memory and has three Oscars for his filmmakng
efforts in directing and writing.  Since Stone has nothing left to prove and
can choose to make any film he wants to, is it necessary to be so pointless?
 At least Steven Spielberg can make a pointless film like 'Jurassic Park'
which at least contains state of the art special effects but entertains an
audience to the point where they want to come back.  Stone hasn't had a top
notch film since 1991's 'JFK' and six years is a long enough wait.     

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Oliver Stone, one of our most visceral directors, rarely makes
anything but engaging films.  He received Oscars for his hard-hitting
PLATOON and BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, but even his films like JFK,
which are nothing less than balderdash, are fascinating and involving
pieces of filmmaking.  And when Stone tests our tolerance for violence,
as in NATURAL BORN KILLERS, he can enrage an audience.  Like him or
hate him or both, his pictures are always in your face.
     U-TURN can be argued to be one of Stone's most shocking films
since it is shockingly mediocre.  People are likely to leave the
theater neither engaged nor enraged.
     Although Stone may not operate on the edge in U-TURN, his Academy
Award winning cinematographer Robert Richardson does.  Every frame is
oversaturated with grainy colors, and the images frequently jump as if
filmed with a strobe light.  His obsession with panning and zooming
will have you ready to cry uncle before the end of the first reel.
Combined with the choppy, overediting by Hank Corwin and Thomas J.
Nordberg, the film takes on the nightmarish appearance of someone dying
of a caffeine overdose.
     The script by John Ridley, which is based on his book "Stray
Dogs," relies on a stream of quirky characters to create his version of
a black comedy.  With Stone as the director, half of Hollywood shows up
to take part.  Liv Tyler, for example, has a cameo part that requires
her to walk into a bus station to buy a ticket.  Now, that's a part I
could do.
     The star of the film, and the only one worth seeing is Sean Penn.
In recent times Penn's talent has become increasing evident.  Here, as
in this year's SHE'S SO LOVELY, he steals the show.
     Penn, playing a not very successful gambler and crook named Bobby
Cooper, arrives in a dusty, Godforsaken town in the middle of the
Arizona desert.  His car has a broken radiator hose, and the only
mechanic is a dishonest simpleton named Darrell.  Billy Bob Thornton
plays Darrell with a face caked in grease like a cartoon character who
just walked into an explosion and with teeth that looks like he's been
eating dirt.  Darrell flashes Bobby a smile that says "I am about to
take you for everything you have since I'm your only hope of getting
out of this hellhole."  Penn later tells Bobby he is just "an ignorant,
inbred, tumbleweed hick."  But, Bobby saves his best insult for last.
"Darrell," he asks.  "40,000 people die every day.  Why aren't you one
of them?"
     When Penn wanders into town to get a bite to eat, he meets a
blind, part Indian, Vietnam veteran, overacted as almost a self-parody
by Jon Voight.  The blind man is the local philosopher whose aphorisms
include, "Everything is everything."  Is Voight really this far gone?
Why does this once excellent actor only takes roles that are
caricatures?
     In this town, which would make a ghost town look appealing, Bobby
runs into its only shining light, Jennifer Lopez in her sexiest part
yet as Grace McKenna.  After asking him up to her place to shower, her
grizzled husband Jake, played by an almost unrecognizable Nick Nolte,
walks in on them.  Jake turns out to be a man with a highly malleable
conscience.  Or as he puts it, "a man with no ethics is a free man."
     The rest of the show involves contradictory murder plots and ends
in a typical Stone bloodbath.  Along the way, we get to meet a host of
other characters including Powers Boothe as the shifty-eyed sheriff,
Claire Danes as the oversexed, local girl wanting to have Bobby's love
child, Joaquin Phoenix as her violent boyfriend, Julie Hagerty as a
cliched waitress named Flo and many others.
     Penn saves the film, but just barely.  His attempt to find sanity
in this Twilight Zone of a town manages to rise above the rest of the
all-too-cute material.  A week after you have seen the show, only the
film's bold, but repetitiously tiring cinematographic techniques will
remain in your memory.  Nothing else about the film is unusual enough
to be remembered, and that is the tragedy.  Has Stone gone soft?
     U-TURN runs 2:05.  It is rated R for gore, sex, brief nudity, and
profanity.  The film would be fine for older teenagers.  For Penn's
performance I give the film a mild recommendation and ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Oliver Stone's "U-Turn" is his best film since "J.F.K": a jagged, furious,
interminable assault on the senses with enough bloody violence, expletives and
adulterous affairs to send any sensitive Christian out the door. It is a solid
piece of unpredictable entertainment: wickedly funny and darkly comic at every
turn. 
Based on the book "Stray Dogs" by John Ridley (who also wrote the script),
"U-Turn" stars Sean Penn as Booby Cooper, a gambler with a bag full of money
who inadvertently breaks down in the strange town of Superior, Arizona. His
troubles are just beginning: he brings his 1964 Mustang convertible with a
broken radiator hose to a sully mechanic named Darrell (Billy Bob Thornton);
his bag of money (an overdue gambling debt) is blown to bits during an
unexpected convenience store robbery; he has a fling with the sexy Grace
(Jennifer Lopez) before his nose is broken by her husband Jake (Nick Nolte) who
in turn asks him to kill his wife; he has a diner encounter with a ditsy blonde
teenager (Claire Danes) before he's repeatedly challenged to a fight by her
tough boyfriend (Joaquim Phoenix); and then there's the old, blind Indian (Jon
Voight) who teaches him moral lessons about life such as 'Nothing is nothing.
Everything is everything.' 
"U-Turn" engages us and pushes our buttons right from the opening sequence with
a spectacular sight of the Arizona desert where a red Mustang is headed for
unwanted trouble. Bobby is not a hero, though: he's flawed, has murderous
impulses and not much of a conscience. This is the world of film noir, and we
know there are no heroes in such a world. Bobby has no qualms about killing
Jake's wife, Grace, as long as he gets the dough. But when Grace asks him to
kill Jake, split with the money and head for Hawaii, what can Bobby do? He's
confused, pathetic and headed for disaster considering a loan shark is after
him. At one point, since he lost his gambling money, he opts for just
two-hundred dollars to pay the mechanic for the damage to the car. Nobody,
however, will lend him the money. He has a little over twenty bucks left yet it
is not enough for the train ticket to Juarez, Mexico. He pleads and pleads for
it and finally convinces the ticket agent (Laurie Metcalf) to give him a break
- the guy definitely needs it but his day isn't over yet. Before you can say
existentialism, Bobby endures several beatings, tortures, backstabbing, and
double-crosses to make Franz Kafka blush. This is a world he can't escape from,
and his illicit affair with Grace could lead to more than he bargained for. Who
can he trust?
Oliver Stone is the perfect director for this neo-noirish, blood-soaked Western
that is reminiscent of the cult film "Red Rock West." He bludgeons the screen,
courtesy of the deft cinematographer Robert Richardson, with grainy colors,
strobe cuts, and black-and-white images. The bright colors (bright reds,
greens, and dark blacks) lend the film a baroque, cartoonish look atypical of
Stone's ouevre, but his style is more evocative of the chaos and unpredictable
surprises in Bobby's world than in "Nixon" or "Natural Born Killers." The
rapid-fire montage cutting and editing is not as wild as you might expect -
this is the first Stone film I can think of since "The Doors" where you can
actually breathe while all the sound and fury is exploding on screen. 
As in Stone's other work, the performances are extraordinary. Sean Penn turns
in one of his finest roles as the confounded, bruised Bobby with black hair, a
bandaged hand, and slick clothes, and is more distraught than anyone else in
the movie. Nick Nolte is all fire and brimstone as the vicious, crazed
real-estate mogul Jake who has a certain obsession with Grace - his overbite
and white orange crewcut reveals a strong yet weak, disturbed man who weeps
during sex. Jennifer Lopez ("Selena") is quite captivating as the femme fatale
Grace, an Apache woman who has an incestual past revealed in quick montages -
she keeps the character cryptic to the point where we don't know if she can be
trusted anymore than if Bobby can. Billy Bob Thornton is the welcome comic
relief in this bizarre odyssey as he spews and spits with relish resembling a
revolting court jester. Claire Danes ("Romeo and Juliet") is engagingly
delirious as the girl who is attracted to Bobby - her scene in the diner where
she questions him on the disappearance of Patsy Cline is a classic. Joaquim
Phoenix is bitingly hilarious as her jealous boyfriend. Also worth mentioning
is Powers Boothe as the sheriff of Superior who may have some ties to Grace's
past, and there's also a strange cameo by Liv Tyler as a passenger at a train
station. She doesn't utter a word but most film buffs will love to see her
brief appearance anyway. 
"U-Turn" is not a great film - there's too much time devoted to the mysterious
Grace and her predictably angry husband Jake - but it is a nice change-of-pace
for Stone. It's joltingly alive and incredibly funny. Other major pluses are
the superb performances by all, brilliant cinematography and a terrific
soundtrack full of Peggy Lee songs. "U-Turn" deserves a place in the Western
noir tablets along with "Blood Simple," "Wild at Heart" and the aforementioned
"Red Rock West." 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail me with questions, concerns or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at
jerry@movieluver.com 

Author
Jason Overbeck
There are two ways you can go with U Turn.  You can state that it has no
pont and is contrived, or you can see it as a nice change of pace for a
great director.  That director is Oliver Stone, I have liked everyone of
his film - except Natural Born Killers - and his new found shooting
style.  This style consists of B&W, underexposed film, cornball lenses
and unusual camera angles.  Many find this distracting and migraine
inducing, I find it a wonderful way to add personality to a film.
The story is about a former tennis player (Sean Penn), who owes a
lownshark money, is short two fingers, has car break down in Supierior,
Arizona, fights off murder hirings, a jealous kids warnings and the
philosophy of a blind indian.  During this he meets a Grace (Hot
Jennifer Lopez), who seduces him into a compromisng situation, and has
her husband (Nick Nolte) come home and suckerpunch Penn.
Poor Penn, as you can tell by my synopsis, he is banged around like a
demented pinball.  He goes from frustrating situation to equally
frustrating, watching Penn is fun as you see a man on the edge given
continuous nudges.  U Turn also has echos of After Hours - from another
master in Martin Scorsese - that was a better film (although it had
flaws) and yet quite a compliment for U Turn to be compaired with.
U Turn is technically a black comedy, while After Hours was a regualar
comedy.  Hours had a happy ending and Turn, well.  Both film are
interesting chage of pace films for director stuck in a rut of mega
productions, but this doesn't gel quite like you'd expect a Stone film
to be.  I liked the nasty touches in the film, and the acting is first
rate.  I am giving the film a very mild recomendation to those who feel
like a stylish, bloody, and often sick film that ends up being
suprisingly fun.

Author
Michael Dequina
The words "An Oliver Stone Film" have come to signify a big, bombastic
political statement by the controversial director, so at the opening of
U-Turn, his moderately-budgeted, statement-free thriller, in place of those
words are "An Oliver Stone Movie."  The altered credit is clearly intended
to label the film as an unpretentious, conventional genre piece, but after
seeing the film, I see it as more of a warning.  U-Turn is not a
conventional genre piece, but rather Stone's perception of a genre
piece--which is bizarre, somewhat baffling, but nonetheless intriguing and
warped entertainment for anyone brave enough to tackle it.
This adaptation of John Ridley's Stray Dogs does boil down to a thriller
premise: Bobby Cooper (Sean Penn) on the way to Vegas to settle a debt with
some stolen money, has his radiator hose blow up on him in the
backwater--make that back_desert_--town of Superior, Arizona, where he
becomes part of a murderous triangle with sultry, bored housewife Grace
McKenna (Jennifer Lopez) and her wealthy husband Jake (Nick Nolte).  The
seeds of this conflict are planted early on, but for the space of an hour,
nothing really happens with it; instead, that time is spent with Bobby as
he encounters the various eccentrics about town: flirty hick Jenny (Claire
Danes); her tough guy suitor Toby N. Tucker, a.k.a. TNT (Joaquin Phoenix);
a nameless blind man (Jon Voight) with a dead pet dog; and mechanic Darrell
(Billy Bob Thornton), a grease monkey in the truest sense of the term.  For
this time, Stone appears more interested in the oddball characters than he
is the normal thriller aspects, which would be a problem if the characters
and the situations were not as funny as they are.  Not everything works (a
running gag where Bobby's beverage bottles keep on breaking before he can
drink is especially lame), but for the most part this section of the film
is a demented hoot, galvanized by some great character work by the
supporting players.
With that sideshow going on, the thriller side of U-Turn seems more of an
afterthought, both figuratively and literally; the Bobby-Grace-Jake
triangle and its intertwining murder schemes takes finally centerstage with
about 40 minutes to go.  But Stone gives it his all, using his Natural Born
Killers intercutting visual style to good use here to underscore points in
Ridley's ever-twisting screenplay, and going full-throttle with the sex
and, this being Stone, violence.  Keeping things running smoothly are the
actors, especially Lopez, who shows more depth and versatility with every
film.  In a way, U-Turn feels like two different films--the small-town
satire and the thriller--but what unites them is Ridley and Stone's
pitch-black sense of humor.  The blood-drenched finale may be too gruesome
for most audiences to get the joke, but if you do, it is quite funny in the
most twisted sense.
Many critics have panned U-Turn as a creative cul-de-sac for Stone, but I
think it signifies the opening of a new road for the director to take--the
application of his considerable filmmaking talents to films other than
personal "message" movies.  If the loopy yet fun U-Turn is any indication,
his planned Mission: Impossible sequel should be something to look forward to.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
mj-23@geocities.com  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
Michael Jordan Sites:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html  &
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/
"I can accept failure.  Everyone fails at something.  But I can't accept
not trying.
It doesn't matter if you win as long as you give everything in you heart."
--Michael Jordan

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Sean Penn, Jennifer Lopez, Nick Nolte, Powers Boothe, Claire
Danes, Joaquin Phoenix, Billy Bob Thornton, Jon Voight Director: Oliver
Stone
There comes a unique moment in any bad movie, which redefines it as an
outright awful movie. Unfortunately, we arrive at this point much too
late or I would have left the theatre sooner. The line between good and
poor taste is crossed, when it is revealed that a half-breed Indian girl
(Jennifer Lopez), repeatedly raped by her father (Nick Nolte), decides
to marry the beast even when he murdered her mother. In this most
deranged arrangement, f'king the Sheriff (Powers Boothe) and a stray
stranger (Sean Penn) somehow comes into play. With the help of the
stranger, a succession of bullets and stabbings, murder and money is
obtained. What follows is a further succession of pushing, strangling
and death.
Some people will call this art, but I see it as pure lunacy.
What makes this movie particularly disappointing is the fact the
director is Oliver Stone. After his fixation with the sixties and the
NAM war and now this, one may wrongly accuse him of suffering from a bad
case of post-traumatic stress disorder. Get over it Oliver, we live in
the nineties. No more, no more of this pent up ill will which seem to
stain all your movies.
The plot takes place in the dead-beat town of Superior, Arizona. At
first the quirky characters in the town and the unusual camera angles is
reminiscent of NORTHERN EXPOSURE or RAISING ARIZONA. However, when the
bizarre plot sets in, one begins to experience the TWIN PEAKS phenomena,
before a plummeting straight to Hell.
Sean Penn is a wonderfully gifted actor and is unfortunately wasted as
the non-too-bright stranger who can't seem to get out of town. Nick
Nolte is surprisingly thin and haggard looking, but is otherwise well
suited to the role of a murderous, incestuous bigot. Jennifer Lopez
exudes all the charms of a sexually abused vixen, who is supposedly
meant to be haunted by her abusers, but one would never guess it from
all the hard on sex she's getting from her father, the sheriff and the
stranger - she actually looks like she's enjoying herself?
My final comments are angry. Don't make a U TURN, don't even look back,
keep on driving and miss this piece of trash cleverly disguised as
cinema.
Timothy Voon
e-mail: stirling@netlink.com.au
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Tim+Voon
http://www.labyrinth.net.au/~bouclier/week/movies.html

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     There is nothing superior about Superior, Arizona, an all but dead
town with a few people living in the carcass.  Small time hood Bobby
Cooper, played by Sean Penn, has engine trouble and must pull into
Superior to get his car fixed.  The one garage near town is run by a
desert rat of a mechanic (Billy Bob Thornton) who gives more trouble
than service.  Cooper leaves his car and goes into town and after a
bizarre interchange with a blind half-Indian beggar (a well-disguised
Jon Voight) he gets himself involved with attractive Grace McKenna
(Jennifer Lopez of SELENA).  Too late he finds she has a husband Jake
(Nick Nolte whose performance owes a lot to Bruce Dern).  Soon Jake and
Grace are each trying to embroil Cooper in a plot to kill the other.
If that were not enough of a problem there are people coming to town to
collect on a bad debt.  And to further complicate matters a local bully
wants to show how tough he is by beating up Cooper.  Cooper cannot
expect too much help from the town's unfriendly Sheriff Potter (Powers
Booth).  This seems to be a fly-speck town where everybody either has a
dark secret or is working full time on getting one, and too many of
these plots involve Cooper.  Most of the plot twists are telegraphed as
the film wends its way to a rather bloody and violent last reel.  But
by this point we do not care particularly what happens to Cooper who is
not particularly likable, even less smart, and who basically floats
like a cork and generally is acted upon rather than acting himself.
     In general this film is top-heavy with style touches that add to
uneven effect where less might have been considerably more.  John
Ridley's script based on his novel STRAY DOGS might have made a more
effective as a low-budget independent film with fewer self-indulgent
style experiments.  Oliver Stone has just a bit too much fun here
laughing a little too hard at exaggerated eccentrics for us to really
take the story seriously and the light-hearted score by Ennio Morricone
is a little too flippant.  Stone under-utilizes expensive actors where
unknowns might have worked a lot better.
     Since NATURAL BORN KILLERS weird camera effects have been a Stone
hallmark.  Even NIXON had to have a few weird visual effects and here
there are more than the story needs.  The film opens with Cooper
driving down a road under credits that look like they were scratched
into the film.  There are repeated images of vultures showing how
little sympathy this corner of Arizona has for the weak or unprepared.
Robert Richardson's cinematography experiments with film stocks as much
as it does with light.  He will drop into black and white and then jump
to a grainy super-saturation of color.  None of this does much to help
the mood of the film.
     U-TURN is one of those films in the middle ground.  Its flaws are
in large part ones we could overlook in a new filmmaker and still say
he is promising.  From a now major filmmaker like Oliver Stone, it
probably must be considered just a minor effort and perhaps a false
step.  I give it a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
David Sunga
Written by: John Ridley (based on the John Ridley novel Stray Dogs')
Starring:  
Sean Penn, Jennifer Lopez , Nick Nolte, Powers Boothe, Joaquin Phoenix,
Billy Bob Thornton, and Claire Danes
Ingredients: 
down and out gambler guy whose car breaks down, frustration, remote town
in Arizona, sleazy women looking for a free ticket out of town,
lecherous underintelligent hillbillies, redneck police
Synopsis:
In this a dark comedy Bobby (Sean Penn) is driving to Vegas to pay off a
gambling debt when his Mustang convertible breaks down in a backwards
Arizona desert town. Through huge coincidences, Bobby loses all his
money and means of transportation. In town he meets an assortment of
annoying and exaggerated backwater creeps: violent unintelligent men and
sleazy women. For example, Jake McKenna (Nick Nolte) is an incestuous
lunk who wants Bobby to murder his daughter/wife Grace. Meanwhile his
wife Grace McKenna (Jennifer Lopez) is a mentally unstable woman who
promises to run off with Bobby if he murders her husband.  How can Bobby
get out of there before he goes nuts?
Although the cinematography is great and the performance of the cast
members is strong, it's not enough to overcome two things which are
poisonous to most moviegoers: unsympathetic protagonists, and the
depressing message that life consists of inescapable suffering.
In 1917 the famous artist Marcel Duchamp signed a men's urinal and
submitted it as artwork to the first exhibition of the Society of
Independent Artists -- the idea, I guess, being that it was the job of
the modern artist to shake things up and make the audience look at
ordinary things a new and different way.  To me, Oliver Stone is the
film director version of that mentality. Here he takes an old action
plot (adventurer gets stuck in a hellish hick town), and retools it as a
dark comedy set in the West that preaches a morbid existential message:
that life consists of inescapable suffering. 
Okay as art. But the difference between conventional art and a good
movie is that in a good movie the audience is supposed to identify with
and care about what happens to the characters. Aside from the ultimately
depressing existential theme, the central weakness of U-Turn' is that
its characters are colorful, but so disloyal and disgusting that the
audience doesn't really care what happens to them by the end of the
movie.

Author
Larry Mcgillicuddy
**1/2 (out of 4)
Directed by Oliver Stone
Starring Sean Penn, Jennifer Lopez, Nick Nolte, Billy Bob
Thornton, Joaquin Phoeniz, Claire Danes, Jon Voight,
Oliver Stone is one of my favorite filmmakers. His past
films - Salvador, Platoon, Born on the 4th of July, Natural
Born Killers, and JFK - have been among the best of the last
12 years. They've all made some sort of political or
thematic statement and usually caused controversy. This time
out, Stone seems intent on just making a cool modern noir
thriller. Unfortunately, the same things that have made his
past films great work against him here.
Sean Penn stars as Bobby Cooper, a drifter whose car breaks
down in the small desert town of Superior, Arizona. He meets
several offbeat characters, who thwart his attempts to
escape from Superior. He catches the eye of the mysterious
vixen Jennifer Lopez, but unbeknownst she has a husband with
 more than a few screws loose. He also runs into a flirty
teenager played by Claire Danes, whose boyfriend goes insane
whenever she's around another guy.
This story is sort of like a demented acid trip cross
between Doc Hollywood and Red Rock West. The problem is, I
think Stone's material isn't strong enough this time around,
and his directorial style, while visually stunning, fails to
create a true sense of suspense or fear. The first hour is
impressive enough, introducing us to the many offbeat
characters, the most memorable being Claire Danes and a
strange mechanic played by Billy Bob Thornton. The movie
falls apart in the last 30 minutes, when it goes way
overboard with one moronic twist after another, none of
which make much sense in retrospect.
U-Turn features brilliant performances by nearly everyone in
the cast and there are several exciting sequences.
Unfortunately, it fails to come together in the conclusion,
which just piles one twist on top of another. So after
making meaningful and controversial films the past 2
decades, Oliver Stone just wanted to make an entertaining
offbeat thriller. He was almost successful.

Author
V.B. Daniel
A movie review by Dr. V.B. "Doc" Daniel of Dr. Daniel's
Movie Emergency
Copyright 1997 by Stairwell Studios.  Send comments to
drdaniel@stairwell.com
'TRAFFIC VIOLATION'  Dr. Daniel's Review of U-Turn
Dr. D's Rating: Critical Condition (1 star out of 4)
Okay, here's the deal. I'll be the first one to grant that everybody
needs a day off now and then. I'll even go so far as to say that a
vacation is a necessary part of doing any job well. I mean, hey, I've
been known to stretch a weekend into a three-day outing, if Friday
looks to be a slow day. And if Monday ain't looking like a pick-me-up,
well, I've been known to give Martha Nell a call and say, "Do me a
favor, sweetheart. Bump Old Man Ferguson's boil lancing to Tuesday
morning, and tell Miss Audrey that I'll swing by her house Monday
evening and see if we can't get her trick knee back in line."  A
simple sentence like that, and I've got a nice four-day fishing trip
with the boys, or more often than not, a trip up to Cherokee, N.C.,
for jackpot bingo and assorted other mountain funnery. 
But the point is, if you take a day off, do something different. If
you've worked yourself silly for months, relax a bit. Sleep in. Eat
pancakes at noon. Microwave an egg in its shell. Watch pro wrestling
with the sound off. Listen to some Barry White records at high
speed. Whatever.  But do not, under any circumstances, spend your
vacation doing the same thing you do for a living. And, if you do,
don't make the final product look ten times worse than it would any
other time.
Because I do not want to hear your sob stories, Oliver Stone. You
apparently thought you needed a break from making "important films."
Cool. So you found this hinky little book and decided to make it a
movie. That's cool, too.  But, Ollie, old sage, do not take a good
story and a hot cast and make one of the most pointless and worthless
films of the decade. I'm just eager to meet you one day, so I can buy
you a Stoli, look you in the eye and say, "What in the Wide World of
Sports were you thinking with U-Turn?" And I'll stand there staring
'til I get a straight answer.
Sean Penn stars U-Turn, as Bobby, a drifter who's had some troubles a
while back. He's heading cross the desert minus two fingers when his
Mustang ragtop blows a radiator hose, stranding him in Superior,
Arizona, held there by an "ignorant, inbred, turtleneck hick" of a
mechanic named Darrell. While Darrell puts a new hose on the ride,
Bobby walks into town to see what's cooking. Is it needless of me to
say that Superior, Arizona, is not exactly the shiny scrubbed home of
all things lovely? Probably not.
Bobby meets up with Grace (Jennifer Lopez), who invites him back to
her place, for drape-hanging and other domestic issues. Just as those
issues are starting up, Grace's husband, Jake, storms in, looking like
check-out day of the Elks Lodge Convention. Just beats Bobby
silly. Bobby takes to the road, only to meet up with Jake again, and
Jake asks Bobby to kill Grace. A little while later, Grace asks Bobby
to kill Jake. Them murderous Arizonians. Gotta love 'em.
If any of this sounds familiar, congratulations. You win a kewpie
doll. The story is a straight shoplift of Red Rock West, a cult
favorite a few years back from John Dahl, maker of the phenomenal The
Last Seduction. But the contest doesn't end there, guys and gals. We
get steals from Russ Meyer movies, where everybody in town is horny
and sweaty. We get the town from Bad Day at Black Rock, minus the
train, plus busty women who can speak. Look at any Schwarzenegger
film, and you'll see our hero, Bobby, as Bobby has a mudhole stomped
in his keister a dozen times, has his ribs stove in at least fifteen
times, gets bit by a tarantula, gets shot at, and ends up with
vultures circling overhead, all the while getting up like he just got
a shaving nick. Bobby as Terminator? Stretch it a bit, and we have a
five-finger discount from Doc Hollywood, where the whole story occurs
because of car trouble, forcing the main character to stay at the
mercy of the town and the mechanic. Okay, he's working from a book, so
maybe Ollie's not totally to blame for blatantly copping these
ideas. I just expect a man who can make up an alternative history of
the United States to be able to craft a few original ideas before
exposing the negative.
I just wish he hadn't brought a cast like this together for what
amounts to a group toe-stub.  Sean Penn gives a great performance, and
Jennifer Lopez and Nick Nolte are as on target as they can be, playing
over-the-top caricatures of stereotype characters. The best thing
about the movie is watching Penn react to the madness around him and
try to figure out exactly what the blankety-blank is going on. Too bad
it's not fun to watch when it's happening to us...while we sit through
this mess of a film.
U-Turn is not a bad film if you're a fan of technique. It's the Oliver
Stone you've always known. Robert Richardson is his usual
cinematographer, and Rob and Ollie know how to shoot a flick -- great
camera angles, shifting viewpoints, wicked colors, nice looking
pictures. But pictures of what? I think I'd rather stare at a xeroxed
envelope for two hours than try to figure out the Tilt-o-Whirl point
of this loser film.  Plot twists are one thing, repetition is almost
unforgivable, and this is dang near as unforgivable as any movie I've
seen in the past five years.  Oliver, I know your body of work is
nothing to sniff at. You've been nice enough to limit us to only one
Doors movie, and films like Platoon, JFK, Wall Street and Nixon give
us plenty to dig on. Your scripts are certainly respectable, your
budgets are up there on the screen, and your actors don't dog it. And
I know that, maybe, with U-Turn, you were just kicking back, just
having fun. That's fine. But don't do that with a movie with the
potential of this one. Do some Police Academy sequel (imagine that.)
Do a big comedy, like a remake of It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World. But
do not drop a limp U-Turn out of your pocket and expect us to accept
it as "An Oliver Stone Movie," and not question why it stinks like
week-old snook. There's a right way to have fun, and a wrong way to
have fun. This was as wrong as you can get without going to jail.
For more review from the Doc, see the site at
http://www.stairwell.com/doc/
Cast: Sean Penn, Jennifer Lopez, Nick Nolte, Powers Boothe,
Billy Bob Thornton,
      Claire Danes, Joaquin Phoenix, Jon Voight, Liv Tyler
Director: Oliver Stone
Producers: Dan Halsted, Clayton Townsend
Screenplay: John Ridley based on his book STRAY DOGS
Cinematography: Robert Richardson
Music: Ennio Morricone
U.S. Distributor: TriStar Pictures
--

Author
Harvey S. Karten
U-TURN    
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 TriStar
 Director:  Oliver Stone
 Writer:  John Ridley
 Cast: Sean Penn, Billy Bob Thornton, Powers Boothe,
Jennifer Lopez, Nick Nolte
   Oliver Stone must have decided he was getting too serious,
dealing with assassination conspiracies and other movies
filled with gruesome, dead-on violence.  He now makes a u-
turn in his career without giving up his favorite theme--what
characters do in extreme situations--and comes up with a fun
movie, one which allows him to relax a bit and send up a few
Hollywood gems of the genre.  Stone calls "U-Turn" a
"scorpion in a bucket" movie, with characters eating each
other and trying to crawl up out of the same bucket.  If that
sounds as though he's filming in the rat-race, urban milieu--
thousands of creatures going through their paces with office
politics, gang warfare and the like--Stone reminds us that the
smallest towns are no escape from mayhem, conspiracies,
intrigues, and a dog-eat-dog mentality.  City folks who think
they can bail out of the great void of anonymity by
disappearing into the friendliness of Small Town America
might think again after this movie.  "U-Turn" looks low budget,
with a minimalist production design, but what's lacking in
fashion is compensated for by photographer Robert
Richardson's jumpy camera, which scans Arizona's
breathtaking scenery and zeroes on one of its seedy towns as
though to contrast humankind's majesty with the individual's
scuzziest impulses.  The figures whom Stone creates, using
scripter John Ridley's adaptation of his own novel "Stray
Dogs" are not people you'd identify with.  They're off-the-wall. 
But the outlandish depictions are meant to highlight traits with
which we all share deep-down under our veneer of polish and
sophistication.  
   "U-Turn" is perhaps inspired by John Dahl's 1993 movie
"Red Rock West," a thriller about an unemployed, honest
Nicolas Cage who finds himself mistaken for a contract killer
hired to do in seductive adulterous Lara Flynn Boyle. It
illustrates the problems faced by the basically decent Bobby
Cooper (Sean Penn), now encumbered by a $13,000
gambling debt, driving across a dry Arizona highway en route
to California.  Missing two fingers, which have been
indelicately removed by a couple of Vegas hoodlums as a
down-payment of Bobby's arrears, he continues his bad
stroke of luck when his 1964 Ford Mustang breaks down just
outside the godforsaken dust bowl known ironically as
Superior, Arizona.  Leaving the vehicle with a repulsive Darrell
(Bill Bob Thornton), whom Bobby eventually calls an "ignorant
inbred turtleneck hick," he proceeds to the center of town
where he becomes embroiled in a web of treachery.  Ignoring
the advice of several townspeople who look at his bandaged
hand and counsel, "You've got to be more careful," he is
invited to the home of the sultry Grace (Jennifer Lopez) to
"hang drapes," is discovered and thrown out by Grace's
grizzled husband Jake (Nick Nolte), admonished by a blind,
fortune-cookie-philosopher Indian (Jon Voight), and beaten up
by a young, ignorant stud who is convinced that Bobby is
flirting with his bimbo, Jenny (Claire Danes).  Desperate to
raise the money to pay off the Russian criminal, he accepts
an offer of money if he would murder Grace, a promising
proposal provided that he can overcome the watchful eye of
the town sheriff (Boothe Powers) and his lust for the
voluptuous woman.
   Oliver Stone throws movie cognoscenti in the audience
some references to previous films, particularly to King Vidor's
1946 sex-Western "Duel in the Sun," a larger-scale, brawling
work with half-breed Jennifer Jones caught between her
brother Gregory Peck and Joseph Cotten.  Replicating that
movie's bizarre finale, Stone tickles our funny bones as we
watch an ax-murder, several beatings, a de-digitalization, and
other developments which would have Norman Rockwell
turning in his grave. He also frustrates us by his dependence
on outrageously cheap movie tricks, changing his film stock
as often as his characters swap loyalties and bouncing his
camera as though it were riding across the state's craggy
topography in a 1971 Volkswagen Bug.  Crosscutting some
portentous imagery--vultures feeding on the carcass of some
road-kill, a crow which emits warning signals from time to
time, and a couple of snakes--Stone seems to be having the
time of his life among a bevy of performers who prove that
like the creatures of the desert, we're all animals deep down.
New Age folks are convinced that AZ's red rocks have healing
properties, but the director of "Natural Born Killers" may have
succeeded in convincing them otherwise. Rated R.  Running
Time: 125 minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey Karten

Author
Chris Webb
Starring: Sean Penn, Jennifer Lopez, Nick Nolte, Billy Bob Thornton, Claire 
Danes, Jon Voight, and Joaquin Phoenix.
Directed by Oliver Stone.  Written by John Ridley
        Imagine yourself being placed in a world where you have lost all 
control, cannot trust anyone, and where all roads lead to nowhere.  You 
find yourself facing self-centered and self-serving people who seem to 
only know two things: how to survive everyday life and how to make your 
life miserable.  You are stripped of trust and faith in humanity.  Now, 
go see "U-Turn."
        The idea of stagnant lifestyles in the southwest have crept onto 
the screen in recent years with Richard Linklater's teen slacker films 
"Dazed and Confused" and "Suburbia."  Once again, the south becomes the 
butt of a cruel joke in Oliver Stone's "U-Turn," which seems to ask the 
question: what would the slacker adults be like?
        Sean Penn stumbles into Superior, Arizona, after his car 
overheats, running into the most extreme characters one could imagine.  
His days brings him into contact with a greasy mechanic (Billy Bob 
Thornton), a street dwelling, blind Vietnam veteran (Jon Voight), a 
nymphomaniac teen and her tough guy boyfriend (Claire Danes and Joaquin 
Phoenix), and a wronged seductress and her small town mogul boyfriend 
(Jennifer Lopez and Nick Nolte).  This superstar ensemble cast plays each 
bit with subtlety and great effort, as Stone crafts a painful tale of 
being stuck in a state of inertia.
        In what turns into an oddball coming out gala, one might find 
"U-Turn" reminiscent of Coen Brothers movies like "Raising Arizona" or 
"Fargo."  But, idiosyncracies that are celebrated in their films take a 
back seat to irony and perhaps a deeper meaning that only Stone himself 
would know.  The times that the locals shine come with the running gag, 
"You really oughta be more careful."          
        Penn plays Bobby Cooper, a small-time gambler in big-time trouble on
his way to Vegas to pay off a debt.  In this detour, we discover that his 
gambling losses not only entail money but also two fingers.  We are not 
supposed to sympathize with this guy.  So, in Superior, he is fleeced by 
the mechanic, loses his payoff and his weapon, is dragged into a bidding 
war to have Lopez or Nolte killed, and is harrassed by the teens.  His 
words to Thornton as he leaves the garage, "The difference between you 
and me is that I'm only driving through," have come back to haunt him.
        Stone has left behind the high-minded social and political theory 
we found in "JFK," "Natural Born Killers," and "Nixon," and has turned 
his sights to creating a claustrophobic story of losers using tricky 
camera work.  This is more of a chance for him to display his cinematic 
eye.  He does so with still shots or focusing away from the action during 
a scene that allow us to see what we might not normally notice.  The 
ugliness or sexiness of the characters are expanded through this 
technique, for we see the world through Penn's eyes during these 
moments.  
        Another difference between this and a Coen Brothers film is the 
way Stone removes sympathy from the equation.  While Nicolas Cage 
(stealing a baby in "Arizona") and William H. Macy (having his wife 
kidnapped in "Fargo") committed horrible acts, we nonetheless held some 
sympathy for their characters.  In "U-Turn," we are not meant to like any 
of them.  They are meant to disgust us. 
        Sophisticated? No.  Claire Danes asks Penn, "Why doesn't Patsy 
Cline make no more records?" not knowing she's dead.  Trustworthy? No.  
Thornton's prices raise, and Lopez and Nolte are bedhopping headhunters.  
Comforting? No.  Penn is always on edge, either being attacked by Nolte 
or Phoenix, or being involved in a grocery store heist.  We would not 
want to alone in a room with any of these people.  In proving this point, 
however, does writer John Ridley, who adapted this from his story "Stray 
Dogs" wander too far?
        The idea that we would run into this many people and have so many 
breaks go against one person is highly unbelievable.  Furthermore, the 
addition of an incest plot and suicide plot muddle the already filled 
script even more.  It is Stone's technical mastery and the incredible 
acting which push this movie over the top.
        Believe it or not, I enjoyed "U-Turn" a lot.  I was one of the 
few I saw it with who did, and I know this movie is divisive.  It is 
bloody and gory for one thing, which alienates some viewers.  It is 
highly difficult to follow and will play mind games that will leave you 
numb at the end.  Soon, everything bad (killing, even the incest) seems 
to have a funny side to it, and you will not be able to figure out just 
how bad a person you are if you do laugh.
        So, try not to think too much.  Resist the temptation to add any 
significant allegory for modern day greed, and you just might have fun.  
"U-Turn" is not as intelligent as "Trainspotting," but will manipulate 
your brain just as handily.  If you see it for the fun of movie watching, 
you will have a good time.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Oliver Stone
Writer: John Ridley (based on his novel "Stray Dogs")
Starring: Sean Penn, Jennifer Lopez, Nick Nolte, Powers Boothe, Claire
Danes, Joaquin Phoenix, Billy Bob Thornton, Jon Voigt, Julie Haggerty,
Abraham Benrudi, Laurie Metcalf, Liv Tyler
If "U-Turn" is what Oliver Stone does to take a "vacation" from being all
politically cynical, then I wonder what he must do for real vacations. 
Stone has done so much awesome work lately in the arena of political
criticism, as well as media, some of it being barely-well received by
critics and audiences (remember "Nixon?"), and so it's about time he tried
to not be such a political cynic and open his doors to being just a regular
cynic like the rest of us.  The result is this.
"U-Turn" is basically a black comedy a la "After Hours," except that it's
basically a redo of all those old crap film cliches, like a town where
everyone's crooked, there's no industry but a couple convenience stores and
diners, and, well, everyone's just plain weird.  It's also one of those
nightmarish kafkaesque films where everything where Murphy's Law takes into
effect, and everything that could go wrong goes wrong.
But unlike "After Hours," which featured an innocent man plagued by some
kind of weird Job-like bad luck, we are given a detestable creature, a
person who's on the lowest possible rung of the criminal ladder: the slimy
rat who owes money but is constantly running from those who want to collect
it.  He's Bobby Cooper (Sean Penn, making the 97 rounds nicely), and we
meet him as he's driving down the road in the middle of a desert when his
convertible gets a blown radiator hose, and he is forced to stop at the
nearest Arizona town in an effort to get his car fixed.
There, he runs into all kinds of trouble as he meets odd people he probably
shouldn't, and ends up in situations in which he does not belong.  For
instance, he loses all his money when he goes to a convenience store and
some robbers come in and a little gun fight ensues, blowing all his cash
up.  And a bit later, he meets a teenage girl named Jenny (Claire Danes),
who's remarks to him that he wants him to father their "love child" get him
in trouble with her hot-headed and dim-witted boyfriend, Tobey N. Tucker
(Joaquin Phoenix), who says people call him "T.N.T" because when he goes
off, people get hurt.
A couple other people we meet: the inbred hick garage mechanic, Darrell
(Billy Bob Thornton, unrecognizable under about an inch of grease), who's
probably the most evil person in the film; a blind man (Jon Voigt) who says
a couple of meaningful and not-so-meaningful afforisms; the sheriff (Powers
Boothe), who has his paranoid eye on Bobby; and even a diner waitress named
Flo (Julie Haggerty).
But the most notable people he meets are a married couple named Grace and
Jake McKenna (Jennifer Lopez and Nick Nolte, respectively), who hate
eachother so much that each ends up hiring Bobby to kill the other without
the other knowing (a blatant rip-off of "Red Rock West"), causing Bobby to
do some character weighing to see which one he should off if either of
them.
The plot pretty much goes in circles, as we see Bobby being beaten up like
crazy in every other scene, get up, and get beaten up again.  The guy is
already missing two fingers from a scene before the movie (which we are
shown in flashbacks throughout the flick), and we see that this is
basically God's revenge on Bobby for being such a bastard.  The story
becomes a nightmarish revenge story, all the more nightmarish because Penn
makes Bobby such a likable person and we soon sympathize with his plight
and just want him to get the hell out of Dodge.
This is all done with the kind of overdirecting that Oliver Stone is
famous/infamous for.  We get all kinds of wacky camera movements and
angles, cataclysmic editing, some screwing around with the sound track, and
gorgeous cinematography which make this technically amazing, but still a
lot like the headache that "Natural Born Killers" was.  I almost wonder if
Stone can make a technically simple movie anymore, like some of his earlier
work.
Nevertheless, Stone has a personal staple he puts on the film, and all his
technical stuff works this time in creating sheer paranoia, and giving the
film a nightmarish edge that it needs.  Too bad he doesn't really take it
over the edge and give the film a deeper tone, which is what Scorsese did
with "After Hours," turning what could have simply been a "shit happens"
film into an almost brilliant black comedy.  The film needs more of a plot,
which it runs out of about forty-five minutes along, leaving some subplots
(Jenny/Tobey, the guys who he owes the money to, as well as a couple
others) dangling with very little closure.
Oh, and then there's the "attempt" to add a message about, oh I dunno,
manifest destiny and the way we hurt the Native Americans (Lopez's
character is a Native American corrupted by an American).  Just to make
sure we didn't miss his "message," he adds photos of Indian chiefs over the
end credits.  This approach is so underdeveloped that the photos at the end
are a big laugh, and the entire need to add a political subtext to the film
just should have been dropped all together if he couldn't have fit it in in
the film nicely.
But Stone still exhibits a great sarcastic cynical take on life, turning it
into a bit of a pessimistic allegory for life: we're beaten around a lot,
have to deal with people as if not more selfish than we are, and then we're
eventually given the big screw-over by someone we didn't even suspect was
scewing with us in the first place.  He's expanded his pessimism a little
further, but hardly promises the same relief that his political or media
satires promise: that learning from our mistakes can prevent similar things
from happening.  This is more like: life sucks and there's nothing we can
do about it.
Still, for fans of Stone's wild stylistic approach to filmmaking, and
anyone who is into wacky surrealism, as well as a film where every actor
goes deliciously over the top with their performances (yes, even Claire
Danes), this will be pretty pleasing.  It's not a great film, but the
result is a rather fun film which steals from many films (the ending is a
sorta rip-off of "Duel in the Sun"), but still comes off as being at least
marginally entertaining.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
