Title
Review for Assassins (1995)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Sylvester Stallone, Antonio Banderas, Julianne Moore, 
      Anatoly Davydov 
Director: Richard Donner 
Producers: Joel Silver, Bruce A. Evans, Raynold Gideon, Andrew Lazar, 
           and Jim Van Wyck 
Screenplay: Andy Wachowski and Larry Wachowski 
Cinematography: Vilmos Zsigmond 
Music: Mark Mancina 
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers 
     Some time ago, I wrote that Sylvester Stallone was a better actor 
than Steven Seagal.  While that was once true, the recent difference 
between the two might be likened to that of oak and maple:  despite 
dissimilar textures, each is still wood(en).  Oddly, Stallone, who once 
shone in ROCKY, seems to have adopted the non-emotive state in response 
to the desire of his most ardent fans, who want action, not character.  
Those Stallone die-hards should be pleased with their idol's latest, 
ASSASSINS.  It effectively fills the above mandate. 
     One of the most serious gaps in this film is that the script calls 
for a hero suffering through a deep moral crisis--with the cold war 
over, hired killer and ex-government operative Robert Rath (Stallone) is 
re-evaluating his life and career choice--but Stallone is ill-equipped 
to play someone engaged in a deep inner struggle.  It's like Arnold 
Schwarzenegger essaying an existentialist--laughably absurd.  And 
"absurd" is precisely what a good portion of ASSASSINS is.  In addition 
to Stallone's inflexible facial expression, the film is saddled with a 
preposterous script and hideous dialogue.  Plus, it weighs in at a too-
long one-hundred thirty-two minutes.   
     The plot is an excuse for gun fights.  Rath is trying to get out of 
the hit business after one final $2,000,000 score.  He has an adversary, 
however, in the person of Miguel Bain (Antonio Banderas), who is a great 
admirer of Rath's, but intends to take him out anyway.  After all, there 
can only be one #1, and Bain intends to be it.  Rath (like the audience) 
could care less.  He just wants to get out rich and alive.  In order to 
do so, he has to kill Electra (Julianne Moore), a computer security 
specialist who accidentally captured sensitive information while surfing 
the Internet.  Of course, once Rath actually meets his quarry, he 
decides she's too attractive to kill.  Thus begins one of the great 
screen romances of the last five minutes... 
     The cast is interesting.  Aside from Stallone, there's Antonio 
Banderas, who's fast becoming a big-time sex symbol (quite a feat for 
someone who started out as a Pedro Almodovar regular).  It's Banderas' 
pecs, however, not his acting, on display here.  His Bain is a pure 
caricature--he laughs, sneers, and sweats his way through the part.  
As for the presence of a solid talent like Julianne Moore in this living 
comic book... at least she got a nice paycheck. 
     Director Richard Donner, of LETHAL WEAPON trilogy fame, might do 
better going back to Mel Gibson as his leading man.  Come to think of 
it, though, even an accomplished actor couldn't do much with this 
screenplay.  The action scenes are competently constructed, and the 
climactic shootout provides a few moments of tension, but that's 
scarcely reason to sit through the rest of ASSASSINS' drivel.  It all 
amounts to nothing, anyway--these two indestructible supermen are both 
guaranteed to be on their feet until the final showdown, which 
inevitably happens during the last five minutes.  There are plenty of 
more exciting, reasonably intelligent action films (including the 
aforementioned LETHAL WEAPONs) available to the adrenaline junkie.  Of 
course, with all the gunplay, the body count here goes pretty high, but 
the biggest casualty of ASSASSINS is the viewer who expects to get 
something remotely original out of this recycled formula with its stony 
star.   
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Till Noever
Rating: +3.5. (scale: -5=abomination to +5=epiphany).
I never liked Stallone much and have always avoided his movies like the 
plague. When I couldn't help it and, overcome by sloth and laziness, 
turned on the TV and watched abominations like 'Cobra' this usually 
confirmed my low opinion of the man as an actor of anything. 'Rocky' 
never did it for me either. I never got past the first few minutes. I 
still don't know what people see in it.
So, why should ASSASSINS be the movie to change my mind about the man and 
the actor? After all, if you listen to people, it's supposed to be just 
some ponderous would-be action flick with stereotypical cardboard 
characters and unconvincing perfomances overall. Nothing, it seems, to 
provide much of a character-acting opportunity for anybody; least of all 
Stallone!
Well, surprise, surprise, but ASSASSINS is much more than that. It's a 
deft mixture of a (sometimes rather slowly-paced) action drama and a 
study of three desperately lonely, even twisted, human beings, who happen 
to cross each others' paths with some predictable and some 
not-quite-expected results.
Robert Rath, assassin extraordinaire, with a record of killings as long 
as a reel of film, has had enough. It's been getting that way for some 
time, but his last contract, the killing of a colleague, does it for him. 
He's also getting old. He has to wear glasses when reading his computer 
screen, and his moment of weakness, when he allows his last 'mark' the 
dignity of committing (albeit supervised) suicide, rather than killing 
him himself, demonstrates that he's becoming somewhat less detached than 
he ought to be. He just hasn't got the mind-set anymore which allowed him 
to accept a contract fifteen years ago to kill his friend, Russian 
Nicolai Tashlekoff. Besides, that particular assignment still 
occasionally haunts him. The images of his former friend emerging from a 
bank in San Juan, looking up at the top of the building where Rath was 
waiting with a scoped rifle, knowing that he was going to die, and 
knowing who was doing the job... they keep flashing back to him.
One more job he's going to do and then he's out for good. Problem is that 
apparently his shadowy employer, who only exists as an anonymous 
correspodent at the other end of an email connection, seems to have hired 
another assassin, Miguel Bain, to do the same job. Bain beats Rath to the 
kill. Rath, angry at the duplicity, tries to corner Bain, but the latter 
manages to escape both the police and Rath. Indeed, as it turns out, he's 
rather keen to test his skills against Rath, whom he's always admired, 
but who, he thinks (quite correctly) is getting a bit soft around the 
edges now.
His mysterious employer offers Rath another job. The elimination of 
surveillance expert/hacker called Electra - who's stolen a disk full of 
information worth a lot of money to certain people - and the retrieval of 
the disk. Electra is trying to sell the disk to a bunch of Dutch buyers 
for a load of cash. A meeting at a hotel is arranged. Everything seems to 
go well until it becomes obvious that Bain again has been contracted for 
the same job as Rath. Bain kills the buyers and a load of Interpol agents 
at the scene, but fails to get to Electra, who is saved by Rath - who, 
when confronting her, realizes that he has reached the point where he 
finds himself unable to kill in cold blood.
Rath and Electra go on the run, trying to sell the valuable disk to 
Rath's duplicitous employer for two million dollars. A meeting is 
arranged for the exchange, but, though Rath delivers a laptop computer 
with the information, the case with the money is rigged with a bomb. By 
sheer luck the Rath and Electra avoid being killed. Rath also finds out 
that Electra has been hedging her bets, and given the treacherous buyer a 
computer without the required information.
The pair now 'up' the price to twenty million dollars. An exchange is 
arranged. Rath is to deliver the computer to a bank in San Juan, in 
exchange for the cash. Ironically, the bank is the same, outside which, 
ten years ago, Rath killed his friend Nicolai. And this time it's Bain 
who's given the contract to kill Rath. Bain, with a fine sense of 
history, elects to do things the same way Rath did all those years ago. 
Rath anticipates this (that's why he selected this particular setting), 
and him and Electra set up a scheme to foil Bain's plan.
The plan almost goes awry, and only Electra's intervention saves Rath's 
life. During the final climactic fight between Rath and Bain a third 
party intervenes: their employer, who turns out to be none other than 
Nicolai, who, fifteen years ago, faked his own death by wearing a 
bullet-proof vest, since he just KNEW that Rath was going to 'go for the 
heart' - and who, since then, has become Rath's sadowy employer. Indeed, 
it was Nicolai himself to took out the contract on himself, and used Rath 
to 'disappear'. Rath had been outguessed and outmanoeuvred by Nicolai, 
just like Bain was now by Rath and Electra. History coming full circle.
Still, there are a couple of twists in the final events, and when the 
dust settles, it's Rath and Electra who are left standing and go off into 
the sunset with the money.
Pretty formulaic stuff, and nothing that, by itself, would attract a 
great deal of attention. What sets this drama apart from a gazillion 
other action flicks though are its characters, and a certain brooding 
atmosphere, which imbues ASSASSINS with a quality rarely seen in this 
genre. Stallone, Banderas, and Moore, each deliver performances which 
make the characters quite credible, even though in Banderas' case the 
character is so over the top that he's almost too much to take. Still, 
Banderas pulls it off with a kind of maniacal glee and reckless abandon 
that just too much fun to miss. 'Desperado' leaps to mind, only that here 
Banderas is the bad guy.
Stallone is an excellent ageing assassin. A lonely man, whose 
relationships with others consist of email exchanges, or of him planting 
a bullet in them. His estrangement became complete when he killed his 
friend a more decade before. Rath is a sad character. One wonders how he 
came to be what he is, because there's an air of gentleness and 
conscience about him. Makes one wonder what the world has to do to a 
human being to make him into a killer.
Julianne Moore, as Electra, portrays an equally lonely human being, whose 
main contact with others also consists of email exchanges, or of her 
viewing them with video cameras hidden in their apartment. They don't 
even know she's there, but she's as involved in their lives as can 
possibly be. 
When Rath and Electra are thrown together there is an instant rapport, 
tinged though as it is by cynicism and suspicion. She sees his face above 
a gun that's about to kill her (but then doesn't), and he sees in her 
eyes, maybe for the first time, a human being that he cannot kill. 
Circumstances force them to stay together, even though the exposure is a 
strain for both of them. At one point Electra (after an argument with 
Rath) asks for privacy, since, as she says, "I haven't been with a single 
human being for this long" for a long time. As she turns away to leave 
Rath looks after her. "Neither have I," he says softly, but she doesn't 
hear him. 
Rath and Electra people are sick to the core, but they have features 
which ultimately redeem them. Like a conscience, which just needed some 
prodding. 
Bain hasn't got a conscience, and neither has Rath's 'friend' Nicolai. 
That's why they have to die, and why Rath and Electra survive. A modern 
morality tale, which we've seen in a thousand different ways before, but 
its well done, and deserves much more credit than it has.
There's no sex in this movie. Just a fairly chaste kiss. In another 
ironic twist, the one occasion where Rath, with uncharacteristic shyness, 
open himself up to Electra, (who's standing behind a curtain on a 
balcony) and tells her what she means to him it turns out that she 
actually isn't there at all any more, and that his words were addressed 
to nobody but himself. Still, despite all this lack of explicit romance, 
it's there all the time, from the moment they meet - and there's no doubt 
what's going to happen after it's all over.
I don't know what you look for in a movie, but if it's a well-told story 
of redemption, an action flick with plenty of shooting to keep everybody 
happy, a bit of romance, and a happy ending - well, it almost as good on 
video as on the big screen.
"One man's 'magic' is another man's engineering." L Long

Author
Choo Eng Aun
Starring : Sylvester Stallone, Antonio Banderas, Julian Moore
Directed by : Richard Donner
Running Time : 2hrs
     Team up the Italian Stallion with The Spanish El-Mariachi into one
film and call up Richard (LETHAL WEAPON 1,2 & 3, MAVERICK) Donner to
direct it, looks like a sure hit right?  Wrong!  This the second movie
for Stallone this summer (he reportedly got paid US$50 million to do
three movies this year) and the second bomb for him this year after the
dismal response for the high budget sci-fi flick, JUDGE DREDD.  While,
Sly's career seems to be going downhill, his Spanish counterpart (who
can actually speak better than him!) is on his way up.  Banderas also
starred in DESPERADO, a high octaned action film with the bodycount
higher than all the RAMBO movies put together, which incidentally may
not pass the censors here, I hope not!!
     Stallone is Robert Rath, the best hired gun money can buy.  He's
been on the business for many years and can be considered a veteran of
that trade.  From the starting sequences, we see that Rath is getting
tired (bored?) and seemingly a little frustrated about the direction of
his life, retirement is on his mind, but its not exactly one job one
can just quit so easily.  His life was immediately made more
interesting with the appearance of Miguel Bain (Antonio Banderas), a
psychotic, semi-lunatic hired gun, who `steals' Rath's contracts by
killing the targets before he can get to them, in the beginning we are
made to think that Miguel is just some crazy hired-gun who is trying
very hard to be oust Rath and be no.1 in the trade but as the story
unfolds, a greater plot ensues.
     The love interest, (I shall call her Cat, couldn't catch the name)
played by Julian Moore, a small time hacker with no real identity and
gets entangled in something much more than she would ever imagine.  Cat
started out being the prime target of a hit but ended up being saved by
Rath from Miguel.  For once, there's a decent plot in a Stallone movie
and although slightly predictable, is quite interesting + enjoyable.
     Stallone fares well here, partly due to the fact that he speaks
very much less than most of his other movies.  Banderas's Miguel was
totally cool ... toting around town in in his sweaty,
psychotic-appearance, Latino looks and a "Speedy Gonzales" accent, his
character easily outshines Stallone's Rath.  Is this a precedence in
action movies today?  Most baddies seem to take the front seat from the
hero.
     All in all, there's a lot of creative shoot-outs in this film (very
John Woo, but on a more believable level), enough explosives and
suspense to satisfy most action lovers.  But there are time when the
action tries a bit too hard, only to end up being totally boring and
predictable.  Richard Donner is an exceptional action film director and
it is sad to see his film not doing well, maybe he should team up with
Gibson again in another LETHAL WEAPON movie, I'll like that.  If you're
an action fan, this film should prove to be quite enjoyable, Banderas
is pure fun to watch.

Author
Christopher Null
     Okay, I admit it.  I was expecting something horrible like JUDGE
DREDD when I sat down for ASSASSINS.  Instead, imagine my surprise to
find a nicely-crafted action thriller that does *not* feature Sylvester
Stallone making a bunch of "witty" remarks.
     ASSASSINS is essentially an updating of a well-established story
line.  Robert Rath (Stallone) is the best in the world at what he
does--killing people for money.  But he's getting tired of it all and
wants out of the business.  Unfortunately, you can't just give two
weeks notice to your faceless hit contractor; it's a bit more difficult
than that.  So it's understandable that Rath barely flinches when he
finds out Miguel Bain (Antonio Banderas), the #2 assassin, is after
him.
     When you throw into the mix the world's best actress (Julianne
Moore) as Electra, a surveillance expert and electronic thief, all hell
breaks loose.  Electra is his latest "mark," and, fed up with
everything, Rath elects not to kill her, as he was charged to do.
Instead they team together against a new, common enemy:  Bain, who
Banderas brings to life with a soul of pure evil.
     ASSASSINS starts out a little slow in setting up this tricky web,
but it pays off the first time Bain and Rath meet.  Thereafter, each
meeting grows progressively more intense--and more violent--as the two
square off like fighting lions.  These action sequences are some of the
best of the year, and together with Moore's turn as the enigmatic
Electra, ASSASSINS develops into a great entry for its genre.
     Yes, there are some cheap "dog-barks-suddenly" surprises, a few
sappy and overdramatic moments, and the story is just on the other side
of impossibility, but what the hell, it's an action movie, right?  That
it is, and it's a pretty good one to boot.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-E-mail request to join the movie review mailing list
