Title
Review for Next Friday (2000)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Bob Bloom
 Next Friday (1999) Starring Ice Cube, Lisa Rodriguez, Don `D.C.' Curry
and John Witherspoon. Directed by Steve Carr.
 "Next Friday" is a raunchy, innocuous little comedy relying mostly on
slapstick and scatology for its humor. The movie, a sequel to 1995's
"Friday," was written by Ice Cube, who also stars as he did in the
original.
 The premise is simple: Cube's Craig, who only wants to survive in the
'hood, is sent packing to the suburbs to stay with his uncle after the
neighborhood bully he beat up at the end of "Friday" escapes from prison
and comes looking for him. 
 Craig discovers the burbs can be just as wild as the city, as he
begins feuding with a Latino neighbor, smokes pot like it's becoming
scarce and falls for a beautiful woman -  a fetching Lisa Rodriguez, who
happens to be the sister of the Latino neighbors.
 The entire affair is rather silly and slight. There is no attempt at
character development. Cube and director Steve Carr just want to pack
one joke on top of another, hoping the entire structure can hold. 
 And "Next Friday" is funny. If you enjoy lowbrow humor, it will afford
you several yuks.  And many of the characters are quite vaudevillian:
Craig's uncle, played by Don `D.C.' Curry, who lives in the suburbs
because he won the lottery; and Craig's dog-catching, taco-loving dad,
played by John Witherspoon. Ice Cube seems to be the ringmaster, playing
it straight while everyone around him clowns outrageously. 
 "Next Friday,"  at about 90 minutes, definitely will appeal to a
younger audience. 
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net

Author
Max Messier
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Max Messier.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/0d8f5b3da6b7da6688256864000c2948?OpenDocument
I usually don't like sequels.  The mind-numbing rehash of characters;
the bad puns that related to subject matter from the original film; the
vain attempt at trying to create something `new and fresh' that turns
into an overstuffed turkey and usually follows the same blueprint.  I
mean, who the hell gave the OK for such films as The Crow 2 and
Universal Solider: The Return.  Only a few films, which I can probably
count on my right hand, have equaled or surpassed the original -- The
Empire Strikes Back, Godfather II.  When I walked into Next Friday, I
must admit I carried this feeling in with me.  When I walked out, I
wasn't surprised by my reaction to the film.
Let me make one thing clear before I proceed.  I loved the original
Friday.  The inner city setting gave such a rich backdrop to a wonderful
ensemble of interesting and colorful characters.  The interactions of
these characters let the film breathe life back into the territory
previously covered by the Hughes Brothers and John Singleton, and then
ridiculed by the Wayans Clan.  The film also introduced the directing
debut of F. Gary Gray and the acting debut of Chris Tucker.  Ice Cube,
one of the original writers and producers of Friday, tries to recapture
the innocence and originality of the previous film but ends up failing
by not producing the same even-flow of character interaction and
storyline so prevalent in the original.
I like Ice Cube.  He holds responsibilities as music and film producer,
a musician, and a screenwriter and director under his belt.   He is
politically outspoken and waves a mighty fist at the establishment.  I
enjoy his acting and his music and even found Player's Club to be a
well-done piece of filmmaking.  But Next Friday only highlights his
acting abilities and not his writing talent, which he is credited for
with the screenplay of the film.
The first forty or so minutes of the film try to capture the fun and
honesty of the original and succeed in producing some memorable
moments.  But the second half of the film changes gears and becomes some
serious drama with guns waving and a dog high off pot brownies.  The
second half pulls the film down under the gravity of certain situations
and the audience is left feeling somewhat confused by what attitude
should be towards the actions of Cube and Co.  I mean, is Cube trying to
say that breaking into a drug dealer's house and committing a robbery is
a good thing?
The main problem with the film is the sidekick of Cube, played by Mark
Epps.  His character Day-Day is introduced as a bumbling big-talker but
ends up being a whining sissy who finds enjoy being harassed by a
pregnant ex-girlfriend and her large sister, Baby D.  The subplots of an
old nemesis from the original, played by Tom `Tiny' Lister (Zeus to all
of us old WWF fans), and a bumbling romance between Cube and a next-door
neighbor woman are pointless and trite.
If you are a fan of the original Friday, wait for the video of this
latest installment in this series.  Let's just hope there's not Another
Friday in the works as I write this.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Next Friday (2000)
Ice Cube, John Witherspoon, Mike Epps, Justin Pierce, Don "DC" Curry,
Tommy "Tiny" Lister, Tamala Jones, Lisa Rodriquez, Lady of Rage,
Sticky Fingaz, Lobo Sebastian, Kym E. Whitley, and Amy Hill. Written
by Ice Cube. Directed by Steve Carr. 95 minutes.
Rated R, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com 
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott 
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests
to ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com
with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
Kurt Vonnegut acknowledged one of the great truths about life in his
1985 novel, "Galapagos." The narrator of the tale is from 1,000,000
years in the future, when mankind has evolved into beings that bear
scant resemblance to present-day humans. Still, he assures us, some
things never change, even in the distant future. For instance, people
in that era still laugh about as much as we do now. "If a bunch of
them are lying around on a beach," he says, "and one of them farts,
everybody else laughs and laughs, just as people would have done a
million years ago."
Vonnegut is right, of course, though too many of us are loathe to
admit it. Writers like me babble endlessly about the post-modern irony
of the "Scream" series or the deliciously surreal verisimilitude of
"Being John Malkovich," but throw a fart joke our way and we fold up
like a cheap tent. In our insular, oh-so-sophisticated little world,
we turn our noses up at movies that traffic in low humor.
Unless they're old, that is. You see, old low humor is classic, while
new low humor is crude and juvenile. W.C. Fields made a career playing
drunken louts who routinely threatened children and we rave about his
brilliance. But when Adam Sandler plays a slacker who teaches a kid to
pee against a wall, we complain that he's a horrible role model whose
parenting is tantamount to child abuse. If "Blazing Saddles" or
"Animal House" were released today, I guarantee there would be whining
about the lewd humor, not to mention the shameful objectification of
women and tasteless racial and ethnic jokes.
Which brings me (finally) to "Next Friday," the sequel to Ice Cube's
1995 comedy, "Friday." The film, which features a gag involving a big
pile of dog shit in its first five minutes, is packed with fart
jokes. There is also considerable dope smoking, as well as crude
sexual humor and numerous pratfalls. Our heroes are lazy stoners who
steal, most of the women are either brassy or shrill, and the only
male Hispanic characters act like Cheech and Chong on
methamphetamines. In addition, "Next Friday" is sloppily assembled,
with virtually no plot and absolutely no character development.
But it's funny. Imagine a live-action "Nickelodeon" slapstick comedy
with lots and lots of swearing and you'll have an idea of what to
expect. There isn't a sophisticated second in "Next Friday," but for
those willing to loosen up and go with the flow, the burlesque is
often entertaining.
The original "Friday" followed Craig (Ice Cube), a laid-back guy still
living with his parents, through one day in South Central Los Angeles,
climaxing with him duking it out with neighborhood bully Debo (Tommy
"Tiny" Lister) and becoming a hero of sorts. The sequel picks up four
years later. Debo has just broken out of prison and, at his father's
insistence, Craig goes to stay with relatives in the suburbs until
things settle down. Within an hour, he is up to his neck in a new set
of problems.
John Witherspoon, reprising his role as Craig's pop, spends most of
the movie running around with dog poop smeared on his clothes,
blathering about hot sauce while frantically trying to find a
bathroom. His performance is wildly over the top and I tried not to
laugh at his hammy antics, but the man's twitchy abandon was
impossible to resist. Likewise, Craig's sidekicks Day-Day (Indiana
native Mike Epps) and Roach (skateboarder Justin Pierce) make a
likable Mutt and Jeff team, sputtering and falling down a lot as they
play out the film's obligatory wacky scheme.
The women get a chance to overact as well. Tamala Jones and Lady of
Rage behave like "Jerry Springer" guests as D'wana and Baby D, a
wrathful pair aiming their anger at Day-Day. And Kym E. Whitley is
loosey-goosey as Suga, the horny girlfriend of Craig's Uncle Elroy
(Don "D.C." Curry).
Ice Cube serves as the calm center of this group of loons, acting as
an anchor for all the craziness, much like Mary Tyler Moore did in her
old TV series (by the way, this is probably the very first time anyone
has ever compared Ice Cube and Mary Tyler Moore). Cube, who also wrote
the screenplay, remains an enigmatic performer. With each new role, he
becomes a bit more accomplished and, oddly, more opaque. Sometimes it
seems like the stoic actor is trying to disappear in his own movie,
which makes him all the more interesting
Even at a relatively short 95 minutes, the slapstick and bantering
loses steam towards the end. Still, "Next Friday" is mostly good
lowbrow fun. Ten years from now, I doubt if this will be compared to
"Blazing Saddles" or "Animal House." But anyone willing to set aside
their pretensions, lie down on the beach and giggle at the farts is
likely to have a fine time.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "NEXT FRIDAY" (New Line Cinema)
        Writer/rapper/actor Ice Cube's Friday was a surprise hit back
in 1995, so it should not come as a shock that there's a sequel, aimed
directly at the same young, hip, urban audience. Along with serving as
producer, Ice Cube reprises his role as Craig, a young man who was
trying to survive on the mean streets of South Central Los
Angeles. Now, he's moved from the city to the suburbs only to discover
that his troubles came right along with him. They're personified by
Debo, played by Tommy "Tiny" Lister Jr., a massive bully who wound up
in prison in the original story.  Debo's escaped from the Los Angeles
County Men's Central Jail and wants payback - which is why Craig's
father (John Witherspoon) suggests that he hang out in Rancho
Cucamonga with his Lotto-winning uncle (Don "DC" Curry) and
trophy-wife aunt (Kym E. Whitley), much to the consternation of other
friends, relatives, and Hispanic gangster neighbors. Chris Tucker's
manic character of Craig's pal Smokey has supposedly "gone into rehab"
but, obviously, Tucker's gone on to bigger and better things.  Most of
the vulgar dialogue is unprintable and the crude, chaotic humor
centers on bathroom functions. What could have been an amusing Beverly
Hillbillies riff is ineptly directed by first-timer Steve Carr, whose
background is in disjointed music videos - and it shows. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Next Friday is a coarse, cheesy,
repetitive 3. It's loud, lame slapstick silliness.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Stupidity reigns supreme in Steve Carr's NEXT FRIDAY, starring Ice Cube
and written by Ice Cube and D.J. Pooh.  Filled with repugnant racial and
sexist stereotypes, the film is an instant candidate for the worst film
of the year.
Craig Jones (Ice Cube) is visiting the big new house of his Uncle Elroy
(Don Curry), who left the 'hood for the 'burbs after winning a
million-dollar lottery.  His uncle's next-door neighbors are a
drug-dealing Chicano family.  Most of the characters in the movie appear
to have IQs somewhere in the double digits, and the acting doesn't even
rise to the level of what you might find in a low-rent comedy club.
The plot is well hidden, not that you'll care.  The movie relies on
gross humor with the film's ongoing joke revolving around the stench
from Craig's father, Mr. Jones (John Witherspoon).  In the opening
sequence, a tiny dog has a world-class bowel movement.  Mr. Jones falls
backward into the fecal matter but doesn't even change his clothes
afterwards.  Instead, he takes along an aerosol can of air-freshener
that he sprays wherever he goes.
Uncle Elroy has a swimming pool and a spa in his backyard.  The pool has
only a few inches of dirty rainwater in it and some beat-up, old lawn
chairs.  He explains that people in the 'hood can't swim so there was no
point in filling it.  The spa, on the other hand, is full and has a
used, purple condom floating in it.
The women, with one notable exception, Karla (Lisa Rodriguez), are all
referred to as bitches and 'hos (whores) and treated accordingly.  One
man claims that his woman can smell junk sweets from miles away.  The
fatness of various characters' buttocks is a prime topic of conversation
in the story.
Throughout it all, the baby-faced Ice Cube manages to be likable in a
film that never is.  "I can't wait to get back home," his character says
at the end.  And neither could I.
NEXT FRIDAY runs about 1:30.  It is rated R for strong language, drug
use and sexual content.  The film might be considered acceptable for
older teens, but I'd hate to see anybody wasting their time watching
this movie.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Steve Carr.
Cast: Ice Cube, Mike Epps, Justin Pierce, John Witherspoon, Don "DC" Curry, 
Jacob Vargas, Lobo Sebastian, Rolando Molina, Lisa Rodriguez, Tommy "Tiny" 
Lister Jr., Kym E. Whitley, Amy Hill, Tamala Jones, Robin Allen, Michael 
Rapaport.
2000 - 93 minutes
Rated R (for profanity, sexual situations, and drug use).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, January 13, 2000.
I was spoiled last weekend when I got to see two of the best pictures of 
1999--P.T. Anderson's "Magnolia" and Scott Hicks' "Snow Falling on Cedars." 
But, you know, it's the first month of the new year, and as any "in-the-know" 
person should realize, the quality of films significantly drop with each year 
crossover. 2000 is a new millennium, to some a chance to start anew, whether 
it be concerning something minor, or even the full direction of their life. 
Could movie releases also possibly start fresh this January? Well, the rest 
of this month's upcoming films have yet to be seen by me, but 2000 has begun 
with Steve Carr's "Next Friday," the sequel to the despicably low-rent 1995 
comedy hit, "Friday." To put it in as gentle of a manner as humanly possible, 
"Next Friday" is an instant front-runner for the absolute worst motion 
picture to be unleashed upon movie screens in 2000.
If anyone should have the blame put on them, it should be Ice Cube himself, 
since it was he and some writing genius by the sophisticated name of D.J. 
Pooh, who penned the maddeningly stupid, dull, and completely unfunny 
screenplay. The fact that there are a string of great films each year that 
never get their rightful recognition because they fail to be awarded a strong 
theatrical release, and yet "products" by the name of "Next Friday" instantly 
come out on thousands of screens across the country, is not only a sad 
statement about the moviemaking business, but also one concerning the 
validity of audiences who will actually throw down the cash to see something 
as brain-numbingly inept as this. Granted, I went to see it opening night 
(with a theater fairly packed for a Wednesday evening), but at least I have 
two excuses: (1) It's sort of my duty to wade through such trash to get to 
the film gems, so I can ward readers away from the former category, and (2) I 
got in with my Hoyts 2000 Season Pass, and didn't have to pay one cent. What 
I lost, however, are 93 minutes of my precious life that I could have been 
putting to better use--you know, by getting my head smashed in with a large, 
metal hammer, or receiving refreshing root canal surgery.
Now this is only a guess, so don't hold it against me if I get it wrong, but 
I think the premise of "Next Friday" goes something like this: Craig Jones 
(Ice Cube), the pot-smoking "hero" of the film's predecessor, is still living 
at home with his father, Mr. Jones (John Witherspoon), showing no signs of 
attempting to partake in responsibility for his fully adult self, or even 
getting a job. Believing that what Craig needs is a change of atmosphere, Mr. 
Jones takes him to stay with his Uncle Elroy (Don Curry), who has recently 
won the lottery and moved to the suburbs with a much younger wife by the name 
of Suga (Kym E. Whitley). 
The rest of the movie, all of which is set on a Friday, of course, consists 
of nothing more than one occurrence happening after the next, none, or rarely 
any, of which are connected to anything else in the so-called story. There 
are two crooks from the original who have escaped from prison and have set 
out to seek revenge on Craig. Then there is a crazy pregnant woman (Tamala 
Jones) and her chubby sidekick (Robin Allen) who are out to destroy the 
belongings of Craig's cousin (Mike Epps) until he takes responsibility for 
his unborn child. Nothing comes of this subplot, by the way, and like every 
other character in the film, it is played for gratuitous laughs and no 
attempts is ever made to develop anyone beyond a broad caricature. In fact, 
'caricature' may be too kind a word to describe the zero-dimensional 
characters, all of which are so inanely vacuous that I often felt as if I was 
watching a blank, white wall that kept cussing at me, with an occasional gust 
of marijuana smoke blowing in front of my view.
I've got one question for the entire cast, crew, and studio, New Line 
Cinemas, and then I'm just leaving this movie alone forever. It's something I 
ask many films of this low, low caliber, because I am always left wondering 
it. I never get an answer, but if anyone who was involved in "Next Friday" 
happens to read this, could you please e-mail FilmFan16@aol.com and offer up 
an insightful answer? Here goes: Was there ever a minutiae of a second, 
either during preproduction, filming, or post-production, where you actually 
warped your mind into thinking that you were making a motion picture worth 
any sort of value whatsoever?
Okay, I'm through. May I never have to think about this heaping piece of 
rancid garbage for the remainder of my life--well, okay, at least until I 
write my Worst of 2000 essay next January.

Author
Michael Dequina
        Released in 1995, the low-budget comedy _Friday_ was obviously meant  to
be a big showcase for its co-writer/star/executive producer, Ice Cube. 
However, it was Cube's co-star, a then-unknown stand-up comedian by the 
name of Chris Tucker, who was ultimately credited for the film's modest 
but solid box office returns and even greater popularity in video stores
(where it is still a rental and sales hit). With such a profitable
investment-to-return ratio, a follow-up is inevitable, so now we get to
see what happens _Next_Friday_. But with Tucker having long graduated
into bigger-budget starring roles, one wishes that Cube and New Line
Cinema had left well enough alone.
        Although it prominently featured the now-famous hyper comic stylings of
Tucker, the original _Friday_ was distinguished by its decidedly laid
back tone and execution. Sort of a lighthearted tonic against the
traditionally dour and violent cinematic portrayals of South Central Los
Angeles, the film followed one especially eventful 24 hours in the lives
of a close knit South Central neighborhood, and director F. Gary Gray
(who himself has moved on to higher-profile and -budget projects) and
writers Cube and DJ Pooh perfectly captured the often-lumbering rhythms
of everyday life: moments of eventful activity padded by stretches of
inactivity that is interesting in its own way. The film presented the 
'hood as a typical community, populated by people all with their own
little quirks, some more eccentric than others. As such, _Friday_ was, if
not exactly groundbreaking cinema, a likable film--not to mention at
times one that was quite funny, thanks to Tucker and his memorable
pothead character, the aptly named Smokey. 
        For _Next_Friday_, Cube (now writing solo) and director Steve Carr
decide to compensate for Tucker's absence (for the record, Smokey is
mentioned as being in drug rehab) by creating some manic energy of their
own in the script department. _Next_Friday_'s more quickly paced story
transplants Cube's rather blah Craig Jones from the 'hood to the home of
his uncle Elroy (Don "DC" Curry) and wisecracking cousin Day-Day (Mike
Epps), who--after winning the lottery--live in a fairly upscale
neighborhood in the suburban haven of Rancho Cucamonga. Craig is sent
there by his dog catcher father (John Witherspoon, the only other major
returnee) to stay out of trouble--which, of course, is not far behind: it
turns out the stereotypically boorish Latino drug dealers across the
street have a beef with Day-Day; and Deebo (Tommy "Tiny" Lister, Jr.),
the bully whom Craig had beaten at the end of the previous film, has
escaped from prison and is out for revenge. 
        Plot details such as these, however, take a back seat to individual
gags.  Where the first film was fairly grounded in reality, _Next_Friday_
is all about outrageousness. Craig's father spends most of the movie
wearing a uniform stained with dog excrement. Uncle Elroy indulges in
wild sex with his girlfriend Suga (Kym E. Whitley), who, in turn, would
like to "keep it in the family" and get down and dirty with Craig. 
Across the street, the drug dealers get down and dirty themselves with a
few "bitches" (which shows how well women are portrayed in this
installment). Craig gets into a knock-down, drag-out fight with the
flamboyant owner of the record store where Day-Day works. And, since it
wouldn't be a _Friday_ without it, there's a lot of marijuana, which is
given an even more prominent role. These bits may sound funny here in
print, but in execution--and when added to a number of other jokes
attempting the same shocking effect--it's all a bit too much.
        That could not be said of the original, whose easy-going way took its 
time to endear itself to the audience. _Next_Friday_ is always in your
face, and in laying on all the outrageousness, Cube sacrifices a key
element to _Friday_'s appeal: a surprising amount of heart. Not only does
_Next_Friday_ not have any, it also lacks any soul.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
1999 was a great year for film, especially when it came to creating
refreshingly original scripts.  Whether it involved journeys through the
brains of superstars or amphibians falling from the sky, screenwriters
upped the ante in '99, showing that stuff like The Out-of-Towners and
Wild Wild West just don't cut it anymore.  Tired stories, usually
remakes or film versions of television shows, floundered at the box
office, while repeat business for movies like The Sixth Sense and The
Blair Witch Project signaled the public's exhaustion with the same ol'
same ol'.
Gotcha.  Forget that whole paragraph.  This is 2000, baby.  The 21st
century (for those of you that can't count).  The Willennium.  And
what's the first film that comes our way?  A harebrained sequel of a
movie that was, at best, mediocre.  No, I'm not talking about Shaft
Returns or Blade 2 (they aren't until later this year).  The film in
question is Next Friday, a lifeless follow-up to the 1995 underachiever
Friday.
Friday wasn't totally devoid of entertainment value.  In fact, it was
often pretty funny.  The plotless mess didn't perform too admirably at
the box office, but it was a huge video rental and is probably best
known for launching the career of Chris Tucker (Money Talks).  Friday
also boosted the careers of Boyz in the Hood co-stars Nia Long and
Regina King, and was the directorial debut of the marginally talented
F.Gary Gray, who later found success helming Set it Off and The
Negotiator.  But Tucker, Long, King and Gray are all absent from this
miserable project.
Making a sequel to Friday without Tucker is like Thanksgiving without
the turkey.  But, speaking of turkey, Ice Cube returns from the original
film, and he's as plump and round as a Butterball bird.  Mr. Cube (Three
Kings) reprises his role of Craig Jones, a dumpy, perpetually
unemployed, wannabe playa from the hood in south central Los Angeles.
In Friday, Craig and his sidekick Smokey (Tucker) had to raise $200 to
keep the neighborhood bully Deebo (Tom 'Tiny' Lister Jr.) from kicking
the crap out of them.  As the film ended, Craig beat Deebo with a brick
and became somewhat of a neighborhood hero as the tyrant was hauled off
to prison.  Next Friday's story is remarkably similar to its
predecessor.  In fact, you just have to replace the following words:
ˇ Change `hood' to `suburbs'
ˇ Change `Smokey' to `cousin'
ˇ Change `$200' to `$3,800'
ˇ Change `neighborhood bully' to `property tax collector'
ˇ Change `kicking the crap out of them' to `foreclosing on their house'
It's just that simple.  The sequel takes place years after the original,
and the hapless Craig is still unemployed, his buddy Smokey is
conveniently in rehab, his foul-bowel dad is still catching dogs and his
arch-enemy Deebo is still in the clink.  But the word on the street is
that Deebo plans to bust out of the joint and mess up Craig real good.
So, to protect his son, Mr. Jones (John Witherspoon) decides to send his
boy to live with his brother Uncle Elroy (Don `D.C.' Curry).
A recent resident of the hood, Uncle Elroy escaped his past by winning a
cool million in the lottery and paying cash for a giant house on a
cul-de-sac in posh Rancho Cucamonga.  Or, as Craig says after rolling up
on his peeps crib, `fake-ass Brady Bunch.'  Of course, the secluded
street still offers both a love interest (Tamala Jones, Blue Streak) and
an antagonistic Latino family as neighbors.  No wonder the only white
person in the whole film is the guy that delivers the notice that Uncle
Elroy's house is being foreclosed on due to delinquent taxes.  And the
white guy (Michael Rapaport) doesn't even appear in the credits.
The strange thing about the Friday films is that the characters can
never think of an original way to get the money they need to get out of
trouble.  In the first film, Craig never even got the cash, and the
sequel is nearly as stupid in that regard.  Films like Risky Business or
The Brady Bunch or even Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo offer characters that
are motivated to earn those frogpelts.  I guess that's what you get when
you have a rapper write the script to your film.
Next Friday is the directorial debut of Steve Carr and, quite frankly,
the film shows the uneven pacing of a novice.  Toss in Day-Day's psycho
pregnant ex-girlfriend and her chubby sidekick sister, a killer
pit-bull, numerous pot scenes and a flurry of cheap jokes and derogatory
female characters, and you've basically got yourself an R-rated,
three-part episode of The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air.  Hey, I warned you
that it was the Willennium.
1:35 - R for adult language, drug use and deviant sexual content
