Title
Review for Hercules (1997)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Steve Rhodes
     It is no wonder that the Disney executives are scratching their
collectives heads over the disappointing performance of their big
animated movie of the summer.  Whereas their last two and much more
financially successful summer movies, POCAHONTAS and THE HUNCHBACK OF
NOTRE DAME, featured unlikely cartoon heroes, their latest has a star
straight from central casting.
     Since we live in an age of superheroes and action figures, what
better place to look for material than the gods of Greek mythology?
And what better choice for the protagonist than that guy with bulging
pecs, Hercules?  Surely, the executives must have reasoned, the kids
will flock to HERCULES in droves and come back to see it again and
again.
     Why this has not transpired as anticipated is unclear.  Perhaps
there is something lacking in the implementation of the idea, but more
likely it has to do with the picture's competition and with the
obsession of this summer's audiences for the action blockbuster of the
week.  For whatever reason, the film is much better than its box office
receipts indicate, and worth a visit if you have not seen it yet.
     Like most Disney movies, the script by John Musker, Ron Clements,
Bob Shaw, Don McEnery and Irene Mecchi, plays fast and loose with the
traditional story so as to extract the maximum number of laughs and to
pack a lot of mythology into an hour and a half.  Except for classical
scholars, the rest of us will happily accept the results.
     In Disney's version of the story, Hades, voiced with great glee
and energy by James Woods, plans a "hostile takeover " of Mount
Olympus.  Hades is told that only Hercules will be able to defeat him
so he tries to makes baby Hercules mortal, but through a slip-up, a
small portion of his deity remains, leaving him with the strength of
the gods.
     Hercules, as voiced by Tate Donovan and as drawn by British
illustrator Gerald Scarfe, is arguably not the most interesting
character in the film.  Much better is Hades, and even better still is
Meg (Megara), voice by Susan Egan.  ("My friends call me Meg, that is
if I had any friends.")  Meg, Hercules's girlfriend and Hades's human
trap to try to bring Hercules down, is played with sassy and mocking
humor.  Meg's confidence and smart mouth makes many good lines come off
like jewels.  She keeps taunting Hercules by referring to him only as
"wonderboy."
     Hercules and some of the other characters are drawn with strange
and awkward proportions, especially the feet.  Hercules's, in
particular, are half again too large.  Gerald Scarfe's drawing style
becomes one of the movie's low points.  On the other hand, some, Meg
and Hades being two, are drawn strikingly well.  Hades has red or blue
fire shooting out of his head depending on his mood, and Meg has
provocative bangs and a slightly revealing gown.
     As Hercules grows up, his nickname is Jerkules because of his
clumsiness.  Through the help of a little satyr named Phil
(Philoctetes), played with his usual style of humor by Danny DeVito,
Hercules trains to become a superhero.  Hercules has been promised by
his father Zeus (voice by Rip Torn) that if he proves himself a true
hero, he can become a god again.
     As in most Disney creations, comical sidekicks abound.  Hercules
rides on Pegasus, "a magnificent horse with the brain of a bird."
Hades has two bumbling assistants, Pain (voice by Bobcat Goldthwait)
and Panic (voice by Matt Frewer).  Someone goes to the underworld, when
one of The Fates (voices by Amanda Plummer,  Carole Shelley, and Paddi
Edwards) cut their soul's string.
     The show has many good musical numbers with the best songs by a
group of black soul singers called The Muses (voices by Lillias White,
LaChanze, Cheryl Freeman, Roz Ryan, and Vaneese Thomas), who come off
of a Greek vase.
     The best jokes, and the film needs even more, come from its
self-deprecating humor.  Once Hercules become famous, his action
figures are sold everywhere and his image adorns everything including a
fast-food cup in the shape of a pillar.  There are even fancy Hercules
Stores and AirHerc sandals.
     Hercules reasons with his father that he is ready for divinity.
"I'm the most famous person in all Greece," he brags.  "I'm an action
figure!"  But Zeus demands more from his son and gets it.
     After many battles, the best being the well choreographed
destruction of the almost unstoppable Hydra, Hercules does return to
his place in the clouds.
     In the press kit, conveniently on CD-ROM these days, the
filmmakers say one of their main goals was to make the story
"accessible."  They succeeded admirably and delightfully.  More
families should skip one of those homogenous action flicks one week and
see HERCULES instead.  That way they could laugh with the film rather
than at it.
     HERCULES runs just 1:30.  It is correctly rated G and is fine for
all ages.  My son Jeffrey, age 8, and his friend Alan, also 8, both
thought the movie was "really good."  They both said they liked it much
better than THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME and even better than THE LION
KING.  As they left the theater, they were busy ticking off their
favorite monsters from the movie.  I recommend the picture to you and
your whole family and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) I skipped the last two Disney features because I
thought they looked exactly like the previous four - beautiful
adolescent heroes, nonbeautiful comic-relief sidekicks, simplistic
morality, and a song here and there. 
Looks like I should have skipped this one too. 
If you have kids and feel obligated to see this movie, go right ahead.
It is a clone of all the Disney features since THE LITTLE MERMAID. You
know exactly what you're getting into. If you're like me - looking for
something original or fresh, then you can probably skip this one. 
The story is a Disneyfied version of Hercules. Lots of the details are
wrong (see http://net.indra.com/~mmapes/her_gz97.htm), but the basic
story is about right. Hercules is the mortal son of Zeus, but he has the
strength of a god.  Brave Herc decides to become a hero and sets out to
prove himself by fighting all sorts of nasty monsters. Eventually, he
gains the notice of a jealous god (Hades, not Hera) whom he must later
confront. This being Disney, there is of course a love interest, Megara. 
As usual, the only character that's not white bread with mayo is the
villain. James Woods steals the show as a very show-businesslike CEO of
the underworld, complete with flaming blue hair.  
Of the songs, two stand out: one because it's bad, the other because
it's good. "Go the Distance" is a thankfully short gaggy schmaltzy
you-can-do-anything number, and "Zero to Hero" accompanies a packed
montage of heroic feats and mythological references that actually might
merit a second viewing. Parents who feel obligated to buy every Disney
movie shouldn't mind seeing that sequecne the first 15 times. There's
probably a lot there. 
One final note deserves mentioning; the credits zoom by at an unusually
high speed. Most people walk out during the credits anyway, so the crawl
speed really shouldn't matter. Nevertheless, the credits rocket upwards
insultingly fast. A lot of people worked very hard to produce HERCULES,
and they deserve better.
(c) 1997 Marty Mapes
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Phil Brady
Well, I had ducked both Pocohantas and The Lion King, so continued
U.S. citizenship required that I go see the latest Disney animation,
Hercules. Not that I wasn't looking forward to it..the promos made it
clear that this was much lighter fare than recent Mouse droppings. And a
happy film it is. An opening scan of  Grecian urns is accompanied by the
grave tones of  a Charlton Heston voiceover, but before he gets into it,
he is interrupted. "Too boring!", says a group of Muses, stepping down
from their picture on an urn. Graciously, Chuck accedes to our new
narrators, who form a rockin' Greek chorus (and anyone who's seen The
Little Shop of Horrors can tell you: hip black chicks make the very best
Greek choruses).
The basic story is normal for this franchise: coming-of-age for a
not-so-typical youth. Greek mythology meets Damn Yankees is the
high-concept blurb. Herc's quest to become a hero and return to Olympus
is thwarted by the plotting Hades and Meg(ara), but you can see Joe, Mr.
Applegate and Lola quite clearly. Meg works for Hades, in a standard
seduction/soul-acquisition gig, but as she brings down Hercules, she
falls in love with him. With apologies to Ray Walston, James Woods makes
a much funnier Hades.  Memorable for playing many jittery, dangerous
heavies, Jimmy's real persona is funny, and very close to the Hades
character, and Hades is played as a stand-up comic trying to take over
the universe. "What is this, a crowd or a mosaic?", he asks when his
opening joke bombs. His sarcastic exasperations over his minions'
failures are very funny, and it's nice to see that Bobcat Goldthwait has
found his niche, as a wretched goblin in service to Hades.
Additional casting gems are Danny DeVito as a not-so-Yoda mentor to
young Hercules, and Rip Torn as Zeus. The movie makes a parody of its
own genre, showing merchandising run rampant when Hercules becomes
famous. When Zeus tells Herc that he isn't a hero yet, he protests: "But
I'm an action-figure!" Priceless is a scene where an incredulous Hades
notices that Bobcat is wearing "Herc-Air" sandals. Can't say much about
the music, though. It gets us from this scene to that scene, but all of
it was forgotten ten seconds later. They shoulda stolen some of the Damn
Yankees' music, too. The designated single, "Go the Distance," meanders
around, bumping into things. Michael Bolton does a cover over the
closing credits, but methinks the coast is clear for a non-Disney Oscar
in the music category.
Hercules was a very enjoyable film, and although I didn't leave the
theater humming the music, I can sing its praises.

Author
James Berardinelli
Featuring the voices of: Tate Donovan, Joshua Keaton, Roger Bart, 
      Danny DeVito, James Woods, Susan Egan, Rip Torn, Samantha Eggar, 
      Bobcat Goldthwait, Matt Frewer 
Directors: Ron Clements and John Musker
Producers: Ron Clements, John Musker, Alice Dewey
Screenplay: John Musker, Ron Clements, Bob Shaw, Don McEnery, 
      Irene Mecchi
Music: Alan Menken
Lyrics: David Zippel
U.S. Distributor: Walt Disney Pictures
     Let me start by saying that HERCULES, Walt Disney Pictures' 35th 
animated feature, makes for good family entertainment.  Good, not great.  
While this film is capable of providing a ninety minute diversion for 
both kids and adults, it's a far cry from such recent classics as THE 
LITTLE MERMAID, BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, and ALADDIN.  A mere five years 
ago, Disney was developing top-notch animated movies on a regular basis.  
Now, in 1997, the studio's efforts have become dull and routine.  
Complacency has set in.  No one is pushing Disney and revenue is up -- 
where's the incentive to stop the assembly-line animated feature 
production and get back to creative movie making?  HERCULES has the 
dubious distinction of being the least-enchanting cartoon Disney has 
fashioned in over a decade.
     Students of mythology may be irritated by the changes made to the 
legend of Hercules.  Many of these are understandable, given the 
studio's espousal of family values.  After all, how much light-hearted 
fun can you have telling the tale of the bastard son of a god and mortal 
who grew up to kill his wife and children?  So, instead, Disney has made 
Hercules the divine offspring of a couple that represents Olympian 
marital bliss:  Zeus and Hera.  Unfortunately, Hades, who is preparing a 
"hostile takeover bid" of the big mountain, has it on good authority 
that Hercules is the only one who can foul up his plans.  So, using his 
inept assistants Panic and Pain, he has Hercules turned into a human.  
When Dad and Mom learn about this, they realize that their son, who is 
no longer immortal, cannot live on Olympus, and they allow him to be 
raised by Greek foster parents.
     The majority of the film centers on the adult Hercules performing 
all sorts of grueling tasks to clean up the ancient city of Thebes ("the 
Big Olive" -- if you can make it there, you can make it anywhere) and 
establish his status as a hero.  His mentor is a satyr named Phil, who 
fills the role of the irascible-but-lovable sidekick.  Meanwhile, Hades 
is out to get Zeus' son, throwing all sorts of obstacles in his path -- 
hydras, giant boulders, and a Mae West-type damsel in distress named 
Megara.
     HERCULES comes close to being a remake of the THE LITTLE MERMAID 
with a male hero.  One could easily argue that all Disney animated films 
are similar (for example, the hero is always a loner who proves 
herself/himself through some deed of self-sacrifice), but HERCULES is a 
little too blatant in its cannibalization of past themes and plot 
points.  Besides that, this film has a distractingly episodic feel.  
Instead of coming together as a cohesive story, it's like a bunch of 
thinly-related events strung one-by-one to reach a ninety-minute running 
time.
     The most disappointing aspect of HERCULES is the amateurish quality 
of the artwork.  The "excuse" for this is that the animators at Disney 
were trying a new, angular style (one that is attributed to production 
designer Gerald Scarfe).  In fact, this approach makes the film look 
rushed and, at times, incomplete.  It is never a visual marvel -- even 
the computer-generated scenes fail to impress.  The sequences intended 
to offer the biggest spectacle -- Olympus and the Underworld -- provoke 
little more than a yawn.  
     With HERCULES, composer Alan Menken is scoring his sixth animated 
Disney feature.  His work on three (MERMAID, BEAUTY, and ALADDIN) has 
been noteworthy.  It has been adequate on another (POCAHONTAS).  
However, the songs for last year's HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME were generic 
and lifeless, and there's little sign of improvement here.  The fact 
that Menken tries a different style for this music (the Greek Chorus is 
a gospel soul group) doesn't change its inherent banality.  Simply put, 
this is a boring soundtrack. 
     On the other hand, HERCULES' vocal characterizations are uniformly 
good.  Joshua Keaton and Tate Donovan team up effectively as the title 
character.  Susan Egan (who played BEAUTY AND THE BEAST's Belle on 
stage) is suitably sassy as Meg.  Danny DeVito is a riot as Phil, as are 
Bobcat Goldthwait and Matt Frewer as Pain and Panic.  Rip Torn makes for 
a nicely authoritative Zeus.  Cameos include the likes of Amanda Plummer 
(one of the Fates), Paul Shaffer (Hermes), Hal Holbrook (Hercules' 
foster father), and Charlton Heston (the narrator).  But the real star 
of the show is James Woods, whose Hades is the most vibrant Disney 
creation since Robin Williams' Genie.  Hades is a lively villain with a 
great repertoire of one-liners.  And, although Woods isn't as much of a 
vocal chameleon as Williams, he's close enough that it hardly matters.
     HERCULES is saturated with cultural references -- points should be 
awarded for anyone who spots them all.  There are nods to MacDonald's 
(over 5,000,001 served), "chariot chasers", I LOVE LUCY ("Zeusy, I'm 
home!"), Siskel and Ebert ("two thumbs way, way up for our leading 
lady"), and other pop phenomena.  Most amusing of all, however, is the 
way HERCULES willingly lampoons its own reputation, taking several jabs 
at the inevitable merchandising whirlwind that surrounds its release.  
     So, although HERCULES is undoubtedly one of the summer's most 
lightly enjoyable motion pictures, I couldn't shake the feeling that it 
could have been and done more.  Those on the lookout for another Disney 
masterpiece won't uncover it here.  However, anyone with the modest goal 
of finding a screen solution to the problem of a family outing need not 
worry:  Disney's 35th animated motion picture fills the prescription.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Berge Garabedian
Disney's 35th feature-film foray into the world of cartoon animation
is set within the mythological world of the ancient Gods, in the
historical setting of Greece. 
PLOT:
Greek God Zeus's son Hercules is kidnapped by a couple of incompetent
underlings of the evil Hades, accidentally placed down to Earth, and
brought up by some human beings. To recapture his God-hood, Hercules
must prove to his real father Zeus, that he can be a true hero. While
all of this goes on, the menacing Hades prepares to take over as the
ruler of the after-life.
CRITIQUE:
Uninspired, semi-interesting, and sometimes funny cinematic attempt
by Disney to cash in on another marketable historical myth. This film
seemed destined for success, but didn't seem to fully hit all of the
right notes on its way to the concert. I thought that it basically
lacked the heart of THE LION KING (7.5/10), the humor of ALADDIN
(7.5/10), and the romance of BEAUTY AND THE BEAST (8/10). I was most
disappointed by the lack of realism in the "love" that ultimately
materialized between Hercules and the New York-accented Meg. I found
it to be quite weak.
The hero story line was nice, and cool to keep track of, but
ultimately the romance, the songs or the bad guy have to stick out for
a children's animated tale to fully succeed, and unfortunately for
Disney, this one contained no such stickout. Having said that, James
Woods did make an excellent bad guy voice for Hades, but the
character itself never seemed to be such a real threat to anyone but
himself (Word on the street is that Hades was originally scripted as a
slow, menacing character until James Woods auditioned for the role and
impressed the casting directors with his rapid-fire style. The script
was rewritten, but Woods ad-libbed many lines.)
The songs in the film were passable, but could someone please explain
the connection between the re-occurring Motown quintet in a film set
in ancient Greece? Another aspect of the film that didn't seem too
kosher in my opinion was Hercules' trainer in the film, Phil (DeVito),
who is generally supposed to be cute and adorable in films as such, but
stood as half-man, half-goat in this movie. Not your cutest character
ever invented by the Mickey-crew, that's for sure! 
All in all, I would recommend this film to all kids (mind you, I
don't see this becoming a classic by any stretch of the imagination),
and some adults who are interested in viewing a quick (88 minutes),
harmless animated story about the Greek Gods, and some hip, quirky
one-liners from James Woods. If not, warm up those nachos, and go out
to rent any of the three Disney films that I suggested earlier.
You've got heart, humor and romance on the tab. Make your choice.
Little Known Facts: 
Danny DeVito stands 5"0, hails from New Jersey (hence the name of his
production company: Jersey Films), and has been married to the
infamous barmaid from the super-successful TV sitcom "Cheers", Rhea
Perlman since 1982.
Ron Clements and John Musker have also co-written and co-directed
ALADDIN (8/10), THE LITTLE MERMAID, and THE GREAT MOUSE DETECTIVE.
During one scene in HERCULES, when Phil (DeVito) is hit by a
discarded painter's palette he cleans himself up using a lion's fur
that bears a striking resemblance to Scar from THE LION KING (7.5/10).

Author
Michael Dequina
After making steps toward maturity with 1995's serious-minded
Pocahontas and last year's vastly underrated dark masterpiece The Hunchback
of Notre Dame, Disney's 35th full-length animated feature, John Musker and
Ron Clements's comic adventure Hercules, finds the studio in retrograde.
While this shift in gears is a bit disappointing after the admirable
ambitions of the previous two films, there is no denying that Hercules is a
rousing crowdpleaser--the type of light, fun family entertainment the Disney
name has become synonymous with over the years.
The first few minutes of Hercules could not be more of a contrast
from the dark opening of Hunchback, in which the evil Judge Frollo kills
baby Quasimodo's mother attempts to drown him in a well--we see the
absolutely adorable baby Hercules (whose big head makes up two-thirds of his
entire body), superstrong son of gods Zeus (voiced by Rip Torn) and Hera
(Samantha Eggar), cuddling with his pet, baby Pegasus.  The bliss on Mount
Olympus is short-lived, however; baby Herc is soon snatched away by god of
the underworld Hades (a well-cast James Woods, more smarmy used car salesman
than devilish overlord) who feeds the child a potion that makes him mortal
and thus unable to rejoin his parents in the land of the gods.  Under the
training of wisecracking satyr Philoctetes (Danny DeVito, in top
wisecracking form), the strong and brave Herc (voiced as a teen by Joshua
Keaton and Roger Bart; voiced as an adult by Tate Donovan) becomes, if you
will, the Michael Jordan of ancient Greece, admired by millions and earning
millions through endorsement deals.  But to regain his divine aura, he must
prove to be a "true hero," and standing in his way is Hades, who plots to
take over Olympus for his own dastardly purposes; and possibly Megara (Susan
Egan, the original Belle in Broadway's Beauty and the Beast), a
sharp-tongued damsel whose true motives are not clear.
As with all Disney animated features, the music is one of the main
attractions--or, at least, it should be.  For Hercules, regular Disney
tunesmith Alan Menken, this time collaborating with Tony-winning lyricist
David Zippel, provides his most uneven work for a Disney film.  The majority
of the singing is done by a quintet of Muses (Lilias White, Cheryl Freeman,
LaChanze, Roz Ryan, and Vaneese Thomas), a Greek chorus of narrators that is
part gospel choir, part Motown girl group.  Their soulful numbers, which are
more than slightly reminiscent of Menken's catchy '50s-flavored work in
Little Shop of Horrors, provide a toe-tapping (if not particularly memorable
lyrically) musical framework for the film.  But Menken's more traditional,
formulaic numbers fall flat.  Phil's dreadful comic number "One Last Hope"
picks up right after Hunchback's weakest song, the uninspired gargoyle
showcase "A Guy Like You"; and "Go the Distance," Herc's big "I Want" song
(his _only_ number in the film), is a forgettable, sappy ballad that
shallowly expresses his desires without shedding much inner light into the
character.  Menken would have been better off spreading the R&B motif
through the entire picture--a point reinforced by the film's best song, "I
Won't Say (I'm in Love)," sung in the style of a '50s girl group by Meg and
the Muses.  Why the producers chose a version of "Go the Distance" (sung by,
of all people, Michael Bolton) to serve as the film's pop single instead of
a rendition of this memorable song is beyond me.
Hercules also leaves a little something to be desired on the visual
level.  While the artwork and animation is perfectly serviceable, the rather
simplistic art style is a bit of a comedown after the impressive visual
splendors of Hunchback.  There is only one truly visually spectacular
sequence (Hercules's wild battle with a computer-generated Hydra) and only
one character with a striking look--Hades, whose head-topping flame changes
color depending upon his mood.  Meg's appearance is particularly
disappointing; a femme fatale is something new and exciting for the genre,
but her animators aren't up to the task.  Both curvy and sharply angular,
jarringly so, she is the first unattractive female lead in recent Disney
animated features.  But where the artists fall short, Egan makes up,
delivering Meg's lines with the right balance of sass and teasing allure.
And what about Hercules?  He's big, strong, well-meaning... and
dull.  Sure, he has all the muscles; he can lift heavy objects over his
head; but no distinctly interesting personality shines through.  At least
Aladdin had his life of crime and Prince Ali charade, John Smith his
"consent vs. descent" issue with Pocahontas, Simba his guilt over his
father's death, the Beast and Quasimodo their angst over their appearances.
Nothing is really made of Herc's main conflict (godly strength trapped in a
mortal body), save for one scene in which the teenage Herc is called
"Jerkules" after inadvertently destroying some architecture.  He displays
some cockiness when he first meets Meg, but it's quickly thrown out the
window; perhaps a longer-lasting dash of that would have added something to him.
Even with a vapid void in the center, Hercules is still top-flight
entertainment for the family, even if it does not quite qualify as an
instant classic.  It should have no problem reversing Disney animation's
slowly eroding box office grosses, which makes this Disney fan worry.  With
the light, bouncy Hercules's box-office success just about assured, will the
Mouse completely abandon, unjustly so, more experimental and mature animated
works like Hunchback?        
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html

Author
Steve Kong
I've skipped the last two Disney animated films because of a lack of
motivation to see them.  And I would have missed Hercules also if it were
not for the fact that the guys who did Aladdin are the ones who made Hercules.
Hercules starts off well; I never thought that Greek mythology could be set
to gospel soul music.  The story of Hercules is not true to the myth, but
it is entertaining enough that one can put that aside.  And the kids
wouldn't know the difference.  In Hercules, Zeus (Rip Torn) and Hera
(Samantha Eggar) have a little child, Hercules (Tate Donovan).  Because of
a prediction that Hercules will stop evil Hades' (James Woods) plan to take
over Mount Olympus and the world, one night Hercules is taken away from
Mount Olympus by helpers of Hades.  The two helpers, Pain (Bob Goldthwait)
and Panic (Matt Frewer) take Little Hercules to Earth and feed him formula
to make him a mere mortal.  But, they don't feed him all of it, by
accident, and Hercules becomes a mortal who retains hid godly power.
Hercules is raised by a couple who discover him after Pain and Panic
abandon him.  As a teen Hercules gets outcast because of his amazing
strength and clumsiness.  He discovers that he is the son of Zeus after
becoming depressed.  He wants to be a god and join his father on Mount
Olympus.  In order for this though he needs to be a hero.  On his quest to
be a hero, he meets Meg (Susan Egan), a strong self-reliant woman, for whom
he falls in love with.  But, Meg has other motives, at least that's how it
seems.
Hercules is an above average Disney film.  It does not rise above Disney's
earlier films, Aladdin, Lion King, or Beauty and The Beast.  For me the
biggest thing that defines an animate Disney film is the music.  And though
some of the music is highly entertaining, none of it is memorable.  The
soundtrack to the film, by Alan Menken is just plain boring and uninteresting.
The film itself moves along quickly, and takes chances in places.  It
takes, for instance, the chance to poke fun at the merchandising blitz that
Disney films create.  The animation is well done; I especially enjoyed the
animation for Hades and the (computer generated) multi-headed beast that
Hercules battles.
The person who seems to be having the most fun is James Woods as Hades.
His Woods is all over the places and comes close to Robin Williams as the
Genie in Aladdin.  Woods does don't hold back, and is one of two people in
Hercules that is memorable.  Susan Egan as Meg also memorable.  Her strong
and sexy Meg is pure entertainment.  She is the exact opposite of being the
typical damsel-in-distress.
Hercules is an entertaining but flawed film.   If you'r a parent and have
children wanting to go see it in the theatres, you don't need to worry,
Hercules is entertaining on two levels.  You won't be bored.  I am
recommending Hercules but not with too much conviction, there and better
animated Disney films.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Disney)
Voices:  Tate Donovan, James Woods, Danny DeVito, Susan Egan, Rip Torn,
Joshua Keaton, Bobcat Goldthwait, Matt Frewer.
Screenplay:  Ron Clements & John Musker, Bob Shaw & Donald McEnery and
Irene Mecchi.
Producers:  Alice Dewey and Ron Clements & John Musker.
Directors:  Ron Clements & John Musker.
MPAA Rating:  G.
Running Time:  90 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Over the past few years, while most studio event films were growing
bigger, louder and dumber, the folks at Disney were doing something
terribly underhanded with their animated features.  Like cereal makers
injecting twelve essential vitamins and minerals into our Frosted Sugar
Bombs, they were slipping competent story-telling into our entertainment.
In films like POCAHONTAS, TOY STORY and THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME, the
Mouse gave our unsuspecting children reason to expect thematic depth,
complex villains and appealing heroes even while they were being amused
and dazzled.
     It's all terribly insidious, this raising of expectations, and not
just for audiences.  Expectations in the Disney boardroom were raised by
the $530 million in domestic grosses racked up by ALADDIN and THE LION
KING, making the mere $140 million for POCAHONTAS and $100 million for
HUNCHBACK look like chump change.  Perhaps, Uncle Walt's successors may
have concluded, audiences would rather eat a salad when they want their
twelve essential vitamins and minerals.
     All this being prologue to the observation that HERCULES, a frisky
and energetic offering from directors John Musker and Ron Clements (who
helped revive the moribund Disney animation empire with the frisky and
energetic THE LITTLE MERMAID and ALADDIN), is merely a pleasant way to
spend a Saturday afternoon.  It's a typically Disney-loose version of the
Greek myth of Hercules (right down to giving him the Roman name rather
than the Greek Heracles) in which the young hero (Tate Donovan) must prove
his mettle by foiling the evil plans of Hades (James Woods), lord of the
underworld.  Assistance comes in the form of a hero-training satyr named
Phil (Danny DeVito); trouble comes in the form of a tough-talking woman
named Meg (Susan Egan) who may or may not be on Herc's side; comic relief
comes in the form of Hades' two inept assistants, Pain (Bobcat Goldthwait)
and Panic (Matt Frewer).
     No trouble so far...in fact, there's quite a bit to recommend
HERCULES.  British cartoonist Gerald Scarfe, who acted as production
designer, gives HERCULES a distinct look full of sharp angles and stylized
characterizations which separates it from other recent Disney efforts.
There are a couple of very catchy tunes by Disney stalwart Alan Menken and
new lyricist David Zippel, including a wonderful Brill Building-style love
song called "I Won't Say."  Musker and Clements also trot out the kind of
pop culture references which worked so well in ALADDIN, including quotes
of THE KARATE KID, MIDNIGHT COWBOY and THE SEVEN YEAR ITCH as well as some
deft satire of over-saturated merchandising.
     If HERCULES had come up with a heart to match its art, it might have
been deserving of that "masterpiece" label Disney affixes indiscriminately
to its animated features.  It starts out with promise, presenting the
adolescent Hercules (voiced by Joshua Keaton and perfectly rendered as a
gawky jumble of massive hands and feet) as the quintessential teen-age
outsider.  The arc of his character takes him, as one song title describes
it, from "Zero to Hero," but the screenwriting team isn't interested in
digging into how he deals with his fame, or how he is chastened by his
failures.  It's not exactly a redemption story, not exactly a quest story,
and not exactly a love story.  It is, quite simply, a cartoon.
     The fact that there's anything remotely dismissive about that term
shows how far Disney has raised the bar on animated film-making.  Even
HERCULES, which comes up short in defining its hero, delivers complex
supporting characters like Meg (a superb vocal performance by Susan Egan)
with real emotions.  After recent Disney triumphs, however, we know that
more is possible.  Children will probably be more delighted by HERCULES
than by the darker HUNCHBACK, and adults will probably enjoy James Woods'
oily wheeler-dealer manner as Hades (we all knew that the devil was really
an agent).  HERCULES is one of the better entertainments of the summer, a
big tasty bowl of Frosted Sugar Bombs.  If you want your vitamins this
time, you'll have to order a side salad with that.

Author
Joe Blenkle
    Okay, I'll admit right up front that it's hard not to be biased in
my review of Walt Disney's 35th full-length animated feature -
HERCULES.
    Over the past few months I have become acquainted with one of the
stars of the film - Meg (better known as Susan Egan). 
    Susan is also better known in another Disney role , as she played
(and originated) the role of Belle in the Broadway stage production of
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.
    I am also proud to run the Official Susan Egan Fan Page (see link
below), where fans can see the many things Susan has done in an
unbelievably short amount of time.
    But back to the present. HERCULES opens today (June 27) in
theaters nationwide and Disney fans are going to be pleasantly
surprised at this film.
    For me personally, I felt HERCULES fell a little short of other
recent Disney outings like ALADDIN and BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, but it
still holds the magic that all Disney classics do.
    The only real shortcoming of the film is that it didn't have
nearly enough singing by our beloved Meg. Susan had only one featured
song in the movie, "I Won't Say," which is a true pleasure to listen
to as she sings about her feelings toward Hercules and her disbelief
that she is falling for him.
    The movie itself is great. Hercules (Tate Donovan) is portrayed in
this film a little differently than told in ancient mythology, but the
general idea is the same. Part god and part mortal, Hercules sets
out to be a "true hero," the only way he can earn his way back to
Mount Olympus.
    But Hades (James Woods) has other plans. He is planning a hostile
takeover over Mount Olympus and he has been advised by the Three Fates
that only Hercules will stand in his way. 
    He dispatches his bumbling henchmen Panic (Matt Frewer) and Pain
(Bobcat Goldthwait) to kidnap the baby Hercules from Mount Olympus,
take him to Earth, give him a potion to make him mortal and then do
away with him.
    They only partially succeed, giving him all but a drop of the
potion which turns him mortal, but lets him retain his god-like
strength.
    Herc grows to manhood and sets out to find his roots, discovering
he is the son of Zeus (Rip Torn). Zeus tells him that his only way to
come back to Olympus is to become a true hero and to that end,
Hercules seeks out the trainer of heroes, a satyr named Phil (Danny
DeVito).
    Herc and Phil take on a relationship like Rocky and his trainer
and indeed, some of the sequences are reminiscent of the ROCKY movies.
    Phil soon gets Herc up to speed and it's off to challenge to
world, defeat all the monsters and become a hero. Along the way, Herc
becomes so famous that he has his own line of merchandise -
everything from sandles to action figures (available at a store near
you, I'm sure).
    But of course, everything isn't that simple. Hades is still out to
get Hercules and this time has a secret weapon - Meg - a young woman
who is working off her "life" sentence to Hades after dying
to save the life of her ungrateful boyfriend. 
    Meg doesn't want to get involved romantically ever again, but you
can guess what happens and the rest is "history."
    Herc's sidekick flying horse Pegasus and Phil take a dim view of
this distraction in Herc's life, but the hero won't listen to reason.
    Susan Egan and Tate Donovan do excellent jobs in the title roles.
There is a lot of humor, heartbreak and romance...but I won't give
away what happens, when or why.  The story becomes as touching as
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST in the end and HERCULES will have you leaving the
theater with a good feeling inside.
    HERCULES also stars the voice talents of Samantha Eggar as Hera;
Hal Holbrook as Amphitryon; Paul Shaffer as Hermes; and Charlton
Heston as the Narrator. 
    HERCULES is a Walt Disney Pictures production and is rated G for
General Audiences. The running time is 86 minutes and this flick rates
a perfect four stars.
See this review and more at THE MOVIE CORNER
http://www.calweb.com/~jblenkle/movies
and visit Susan Egan's Official Fan Page at:
http://www.calweb.com/~jblenkle/egan 

Author
Tim Voon
Featuring the voices of: Tate Donovan, Joshua Keaton, Roger Bart, Danny
DeVito, James Woods, Susan Egan, Rip Torn, Samantha Eggar, Bobcat
Goldthwait, Matt Frewer Directors: Ron Clements and John Musker
Screenplay: John Musker, Ron Clements, Bob Shaw, Don McEnery, Irene
Mecchi Music: Alan Menken Lyrics: David Zippel
I was excited when I heard that Disney's next new animated classic
"Hercules", would be brought to us by the creators of "Alladin". I
unrealistically expected material that carried the same humour, style
and wit; instead I found substance more reminiscent of a "Care Bear"
movie. I didn't realise that there were so many hues of "pastel" until I
visited "Mt Olympus" where every god and demigod is colour coded by
bright blues, oranges, reds and greens, embalmed in a shimmer of gold
(to show they are gods, and not just colour pencils). Perhaps these
artists have become tired of pencilling the realistic cartoon feel we
have come to expect form Disney; but going to the other extreme, and
ending up with something of an "Asterix" comic is rather amusing.
The next annoying feature was the use of "Gospel music" to help liven a
"Greek Tragedy"? Those damn sexy muses kept singing - "That's the Gospel
Truth" at the end of every commentary song, which left me wandering
whether Jesus Christ was going to suddenly make an entrance???? He
didn't.
Hercules is boring, clumsy and pure muscle with no brain. Sure this is a
"Coming of Age" movie where, boy becomes man, freak becomes famous, geek
becomes hero blah blah blah. Yeah, but in truth "We Don't Need Another
Hero". So I kept wishing Tina Turner would burst onto the screen and do
a number. She didn't.
Hades, looks like a creation from a "Beavis and Butthead" episode, and
may be mistaken for their missing triplet "Matchstick", if given half a
chance. Sure James Woods has a nice low, droll voice; who spits snippets
of wry cutting one liners, making him a hell hole of a tough Don; but
when compared to other recent Disney villains like "Jafar" and "Ursula",
he pales.
The two imps "Pain" and "Panic" come only second on my scale of
annoying, failed sidekick generated humour. Ranked first is still the
poodle and racoon from "Pochahontas". They weren't allowed to speak in
that movie, so perhaps these imps should have kept their mouth shut
throughout this one.
By far the most interesting character is "Meg", who exudes sensuality
with every hip swing, head toss, and eye blink. Whose "come ons" and
tantalising teasing makes Hercules' muscles go hard. Perhaps the movie
should have centred more around her, because without her Hercules would
have been pure meatballs without the spaghetti. Meg's musical number
with the Muses is probably this movie's highlight. I started to yawn
when the Hydra's head started to multiply by the thousands.
So "Hercules" has not quite lived up to the myth in set out to be. It's
not as romantic as "Beauty and the Beast"; not as humorous or lively as
"Alladin"; not as thoughtful and sensitive as "Hunchback"; not about
silly lions; but it's still way, way, way, way better than that little
Indian princess.

Author
John Bauer
I've been spoiled by THE LION KING.  With that film, Disney proved that they
could make an animated feature that was as multi-layered as any film --
witty, moving, at times breathtaking to look at, and with a song score that
at its best enhanced the emotional mood.  ...Oh yeah, and kids liked it, too.
 No wonder it's the most popular film in the studio's history.  It also set a
standard that more and more seems unlikely to be matched.  For as much as I
appreciated the special merits and envelope-pushing spirit of POCAHONTAS and
THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME, neither came anywhere near the same level of
achievement -- in part because the studio lost sight of its target audience
of children in its quest for LION-sized grosses.
Perhaps realizing that their reach was exceeding their grasp, Disney has
crafted their latest opus, HERCULES, with more modest goals in mind.  Rather
than try to turn an adult literary classic like HUNCHBACK into kiddie fare,
its subject is one children have been enthralled with for generations.
 Instead of using revisionist history to teach lessons in respect for other
cultures and the environment, as in POCAHONTAS, the moral of HERCULES is a
more straightforward (though still timely) message about the true nature of
heroism.  By retrenching from the outer reaches of ambition and maintaining a
fairly light-hearted tone throughout, however, this latest contender for a
place in every child's video collection feels a tad too safe.
The suspicion that HERCULES may not be a giant-killer among movies is planted
early on.  The opening 15 minutes or so are the most uninvolving of any
Disney animated film in recent memory.  After a brief but mildly amusing
setup by the 5-woman Greek chorus-cum-girl group, the scene shifts to
Olympus, where Zeus is showing off his newborn son.  What might have been an
amusing look at life among the gods turns out to be a tedious exercise in
story exposition.  This is more akin to how Disney's imitators behave, those
that haven't quite figured out that animated success lies less in how the
film is drawn than in how the tale is told.  It is disconcerting to see the
standard-bearer doing this.  Maybe they should've watched the opening of THE
LION KING a few times for inspiration.
Things improve as Herc becomes a teen, but are derailed again as he sings a
trite song about finding his place in the world.  Didn't Belle in BEAUTY AND
THE BEAST sing one of those?  Doesn't every Disney protagonist feel alone in
the world?  How about a song about being a hero instead?  (Doesn't Hercules
have any idols?)  Once Hercules reaches heroic proportions (with the only
intermittently amusing help of Phil, a satyr voiced by Danny DeVito), the
film finally gets in gear, though it takes another uninspired transition
("Let's go to Thebes.") to get us there.
As Hercules begins in earnest to prove himself by battling the forces of
Hades, the film assumes a higher level of interest more customary for Disney.
 The songs are fresher (including a funny if all-too-brief take on fame by
the chorus), the animation more intriguing (as when the screen fills with the
menace of a multi-headed monster), the humor more pointed (sometimes
literally).  And we are introduced to a Disney female like no other, the
sarcastic and jaded Meg, marvelously voiced by Susan Egan.  Though others may
prefer the devilish work of James Woods as Hades, for my money the tough but
vulnerable Meg steals the show.
By the time the final credits roll, HERCULES has managed to overcome its
plodding beginning and occasional lapses to make you feel warm all over.
 Disney's admirable record for maintaining a level of quality that is never
less than good is upheld.  But unlike THE LION KING, it's easy to spot ways
in which this film could have been a whole lot better.  ...Oh yeah, the
kids'll like it.

Author
Ben Hoffman
HERCULES may bear little more resemblance than the name of the
Greek hero we read about in school but it nevertheless is the
recounting of a heroic effort.   And it tells the young who will
love the film that you do not call someone a hero because he can
perform feats of strength; true heroism, Father Zeus tells son
Hercules, involves feats of the heart. That message is delivered in
this palatable animation that involves humor mixed with some
irreverence.
The film opens with a Greek chorus (the Muses) relating the latest
on the celebration of the birth of Hercules on Mt. Olympus where
the Greek gods live.   Zeus, a proud daddy, gives his son a winged
horse named Pegasus as both he and his wife Hera beam at their
infant son and Pegasus cuddling.
With the appearance of Hades we are made aware that there is a
plot afoot to have the Lord of the Underworld, usurp the throne
from Zeus.   The Fates told Hades that in 18 years, when the
planets align, it will be the most propitious time to take over.
However, they warn him, that unless Hercules is in some way out of
the picture, Hades' attempt will not succeed.  Aided by his two
dimwitted monsters, Pain and Panic, Hades has baby Hercules
kidnapped.   A drug deprives him of his godliness, turning him into
a mere mortal, but the monsters fail to deprive him of his
super-human strength.
Something tells our hero that he is "different."  Determined to
find out why he feels that way, he goes to a statue of Zeus who
suddenly comes to life,  and now father and son are at last
re-united.  It is then that Zeus tells his young son he can only
return as a god to Mt. Olympus if he does something heroic on
Earth.   He also advises him to get help from the legendary
hero-trainer, Philoctetes, affectionately known as "Phil."   This
is one of the highlights of the film with the animation of Phil
looking exactly like Danny DeVito, the distinctive voice of Phil
and the source of much of the film's humor.  Great casting.
Before Hercules attains true hero status, he meets Megara, a
sultry Greek beauty who works for Hades.  Before "Meg" can do
Hercules any harm as per her boss' bidding she realizes she has
fallen in love with our hero.
Voices of the many wonderful animated characers are supplied by
Tate Donovan as the adult Hercules; Phil's voice is that of Danny
DeVito, Hades voice is that of James Wood.  Meg, the seductress,
uses the voice of Susan Egan.  Zeus and wife Hera are given voices
by Rip Torn and Samantha Eggar. Pain and Panic are Bobcat
Goldthwait and Matt Frewer.  Voice of the Cyclops is supplied by
Patrick Pinney;  Hal Holbrook lends his voice to Amphitryon with
Alcmene being Barbara Barrie's voice. Hydra, the octopus-like
demon is given voice by Oskar Urretabizkaia.
Songs are by Alan Menken with lyrics by David Zippel.  Music is
fine and the lyrics are witty but I still yearn for something
comparable to the songs we used to sing and hum long after we had
left the theater: Give me a "Hi Ho, Hi Ho, It's off to work we go
. . ."

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Disney's 35th animated feature-- a retooling of the Olympian legend
crossed with, well, the Superman story-- is surprisingly soft at the
center.  Great wit, great art, and a great villain (James Woods as
Hades, Lord of the Underworld and local lounge act) can't quite stifle
the yawns induced by a bland hero, his colorfully monotonous sidekick
(Danny DeVito as the satyrical trainer Phil), and a largely unremarkable
soundtrack.  (None of the Alan Menken/David Zippel tunes are particular-
ly noteworthy.  Some lack lyrical snap.  Others need more memorable
melodies.  Boring ballads we expect, but boring production numbers,
too?)
     So, HERCULES is a bit of a long sit, but you won't stay bored.  The
highlights include a nifty round of animated action (Herc battling a CGI
hydra), a steady stream of anachronisms ("somebody call IX-I-I") and pop
references ("let's get ready to rumble!") a la ALADDIN, and several
long-overdue jabs at the Mouse's marketing and merchandising depart-
ments.  While not as rock-solid as HUNCHBACK, it's a still a new world
of improvement over POCOHONTAS.  Directed by Ron Clements and John
Musker, with voice credits including Tate Donovan, Susan Egan, Bob
Goldthwait, Matt Frewer, Samantha Eggar, Paul Shaffer, and, as Lighting
Bolt Zeus, Rip Torn, who's having a very good summer, also appearing in
TRIAL AND ERROR and MEN IN BLACK.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        HERCULES is the first animated Disney film in a long 
time that doesn't seem like it came from Disney. It's entertaining, 
yes, and has the usual Disney trappings -- a story, adapted from 
classic literature, about stumbling hero who strikes it big, has a cute 
animal sidekick and a beautiful cartoon woman, but has to fight a 
very-evil villain with a cute animal sidekick of his own -- but it's got 
the cheap laughs of a Warner Bros. effort. It's more SPACE JAM 
than HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME.
        Visually, HERCULES is on the Warner Bros. level, or 
maybe half a notch above the Disney afternoon cartoon shows. 
Its characters all look like caricatures and the backgrounds are 
generally unimpressive, but there are a few beautifully-animated 
scenes, all of which seem to take place in the evil underworld. The 
other scenes are pretty autopilot, which makes me wonder where 
Disney's priorities lie. Maybe these people _are_ as aligned with the 
devil as folks at the American Family Association say.
        I've pretty much forgotten all the Greek mythology stuff I 
learned in freshman English, so forgive me if I don't rattle off the 
names of the gods with the greatest of ease. I remember Hades, 
Hermes, Herpes, Sneezy and Doc, and at the head of it all -- the 
gods of the gods -- are Zeus and Hera. They have a baby at the 
beginning and name him (what else?) Hercules. Zeus gives him a 
playpen companion, a winged horse baby named Pegasus. I'm all for 
pets but a baby and a horse sleeping together is a little odd, even for 
mythology.
        Things are peaceful on Mount Olympus, but as we all 
know, when a baby is born in the Disney world, there's a villain 
there to sabotage. This time it's Hades, lord of the underworld, who 
is so evil he has blue fire for hair. Voiced by James Woods, Hades is 
one of the best things about this movie, an enemy worthy of Disney. 
His two cute animal sidekicks, Pain and Panic (voices of Bobcat 
Goldthwait and Matt Frewer, both of whom needed the paycheck), 
can change themselves into whatever form they wish.
        Old Hades kidnaps Hercules and strips him of his god 
status, but since he didn't drink all the evil potion, he still has the 
strength of a god. So he's trapped on earth, raised by an elderly 
couple who think he fell from heaven, just like Superman. There are 
a couple unintentionally amusing scenes that follow, where we see 
a 12-year-old Hercules called Jercules by his insensitive peers, who 
just can't accept that he's different. Ever wonder what it's like to 
wander the world, knowing you're a god, and not having anyone 
believe you? By the way, Shirley MacLaine, that's a rhetorical 
question...
        Hercules grows up and finds out he can't return to the table 
of the gods until he proves himself a true hero, which is cartoon 
code for "the end of the movie." That means he has to save the world 
from centaurs, giants, Limbaughs and all sorts of mythological 
beasts with the aid of his half-goat personal trainer (voice of Danny 
DeVito). There's also the femme fatale, Meg, who tries not to fall in 
love with Herc but can't resist.
        HERCULES is good fun, but it's definitely one of the lesser 
movies of the Disney revolution that began with THE LITTLE 
MERMAID. It's the only one besides POCAHONTAS in which the 
attempts at drama fall completely flat, leaving only the surface-level 
jokes and songs to entertain. You get the feeling the Disney people 
are reaching with a lot of that present-past humor too -- once 
Hercules becomes a hero, all the cool Athens kids are wearing 
Air-Herc shoes. Flintstones, meet the Flintstones...
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Nearly 1/25th of a Century!

Author
David N. Butterworth
After its recent, serious-minded entries--the bleak "Hunchback" and the
tragic "Pocahantas"--the Disney studios have finally put the fun back in
feature-length animation with their 35th effort, "Hercules."  A colorful,
toe-tapping odyssey that is closer to the exuberance and charm of "Aladdin"
and "The Little Mermaid," "Hercules" follows in the footsteps of those
winning films, echoing their respective hipness and style.
Hercules the man (or is that the god?) lends himself well to the Disney
treatment.  While his twelve labors are conspicuously absent from the film,
he does put in a full day's work, battling hydras, cyclops, and a love
interest with ambiguous allegiances (Meg, voiced by Susan Egan, who looks
like she was modeled on Fran Drescher).  Meg's smart, curvaceous female is
just one of the typical components of the tried-and-true Disney formula.
Add also the well-chiseled hero, fighting to prove himself; the bumbling,
wise-cracking sidekicks, in this case the Bobcat Goldthwait and Matt Frewer
rendered Pain and Panic.  And, of course, the villain.
The bad guy in "Hercules" is Hades, ruler of the Underworld, performed by
James Woods.  Woods is the commanding force in the movie, fast-talking,
fast-scheming, and fast on his way to becoming his very own Mickey D's
tie-in.  With his blue, pilot light jet of hair, Hades is like a demonic
auctioneer on acid, waxing mythologic and anacronistic, with topical
references to Siskel and Ebert and everything in between.
Hades, wishing to topple Zeus and mount a hostile takeover of Mount
Olympus, sends his shape-changing sidekicks to steal Zeus' son, the infant
Hercules, turn him mortal, and knock him off.  The fates have forewarned
Hades that "should Hercules fight, you will fail."  Pain and Panic bungle
their mission and Hercules grows up mortal but with superhuman strength.
After learning of his origins, Herc sets out to become a "true hero," the
requirement for returning to Olympus.  His personal trainer is a cynical
satyr, Philoctetes ("call me Phil"), gleefully performed by Danny DeVito,
whose goofy irreverence evokes both the genie from "Aladdin" and the
flatulent warthog from "The Lion King."
Unfortunately, Hercules confuses fame with heroism, and it takes more than
a couple of sticky situations for him to learn that true strength comes
from within.  Coming as late in "Hercules" as it does, this message is not
too intrusive, although the film's "zero to hero" theme seems to have been
shamelessly borrowed from "The Mask."
While none of Alan Menken and David Zippel's see-you-at-the-Oscars,
gospel-influenced score--the pastiche-laden production numbers or slower,
soul-searching ballads--contain any real show-stoppers, the five Motown
muses who carry the story along provide a refreshing change of pace.
With the additional vocal contributions of Tate Donovan, Rip Torn, Samantha
Eggar, Barbara Barrie, and Paul Shaffer, "Hercules" is a grab bag of
personalities.  But at the end of the day, it's Woods and DeVito who give
"Hercules" its strength.
