Title
Review for Music of Chance, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Mandy Patinkin, James Spader, M. Emmet Walsh, 
           Charles Durning, Joel Grey
Director:  Philip Haas
Producers:  Frederick Zollo and Dylan Sellers
Screenplay:  Philip Haas and Belinda Haas based on the novel by 
             Paul Auster
Music:  Phillip Johnston
Released by I.R.S Releasing and Trans Atlantic Entertainment
     On the way to New York City, James Nashe (Mandy Patinkin) stops by
the side of the road to offer a lift to a beat-up and bedraggled
stranger.  This man turns out to be Jack Pozzi (James Spader), a
professional gambler.  As the two get to talking, Pozzi tells Nashe of
a recent robbery that lost him the ten thousand dollars he was going to
use in an upcoming "sure thing" poker game.  Intrigued by the idea of
some quick, easy money, Nashe offers Pozzi a proposition.  He'll
advance the ten thousand if all profits get split fifty-fifty.  The
deal is struck and the two are off to the rural Pennsylvania residence
of Flower and Stone (Charles Durning and Joel Grey), where the games
begin.
     THE MUSIC OF CHANCE is a film of many levels.  At its most
literal, it tells the story of a poker game and its consequences, which
include building a ten-thousand stone wall.  However, those that choose
to see this movie on that level only will find the production a rather
dry and stale experience.  While final scene, dripping with meaning,
gives the picture closure, very little is resolved, and there are a lot
of questions left unanswered.
     Peel back the straightforward plot and take a peek at what lies
just beneath it.  There you will find other questions, but these are of
a far more imposing and thought-provoking nature.  THE MUSIC OF CHANCE
explores how one moment can forever alter--and perhaps destroy--lives.
It also reinforces that old saw that luck is too capricious a force to
trust.
     At the center of the story are three characters.  James Nashe is
the basic "nice guy" who believes in honoring obligations regardless of
the cost.  He is also willing to accept far more of the blame than he
deserves.  On the other hand, his mismatched partner, Jack Pozzi, is
unwilling to accept the blame for anything; he would rather shift it to
fate, chance, or anything else he can make a connection with.  Calvin
Murks (M. Emmet Walsh) represents the crusty authority that keeps these
two very different men together in a union that neither wants nor can
deny.
     Metaphors abound, from the "wailing wall" to the "City of the
World" being built by Willie Stone.  In fact, there's so much symbolism
that little in this movie has a single meaning.  There are times when
the screenplay tries too hard to be intellectual, spouting such
nonsense as prime numbers having souls, but these isolated instances in
no way detract from the deeper meaning of the overall story.
     Character motivation and interaction are driving forces, and
necessary to understanding any of what happens during THE MUSIC OF
CHANCE.  As obscure as some of the plot may be, Jack and James are
completely understandable.  Calvin Murks starts out as something of an
enigma, but as the film progresses, clues about his real nature slip
out.
     James Spader, cast against type, is completely believable as the
unsavory and difficult-to-like Jack.  M. Emmet Walsh does his usual
"good ol' boy" routine with a nasty, sadistic twist--something he
presents in a subtle-yet-distinctive manner.  The standout, however,
is Mandy Patinkin who, with little fanfare, captures our attention and
sympathy with his portrayal of James Nashe, the man trapped and
battered by fate's cruel whims.
     The film's conclusion is it's greatest weakness.  Aside from being
relatively predictable, it isn't entirely satisfactory.  Movies such as
this don't have to wrap up all their disparate plot threads for the
whole to come together.  Nevertheless, THE MUSIC OF CHANCE might have
benefitted from a little more certainty about some of what goes on, and
how it all ends up.
     THE MUSIC OF CHANCE did not receive wide release because, in spite
of a well-known cast, it is not a movie for mass consumption.  After
all, how many people out for an evening's light entertainment are going
to get excited about an occasionally-pompous, intellectual film about
poker and wall building?  Nevertheless, as is often the case with
movies such as this, there's more to THE MUSIC OF CHANCE than can be
seen with the first casual glance.  An investment of time is needed
and, for the most part, rewarded.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The rise of feudalism, power of money, and considerably more are the
subject of an odd, allegorical film of two people caught up in a very weird
vortex of circumstance.  This little film has a "Twilight Zone" surrealism,
but definitely keeps the viewer on edge as to what is going to happen next.
THE MUSIC OF CHANCE is a strange film about about two men who virtually
become serfs in modern day Pennsylvania.  Jim Nashe (played by Mandy
Patinkin) picks up on a road a stranger who calls himself Jack Pozzi (played
by James Spader) and is pulled into Pozzi's scheme to win large sums of
money playing poker with two old multi-millionaires named Stone and Flower
(played by Joel Gray and Charles Durning).  Stone and Flower have an immense
fortune built on top of a lottery win and have used it to insulate
themselves from the real world and replace it with a perfectly functioning
model world.  They even have a little dollhouse model of their ideal world
and are recreating it in real life.  Pozzi has played poker with the two old
men before and thinks that they will be easy marks if he takes them up on
their invitation and play them again.  Nashe stakes him to the money he will
need, but things go wrong and Nashe and Pozzi find themselves owing the old
men.  To pay off he debt they must build a wall on the vast estate of Flower
and Stone.  This task is placed under the supervision of a particularly
insensitive functionary played by M. Emmet Walsh.
     There is a lot that is strange but compelling about this story. There
is a hypnotic quality to Flower telling with absolute lack of self-doubt how
they built their fortune and authoritatively philosophizing about the world.
There is almost a supernatural quality about how the two men--dressed
entirely in white--control the world around them, much of it modeled in
miniature in their scale model.  They are reminiscent of the gods on Olympus
in JASON AND THE ARGONAUTS who control the lives of humans, manipulating
them with little models.
     This is a story that has a very literary feel.  It is based on a novel
by Paul Auster and clearly has a very literary sensibility.  In some ways it
is a sort of fantasy akin to the writings of Franz Kafka. Ambiguity and
uncertainty as to what is actually molding the fate of Nashe and Pozzi
abound.  Does the model world affect what is happening to our characters?
Once they are limited to receiving their information from their overseer,
how much of what he tells them can be believed?  Perhaps the only false move
in this compelling story is the very last scene which is a little cliched.
However, THE MUSIC OF CHANCE is a compelling allegory and a genuine pleasure
in its originality.  My rating would be a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
