Title
Review for Big Night (1996)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Christopher Null
     One reality in this world is certain:  nice guys finish last.  And
while the case can be made that Primo and Secondo aren't the nicest guys
around, it's pretty clear from the beginning of BIG NIGHT that they are
doomed to be taken advantage of.
     This little gem, a darling of the festival circuit and cause for a
huge rebirth in star, co-writer, co-producer, and co-director Stanley
Tucci's career, tells the beautiful and touching story of two brothers
(Tucci as Secondo, and "Wings" cab driver Tony Shalhoub as Primo) trying
to make it as restaurateurs, straight off the boat from Italy.
     Primo, the head chef, refuses to compromise on the tiniest detail
regarding the food, while Secondo does battle on the business end.  The
meals they serve are second to none, but all the customers go down the
street to their rival's (an Italian Ian Holm) thanks to his singing
waiters.  With the bank ready to foreclose, Primo and Secondo try to
turn things around, and they put all they've got into one last feast in
honor of jazz great Louis Prima, who may or may not actually be showing
up.  A big night indeed.
     Intertwining the restaurant drama with the brothers' unsatisfying
personal lives, Tucci and co-writer Joseph Tropiano tell a beautiful and
touching story that resonates with a authenticity rarely found in
today's films.  Tucci, Shalhoub, and Holm are all excellent, as are
Isabella Rossellini and CIRCLE OF FRIENDS's Minnie Driver as Secondo's
love interests.  Tucci and co-director Campbell Scott (co-star of
SINGLES) also do excellent work considering their amateur status.
     While the film can get a bit talky at times (beware of the scenes
with subtitles), it's overall a very moving and delightful first work
for these guys.  Deserving special notice are the exquisite
cooking/dining scenes, which do for Italian food what EAT DRINK MAN
WOMAN did for Chinese.  All-in-all, it's a warm, funny, and at the same
time heartbreaking look at one big night in the company of some truly
interesting people.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Edwin Jahiel
BIG NIGHT *** 1/2  Directed by Campbell Scott and Stanley Tucci. Written
by Tucci and Joseph Tropiano. Photography, Ken Kelsch. Editing,Suzy
Elmiger.; Production design, Andrew Jackness.  Music, Gary DeMichele.
Producer,  Jonathan Filley. Cast:  Tony Shalhoub (Primo), Stanley Tucci
(Secondo), Minnie Driver (Phyllis),  Isabella Rossellini (Gabriella),
Ian Holm (Pascal), Allison Janney (Ann), Campbell Scott (Bob).  A Rysher
Entertainment release. Some Italian with subtitles. 107 min. Rated R
(language). 
The review by a respected critic of a major weekly newsmagazine, had the
following dumdum headline :
"A Movie To Dine For. Big Night Makes Babette's Feast Look Like Pizza
Hut". 
There's nothing in the critic's text that corresponds to that headline
--or to facts for that matter. Since writers almost never write their
headlines, this must have been put in by some kid at the copy-desk, some
new hiree who needs to see more films, to learn about cusine and to read
more Dave Barry.
The only connection between the superb "Babette" and the excellent --but
awkwardly and flatly titled -- "Big Night" is the gastronomic feast that
crowns both movies. 
Scott and Tucci's film is set in the 1950's (when Cadillacs grew fins)
by the Jersey shore. It deals with two brothers who have been in the
States for a short time and are trying to make a go of their restaurant,
"Paradise." 
Primo is the gifted chef who, in spite of the establishment's precarious
situation is a purist. He will not tolerate barbaric requests or
compromises in his authentic Italian cuisine. Played by an actor with an
Arabic-sounding name, Primo  looks and sounds entirely Italian, down to
the hot temper. 
A funny opening scene (with a sad subtext) sets the tone.  One of the
rare customers does not understand the basics of risotto, wants a side
order of spaghetti (another pasta!) and, horrors, wants it with
meatballs, which is an American invention.
Younger brother Secondo, is the practical one, the manager who helps in
the kitchen (a primitive place that produces wonders) but whose main
task is to avoid losing the restaurant to the bank. He's pure of heart
yet also a realist who tries to reason with Primo. But the chef sticks
to his guns:"If you give people time, they learn." Secondo: " I don't
HAVE time." Yet, during the constant, affectionate tension between the
two, Primo insists: "If you comp[rpmise with my work, it dies." 
Nearby is "The Grotto," one of those Italian eateries where waiters and
customers sing, where indifferent, inauthentic food is served, where
phony local color prevails, where (as per Primo) food gets raped
nightly... and where the cash register keeps ringing. The owner, cynical
friend Pascal, is played by that most British actor Ian Holm
convincingly transformed into an Italian.
The single real Italian in the film, Isabella Rosselini, plays
Gabriella, vaguely the hostess and not vaguely Pascal's mistress.
The brothers are handsome and molto simpatici, Primo in his unloquacious
way, Secondo in his natural elegance. They succeed (with, of course, the
filmmakers) in making "Big Night" into a genuine Italian movie set in
the land of plenty, "plenty" that is, if you conform, adapt and leave
ideals behind you. 
Secondo goes to Pascal to search for a solution. It's not forthcoming --
until Pascal mentions that the popular band-leader Louis Prima (yes,
Virginia, there was such a person) is his pal and that he, Pascal, will
arrange for him to come to a special dinner at the Paradise. The
resulting PR and publicity will surely bring more customers.
With the brothers investing their last pennies and immense labor, the
feast does take place. It's a gathering of friends and new
acquaintances, from Pascal to Gabriella, from a nice Cadillac salesman
(just met by Secondo under slyly warm circumstances), to a florist lady
whom Primo is to shy to court, and so on, down to (or up to) the U.K.'s
Minnie Driver ("Circle of Friends") who, as Phyllis, Secondo's girl
friend, is amazingly genuine as a Yank. I say "up to" because the ladies
all tower above the men, not just the diminutive Ian Holm.
There are two surprises in store. One, I cannot mention without spoiling
things.  The other is the meal itself, a repast greeted by oohs and aahs
by the guests as well as the audience.
The menu, gargantuan and sumptuously delicious, starts with La  Zuppa
(Soup), goes on to I Primi (First Courses, in the plural), then I
Secondi (Second Courses, also plural) and I Dolci (The Sweets).  Even if
you find a top Italian restaurant you will not encounter the likes of
those dishes again, recipes of the pre-cholesterol, pre-fat calories
era, all under the sign of the stomach pump. (The brothers are also
chain-smokers). 
We get to the meal well after one hour of film. It lasts no more than 10
to 15 minutes. Before all this, the movie followed the brothers in their
mini-odyssey, especially Secondo. He had taken us for a walk (plus a
ride in a Caddy) that, while sometimes a bit unfocused and slow, gave
his character dimensionality.  Among the asides was an almost hilarious
reversal of sex attitudes. Phyllis wants to cuddle, and much more,
Secondo reacts like a shy virgin. "I want the time to be right. It is
not right for you." Phyllis doesn't get it, while next --surprise!-- we
see Secondo in bed with Gabriella.
"Big Night" is studded with nostalgic Italian and Italian-American
period music in the background and with  sensitive, intelligent touches
in the foreground. The dialogue proceeds in shifts, indirections and
allusions. Almost incredibly for an "Italian" movie, this one has more
pregnant silences than talk and goes easy on loudness and theatricalism.
There are also some visuals of Phyllis and others by the sea, which may
remind you of Fellini or Antonioni yet are not copycat scenes. 
The naturalist tone of the movie seldom abates. It is cannily recorded
and splendidly performed, although some bits do push verisimilitude to
its limits, notably Secondo's fluid command of the American language,
far too unlikely for a recent immigrant.  Some of the wines on the
banquet table look like Bordeaux bottles. But several other absurdisms
are humorous, such as Secondo's linguistic, didactic argument: "You
can't say 'It is raining outside,' since rain always falls outside.." 
Some gastronomes may find food for thought in the comparative
celebrations of Italian cooking and Europe's champion cuisine, the
French, that was glorified in "Babette's Feast." 
Filmically speaking, "BN"'s dialogue-less ending is a little gem as, the
morning after, Secondo makes a simple omelet for himself, his brother
and their assistant. The dish, like the mood, is in touching contrast
with the earlier, intricate relations, preparations and dreams. 
The film won the Sundance Festival's script writing prize. Score another
win for  Sundance,  by now incontestably the breeding and launching
grounds for the New Independent America Cinema.

Author
news@ix.netcom.com
I live in Wheaton, Illinois, a suburb of Chicago. It is a
place where you can hardly open your car door without
banging into a goose. During egg sitting time in the Spring,
the suckers rush you if you are out for a stroll in the
park. But, no matter,  you can't go to the park without
stepping in goose poop anyway. The people around here are so
enamored with fauna that they feed the geese so that they
stay around all year and have lost the ability to migrate.
We have goose crossing signs along certain roadways for
heavens sake! Not long ago, some teenage kids found a
wounded goose and abused it to death. They were arrested and
the news commentary stated that "charges were pending in the
goose homicide." Just think about that sentence. So, in my
area, animals have been raised to genus homo' and the world
goes mad. 
So I knew what I was in for when I went to see this movie.
And, while I am not one of the converted, I have to say that
it was a wonderful kid/animal movie. You have seen this
story many times before, albeit usually with horses or dogs
and lately with whales and sea lions. But this film is
significant in that we have at last moved out of the mammal
class. Here we have the reliable formula:  sad child forms 
relationship with needy creature(s) somewhere lower on the
food chain. The two grow mutually dependent and both are
(usually) saved from some kind of trouble. It works
wonderfully well. Here too. 
But we should be able to broaden things a bit. How about it?
Can we get a kid/animal movie with amphibians? Beetles?
Lobsters? Demand equal rights for bottom feeders! If a goose
can cuddle, (a needed requisite in kid/animal movies), why
can't a ... whatever? Just put a little food juice on the
nose or in the hair and you have a relationship!
I especially enjoyed Jeff Daniels as the eccentric Canadian artist. His
performance was the result of a terrific character/culture study. 
The triumph in this particular film is the flight photography. It is a
real feast for the eye and the heart. Take your kids and your inner kid
to this one. 

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Samuel Goldwyn/Rysher)
Starring:  Stanley Tucci, Tony Shalhoub, Ian Holm, Minnie Driver, Isabella
Rossellini.
Screenplay:  Stanley Tucci, Joseph Tropiano.
Producer:  Jonathan Filley.
Director:  Stanley Tucci, Campbell Scott.
Running Time:  108 minutes.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity)
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     It probably says as much about me as it does about BIG NIGHT that I
consider it a remarkably insightful film about the state of contemporary
film-making.  Yes, BIG NIGHT is about food, and it is about the
relationship between two brothers, and it is about what it means to
participate in the American dream as well.  However, I think BIG NIGHT is
something particularly special for anyone who loves movies because of what
they can be.  It is a warm, engaging and extremely funny film which
manages not simply to describe the battle between art and commerce, but to
win it on behalf of the former.
     BIG NIGHT takes place in a Jersey shore town of the 1950s, where
brothers Primo (Tony Shalhoub) and Secondo Pilaggi (Stanley Tucci) run an
Italian restaurant called the Paradise.  Business is anything but
heavenly, though, as master chef Primo's insistence upon creating daring
traditional cuisine has not created the booming clientele enjoyed by the
Americanized bistro across the street, run by Pascal (Ian Holm).  Two
years of poor receipts have placed the Paradise on the brink of
foreclosure, but Pascal offers Primo a last chance.  Pascal suggests
inviting band leader Louie Prima, a personal friend, to dine at the
Paradise and create a media event which will boost business.  With nothing
to lose, Primo and Secondo throw everything they have left into one big
night, a sumptuous dinner which will either make them or break them.
     Stanley Tucci co-wrote (with his cousin Joseph Tropiano) and
co-directed with actor Campbell Scott) BIG NIGHT in addition to starring
in it, and he has created one of the year's most delightful character
studies.  His own character of Secondo is the film's central figure, but
all three main characters are superbly written and acted.  Tony Shalhoub
(TV's "Wings") is hilarious as Primo, whose passion for his cooking leads
to fits of pique over the "Philistines" who cannot appreciate his work,
but who has difficulty showing that passion to the florist (Allison
Janney) he secretly pines for.  Ian Holm has a tasty, showy role as the
unapologetically assimilated Pascal, who runs his restaurant like a
circus; Holm's accent is hit-and-miss, but his truly unprintable favorite
epithet for Secondo actually gets funnier every time he uses it.  Between
them is Secondo, with Tucci doing solid, subtle work as an immigrant
trying to navigate the treacherous course between tradition and
assimilation without committing fully to either one, but tending towards
his vision of the American dream.  His mockery of Primo's more broken
English begins as good-natured, but gradually it becomes indicative of
Secondo's frustration with his brother's steadfast refusal to compromise.
     It is this conflict which makes BIG NIGHT such a potent metaphor for
cinema in the 1990s.  Primo is an artist unwilling to compromise even if
it means alienating potential customers; Pascal is the capitalist who
believes that "if a guy wants a steak, you give him a steak."  Secondo
wants to have it both ways, to be the artist and the capitalist, but when
push comes to shove he finds himself more willing to compromise on the
art.  What BIG NIGHT ultimately argues is that somewhere along the line,
you have to choose between doing the work you know will make you proud and
doing the work you know will make you rich.  There is room for both, Tucci
suggests, but the greatest satisfaction comes from people loving the best
you had to give them.
     But whether you see BIG NIGHT as a simple tale of brotherly conflict
and fine dining or as a meditation on art as a consumer product, you
should see BIG NIGHT, because film-making simply doesn't get much more
satisfying.  Tucci, Scott and company have put together a banquet of
finely drawn characters, smart dialogue and assured direction, culminating
in an elaborate meal which might inspire you to the same conclusion which
leads one character to utter one of the year's best punch lines.  It also
ends with a wordless single take in which resolution is achieved with such
grace, simplicity and emotion that you could find yourself smiling all the
way out the door.  Primo states his believe in one scene that great food
is what "brings us closest to God," but that could be true of any true
work of art.  With BIG NIGHT, Stanley Tucci and a host of gifted
contributors have served up a small piece of Paradise.

Author
news@ix.netcom.com
Co-Directors: CAMPBELL SCOTT and STANLEY TUCCI
Screenplay by: JOSEPH TROPIANO, STANLEY TUCCI
At the end of this fine food film, after all the Italian
passion -- the shouting, the kissing, the fighting, the
yearning -- is over, and defeat is certain for all has been
spent, there is still the cooking of an omelet. 
Secundo, the brother whom we think has lost the most, (he
possesses none of the  genius of the food artist Primo), cooks
an omelet as an act of service for his helper and his brother.
This simple three egg omelet is perhaps the last bit of food
that will be given life in this restaurant called "Paradise." 
We watch as this omelet is made. We watch the whole thing,
without aid of time lapse photography, words, or music -- only
the clicks of spatula and fork and our melancholia to help us.
We watch the omelet from the idea of it, to the gathering of
material for it, through the cooking, the serving, and at last
the eating of it. And when at the final bite, a hesitant arm
is extended over the great divide --  Secundo to Primo,
business man to artist, pragmatist to idealist -- we know we
have seen something god-like. It is an act full of love and
forgiveness and promise. 
It is quite a divide that must be bridged because this is a
culture clash film. It is Old World vs. New World; principle
vs. utility; fine cuisine vs. beer and pizza; the holiness of
genius vs. base and filthy lucre. 
Secundo, who cooks the omelet and extends the arm, is not the
cook. He is the business man. He and his brother Primo are
immigrants from Italy who have come to make their fortune in
America. Secundo would like to compromise in matters of taste
for the sake of the business. Primo cannot -- will not -- do
it. "If you sacrifice, then the work dies." 
If you know an artist (in the radical sense of that word) for
whom to compromise artistic standards in any way means
pandering to the philistine taste of base people or else
prostituting the artistic soul for mere money or worldly
success, you will be reminded of him or her in this film. 
In art the question is always, "Who is art for?" Is art for
the sake of ART or perhaps for the "gods?"  Is the work the
thing? Is the artist's authenticity and integrity ultimate?
Must the artist be true only to himself and the rest be
damned? Or is business the god who must be served? You have
heard the arguments before. "You have to give people what they
want or you won't be able to give them any thing at all." In
this movie the line is, "I am a business man. I am what I need
to be at the time." 
So which wins in this movie? Neither. After a final "Big
Night," and an omelet the morning after,  Paradise must close.
Business has lost -- art too. 
But as we leave we are hopeful if somewhat melancholy. Hope
arises as Secundo cooks and then places his hesitant hand on
Primo's shoulder. These acts are a bridge across the divide.
They suggest a third and better way: not art for ART, nor art
for money;  not the artist as rare self-indulgent eccentric, nor as
pitiable prostitute who has sold his genius for a mess of the world's
tripe.. Rather art as service, art as love, art as, "let me make
something beautiful for you." 
This movie has an "R" rating because of rough language and a suggested
adulterous sexual situation. 
For more reviews by John Schuurman see:
http://www.mcs.com/~wcrc/movies.html

Author
Ben Hoffman
     BIG NIGHT comes across as if it were a foreign film with all the
delightful nuances we frequently find in films made outside our
country, in this case, Italy.  This has all the delicious pathos
without overwhelming us with undue sadness.  One leaves the theater
knowing one has seen a wonderful film.
     And what is its story?  Nothing big.  No one is shot.  Just the
story of the American Dream and of two brothers who dare to believe in
it.  Primo (Tony Shalhoub) is the chef at the Paradiso restaurant
which he and his younger brother, Secundo, (Stanley Tucci) own.
Secundo manages the restaurant but unfortunately it is not doing well
despite Priimo's dedication to preparing the best meals in a small
town in New Jersey.  Their customers are spaghetti and meatball
eaters; what do they know of fine, delicate food?
     Just across the street is a popular Italian restaurant, Pascal's,
which is always crowded despite the fact that prices are high and the
food does not begin to compare with that found at the Paradiso.
Pascal's is owned by the prosperous  Pascal himself (Ian Holm).
Secundo knows the secret to success:  give the public what it want,
not what you would like them to want but  Primo cannot lower himself
to do that.
     But one wonderful night they are told by Pascal that Louis Prima
will be at their restaurant.  That is just what the Paradiso needs, to
have a big name enjoy his food at their restaurant.  In a last
desperate effort to save their business they put everything they have
into making that night a BIG NIGHT, the best and biggest they have
ever attempted.
     While the food and the restaurant are ostensibly what the film is
about, like BABETTE'S FEAST, it is about something quite different.
Love.  Family. Truth.
     Minnie Driver is Secundo's lovely girlfriend.  Cristiano, the
chef's assistant is played by Marc Anthony.   Primo's heartthrob is
played by Allison Janney. The always lovely Isabella Rosselini is
Gabriella on whom Primo and Secundo have a crush. . . as who would
not?
     The son of George C Scott and Colleen Dewhurst, Campbell Scott
directs his first film.  He previously had been acting in several
films and has a small role here. Don't miss this tasty morsel of a
film.

Author
news@daily-bugle.newsops.execpc.com
"My brother is a world above you," says Secondo (Stanley Tucci)
to Pascal (Ian Holm) about his idealist brother Primo (Tony
Shaloub).  Primo makes subtle, authentic Italian food and
refuses to serve watered-down, traditional fare at his
restaurant.  "I'm a businessman," retorts successful but
commercial restauranteur Pascal, "what are you?"  One of the
many maddening things about BIG NIGHT is that we never do get to
find out who Secondo really is... and a lot more is missing as
well.
Primo and Secondo have come over from Italy in the 50's with the
dream of making it big in America by doing what they know best:
making the greatest Italian cuisine known to man.  After two
years of preparation, they've just opened their restaurant and
found that the patrons in the unnamed east coast city they've
settled in don't seem very interested in genuine Italian
cuisine, preferring instead the "spaghetti and meatballs" style
of "Italian" food available down the street at Pascal's
restaurant.  The bank has demanded a payment by the end of the
month on their loan, and the brothers don't have the money.
Pascal, in a seeming fit of goodwill, has recommended the
brothers' restauarant to jazz great Louie Prima to hoist the
brothers out of debt and into the restaurant spotlight.  BIG
NIGHT covers the boys on their quest to serve the greatest meal
ever on the last night their restaurant is open.  In doing so,
the film brings up the themes of brotherly love and the myth of
the American dream.
Unfortunately, the movie doesn't stick to that quest, instead
bringing in puzzling subplots about the romantic affairs of the
brothers.  Primo's affair with Ann (Allison Janney), a widowed
Florist, is cute but brings little to the plot.  Secondo's
relationship with his girlfriend Phyllis (Minnie Driver),
however, borders on the nonsensical.  Secondo refuses to make
physical advances to Phyllis, instead telling her that he wants
to wait until they are more financially secure.  Throughout the
film, Secondo ignores Phyllis, showing little attraction or
desire for her, and all of the exchanges between the two are
awkward.  We later find out that Secondo is having sex with
Gabriella (Isabella Rosellini), Pascal's mistress.  At the end
of the film, Secondo seems genuinely distraught that Phyllis,
after seeing Secondo and Gabriella together, wants nothing to do
with him -- something that I really had a hard time believing.
I don't mind not liking a character, but Secondo's motivations
in BIG NIGHT make so little sense that I truly had no idea why
he was doing the things he did.  It's not that his character was
an enigma, but that his actions are never adequately explained.
Later in the film, Secondo insists that he will stay in America,
after his brother reveals that he's lined up a job for both of
them at their Uncle's restaurant in Rome.  Why?  It's explained
only in the vaguest of ways.  While the plot expresses Primo and
Pascal's motivations clearly in the script, Secondo, the focal
character, wanders through the action making idiotic choices for
no explained reason.  Some of the most sympathetic characters in
film are shown as having made poor choices in life -- and it's
easy to sympathize with a character if they make a bad choice as
long as they had a good reason at the time to do so.  I don't
even mind characters who make completely arbitrary decisions
provided that the character's poor judgement is explained in the
film.  However, I get the feeling that Tucci wants us to
sympathize with Secondo, and to like him -- and other
individuals upon seeing the movie seem to have found him a
"likable" character -- but I found the character to be so
idiotic and unlikable as to spoil the rest of the film.
Ian Holm's portrayal of Pascal verges on the ridiculous.  Every
other word out of Holm is an obscenity filtered through an
obviously fake accent, and he comes off as being entirely
unconvincing as an Italian restauranteur.  The comedy in the
film is played as being extremely broad -- overstated reactions
are the norm (the "heavenly" reactions of those biting into
Primo's food are extremely overdone, and by the end of the film,
had me wincing every time any character had anything to eat).
Other than Tony Shaloub's sublime and noble Primo, the rest of
the characters have little depth.
While some of the food prepared by Primo looks truly delicious,
pictures of food are not enough to make me enjoy a film.  While
the static camerawork is acceptable, tracking shots and zooms
seem hesitant and jittery, strange for a film that lists a
Steadicam operator in its credits.
It seems equally strange for a movie that seems to value Primo's
sense of subtlety and richness in flavor of food so highly to
play the comedy in such an over-the-top way, to make only the
basest of observations on the topics it brings up...while
supplanting the film with shallow characters, little plot and
less than amazing camerawork.  So I ask the viewer of this
movie, as the choices this film makes seem less like Primo's
artistic virtuosity or Pascal's commercial mechanations, and
more close to the arbitrary decisions of Secondo, "What is BIG
NIGHT?"  To that, I answer, "confused" -- a quality that left me
with a bad taste in my mouth after the BIG NIGHT.
Dave Cowen (esch@fische.com)
Eschatfische. ---------------------------- http://www.fische.com

Author
Vince Waldron
One of the real joys of this past season, and definite must-see.  A wholly
original film that's packed with great performances and privileged
moments.  Though nominally the tale of two brothers struggling to save the
failing restaurant on which they've pegged their hopes and dreams, that
synopsis doesn't begin to do justice to the film's poetry, nor does it
prepare you for the surprising generosity of the film's exquisite pace. 
Alternately riveting and almost maddeningly langorous, this is a film of
paradoxes: a film of nuanced subtlety whose comedy is at times painted in
broad strokes indeed.  Making this film must have been an act of faith on
the part of all involved, since it's difficult to imagine how any of the
film's grace notes could possibly have been spelled out in the script, as
good as it may have been.  An elegant tale, deftly told.
reply directly to vince at 
ag644@lafn.org

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: beginning 9/27/96 (limited)
Running Length: 1:55
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Stanley Tucci, Tony Shalhoub, Isabella Rossellini, Ian Holm, 
      Minnie Driver, Allison Janney, Marc Anthony, Campbell Scott
Directors: Campbell Scott and Stanley Tucci
Producer: Jonathan Filley
Screenplay: Joseph Tropiano and Stanley Tucci
Cinematography: Ken Kelsch
Music: Gary DeMichele
U.S. Distributor: The Samuel Goldwyn Company 
     From time immemorial, the experience of eating a good meal has been 
regarded as one of life's most hedonistic pleasures.  In a recent 
survey, more than 50% of Americans indicated they would rather eat a 
memorable dinner than experience a night of uninhibited sex.  Motion 
pictures, ever reflective of the cultures that spawn them, have always 
recognized the potential for food-related stories.  Recent films like 
BABETTE'S FEAST and EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN have sent audiences home sated.  
Now, there's a new entry on the menu:  BIG NIGHT, the directorial debut 
of actors Stanley Tucci and Campbell Scott.  And, while perhaps not as 
sumptuous as the previously-mentioned entrees, it's nevertheless a tasty 
main course.
     Events in BIG NIGHT reminded me of the so-called "Pizza wars" of 
the 1980s.  With the advent of the chain Dominos, with their "we deliver 
anywhere for free" slogan, the entire business changed.  Suddenly, local 
pizzerias were fighting for their lives.  People, it seems, didn't care 
about quality.  For the simple convenience of not having to get off the 
sofa, many preferred eating flavored cardboard to real pizza.  In the 
end, a number of small outfits that elected not to implement free 
delivery went out of business, regardless of how good their product was.
     BIG NIGHT examines a similar battle in a different setting.  During 
the 1950s in the seaside resort of Keyport, New Jersey, two brothers -- 
master chef, Primo Pilaggi (Tony Shalhoub) and his maitre d' brother, 
Secondo (Stanley Tucci) -- open an authentic Italian restaurant called 
the Paradise.  Not many customers frequent this small establishment, 
however -- there aren't free side orders of pasta, the lovingly-prepared 
food takes too long to reach the tables, and there's no live performer.  
Across the street is Pascal's Italian Grotto, which nightly draws full 
houses for its cheap, plentiful, familiar Italian fare and  lively 
ambiance.  In fact, many evenings after closing the Paradise, Secondo 
stops by to have a drink with his friend, the exuberant Pascal (Ian 
Holm, in a deliciously over-the-top role).
     Not surprisingly, the Paradise is in financial trouble.  
Foreclosure is imminent.  Secondo wants to make a few changes to broaden 
the restaurant's popularity, but Primo is against capitulating to 
"Philistines" who can't recognize good food from "the rape of cuisine" 
that is available at the Italian Grotto.  For Primo, an uncompromising 
purist, "to eat good food is to be close to God."  He tells his brother, 
"If you give people time, they will learn" to appreciate what the 
Paradise has to offer.  The problem is, the brothers' time is almost up.
     Pascal, who respects both Primo and Secondo, offers his help.  He 
assures the brothers that when famous singer Louis Prima is in town next 
week, he will invite him and his band to dine at the Paradise.  To 
celebrate the event, Primo and Secondo prepare the feast of a lifetime, 
aware that if everything doesn't go right, this one expensive evening 
could turn out the be their Last Supper.
     Not only is BIG NIGHT a wonderful expression of the passion for 
food, and, by extension, for life, but it serves as a metaphor for the 
fight of independent artists against the establishment.  Taking the film 
industry as an example, the Paradise could be the local art house with 
Pascal's as the multiplex.  The parallels are plentiful, with customers 
at the more eclectic site complaining when they get something that's not 
the recycled fare they were expecting.  The Italian Grotto caters to the 
masses, giving them a flashy meal without the originality and excellence 
that can be found at the smaller, less ostentatious location across the 
street.
     The centerpiece of BIG NIGHT is, obviously, the big night -- 
everything from the preparation to the serving of the dishes comprising 
the multi-course dinner.  Once the party gets underway, there's singing, 
dancing, drinking, and, of course, eating.  Lots and lots of eating.  
For everyone, it's an evening to remember as Primo finds himself, 
Secondo wonders what he really wants from life, and the two brothers 
rediscover something they've known all along:  that food, like love, is 
an unspoken, universal means of communication.  This realization is 
cemented the next morning, when, in an unbroken five-minute take, 
Secondo prepares an omelet that he and his brother wordlessly share.  
     While Primo and Secondo anchor the film, the guests at the party 
add flavor and color to the night's festivities.  They include Pascal's 
mistress, the sensuous Gabriella (Isabella Rossellini); Secondo's 
earthy, charming girlfriend, Phyllis (Minnie Driver, the best thing 
about CIRCLE OF FRIENDS); Primo's would-be flame, Ann (Allison Janney); 
and a car salesman (Campbell Scott) who's always ready with a pitch.
     The cast is wonderful, as is the direction by Scott and Tucci.  The 
bond between brothers is developed in a believable way, with the usual 
mix of friction and wordless affection.  In addition to their deft skill 
with light drama, the directors understand well-placed humor, and throw 
just the right amount of comedy into the mix to make BIG NIGHT fun 
without turning it into an outright farce.  Watch for a visual joke 
featuring a lamp in Pascal's office and some wordplay about whether it 
can rain inside.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     BIG NIGHT is a charming little gem.  It isn't about much of
anything, and yet the emotions are more genuinely expressed that many a
more pretension endeavor.  This is not a particular important picture,
and it will certainly not be much of a money maker, but it is full of
heart and some nice pieces of acting.
     Except for a little before and after, BIG NIGHT happens over a
single day and night.  In New York in the mid-1950s two brothers, Primo
(Tony Shalhoub) and Secondo (Stanley Tucci), are new immigrants from
Italy.  They own a soon to be totally bankrupt Italian restaurant
called Paradise.  Primo is a great chef, but he only wants to make
authentic Italian food like risotto whether the customers like it or
not.  Primo's philosophy is, "to eat good food is to be close to God."
     In the opening scene a woman tries to get a side order of
spaghetti and meatballs since she hates the risotto she has ordered.
Primo refuses since he would never put meatballs in spaghetti and would
certainly not serve the woman a second starch dish.  Secondo runs the
restaurant and pleads with him to give their only customer what she
wants since the restaurant is going broke afterall.
     Across the street is an Italian place owned by their friend Pascal
(Ian Holm).  He serves his customers spaghetti with lots of meatballs
and has ostentatious flaming dishes for show.  Helping him is his
beautiful wife Gabriella (Isabella Rossellini) who is having an affair
with Secondo.  Secondo is dating Jill (Minnie Driver) who is a teller
at the local bank.  Secondo refuses to have sex with her until he is
more financially secure.  Since her bank is calling in his loan, the
future looks bleak.
     Pascal advises Secondo, "give people what they want, then later
you can give them what you want," but Secondo can not get Primo to
change the menu even a little.  Pascal sees life much simpler.  As he
explains, "I am a businessman.  I am anything I need to be at any
time."
     Pascal manages to give Primo and Secondo a last chance.  He says
he can get Louie Prima, the famous jazz musician, and all of his band
to have dinner at the Paradise Restaurant.  With the subsequent
publicity, people will flock there.  Almost all of the movie is about
the preparations for and serving of the food on the BIG NIGHT.
     In its lush and colorful food photography and in the reverence it
gives to food, it is reminiscent of that great film, LIKE WATER FOR
CHOCOLATE.  The cinematography is intimate and the sets, especially of
the wood paneled restaurant, are extremely authentic.  Paradise is a
church for food, and the actors become the holy choir.  The people who
designed the food for the film deserve extra credit.  You may want to
go to a great Italian restaurant after seeing the picture, but don't.
You would be disappointed.  This food is heaven - you would only get
food for mere mortals.
     The acting by Tucci is excellent, but Shalhoub steals the show.
Think of Primo as the Gandhi of chefs.  I kept expecting a scene with
him lighting incense sticks to the food and praying to it.  I like
Holm, but had trouble hearing him speak with an Italian accent.
Driver, from CIRCLE OF FRIENDS and the Masterpiece Theater TV show "The
Politician's Wife," is a great actress, but her role here is secondary
does not allow her to show off her talents.  Only Rossellini is
miscast.  Her performance seems out of another movie.  Finally, in a
comedic part Campbell Scott is good as a Cadillac dealer.  As those of
you not alive during the 50s may not be fully aware, to own a new
Cadillac then was proof positive of your success in life.
     The direction and the script is ready to take things slow and
natural.  Many scenes have little dialog and in fact there is a
reasonably long epilogue with no words at all just food preparation and
consumption.  All of this notwithstanding, the films is never boring
nor the pace too slow.  There are tragedies, mainly small, along the
way, and the actors, particularly Shalhoub, with few words and great
facial expressions manage to move the audience.
     BIG NIGHT runs about an hour and three quarters.  It is rated R,
but is one of the softest R I can ever remember.  There is no sex,
nudity, or violence.  This is a gentle film, but there are just a few
bad words and one them happens to be the F word hence the rating.
Although 99 per cent of the film is in English, the F word appears in
the Italian part with the English subtitles.  Except for that one word,
the movie would be PG.  I think the film would be fine for any kid who
is interested in it.  I recommend the picture to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Every once in a while a particular performance grabs my attention
and I begin to watch for the actor gave it. Perhaps the best thing
about PRELUDE TO A KISS was the comic acting of Stanley Tucci.  I saw
him several times after that and always liked his performances.  But he
always seemed to have small parts; generally he plays thugs and
henchmen, at least in the films I have seen.  Apparently to actually
star in a film he had to co-write the script, co-produce the film, and
then co-direct it.  But it is worth it to see much more of his acting.
     Tucci plays Secondo, an immigrant from Italy trying to run the
aptly-named Paradise, an Italian restaurant somewhere on the New Jersey
shore in the late 1950s.  Secondo manages the tiny restaurant while his
older brother Primo (Tony Shalhoub) does the cooking.  And what cooking
he does!  Primo is an artist who believes that "to eat good food is to
be close to God."  Eventually we see some of what Primo can do.  Like
BABETTE'S FEAST and  LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, this is definitely not a
film to see when you are hungry.  Among other things this film is a
paean to great Italian cooking.  The problem is that the customers are
expecting spaghetti and meatballs.  Every dish must have a spaghetti
side dish and most must be buried under cheese.  New Jersey is just not
ready for great authentic Italian cooking in the late 1950s. The
customers just don't get it.  Making things even harder is just down
the street is the fabulously successful Pascal's Italian Grotto.
Pascal (Ian Holm) makes an art of living, not of cooking.  His
philosophies are "bite life in the ass" and "give the people what they
want, then later you can give them what you want."  That "later" may
never come, but in the meantime he is making a fortune selling steaks
and spaghetti with meatballs.  To help the failing brothers he arranges
that the famous singer Louie Prima (playing himself) will come to the
restaurant to eat and thereby endorse the establishment.  The brothers
have one night to demonstrate the best in Italian cuisine for Prima and
some invited friends.  Secondo has to balance the preparations for
dinner with his diffident relationship with his woman friend Phyllis
(Minnie Driver) and his mistress (Isabella Rossellini).
     This is probably Stanley Tucci's favorite role, since he did,
after all, write it for himself.  However his acting is just a little
more reserved than is some other films. Complete with Italian accent he
is certainly believable in the role, but I still prefer some of his
humorous touches in PRELUDE TO A KISS. He is looking for more
authenticity in this part than in some of his others, apparently.  He
seems a little too unflappable as Secondo and the film foregoes some
comic possibilities as a result.  On the other hand Tony Shalhoub is
just a bit over-the-top as Primo boisterously rebuking a boorish
customer or accusing Pascal of "culinary rape."  Even more exaggerated
is Ian Holm's wild and crazy Pascal, literally biting people on the ass
as part of his life-loving routine.  Tucci co-directs with Campbell
Scott (of LONGTIME COMPANION, DEAD AGAIN, and MRS. PARKER AND THE
VICIOUS CIRCLE).
     A well-made period piece is always a pleasure to watch, though
Tucci does not flood us with late-50s detail. Occasionally we notice a
price has been changed, a car has fins, or a pair of glasses has the
same distinctive fin-styling.  The feast itself is complete with titles
for each of the courses and includes some authentic Italian dishes that
are unfamiliar even today.  The photography of food preparation and of
the final product is at times gorgeous, but not all the film is as
well-paced as it might be.  At times the plot just stops dead while the
camera watches somebody prepare food.  In the end there are still many
loose ends intentionally not tied up.  But then not everything in life
is tied up at the end of a day.  BIG NIGHT will leave some audience
members feeling that there should be more to the story, while others
will be happy it is over so that they can proceed to dinner.  I give
BIG NIGHT a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
