Title
Review for At First Sight (1999)
Number of Reviews
18

Author
Jamie Peck
Rating: ** (out of ****)
MGM / 2:08 / 1999 / PG-13 (language, thematic material, strip-club
nudity, sexuality)
Cast: Val Kilmer; Mira Sorvino; Kelly McGillis; Nathan Lane; Bruce
Davison; Steven Weber; Ken Howard
Director: Irwin Winkler
Screenplay: Steve Levitt; Irwin Winkler; Rob Cowan
Here's an ironic oddity: a movie about overcoming a handicap that,
despite a dearth of assets, never quite overcomes its own handicaps.
Notable for the trivia it offers rather than for presenting a
well-rounded portrait of disability, "At First Sight" tells an immensely
crowded tale adapted from a case study in Dr. Oliver Sacks' 1995
non-fiction novel "An Anthropologist on Mars." But check out Penny
Marshall's "Awakenings" for a stronger Sacks adaptation, as "Sight"
boasts similar high-quality acting and an engrossing set-up, but lacks
the eventual focus and smarts of its '90 counterpart. Oh, well. At least
it settles the alleged existence of a special Braille "Playboy" once and
for all.
Photogenic leads Val Kilmer and Mira Sorvino click as a blind masseur
(he) and a traveling architect (she) who fall deeply in love after an
apparently superlative back-rub moves her to tears - a goofy sequence
saved, like many others, by their generated chemistry. Not far into the
affair, Sorvino locates a cure for Kilmer's nearly life-long affliction:
miracle eye surgery that restores his vision but comes with damaging
physical and mental side-effects, like lots of blurry, distorted camera
angles. At this point, interest in the story reaches its pinnacle as
Kilmer grapples with his newfound sense. Then, the film goes in
directions that don't make much sense.
Kilmer's omnipresent Stevie Wonder-esque smile during all of this will
cause unintentional laughs for some, but his performance is still an
improbable stretch he executes admirably. Sorvino's supposed to be a
brain, but thanks to some unfortunate scripting, she comes off like the
air-headed dealership clerk she so wonderfully played in "Romy and
Michele's High School Reunion." Kelly McGillis lends fine support as
Kilmer's stolid sister, and even Nathan Lane ("The Birdcage") pops up
for a few scenes as a visual therapist described by colleagues as
"unorthodox," though his "unorthodox" methods seem to stem less from
narrative necessity than a need for comic relief.
Further distracting from the highly intriguing central
to-see-or-not-to-see dynamics - and bogging down the midsection
considerably, inflating this puppy out past two interminable hours - are
a seemingly endless (but inexplicit) series of sex-in-the-shadows
montages and a pair of superfluous subplots involving Kilmer's search
for his estranged father and Sorvino's relationship with her ex-husband.
We don't care, many are likely to say. Even a TV-movie-of-the-week,
which is the status the overloaded "At First Sight" struggles to
overcome, would have jettisoned this padding in favor of a leaner,
meaner - and therefore more effective - message.
Š 1999 Jamie Peck
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit The Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/
"Maybe another 200 cigarettes would have helped; coughing would be
better than some of this dialogue." -Roger Ebert on "200 Cigarettes"

Author
Dustin Putman
 Directed by Irwin Winkler.
 Cast: Val Kilmer, Mira Sorvino, Kelly McGillis, Nathan Lane, Steven 
 Weber, Bruce Davison.
 1999 - 128 minutes.
 Rated PG-13 (for profanity and sexual situations).
 Reviewed January 22, 1999.
 Like the wonderful 1990 drama, "Awakenings," starring Robin Williams and 
 Robert De Niro, "At First Sight, " directed by Irwin Winkler, is 
 inspired by a true story documented by physicFirst Sight, " directed by 
 Irwin Winkler, is inspired by a true story documented by physician 
 Oliver Sacks. Since "Awakenings" was so very good, and made my top ten 
 list the year it was released, "At First Sight" is not quite as strong 
 since it is not directed with as sure a hand as Penny Marshall, but is still
 an intelligent and vibrantly-acted drama.
 The film begins as Amy (Mira Sorvino), a stressed-out New York 
 architect, decides to take some time off and travel upstate to the 
 country. At the hotel she is staying at, she makes a massage appointment 
 and after a long, soothing session which ends with her crying as a 
 release of emotions, she strikes up a conversation with the handsome 
 masseur Virgil (Val Kilmer), only to find out later that he is actually 
 blind. Amy doesn't really care if he has a handicap or not, and begins 
 to spend time with him more and more until they finally start to fall in 
 love. Once she has returned to New York, Amy begins to research on 
 Virgil's certain type of retinal blindness, which he has had since three 
 years of age, and out of a stroke of luck, comes into contact with a 
 doctor (Bruce Davison) who believes he can repair Virgil's sight, even 
 though there have only been thirty similar cases in history. At first 
 reluctant, Virgil finally travels with Amy to NYC and agrees to the 
 surgery, much to the hesitance of his overbearing, but loving older 
 sister (Kelly McGillis). Ultimately, the surgery is a success, but 
 problems arise since Virgil cannot relate to what he sees, since he has 
 never visually seen anything before, only touched objects. He moves into 
 Amy's apartment and she is eager to stand by him, but Virgil's 
 maladjustment begins to put a strain on their relationship.
 On the basis of the overall story, "At First Sight" is indeed a film 
 that has been done many times before, and owes a great deal to its 
 predecessor, "Awakenings." What will happen throughout the film can also 
 be easily telegraphed in advance. However, what helps "At First Sight" 
 rise above this predictability is in the mature and intelligent 
 relationship that develops between Virgil and Amy. Usually, romantic 
 pictures are of the shameless puppy-dog sort (the recent Tom Hanks/Meg 
 Ryan-starrer "You've Got Mail" immediately pops to mind), but with this 
 film, I grew to care more about the characters and their plight. 
 The film starts off noticably well as Amy travels up north and first 
 meets Virgil. The massaging sequences were strangely erotic, maybe even 
 more so than the later actual "love scenes," and as their romantic 
 involvement quickly developed, the film was both entertaining and sweet, 
 and there was clearly a lot of chemistry between the two. These joyous 
 moments early on balanced out well with the later scenes in which their 
 relationship is seriously tested due to a contrast in the life styles 
 that they have always known, with Virgil completely used to being blind 
 and having a comforting, peaceful life in the country to Amy's eventful 
 life in the "big city."
 The other major compliment that must be given to the film are the nearly 
 flawless performances across the board. Val Kilmer, usually cast in the 
 "macho" type of role, was always believable as a blind person, and 
 playing his character was probably a little more tricky than it appears. 
 It was up to Kilmer to not come off as someone to pity, but to 
 sympathize with, and he pulled it off. Mira Sorvino, who made a 
 spectacular debuting splash in 1995's hilarious Woody Allen comedy, 
 "Mighty Aphrodite," for which she won a well-deserved Oscar as a 
 kind-hearted, but ditzy hooker, is a standout here. Although she has 
 made some mediocre film choices since then (1997's "Mimic," 1998's "The 
 Replacement Killers"), she always has managed to come out unscathed, and 
 it is with "At First Sight" that she finally has another juicy role to 
 play. In a truthful climactic scene set in Amy's apartment between she 
 and Virgil, Sorvino proves to be one of the most gifted young actresses 
 around today, and has a flare for both comedic and dramatic pieces. 
 Kelly McGillis, who could have easily come off as the "bad," 
 one-dimensional sister, instead is also given an unexpectedly 
 multifaceted character to play as a woman who may be overly protective 
 but simply cares for her brother. Finally, Nathan Lane, who is usually a 
 little too over-the-top, is appropriately restrained as a vision 
 therapist.
 The one misstep of "At First Sight" is in its treatment of the medical 
 procedure done on Virgil. Very little is ever said or discussed 
 concerning it, and when the surgery occurs, it is so briefly glimpsed at 
 that it is impossible to see what is being done to his eyes. Perhaps the 
 reason this aspect of the film was not more in-depth was that the makers 
 were afraid it would gross out audiences, but I would personally take 
 realism, even if it is graphic, any day over simply giving the 
 explanation of the surgery the cold shoulder. In "Awakenings," the 
 patients and illness were far more satisfyingly portrayed.
 Because of how strong the screenplay, written by Steve Levitt, is in the 
 way it deals with the main relationship, and because of the fabulous 
 performances from Kilmer and Sorvino, the film's few problems can be 
 swept over to the side. The adult way that the romance is depicted by 
 director Irwin Winkler is, no doubt, in respect to the real-life couple 
 that the film was inspired by, who are still together after many years 
 (even though the setting of the film was changed to New York). Since 
 January is usually the time of year that is known as the dumping ground 
 from bad movies, "At First Sight" comes as a refreshing and 
 sophisticated change of pace.

Author
Wil Tirion
I was becoming a little worried that Val Kilmer might be fast turning into a
typecast actor. He's been a drug debased rock star in The Doors, a drink
infested gun-toting cowboy in Tombstone and more recently a gambling junky
in Heat. Add to that the flying rodent obsessed figure of Batman and you
have a line up of characters who would do well from a long break at the
Jenny Craig clinic (Batman may require a little more help than the others)
Imagine my relief when I discovered Kilmer's new role involved a blind man
who regains his sight and falls in love - not a drug or obsessive compulsive
characteristic in sight.
Unfortunately the change in character hasn't paid off and I find myself
wondering if Kilmer isn't naturally suited to presenting surly, self
absorbed roles. In At First Sight he plays Virgil Adamson an architect who,
having been blind since birth, undergoes a miracle operation and suddenly
finds he can see for the first time. The beautiful Mira Sorvino plays the
workaholic architect, Amy Benic, who falls for Adamson and helps him
reluctantly regain his sight. What should be a joyous event, however, soon
turns sour as Adamson is forced to come to terms with a world of shape,
colour and light which he cannot understand.
Happily the mushiness you'd expect from such a movie never really
materializes and the story focuses more on Adamson's struggle to cope with
his newfound world of visual perception than on the developing romance
between him and Benic. Unhappily Kilmer's hot-headed narcissistic portrayal
of Adamson's plight makes the gravity point of the movie extremely hard to
pin down. If you've read the book you'll know the story of the true life
Virgil Adamson is gut-wrenching and will draw a tear from even the most
thick-skinned reader. The movie won't even cause a quivering lip, simply
because its so hard to feel sympathy for Kilmer, particularly when the far
more loveable character of Benic is shown as the insensitive and berated bad
guy.
Overall the film tries hard but, and I know I'm contradicting myself here,
Kilmer just isn't right for the part, Sorvino is simply wasted to bits and
the whole thing could have been so much more but for the awful directing
skills of Irwin Winkler. I'd far sooner recommend, Awakenings, a far
superior version of an almost identical story.
At First Sight opens in the UK 30th April 1999
More reviews at Saturn UK. http://www.saturnuk.com (updates every Thursday)
Posted by Wil Tirion (movie cor.)

Author
Greg King
        Audiences who love a good cry at the movies, and who haven't
overdosed yet on the saccharine excesses of Message In A Bottle and
its ilk, are in for a treat with At First Sight, a sort of light
weight cross between The Miracle Worker and A Patch Of Blue.
Virgil Adamson (Val Kilmer) works as a masseur at an upstate
New York health spa.  He has also been blind since he was three years
old.  He hasn't written a book like Helen Keller, he doesn't play the
piano like Ray Charles, nor does he sing like Stevie Wonder.  But he
has a wonderful, self-deprecating sense of humour and a healthy
appetite for life.  And he does have magic hands!  It's a case of love
at first touch for stressed out, divorced New York architect Amy Benic
(Oscar winner Mira Sorvino, from Mighty Aphrodite, etc), who comes to
the spa for some much needed relaxation and battery recharging.  It
takes just one incredible massage session with Virgil for her to fall
completely and helplessly in love with him.  It takes her a little
longer to accept his blindness.
Before long though, Amy has convinced Virgil to come to New
York and visit a doctor (Bruce Davison, from Six Degrees Of
Separation, etc) who may be able to restore his sight.  Virgil's
sister Jennie (Kelly McGillis, from Witness, etc) has made a lot of
personal sacrifices in her own life to look after him since their
father took off, and she initially resents Amy's intrusive presence.
The operation is a success.  That is when the real problems begin as
Virgil adjusts to seeing the world as it really is for the first time,
and begins to lose sight of what he really wanted.
At First Sight is an old fashioned romance, albeit given an
added dimension through Virgil's blindness.  The story is based on a
true case study written by neurologist Oliver Sacks (the doctor who
also wrote Awakenings), but has been reworked by first time feature
writer Steve Levett to neatly fit into the Hollywood approved template
for romantic dramas.  Director Irwin Winkler (The Net, etc)
unashamedly puts both his central characters, and the audience,
through the emotional wringer during the course of this two hanky job.
Aussie cinematographer John Seale does some neat visual tricks to
effectively convey Virgil's gradual recovery of sight.
Both Kilmer and Sorvino are an attractive and likeable couple,
and they deliver solid and engaging performances.  Kilmer's realistic
performance especially reveals emotional depths that he hasn't tapped
into very often.  The wonderful Nathan Lane injects some humour as the
irreverent Phil Webster, a visual therapist who helps Virgil cope with
understanding this brave new world of sight.
Ultimately, At First Sight is nothing that we haven't seen
before, in one form or another, but it is the obvious chemistry
between its two stars that gives the familiar material its spark and
affecting qualities.

Author
Susan Granger
 Based on a true medical case of a blind man who was able to
see again, Irwin Winkler's film revolves around Virgil Adamson, played
by Val Kilmer ("Batman"), who was totally blind from the age of three
because of a combination of retinitis pigmetosa and congenital
cataracts, despite the painful probing and pondering of "experts"
ranging from eye surgeons to faith healers. Resigned to his condition,
he becomes an incredibly skilled and gifted massage therapist at an
Adirondack Mountain resort. That's where he meets a workaholic
architect (Mira Sorvino) who falls under the spell of his magic
fingers. Convinced by his new client who marvels at his emotional
depth, and ignoring the warnings of his wary, protective older sister
(Kelly McGillis), he submits to the ministrations of a top
ophthalmologist at Manhattan Eye and Ear Hospital (Bruce Davison) who
promises miracles - and, in fact, delivers sight to Virgil. But how
Virgil interprets what he is suddenly able to "see" is another
thing. Thousands of unexplainable images assault him. He stands in the
midst of New York's fast-moving traffic, unable to believe that a
speeding car could hurt him. When he spots his image in a mirror, he
says "hello" and is curious why he gets no reply.  He is confused by
"flirting" and bewildered by "disappointment." Val Kilmer wears a
moronic smile through much of the drama, rendering his performance
wooden, and Mira Sorvino doesn't fare much better.  Only a cameo by
Nathan Lane elicits real laughter. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, "At First Sight" is a philosophical 5, echoing the sentiment of
the blind jazz pianist Ray Charles, who once said he wouldn't want his
sight restored because he senses a greater authenticity in his present
condition.

Author
LARRY MCGILLICUDDY
Conflict is overrated. Too many screenwriters who have based their 
work on the numerous books that teach you how to write a screenplay 
step by step feel the need to inject conflict at every possible 
moment. At First Sight is a good example of this. There are so many 
things about this film that work so well, but at times the forced 
conflict is so embarrasingly mindless it made me cringe.
At First Sight is based on a story by Oliver Sacks about restored 
sight. In the film, Val Kilmer plays Virgil Adamson, a man who has 
been blind since he was 3. He works as a masseuse at a vacation 
resort. This is where he bumps into architect Amy Benic (Sorvino). 
These early scenes between them are nothing short of fantastic. 
Kilmer and Sorvino have a dynamic chemistry, and the film could've 
simply focused on their romance the entire running time and be 
successful. 
But I know that's not the only story Irwin Winkler wants to tell. 
This film is also about how a blind man copes with restored sight. 
There is nothing wrong with this, considering the early scenes here 
are also quite effective. Bruce Davison is a doctor who performs a 
surgery to help Virgil restore his sight. Virgil's first moments of 
sight are very frightening, since has has no idea what exactly he is 
looking at.
The moments of this story I enjoyed most dealt with Virgil attempting 
to make sense of what he is seeing. For example, he knows what an 
apple looks like, but he can't tell the difference between a real 
apple and a picture of an apple. Virgil is aided by visual therapist 
Phil Webster (Nathan Lane). Lane's performance is very good, but I 
wish there was more of his character here. I would've preferred more 
scenes of human interaction and therapy between Virgil and Phil than 
dull lectures from Bruce Davison's character.
But that's only a minor problem. The film's two biggest flaws are the 
introduction of two minor characters that didn't need to be in this 
story. Steven Webber plays Sorvino's ex-husband and boss. First of 
all, it's hard to beleive these two were ever married,and it's even 
harder to beleive that their breakup wouldve been amicable enough for 
her to still want to work for him. But conflict is necessary says 
these screenwriting books, and the screenplay makes the major mistake 
of presenting Webber's character as a threat to Virgil and Amy's 
romance. This guy is the most pathetic and pointless character since 
John Pankow in The Object of My Affection. Any scene he is in shakes 
the credibility of the entire film.
Another misconceived character comes in the form of Virgil's father. 
He left Virgil many years ago when he couldn't find a cure for his 
blindness. When he learns of Virgil's restored sight, he tries to 
arrange a meeting between them. I don't care about this. The father 
is a throwaway character who we only see in two scenes, but the film 
asks us to find the scene between them touching and sad. It's just a 
mindless way to inject more conflict for Virgil than was necessary.
Instead, why couldn't the film give a better subplot for Virgil's 
sister (very well played by Kelly McGillis)?. She has seemingly 
devoted her entire life to taking care of Virgil, so why not show 
scenes where she wonders about her future without Virgil? Now that 
he's with Amy, she no longer has anyone to come home to and take care 
of. Scenes like this would've been more touching than a lame father-
son reunion. The film does hint at this once, but it's quickly 
abandoned.
Yet once again this year, I enjoyed a film despite the appearance of 
several major flaws. If the allure of the friday night lights 
propelled Varsity Blues past it's flaws, then what works here is the 
powerful romance between Virgil and Amy. Mira Sorvino is a terrific 
actress, and this performance is among her best. She has a natural 
ability to show how much she cares for someone without even having to 
say a word. Val Kilmer abandons his usual brooding, egotistical style 
of performance and instead creates a character that he actually seems 
to care about. Virgil is sweet, funny, smart, and even infuriating. 
Kilmer is able to bring out all these traits perfectly, which is 
certainly more impressive than the simple technical task of looking 
like a blind person. Together, they have immense chemistry and are 
able to carry the entire film past even it's most gaping of flaws.

Author
David Nusair
Starring Val Kilmer, Mira Sorvino, Nathan Lane
What must it be like to be blind?  Never being able to physically see
anything, always touching for some semblance of that sensation.  I respect
blind people just because they're able to get through every single day
despite such a huge hurdle to overcome.
In "At First Sight", Val Kilmer plays such a person.  Blind since the age
of three, he's just as competent as anyone else, provided he's familiar
with his surroundings.  He's employed as a masseuse at the local spa, he
has lots of friends, and a sister who loves him and cares for him.  All
this changes, though, when he meets a vacationing architect, played by
Mira Sorvino.  They fall in love, and she changes his life.  She moves him
to New York and introduces him to a doctor who promises him his sight
through a radical new operation.  He accepts, and finds himself thrust
into the world of the seeing.  Nathan Lane enters the picture as a "sight
therapist" who helps Kilmer understand what he's seeing.
"At First Sight" contains the restoration of sight to a blind man, but is
more interested in the romance between Kilmer and Sorvino.  And that's the
major flaw of the movie.  Not that Kilmer and Sorvino don't make an
enjoyable and engaging couple; in fact, their chemistry is instantly
believable.  
No, the problem with "At First Sight" is that the filmmakers seem to think
that we would prefer to witness endless scenes of Kilmer and Sorvino
frolicking in parks, ice rinks, etc.  I found the concept of restoring
vision to a blind man to be fascinating, and was quite disappointed to
come to the realization, around an hour into the movie, that Kilmer and
Sorvino's romance was going to dominate the film.
Not nearly enough time is spent on Kilmer's adjustment to sight.  I'd say
it takes him about 15 minutes of screen time to get acclimitized to the
world of the seeing.  I would have liked to have seen a lot more of this
process, and I especially would have liked to have seen more Nathan Lane. 
He's the stand-out here, and it's too bad that his part is such a minor
element of the movie.
"At First Sight" isn't a bad movie by any means.  It's just a
disappointing one.

Author
James Sanford
 Near the beginning of "At First Sight" there's a scene guaranteed to
make almost every female viewer very, very jealous of Mira Sorvino, who
plays Amy Benic, a worn-out yet still somewhat glamorous New York
architect who's come to a mountain spa for a bit of rest. And what
better treatment to start with than a full-body massage from the magic
fingers of Virgil Adams, who is played by -- breathe deeply, ladies --
Val Kilmer?
 Minutes after he touches her, Amy is so relaxed, she bursts into tears.
"Oh no," Virgil apologizes. "Did I go too deep?".
 Like Virgil, the slickly produced "At First Sight" tends to shy away
from depth as well. Sad, since there's certainly the potential for a
fascinating picture here as Virgil, blind since early childhood, is
persuaded by Amy to participate in an experimental surgery program that
may restore his vision. The movie's most intriguing stretch begins
immediately after the operation, as Virgil struggles to reintrepret his
world visually, instead of through his other senses.
 But after paying lip service to the challenges of adjusting to being
able to see again, the Steve Levitt screenplay backpedals into the safer
ground of conventional romance, as long-suffering Amy does her best to
be patient while Virgil rants about how "seeing sucks." Though derived
from a true story chronicled by Dr. Oliver Sacks in his 1996 book "An
Anthropologist On Mars," "Sight" always seems closer to soap opera than
case study.
 All the usual suspects are brought in, including Virgil's
overprotective scold of a sister (Kelly McGillis), the hand-wringing
research scientist (Bruce Davidson) and Amy's cynical ex-husband (Steven
Weber), who's certain she'll come back to him on the rebound. The most
enjoyable of these walking cliches, a smart-mouthed therapist played by
Nathan Lane, ends up getting short shrift after a promising build-up.
 As for Kilmer and Sorvino, suffice to say the sparks don't exactly fly
between them. Speaking in a slowed-down, slightly thick voice, Kilmer
gives a performance that seems technically accurate but strangely
chilly, while the generally bubbly Sorvino seems to be trying to channel
the spirit of Justine Bateman here; she's all goofy looks, curled lips
and "ohmigod" flutteriness.
 Though the movie is not particularly insightful as either a medical
drama or a love story, director Irwin Winkler knows how to make a pretty
picture, and "Sight" even works in a couple of creative touches, such as
a distorted, disorienting double-exposure technique used to express
Virgil's first visions of the people around him. The soundtrack,
featuring two scintillating new songs from jazz pianist Diana Krall and
a host of standards, is also highly agreeable, even though the sluggish
plot it accompanies could inspire most viewers to close their eyes for a
long winter's nap. James Sanford

Author
Mac VerStandig
At First Sight
Reviewed by Mac VerStandig
Critic@moviereviews.org
4 stars (Out of 4)
After seeing At First Sight I found myself in a very rare scenario. As I 
tried to visualize how this review would go, what angles I would take, 
and whether or not this film deserved a positive or negative review, I 
was at a loss for both word and thoughts. But then, to quote one of my 
favorite films, Good Will Hunting, "Something occurred to me and I fell 
into a deep, peaceful sleep." It occurred to me that any movie capable 
of making me think that hard about it's entire panoply of elements is a 
great film for that reason alone.
The real beauty behind At First Sight is that any idiot can see it, and 
they will probably enjoy it and get something out of the whole 
experience. But when someone who is capable of thinking is to view it, 
they will be intellectually challenged by the incredible amounts of 
symbolism found within this great work. Everything in this film from a 
hockey stick to a school bus to a tree brings so much more significance 
to it than the 3 dimensions in which it exists. Not a scene will escape 
where this movie hasn't transformed an otherwise dull object, activity, 
or element of life into a richly vast rainbow of emotions.
Virgil Adamson (Val Kilmer) has been blind since he was 3 years old. 
Living in a small town and working as a masseuse for a resort, he had 
adapted to this handicap and his sister, Jennie (Kelly McGillis), had 
dedicated her life to helping him fight it. Absent of both a father and 
mother, the 2 have fought their way through life together. Their lives 
are filled with the routine necessary for a blind man, and that is the 
extent of excitement that they will encounter.
But all will change when Virgil falls in love with a client named Amy 
Benic (Mira Sorvino). As Amy slowly takes over his life, she convinces 
him that he can regain his sight through a complex medical procedure. 
After undergoing this treatment, Virgil indeed can see, but struggles 
with association and adjustment. Despite the help of therapist Phil 
Webster (Nathan Lane), things seem even blurrier than before. And so it 
is that the lack of a sense that he once claimed to be a handicap holds 
a presence that disables him even more.
On the surface this appears to be study of human sight, love, romance, 
and a life regained; but below the surface it is so much more. The lack 
of and regaining of sight are merely a vehicle for this film to explore 
some of the innermost complex human emotions. And it does that in a 
manner equivalently miraculous to the vehicle it uses.
Val Kilmer's performance is the best yet of this new year. He takes on a 
very demanding role and meets every expectation that could be imagined, 
then takes it one step farther. Nathan Lane also gives a wonderful 
performance in his small, but far from limited role. He actually manages 
to create a memorable and unforgettably emotional scene in a strip bar. 
However, as all things must have a down side, this film's weak link is 
Mira Sorvino. She is incredibly dull and unconvincing. She closer 
resembled to her father, Paul Sorvino, in Goodfellas than a young girl 
in love. And with that can only bring questions of whether or not she is 
capable of acting, or could Mighty Aphrodite have been a shear fluke.
At First Sight is not so much a film but rather a dazzlingly complex 
portrayal of symbolism. Although damaged by a sub-standard acting 
performance, At First Sight will still has an incredible effect on 
everyone that will see it. And it is for that reason that it is such a 
wonderful film.
CHECK OUT THIS REVIEW AND MANY OTHERS AT HTTP://WWW.MOVIEREVIEWS.ORG

Author
Scott Renshaw
AT FIRST SIGHT
(MGM)
Starring:  Val Kilmer, Mira Sorvino, Kelly McGillis, Steven Weber, Nathan
Lane, Bruce Davison.
Screenplay:  Steve Levitt, based on "To See or Not See" by Oliver Sacks.
Producers:  Irwin Winkler and Rob Cowan.
Director:  Irwin Winkler.
MPAA Rating:  R (sexual situations, nudity, adult themes, profanity)
Running Time:  127 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     It's a shame when a true story gets in the way of a good story.  Take
AT FIRST SIGHT, for instance, an adaptation based on a case study by
Oliver Sacks (AWAKENINGS).  It begins in New York City, where workaholic
architect Amy Benic (Mira Sorvino) is preparing for a long-overdue
vacation.  Her destination is an upstate mountain spa, where the amenities
include the services of gifted masseur Virgil Adamson (Val Kilmer).
Unexpectedly, the two begin developing a romantic relationship, a coupling
complicated by the fact that Virgil has been blind since he was a young
boy, and by the suspicions of Virgil's protective older sister Jennie
(Kelly McGillis).
     The first half-hour of AT FIRST SIGHT focuses largely on the
tentative early steps of Amy and Virgil's romance, and it's wonderfully
effective stuff.  Amy's first massage appointment with Virgil is intimate,
sexy and emotionally charged; their meeting on a remote skating pond is
loaded with simple charm.  Both lead actors are about as appealing as
we've ever seen them -- Sorvino aglow with re-awakened sensation, Kilmer
dropping his recent posing to connect with a fellow actor.  At first
glance, AT FIRST SIGHT is a throwback love story, short on world-changing
ramifications but long on gorgeous photography and superb chemistry
between Sorvino and Kilmer.
     Then the facts step in to blow the whole thing to shreds.  When Amy
researches Virgil's condition, she discovers that an experimental surgery
could offer hope.  Virgil eventually agrees to the surgery, and emerges
with the ability to see for the first time in over 25 years.  Director
Irwin Winkler does a fine job of conveying Virgil's initial
disorientation, an assault of stimuli on a man with no real visual
vocabulary.  And for a while, the medical details of Virgil's recovery --
such as his challenges with perspective and depth perception -- are
undeniably intriguing.
     The long-term problem with AT FIRST SIGHT -- and it becomes quite
long indeed -- is that the story becomes less about the relationship
between Virgil and Amy than it does about the relationship between Virgil
and his sight.  We watch Virgil struggle with being dependent once again
after living a hard-fought life of independence; we watch him struggle
with his feelings of abandonment after receiving a message from the father
who deserted him (Ken Howard).  Amy, meanwhile, is frustrated by her
inability to help Virgil enough, and turns to her ex-husband and business
partner Duncan (Steven Weber).  The simple appeal of the relationship
between Amy and Virgil turns overwrought, the chemistry fading with each
moment of focus on the disease of the week.
     It becomes even more frustrating when it becomes evident that AT
FIRST SIGHT is going to take exactly the same dramatic arc AWAKENINGS
took.  That's when you start to feel every minute of the two hour plus
running time, waiting for the inevitable revelations and confrontations
which in some cases are twenty or thirty minutes away.  AT FIRST SIGHT
closes with a caption informing us how Virgil and Amy fared in real life
after the events of the film, which only served to remind me that "based
on a true story" was no advantage in this case.  The film had too much
going for it as a love story to become a medical drama.  When fact proves
duller than fiction, it's time for a little artistic license.

Author
Victory A. Marasigan
Traveling architect Amy (Mira Sorvino) meets hunky, sexy-voiced masseur
Virgil (Val Kilmer).  Said masseur turns out to be blind.  Amy falls for
Virgil, and within what seems like a week of their first meeting, she
suggests he have his blindness "corrected" with an innovative surgery in
New York City.  Is this love?
At First Sight is just the sort film Hollywood thinks it can pull off
and not seem condescending. What filmmakers more often than not fail to
realize is that it is virtually impossible to succinctly capture the
full scope of the life of a blind person.  You can have an actor stand
there and flail his arms around, but that doesn't make him blind.
All of the lessons on vision that are espoused in the film are
overshadowed by syrupy melodrama and on-subtle preaching. Among the more
unnerving aspects of the film is the fact that Sorvino's supposedly
protagonistic my more often comes off as disruptive to Virgil's life
than helpful. For most of the movie, she's more blind than he is. Even
after the tacked on happy ending, we feel that Virgil would have
probably fared better learning on his own rather than escaping away with
his fawning client.
Besides Amy, many other secondary characters act with unbelievable
insensitivity towards Virgil's unique situation, including the doctor
(Bruce Davison) who helps restore his sight (Come on, what idiot doctor
lets a camera crew shine its lights in the face of a man whose never
seen before!). These ironies in characterization are, of course, the
intent of screenwriter Steve Levitt, but does he have to force it down
our throats?
Granted, the film may prove enlightening for some, if more for the
discussions on sense and perception it will provoke than for what
actually transpires on screen.  How do blind people manage to live their
lives? Should we feel sorry for them or not?  At First Sight works best
when it addresses ideas of the infinite suddenly becoming finite, of the
undefinable being
defined.  If there is a lesson to be taken away from it, it is that we
shouldn't feel sorry for the blind, because what they lack in sense is
made up for by a truly unique experience.  And that can be much better
than what we really see.
Reviewed January 27, 1999 at Loews White Marsh Theater, White Marsh, MD.

Author
Michael Redman
It must be an overwhelming shock to suddenly awaken one day with an entirely
new view of life. Previously comfortable in our old perceptions and way of
being, the new vision shatters our old world and the new one is an
surrealistic landscape.
Metaphors aside, massage therapist Virgil Adamson (Val Kilmer) experiences
this - literally. Once blind, now he sees and he's not sure he likes it much.
Virgil, blind since childhood, works in a spa in a small New York town and his
life isn't too bad. He takes a bus to work. His sister fixes his dinner. He
has memorized his home so he gets around easily. Then his life is turned
upside down when he meets Amy Benic (Mira Sorvino).
Overworked NYC architect Amy takes a break at the spa and meets Virgil's
tender touch. After a couple sensual encounters, they fall in love. Back in
the city, Amy researches the web and discovers a possible cure for his condition.
Kilmer is credible as a blind man and again demonstrates his increasing acting
skills. Although she has turned in commendable performances in the past,
Sorvino is less successful. Nathan Lane's small role as a sight therapist is
the most human one in the move. Unfortunately we only see a few minutes of him.
When Virgil regains his sight, he can't deal with the new sensations
bombarding his life. Infants learn to visually relate to their surroundings
gradually. Virgil gets it all at once. He doesn't understand perspective and
depth perception. When he sees himself in a mirror, he starts a conversation.
He thinks a picture of an apple _is_ an apple. City streets are perplexing.
If the film had concentrated on Virgil's struggle with his new vision, it
would be more absorbing. Instead it's a love story. Admittedly Virgil and
Amy's early scenes seem like they could lead to something, but when they
become a couple they turn into aliens. The massage between strangers is more
erotic than their love-making. After Virgil can see, their relationship
painfully lacks chemistry. The ending is easily foreseen.
Although the movie is based on a true story, director Irwin Winkler has
concentrated on the least interesting aspects. Creating a movie about sight,
he shows little insight.
(Michael Redman has written this column for over 23 years and thinks he's
going to go out and look at some stuff. Email your visions to Redman@indepen.com.)
[This appeared in the Jan. 28, 1999 "Bloomington Indpependent", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be contacted at Redman@indepen.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review: http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive: http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman
Y2K articles: http://www.indepen.com/

Author
David E. Smith
"At First Sight" (1999) - Val Kilmer, Mira Sorvino...
        Is there a better way to say "I love you" than by undergoing
experimental surgery?
"At First Sight," with Val Kilmer and Mira Sorvino, strives to
answer this question. Along the way, it delivers a moving romantic drama
that can soften any heart. 
Kilmer plays a blind massage therapist working at a resort spa in
northern New York. Sorvino is an overworked, stressed-out architect from
the Big Apple. When her co-workers convince her to take a few days off,
she ends up at that very spa. They swap stories over Shiatsu massage,
eventually falling for each other. 
Eventually, Kilmer moves to New York City with Sorvino, to go
under the knife (or, in this case, the laser) in an experimental procedure
to restore his sight. As he learns to cope with this new sense, "At First
Sight" gets more insightful too. Watching Kilmer adjust, the audience is
pulled along for both drama (a hockey fan, Kilmer sees his first Rangers
game) and some dark humor (Kilmer almost gets hit by a cab after standing
in the middle of the road, watching it close in, fascinated by its
changing perspective).
"At First Sight" is an emotional roller-coaster: it goes up
(Kilmer and Sorvino fall in love), and down (Kilmer's over-protective
sister, played by Kelly McGillis, berates Sorvino for giving him "false"
hope), and back up (Kilmer can see, but he's not sure if he wants to). It
even picks up passengers along the way, such as Nathan Lane as an offbeat
visual therapist (to help Kilmer's eyes adjust to complex stimuli, they go
to a strip club).
Kilmer shows off his acting talents more than he has in a while;
in contrast to some of his earlier, goofier roles ("Willow," "Batman
Forever"), his portrayal of Virgil shows true depth. Sorvino has a similar
career epiphany, playing cute and charming consistently, but believably.
Even the visual effects are well-done. The camera tricks used to
show things through Kilmer's eyes are technically simple, but in the
context of the story are entirely appropriate. They help the viewer not
only in seeing as he sees, but also to understand his perspective on the
world and to identify with his character.
The romance is done splendidly, without being too sappy, and makes
for a funny, charming movie. It also challenges the traditional belief
that blindness is a handicap, showing that the real problem can be trying
to "fix" it. The message isn't heavy-handed, and actually makes "At First
Sight" a rich movie experience that's well worth seeing. 
(This review was originally published in The Capaha Arrow, the student
newspaper of Southeast Missouri State University.)

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Imagine that you've been transported to a distant planet in
another galaxy, one which has the same climate and
atmospheric conditions as Earth.  You're pleasantly surprised
that you can breathe just as you did in your own world and
even more astonished that the people you see around you
can all speak English.  But that's where the familiarity ends. 
The signs on the stores are written in a language which
appears a cross between Thai and hieroglyphics.  You stretch
out your hand to shake with a friendly man coming toward
you, but the man knocks you flat on your back and is then
paradoxically solicitous about your health. You run outside to
feel the snowflakes but, stretching out your palm, you are
severely burned by the white substance floating cheerfully to
the ground.  You pick up a piece of fruit resembling a Golden
Delicious apple, bite into it, and detect the taste of cardboard-
-it's only the picture of an apple.  After a while, you adapt to
this strange and wondrous culture, you meet someone on
your own wavelength, and resolve never to return to Earth.  
   Science fiction?  Of course.  The principal character of
Irwin Winkler's involving new film takes such a metaphorical
trip to outer space. "At First Sight" centers on a short,
dramatic incident in the life of Virgil Adamson (Val Kilmer),
totally blind from the age of three because of a combination
of retinitis pigmentosa and congenital cataracts, a man whose
father puts the boy through a series of probes conducted by
all sorts of people, from professional ophthalmologists to
new-age faith healers--all to no avail.  Resigned to his
condition, Virgil puts himself in the loving care of his older
sister, Jenny (Kelly McGillis), and takes on the career of a
massage therapist in an Adirondack Mountain resort not far
from New York City.  We don't wonder that Virgil is a popular
favorite among the guests at the spa: with the increased
sense of touch that a blind man develops, he becomes very
good at his trade.  In the PG-13 film's most erotic scene,
Winkler shows Virgil easing the cares of a successful New
York architect, Amy Benic (Mira Sorvino), who is literally
brought to tears by her contact with Virgil's strong and
seemingly enchanted palms.
   Amy's fondness for Virgil grows, leading to the
consummation of their mutual attraction in a sexual embrace
which, compared to the earlier spectacle in the massage
room, is disappointingly mechanical.  When Amy suggests
that Virgil submit himself to a new, experimental surgery at
the famed Manhattan Eye and Ear Hospital--which counts
among its practitioners the world's finest eye doctors--Virgil's
reluctance gives us pause.  Wouldn't any of us in his position
enthusiastically agree to such surgery, whatever the odds of
success?  It is a tribute to Winkler's directorial skills, and to a
fine script based on neurologist Oliver Sacks's book "To See
and Not See," that we understand his hesitation.  Not only
had he gone through a long series of painful procedures as a
young lad, but more important, he has grown comfortable in
his limited world.  Virgil is aware--as his sighted counterparts
are not--that regaining the use of his eyes would be like our
traveling to that distant planet.  He would be like the
characters in Plato's cave who finally break their chains,
refusing to believe that the shadow which a fire cast on the
wall was the only reality.  Emerging into the sun, the
occupants of the cave are soon driven back to the dark
confines of their cavity, blinded by the light above and
rejecting the images they see as though they were segments
of a strange, satanic dream.  
   As though to confirm Virgil's prejudices, he is at first
blinded by light, then exposed to a thousand images which
bewilder him to the point of derangement.  Standing in the
middle of fast-moving car lanes in New York City, he refuses
to believe that an onrushing vehicle could hurt him.  When he
spots his image in a mirror, you don't wonder that he says
"hello" and is put off when he receives no answer.  He walks
into glass, in one case shattering it; he cannot distinguish
between an apple and a picture of an apple; he observes
Amy giving a brief kiss to her ex-husband and present
architectural partner Sam Allanbrook (Steven Webster) and
wonders, "What does that kiss mean?" He attends a noisy
party with Amy and soon wants to go home because he feels
he does not belong in this world.  Essentially Virgil is not
unlike Ray Charles, the blind jazz pianist, who once declared
that he would not wish to leave his state of sightlessness
because he senses a greater authenticity in his present
condition.
   The chemistry between Val Kilmer and Mira Sorvino is
palpable, but then, when Sorvino dances with her ex-
husband--who is attempting a reconciliation--the sparks fly
even more.  Sorvino is cute--not a beauty by Hollywood
standards.  With her ski-slope nose and expressive features,
she is ideally cast as the credible lover of a sightless man. 
Sorvino is so emotive that we don't wonder that her character
broke up with her husband, whom she describes as a man
with the emotional depth of a soapdish, one who cried only
once, when he did his tax returns three years earlier.  Val
Kilmer, not a great actor, is burdened with a moronic
smile through most of the story, the sort of grin that
psychologists often associate with a contemptuous air.  Bruce
Davison is far better as the doctor excited by the prospects of
reversing a serious disability.  This remarkable actor, who in
the role of Charles Aaron combines professional dignity with
an expression of genuine caring, rivets attention in every
scene while Kelly McGillis, in the role of the self-sacrificing
sister who enviously fears the loss of her dependent brother
to another woman, performs adequately.  In an all-too-small
role, Nathan Lane does shtick as only he can do.  He is Dr.
Phil Webster, an unorthodox sight therapist who at one point
takes his prize patient to a strip joint to further highlight the
joys of seeing.  Lane has the movie's best line.  Describing
the limbo separating a man who has newly regained sight
and one who has spent enough time in therapy to distinguish
an apple from a magazine picture, he holds that "limbo is like
New Jersey: you can see all the good things that are
happening; you just have to find out how to get there."
   While "At First Sight" brings to mind "Beyond Silence," a
portrayal of the world of the deaf, an even better correlation
can be made with Ralph Nelson's 1968 charmer, "Charly,"
which featured Oscar-winner Cliff Robertson as the title
character who is changed from a retarded baker's helper to a
man of genius--only to be transformed unhappily back when
the operation ultimately fails.  "At First Sight," with its panoply
of emotional responses, is a fine example of romantic
melodrama which professionally displays the effects of
dramatic change on the life of a man and of the persons
whose lives he touches.

Author
Walter Frith
'At First Sight' is written by Steve Levitt, Irwin Winkler and Rob Cowan
and is based on the story 'To See and Not See' by Oliver Sacks.  Irwin
Winkler also lends his talents as director to the film.  You may
remember another Oliver Sacks story turned into a movie in 1990 entitled
'Awakenings'.  That film chronicled the experimental tests that led to
the temporary success of a doctor treating patients for a deadly form of
sleeping sickness.  Robin Williams was the doctor and Robert De Niro the
patient.  Two powerhouse actors that brought their consummate
craftsmanship to a very human subject.  The extremely subtle and
wonderfully crafted story of 'At First Sight' is no classic but takes
the idea of human sight, and how we all (whether we want to admit it or
not) take it for granted and how painful it would be to adjust to a
world of darkness.  Just turn the tables and try to imagine the story of
a blind man, sightless since the age of three because of severe
cataracts, and how painful it is to adjust to a world of sight where
you're used to years of adapting to the dark and not understanding the
three dimensional concept of perfect vision.
You wouldn't think that someone would feel more comfortable being blind
after being given the opportunity to see but truth is stranger than
fiction and that's exactly what happens in this film which is one of
1999's most pleasant early surprises.  The story has some of the names
changed and this is a mystery to me because the characters are so
inspirational that they should be proud to have their names displayed as
the real ones in this movie.  Val Kilmer portrays Virgil Adamson, the
individual in question who, until the age of 8, had his eyes worked on
by the medical community almost to the point of torture and his sister
(Kelly McGillis) is reluctant to have him go through the procedure again
as a fully grown adult.  He meets the love of his life, Amy Benic (Mira
Sorvino) who is more open to the idea of him seeing than he is.  Her
heart is in the right place but she realizes later that Virgil has his
own decision to make.  After meeting the leading eye doctor on the east
coast of the U.S. (Bruce Davison), Virgil agrees to the procedure and
the medical institute, using his case for their own experimental ends,
agree to pick up the tab.
The highlight of the film comes after the operation and while sitting in
his wheelchair surrounded by his love ones, the bandages are taken off
Virgil's eyes and he slowly begins to adjust to a world of sight.  Val
Kilmer is stunning in this film.  It's obvious that Kilmer has always
struggled to be an intense method actor.  He virtually threw himself
into radical research for the role of Jim Morrison for 1991's 'The
Doors' and was terrific in it.  He has had his misses like everyone
else, but he brings a sublime and memorable portrayal of a blind
individual to the screen with a likable persona but his character never
goes awry to making this a disease of the week movie with weepy
sentimentality.  Mira Sorvino's performance as the lady in his life is
wonderful.  She's every guy's dream girlfriend.  Considerate, tolerant,
patient and most of all understanding.  Their chemistry is convincing
and totally memorable.  Rather underwritten and not used properly in the
film is a therapist (Nathan Lane) who helps Virgil adapt to his new
world.  For his small part in this film, Lane is quite good at drama.
This film's strongest asset is its attention to detail.  It focuses on
the little parts of Virgil Adamson's therapy after receiving surgery to
correct his eyesight.  And while he never fully adjusts to a world of
sight, his brief journey into that world is one that should be cherished
by everyone who's ever thought seriously about any handicap -- whether
it's physical or mental.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com
Take the man who produced GOODFELLAS (9/10), give him a story based in truth
written by Dr. Oliver Sacks (entitled "To see and not see"), the man
portrayed by Robin Williams in AWAKENINGS, slap in Quentin Tarantino's
ex-chum, Mira Sorvino, and one of the many Batmen we've had over the past
decade, Val Kilmer, and you've got yourself a perfect recipe for a romantic
melodrama, right? Well, not exactly, but somehow, the movie works!
PLOT:
Blind massage therapist falls in love with an architect from New York, and
vice-versa. She discovers an alternative surgery for him that would allow
him to regain his sight, which he lost at the age of one. Visual
transformation complete, the duo find themselves drifting apart as the
hardships of his newfound sight prove difficult. In the end, they must look
within themselves to figure out what they truly want out of life.
CRITIQUE:
Effective sappy film, runs slow at first, but eventually draws you in with
the solid performances by its leads, an interesting and truthful premise,
and its heartfelt epilogue, which teaches us never to lose sight of what is
most important to us. This is one of the few films that actually had me
buying the sap that it was preaching. It's longer than it should be, but it
does take the time to create a few believable characters, and develop a real
relationship between two people who truly want to be with one another. It
sure had me root-root-rooting for the home team! The cinematography of the
film was also real sweet, with New York in the winter months always looking
so fine. Add to that, the hockey references (I love hockey), a few cute
one-liners, and a couple of unexpected turns, and you've got yourself one of
the few recent romantic dramas to score.
The actors in this picture also made a big difference, with each one
bringing their own truth to their characters. Mira Sorvino was good, and not
overly tearful like the women from STEPMOM (6/10). Val Kilmer, who is
incidentally getting skankier by the picture, also came through as the blind
guy with the heart of gold. And guess who also makes an appearance? Remember
the flight instructor from 1986's TOP GUN (7/10)? That's right, Kelly
McGillis is back and she hasn't aged like the wine that is fine. She is also
very good as the older sister, who essentially raised Kilmer's character
from childhood. I think the relationship between the loving couple could
have used a little more spice, but other than that, this film did manage to
"gulp me up" during its money scenes, and in my book of colours, that's a
definite sign of an effective character drama.
All in all, a nice romantic tale to enjoy with your better half, especially
if you're in the doghouse, because this movie will surely bring out the
appreciation of the most important aspects of your relationship. It's a tad
slow and about twenty minutes too long, but it does manage to develop some
rich characters, around a fascinating premise, and dash in a couple of
romantic and enlightening moments all the while.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
This film is based on a real-life couple who are currently married and
living in Ohio.
It was during the week of this film's release, that actor Nathan Lane (real
name: Joe Lane), who plays the character of Dr. Phil Webster in this film,
"came out" in a publication of "The Advocate". For the first time, he
publicly announced that he was gay. He joins fellow actors Rupert Everett,
Nigel Hawthorne and Ian McKellen in that respect (among many other I am
sure.)
It was in January 1999, that Val Kilmer claimed that his old friend Kevin
Spacey, whom he studied with at Julliard, still owed Kilmer's father,
Eugene, $18,000, from a friendly loan that he took out from the latter, in
1979, in order for him to finish up his education at the prestigious acting
school. He never did finish his tutelage at the school, but did claim to
have paid pop Kilmer back $1000, which he claims was closer to the correct
amount of the loan. Kilmer claims that he will not speak to the actor until
his debt to his father is fully restored. Mind you, Kilmer's father passed
away in the early '90s, so he says that he's "gonna have to have Spacey pay
for the college education of my children." Oooh, what fun in Hollywood! Stay
tuned.
During the hockey game scene, you can clearly see the character of Austin
Powers, from AUSTIN POWERS: INTERNATIONAL MAN OF MYSTERY (7/10) on the giant
scoreboard over the ice.
Irwin Winkler is good friends with actor Robert DeNiro. DeNiro's daughter
Drena plays the character of Caroline in this film. Winkler produced ROCKY
(8/10), for which he won an Oscar,
This film was originally titled SIGHT UNSEEN.
When in Key West, Florida, be sure to stop by a restaurant named "Kelly's",
owned by the actress of the same name, Kelly McGillis.
The real Dr. Oliver Sacks also makes an appearance in this film as a doctor
at the news conference.

Author
Matt Williams
Oliver Sacks' story To See and Not See, a true account regarding
restoring sight to the blind must have seemed like the perfect idea for
a movie. Not only does an actor get to stretch his chops as a blind man,
but the "miracle cure" would be, by definition, an uplifting moment.
Both of these are true of At First Sight, but the film isn't happy to
leave good enough alone.  Instead, the film is saddled with a romantic
subplot that proves unmoving and distracting.
Virgil Adamson (Val Kilmer) lost his sight between the ages of 1 and 3
due to congenital cataracts.  Since then, under the protective wing of
his elder sister Jennie (Kelly McGillis), he has made a life for himself
as a massage therapist at a local resort.
However, everything is about to change when Amy Benic (Mira Sorvino)
enters his life.  She's an architect from New York who comes to the
resort for a weekend getaway.  She goes in for a massage, and winds up
falling in love.
Back in New York, Amy discovers Dr. Charles Aaron (Bruce Davison), a
surgeon with some radical ideas which just might be able to restore
Virgil's sight.  But, after living all his life without vision, will
Virgil be able to relearn everything he knows about the world in order
to see?
The medical drama of At First Sight, based on a true story, is easily
the film's most compelling element.  Though the premise at first feels a
bit gimmicky, it is handled competently and with a good deal of
thoughtfulness.
But At First Sight is hesitant to rely on the medical drama alone.
Rather, it supplements the story with a romantic angle, and here is
where it falters.  The chemistry-free relationship between Mira Sorvino
and Val Kilmer feels very artificial and lifeless.
Mira Sorvino is the prime culprit here.  Her bland character is simply
unappealing.  Val Kilmer has the heftier role, and can always fall back
on his character's visual dilemma for drama.  Sorvino only has the
romance to work with, and that's not a solid structure here at all.
In a delightful supporting turn, Nathan Lane briefly appears as a visual
therapist.  His few scenes in the film are such a welcome relief that it
leaves you wondering how much better the film would have been without
the overstressed romantic angle.
In the end, At First Sight is still worth watching...but there are
plenty of better things to see.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
Steve Rhodes
A couple of massages and Amy Benic's life is changed forever.
Amy, played with a sweet, nervous energy by Mira Sorvino, is a hard
driving young architect who works with her ex-husband (Steven Weber) at
the firm they co-founded.  As director Irwin Winkler's AT FIRST SIGHT
begins, Amy checks into a spa for "a quick fix" of daily massages - but
not too early in the morning.  After a couple of those "deep tissue"
babies delivered under the tender care of a handsome masseur named
Virgil, she is head over heels in love with him.
The first scene of them together has her crying during her
quasi-orgasmic massage.  "Do you always make girls cry?" she weeps.
"Always," he replies earnestly.  The script is by a series of writers
(Steve Levitt, Irwin Winkler and Rob Cowan) so one cannot be sure to
whom to attribute which lines, but, since all the lines are consistently
sappy, perhaps it doesn't matter.
Val Kilmer, who is only slightly better than in his atrocious
performances in THE ISLAND OF DR. MOREAU and THE SAINT, plays Virgil for
maximum schmaltz.  Virgil's blind, but, as is de rigueur in such
cinematic situations, Amy will not realize this for a while, and, when
she does, she will be suitably embarrassed and apologize profusely.
The romance between the two of them advances rapidly.  "She smells like
cinnamon and nutmeg," is how Virgil describes Amy to his dog.  He is
overhead by his long-suffering sister (Kelly McGillis), who takes care
of Virgil.  She is apprehensive about any possible changes in Virgil's
life.
The acting by the two leads has a certain symmetry.  Amy displays
genuine affection for Virgil and makes him the center of her life.
Virgil agrees -- he loves himself and sees the world in terms of his
needs.  Sorvino is as honestly open and giving in her performance as
Kilmer is self-absorbed.
Soon the two of them have moved from his place near the spa to her pad
in New York after she convinces him to try a miracle cure to restore his
sight.  (The film is "inspired by a true story.") The doctor, played by
Bruce Davison, does give Virgil his sight, which causes Virgil great
consternation.  Dr. Phil Webster, a vision therapist, played by comedian
Nathan Lane, helps Virgil deal with the emotional trauma of his new
sight.  Dr. Webster takes Virgil to a cheap stripper bar where they can
polish off a few beers while the good doctor asks him what he thinks
about the naked visuals.
The movie, which is largely a series of missed opportunities, finds the
ugliest part of one of the prettiest cities around, New York City, for
Virgil to waste his newfound eyesight on.
It was probably inevitable that a movie with this title would have some
"sight" gags, but do they have to have so many?  When Virgil meets Amy
after her massage, he says he doesn't recognize her with her clothes on.
And when she changes clothes when he is still blind, he promises not to
look.  Ad nauseam.
The movie is cluttered with characters and subplots which add little
other than time to the picture.  A subplot concerning Virgil's evil
father could be totally eliminated, as could the one of Amy's
ex-husband.
As likeable as the female lead is and as fascinating as the subject
matter is, the movie slowly falls apart in front of your eyes.  When
Virgil runs out into a busy Manhattan street one evening and plays
chicken with a speeding taxi just to observe the visual effects of
rapidly approaching headlights, you know the movie has finally and
completely lost it.
AT FIRST SIGHT runs too long at 2:08.  It is rated PG-13 for sexual
situations and a little profanity and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com
