Title
Review for Whipped (1999)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Mac VerStandig
---A copy of this review can be found at 
http://www.moviereviews.org/whipped.htm ---
Brad (Brian Van Holt), Jonathan (Jonathan Abrahams) and Zeke (Zorie Barber) 
convene once a week over Sunday breakfast to compare scamming notes from the 
previous two nights. No - they aren't credit card thieves, door-to-door 
salesman or even sleazy businessmen. They are "scammers" or, for those of you 
as apparently out of it as me, "swingers" or, for those of you who missed 
that educational 1996 film as well, they are what the parents of Generation-X 
refer to as "womanizers." Yep, the trio have Friday and Saturday night to get 
through as many women as possible or - in the case of one member with a 
masturbation obsession - come up with as interesting a set of stories as 
imaginable. There is a fourth member of their clan, Eric (Judah Domke), but 
he is two-years married and his encounters with post-marital sex - no matter 
how interesting (and some of them are quite exotic) - nauseate the group.
Oddly enough, the group's ventures are wonderfully entertaining in a very 
primitive, chauvinistic manner and should give single male audiences - 
especially those Gen-Xers with notoriously hyper-inflated egos - a great deal 
of pleasure to watch so long as they don't realize that they are laughing at 
themselves. Those who enjoyed other cheaply-made examinations of dating like 
Kevin Smith's "Clerks" and the aforementioned "Swingers" - both dignified 
cult-classics - should appreciate the biting reality of "Whipped" as the film 
examines how the three sleazy pals will cope with each other when they all 
fall for the same gal, Mia (Amanda Peet) and break the first rule of dating: 
"bros before hoes, pals before gals." And for those who envy the slick world 
of scamming, the film could, in many ways, serve as a starter's manual 
complete with a few sets of pickup lines and plenty of performance tips like 
how a man can enhance his taste to a female if consuming pineapple juice 
before receiving fellatio. 

Author
Jon Popick
When I hear a film start with a woman saying, `Everybody fucks everybody
– it's the nature of the beast,' it usually means I've fallen asleep on
the couch and left Showtime on.  But Whipped isn't your typical 2:00 AM
cable soft-core pornography – it's a new, envelope-pushing sex comedy
playing at your local gigaplex.
Whipped takes place in New York City, where a group of four men meet in
a diner each Sunday to loudly discuss their sexual activity from the
previous week.  There's a Wall Street hunk who is so blonde and so
handsome, he's almost Craig Kilborne (Brian Van Holt, television's Love
& Money), a chronic masturbator who feels bad because he's only had nine
sexual partners (Jonathan Abrahams in his film debut), a married man who
finds himself outcast from his sexually active group of friends (Judah
Domke, Spanking the Monkey), and an unemployed beatnik writer (Zorie
Barber in his film debut – he's also an executive producer).
Each guy brazenly brags about his recent sexual conquests, and more
importantly, the sleazy means at which he `scammed' each woman.  I guess
it's a step up from using date-rape drugs, like in Loser, but it still
doesn't make an entertaining film.  I thought the film was headed toward
a storyline like the superior The Tao of Steve, but instead it gets
stuck spinning its wheels in a pool of vulgarities that have no purpose
other that shocking the audience.
Whipped initially earned an NC-17 rating from the MPAA, and since the
film has no sex scenes, you should have a pretty good idea of how
explicit the sexual dialogue can get.  These guys don't just fuck and
tell – they do it in the most graphic way you can imagine.  And exactly
what crowded diner have you been to where shouting about having your
salad tossed or your knob polished is acceptable?
The film is broken up over a seven-week period, and in week two, each
single guy unknowingly falls for the same girl.  Their diner talk is
more subdued as they sheepishly say things like, No, man – this one was
different.'  Mia (Amanda Peet, The Whole Nine Yards) supposedly has no
idea that the men are best friends, but each is so smitten with her,
they refuse to give her up.  Jealously and hormones rage, but Whipped
becomes bogged down with contrived voice-overs make the film choppy and
annoying
So what is Mia's story?  You know she's playing them from the film's
opening line, so the main questions become `why' and `to what end.'  Is
she a grad student writing a paper on the dating and sexual habits of
the American male?  Nope.  And while the payoff is slightly amusing,
it's still a huge letdown.
Whipped is the directorial debut of Peter M. Cohen, who also wrote the
film's script.  After Peet (who is dating Van Holt in real life) stole
the show from Bruce Willis and Matthew Perry in Yards, I figured Whipped
would be her big breakout role.  But the release date kept getting
pushed further and further back, which always makes me skeptical.
Although she gets top billing in the film, Peet has less screen time
than each of the four main male characters.  She's still an up-and-comer
with a bright future, but Whipped is something that may have been better
off if it was left off her resume.
1:40 - R for strong sexual content and even stronger adult language

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamswhipped.html
It's been a long while since I've actively looked forward to seeing
_all_ of the new releases scheduled to come out here in Podunkville; for
vastly different reasons, I eagerly anticipated seeing HIGHLANDER:
ENDGAME, SAVING GRACE, and this movie, WHIPPED - a triple-play rarity
for me.  Now that I've seen two out of three ("Endgame" is next-up for
me this afternoon), the question is, was my eager anticipation rewarded?
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
Brad (Brian Van Holt), Zeke (Zorie Barber), and Jonathan (Jonathan
Abrahams), are three Wild And Crazy guys who get together for weekly
Sunday brunches, along with their married (and thus, no longer Wild nor
Crazy), completely whipped friend, Eric (Judah Domke), to compare notes
on their female conquests over the past week.  All's well in their
individual worlds - Studly Stockbroker Brad, Horndog Beatnik Zeke, and
Sensitive Onanistic Jonathan imagine themselves quite the ladies men,
and have the raunchy stories to prove it - until they each find a woman
who Completes them; someone who is more than their match.  Who knew Mia
(Amanda Peet) would be the perfect fit for each of them?
The Upshot:
Those who know my taste in movies, will probably be surprised to find
out I liked WHIPPED.  And will probably be even more surprised to find
out *why*.  See, I ain't as bougie as summa y'all might think.
Occasionally, I like to slum, too [/end sarcasm].
Contrary to some folks' perceptions, I can enjoy a raucous film every
now and then.  I can groove on comedies in which the humor is derived
from base situations (the basest of which, some might say, is Gettin'
Some) - as long as the premise, or the characters, don't insult my
intelligence.  And for me, WHIPPED fit that bill nicely.
There's nothing very Deep about it; no real Lessons to be learned, no
Truth that would forever alter the viewer (unless said viewer was one of
those types who like to think he or she is God's Gift.  And even then,
I'm sure said viewer wouldn't see themselves in the on-screen
characters).  And the Moral at the end - that the way (some) men troll
for chicks is muy lame - is likewise nothing new.  But what I enjoyed
most about WHIPPED was how it avoided the patronizingly typical way most
flicks of this nature try to depict the boy likes girl likes other boy
likes same girl likes other boy likes same girl and all of the boys are
friends-setup: [SMALL SPOILER] early on, we are shown that not only do
all the participants in this menage a quad *know* about each others'
involvement, they _accept_ it (some less willingly than others) [END
SMALL SPOILER]. And with that first "twist", I leaned back in my chair
and relaxed, knowing that no matter what else happened, I wasn't about
to see the same ol' same ol' vapid flick as has been repeated ad nauseum
so often in the past.
The "feel" of the film was quite appealing to me.  Multiple elements -
from the nicely-done opening credits, to the "weekly" titles (I admit,
I'm a sucker for inside-joke titles), and even the overdone-on-TV
breaking of the fourth wall (where the characters talk directly to the
camera as if they were being interviewed) - took this movie to a
different place for me than its subject matter would suggest it
belonged.  And indeed, the feel of the movie helped it overcome some
glaring flaws that might have otherwise been deal-breakers for me,
including the incredibly immature way the male characters (especially
Brad) spoke, as if the actors (or writer) thought they were in a high
school flick, and the fact that at least two of the characters (Zeke and
Jonathan) were anything but the God's Gift To Women that they thought
themselves to be.  In fact, I'd be shocked to find that New York women
were *really* that hard up; those two guys were by no means All That
(nor were they A Bag Of Chips).  Not that Brad was any catch, but hey, I
wouldn't kick him out of bed.  Um...the point being, my Disbelief had a
hard time saying Suspended when it came to taking this motley trio at
face value as being Playas.
That, and the potty mouths that these guys all had aside, WHIPPED moved
along at a good pace, though I was disappointed that Amanda Peet didn't
have a much bigger speaking part than she wound up having.  I looked
forward to seeing this flick specifically because of her; I enjoyed her
immensely in THE WHOLE NINE YARDS and looked forward to seeing her in
WHIPPED - and would've walked away completely disappointed if it hadn't
been for her ending scenes.  Even with that, her Mia was more a concept,
than a fully-developed character.
The trio of bachelors, and the Obligatory Married Guy Friend against
which the trio measured themselves, were the true stars of this show.
Strangely enough, the ObMarriedGuy was the most easily accepted of the
four Types (you know: the Studly Wallstreet Type, the Horny Beatnik
Type, the Sensitive Self-loving Type, and the Cockblocked Emasculated
Husband Type); unfortunately, I could believe there are many Erics in
this world, much easier than I could see a Brad, a Jonathan, or
especially a Zeke.  My sympathies for the characters fell right in line
with whom Mia might've picked: I thought Brad was way too full of
himself, Zeke was just too tiny (in more ways than one) to even
consider, Eric needed to be put out of his - and no doubt, his wife's -
misery, and Jonathan was as pathetic as he was harmless.  In this,
actors Van Holt, Barber, Domke, and Abrahams (respectively), performed
their jobs quite well.
And the biggest kick of all, for me?  Seeing Callie "gag" Thorne [who,
along with Jon "spit" Seda and Micheal "retch" Michele, put the last
nail into the coffin that once was TBDSOT, NBC's HOMICIDE: LIFE ON THE
STREET] play the kind of inconsequential sleazy slut for which her
acting abilities were obviously hoed...oops, I mean, honed.  Talk about
your perfect casting...
Having been married for nearly twenty years, I'm glad to say that I
don't recognize *any* of these types from those in my everyday life,
though I knew my fair share back in my college days.  That's the great
thing about The Movies, though: in them, even a city with residents as
jaded as those occupying New York, can have people so willing to believe
what they'd normally know to be unbelievable, if they'd only look closer
at what was being offered to them.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
Often, when I watch a "White" movie [one of these days, we'll have to
Discuss what constitutes a "White", or a "Black", movie.  But that's
another topic for another time], I wonder to myself, "Self, could you
imagine this as a 'Black' movie?"  And in the case of WHIPPED, the
answer was easily, "yes".
If the creative folks behind it had chosen to Go There, WHIPPED could've
easily been Booty Call or The Player's Club or [insert typically
misogynistic hit-dat-bootay flick here].  To the extent it was not,
WHIPPED earned my admiration; though much of the posturing was there,
WHIPPED had the foresight [or so I'd like to think.  It might actually
be that they stumbled upon this quite accidently] to avoid the cliches
inherent in the situations it depicts, and tackle the questions it asked
in a somewhat more mature fashion (even though, as I noted above, most
of the male characters sounded like refugees from high school).
Now, before anyone [yes, I mean you, "babylove"] gets their panties all
in a wad, note that I am NOT saying White "Booty Call" flicks are better
than Black "Booty Call" flicks by default.  What I *am* saying is, in
this specific case, the makers of WHIPPED overcame its predecessor's
faults by making the _way_ they told the story, much more interesting
and much less pathetically, and stereotypically, obvious (though to some
degree, just as titillating) in the end.  Ka peech?
So, what does this say about *Black* flicks within this genre?  Maybe
nothing.  Or maybe, folks like me could tolerate the "Booty Calls"
flicks more if they had some substance behind their empty-calories
style.  I don't see nuttin' wrong/with a little bumpngrind.  But surely
We can do better than Yet Another longform BET video, right?  Uh, right?
Bammer's Bottom Line:
While it's nowhere near gut-bustin' funny, WHIPPED does provide an
entertaining, and refreshingly different, look at The Oldest War in the
book: the war of the sexes.  Take note, fellas: those wack lines y'all
use are _transparent_.
WHIPPED (rating: greenlight):
The bar is raised, Young Black Hollywood; the gauntlet is thrown.  Can
y'all take "Booty Call" to the next level?  Or is that all you got?

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Peter M. Cohen.
Cast: Amanda Peet, Brian Van Holt, Jonathan Abrahams, Zorie Barber, Judah 
Domke.
2000 - 85 minutes
Rated R (for profanity and sexuality).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, September 2, 2000.
A misogynistic and angry movie passing itself off as a raucous comedy, 
"Whipped," directed by Peter M. Cohen, features almost nothing worthy of 
recommending it. The five central characters are unlikable and despicable 
players who get off on using others for nothing more than sex, and whose 
whole lives revolve around this one fact. None of them are ever attempted to 
be developed as fully thought-out people, nor do they have any interests 
outside of what is strictly required by the, albeit slim, storyline. You 
wouldn't think that a writer or director would have the courage to film a 
romance with nary an ounce of heart or soul, but Cohen has done just 
that--and fails miserably at every turn.
The film centers on four Manhattan-based best friends in their 20's who 
apparently do not like each other at all, and meet every Sunday at a local 
diner to discuss their sexual conquests from that week's past. Brad (Brian 
Van Holt) is a hot-shot dimwit who believes he is God's gift to women; Zeke 
(Zorie Barber) is an arty club-goer who spends his time reading and having 
threesomes; Jonathan (Jonathan Abrahams) is less experienced with women, but 
more experienced than his friends when it comes to lube; and the tic-infested 
Eric (Judah Comke) used to be like his other three friends, but is now 
unhappily married. 
Everything changes for each of the bachelors one week when they all meet a 
wonderful young woman whom they surprisingly start to like. What they don't 
expect is that they have all met the same woman--the strikingly beautiful and 
articulate Mia (Amanda Peet). Each of them care enough for her and their 
potential relationships that they mutually agree with Mia when she suggests 
that she be allowed to continue seeing all three of them at the same time, 
since she likes them all equally. What they fail to recognize is that Mia, an 
obvious player herself, has an ulterior motive for dating them all.
While there is nothing wrong, in essence, with making a film about a group of 
womanizers (and in this case, also a manizer), writer-director Cohen almost 
immediately derails the whole undertaking when it becomes clear that he has 
absolutely no insight to give, whether it be about the characters or the 
general plot, nor has he written one person who is the least bit intelligent 
or warm-hearted. It is difficult--okay, nearly impossible--to get involved in 
a movie if there is no one to identify with or care about. The superficial 
beings that populate "Whipped" apparently originated on another planet, as 
there are few signs of human emotions ever presented.
As for its comedic aspect, the amount of laughs that result from viewing this 
thankfully brief 85-minute trifle could probably be counted on one hand, and 
the majority of those come from something occurring that is so wacky and 
off-the-radar that you can't help but chuckle at their sheer stupidity.
As the four jackasses, Brian Van Holt, Jonathan Abrahams, Zorie Barber, and 
Judah Comke are adequate at best, although considering the one-note pricks 
that they were asked to play, 'adequate' is about as good as these actors 
could ever hope for. Who is absolutely bewitching, however, is the bright 
Amanda Peet (the scene-stealer in 2000's otherwise glum "The Whole Nine 
Yards"). Peet's Mia isn't really much more likable than the guys featured in 
the movie, particularly once her own dastardly plans are revealed, but she 
takes her thinly veiled character and runs with it. Once Peet moves away, 
once and for all, from such wastes of time as "Whipped," she has the charisma 
and ability to be a major star and a talented actress.
Peter M. Cohen should be thanking Amanda Peet this instant for being the sole 
reason "Whipped" is receiving a generous one-and-a-half star rating from me, 
because it certainly has nothing else of worthwhile quality. Having seen the 
movie, I wonder what Cohen was hoping to achieve with such a cold, lifeless 
directing debut. Has he been burned so many times by both men and women that 
he simply hates the human race, in general? Or does he merely delight in 
portraying people of no substance and little feeling, doing things that are 
cruel and hurtful to others, all at the expense of a cheap laugh? On second 
thought, "Whipped" is the perfect title for this movie, because everyone who 
is suckered into a theater showing this rubbish will feel just that--whipped.

Author
James Brundage
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member James Brundage.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/73f7419e4b3281de882568cf0000ffb1?OpenDocument
Written, Produced, and Directed by Peter M. Cohen
Starring Amanda Peet, Brian Van Holt, Judah Domke, Jonathan Abrahams,
and Zorie Barber
The time is the present, and the setting is New York: where everyone has
game… or at least thinks they do.  Brad (Brian Van Holt) thinks he's got
game but is really an unabashedly sexist pig.  Zeke (Zorie Barber)
thinks he's got game but all he has are physical shortcomings.  Jonathan
(Jonathan Abrahams) knows he doesn't have game, but is forced to ante up
stories as if he did because Zeke and Brad constantly brag over Sunday
breakfasts about how they scammed during the week.  And Eric (Judah
Domke), a man who was designed to `jump on the grenade' at parties and
ended up marrying the grenade, just wants to escape from his utterly
pitiful life.
Enter into the story Mia (Amanda Peet), a girl who appears to be
innocent but who we quickly discover to be playing all sides against the
middle.  Mia meets Brad, Zeke, and Jonathan one week, then schedules
dates for the next week, only to be surprised by all three on the same
night.  Knowing that she is found out, she decides that it will be
impossible to do a relationship with any single one of them because she
likes them all too much and offers them the choice of each one having a
relationship with her or having them all leave.  Because all of them are
too cocky to let Mia go, they all end up dating her… alternating nights,
bumping into each other on the way out, and generally growing to hate
each other rather quickly.
This is about a half hour into the movie, and the remaining hour and
fifteen minutes are spent poking fun at the trio of headstrong men who
are too dumb to realize what we do immediately: that Mia is a player.
Combining great dialogue with toilet humor (and I mean toilet
literally), Whipped is something like watching a hybrid of `Sex and the
City', Swingers, and There's Something About Mary.  And, like all of
them, it is destined for greatness.  In fact, the best way to describe
whipped is as the second coming of Swingers, except this time the girls
come out on top.
Fully aware of its status as a sex comedy, Whipped never takes itself
too seriously.  Instead, Whipped whips up a batch of great laughs
combined with a light touch of satire.  Peet plays the same perky, sexy
girl that we so easily fell in love with in The Whole Nine Yards, and
writer-director-producer Peter M. Cohen handles the film like he had
been directing since birth.
The films flaws come in two aspects.  One is that the movie is done in a
sort of documentary format, showing clips of each man talking to the
camera (and, as is suggested towards the end, talking to Mia behind the
camera).  The other is that the men are overdrawn in their actions.
They overact their parts until they become nothing more than
charicatures, and when that happens, the satire starts to become too
heavy for such a light film.
Yet Whipped is ungodly funny.  How funny?  Let's just say I'm whipping
out my wallet to pay for a ticket when it comes out.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Chad Polenz
If you ever read an issue of "Maxim," "G.Q." or "Playboy" you'd probably 
think all men are single studs who occupy most of their time with either 
fashion, money or scoring with chicks. "Whipped" is like the filmed version 
of those magazines. I didn't think these kinds of guys actually existed, but 
this film goes a long way to show they do and the result is a funny but kind 
of frightening story. 
The movie has all the makings of an indie flick - no name stars (except 
Amanda Peet), shot mostly indoors with mediocre lighting and only five 
central characters who push the story along by their dialogue alone. It's 
also very honest and unapologetic in its depiction of the characters, 
especially the three male leads who curse up a storm and whose sole purpose 
for living is to have sex with as many women as possible. 
Those guys are Brad, Zeke and Jonathon. Brad's a suave Wall Street guy who 
can schmooze women in trendy bars and clubs. Zeke's a coffeehouse hermit who 
doesn't seem to have a job besides writing screenplays. He picks up women 
right off the street and says he almost always gets some on the first (and 
usually last) date. Jonathon's the more sensitive guy who'd rather have 
something of a connection first but deep down he's just as horny and perverse 
as the other two. There's also Eric, the married guy of the group who's been 
ostracized because of that. When the guys get together every Sunday morning 
for brunch and swap sex stories, they don't want to hear Eric's because they 
know his wife and don't want to picture it. For a bunch of horndogs they have 
a lot of Freudian issues - they view women mostly as sex objects but if and 
when they're in a relationship women suddenly are people who must be 
respected by the other guys. 
Within the film's opening five minutes these guys come off as sexist pigs and 
I was afraid all the men in this picture were going to be depicted as such. 
After all they're all New York City residents and are caught up in the high 
life and trendiness of the city. They call themselves "scammers" in that 
they'll make up any lie to get a woman in to bed as quickly as possible. And 
they do it so easily because they are so comfortable with their atmosphere 
and their lifestyles (as opposed to the guys in "Swingers" in Los Angeles). 
After one or two Sunday brunch scenes the guys all swap stories of a special 
girl they met who they didn't "rail" or "smoke" yet because they like her. 
When each guy chides the other for not scoring they become genuinely offended 
because they don't want to think of the girl as just another slutty chick 
they met. The problem is the guys don't know they've all met the same woman, 
a cute young lady named Mia played by the adorable Amanda Peet. She radiates 
charm in everything she does, especially with that Julia Roberts-type smile 
with the pouty lips and extra teeth. Mia is a charmer - she's sweet, smart 
and sexy in a relaxed, passive way. The guys do most of the "work" with the 
relationship and conversation and she simply responds, she doesn't initiate. 
Not surprisingly the three dudes' friendship is torn apart by the fact they 
all like the same woman and none of them refuses to stop seeing her. Mia 
likes them all so much she can't choose and agrees to date all three 
simultaneously. It's an interesting idea and the second and third acts show 
how each guy tries to one-up the others behind their backs and each tries to 
be the best in bed with her as possible. 
The screenplay does a fine job in filling up the running time with a lot of 
comical moments each guy goes through with Mia, such as Jonathon snooping 
through her medicine cabinet and ending up doing a toilet dive not unlike 
that infamous scene in "Trainspotting." Zeke and Mia have a funny debate over 
which condoms to buy at a drug store - the ones for her pleasure or his. Brad 
gets the least screen time with Mia and they don't have that many funny 
scenes together. It seems the director has a hard time establishing any new 
ground for the character outside of his sex-obsessed personality. 
This idea of sharing a woman isn't some twisted sexual amalgam - they're not 
swingers or orgy guys or members of any of those underground sexual realms. 
It's a familiar idea that, coincidentally, Amanda Peet has been a part of 
before. There was an episode of "Seinfeld" in which she guest-starred as a 
girl Jerry asked out and when he picked her up saw she was living with a guy 
who didn't seem to mind she was going out with another guy. She later dumped 
that dude for Jerry but Jerry couldn't keep up with her so he enlisted the 
help of George and the two kind of split the job of the boyfriend ("Each of 
us would only half to be a half-man" said George). 
"Whipped" kind of toys with this notion of three guys splitting the job of 
the boyfriend but it's not the theme or the point of the film. It's a really 
vulgar, no-holds-barred character sketch of modern men. The black comedy is 
as cold as it can be without being absurd. Eventually something has to give 
way and it does as the film segues into the last act. 
Everyone winds up getting hurt in most relationships, and the more intense 
they are the more it hurts. There's a lot of pain to be emphasized with as 
the story wraps up, but it's in that black comedy kind of way so it's hard to 
tell how seriously we're supposed to take it. It's something Neil LaBute 
could pull off but rookie writer/producer/director Peter M. Cohen only hits 
the nail about halfway in. He's more interested in making a point than making 
a good movie about the characters. It's kind of betraying in a way because 
even though the guys are pretty unlikable characters at the core they start 
to show real signs of growth and maturity that Mia has brought out of them. 
In the end all we're left with is the message that everyone's a slut whether 
they realize it or not. 
After seeing "Whipped" I think there's more of those "Maxim" guys out there 
than I could have guessed, that's scary. 
You can also read this review at: 
http://www.epinions.com/mvie-review-305C-4938892-39D29E91-prod1 
And other reviews on the same topic at: http://www.epinions.com/mvie 
Check out my profile page at: http://www.epinions.com/user-chad9976 
*****
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
In-depth reviews of nearly all mainstream films playing at your local 
cineplex. There's also reviews of a few classic films and some of your 
personal favorites.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
At some point during the late 90s, every guy and his credit card slapped
together a film about how he and his friends scored (or tried to score) with
girls. SWINGERS was the ultimate "guy" movie for me, a film that gave you a
true insight as to how guys feel when asking girls out and what rejection is
like. It was also very, very funny and contained great dialogue! Many other
films failed to deliver the quality writing and acting that SWINGERS did,
and today, another film has tried to once again, to give us an even wider
glimpse into the world of "picking up"- guy style! Of course, the angle with
this movie is that the guys will ultimately be challenged by a woman, who
for all they know, is also playing their "game". So who's gonna end up on
top? Read on...
PLOT:
Three single college buddies and their married friend get together at a
diner every Sunday to discuss their weekly conquests with women. They
generally give their best "scamming" stories and pat one another on the
back. That is until they all happen to really fall for the same girl named
Mia. Now in competition with one another, the trio of bachelors suddenly
find themselves at the other end of the "playa" game.
CRITIQUE:
Lots of laughs, interesting characters and plenty of dirty detailed insight
into the world of "dating" raise this flick above all the other "talking
heads" movies and require that anyone who is riding the "single" scene check
it out. And despite a certain feeling of deja-vu, this film does move along
nicely, delivers a cool soundtrack and for once, gives us a little more
insight into the women's point of view. I personally enjoyed much of this
film because I was in that "single" scene for years on end, and related to
many of the humorous anecdotes presented here. We've all got that one friend
who liked to "play" it, another intellectual type who always thought that he
was God's gift to women and the other guy who just masturbated a whole lot.
I'll say this much...I definitely wasn't the "playa" in my own scenario!
Anyway, I really liked the dialogue in this film as well, most of which rang
funny and true, especially in tandem with the succinct delivery put forth by
most of the actors in the film.
And that's another thing that I really liked. All of the personalities in
the film weren't part of this generic ball of "guy". Each dude actually had
his own personality traits and the actors played off each other really well.
Mind you, the thespianism was a tad off during a couple of confrontational
scenes between the fellas and I suppose some would fault the film for going
for the easy toilet humor at times, but I was personally entertained by much
of it. It certainly isn't a grand film making a major statement, but a small
film with just a little insight into the crappy ass world of dating in this
day and age. Credit Amanda Peet for delivering yet another charming
performance and Judah Domke for having some of the funniest lines in the
movie, as the one guy in the crew who is "happily" married. Don't go into
this movie expecting to see a lot of sex because it's not there. What is
there is a pretty funny little tale about guys and girls and the "games"
that they like to play with one another. It's not romantic and it's not
sexy, but it's definitely got some yucks and should be a definite tool of
the trade for those still in the dating world. Oh yeah and
incidentally...the reason that I am no longer in the dating world myself is
because...I'm whipped!!! :)
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
The Brad character from this film, played by Brian Van Holt, and the Mia
character from this film, played by Amanda Peet, are currently dating and
living together in real life. Amanda graduated from Columbia University in
1994.
This is the directorial debut of Peter M. Cohen and the feature film acting
debut for two of the four guys: Zorie Barber and Jonathan Abrahams. Zorie
Barber is also co-producer of this movie. Jonathan Abrahams is also a
published author who writes books about golf.
Director Peter M. Cohen makes a cameo in this movie as the pizza delivery
guy in one of the film's funnier scenes.
This film was shot in 15 days, with 3 additional days of 2nd unit
photography.

Author
Murali Krishnan
The topic of romance and dating in American society is easily
relatable since most young people devote a large amount of energy to
dealing with it. Although they both eventually aim towards the common
target of marriage, men and women may have different approaches to and
attitudes towards dating. Men can be dishonest in their pursuit of
women simply to initiate a relationship in which sex plays an
important role. This film is about a group of male scammers, men who
will do or say anything in order to enter a sexual relationship with a
woman, and a woman who infiltrates and disrupts the group.
Four young men meet regularly on Sundays to discuss their dating
exploits of the past weekend. Brad (Brian Van Holt) is a Wall Street
type with athletic good looks. Zeke (Zorie Barber) is an unemployed
writer with a huge ego. Jonathan (Jonathan Abrahams) is less overtly
macho, and usually has fewer victory stories. The final individual,
Eric (Judah Domke), used to be a core member of the group, but he is
now somewhat viewed as an outsider since getting married.
The group's normal existence is perturbed when Brad, Zeke, and
Jonathan start dating a woman that they develop serious feelings for.
It becomes chaotic when they find they are all dating the same woman,
Mia (Amanda Peet). Mia's refusal to choose just one of the three,
along with the guys' refusal to give her up undermines their
friendship. Eric also becomes involved because the relationships with
Mia threaten to disband the men's club that is his only respite from
the drudgery of his married life.
The story is basically a comedy, with primarily dialog based humor and
witty observations of the almost military tactics that are involved in
the dating process. Not all of the gags work, many of them are simply
gross or pathetic, but others are creative and insightful. The frank
portrayal of jesting character attacks between male friends is
accurate and entertaining. It does attempt to present a thoughtful
premise as the framework for the plot, namely that men would be
miserable if their own tactics were used against them. However, any
philosophical issues are only explored in a cursory manner, since they
are used simply as a skeleton on which to build the plot rather than
as a source of creativity. The intent of the film is mainly to be
entertaining, and it succeeds in getting laughs from the audience. It
would have been a better film if it had explored the dramatic angle
that it pretended it had.
It is often difficult to construct a comedy primarily around dialog,
but writer and director Peter M. Cohen is successful in keeping the
comedy flowing. Although some of the developments appear contrived and
many of the transitions are forced, the humor creates a momentum that
propels the plot through its rough points. It is important to note
that the raunchy humor could be offensive to viewers who are not
comfortable with frank, and often crude, discussions of sexuality. The
original cut of the film garnered an NC-17 rating, which was reduced
to R after some of the dialog was toned down.
Although the marketing for the film indicates that it is a vehicle for
Amanda Peet, the role of Mia is actually less important, and less
interesting, than any of the four primary men. Peet is successful in
the role, but the character is limited in scope. All the four primary
male characters are well portrayed, although they occasionally become
exaggerated.
Recommended. The film does not set lofty goals, but it is successful
in generating laughs. The humor is primarily based around sexuality
and is definitely coarse, so it may not entertain a general audience.
Although little sexual content is displayed, the discussions about it
are explicit. The film is targeted towards a younger audience which is
as obsessed with the opposite sex as the film's characters.

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "WHIPPED" (Destination Films)
Luscious Amanda Peet deserves better than this wretched sex
comedy.  She's built up a loyal following from TV's "Jack and Jill"
and made a charming appearance in "The Whole Nine Yards," but this is
a disaster. Written, produced and directed by Peter M. Cohen, the
story revolves around three, single twentysomethings who gather each
Sunday morning for breakfast in a Manhattan diner, along with a fourth
buddy who is married, to brag and exchange graphic tales of their
erotic Saturday night conquests. They're self-proclaimed experts in
"scamming" which involves scoring a date and having sex with a
woman. Brian Van Holt plays the Wall Street guy, the slickest of the
trio; his trick is to approach women and pretend to be their friend's
brother. The friend is always named Jen because, as he reasons, "they
all have a friend name Jen." There's Zorie Barber, a shallow
pseudo-hippie, East Village screenwriter type; pathetically eager
Jonathan Abrahams, who's supposed to be sensitive; and Judah Domke,
who gets vicarious thrills and whose exploits with a juicer and an egg
beater are minor league. However, the group's womanizing camaraderie
is challenged when they meet an enigmatic, uninhibited sexpot - that'
s Peet - and she begins to date all three - at the same time. It seems
she's scamming them, waiting until the second date to have sex and
then vowing to each that he, and he alone, is the one she truly
loves. The less said the better about the grotesque scene in which
Peet's vibrator is dropped into an unflushed toilet. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Whipped" sinks to an obnoxious low with a
creepy, cynical, coarse 1.  It's a smutty, repellent sleazefest.

Author
Steve Rhodes
How's this for an original concept?  A bunch of young adult males spend 
their time hitting on women for sex and then lying among themselves 
later about their exploits.  Pretty tired.  The only possible twist in 
writer/director/producer Peter M. Cohen's WHIPPED is whether the women 
are as innocent and vulnerable as they seem or whether they are scamming 
the men just like they are being scammed.  The twist, of course, is no 
twist at all since anyone with any intelligence whatsoever can guess it.
All of this might be ignored if there was good acting or a bright 
script.  WHIPPED, however, features some of the worst acting this side 
of a high school play.  The movie, which badly wants to be a THERE'S 
SOMETHING ABOUT MARY version of DINER, has a script that is disgustingly 
crude but almost never funny.  Its repulsive humor includes anal-oral 
sex on someone who suffers from diarrhea.  The talented Farrelly 
brothers might find a way to make this scene work, but Cohen is in no 
danger of being mistaken for a third Farrelly brother.
The film's four obnoxious fellows like to hang out at their favorite 
diner and talk dirty -- very dirty and very loud.  Their shoot their 
favorite questions at each other -- "Did you nail her?"  "Did you stuff 
her?" -- with salivating coarseness.  The movie's harsh sound makes 
listening to them about as enjoyable as enduring a heavy rainstorm under 
a cheap metal roof.
The leader of the pack and the self-described "good catch" is named Brad 
(Brian Van Holt).  He is a broker with an electronic stock ticker over 
his bed.  Zeke (Zorie Barber) is a martial arts type who likes to buy 
extra-large-sized condoms although he needs extra small.  Told that he 
needs to be nice to women, he replies with "Man, that sucks!"  Jonathan 
(Jonathan Abrahams), called "fag boy" by the others, is an obsessive 
masturbator who worries that we might think he is gay.  He carefully 
dispels this notion by confiding to the camera that he isn't homosexual 
and is just more in touch with his feminine side than his friends.
The odd-man out is the constantly blinking Eric (Judah Domke), an 
unhappily married guy.  He was in charge of "jumping on the grenade" 
when the four of them used to cruise bars looking for chicks.  He would 
jump on the ugliest one to save the other guys.  He married one of these 
"grenades" and now relegates himself to using various pieces of kitchen 
cutlery to spice up their sex life.
Mel, who is the proud owner of a 5-speed that's not a bicycle, meets and 
falls for each of the guys, except Eric.  In the first act, the men talk 
about her constantly but somehow never manage to mention her name so 
that they don't realize that they are dating the same woman.  In the 
second act, they find out but still keep dating her.  And in the third 
and final act, their situation gets resolved exactly as you would 
expect.
Consider what this movie teaches the teenage and young adult audience 
for which the movie is clearly aimed.  Sex is only something to be 
"scammed" from someone and to be snickered at.  The movie reinforces 
this by making the sex acts themselves happen fast and under cover.  
After making sex so filthy, they certainly wouldn't want to show it to 
us.  The act of love is considerably cheapened by this film without any 
comedic payoff in return.  Our packed audience, which had just the right 
demographics for the picture, produced only sporadic and scattered 
laugher.
On a more positive note.  The film is short -- albeit not near short 
enough.
WHIPPED runs 1:25.  It is rated R for strong sexual content and language 
and would be acceptable for college students and older.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   On the day of the New York opening of "Whipped"--
perhaps not coincidentally--New York Times critic Stephen
Holden came out with a think piece entitled "Can Art Cinema
Survive Cruder Times?"  Holden calls art movies a withering
relic, stating that "the...erotic frankness that seemed
revelatory and boundary-breaking to an older generation are
now taken for granted by younger audiences inured to (and
amused by) 'The Jerry Springer Show.'"
   "Whipped" elbows aside even the boundaries bulldozed by
Mr. Springer.  In a movie in which scarcely a minute passes
without the expression of a (once) taboo word or an
illustration of the sex acts embodied by the term, Peter
Cohen's film, which is at its most common downright vulgar
and at best suggestive, is an entertaining frolic, one that does
not stop to catch a breath for its entire eighty-two minutes'
duration.  Yep.  This is a guilty pleasure, one which can't help
inviting some laughs and grins, but which caters to the lowest
common denominator in the audience.  How so?  Instead of
allowing the viewers to extract the motif, or theme of the story
in their own minds, Cohen's narration states--not once, but
twice--"everyone f**** everybody else."  In other words, this
deeply cynical portrayal of humanity calls (mostly) men on the
carpet as Neil LaBute did in "The Company of Men," but does
so without the slightest attempt at subtlety.  And that is the
difference between an electrifying movie like "In the Company
of Men," a work whose low budget does not take away from
its dark view of the male mentality.  LaBute posits two yuppie
office workers who make a pact to date a woman and dump
her after she falls in love with them, allowing the audience to
summon his vision--while "Whipped,"  simply spoon feeds the 
writer-director's derisive dicta to the audience.
   Instead of LaBute's two scheming yuppies, one of whom is
reluctant to go through with his Iago-like pal's plan to mess
up a woman's life, "Whipped" focuses on three, actually four,
comrades who meet regularly at Sunday brunch to discuss
the scams they pulled off successfully on women to seduce
them.  Jonathan (Jonathan Abrahams) look like a post-'50's
beat with his goatee and comes across as the most
responsive one, the one who is not really sure of his charm
or even his sexual orientation.  He hangs out with Zeke
(Zorie Barber), who wears those fashionable, oval-shaped
glasses (which I hate) and with the handsomest of the group,
Brad (Brian Van Holt), who claims to bond with the women he
likes by pretending to know people who are close to them. 
Eric (Judah Domke), the only married guy of the lot, joins
them later, is initially considered an outsider because he is
not expected to tell the down-and-dirty stuff about himself and
his wife, but manages to restore his credentials at these
weekly meetings by doing just that.
   When the three gross-out single guys all wind up dating the
same woman, Mia (Amanda Peet), in a coincidence beyond
the ken of any sensible scripter, they get their comeuppance-
-but only after they have enjoyed the sexually liberated
fellowship of this lovely lass, fall in love with her, and come to
blows (so to speak) in competing for her heart.
   Writer-director Peter M. Cohen may be demonstrating his
philosophy, that men and women are both vicious beasts--no,
as stated before, he actually expresses his motif straight on--
or he may simply be feigning a dark, dark view of humanity to
make a few bucks on his film.  Credit the man with the ability
to write snappy, zappy lines that resound across the screen
with the speed of an Uzi.  Still, his real cynicism could be his
view that no audience is intelligent enough to fathom a film of
any appreciable subtlety.
Rated R.  Running time: 82 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
John Beachem
Brad (Brian Van Holt), Zeke (Zorie Barber), Jonathan (Jonathan Abrahams), 
and Eric (Judah Domke) are four of the most morally repugnant guys you're 
ever likely to meet. Brad, Zeke, and Jonathan spend their weeks trying to 
scam women into sleeping with them so they can get together on Sundays and 
brag about who they scored with. Eric, however, is unhappily married and no 
longer fits in with the group. The other three are enjoying their lifestyle 
until one day they meet the same girl, Mia (Amanda Peet). Mia is the kind of 
girl every guy dreams of: beautiful, interesting, intelligent, and she has a 
real interest in what the guys are into. Soon the three men are battling it 
out with each other for Mia's affections, each convinced that she likes him 
more than the others. Mia, meanwhile, claims she simply can't choose one 
over any of the others because she likes them all equally. Time's running 
out, the friendship is growing more and more strained, and Eric's life is 
growing more miserable without the guys to talk to. Will Mia make a choice? 
Is Mia really scamming them to get even for the way they treat women? Does 
anyone really care?
To call "Whipped" vulgar would be laughably inadequate. To call it 
disgusting would be like saying "the holocaust was bad". In the first 
fifteen minutes of this film I was thinking to myself: "Gee, gross-out 
humor, what do you know." Within the first twenty five minutes I realized 
the movie was much more than just your typical gross-out movie. "Whipped" 
is, conceivably, the most disgusting movie I've ever seen. Do I mean it's 
full of your basic fart jokes? No, I mean this is a movie designed only for 
those who want to hear about the most depraved, revolting sexual acts known 
to man. To enjoy this movie (assuming that's possible) you have to not only 
hear about these acts, but you have to be able to find them highly amusing. 
As for me, I just wanted to stand up and run out of the theater, and I saw 
quite a few people do just that. I decided to stay not because I was 
enjoying the movie, but out of sheer morbid curiosity. I wanted to see what 
they could possibly think of that would be more disgusting than the last 
"joke" I'd heard. I have to hand it to Peter Cohen, he managed to top 
himself every time.
So, can I recommend the movie on the basis of acting? Not in the slightest. 
Other than Amanda Peet, every actor was a relative newcomer, and I don't 
think any of them will go on to great careers. Brian Van Holt plays the 
reprehensible Brad. However, while Brad is supposed to be worthy of all our 
hate, Van Holt plays him in such a sickeningly over-the-top way, we 
eventually start hating Van Holt rather than Brad. Zorie Barber (who also 
co-produced) plays the loathsome Zeke. While the character of Zeke is 
certainly worthy of all our hate, the actor is worthy of even more. Whoever 
told the man to go into a career in acting should be locked away for the 
good of society. To say Zorie Barber acts poorly would be far too kind. 
Barber is one of those actors who is obviously running his next line through 
his head, waiting to say it while the other actors speak. It's the kind of 
acting you see in your average high school play. Jonathan Abrahams overplays 
the part of the sensitive guy far too much, but he's not quite as irritating 
as Van Holt and Barber. Judah Domke does nothing but blink a lot and mutter 
about how much he hates being married. You're no doubt wondering if Amanda 
Peet adds some spark of life to this dreary cast. Well, she does, but she's 
not half as good as she was in "The Whole Nine Yards". I don't think this 
was her fault, it's just that her last movie was funny, and this one is far 
from it. Peter Cohen himself shows up in a cameo as a pizza delivery guy; 
and if I'd known it was him, I would have booed at the screen.
Are there any funny scenes in "Whipped"? I think so, but I can't seem to 
remember what they are. I'm sure a few real jokes got by me while I was 
cringing away from the screen in horror. The rest of the audience, made up 
primarily of teen-agers (that R rating means nothing these days), were 
laughing, but it was nervous, sporadic laughter. Like I said, quite a few 
people got up and walked out. I just had to keep repeating to myself, 
"you're getting paid for this, you're getting paid for this." That didn't 
help much. In addition to the lack of laughs, the constant gross-outs, and 
the terrible acting, "Whipped" features some fairly incompetent direction. 
Peter Cohen is a first time director and a first time screen writer, and his 
lack of experience combined with his apparent lack of talent makes for a 
movie which your average college student could have done better. Not only is 
the comic pacing non-existent, but Cohen throws in occasional interviews 
with the characters which I don't think were even supposed to be funny (if 
that's the case, they succeeded admirably). Why are these interviews 
present? Your guess is as good as mine. I think Cohen wanted to get a 
message across as well. The message is something like this: love is bad, 
marriage is worse, guys are evil, women are evil, all people searching for 
relationships are really short-con operators. If you can think of a more 
revolting message, let me know.
I hated to say this back in April when it was only a creeping suspicion, but 
now that it's September, I believe I can safely say that the year 2000 is 
one of the worst years in cinematic history. If I were forced to make a top 
ten of the year list right now, I couldn't think of ten films to put on it. 
If I had to make a bottom ten list, you can rest assured "Whipped" would 
hold a place of honor (though "Battlefield Earth" still has a firm hold on 
the number one slot). I'll give this to Peter Cohen - I've never seen 
anything quite like "Whipped". It's a gross-out comedy without the comedy. 
It also has no discernable soundtrack other than a goofy number playing 
while Jonathan runs a vibrator all over himself (don't ask, I don't want to 
talk about it). There is a little twist at the end of the movie, but you 
will greet it in one of two ways: either you'll have seen it coming a mile 
off (I fall under that category), or you simply won't care. Thankfully, the 
movie only runs 85 minutes, but that's almost an hour and a half too long. 
I'd recommend "Whipped" to anyone who likes their gross-out humor purely 
sexual in nature and not particularly funny. I give it one and a half out of 
five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at: http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.
Share information about yourself, create your own public profile at 
http://profiles.msn.com.
