Title
Review for Dracula (1931/I)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jerry Saravia
Whether it is Bela Lugosi's frighteningly icy stare or Dwight Frye's madly
incessant need for bugs, this "Dracula" is among the most beautiful
interpretations of Bram Stoker's famous novel, (though it does take all
kinds of liberties from the original text). It is certainly Lugosi who
brings an eerie sense of menace to the film, and he makes you actually feel
uneasy while watching it.
At the beginning of this dreamlike film, we are treated to the sight of a
carriage on its way to Transylvania. Mr. Renfield (Dwight Frye) is on the
carriage which will take him to Castle Dracula for a business venture.
"Castle Dracula?," asks one of the superstitious gypsies. "No!!!"
Nevertheless, despite ominous warnings from the townspeople, Renfield
continues on his journey. He finally arrives at the castle (minus a
driver) and meets the graceful Count (Bela Lugosi) at the top of a
staircase. Here he has one of his many famous lines during the first
half-hour: "I am Dracula, and I bid you welcome," says Lugosi.
We finally enter the vast dining room where dinner awaits but there is no
servant. The Count acts as host and stares at Renfield, wraithlike and
obviously hungry for his blood. Renfield cuts his finger with a
butterknife and attracts some bloodcurling attention from Dracula before
being abruptly stopped by a dangling crucifix.
Afterwards, Renfield falls victim to the Count's fangs and becomes his
servant, as they make the trek to Dracula's new property at Carfax Abbey
in England. It is there where the Count immerses himself in the company of
Dr. Seward (Herbert Bunston), his daughter, Mina Seward (Helen Chandler),
and Jonathan Harker (mild-mannered David Manners). Of course, there are
some pretty necks to take advantage of in the meantime, while the corpses
with neck wounds baffle everyone except for vampire expert Dr. Van Helsing
(Edward Van Sloan). Meanwhile, the deliriously mad Renfield (with his
famously chattering laugh) is a patient at Dr. Seward's hospital, and thus
contemplates with his lack of sanity and unwillingness to do his Master's
bidding.
"Dracula" was directed by Tod Browning, who a year later helmed the
controversial and frightening horror film "Freaks." Here, his astute
direction plays tricks with the audience, and he does a competent job with
the superb cinematographer Karl Freund. This telling of Dracula leaves
everything to the imagination. In one shockingly good scene, Harker
notices that there is a wolf outside the house after Dracula hastily
leaves. Naturally, the wolf is Dracula, but in this film, we never see him
change into a bat, wolf or fog. In fact, Lugosi never has any noticeable
fangs! To make the film really work your imagination, we never see him
arise from a coffin. Each time a coffin's lid is open, we see a close-up
shot of a hand lifting it while the camera pans away to the left and back
to the right to witness the Count standing with the lid closed!
What makes this "Dracula" indelible in everyone's minds is Lugosi - he was
perfectly cast as the Hungarian accented Count. His frozen stares and
piercing eyes evoke an unforgettable image of an animal seeking its prey
yet doing it with poise and subtlety. This by no means is the best of the
vampire flicks (both "Nosferatu" versions can lay claim to that status)
yet all the sequels and remakes of the world will never match Bela
Lugosi's bloody good performance.
Footnote: Originally, "Dracula" was released without an actual musical
score, despite the use of the famous "Swan Lake" excerpt by Tchaikovsky
played during the introductory and closing credits. Recently, avante-garde
composer Philip Glass composed a truly melodic and moody score to
accompany the film for the first time.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or
at Faust667@aol.com
