Title
Review for Drunks (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Made in 1995 but not released until 1997, DRUNKS is an 
ultra-low budget indie adaptation of a play. It comes from the BMG 
Independent film distribution company, which as far as I know, is the 
only film distribution company where you can make 11 movies for 
the price of one, with nothing more to buy ever. The lack of action, 
movement and anything else catering to short attention spans will 
most likely drive most viewers to drink, but the intense acting, from 
people you've actually heard of, no less, keeps DRUNKS interesting.
        DRUNKS is basically a 90-minute advertisement for 
Alcoholic's Anonymous, splitting its scenes between an ongoing 
AA meeting which turns into a series of monologues by its members, 
each trying to outdo the others for sheer dramatics, and the saga of 
Richard Lewis. The venerable "neurotic Jew" comic (whom I've 
always considered a eighth-rate Woody Allen -- all a matter of 
opinion, I guess) plays one of the recovering drunks, two years off 
the sauce, who finally gives in to his desires and ends up drinking 
bourbon, scotch and beer, and not just one like the song says.
        The meeting starts as planned, sure, with Lewis being 
prompted against his will to give an inspirational talk. He tells his 
life story -- heavy drinker by high school, met a woman, fell in love 
with her, she wouldn't marry him unless he went into rehab, he did, 
she died, now he's bitter and questioning everything -- then 
disappears from the meeting while the others start in with their 
stories. They try to milk suspense from the "Will Richard drink?" 
question, but it was obvious to me (and now to you, as I neatly give it 
away) that he would have to. Otherwise, where's your plot?
        The Lewis plot should be the most interesting half, but it 
isn't. All the scenes of him struggling with the bottle, trying to hook 
up with his old junkie girlfriend and wandering through the city 
streets drunk just didn't do it for me. What I enjoyed a lot more were 
the AA testimonials, which would have worked very well in play 
form. Screw Richard Lewis, I can just see that group of people 
trapped on one stage for an hour and a half, trading stories. The 
writer obviously spent plenty of time in this setting. That's the way 
to do it -- turn your alcohol problem into a halfway decent movie.
        I do have to admit, Lewis was good in his dramatic role. 
He did a lot better when he was actually giving his life story as part of 
the group than when he left it. I'm telling you, they should have just 
stuck with the drunks. People like Dianne Wiest, Faye Dunaway and 
indie queen Parker Posey do great here, along with others I didn't 
recognize. The unknowns were even more convincing than the 
established actors, and I'd pay them their dues if I didn't have to go 
back through the movie, write their character names down and wait 
for the credits. You know who you are and you know you're good. 
Too bad no one saw DRUNKS. It's just depressing enough to make 
you hit the bottle.
Visit the Andrew Hicks: Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving The World For Nearly 1/25th of a Century!

Author
Mike Ryan
Director: Peter Cohn (debut)
A cast of dozens including Richard Lewis, Faye Dunaway, Dianne Wiest,
Spalding Gray, Howard Robbins, Christopher Lawford, and George Martin.
     This film debuted tonight at the Boston Film Festival, on the
heels of a glowing review by the Boston Globe's Jay Carr.  I can't
concur--I found it a self-conscious actor's movie--pretty much like
watching an audition tape.
     If you're not afraid of spoilers, here's what happens: There's an
AA meeting, at which each member tells their story.  Richard Lewis'
character goes first, then takes off and goes on a binge.  That's
it--that is literally the entire movie.  There's nothing here but the
barest of frameworks for a bunch of (admittedly talented) actors to
give their individual interpretations of alcoholism.  Each story is
told as a monologue, with no connection to the rest of the film, and no
relationships developed between characters (wait, that's an exaggeration
- two of them did talk for a minute in the women's room).  Each actor
works in isolation, which makes it impossible to forget for a moment
that you're watching actors performing rather than flesh-and-blood
characters.  You could extract each monologue from the film into a
distinct short, and watching neither the short or the film would you
ever guess there was anything missing (other than interest).
Plot - non-existent
Cinematography - yawn
Acting - generally forced and self-conscious, a waste of some talented
people (only Spalding Gray seems to know how to make an isolated
monologue ring true)
