Title
Review for Heist (2001/I)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
One never quite knows what one is going to get with a Mamet film.  
His AMERICAN BUFFALO is a set-bound piece that has very little 
plot.  Sometimes he will tell a story that really moves.  HEIST is 
Mamet doing his most entertaining work.  Unlike his THE SPANISH 
PRISONER, there are no lapses in credibility.  HEIST is probably 
the best Mamet thriller since HOUSE OF GAMES.  It is the kind of 
plot with which you are never sure who will double-cross whom, and 
frequently it is Mamet double-crossing the viewer.  Watching the 
film's team getting around security the viewer is frequently 
asking himself either "what the heck are they doing?" or "why 
didn't anybody think of that before?" 
Appropriately enough HEIST opens with a very clever jewelry store 
job.  It is so clever that one wonders if Mamet really thinks up 
all these ideas himself or if he has help from professional 
magician and con expert Ricky Jay, now a regular actor in Mamet 
films.  This is a robbery that works like a well-oiled machine.  
There is just one problem and it is enough to get Joe Moore 
(played by Gene Hackman) filmed on a security camera.  Now Joe has 
to get out of the business.  It was coming time anyway.  Joe's 
team including Bobby Blane (Delroy Lindo), Fran Moor (Rebecca 
Pidgeon), and Pinky Pincus (Ricky Jay) is going to split up and go 
separate ways.  But crime boss Bergman (Danny DeVito) is pulling 
the strings and he says that Joe and his people have to manage one 
more robbery.  And he has to take along a young kid, the short-
fused Jimmy Silk (Sam Rockwell).  Immediately it is obvious that 
there is more going on than meets the eye. 
Much of what distinguishes HEIST is Mamet's dialog.  Remarkably it 
serves a double purpose.  The robbery team sounds at once very 
professional and at the same time it has Mamet's special feel for 
dialog.  Hackman has lines like "Everybody needs money.  That's 
why they call it money."  Mamet's timing is perfect in the 
direction but terrible in the production.  The plot is 
coincidentally a lot like the plot of the recent THE SCORE, which 
is, in fact, a very similar story.  Both are good films, perhaps 
for some of the same reasons.  But at least on a high level they 
are much the same story.  The other problem with the timing of 
HEIST is that it involves airport security and clever ways to get 
around them.  I saw the film at the Toronto International Film 
Festival on September 12, 2001.  That made the subject matter just 
a little too timely.  My understanding is that the release will be 
delayed. 
My biggest problem with the film is that Rebecca Pidgeon's acting 
at times seems very poor.  It is some kind of Mamet trademark I do 
not understand to have women talk without inflection, as if they 
are just reading the words for the first time.  It is an 
irritation and distracts us from what is otherwise a very good 
thriller.  It is one I rate an 8 on the 0 to 10 scale and a high 
+2 on the -4 to +4 scale. 

Author
Max Messier
David Mamet is a good director.  Mamet's an even better screenwriter and
playwright.  The guy's authored some of the best film and theatre works
in the past decade -- The Verdict, House of Games, Wag the Dog, State
and Main, and the guy even won a Pulitzer Prize for his play Glengarry
Glen Ross.  With that said, it's such a shame that his latest crime
caper, Heist, falls apart by employing too many of the well-known
devices of a Mamet production -- double-crossing femmes fatale, overtly
memorable characters, and deceptive plot lines.
But movies like The Spanish Prisoner, Things Change, and The Winslow Boy
display a roundness to Mamet's innate abilities.  And it's almost a
crime to witness how all of that goes awry in his latest film, Heist.
Heist twists and turns along the road of documenting the shady life of
career jewel thief Joe Moore (Gene Hackman) and his posse of thieves --
Bobby Blane (Delroy Lindo) and Don "Pinky" Pincus (Ricky Jay).  During a
raid on a jewelry store, Moore ends up with his mug on the surveillance
cameras and he goes on the lam from the local marshals.  He decides to
get out of Dodge with his recent bride Fran (Rebecca Pidgeon, looking
like a cross between Sharon Stone and Joan Crawford), sailing into the
sunset on his yacht.  The only problem is that his fence Bergman (Danny
DeVito) has set up a big score -- The Swiss Job -- which he wants done
so badly he holds Joe's cut of the jewelry heist on layaway until The
Swiss Job is done.  To ensure his faithful hound brings the goods home
intact, Bergman tosses his nephew Jimmy Silk (Sam Rockwell) into Joe's
crew for observation purposes.  Things become complicated when Joe's
wife has an affair with Jimmy, The Swiss Job turns sour, DeVito starts
acting like his character from Ruthless People, and Ricky Jay starts
looking for the exit to this mess of a film.
A Mamet production usually derives its success from a solid emotional
attachment to its characters -- usually they've been wronged and are
seeking justice or absolution.  The naďve scientist from The Spanish
Prisoner or the curious psychologist from House of Games were just
decent people we recognize in our everyday lives.  When those people get
royally screwed over, its human nature to desire retribution.  Heist
lacks any such emotional attachment.  Of greater concern is the
recycling of plot points from Ronin, which Mamet also wrote and which
deals with a similar plot involving double-crossing thieves on the run.
To save the day, though, Heist carries some of the best actors working
today.  DeVito, Lindo, and Hackman chew up and spit out the scenery
around them.  Sam Rockwell -- who usually plays naďve and jovial
characters in movies like Galaxy Quest -- plays Silk as cold,
manipulative, and downright spooky.
But the main problem with Heist is how surprisingly predictable the
story is.  Unlike the similar yet far superior The Score, there's never
any surprise during Heist's twisting.  Mamet has just become lazy with
this one.  Everything about the film looks great, but there's nothing at
all underneath.
Reviewed as part of our coverage of the 24th Annual Mill Valley Film
Festival.
Director: David Mamet
Producer: Andrew Stevens, Art Linson, Elie Samaha
Writer: David Mamet
Starring: Gene Hackman, Danny DeVito, Delroy Lindo, Ricky Jay, Rebecca
Pidgeon, Sam Rockwell
http://heist.warnerbros.com/cmp/intro.html
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
