Title
Review for Rising Sun (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Sean Connery, Wesley Snipes, Harvey Keitel, 
           Cary-Hiroyuki Tagawa, Kevin Anderson
Director:  Philip Kaufman
Producer:  Peter Kaufman
Screenplay:  Philip Kaufman, Michael Crichton, and Michael Backes 
          based on the novel by Michael Crichton
Music:  Toru Takemitsu
Released by Twentieth Century Fox
     In an empty conference room on the forty-sixth floor of Los
Angeles' Nakatomo Tower, the dead body of a beautiful young call girl
has been found sprawled out on a table.  When Lieutenant Tom Graham
(Harvey Keitel), the racist cop in charge, has trouble obtaining the
full cooperation of the Nakatomo execs, Special Services liaison
Lieutenant Web Smith (Wesley Snipes) is summoned for help.  Along the
way, Smith receives a call on the car phone telling him to pick up
Captain John Connor (Sean Connery), a man known to be well-versed in
Japanese traditions and, in the opinion of some, a Japanese
sympathizer.  Nothing about this investigation is straightforward, but
as more is revealed about the details of the case, Connor and Smith
find themselves "in the warzone" of a business battle in which life is
a commodity easily lost.
     Michael Crichton's RISING SUN, in addition to being a gripping
mystery/thriller, functioned as a scathing attack on American apathy to
Japanese economic aggression.  In fact, in his afterword to the novel,
Crichton says, "The Japanese are not our saviors.  They are our
competitors.  We should not forget it."  Statements like these earned
RISING SUN the dubious distinction of being a Japan-bashing novel.
Now, with the arrival of Philip Kaufman's film, the protests which
greeted the book's publication have started anew.
     Although the movie RISING SUN is mostly faithful to the written
work which inspired it (Michael Crichton gets his second
co-screenwriting credit of the summer, although he dropped out of this
project early on), much of the anti-Japanese sentiment has been toned
down.  There is little that someone watching the film with an unbiased
eye will notice.  Great pains are gone to the present as many positives
as negatives in the Japanese way of life, and there are as many sleazy
Americans as there are Japanese in the movie.  Crude Asian stereotypes
and caricatures are avoided, and care is taken to give the good guys a
few vices and the bad guys a few virtues.
     With the exception of an ill-timed and confusing ending, the movie
follows the general plotline of the book surprisingly well.  There are
changes of course, but nothing as wholesale or drastic as what
destroyed the screen version of THE FIRM.  Despite altering the
specifics of the killer's identity, the main culprits remain the same.
A few additional action scenes have been added (Sean Connery and Wesley
Snipes enter into a hand-to-hand struggle with a bunch of Japanese
thugs) to keep the audience's attention, and a great deal of Crichton's
detail on Japanese culture has been dropped.  It fits nicely into the
printed version, but would have made the film talky and overly long.
     The most obvious book-to-movie change is the casting of black
actor Wesley Snipes as a character that is white in the book.
Actually, as things turn out, the race of Lieutenant Smith becomes
almost irrelevant, except in one scene new to the movie where Smith
uses a bunch of his ghetto buddies to help him out of a scrape.  With
much of the intended comedy failing in this instance, this was not one
of the better alterations.  It's far too silly.
     One of the problems with getting a rising star of Wesley Snipes'
stature to play opposite Sean Connery is that Lieutenant Smith can't
simply be the Watson to Connor's Holmes.  Admittedly, there was some
friction between the two in the book, but it's nothing like what's
present in the movie, where the two almost come to blows (actually,
Smith wants to fight while Connor looks at him like an amused parent
with a misbehaving child).
     The mystery itself is well-presented, with the usual twists,
turns, and red herrings.  The scenes with Tia Carrere's video guru, as
she attempts to uncover the doctoring that has been done to a laser
disk containing a video copy of a surveillance camera's recording of
the murder, are among the most fascinating moments of the film.  What's
done to the disks certainly makes you realize that pictures--whether
moving or not--can no longer be trusted.
     The ending is a little sloppy, with a bit too much "Hollywood"
added, and a long, drawn-out scene with Snipes and Carrere that's
pointless.  I would have left RISING SUN with a slightly-better taste
in my mouth had the final moments been pruned out.  Apparently the
writers wanted the solve the one outstanding mystery of the film in the
most idiotic way possible.
     Connery, who reportedly was Crichton's "model" for John Connor
during the original writing, seems born to play the role.  He slips
into it with ease and, as always, is a joy to watch.  Wesley Snipes is
a little erratic , unexpectedly having a few instances where his
performance doesn't ring true.  Harvey Keitel, underused as the bigoted
cop who opens the investigation, seethes with spoken--and
unspoken--hatred for everything Japanese.
     Director Philip Kaufman, who has previously tackled the
book-to-screen adaptations of THE RIGHT STUFF and THE UNBEARABLE
LIGHTNESS OF BEING, knows how to create a taut, tightly-paced film.
There aren't many letdowns in RISING SUN; the film moves implacably on,
gathering steam as it goes.  The authentic-sounding Japanese music of
composer Toru Takemitsu helps the movie's tone immeasurably.
     RISING SUN is a mixed bag that contains more positives than
negatives.  Those who have not read the book will probably have a
better impression than those who have (although they will wonder about
the inclusion of certain seemingly-irrelevant characters--such as
Smith's wife--whose roles in the film have been chopped down to
virtually nothing).  Then again, that's almost always the case with
film adaptations.  At least in this case, lovers of the book won't be
shaking their heads in horror as they did with THE FIRM and SLIVER.
RISING SUN is a pretty good movie, but it's still a better novel.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
David N. Butterworth
     RISING SUN does for Japanese businessmen what THE FIRM did for
American lawyers.  However, it didn't do much for me.  I mean, it's not
a *bad* film or anything--it's sufficiently stylish and the
performances are decent, kinda like THE FIRM in that respect (another
film based on a best-selling novel).  But there's nothing particularly
*special* about it.  And when all is said and done, it goes on way too
long.
     What it *does* have going for it is bullet-proof casting,
especially of its two leads, Sean Connery and Wesley Snipes.
     LAPD special services liaison Web Smith (Snipes) is called in to
investigate a homicide at the grand opening of the Nakamoto
Corporation's multi-million dollar skyscraper in downtown Los Angeles.
Connery plays Detective John Connor, a mysterious figure knowledgeable
in Japanese relations, who's lured out of semi-retirement to assist
him.  Snipes plays reluctant *kohai* (junior partner) to Connery's
*sempai* (guide), and the two of them hit the ground running, forming a
congenial on-screen rapport.
     Hampered by negative attitudes towards the Japanese on all sides,
Connor and Smith become embroiled in a murder investigation where the
sale of advanced technology to one of the United States' biggest
competitors becomes a central theme.  There's plenty of
finger-pointing--at an easily-influenced U.S. senator, a yuppie
facilitator, and a smooth, winsome playboy to name but a few--but by
the end of RISING SUN, it's not totally clear whodunit.
     Part of the problem with RISING SUN is that we never get to know
the woman who's body is found on the boardroom table--she's bumped off
pretty early on.  Okay, so she's just a pawn, a call girl, but the film
could have been more interesting had we known
something--anything--about her.
     "Get this body out of here before it starts smelling like sushi!"
yells insensitive police officer Tom Graham (Harvey Keitel).  It's one
of many dumb sushi jokes, and another lather-rinse-repeat performance
from Keitel. Here he's cast as a bigoted bad lieutenant with a penchant
for a little Japan-bashing of his own.  He's played this kind of role a
hundred times before but if he hadn't, he wouldn't be so good at it.
Anyone who can steal a scene from Connery *and* Snipes can't be too
shabby.  On a rant about racism, Graham rails "Whatever happened to
good and evil?  Whatever happened to '*He* did it'?"  This guy's
xenophobic blusterings are laughable, and Keitel's performance is one
of the few pleasures of RISING SUN.
     Tia Carrere (WAYNE'S WORLD) plays Jingo Asakuma, a genius hacker
who helps unravel the mystery on her computer.  Although she looks
great in all that black spandex, the scenes of her manipulating videoed
images of the murder are repetitive and not particularly enlightening.
There are hints that her character is more interesting than her late
night, desktop activities would imply, but these are never developed.
     The film is badly in need of an editor.  There are too many scenes
that go nowhere and one, in which Connor and Smith are chased into the
'hood, is superfluous (and as an attempt at role-reversal humor,
embarrassing beyond belief).  And everything culminates in an awkward
final scene between Smith and Asakuma that makes you wanna scream
"Cut!"
     Director Philip Kaufman (THE RIGHT STUFF, THE UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS
OF BEING) has taken Michael Crichton's politically-charged novel about
corporate and cultural intrigue within the Japanese-American business
world and de-sensitized it, turning it into a slick yet pedestrian
thriller.  RISING SUN has been called a cautionary tale by many, but
Kaufman's overly diplomatic approach to this material is itself too
cautious, robbing the volatile story of its fire and passion.  His
intent may have been to downplay the tensions between two world super
powers, but RISING SUN is a long way from cultural detente.


Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Culture clash and high-tech
     manipulation of reality are the themes that combine with a
     mediocre murder mystery in this adaptation of Michael
     Crichton's novel RISING SUN.  Much of the anti-Japanese and
     anti-Western-decline diatribe from the book are toned down
     for the film.  Rating: high 0 (-4 to +4).
     A party slogan from Orwell's 1984 said "who controls the past controls
the future and who controls the present controls the past."  RISING SUN is a
high-gloss technological murder mystery that, as everybody already knows, is
about xenophobia, xenophilia, and Japanese-American relations, but what is
getting less attention is that it is also about how electronic and computing
technology is changing what we think of as reality.  As portrayed in the
film, the Japanese are masters at the electronic manipulation of reality--an
art that gives them an immoral advantage over their American counterparts.
This, by the way, is an interesting reversal of the 17th Century Japanese
policy to suppress the Western technological advance of the gun which gave
its wielder what was considered by the Japanese an immoral advantage over a
swordsman.  Times have changed and tables have turned.
     In Los Angeles Web Smith, a liaison officer with the police department
(played by Wesley Snipes), is investigating a murder in a Japanese
corporation's skyscraper.  Assisting him as a guide is John Connor (played
by Sean Connery), a mysterious expert on Japanese culture.  An American
woman who was deeply into drugs and kinky sex is found dead, presumably
murdered, on a conference room table.  The police should have a big jump on
solving the case with four observation cameras trained on the room, but that
is electronic data in the hands of people who are masters of the
manipulation of data.  Also complicating the investigation is the amoral,
financially-motivated, chauvinistic presence of the Japanese business
executives.  This aspect is toned down from the novel, but it is still very
present in the film.  But also toned down is the aspect of the novel being
arguably as critical--or more so--of the cultural decline of the West as it
is of the Japanese.  Michael Crichton's book was intended as a wake-up call
to the American people.  Not surprisingly, that message has been completely
obliterated in the transition to film, along with a large proportion of what
was negative about the Japanese.
     What we have left here is an okay murder mystery revolving in large
part around technological elements.  It is then given Hollywood gloss with
high production values and a notable cast.  Sean Connery is, of course, Sean
Connery.  His performance is exactly what you would expect it to be.  In
this film he also has the title "executive producer."  Wesley Snipes is a
good actor who balances the cast racially but unless I am mistaken, it is
very unlikely that the LAPD would have a black in the diplomatic position of
liaison officer to the Japanese, who have a very low regard for blacks.
Also present is Harvey Keitel, certainly one of America's most highly
regarded character actors.  Japanese playboy Eddie Sakamura is played by
Cary-Hiroyaki Tagawa, somewhat familiar for having played an alien lifeform
in the crew of the short-lived television series SPACE RANGERS.  But for all
the gloss and high-tech hardware, the mystery just fails to be intriguing.
This is not a puzzle mystery where the clues are all in front of the
audience.  It is more a "follow the police and all will be revealed" sort of
mystery.  I would have to give it a high 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
