Title
Review for Swiri (1999)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   The major particular to recognize about "Shiri," a Korean
production which received its North American premiere at the
22nd annual Asian-American International Film Festival--is
not the quality of the movie itself.  By Hollywood standards,
the production values are just satisfactory, the story about as
original as a Jean-Claude Van Damme video game, the
romance tepid and hardly credible.  Rather, what's striking is
that this movie has toppled all box office records in its home
country, overturning even "Titanic" to bring in an astonishing
return from the people of that divided Asian nation.  How to
explain the phenomenon?  No doubt the adrenaline-charged
action, which keeps conversations to a minimum, didn't hurt. 
Nor did the presence of Han Suckyu, Korea's number one
star, the country's Tom Cruise.  Like Americans, people
throughout most of the world probably put action pictures at
the top of their lists, and given the preoccupation of "Shiri"
with Korea's leading political dilemma, the division of the
country into two independent sovereignties, "Shiri" was bound
to become a big hit.
  Yet the picture has not yet found an American distributor,
despite the good quality of the English subtitles--the reasons
perhaps being that none of the performers has any
recognition at all except within this country's small Korean-
American communities, and dozens of domestic action
pictures will keep the public busy the year 'round.  Were it
not for the annual Asian-American International Film Festival,
which highlights films featuring Asians and Asian-Americans,
chances are that no one in the U.S. would have had the
opportunity to see this mundane picture.
   Its chief flaw, one which impairs our enjoyment of at least
the first half of this nearly two-hour production, is not even
the credibility factor.  With action-adventure movies we're
perfectly willing to suspend disbelief.  But we must be made
privy to at least a whisper of what's going on.  "Shiri" begins
like a video game, the sort that has zero character
development.  While video games require none--they demand
only that you rack up points by shooting down terrorists and
the like--a film needs to give the audience at least a clue or
two from the very beginning.  "Shiri," however, begins with a
Hong Kong style shoot-'em-up involving sinister people
carrying considerable firepower, virtual killing machines that
destroy everything that moves without seeming rhyme or
reason.  In this case, a film review would not be giving away
information better left concealed by informing readers of the
central plot point. "Shiri"--apparently transliterated from a fish
known as a swiri (whose meaning becomes clear midway)--
involves the struggle of a North Korean unit without the
authorization of its own government to provoke a war with the
South, a combat which the bad guys hope will result in the
unification of the two Koreas after fifty years of division.  The
unit is led by a fanatic name Park (Choi Minsk), a man who
escaped from a plane during a foiled hijack attempt and who
has vowed to override the "corruption" of the politicians on
both sides.  Like some Palestinian extremist groups today, he
has little faith that even his own side will bring about the
reunification that dominates his dreams.
   Park conspires with his band of fellow fanatics to seize a
brand new weapon developed by the South, the CPX, a liquid
bomb indistinguishable from plain water.  The weapon, when
triggered by a combination of fuse and powerful lights shone
on it, can vaporize everything within at least a kilometer of its
center.  Park hopes to provoke a final conflict in Korea by the
strategic placement and detonation of up to ten of these
bombs.  Intelligence agents led by Ryu (Hans Suckyu) seek
to destroy the villain and recover the hijacked bombs, but to
do this Ryu must learn the identity of a leak within the
agency.  Since he, like every other agent, trusts nobody, not
even his partner, he is at a loss to understand how secret
information has become the property of the terrorists.  
   When director Kang Jegyu is not contemplating nuclear war
or something as trivial as mass murder by grotesque machine
guns, he focuses his camera on a luke-warm romance
between Ryu and his current squeeze and fiance, Hyun (Kim
Yunjin).  So tepid is this liaison that when the two are in bed
confessing their passion, Kim is fully dressed while her man
lies coyly protected by sheets up to his neck.
   At the very least, the film will educate its audience to the
political thinking that has dominated Korea for the past fifty
years.  In 1910 Japan annexed the country, calling it Chosun. 
After World War 2, two major allied powers occupied the
former Japanese protectorate, and at Potsdam the Soviet
Union and the United States divided Korea at the 38th
parallel, with the Soviets installing a Communist system in the
North while frustrating the desires of the Korean people to
reunify.  In the film, the satanic Park correctly points out that
while South Korea--which had been administered by the U.S.
for several years after Potsdam--is enjoying hamburger and
cokes, the children of the North are starving.  "The world is
unfair," he whines, implying that the poverty in the North is
somehow the fault of its neighbors to the South.  But political
points aside, "Shiri" is strictly a run-of-the-mill, formulaic
operation.

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
"Swiri" broke all box-office records in its native South Korea when 
it was released, outgrossing even "Titanic".  Its US$2.2M budget made 
it the most expensive Korean movie yet (with a good chunk of the 
money put up by Samsung, whose logos feature predominantly 
throughout).  Maybe it's not surprising that the movie in question 
was created in blatant imitation of the slick Hollywood products it 
would be forced to compete with in Korean theaters.
What we have here is pretty much a Korean take on the 
Simpson/Bruckheimer formula: a fast-moving thrill machine with slick 
visuals, tons of action, and a certain amount of sentiment (in this 
case, a 'cross-the-border love story).  It works as entertainment, 
and people who've never seen a Korean movie in their lives will be 
able to dive right in.  But it's resoundingly hollow.
The first few scenes are shatteringly violent, showing North Korean 
prisoners being used as training dummies in a sickening covert-ops 
exercise.  One of the spies is Hee, a North Korean female 
sharpshooter who's being sent South to perform assassinations.  (The 
movie misses a bet by not having her leave a calling card at every 
killing, but I guess they figured even that would have been 
excessive.)  The hero is Won, a South Korean special agent who's been 
on the tail of Hee for quite some time.  He suspects a leak in his 
department when one of their contacts is gunned down in front of 
them, and stumbles into a plot that (MacGuffin time!) involves a 
special chemical bomb that can level city blocks.
The movie wastes no time in deciding if it's going to be a political 
thriller or a shoot-em-up -- we get a token amount of pontificating 
and introspection about the North and South, and then gobs of 
gunplay.  There is also time for a romance between two major characters, all
the pieces of which are out of the standard kit of movie love stories.  We
do get an explanation of the cryptic title, though -- although it's less
than edifying, and more than a little maudlin.
And for a movie that comes from completely outside Hollywood, it's funny how
many of the cliches are here. True to form, any movie that mentions a bomb
and that does not provide at least one building being blown up is cheating
us, and we do in fact get exactly that (although it would be criminal of me
to see which one or when).  We also get the handy Aquarium Rule (thank you,
Roger Ebert), which dictates that any movie with aquariums in it is going to
have them shot to pieces.  Speaking of visual cliches, if I see one more
shot of a door being kicked  open by a bunch of guys with flashlights
strapped to their guns, I'll puke.  We get that three times here.
I liked "Swiri" without ever really getting involved in it.  It's a 
well-made exercise; it looks and sounds as good as anything Hollywood 
ever put out.  If it were released here in a dubbed edition, it might 
do fairly well.  In fact, director Kang Jae-gyu has hinted that was 
exactly his aim.  But it's a little saddening how unadventurous it 
really is.  Korea has managed to produce one of the best, most 
thoughtful films of all time ("Why Has Bodhi-Dharma Left for the 
East?"); with "Swiri", it's clear they can make big entertainment 
machines as well.  Here's hoping they keep it on an even keel.
