Title
Review for Analyze This (1999)
Number of Reviews
44

Author
Bill Chambers
ANALYZE THIS **˝ (out of four)
-a review by Bill Chambers ( analyzethis@filmfreakcentral.net )
starring Robert DeNiro, Billy Crystal, Lisa Kudrow, Chazz Palminteri
screenplay by Peter Tolan, Harold Ramis, and Ken Lonergan
directed by Harold Ramis
Robert DeNiro is not a comedian. He used this to his advantage, in
what is arguably his best performance, as Rupert Pupkin in The King of
Comedy. In Scorsese's 1982 media-age satire, which becomes more
relevant with each passing year, Pupkin is a struggling comic obsessed
with talk show host Jerry Langford (a self-parodying Jerry Lewis) and
the thought of appearing on his program. Pupkin's routines, however,
are painfully unfunny-and he is blithely unaware of his own
mediocrity. That his jokes don't sound like they were written to bomb
(they're liked warmed over Henny Youngman one-liners that a Catskills
veteran could elicit a chuckle or two from) is because of DeNiro's
desperate delivery; the actor has awful timing in his bones. 
As Paul Vitti, the head of a mafia family in Analyze This, DeNiro
sends up his Goodfellas and Casino characters mostly by playing it
straight: when plunked into veritable comedy, we realize just how
goofy the whole mobster attitude can be. Vitti is having anxiety
attacks over his station in life and an upcoming meeting with the
heads of all the families. He seeks counsel from Dr. Ben Sobol
(Crystal, redeeming himself in this post-City Slickers 2/Forget
Paris/Father's Day/My Giant era), a psychiatrist engaged to be married
to reporter Laura (Kudrow). Vitti, who is the movie equivalent of John
Gotti, panics Ben at first. Ben loosens up and agrees to help after he
realizes they share common neuroses over their fathers, but Vitti's
request that he be "cured" in two weeks naturally puts a wrench in
Ben's nuptials. 
Analyze This takes more intelligent potshots at the gangster sub-genre
than, say, last year's Mafia!, but it doesn't attempt to mimic the
baroque visuals of The Godfather films or Once Upon A Time In America.
(One reason I so adore Mel Brooks' hilarious Young Frankenstein is
that it actually looks and feels like a Universal horror picture.)
Stuart Dryburgh's cinematography is full of missed
opportunities-Vitti's world should appear tantalizing, elegant,
and slightly foreboding to Ben. Even the Italian restaurant used in a
sequence that pays homage to the original Godfather looks like as
generic as the pizza parlour on TV's "Everybody Loves Raymond." 
The film's screenplay has similar problems. The concept is so good, so
utterly "pitch-able," that someone else got there first: the film
bears remarkable resemblance to HBO's weekly smash "The Sopranos."
Unlike that show, Analyze This makes the mistake of anchoring its
whole story on an amusing but thin premise. It lacks meat on its
bones: that's why the film is half over before Dr. Sobol officially
agrees to take on his special patient; that's why there are not one
but two wedding sequences, both involving Ben and Laura (!); that's
why Chazz Palminteri's role consists mainly of shouting "I'm gonna get
that son of a bitch Vitti!" every few scenes. (He's a crashing bore
(er, boor)-Palminteri (Hurlyburly) is a good actor in dire need of new
schtick.) The movie really falls apart in its final third, because it
has relied on up to that point the surprisingly excellent chemistry
between Crystal and DeNiro to carry it through, and the climax has
Crystal flying solo in a flat and endless impersonation gag. Academy
Awards aside, Crystal is always funnier playing off an able co-star. 
(Aside: the relationship between Crystal and his intelligent son sadly
remains mostly unexplored at the expense of plot; Kudrow, alas, is
also wasted in the "girlfriend" role she's too damn good for these
days.) 
Yet I'll remember Analyze This as being a fun movie because of DeNiro
and Crystal's rapport. Crystal, who truly gives zingers their zing, is
granted genuinely witty comebacks to DeNiro's numerous threats. (One
can practically hear the ba-bum-ch! drumbeat after his one-liners.)
Surprisingly, they both begin the film playing caricatures but
end up flesh and blood protagonists. The film also features
outstanding supporting work from Joe Viterelli as Vitti's right hand
man Jelly. Lastly, though the script has its flaws, it's at least as
profane as the genuine mob movie article-"Larry Sanders" refugee Tolan
surely must have been the one who liberally peppered Analyze This with
"fucks." Hearing DeNiro use the word is old hat, but hearing Crystal
repeat the word is a scream. 

Author
Joy Wyse
Insecure psychiatrist, Ben Sobol [ Crystal] rear-ends the car belonging to
mob boss Paul Vitti [De Niro] whose henchmen are hilarious trying to close
the car's trunk carrying a bound and gagged soon-to-be corpse.  Later,
when Vitti casually asks if either of them knows of a good psychiatrist to
help a `friend' they produce the business card that Sobol had given them. 
Suddenly, Sobol has a new patient and his life changes forever.  Just
imagine how all of the mobsters feel when they realize that Vitti is
probably telling all of their secrets to an outsider.
The friction between Vitti and rival Sindone [Palminteri] is only part of
the plot.  Not only is Sobol living in his father's shadow, he is engaged
to marry Laura [Kudrow], a relationship that keeps being interrupted by
Vitti's needs.
There are some very funny moments in this film but there is a lot of foul
language as well.  Sure, gangsters may talk that way but Edward G.
Robinson and James Cagney never had to resort to such dialogue on film and
they were the epitome of underworld figures.  I would have enjoyed it a
lot more without the four letter words, especially seeing that it is aimed
at teenagers who need to add better choices to their vocabularies.
Oh, speaking of children - Sobol has an obnoxious son who conveniently and
thankfully disappears in the second half of the movie.   We really never
get to know him.   They should have left him out entirely.  He was only
there for the few jokes that he generated, but he wasn't worth it. 
This isn't a bad movie.  It just isn't a real good one.  Except for the
language and some nudity, it's an OK way to pass a couple of hours.
I'd give it a B-.  I would watch it again, on free TV.                    

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Paul Vitti (Robert DeNiro) is the head of one of New York City's
two biggest crime families.  But he is losing his drive.  He is beating
people up less and he is feeling their pain more.  For no apparent
reason he will start crying. (The head of a crime family beats people
up himself????  Why does this not seem very likely?)  He decides he
needs good psychiatric help, but he must keep it secret since seeing a
psychiatrist would be seen as a sign of weakness.  Through an odd chain
of events he chooses analyst Ben Sobel (Billy Crystal).  But the last
thing Sobel wants is one of New York's most notorious criminals as a
patient.  Nor does Sobel know how to treat Vitti.  A psychiatrist works
by getting and holding the upper hand over his patient.  No matter what
a patient does the psychiatrist must always be in control of the
situation.  With Vitti he is dealing with a man who is also expert at
control, even if he needs a gun to maintain it.  The two of them begin
a battle for control of their sessions.  It is a struggle that should
have been more interesting than it was.
     But his doctor is not the only opponent that Vitti is battling.
He is in a cold war with Primo Sindone (Chazz Palminteri), the head of
New York's other major crime family.  And Sobel may become a pawn in
the conflict.  At the most inconvenient times suddenly Sobel will be
summoned to have a silly psychiatric session with Vitti.  It is a gag
repeated as many times as is necessary to fill out the length of the
film.  Writing which is very funny in the first part of the film is
wasted in a film which has much sparser and less funny gags in its
second and third.  This film could have done more with the doctor-
patient relationship, but settles for pop psychology and an instant
miracle cure.  It could have done more with the crime plot, but it
settles for something hackneyed and overly cliched.
     What is curious about the film is that the acting is way below
anybody's standards.  Robert DeNiro coasts along as the gangster, a
part he could play in his sleep.  What gives Vitti potential as a
character is that he has emotional problems, but DeNiro is not used to
playing emotional problems of this sort. When he cries in front of the
camera it is like amateur night tryouts for the Actors' Studio.  His
touch at comedy is only marginally better.  Billy Crystal is again the
nice-guy, sincere, New York Jew he always plays, only this time he
plays it as a psychiatrist.  This would have been a far more engaging
film if on Day One DeNiro and Crystal would have just looked at each
other, said "not this role again," and then traded roles.  Lisa Kudrow
is capable or more but plays a bewildered third wheel in the grand
tradition of Terry Garr.  She should never have settled for such a
tangential role.  More interesting are the character roles of Joe
Viterelli as the bodyguard Jelly and Chazz Palminteri is his usual
riveting character.
     Many of the jokes really are funny, but again most are in the
first half of the film.  There are also some interesting allusions to
crime films, both in the dialog and visually.  But the script by Ken
Lonergan and Peter Tolan is not content to simply have many of the
allusions, it must tell the viewer about them so that they are not
missed.  It sacrifices subtlety.  Overall this averages out to being a
decent comedy, but it was capable of being much more.  I rate it a 6 on
the 0 to 10 scale and a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Alex Ioshpe
MPAA: Rated R for language, a scene of sexuality and some violence.
Runtime: USA 103 / France 103 / Germany 103 / Japan 104
Country: USA
Language: English
Color: Color (Technicolor)
Sound Mix: DTS / Dolby Digital / SDDS
Certification: USA R / UK 15 / Finland K-12 / France U / Germany 12 /
Ireland 15 / Australia MA / Norway 15 / Portugal M/12 / Sweden 11 /
Netherlands 12 / Belgium KT
Paul Vitti (Robert De Niro) is one of the most known and feared mafia
leaders
in the U.S. A man that has handled "the family business" his entire life.
But then
a strange thing happens. Paul can't sleep, he keeps thinking about his wife,
while being with his regularly girlfriend. But what's most important - he
lost his ability to kill.
  Ben Sobol (Billy Chrystal) is one of the most known and respected
psychiatrists in the U.S. - a man really living the American dream,
surrounded by perfection. But no one realizes is that underneath he is
rather ordinary kind of man, with a son, a fiancé (Lisa Kudrow) and the same
problems as everyone else.
By some peculiar circumstances these two men, so different in personality
and way of life, meet. Sobol is then offered a doubting privilege of being
Vitti's "underground shrink". This is the beginning of a strange
relationship, which will not only bring the two men closer to each other,
but also change their personalities, completing them by their opposites.
This is Harold Ramis'amusing comedy. Instead of trying to squeeze laughter
out of us by bad jokes and other desperate measures (think "Mafia" !),
"Analyze This" is actually funny and entertaining, because of the humorous
situations, fine acting and witty dialogue.
Instead of repeating the horrible comedy clichés, Ramis is actually using
them to get a shine of self-parody to his film. This interesting tactic is
effective and amusing, allowing satire, referring to De Niro's screen past,
and yet keeping the focus on the strange friendship between two men who
speak entirely on different levels and in languages.
The fact that Robert De Niro is playing a mafia chieftain in this kind of
film is interesting indeed. The actor has almost become a trademark for
"godfathers" and mafia leaders. While playing his part with a sense of
self-parody, he manages to not overact, so that his character does not seem
silly or unreal. He really is a magnificent actor, that manages to float
into every role, be that emotional drama or light comedy; and although this
is not an award worthy  performance, this is one of his most amusing roles,
for which he deserves some credit. Lisa Kudrow, Vitty's "people", and other
supporting characters in the story are almost unnoticeable, as the director
concentrates his energy on the two main characters.
And jet, although this is a comedy, and both the events, characters and
their interrelations with each other are glamorized and simplified, this is
also an interesting and nuanced meditation of what it means to be an Italian
functioning in an America where Italian is an synonym for pizza and "The
Godfather", as well as giving us an interesting peek into mobster mentality.
Those particular elements are not especially explored simply because t his
isn't a deeply involving human drama. The characters are thin as bible
paper, many parallel stories and relationships are started, but not
completed, leaving them unfinished; and the film itself isn't an elegantly
crafted cinematic experience, but I guarantee you a good time and a good
laugh.
"Analyze This" is a funny, clever and well crafted piece of moviemaking,
which although won't make history, will entertain and amuse many before it's
forgotten, and that's exactly its purpose.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Serious actor Robert DeNiro lines up in another one of his
every-now-and-again comedy roles, satirizing a role that he knows all too
well...a mobster. This movie also co-stars every other mafia-looking actor
this side of Italy, and the seriously-looking-for-a-hit-movie actor, Billy
Crystal.
PLOT:
Mafia kingpin suddenly finds himself suffering from panic attacks, stress
and bouts of sadness during his everyday mob routines. He decides to help
himself, by seeing a psychiatrist. The shrink is not very willing to help
the renowned gangster during the week of his own wedding bliss, but a little
strong-arming by the kingpin's "associates", ultimately waives the doctor's
well-rooted reservations.
CRITIQUE:
This is a very funny movie, I mean, it's like...fuggeddaboudit! Whether or
not you enjoy mob movies, this film will have you laughing out loud during
several scenes, chuckling along to DeNiro's infantile blubbering sessions,
and re-appreciating Billy Crystal for the superior comedic actor that he is.
This movie takes a completely overdone film genre, the mob films, and mixes
it into a great script, some super performances, and an all-around good
time. It's never boring, striking jokes at every other line, and confirms
Robert DeNiro's stature as one of the greatest American actors of his
generation. The superb performance put forth by DeNiro in this movie, is one
of the main reasons that it works. You like to watch DeNiro. He has that
charisma, that look, that weighty presence that makes you want to see him in
each and every scene. He even convinces during his ultimate "breakthrough"
scene with his doctor. This man is truly an American acting legend.
The one thing that did surprise me about this movie was its excessive use of
obscenities. Not that I mind that one bit, it just threw me back a little
considering that it was a comedy. Having said that, another reason for the
script to work as well as it does, is because it doesn't overly parody the
mafia folks like in other comedies. It shows them as they are, violence,
swearings and all, with pointed humour laced throughout. This was the first
movie since THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY (7/10) that actually had me missing
many of its lines, due to the audience's over-the-top laughter. I personally
loved the whole "Freud" scene the best, along with the hilarious remake of a
very famous scene from a very famous mafia movie. Francis would be proud!
I'm actually looking forward to seeing this movie again on video, so that I
could catch all of the lines the next time around. The light tone of the
movie and its soundtrack are additional points to director Ramis, as well as
the upbeat pacing and the solid acting. The film might not go down as well
for non-DeNiro or non-Crystal fans, but everyone else should prepare to
strap on their giggle-belts.
This movie's got an original premise, some convincing performances by its
leads, especially DeNiro in an atypical role, and plenty of fresh humour
sprinkled throughout its spaghettilicious body of fun. Capice??
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Billy Crystal once studied directing under the guise of legendary director
Martin Scorsese (a man Robert DeNiro knows quite well) at New York
University. Crystal is also known to have played the first openly gay
character on a network television series, "Soap".
One of the producers of this film, Jane Rosenthal, founded the Tribeca
Productions company with Robert DeNiro. Bobby received US$8Million for his
role in this film.
Born and raised in California, Lisa Kudrow attended Vassar College and
graduated with a bachelor's degree in biology, intending to pursue a career
in medical research with her father, a renowned headache specialist.
But when she returned to California after college, her passion for
performing also came back. Encouraged by her brother's good friend,
actor/comedian Jon Lovitz, she began studying improvisation, and in 1989,
became a member of the famed Los Angeles improvisational group, The
Groundlings. She claimed to be a virgin until she got married in 1995 to
French advertising exec Michel Stern. She was 31 at the time.
Joseph Viterelli was a late bloomer in his acting career. For more than 25
years he had been offered acting opportunities from producers, casting
directors, and directors, including his longtime friend, filmmaker Leo Penn.
Viterelli declined them all until 1989, when Sean Penn called and said they
were having difficulty casting a character from the Lower East Side in a
film that was shooting on location in Viterelli's old neighborhood on Mott
Street. That screen test led to a major role in Phil Joanou's STATE OF
GRACE, Viterelli's motion picture debut.
CASTING FUN: The roles of Vitti's "people" were filled in a rather more
unconventional manner. "We sort of adopted the Martin Scorsese-Bob DeNiro
method of casting when it came to the Mob roles," Ramis says. "This consists
of Bob and Marty walking the streets of Little Italy, spotting a civilian,
saying, 'Hey, that guy would look good,' and signing him up.
Review Date:  February 20, 1999
Director:          Harold Ramis
Writers:           Peter Tolan, Harold Ramis and Ken Lonergan
Producers:     Jane Rosenthal and Paula Weinstein
Actors:            Robert DeNiro as Paul Vitti, Billy Crystal as Ben Sobol,
Lisa Kudrow as Laura, Joseph Viterelli as Jelly
Genre:             Comedy
Year of Release:  1999

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        Paul Vitti (Robert De Niro) has a problem: although he's
one of the most feared and powerful gangsters in the country, he's
lost his passion for his work.  Things aren't as simple as they
once were ("We gotta change with the times," states an advisor.
"What, are we gonna get a web site?" sneers Vitti in reply).  But
there are other reason for the boss's recent distaste for violence:
having just witnessed the murder of his best friend, Vitti is so
torn with stress and tension that he now bursts into tears at the
slightest provacation.
        The members of Vitti's "family" are concerned: if word gets
out that their boss is turning into a quivering crybaby, their
organization will lose prestige and power.  Hoping to reclaim his
composure and save his career, the boss seeks the help of an
unwitting psychiatrist, Dr. Ben Sobol (Billy Crystal).  Sobol wants
nothing to do with the infamous Vitti, but the gangster won't take
"no" for an answer.  Soon the two men are working through the
complex issues which have resulted in Vitti's breakdown.
        Harold Ramis's "Analyze This" could just as easily be
called "There's Something About Gangsters."  Funny and clever,
the film gathers up the entire "Untouchables" genre and shakes
it vigorously.  The jokes are sly, revolving more around verbal
gags than we expect from an action-film spoof, though the humor
never once descends to the level of stupidity which earmarked
lesser mobster parodies, such as "Mafia!"  It is, quite simply,
the most unabashedly funny movie I've seen since last autumn's
"Rush Hour," with Jackie Chan and Chris Tucker.
        The interplay between Crystal and De Niro is well
developed: their psychiatric sessions skip by like a live-action
episode of Comedy Central's "Dr. Katz, Professional Therapist,"
including a great scene in which Sobel tries to explain Oedipel
complexes to Vitti.  Sobol also challenges Vitti's adulterous
habits:
        We are given ample insight into Vitti's personality,
witnessing both his crumbling power and growing insecurity with
himself.  De Niro makes Vitti real to us: he may be a hardened
criminal, but he's also a loving father (observe how he casually
gathers up his kids' wildly strewn Disney videos before making
his escape in one crucial scene).  It's a clever directorial
touch from Ramis, and it adds a subtle degree of characterization.
        Much of the film reminds me of "What About Bob?", the
Bill Murray/Richard Dreyfuss psychiatric comedy in which a
clingy patient pushes his psychiatrist to the limit.  The same
thing happens in "Analyze This," as Vitti demands more and more
of Sobol's time, much to the chagrin of the doctor's fiancee',
Laura (a spunky Lisa Kudrow, fresh from her success as Lucia
in "The Opposite of Sex").
        Only two minor items mar the film: (a) the Billy
Crystal character finds himself forced to attend a Mob meeting
for reasons that struck me as thoroughly unbelievable, and (b)
the story culminates in a yawn-inducing shoot-out with a rival
"family."  I was hoping for a more original resolution to the
movie, as the film sparkles with energy and wit for the
rest of its duration.
        These are not major flaws, however, and won't stop me
from unhesitatingly recommending "Analyze This," the best comedy
to emerge so far in 1999.  Great acting, great directing, great
writing, and a cameo by Tony Bennett?  Oh man, I am *so* there.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please
write to: joefilm-subscribe@listbot.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Harold Ramis.
Cast: Billy Crystal, Robert De Niro, Joe Viterelli, Lisa Kudrow, Chazz 
Palminteri, Bill Macy, Leo Rossi, Kyle Sabihy, Rebecca Schull, Molly 
Shannon, Max Casella, Pat Cooper, Richard Castellano, Jimmie Ray Weeks, 
Elizabeth Bracco.
1999 - 106 minutes.
Rated R (for profanity, sexual situations, and violence).
Reviewed March 6, 1999.
Reading the cast and director for the new mobster comedy, "Analyze 
This," I asked myself, "how could this miss?" Robert De Niro ("Taxi 
Driver," "Raging Bull"), Billy Crystal ("City Slickers"), Lisa Kudrow 
("The Opposite of Sex"), and Director Harold Ramis ("National Lampoon's 
Vacation"). These are usually reliable filmmakers (well, okay, Crystal 
has been in a sizable slump lately), and tellingly, the first half-hour 
of "Analyze This" was very funny. Unfortunately, as the running time 
ticked away, I began to think that the first thirty minutes had, 
unbeknownst to me, been rewound and were being replayed another 
two-and-a-half times. The film has obtained a clever premise, but does 
not have any idea what to do with it as it progressively becomes more 
and more repetitive until I finally stopped enjoying or caring about 
what was happening on the screen.
Middle-aged psychoanalyst Ben Sobel's (Billy Crystal) life is finally 
going very well. Although he has never gotten along with his own 
uncaring parents, especially his father, who is also a psychiatrist, Ben 
has an easy-going teenage son (Kyle Sabihy) and is about to travel down 
to Miami to get married to his TV news reporter girlfriend, Laura (Lisa 
Kudrow). In little but a flash, however, Ben suddenly sees his plans 
ruined when he accidentally hits the car of the mob and subsequently 
gets paid a visit from famed mafia guy Paul Vitti (Robert De Niro), who 
desperately wants counseling, even though he himself won't even admit to 
having anxiety attacks. Ben tries to help Paul, mostly so he will get 
him off his back, but the plot gets more complicated when Paul follows 
Ben to his wedding, which ends with a man dropping eight stories to his 
death. It seems to Ben that no matter what he does, Paul Vitti will not
 go away, and the more they become involved, the more Ben's potentially 
happy life gets into danger.
"Analyze This" has a few laughs sprinkled throughout (mostly in the 
first half), but I always had the nagging thought that what director 
Ramis and writers Peter Tolan, Ramis, and Kenneth Lonergan had done was 
thought of one joke (Robert De Niro lightly spoofing his serious past 
mafia roles, while terrorizing and becoming buddies with comic Billy 
Crystal) and then tiresomely recycled it for the duration of the 
106-minute running time. Admittedly, De Niro is very funny here (and I 
can't remember the last time you could use that adjective to describe 
him), and Crystal is in top-form, but the whole movie is weighed down 
directly on their shoulders with nothing else to support them, including 
a substantial plotline.
Since "Analyze This" bills not one, not two, but three writers, you'd 
think that they would have been able to work together to fix the 
noticably large flaws, but they must have all been on auto-pilot. One of 
the most disappointing and wasted opportunities in the film is the way 
the movie deals with the supporting characters, all of which have next 
to nothing to do and aren't even given multi-dimensional characters to 
attempt to develop. Coming off of her Oscar-caliber work in two of last 
year's best films, "Clockwatchers" and "The Opposite of Sex," Lisa 
Kudrow's throwaway "girlfriend" role is an incredible step down. Sure, 
Kudrow's fellow "Friend" Jennifer Aniston did the same thing two weeks 
ago in "Office Space," but at least we got to spend a little time with 
Aniston. Kudrow, meanwhile, mostly just stands around, no doubt 
wondering why she agreed to appear in this film in the first place. 
Chazz Palminteri, as rival gangster Primo, fares even worse, in a role 
that plays more like an afterthought than an actual character. Finally, 
Molly Shannon (rising film star and cast member on "Saturday Night 
Live") has a rousingly hilarious one-scene cameo right at the beginning 
as one of Crystal's patients and then completely disappears. Too bad, 
considering that the supporting actors surely have proven that they have 
the abilities to support De Niro and Crystal.
Once "Analyze This" approached its second wedding scene leaving Kudrow's 
Laura standing alone at the altar once again, I had become thoroughly 
annoyed by where the story had gone, and had mostly lost respect for the 
character we were supposed to sympathize with the most, Ben. Afterwards, 
the climactic scene with Ben posing as a fellow mob boss in place of the 
depressed Paul, became a real laugh-free dead-zone, losing its last 
remaining comic punches. "Analyze This" proves that talent can certainly 
help any film out, but when the written material isn't up to their 
level, what we are virtually left with is a vacuum of thin air.
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman 
Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Brandon Stahl
Analyze This is living proof that stereotypes can be amusing in film. Every
character in the movie  each mobster, a psychiatrist and his fiance, the
psychiatrists son and parents, the fiancešs parents, all of them  are pure
stereotypes. Yet the movie can be at times funny and is overall a good film
worth renting. Audiences know the mob by the movies we watch, not by the
truth of who they are. Analyze This is fun because it takes pleasure in the
stereotypes that past mob films have created.
For the five of you who havenšt seen it, Robert De Niro is a mob boss who
realizes he has a few psychological problems and is having anxiety attacks.
He seeks out a therapist, Crystal, to help him deal with his problems.
Crystal is hesitant at first, but De Niro is persuasive (in a manner of
speaking - persuasive as only a mafia movie character can be, for example,
he throws Crystal in a shark tank) and Crystal ends up becoming more
involved with De Niro and his organization than he wants to be. Of course,
Crystal has issues of his own to work out and learns to deal with them when
De Nirošs mafia-matter-a-factness begins rubbing off on Crystal. A side plot
features Crystal getting married while treating De Niro.
Everything in this movie is predictable, yet for some reason I was never
bored or felt cheated. I guess itšs hard to find a comedy that finds ways to
make people laugh without being mean. Are the stereotypes mean? No, because
making fun of an organization that professionally kills people is, for some
reason, okay.
I imagine that the idea must have come to the writers, while they were
sitting on their therapistšs couch, that it would a funny if a mob member
went to therapy to work out personal issues. Amazing that a single idea can
create two hours worth of movie. To write the script and come up with the
dialogue, the writers must have sat down and watched every mob movie they
could get their hands on and read Mario Puzošs łThe Last Don˛ six or seven
times. De Nirošs mafia boss is the epitome of all of the Godfathers and
Goodfellas scrunched into a character. He speaks in cliche (When he
interrupts a party thrown by Crystal łHey, whyšs you gotta be mean, Išm
being nice here,˛ when  ) and always aware that hešs supposed to be a mob
boss. He plays it like he knows hešs acting.
I doubt they researched by actually talking to mob members. That would have
taken too much time, and besides, this isnšt the kind of movie that requires
that type of research. They use the stereotypes of movies past to their
advantage. Mobsters seem to say łFuhgetaboutit˛ a lot (see Johnny Brasco),
so they have De Niro say it ten times. Mobsters seem to make a point of
eating in dimly lit, crunched up Italian restaurants, so they put a crucial
scene in there (even paying tribute to the Godfather during a bathroom
scene, or maybe it was a tribute to Austin Powers). Mobsters also beat up
and threaten whomever they please, whenever they please. When Mobsters have
a meetings, they like to do it at a warehouse out in the middle of nowhere,
that seems specifically constructed to have Mobster meetings. And of course,
the police are a bunch of idiots, always coming in two minutes too late to
catch the mobsters. All of this does get a little tiresome, but the actors
bring such energy and timing to the material, that it can be forgiven.
Joe Viterelli did such a stand out job playing De Nirošs faithful bodyguard
Jelly that it would be a shame if he didnšt receive mention for an
supporting Oscar nomination. Lisa Kudrow, as Crystalšs fiance, is wasted
here, but at least shešs pretty to look at. Also, Crystalšs son seems like a
wasted opportunity.
It seems like Išm picking out whatšs wrong with Analyze This, but in truth
there are genuinely clever moments, such as Crystal trying to convince De
Niro  to stop crying and fight back during a shoot out. However, Analyze
This isnšt laugh-out-loud funny. Itšs a blend of violence and humor, that
skates along black comedy at times or farce the next. Itšs a movie made by
veteran actors and producers that have their timing down and have stretched
out a small idea into a two hour popcorn movie.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
When a New York Mob boss starts having panic attacks and
secretly seeks out a suburban psychiatrist what you get is one of the
most inventive, original comedies in years.  Robert De Niro is
terrific as the powerful, domineering gangster, Paul Vitti, whose
paralyzing anxiety is preventing him from assuming his role as leader
of his crime family. And Billy Crystal has never been better than as
the divorced psychotherapist, Dr. Sobel, with a young son and a
determined fiancee ("Friends" Lisa Kudrow) he's about to marry. "What
is my goal?" he asks. "To make you a happy, well-adjusted gangster?"
Despite Dr. Sobel's understandable terror of his new patient, he's
gamely determined to unravel the mystery of Vitti's childhood and make
him healthy enough to cope with an all-important Mafia meeting - in
just two weeks. Cleverly directed as a fable with Damon Runyon
overtones by Harold Ramis ("Groundhog Day") from a wickedly amusing
screenplay by Peter Tolan, Howard Ramis and Kenneth Lonergan, this
movie offers a rollicking good time, balancing drama, suspense, and
action, as Vitti's psychological troubles have the audience literally
howling with laughter. The key, of course, is that the problems (fear,
grief, rage, and guilt) are firmly grounded in reality and De Niro's
willingness to poke fun at the screen persona that he has created over
the years, along with Crystal's amusing reactions to the
conflicts. Their sense of timing is flawless, and the humor is deeply
inherent in each of their characters. Chazz Palminteri and Joseph
Viterelli ring true in supporting roles. On the Granger Movie Gauge of
1 to 10, "Analyze This" is a devilishly clever, utterly hilarious 10,
the first genuine comedy hit of 1999.

Author
Alex Fung
ANALYZE THIS (Warner Bros. - 1999)
Cast: Robert De Niro, Billy Crystal, Lisa Kudrow, Joe Viterelli,
      Chazz Palminteri
Screenplay by Peter Tolan and Harold Ramis and Kenneth Lonergan
Produced by Paula Weinstein and Jane Rosenthal
Directed by Harold Ramis
Running time: 103 minutes 
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   Harold Ramis' comedy ANALYZE THIS is a film whose central conceit
   winds up being more interesting than its screen realisation.
   Lampooning mafioso stereotypes with abandon, the picture runs out of
   gas fairly early on and lurches the remainder of the way to the
   finish line.
   With the public's fascination with the dangerous glamour of organized
   crime reaching the level where media saturation on the topic has made
   the John Gotti-led Gambino crime family as fabled and familiar to the
   masses as the Corleones, it was inevitable that accompanying
   cinematic attention to the Mafia would ultimately lead to the
   evolution of an unlikely film sub-genre -- the mob comedy.  Joining
   Andrew Fleming's THE FRESHMAN and Jim Abraham's unfortunate MAFIA! in
   this category is ANALYZE THIS, which attacks one of the more curious
   what-if scenarios of late (though not *singularly* curious -- I
   understand that there's a new HBO series operating on the same basic
   premise): what if a mob boss was stricken with panic attacks and
   enlisted the services of a psychiatrist?
   Billy Crystal, adorning the requisite shrink beard, plays the doctor
   and Robert De Niro lends his iconic status as the angst-ridden
   gangster who finds his life as fearsome New York mob boss Paul Vitti
   increasingly crippled by his volatile emotional state.  An inability
   to brutally bash in a turncoat's head with a steel pipe?  Can't
   perform in bed?  For a macho overlord whose dominance over the Big
   Apple is threatened by a rival mobster (Chazz Palminteri), this
   simply will not do.  And becoming teary-eyed at sentimental
   commercials? Unforgivable.
   Vitti commandeers the unwilling services of Crystal's mild-mannered
   Dr. Ben Sobel at a rather inopportune time -- the shrink is headed on
   vacation to Miami where he's scheduled to marry reporter Laura
   MacNamara (Lisa Kudrow).  After this setup, the Florida-based segment
   of this film mostly plays like a Mafia-tinged version of WHAT ABOUT
   BOB?, where the befuddled Sobel is constantly hounded by his
   demanding new patient who continues to appear at the most
   inappropriate moments.  Of course, fitting the stature of a crime
   boss, it's not Vitti himself who pesters Sobel -- his dim, sad-eyed
   right-hand man Jelly (Joe Viterelli) is the one to break into the
   shrink's hotel room and haul him out of bed in the middle of the
   night.
   The culture clash between the hardened world of the mob and Sobel's
   suburbanite is often amusing, and there are several funny comic
   routines and sight gags, but it gradually becomes apparent that the
   film is content to skewer the Mafia in a series of repetitive riffs,
   toying with the tough, family-loving, God-fearing, honour-bound
   archetype familiar from the movies; the picture establishes a rhythm
   which plays itself out quickly.  On the flip side, although hinting
   at it on several occasions (at one point, when instructed to be
   vague, Sobel notes that his profession has left him well-equipped for
   imprecision), the picture fails to add a little variety to the comedy
   by doing little to send-up the psychiatric profession, and indeed
   winds up endorsing mushy therapeutic cliches during the story's
   uninvolving resolution, dulling the carefree irreverence of the
   picture.
   Beyond its premise, the film doesn't really have much of a compelling
   story to speak of, and what that there is evolves in the weaker
   latter half of the picture as the action shifts back to New York.
   It's mostly routine and uncompelling material -- FBI stings, mob
   summits, yet *more* goofy wedding ceremony fiascoes (a tired gag
   which has been pretty much been run into the ground) and serves as a
   rather flimsy hanger upon which to float more comic bits.  Howard
   Shore attempts to inject energy into the piece with a jaunty score
   which only serves to underline how muddled the film has become.
   While De Niro demonstrates his good sportsmanship in the picture
   through his cheerfully straight portrayal of the stressed mob boss,
   Kudrow's imitable quirkiness is largely wasted in a tiny, generic
   role, and Palminteri's saddled with a two-dimensional character he
   could play in his sleep.  On the other hand, it's been so long since
   his heyday with WHEN HARRY MET SALLY... and CITY SLICKERS that I'd
   begun to actually forget about Crystal as a solid screen comedian and
   found myself thinking of him mostly as The Guy Who Knows How To Host
   The Oscars.  In the final reel of ANALYZE THIS, he gets to shed the
   second banana role worn throughout the bulk of the picture to deliver
   one of his best onscreen moments in quite some time.  The result was
   silly and predictable, but it had me chuckling.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"X-FILES fans come up to me in malls expecting me to be able to fill them
 in on the whole conspiracy.  Half the time I have no idea what they're
 talking about." - Martin Landau

Author
Chad Polenz
1999, R, 103 minutes [1 hour, 43 minutes]
Starring: Billy Crystal (Dr. Ben Sobel), Robert De Niro (Paul Vitti), Joe
Viterelli (Jelly), Lisa Kudrow (Laura MacNamara); written by Peter Tolan,
Harold Ramis, Ken Lonergan; produced by Jane Rosenthal, Paula Weinstein;
directed by Harold Ramis.
Seen March 5, 1999 at 7:40 p.m. at Hoyts Crossgates Cinema 18, theater #2,
with my brother John for free using my Hoyts critic's pass. [Theater rating:
***: good seats, sound and picture]
(author's note: this is the first review I've written since October 1998 when
I reviewed "Rush Hour." That was FIVE months ago... so if I'm a little rusty,
please bear with me.)
        Originality is something today's entertainment industry seems to be running
short on, so the new thinking seems to be "How many ideas can be recycled
without going overboard?" I think it's fair to say `Analyze This' is an
example of that thinking since its not exactly the most novel concept in the
world, but it still manages to be everything a good movie should be. Isn't
that the point of entertainment?
        The film's selling point is obviously its plot, its stars and the creative
forces behind it. We've seen a lot of crime movies starring Robert De Niro and
a lot of comedies starring Billy Crystal and of course veteran comic talent
Harold Ramis usually guarantees something good. But each's talent comes from a
different school... world even. Bringing big names together for the sake of it
is something Hollywood thrives on but doesn't necessarily succeed at (i.e.
`Heat'), so why should this movie be expected to work?
        Probably because everyone does what they do best, often stepping on the
other's toes just to upstage them and it works.
        The film tells the story of Dr. Ben Sobel (Crystal), a middle-aged
psychiatrist who lives and works in the burbs of New York City, and his
forced encounter with mob boss Paul Vitti (De Niro). Vitti's your typical
Mafia guy in a typical Mafia scenario surrounded by other typical Mafia guys
in a typical conflict about typical `family' betrayal and rivalry. 
        Ramis doesn't try too hard to disguise the obvious which is good because
otherwise the setting would immediately seem trite and cliched. He doesn't
waste our time by giving a lot of back story, instead we're just kind of
dropped in the middle of another `GoodFellas.' Within a few minutes or so
we've got an idea of a bitter war between Vitti and Primo Sindone (Chazz
Palminteri). There's some mention of some kind of big meeting coming up, which
does play a major role in the film, but Ramis and his fellow screenwriters
don't let it get too convoluted with the comedy.
        How Sobel and Vitti come together really isn't relevant, and it's another
obvious point the filmmakers know not to dwell on. What is relevant is the
interaction between the two characters, especially as portrayed by these two
fine actors.
        Both Crystal and De Niro are allowed to do their usual schticks for a while
and it's surprisingly effective. De Niro's Vitti is a bit more mature and calm
than those he's played in Martin Scorcese's films. Here, he gets to play a
`kinder, gentler' mobster with a bit of heart and soul (emphasis on `a bit').
After one of his elders is killed it actually saddens him, causing him to have
anxiety attacks, although he refuses to believe it despite medical evidence.
        Here's where the two come together and the initial confrontation is
interesting. Mobsters in the movies only believe what they want to hear and
people only tell them what they want to hear, so when Sobel begins telling
Vitti what his problems REALLY are, it's a breath of fresh air (or maybe I
should say nitrous oxide).
        The chemistry between the two is great. Both characters are secretly afraid
of each other despite their attempts to have macho facades. Vitti is afraid to
hear the truth and Sobel is just plain afraid of Vitti. The result is dozens
of funny scenes of each caricature trying to psych out the other. Imagine the
type of routine Crystal does at the Academy Awards interacting with a De Niro
character out of a Scorcese flick, except without the security of a blue
screen. Now image both men slightly possessed by Woody Allen - how funny is
that?
        Of course the whole film isn't just the two men freaking each other out. This
is a comedy about the mob so it definitely becomes the driving force of the
plot. In fact, the film's handling of the plot is one of its best aspects. It
plays its elements straight and realistic for the most part. If a mobster were
to suddenly become an integral part of a regular person's life, it probably
would have a huge effect of them. Since this is a comedy that effect is played
for laughs and always very well.
        Sobel is about to marry Laura MacNamara (Kudrow, in full `Phoebe
Buffay'-form), a Miami television journalist, but can't since Vitti and his
goons keep butting in. The goons, such as Jelly (Viterelli in a great
performance), are played strictly for laughs a la `The Simpsons.' The
atmosphere is enough to keep the satire cartoony enough for such a mainstream
film, but without going too far and becoming zany (okay, it is a little bit
zany but I liked it anyway).
        There's nothing genus or ground-breaking to `Analyze This,' but it never
really tries to be something it's not. Anyone can do a crime spoof or a fish-
out-of-water flick or violent crime movie, but not everyone can do all three
at once. That's what makes this film a fine investment of 103 minutes.
---------------------------------
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ 
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - Over 200 new and old films reviewed in
depth, not just blind ratings and quick capsules.
Member of The Online Film Critics Society
(www.ofcs.org)

Author
Matt Williams
Analyze This at first seems like the perfect example of a high concept
comedy, able to be summarized in a mere sentence fragment:  mob boss
seeks therapy. But, on further analysis, the movie proves to be
atypical.  It's actually funny.
Paul Vitti (Robert DeNiro) has a big problem.  He's a powerful mafia
boss in New York City.  Mob control of crime is beginning to wane, and
the heads of all the powerful families want to meet. Paul's bitter
rival, Primo Sindone (Chazz Palminteri) would prefer that Paul sleep
with the fishes, and orders a series of hits on the mob boss' life.
But that's not Paul's big problem.  No, his big problem is that he has
stress.  So much stress that he's suffering from panic attacks, and
severe emotional breakdowns.  Things get so bad that he reluctantly
decides to see a shrink:  one Dr. Ben Sobol (Billy Crystal).
Dr. Sobol doesn't particularly relish the idea of having an infamous
criminal as a client.  But a few kidnappings here, and a little harmless
torture there, and suddenly Paul Vitti is his favorite patient, or at
least his most persistent one.  When Paul needs therapy, Ben is expected
to deliver...any time, anywhere.  Even Ben's pending wedding to
newswoman Laura MacNamara (Lisa Kudrow) isn't a worthwhile excuse.
Analyze This is based on a gimmicky formula...but if there's a director
who knows how to take a comedy based on a gimmicky formula and make it
work, it's Harold Ramis (director of Caddyshack and Groundhog Day).
Under his easy, guiding hand, the film is able to weather a few
predictable scenes, and actually locates humor in unexpected places.
The key to the entire film is Robert DeNiro.   He has played every
variation of mobster known to film...but who knew he had such comic
potential?  His Paul Vitti is not only believable as a mafia boss, but
is played with perfect deadpan comic precision.
Billy Crystal finally breaks his unlucky streak of smarmy roles. He
subdues his typical schtick, and delivers a stronger character because
of it. He may be playing the straight man to DeNiro's more vibrant don,
but he never allows himself to become overshadowed, having many humorous
scenes of his very own.
The supporting cast can't quite live up to the film's two leads. Lisa
Kudrow, so wonderful in last year's The Opposite of Sex is woefully
misused here.  As is Chazz Palminteri, who barely registers on screen as
the movie's villain (relatively speaking). Only Joe Viterelli, as Jelly,
Vitti's loyal, but self-admittedly stupid henchman, makes a lasting
impression.
Excellent comic performances by the two leads, and a steady hand of
direction are able to overcome the film's few weaknesses.  The comedy of
Analyze This is occasionally predictable, but always funny.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
Jon Popick
After a preview screening of the new Harold Ramis film, Analyze This
(*** ˝), I broke into a black, fully-loaded 1999 Lincoln Continental in
the theater's parking lot.  My friend at the DMV had previously traced
the plates to one Tony Boombatti (Fat Tony), the owner of the Boombatz
Pizzeria and the right arm of the even more well-known local
`waste-management specialist' Tony Matsorelli (Tony Two-Step).  I then
placed a transmitter under both sun visors in order to get their
reactions to the film.
Tony Matsorelli: Jesus, that was a great  movie.
Tony Boombatti: Great  movie.  Funny as .
Tony M:   Tom Hanks.  Now, DeNiro can act.
Tony B:  Yeah.   Tom Hanks.  (Starts car.)
Tony M: His hand shakes a little bit and all of a sudden he's some great
actor?  C'mon.
Tony B: (Burps.)  Hey, you got a  toothpick?
Tony M: Yeah, I got your toothpick right here, you  .
Tony B. Jesus, my balls  itch like a  mother .
Tony M. What the .  Do I look like your  mother?  I gotta
itch your  balls for you now?  Holy .
Tony B.  you.  I was just sayin'.
Tony B. You know, even that little  Crystal wasn't bad.
Tony M.  money-lenders.  They should stay behind the scenes.
Tony B. He ain't no  Pesci, but he ain't too  bad, either.
Tony M. DeNiro and  Pesci should be in every  movie.
Tony B. Are you  crazy?  If DeNiro and  Pesci were in
every  movie togetherholy .  That would be  great.
Tony M. Hey, didn't Crystal sorta remind you of that lawyeraww ,
what's his name?  Alan Berkowitz?
Tony M.  it.  I forget his  name.  The guy that got that
other guy off for whackin' his wife.
Tony B. That's a  great  lawyer.
Tony M. That fat  guy with the bad skin that's always in the
Mafia movies.  Kinda looks like you, you fat .
Tony M. Jesus  Christ.  You got  marinara in your 
ears?
Tony B.  No, Tony.  I just don't know who you're  talking about.
Tony B. You believe that a hard  like DeNiro would really need to
go to a shrink?
Tony M.  no.  It's just a  movie.  The whole premise was
that he was nervous about the big meeting of the heads of all the
 Families in the whole  country.
Tony M. Everybody knows that we don't  meet like that.  If we
need to have a sit-down, we use  video conferencing on the
 Internet.  We're Sicilian, but we ain't stupid.
Tony M.  Hollywood thinks that we would be stupid enough to meet
in a big  warehouse with no security.
Tony B. Bunch of  parasites.  You think it was too much like The
Sopranos?
Tony M.  no.  The Sopranos don't got DeNiro.  It was sorta the
same, but different, too.
Tony M.  A.  And I gotta hand it to em  that Godfather dream
sequence, where  Crystal gets whacked like Brando, was 
hysterical.
Tony B. That was from The Godfather?  No .
Tony M. Yeah; no , you  .  And that part where
Crystal turns fed and wears a  wire to the sit-down with DeNiro,
but thinks better of it and tears the wire off in the  crapper?
 brilliant.
Tony B.  me.  I think I missed that part when I went to the lobby
to get more  butter on my  popcorn.
Tony M. You wanna get something to eat?
Tony M. Now, there's a  shocker.  Fat Tony hungry.  Stop the
 presses.
Tony B.  you.  I got a slow metabolism.
Tony M. That ain't the only thing that's slow on you, you fat 
mother .
Tony B. (Shouting.)  Hey!  (Tires squeal, horns blow.)  Stay the 
out of my  lane, you piece of  !
Tony M.  this.  (Click, click.)   this guy.
Tony B. (Revving engine.)   mother .  (Whir of power
windows.)
Tony M. (Shouting.)   you, you mother  son of a .
(Repeated gunfire, more squealing tires.)
Tony B. Ooh, I'm  hit.  They  got me, Tony.  (Loud crash
and silence.)
PLANET SICK-BOY:  http://home.eznet.net/~jpopick

Author
Scott Renshaw
ANALYZE THIS
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Robert DeNiro, Billy Crystal, Joe Viterelli, Lisa Kudrow, Chazz
Palminteri.
Screenplay:  Peter Tolan and Harold Ramis and Kenneth Lonergan.
Producers:  Paula Weinstein and Jane Rosenthal.
Director:  Harold Ramis.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, violence, sexual situations, adult themes)
Running Time:  106 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     The very concept behind "high concept" comedy is that the premise
sells itself.  A potential viewer can see one poster or one 30-second
commercial and understand instantly all the wacky comic possibilities:
Schwarzenegger and DeVito as twins, Eddie Murphy as the nutty professor,
Robin Williams as an iconoclastic medical student.  The work is half done,
it seems, as soon as the stars sign a contract.  The reason so many "high
concept" films are so mediocre is that no one bothers to do the other half
of the work, leaving a situation comedy that's entirely situation.
     There was reason to hope for a bit more from ANALYZE THIS, since
director Harold Ramis also directed and co-wrote the decade's best high
concept comedy, GROUNDHOG DAY.  Ramis' set-up this time around involves a
New York mob boss named Paul Vitti (Robert DeNiro) who is having some
unfamiliar experiences:  shortness of breath, crying jags, difficulty --
ahem -- performing.  In short, Vitti's got stress.  To help with the
problem, he visits psychiatrist Ben Sobol (Billy Crystal), and instantly
becomes convinced that the doctor is a genius.  Suddenly the mild-mannered
doctor is expected to be at Vitti's service 24 hours a day, a severe
inconvenience as Ben prepares to get married to his fiancee (Lisa Kudrow).
     As a pitch, it probably sounded hilarious; with DeNiro and Crystal in
the lead roles, it probably seemed like a can't-miss mismatched tandem.
Instead, ANALYZE THIS is primarily a series of botched opportunities.  The
most glaring gaffe is the casting of Crystal as Sobol, though at first
glance he might appear to be ideal for the uptight therapist.  Early in
the film we learn that Ben is professionally dissatisfied, sick of his
whining patients and left in the shadow of his best-selling pop therapist
father (Bill Macy).  Not only does this bit of character background prove
utterly pointless in the long run, it emphasizes that Ben could have been
an interesting charcter if played by an actual actor.  Crystal simply
can't avoid turning his every scene into shtick, making a classic deadpan
straight-man part -- something perfect for, say, DeNiro's MIDNIGHT RUN
partner Charles Grodin -- into something silly and clownish.
     And the parade of bad decisions only begins there.  The remarkably
talented Lisa Kudrow, though given third billing, is wasted in what
amounts to the "girlfriend part" for a handful of scenes; the rival
gangster played by Chazz Palminteri, which should have provided a nice
counterpoint to the frazzled Vitti, barely registers as a character.
Perhaps most distracting is a constantly shifting tone that makes ANALYZE
THIS a candidate for its own multiple-therapy session.  While scenes of
slapstick and comic misunderstanding are colliding with violent shootouts
and emotional breakdowns, there's never the feeling that Ramis is aiming
for an edgy, dark comedy -- it's just a high concept comedy into which
other elements keep intruding.  There's no narrative momentum to ANALYZE
THIS, no sense of character consequence to keep it from turning into a
repetitive series of sketch comedy scenes.
     There's at least one thing really right with ANALYZE THIS, and that's
DeNiro.  As many times as he's gone to the wiseguy well in his career --
MEAN STREETS, THE GODFATHER PART II, GOODFELLAS, THE UNTOUCHABLES, etc. --
he always seems to find a new twist to keep it fresh.  It's fun watching
him nod to his past when he comments on a GODFATHER-inspired dream Ben
has, it's fun watching him work with the amusing Joe Viterelli as Vitti's
main muscele man, and it's fun watching him show the comic chops he too
rarely has a chance to employ.  Unfortunately, he's wasting his
performance on a movie that doesn't know what to do with its actors, its
premise -- one-upped by the current HBO series "The Sopranos" -- or its
character development.  ANALYZE THIS is a smaller scale example of what
happens to so many summer blockbusters:  it's a ready-made marketing
campaign to which a film has been attached almost as an afterthought.

Author
David Wilcock
Starring Robert De Niro, Billy Crystal and Lisa Kudrow
Directed By Harold Ramis
Running Time: 1 hour 43 minutes
Although many people have compared this new gangster comedy to the hit HBO
drama 'The Sopranos,' Analyze This is witty and entertaining enough to be a
good movie in it's own right. Billy Crystal plays wiseguy shrink Ben Sobol,
who new 'patient' happens to be gangster boss Paul Vitti (De Niro.) Ben
wants nothing to do with Vitti, as he's about to get married to Laura
MacNamara (Kudrow) and having a gangster as a patient wouldn't really help.
But Ben is soon drawn into Vitti worlds, and reluctantly helps Vitti to sort
his life out. All done in a comic fashion, of course.
Although never brilliant, Analyze This is also never rubbish, which makes
for a fun ride. Billy Crystal, who hasn't had a good role since City
Slickers way back in the early '90's, is given a role that lets him fully
exploit his wiseguy act. He's pretty funny while he does it, and although
his character is a little close to his character in City Slickers, he's
pretty funny. Robert De Niro is hilarious as Vitti, playing it dead straight
but coming off as really funny. He's a serious gangster unaware that he is a
comic gold mine. Lisa Kudrow, barely seen as Crystals' estranged wife to be,
basically reprises her Phoebe role from T.V series Friends, which is getting
rather tiresome, and doesn't come off well on the screen. The supporting
cast is apparently made up of the entire cast of Casino and Goodfellas, and
are all funny caricatures, especially Vitti's bodyguard Jelly (Joe
Viterelli.)
The film genuinely plays like a proper gangster movie, but with laughs
instead of hard ass talking. It sometimes gets a little bloody for a light
hearted film, but it strangely fits in. Spoofs are made of famous gangster
movies, including a nice parody of The Godfather. The Italian tunes playing
throughout the soundtrack contribute to the fun. There's also some odd plot
points: FBI guys appear and suddenly disappear for no apparent reason. It is
true that Analyze This has had a somewhat chequered production history, and
perhaps the plot points were expanded in a earlier version of the script.
Unfortunately, this is Hollywood, so we will never know.
Harold Ramis, best known as Egon from Ghostbusters, has a deft touch with
directing comedy, as shown in the immortal Groundhog Day, and the less
immortal Caddyshack. All the comic potential in a scene is dug out and
presented to the audience. The script, written by Ramis along with Peter
Tolan and Ken Lonergan, starts off funny, remains funny for the most of the
film, but sadly peters out somewhat during the last twenty minutes where it
wrongly enters more serious territory. The film is short, however, and just
before audience interest is waning the film suddenly goes into a rather
rushed and unsatisfying ending and the credits roll.
Analyze This is a good comedy, and is certainly worth watching. Robert De
Niro sobbing is reason enough to watch it, even though it does seem forced,
or like a parody (although I think this was intentional.) Crystal is his
most likeable in years, Kudrow is given as little screen time as possible,
which is a good thing, and De Niro is just awesome. It's no Goodfellas, and
it probably won't be remembered as much as Groundhog Day, but Analyze This
is a well done comedy that won't leave you feel cheated.

Author
Homer Yen
If I've learned anything from watching movies with a Mafia element in
it, it's that the big bosses never have it easy.  They're constantly
being assailed by gunfire, busy plotting out their next crimes, and
always being chased by the law.  It's enough to give the toughest boss
a panic attack.  
Even kingpin Paul Vitti (Robert DeNiro) is not immune to the pressures
of his job.  He is the head of a powerful mob family who strikes fear
in those who dare to cross him.  Though he is tough, he begins to lose
control of his ability to command others.  Among other things, he's
beginning to have trouble bringing himself to kill people (a vital Mob
job requirement).  If others find out about Vitti's inadequacy, he'll
be targeted for sure.  He needs to quickly find a psychologist to help
him out.  The therapist that unluckily finds his way into Vitti's life
is Dr. Sobol (Billy Crystal).  Meeting Vitti couldn't come at a worse
time in his life.  He is about to marry his fiancée (Lisa Kudrow) and
wants as little to go wrong as possible.  But Vitti doesn't take no
for an answer (Vitti funnily says that he only hears no' when his
victims are whimpering for mercy), and Sobol begins to try to help him
resolve his personal problems against his better judgment.  But it's
not going to be easy helping Vitti become a well-adjusted gangster. 
And from that point on, an uneasy but sometimes droll friendship
begins to develop.
There seems to be lots of potential comedy in this kind of setup. 
DeNiro has played the tough mob boss many times over, and Crystal is a
funny guy when he has the right material.  But the material here
doesn't really let any of these two gifted performers shine.  On the
one hand, there is the slapstick comedy using Crystal's likeable
demeanor against DeNiro's stone-faced, tough-guy persona.  But most of
the comedy seemed subdued and reduced to mini-skits.  DeNiro's a good
sport as he satires his past Mob roles by, for example, crying during
touching commercials.  But I felt that Kudrow's role was no different
than watching Phoebe with an attitude (on Friends).  The comedy never
makes it past the lightweight status because the dialogue focuses too
much on one-liners, and it didn't seem like there was any thought to a
scene's setup other than letting Crystal and DeNiro square off against
one another.  The other strange thing was that at points, the movie
tries to take itself too seriously such as when Crystal begins to
unravel the root of the problem or at the end when the film seemingly
gives up on its premise by showcasing a bizarrely timed hail of
gunfire.  It seemed as if someone just picked this ending out of a
hat.  These kinds of scenes made the film seem uneven.  
`Analyze This' had some cute moments and some clever ideas.  There are
moments that are droll and other moments that seem to last a bit too
long.  DeNiro does carry himself well, but there's not enough here to
put his teeth into.  Even at 106 minutes, the film seemed a bit long. 
If you analyze this, you'll probably come up with the same conclusions.


Author
David N. Butterworth
With its fondness for slick Armani wardrobes, Caddies with ample trunk 
space, and Italian family restaurants, the Mob is a prime target for 
parody.  Filmmakers willing to make a mockery of organized crime have a 
relatively easy task, but it takes a certain skill to rise above the 
ordinary.
Recently, "Jane Austen's Mafia!" used the gag-a-minute technique (first 
unleashed on the unsuspecting public in "Airplane!" by the team of 
Zucker, Abrahams, and Zucker) to lampoon "The Godfather" and its many 
cinematic wannabes.  In "Analyze This," director Harold Ramis 
("Groundhog Day") and his screenwriters have found their own secret 
weapon to ridicule the Mafiosi in Robert De Niro.
De Niro, himself an alumnus of the influential "Godfather" series, has 
played a mobster on innumerable occasions.  Yet with "Analyze This," 
Hollywood's most prolific of actors proves that, even after all these 
years, he's still capable of something a little different.
De Niro plays mob boss Paul Vitti and at times in the film you'd swear 
you were watching a sequel to "Goodfellas": De Niro is unsparing in his 
portrayal of a ruthless, tough-as-nails gangster, from his dress sense, 
to his Brooklyn patois, to his everyday behavior (not all of it good).  
But Vitti has a problem.  He's starting to go soft.  He worries a lot, 
and is experiencing these so-called panic attacks.  Oh, and he bursts 
into tears at the slightest provocation.  Not something someone in his 
profession would be wise to admit.
But when he does confess to needing help to his bodyguard, the 
terrifically dumb Jelly (Joe Viterelli) just happens to be carrying an 
appropriate business card.  Earlier that evening psychiatrist Ben Sobol 
(Billy Crystal) rear-ended Jelly's limo and was quick to provide 
insurance information.
Vitti meets "da shrink" and realizes, much to Sobol's chagrin, that 
he's the man to solve all his problems.  Soon to be married (to 
"Friends"' Lisa Kudrow, who fails to add much to the proceedings), Sobol 
tries valiantly to sever his blossoming relationship with Vitti, but 
instead succeeds in winning the confidence of the uncompromising 
mobster.  Winning in the sense of:
Vitti: "Do you know who I am?"
Sobol: "Yes."
Vitti: "No you don't."
Sobol: "No I don't."
Vitti, sporting De Niro's knowing wink and pointing an appreciative 
finger at his analyst: "You...  You...  You're good."
Sobol: "Well, I wouldn't..."
Vitti (voice raised threateningly): "You're good!"
Crystal *is* good, but he's a comedian first and an actor second, which 
causes him to exhibit some annoying smirkiness in "serious" scenes.  De 
Niro, on the other hand, is an extraordinarily versatile actor who can 
nail comedic roles, and that's the significant difference between the 
two performers.  The script does require Crystal's character to stand in 
for De Niro's during the big meeting of the mobs, thus allowing Crystal 
to deliver his virtuoso gangsta shtick in the face of Vitti's rival, 
played with well-dressed menace to society by Chazz Palminteri.
Unfortunately, the film's subject matter necessitates some large doses 
of violence in and amongst the couch trips, but De Niro and Crystal work 
so well together that the inevitable whackings seem almost forgivable in 
context.
A slightly bent cross between "Midnight Run" and "What About Bob?," 
"Analyze This" is a successful product of casting.  The movie 
overreaches its conventional "*You* try telling him his 50 minutes are 
up" promotional campaign by delivering two deft, on-the-money 
performances that bring down the house.  Crystal is good, and De Niro is 
even better.


Author
Edwin Jahiel
ANALYZE THIS (1999) *** 1/2. Directed by Harold Ramis. Written by Peter
Tolan, Ramis,
Kenneth Lonergan, based on a story by Lonergan and Tolan. Photography,
Stuart Dryburgh. Editing, Christopher Tellefsen. Production design,Wynn
Thomas. Music, Howard Shore. Produced by Paula Weinstein & Jane Rosenthal.
Cast : Robert De Niro (Paul Vitti), Billy Crystal (Ben Sobel), Lisa Kudrow
(Laura MacNamara), Joe Viterelli (Jelly), Chazz Palminteri (Primo Sindone),
Bill Macy (Isaac Sobel), et al  A Warners release. 110 minutes. R
(language, violence,sexual situations)
My favorite Sylvester Stallone picture is Oscar (by John Landis, 1991), a
free remake of a Gallic movie, itself adapted from a French play.
What does this got to do with the price of eggs? you'll ask. Quite a bit.
Analyze This bears no rleation to Stallone, but it's in the same genre
--farces about the Mob. And now it's my favorite Billy Crystal performance.
I can't say "Billy Crystal movie" since Billy, as psychotherapist Dr.Ben
Sobel, plays straight-man (sort of), sounding-board and hapless consultant
to Robert De Niro's mobster capo Paul Vitti. And you know that  De Niro is
a movie giant who is always the focus of his picture and of our attention..
Here, De Niro, elastictically using his talents, his face, his
Italian-American speech and body language, is very, very funny. So is
Crystal. So is everyone else, from supporting to tiny roles
The film was written with clockwork precision, a must for any successful
farce. Tightly scripted and directed, it does not indulge in fillers,
irrelevancies, overly broad effects or pratfalls. Director-co-writer Harold
Ramis has been an actor, a scripter, or both in many pictures, but has
directed just seven, starting with  Caddyshack (1980) then on to National
Lampoon's Vacation, Club Paradise, Groundhog Day, Stuart Saves his Family,
and Multiplicity (1996). People's reactions to humor are, of course,
imponderables, as varied  and unpredictable as their taste for food, but
for me Analyze This is Ramis's funniest movie.
It opens with a reminder of the famous gathering of vultures at Apalachin
in 1957, where the heads of Mafia families met to discuss territories,
alliances and ways to improve their profitability.
Cut to the contemporary Mafia, in which Paul Vitti is one of the biggest
capos in the East. When Vitti (which sounds like Gotti)  hesitates to
exterminate a bad guy (there are good and bad guys among the bad guys) and
finds himself crying and going through strange depressions, heart trouble
is suspected.
In  ways that  are like a comically devious daisy-chain, Vitti gets told at
a hospital's emergency ward that he suffers from panic or anxiety
syndromes. He repays the diagnosing doctor by roughing him up. Hence the
title Analyze THIS --which could have been better.
Crystal is shown in a carefully dosaged number of times --not too many, not
too few -- in  highly amusing situations with patients. The set-ups are
takeoffs of therapists and the therapied, but with kernels of truth --like
cartoons in the New Yorker.
The six degrees of separation theory works well. The links lead Vitti to
Dr. Sobel and the main subject is now reached. Uneasy, uncomfortable, even
scared, Sobel would like to get rid of his gangland client, but in spite of
misunderstandings and mutual bewilderments, an odd-couple relationship
results. (Among other things Vitti does not grasp, or else misinterprets
Sobel, his theories, his "shocking" Freudianism or high-falutin' words like
"closure").
Sobel's Jewishness is played up, but gently. So is the cameo part of
Sobel's father, the senior Dr. Sobel, also a shrink plus best-selling
author who is all wrapped up in himself and his book tour. (Bill Macy does
a terrific job of his few minutes).Vitti's Italian-American-Mafiosity is
played up too, in his case with a vengeance.
Taking along his fat, witty teen-ager son, the divorced Sobel goes to
Florida for his  wedding with blonde WASP TV reporter Laura MacNamara (Lisa
Kudrow). Guess who's coming to Florida too? Paul Vitti,who feels increasing
need for Sobel; Paul's bodyguards; and assassins sent by a rival. an
invreased  Comic mayhem and complications of all kinds follow.
The episodes cannot be revealed. There, and later back in New York,  the
doings, sayings and one-liners are non-stop laugh-getters--but  almost
never forced or cliched.Wisely too, the characterizations of the lesser
people are held to a necessary minimum, without wasting time and dialogue
on them. The filmmakers draw traits with economy. e.g. Vitti's sexual
disfunctions, his mistress, his wife, his being a family man.
Throughout, there's an incessant, humorous, deftly-incorporated stream of
allusions,  references and elements --sly, overt or rib-ticklingly blatant
--not just to real mobsters but also to Mob movies of all types, from the
Godfather saga to Woody Allen's Italian-Americans. Also parodied is De Niro
himself in roles such as the dead-serious Jewish-American gangster in Once
Upon a Time in America to Scorsese's blood-and-humor pictures of "made men"
and beyond. De Niro basks in the spoofing of his own images as distorted by
the mirror of comedy. Analyze This is at the same time an affectionate
homage to the great flicks in both serious and light  gangster genres.
One might call this a high-concept movie:"Mafioso Boss and his reluctant
Shrink bond." It's not that simple, nor is this just a one-gag film. The
main joke is so cleverly concocted that it becomes the equivalent of a
musical "tema con variazone." It maintains a light touch with its heavies
and an unforced touch with a Billy Crystal who neither clowns nor mugs.
There are no hesitations, no dead spots, no disturbing naturalism. You know
that a corpse in a car's trunk is a dummy, a joke; that the gunshots are a
fantasy. There's also a lot of toned-down Mel Brooks in this picture.
In importance and screen time, the third role is Joe Viterelli's. As Jelly,
he is Vitti's fat, pock-marked, adoring and obedient guard-dog, slow-witted
but quick on the trigger. The fourth role goes to  Chazz Palminteri's Primo
Sindone, Vitti's villainous rival.  Though  un- nuanced --he just huffs,
puffs and plots--he comes in handy for the wrap-up.
If Crystal is second --but indispensable-- banana to De Niro, the
Palminteri sub-plot is perfectly timed to bring Dr. Sobel to the fore. Soon
after a hilarious, two-seconds gag involving Crystal with some puzzling
holy water, Sobel goes to a neo-Apalachin gathering. There he  impersonates
Vitti's new consigliere. His tough perfomance is a mega-comical howl.
Analyze This is no epic saga, explosive socially-conscious film,
heart-rending drama,  message or avant-garde movie, but within its niche
it's a great, unpretentious not-just-for-dummies work. It joins easily the
roster of must-see screwball comedies.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Jamey Hughton
It must be tough to be a mob boss. Just ask Paul Vitti (Robert DeNiro),
a man who finds his job as Mafia head to be rather stress inducing. I
can believe it, too - one can't even begin to fathom the turmoil he must
go through when he's forced to choose between an ice pick, baseball bat
or sledgehammer to torture victims with. Suffering from reoccurring
panic attacks, Paul decides he needs to consult some professional help.
And who better than Billy Crystal. After appearing in
bottom-of-the-barrel flops, Father's Day and My Giant, Crystal finally
finds a reliable costar and some very promising material here. Playing
Vitti's private shrink, the two very different stars strike an
unorthodox, but interesting relationship that carries this enjoyable
comedy on a steady wave of laughs from start to finish. Casting Robert
DeNiro as Paul Vitti is something of an in-joke, I think. Placed in this
mobster's shoes, DeNiro gets to spoof  characters he himself played in
films like The Godfather, Part II and Casino. It's obvious he's having a
lot of fun doing so.
The man behind the camera is Harold Ramis, whose credits include
Ghostbusters (as writer and star), and his best directing effort, the
Bill Murray vehicle, Groundhog Day. Ramis has a knack for drawing laughs
because he simply knows what's funny, and here he manages to accentuate
the strengths of nearly all the actors. The only character who weakens
the payoff is Crystal's bride-to-be (Lisa Kudrow). Playing the same
dumbed-down role as she does in Friends, Kudrow is amusing, but doesn't
fit into this comedy mold as well as the director may have hoped.
The supporting cast sparkles. Joe Viterelli is hilarious as Jelly,
Vitti's pea brained right-hand man, and Chazz Palminteri is a show
stopper playing a fellow mobster who's in desperate need of the
definition of `closure'. The movie manages to maintain
consistent chuckles throughout, putting the emphasis on 3 or 4 really
big laughs that will have audiences grasping their sides. The
situation is just too cute to resist.
It's unfortunate that the language gets somewhat out of hand. But hey,
if you're in the Mafia, using obscenities probably comes naturally. And
near the end, seeing Billy Crystal attempt to walk and talk like a mob
boss is truly a special treat.
Jamey Hughton was a 1999 Writing Finalist in the YTV Achievement Awards
and writes a Published Weekly Column in The StarPhoenix (Saskatoon, Sk.
Canada).

Author
Greg King
ANALYZE THIS (M).  
(Warner Bros/Village Roadshow)
Director: Harold Ramis
Stars: Robert De Niro, Billy Crystal, Lisa Kudrow, Chazz Palminteri, 
Joseph Viterelli, Kyle Sahiby, Leo 
Rossi, Richard Castellano, Bill Macy, Jimmie Ray Weeks, Ira Wheeler, Tony 
Bennett
Running time: 103 minutes.
Robert De Niro lightens up slightly as he takes the mickey out
of the sort of character he has specialised in playing during his
thirty year film career.  The mannerisms are the same, as is the
intensity, but in this comedy from Harold Ramis (Groundhog Day, etc)
they are given a comic spin.  De Niro plays Paul Vitti, a tough New
York mobster who is having anxiety attacks.  Desperate to find a cure
before a planned meeting between all the gangster families, Vitti
secretly seeks psychiatric help.
The unlucky doctor is Ben Sobel (Billy Crystal), a family
therapist anxious to break out of the shadow of his more famous
father, an up-market psychiatrist, best selling author and multi-media
personality.  Although Ben recognises the challenge in working with
Vitti, he is about to take a week off work and marry his fiancee
(Friends' star Lisa Kudrow), a tv journalist.
However, a powerful mobster like Vitti doesn't easily take
"no" for an answer, and Ben's simple life is turned upside down.  He
becomes heavily involved in Vitti's cut throat and violent world.
This unusual premise works a treat under Ramis' slick
direction. There are plenty of superb one-liners and throw away
visual gags, and even the homage to The Godfather works beautifully.
In one scene, Ben tries to explain complex Freudian concepts to the
hot headed mobster.  In another, Vitti turns the tables on Ben by
probing his fears, thus proving that even gangsters have rare insights
into human nature.
De Niro doesn't make many comedies (the disappointing We're No
Angels is a rare exception), but he seems to be enjoying himself in a
rare comic role that enables him to put a different spin on the type
of character that he has made his own.  In a welcome return to form,
Crystal holds his own against the volatile and intimidating De Niro.
Kudrow, who added spark to the wonderful The Opposite Of Sex, is given
little to do as Ben's fastidious fiancee.  Chazz Palminteri (The Usual
Suspects, etc) is also wasted in a small and increasingly familiar
role as a tough gangster who'd rather exchange bullets than words.  If
anyone comes close to stealing the acting honours it is Joe Viterelli
(Bullets Over Broadway, etc), who gives a wonderful performance as
Vitti's rotund body guard, the aptly named Jelly.
Analyze This is a far cry from the mean streets that De Niro
ordinarily inhabits, but it is an interesting and entertaining
diversion through less travelled territory for, arguably, America's
greatest living screen actor.

Author
James Brundage
Starring Robert DeNiro, Billy Crystal, Lisa Kudrow, and Chazz Plamantari
     We've seen it before.  We've seen Bobby DeNiro as a gangster in
Godfather, Part II, in countless Martin Scorcese films, as Al Capone in The
Untouchables.  But, what we haven't seen before is the humor.  Never before
has Robert DeNiro tried to parody himself, to make fun of his own standards
and stereotypes.  Sure, we don't get a parody of the monologue from Taxi
Driver (`You talkin' to me?'), but we get a steady does of mob film spoofs,
including a shot-by-shot parody of The Godfather.
     Harold Ramis takes the helm of this risky project about the original
risky business.  Paul Viti (Robert DeNiro) is a mobster with issues.  His
best friend has just been killed, and, to be honest, he's conflicted about
being his harsh old self.  He's having panic attacks, he's not willing to
beat information out of someone.  Let's face it, it's crimpin his style.
So, taking advantage of  a run-in (literally, Billy Crystal hits the back of
a sedan with a person on his way to be killed in it) with psychiatrist Ben
Sobol, he starts going to a shrink.
     Sobol is just your garden-variety shrink, leaning a little too much
towards the `Fraiser' side.  His son's a smart Alec, his fiancée (Kudrow) is
a bimbo.  He listens to the problems of neurotics all day long.  Of course,
when a gangster steps in the door, everything changes.
     Viti starts following him everywhere.  He becomes his only client
because he need to have a therapeutic breakthrough before a meeting of the
heads of all the families in two weeks.
     The fact is, though, that we have seen this before.  This was the plot
of The Don's Analyst, with Robert Loggia.  It's also the plot of the HBO
Series The Sopranos.  However, Analyze This does it's job much better than
The Don's Analyst, which was dry and unfunny, ever could.
     Despite the fact that the script was plagued by last-minute rewrites
and a director who's only product that I've seen and respected was the
moderately creative (although now hackneyed) Groundhog's Day, it actually
doesn't seem as openly contrived.  It does its job: mix humor with a serious
plot fairly well, and it's fun to see Robert DeNiro break into tears at a
Prudential commercial.  Robert DeNiro, too, does his job.  He turns out a
performance that's good for him, a man who has won two academy awards and
is one of America's finest living actors.
     The real disappointment in the film, despite a lack of originality in
plot is Billy Crystal.  Crystal turns out a lackluster performance as the
psychiatrist, and seems to merely sit around and be glad he landed a role
with DeNiro at all.  He delivers a few good scenes, such as the one where he
tries to act like the consillieri.  Lisa Kurdrow also does a good job as the
bimbo fiancée.
     As I've said, there aren't that many holes in the script.  One little
thing that bothers me is that, considering how much Kudrow seems to hate
Crystal, she ends up with everything honky-dory with him at the end.  Once
again, idiotic characters are constructed, but that's the price that is paid
for a funny movie, and it is a funny movie.
     Analyze This isn't really quality cinema, but it's fun.  It's fun to
see people parody themselves.  It's fun to watch someone admit that they've
been doing to same part for so long (albeit, doing it great).  It's also fun
to watch this film, and is one definitely worth heading out to the theatre
to see.

Author
Michael Dequina
In its first two acts, Harold Ramis's comedy uproariously mines
co-scripters Kenneth Lonergan, Peter Tolan's premise for all its comedic
worth.  Robert DeNiro and Billy Crystal make a terrific team as,
respectively, a tough mob boss and the shrink who reluctantly treats him
for recurring panic attacks.  Crystal's effectiveness comes as no
surprise (OK, maybe so in light of recent pathetic efforts such as
_Forget_Paris_ and _My_Giant_), but the true comedic firecracker of the
two is DeNiro, who is explosively funny taking a self-deprecating spin on
his usual mafia screen persona.
So when DeNiro's character disappears for a good chunk of the home
stretch, so does the explosive energy of his performance and presence. 
Strangely enough, Crystal cannot pick up the comedic slack; the film's
climax is his showcase, and his schtick comes off as just that, schtick,
in comparison to DeNiro's relaxed comic ease.  One performer who could
have possibly risen to the challenge is co-star Lisa Kudrow, but she is
woefully underused in the equally as undeveloped role of Crystal's
fiancee.  But even if it does not end quite as well as it begins,
_Analyze_This_ offers more laughs than any other comedy so far released
in 1999.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com___________________________________________________________________
You don't need to buy Internet access to use free Internet e-mail.
Get completely free e-mail from Juno at http://www.juno.com/getjuno.html
or call Juno at (800) 654-JUNO [654-5866]

Author
Bob Bloom
 Analyze This (1999) 1 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Robert De Niro, Billy
Crystal and Lisa Kudrow. Directed by Harold Ramis.
 The key to comedy is pacing and timing.
 And the creators of "Analyze This" need to have their watches repaired.
 "Analyze This" is slow, uneven and only intermittently humorous.
 The movie is unoriginal, predictable and cliche-bound. Worse, you can see
the actors working at trying to be funny.
 Robert De Niro plays Paul Vitti, a powerful New York mobster who is having
a mental crisis. He's under a lot of stress. His best friend has just been
killed and he has to prepare for a big meeting of all the mob bosses from
across the country.
 Billy Crystal is Dr. Ben Sobel, a suburban shrink with a comfortable
practice, a smart-aleck son and an insecure fiancé.
 Fate takes a hand when Vitti's and Sobel's worlds collide - literally.
Before you can say "GoodFellas," Vitti is unburdening himself to Sobel,
much to the uptight doctor's dismay.
 Vitti cannot take "no" for an answer, even though Sobel continually tries
to discourage him from becoming a patient.
 The comic possibilities of such a plot are unfulfilled in "Analyze This."
It's flat and slow.
 Unlike the new HBO series, "The Sopranos," which is an expanded version of
the same premise - conflicted mobster unloads his psychic garbage on a
sympathetic shrink - "Analyze Thi"s cannot sustain or take advantage of the
possibilities of such a situation.
 De Niro and Crystal seem lost, as if they cannot get a firm grasp on their
characters. Crystal mostly frowns or looks scared, while De Niro does a lot
of cursing, finger pointing and crying.
 And lovely Lisa Kudrow is wasted in the thankless role of Crystal's
frustrated fiance.
 The only time the movie seems to come alive is when Sobel fills in as
Vitti's representative at the big meeting and begins transforming it into a
giant therapy session.
 Other than that, "Analyze This" just plods along, hoping that the
personality of its stars will carry the weight. Unfortunately, there is no
strong script to bolster them.
 "Analyze This" is a major disappointment, unworthy of the talents of its
two stars.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or a
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: March 5, 1999
Starring: Robert De Niro, Billy Crystal, Lisa Kudrow, Joe Viterelli,
Chazz Palminteri
Directed by: Harold Ramis
Distributed by: Warner Brothers
MPAA Rating: R (language, a scene of sexuality, some violence)
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1999/analyze.htm 
Black comedies -- those movies which make light of serious and usually
morbid situations -- come in a number of different varieties, each with
their own levels of hilarity and cleverness. GROSSE POINTE BLANK is a
good example of a well-done black comedy: subtle, witty, and
straightforward. It moved quickly to keep expectations high, and it
ended up doing much better than expected. ANALYZE THIS, the latest for
this genre from CADDYSHACK helmer Harold Ramis, does not have these
elements perfected; instead, it's a lighter, breezier comedy of
outrageous situations. 
The outrageous situations are supposed to draw laughs in their own
right: mob boss seeks psychiatric help. But the premise lends itself to
very little thematically, causing the movie to fall into a repetitive
order. The leading names, Billy Crystal and Robert De Niro, add some
life to their roles but don't give them excessive dimension. 
De Niro is New York mobster Paul Vitti, head of one the many crime
families struggling for dominance in the area. After a lengthy monologue
which establishes his place in the crime scene, Vitti luckily avoids an
assassination attempt. Unfortunately his friend takes the bullet
instead, and Vitti is shaken by the affair. Having in his possession --
by a bizzare chain of circumstances -- the name of psychiatrist Ben
Sobol (Crystal), he seeks help and proceeds to drag the unwitting Sobol
into the comically portrayed mob life. 
This story is simple enough, and has moments of comic genius, most of
which are manifested by a Vitti henchman named Jelly (Joe Viterelli).
Unfortunately, most of the movie sees this character dragging
psychiatrist Sobol out of his life so he can "help" Vitti, and his
efforts are wasted. The movie does manage to break this pattern toward
the end of its running time, picking up steam with some great comedy
sequences from Billy Crystal. Even with a GODFATHER parody, though, the
movie never really manages to muster any true comedy. 
Instead, it plays out like to A-list actors goofing around. It's easy to
see that Crystal and De Niro are having fun, but the real question is
whether or not the audience is having fun. And in this case, the answer
is: not as much as they should have. 

Author
Robert Workman
The Happy Bastard's Quick Movie Review
How does one do a comedy focused on the mob?  Well, a few years ago,
there was a sly little comedy called The Freshman, which had Marlon
Brando doing a romp of a send-up of his famous Don Corleone character
and, recently, the utterly stupid (in a bad way) movie Mafia! failed to
really get the joke.  This time around, however, Warner Bros. may have
gotten it right with Analyze This, a movie that hits its targets more
than it misses...and for plenty of reasons.
The story goes like this.  A mobster (Robert DeNiro) finds himself
receiving several panic attacks as of late, fueled by the stress of an
upcoming mobster meeting and a near-death following a drive-by shooting.
It's these attacks that prompt him to hire a psychiatrist (Billy
Crystal) who's mostly reluctant to take the mobster's case for two
reasons.  First, of course, he's a mobster, but secondly, he's trying to
get married and enjoy a quiet honeymoon with his wife (Lisa Kudrow) and
kid.  And, of course, he can't rest worth for a moment because the
mobster's goons are always needing the shrink for something, be it a
quick consultation or dream analyzation.
Fortunately, the movie is played out for plenty of laughs.  Director
Harold Ramis (who also helmed the comedy Multiplicity, which wasn't half
bad) keeps the tone peppy and light, even if it's sometimes sprinkled by
slight dramatic moments (shootings can't always be taken for laughs, you
know).  DeNiro does some of his finest comic work since The King of
Comedy, giving off a somewhat similar performance to his role in
Goodfellas, but with a bit of a lighter heart.  (A scene where he tries
to display his anger over the phone and fails miserably is hilarious.)
Crystal plays an excellent straight man to DeNiro's character, uplifting
him from such bombs as Father's Day and My Giant.  Kudrow is also a hoot
as Crystal's wife-to-be, who's on the verge of a breakdown thanks to
DeNiro's presence.
Is the movie perfect?  Not really, thanks to a simplistic ending and
some slightly wasted moments with a character portrayed by Chazz
Palminteri (he's a comic actor, too, come on, give him some more!), but
it is an enjoyable romp that lets DeNiro do something different but same
for a change, taking his dramatic act to a new field of comedy.  Kudos
to Crystal and Kudrow for not just making it his show, either.
Line of the movie: Crystal: "When you said you needed family therapy,
this is NOT the family I had in mind!"

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
Last year's mob comedy MAFIA! didn't work very well, due to lack of a
smart script and good acting. Harold Ramis' ANALYZE THIS works in all
the ways that MAFIA!  doesn't.  ANALYZE THIS tells the story of Long
Island shrink Ben Sobel(Billy Crystal), who one day gets into a car
accident with a mobster nicknamed Jelly(Joe Viterelli) and the trunk
pops open, exposing a half-dead, tied up man. "You didn't see
nothing," Jelly assures him. Jelly's Don, Paul Vitti(Robert De Niro),
keeps having panic attacks, and expresses the need to see a shrink to
discuss "his friend." Jelly tells him about the one he ran into, and
Vitti pays him a visit. Vitti seems to be losing his gangster
mentality.  He cries at corny commercials and can't find the will to
kill a person anymore. Vitti becomes so obsessed with becoming sane
that he follows Sobel to Florida, where he is supposed to wed
Laura(Lisa Kudrow).
If put in the hands of other filmmakers, ANALYZE THIS would become a
mess.  But director Ramis(GROUNDHOG DAY) keeps things light, and gets
great performances from both leads. Billy Crystal has found a role
wothy of his comic presence, but the one who steals the show is
undoubtedly De Niro. The greatest actor of all time in my opinion, De
Niro shows an gives an exceptionally funny performance. In the film,
he seems to be reprising all the mob characters he's ever played, and
for that reason, De Niro's Vitti didn't need to be a very developed
character, just a funny guy.  ANALYZE THIS also gives viewers the
first chance(I think) to watch De Niro cry. Oh, if only word got out
to the Corleone family... There is nothing groundbreaking about
ANALYZE THIS, but it features a performance that any De Niro fan
should seek out.


Author
John Carroll
John Carroll
Editor/Critic for The Movie Page (http://moviepage.hypermart.net/)
Review of ANALYZE THIS
Analyze This, starring Robert DeNiro, Billy Crystal, Lisa Kudrow, Chazz
Palminteri, Bart Tangredi, Michael Straka, Joseph Rigano, Joe Viterelli,
Richard C. Castellano, Molly Shannon and Max Casella.  Directed by Harold
Ramis.  1999.
   After the buddy comedy Rush Hour, with Jackie Chan and Chris Tucker, Analyze
This was another chance to capitalize on this market.  Directed by Harold
Ramis, Analyze This is able to get similar laughs to Rush Hour, but just like
Rush Hour, Analyze This fails when it strays away from its main duo.
   Robert DeNiro and Billy Crystal play the double trouble team of Analyze
This, and I must admit, DeNiro in this type of comedy is very scary.  I was
skeptical, but DeNiro is able to salvage a slightly above average performance,
mainly because of Crystal's amazing comic wit.  The rest of the cast, aside
from Lisa Kudrow and Molly Shannon, are mainly unknown Italian actors, playing
Paul Vitti's (Robert DeNiro) associates.
   Analyze This is a very funny comedy at times.  And at other moments, it is
downright boring.  It starts off very dull by examining the life of Paul Vitti.
 However, a hilarious sequence between psychiatrist Ben Sobol (Billy Crystal)
and one of his patients, Caroline (Molly Shannon), gets Analyze This back on
the right track.  The interaction between DeNiro and Crystal gets downright
hilarious, with DeNiro being able to play upon his tough-guy image and still
get laughs.  Even better, he gets sensitive, and when that happens, Analyze
This becomes a downright laugh-riot.
   Lisa Kudrow never seems to find the right film.  No matter where she goes,
she still reminds everyone of Phoebe, from the popular TV series "Friends." 
Kudrow tries to surmise a new side of her comic mind by playing Ben Sobol's
wife-to-be, Laura MacNamara.  However, her character comes off stale.  She
plays the fiancee of Sobol, and is very upset and Paul Vitti becomes one of his
patients.  The only times when DeNiro and Crystal do not fully function is when
Kudrow gets in the way.
   Director Harold Ramis (Groundhog Day, Caddyshack, Animal House) adds this
comedy to his already populated list, and while it is definitely not the cream
of the crop, he has had far worst.  Ken Lonergan and Peter Tolan are credited
with the script, and while their interaction of Crystal and DeNiro is flawless,
they fail with Kudrow's character and the mob implication.  Kudrow never gets
any laughs, despite being paired with Crystal and DeNiro, a horrible feat to
say the least.  Also, whenever Vitti's fellow mobsters get involved, laughs are
usually dry.  One exception is Joe Viterelli, who plays Jelly, Paul Vitti's
right-hand man.  Jelly is sorely lacking in on-screen time, but when he does
show up, he always gets a laugh.
   1999 was a great year for comedies.  While Analyze This is not in the range
of Steve Martin's comic masterpiece, Bowfinger, Billy Crystal and Robert DeNiro
play off each other perfectly to deliver another solid comedy for everyone to
enjoy.
Final Verdict: B
The Movie Page- http://moviepage.hypermart.net/
Reviews, Previews, News and So Much More!

Author
Luke Buckmaster
ANALYZE THIS
Cast: Robert De Niro, Billy Crystal, Lisa Kudrow, Joe Viterelli, Richard
C. Castellano, Chazz Palminteri
Director: Harold Ramis
Screenplay: Peter Tolan and Harold Ramis and Ken Lonergan
Australian theatrical release: March 11, 1999
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
3 stars
Fans of Robert De Niro are not often given the chance to watch him act
silly, so I guess all the hip-hoola surrounding the release of Analyze
This is justified.  What doesn't seem so justified is the common
appraisal of the film's script. The only really clever idea that the
three screenwriter's have developed is a funny concept: a Mafia bigwig
looses his nerve, and seeks help from an untainted shrink. You can
probably guess the type of jokes that will fill the following 90
minutes, as De Niro and co-player Billy Crystal share opportunities to
mouth off.  The comedy between these two - and, I guess, the film's
overall success - relies heavily on dialogue.  It then comes as good
news that the dialogue is punchy and fun; the kind of which would take
writers hours to get the timing just right.
It must be said, then, that Analyze This finds a constant comedic beat,
the kind that the recent Waking Ned Devine severely lacked.  But in this
case, solidarity is both good and bad.  If you appreciate a couple of
the film's early jokes, you'll probably appreciate most of its later
ones.  Unfortunately, Analyze This takes precious few risks, so nothing
in it feels particularly involving.  However much like Rush Hour, the
chemistry between its two protagonists generates enough laughs and
memorable moments to make a pleasing film experience.
Paul Vitti (De Niro) is a powerful New York gangster, and is under
constant threat of assassination and prosecution.  His tough guy image
is jeopardized when Vitti loses his edge.  He becomes the victim of
anxiety attacks (in one amusing scene, he attempts to persuade a doctor
that he has had a heart attack), and even finds television ads as enough
of a reason to break down and cry.  Vitti realizes that he must cure
himself before his reputation shatters, so he seeks the help of
psychiatrist Ben Sobol (Crystal).  Sobol has a young son and a fiancée
(Lisa Kudrow) that he is about to marry, so naturally helping Vetti is
not one of his primary concerns.
Robert De Niro is fun to watch as the extravagant Vetti, although his
performance is not to be mistaken as an excellent one.  De Niro's part
is simplistic and two-dimensional (sort of like a cameo that lasts for
an entire film) but constantly entertaining.  Billy Crystal is the real
highlight here.  Crystal never lets his talent or experience overshadow
his charm, and in Analyze This he has all the energy of an actor trying
to make it big, and all the passion of man who's worked twenty rewarding
years.
The biting chemistry between De Niro and Crystal is, at its best, shrewd
and entertaining.  Like other "concept" films (such as Groundhog Day and
The Birdcage), the concept behind Analyze This is exaggerated and
developed into a full length film.  For those who have had enough of
sight comedies and satires, Analyze This might just bridge the gap
between intelligent and funny films, whilst making a new gap of its own:
a smart movie that doesn't take enough risks.


Author
Dennis Schwartz
ANALYZE THIS (director/writer: Harold Ramis; screenwriter: Peter
Tolan/Kenneth Lonergan; cinematographer: Stuart Dryburgh; cast: Robert
De Niro (Paul Vitti), Billy Crystal (Ben Sobel), Lisa Kudrow (Laura
MacNamara), Joe Viterelli (Jelly), Chazz Palminteri (Primo Sindone),
Molly Shannon (Caroline), 1999)
Another mob film. This one is a comedy, lampooning a mobster needing to
see a shrink because he gets panic attacks. It's a one joke movie that
quickly runs out of steam, as the cloying humor soon becomes insipid and
the comic situation turns out to be more ridiculous than funny. It's a
star vehicle effort, so if you like De Niro and Crystal, then you have a
chance of falling for the film's silly premise and not caring how inane
the dialogue is.
Paul Vitti (De Niro) is a wise guy (a clone of crime boss John Gotti),
he is the head of a New York crime family. He remembers as a child the
1957 Apalachin meeting in upstate NY, where all the crime families met
to decide how to divide up the country. Now the families call a meeting
for two weeks from now to figure out how they are going to survive.
Vitti's family is in a war with his arch rival Primo Sindone
(Palminteri), and he is stressed out about this and about the upcoming
mob meeting.
When one of Vitti's key men gets killed and he is trying to beat a
confession out of the the suspect they nab, Vitti finds that he is
unable to do it. To the rescue comes the unwitting psychoanalyst Dr. Ben
Sobel (Crystal). Vitti's strong-arm man, the likable giant, Jelly
(Viterelli), arranges for his boss and the shrink to meet and start the
sessions. He has two weeks to cure the mafia kingpin before the mob
meeting begins. The shrink is absolutely frightened of Vitti and wants
no part of it, which is a source for much of the film's early humor. The
timid, bearded Ben (to look the part of what a shrink is supposed to
look like), is getting married next week in Florida to Laura MacNamara
(Kudrow) and plans no consultations with patients for that period. But
Vitti tells the shrink he's great and he will be his analyst. When he
has another panic attack, he tells the shrink he's still not cured after
the first session and demands immediate service no matter the time or
place. Vitti even goes to Miami, rustles the shrink out of his hotel bed
and has some forced therapy take place.
>From here on the story has no place to go but downhill, the jokes
quickly fade, and the pacing of the film drags. The film is loaded with
sight gags, clashes of culture between the educated Jewish doctor and
the tough-guy Italians. There are many mafia type of jokes, stereotypes
of Italian gangsters, and many other routines about the mob that have
been seen in a host of other mob films. The film falls completely on its
face by the last scene, with Crystal imitating the mob's consillieri at
the family meeting. The scene wasn't funny, believable, or watchable. I
don't think the director knew how to end this satire with any
credibility. The film just ran out of one-liners and ways to be
irreverent to the mob, the F.B.I., and the psychoanalysts. At one point,
Crystal says about his profession, when he is asked by the gangsters to
be vague, that his profession has left him well-equipped to be
indeterminate.
This film has the potential to be late night staple on cable TV for well
into the future. The jokes might even seem funnier late at night. The
film just wasn't involving enough to work as drama, but if it's a few
laughs that you are after, then this film delivers. De Niro has a good
eye for parody and is the best thing about the film. Crystal seems to be
miscast. Viterelli and Kudrow add light touches of comedy in their
supporting roles. The funniest bit, I thought, was of De Niro crying
over a television commercial, thinking it was so much like his real-life
situation.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Walter Frith
As you might expect, when you put someone who is a movie star first
(Billy Crystal) and someone who is an actor first (Robert De Niro)
together, there is an odd chemistry that allows both individuals to
showcase their talent.  Robert De Niro is a true movie legend and a rare
commodity: a great actor who is also a movie star.  Billy Crystal is a
great movie star who can also act, but only superficially.  Finding a
balance in giving each other an equal opportunity to tell a story from
their own point of view is a test that could have easily failed those
involved with this production.  And aside from being whimsically off
beat, 'Analyze This' works because the strength of its leading
characters carries those who choose to be slackers.  It's not really
their fault because they're just written that way.
Director Harold Ramis ('Multiplicity', 'Stuart Saves His Family',
'Groundhog Day') directs his latest film with more of an emphasis on the
characters than on any other part of his film.  The first half of this
movie is uproariously funny but the second part suffers by comparison
and what allows me to give this movie a marginal recommendation is that
it runs a perfect length of 103 minutes.
Billy Crystal plays Dr. Ben Sobel, a divorced shrink who is about to be
married.  He has a teenage son and does what a lot of us do from time to
time on the job: let our minds wander.  He doesn't always pay full
attention to his patients and one encounter makes for a funny scene as
we realize that what we just saw didn't really happen, except in
Crystal's mind as he would really like to tell one of his clients what
to do about their silly problems.  His bride to be (Lisa Kudrow) is a
slightly neurotic news reporter in Florida who has just given up her
job.  But all is not rosy for Crystal as he is about to meet the person
that will make him the most nervous, mob boss Paul Vitti (Robert De
Niro).  Vitti has been having a problem with his authority lately.  In
his line of work, authority means killing another rival, literally, so
his inability to pull the trigger, combined with fits of crying, don't
help his cause.
He decides to check himself in for therapy and chooses Dr. Sobel after
the doctor and one of his associates have a minor traffic accident and
Dr. Sobel gives one of Vitti's men his business card.  A real gem of a
movie from 1990 entitled 'The Freshman' with Marlon Brando showcased
Brando lampooning himself from his role in 'The Godfather' and De Niro
does the same thing here.  Taking all of the mob parts he's played from
'The Godfather Part II', 'GoodFellas' and 'Casino', De Niro rolls them
all into one bundle and puts on a dunce cap and red nose (a figure of
speech, of course) and clowns around and has fun with this role.  His
character is always in control of his life in other ways but it's funny
to see him break down and cry at the sight of sentimental television
commercials.  De Niro also employs many of the characters that appeared
in minor roles in a lot of his gangster films and uses them here.  You
know, those actors whose face you know but you can't place the name
because of their lack of notoriety.
As for Billy Crystal, he is excellent in this film for two reasons.
First is his reaction to many funny moments such as the one where his
future father in law gives away his bride to him at the wedding and
politely threatens him in hilarious fashion (to the audience only) if
anything happens to his "little girl" if his involvement with the mob
hurts her in any way.  Crystal holds his own in most of the scenes with
De Niro and carries a good part of the film's climax as he's forced to
sit in as a make believe "consigliere" before Vitti's arrival at a major
meeting of crime bosses from all over the country.  The film includes a
rather small but mostly meaningful part played by Chazz Palminteri as a
ruthless crime boss who wants to rule the underworld all by himself by
killing off all of his hated rivals.
Ken Lonergan and Peter Tolan have fashioned an original screenplay that
cooks up some really outrageous scenes that are startlingly real in
their initial measures as pieces of comedy.  Who's to say something this
outrageous couldn't happen.  The writers make the classic and near fatal
mistake, however, of cramming all of the best jokes into the first
hour.  I would have preferred to see the film switched in tones and have
many of the jokes from the first half displayed in the second because if
the movie had been built up slowly rather than drop off the way it does,
we might have had a truly memorable comedy instead of a film that is
good when it should have been great.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Steve Rhodes
For today's cinematic feast, ANALYZE THIS, we assemble the finest
ingredients.  For one leading actor, we put in one of Hollywood's very
best actors, Robert De Niro, who has been nominated for 6 Oscars and won
two.  And for the other lead, we combine De Niro with one of America's
funniest comedians, Billy Crystal.  We locate some of the top supporting
actors, including Lisa Kudrow and Chazz Palminteri, to give extra
flavor.  For the chef, we use GROUNDHOG DAY's director, Harold Ramis,
who, working with other writing talents, also comes up with a hilarious
recipe.
Okay, so the right ingredients do not always produce a sumptuous meal.
Sometimes, they turn out incredibly bland (FATHER'S DAY) and other
times, stomach curdling indigestible (MY GIANT).  This time, however,
the meal from appetizers to dessert is a real treat.
Robert De Niro plays Paul Vitti (Mr. V. to you), a gangster with a
debilitating illness.  The head of one New York's crime families, as was
his father, Mr. V. suffers from anxiety or panic attacks that cause him
to break into tears, not something likely to instill fear and loyalty in
his men.  He even admits to having had trouble in bed once.  Well,
twice.  Maybe 3 times.  Actually, he doesn't want to discuss it.  What
he needs is a good shrink who can provide a quick cure -- he's currently
in the middle of a gang war with a family headed by Chazz Palminteri --
and can keep quiet about the treatment.
Mr. V. decides Ben Sobol (Billy Crystal) is just the psychiatrist for
him, even if a scared Ben wants nothing to do with him.  The chemistry
between the street-wise Mr. V. and the intellectual Ben is deliciously
funny.  "What is my goal here, to make you a happy, well-adjusted
gangster?" Ben asks rhetorically.
Not wanting to spend time at the bottom of the river with bricks in her
pockets, Ben reluctantly agrees to treat the gangster when he returns
from his honeymoon.  But before the marriage with his non-understanding
fiancée, played by Lisa Kudrow, Mr. V. keeps yanking Ben away to deal
with one emotional crisis after another.  De Niro and Crystal, who are
both at the top of their form in ANALYZE THIS, have great chemistry
together with both giving as good as he gets in the comedic battle of
the actor titans.  Ramis has the good sense to have them play the comedy
seriously, thus avoiding the overacting that a pure parody would have
likely created.
The best of the movie's sight gags comes in the wedding present that Mr.
V. sends the happy new couple.  A Vatican-sized fountain, complete with
flying horses spouting water, adorns -- actually, totally dominates --
the Sobol's front yard.  Later, Mr. V. will top even this lavish token
of his appreciation.
Some of the movie's best lines are unprintable.  One of these comes when
Mr. V. is explaining his problems with sexual dysfunction with his
girlfriend.  Ben asks, seriously, why Mr. V. needs a girlfriend since he
already has a wife.  De Niro, who has trouble keeping a straight face
with his answer, provides a rationale that most people have probably not
considered.
The mark of a well-rounded movie is whether the supporting cast is
offered as many good lines as the stars.  By that measure, ANALYZE THIS
is certainly a success.  A typically oddball line occurs when one of Mr.
V.'s guards, a flabby one appropriately named Jelly (Joe Viterelli),
goes out for sandwiches.  Jelly asks the other guard if he wants one
too.  "What kind of sandwich ain't too fattening?" the other guard asks.
"A half a sandwich," a never-weight-conscious Jelly replies in disgust.
Between warring gangs and investigating members of the OCD (not
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder as Ben surmises but Organized Crimes
Division), Ben tries to keep his head while all about him are losing
theirs.  When Mr. V. goes into another of his crying fits at an
unpropitious moment, Ben counsels him, "It's time to turn all of that
nice grief into a murderous rage."
Comedies, even the best ones, frequently fizzle in the end, as happened
in the recent OFFICE SPACE.  With melodramas, the conclusion is usually
central to the narrative, but not so when it comes to humorous stories.
ANALYZE THIS manages to find a way to resolve the story's conflicts in a
manner that is both satisfying and unusual -- a nice cap to a sweet
comedy.
ANALYZE THIS runs 1:45.  It is rated R for profanity, brief sexuality
and comic violence and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   There may still be some people out there who think that
you've got to be crazy to see a psychiatrist.  Not so long ago
a guy named Eagleburger was dropped from the vice
presidential ticket because he had visited a shrink.  But
anyone with a semblance of education knows that we all
have problems and that people who seek help are probably
the most stable of us all.  No wonder, then, that convicted
killers talk out their feelings only on the day they are to be
executed.  You'd never expect a member of the Mob to go on
the couch purely on his own volition, and since comedy is
often dependent for laughs on unexpected occurrences that
look silly (slipping on a banana peel, for example), a movie
like "Analyze This" should have no problems getting laughs. 
When a nationally known gangster weepingly pours out his
problems to a reluctant psychiatrist, the stage is set for
chuckles. 
   "Analyze This" does get its share of chortles.  With one of
America's great comics, Billy Crystal, in the role of a
frightened shrink who is forced to blend in with members of
Organized Crime, how could it not?  The trouble is that
Robert De Niro, so suited for roles as sociopaths ("Taxi
Driver," ""The Godfather Part II," "Mean Streets"), is about as
convincing in the part of a vulnerable, whimpering mafioso as
Kenneth Branagh was as a clone of Woody Allen in
"Celebrity."  Casting De Niro with a comic constitution makes
as much sense as posting Billy Crystal as "Henry V."
   The story takes off after Dr. Ben Sobel (Billy Crystal)
accidentally rear-ends the car of a mafioso, Jelly (Joe
Viterelli), exposing a man who is tied up in its trunk.  He
hands his business card to Jelly (Joe Viterelli) who, in turn,
recommends that his boss, Paul Vitti (Robert De Niro),
contact the psychiatrist about anxiety attacks he had
experienced.  Their sessions together take on comic import
because the talking cure works only if the patient is educated,
liberal, and open-minded--everything that Vitti is not.
Alternately threatening his doctor and praising him ("You've
got a gift...yes you do...YES YOU DO!"), Vitti is at first
disappointed that his anxiety is not relieved in just ten
minutes, but ultimately the doctor is able to use both his
Freudian background and his ability to improvise to
successfully turn the gangster's life around.
   "Analyze This" is filled with standard psychiatrist jokes
together with some insights into Freudian thinking that would
sound tiresome to those who know, mind-boggling to those
who do not.  Take Ben Sobel's explanation of the Oedipal
conflict to a baffled new patient.  Guessing that Paul Vitti
unconsciously wanted to kill his father and have sex with his
mother, Vitti retorts incredulously, "Have you seen my
mother?"  Later he reports that he's afraid even to call his
mom after what the doctor had told him.
   The picture is anything but a rout, however, because the
masterful Billy Crystal shows his mettle as a stand-up comic
able to conform to romantic and other situations with his
stock of surprises.  He is at his best (as in "When Harry Met
Sally") when reacting to the demands of those he is with. In
the movie's choice scene, he is required to don a $1200 suit
and blend in with a score of gangsters at a Mafia summit
meeting.  Watching his mentor Jelly, he proceeds to throw his
arms around large and scary mobsters and kiss them on
each cheek.  In one such cuddle he mumbles "Easter
Weekend" to a gangster--apropos of nothing.  Crystal
succeeds as well in holding on to his fiance Laura (Lisa
Kudrow) even after Jelly has caused a disruption in their
Miami marriage ceremony--while fending off threats by his
patient's rival, Primo Sindone (Chazz Palminteri).
   Director Harold Ramis has proved himself in working with
comedy troupes that included Bill Murray, John Belushi and
Gilda Radner.  He is best known for directing lowbrow
comedies with box office appeal, such as "Meatball,"
"Caddyshack," and "National Lampoon's Vacation."  This time
he has raised his sights a few notches, elevating his material
with psychoanalytic terminology  This is a dependable idea
considering the top-notch comedian he is working with.  A
bad film featuring Crystal has not been made.  See it to
admire the talents of this master comedian and forget the
many ways that crackerjack actor Robert De Niro is
compelled to embarrass himself.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Paul Vitti (Robert DeNiro) is the head of one of New York City's
two biggest crime families.  But he is losing his drive.  He is beating
people up less and he is feeling their pain more.  For no apparent
reason he will start crying. (The head of a crime family beats people
up himself????  Why does this not seem very likely?)  He decides he
needs good psychiatric help, but he must keep it secret since seeing a
psychiatrist would be seen as a sign of weakness.  Through an odd chain
of events he chooses analyst Ben Sobel (Billy Crystal).  But the last
thing Sobel wants is one of New York's most notorious criminals as a
patient.  Nor does Sobel know how to treat Vitti.  A psychiatrist works
by getting and holding the upper hand over his patient.  No matter what
a patient does the psychiatrist must always be in control of the
situation.  With Vitti he is dealing with a man who is also expert at
control, even if he needs a gun to maintain it.  The two of them begin
a battle for control of their sessions.  It is a struggle that should
have been more interesting than it was.
     But his doctor is not the only opponent that Vitti is battling.
He is in a cold war with Primo Sindone (Chazz Palminteri), the head of
New York's other major crime family.  And Sobel may become a pawn in
the conflict.  At the most inconvenient times suddenly Sobel will be
summoned to have a silly psychiatric session with Vitti.  It is a gag
repeated as many times as is necessary to fill out the length of the
film.  Writing which is very funny in the first part of the film is
wasted in a film which has much sparser and less funny gags in its
second and third.  This film could have done more with the doctor-
patient relationship, but settles for pop psychology and an instant
miracle cure.  It could have done more with the crime plot, but it
settles for something hackneyed and overly cliched.
     What is curious about the film is that the acting is way below
anybody's standards.  Robert DeNiro coasts along as the gangster, a
part he could play in his sleep.  What gives Vitti potential as a
character is that he has emotional problems, but DeNiro is not used to
playing emotional problems of this sort. When he cries in front of the
camera it is like amateur night tryouts for the Actors' Studio.  His
touch at comedy is only marginally better.  Billy Crystal is again the
nice-guy, sincere, New York Jew he always plays, only this time he
plays it as a psychiatrist.  This would have been a far more engaging
film if on Day One DeNiro and Crystal would have just looked at each
other, said "not this role again," and then traded roles.  Lisa Kudrow
is capable or more but plays a bewildered third wheel in the grand
tradition of Terry Garr.  She should never have settled for such a
tangential role.  More interesting are the character roles of Joe
Viterelli as the bodyguard Jelly and Chazz Palminteri is his usual
riveting character.
     Many of the jokes really are funny, but again most are in the
first half of the film.  There are also some interesting allusions to
crime films, both in the dialog and visually.  But the script by Ken
Lonergan and Peter Tolan is not content to simply have many of the
allusions, it must tell the viewer about them so that they are not
missed.  It sacrifices subtlety.  Overall this averages out to being a
decent comedy, but it was capable of being much more.  I rate it a 6 on
the 0 to 10 scale and a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Curtis Edmonds
by Curtis Edmonds -- blueduck@hsbr.org
The joke goes like this:  What do you get when you cross a lawyer and a
mobster?  Someone who makes you an offer you can't understand.
What do you get when you cross a psychiatrist with a mobster?  Well,
instead of a clever punch line, you get Analyze This, with Billy Crystal as
the neurotic psychiatrist and Robert DeNiro as his patient, a gangland
leader suffering from anxiety attacks and difficulties in managing his
inner rage.  It's a cross between genres -- Goodfellas meets What About
Bob? -- and a cross between a legitimately funny movie and a dull, lifeless
plodding mess.  (Which makes it a double-cross, sort of.)
Analyze This is one of those movies where you don't need character
development.  Crystal is the same character here that he plays in his best
movies -- City Slickers, let's say, and Throw Momma From the Train -- an
ordinary, wise-ass schmuck carried on by circumstances he can't control.
DeNiro, on the other hand, plays his part like a cartoon character of his
previous performances.  (To be charitable, this is probably the best he can
do in a script that has him bawling at Merrill Lynch commercials.)  The
script even does us the favor of having Crystal recognize DeNiro from TV,
so their relationship doesn't need to go through the initial development
stage, either.
The good part of the movie -- the only good part of the movie -- is the
banter between Crystal and DeNiro.  It's sharp, funny dialogue between two
master actors.  It's great to see how they challenge each other, how they
try to outdo each other, and how they manage to make it funny.  At one
point, Crystal, in a hurry to get DeNiro out of his vacation, offers to see
him exclusively.  DeNiro considers this:  "You want me to clear your
schedule for you?"
And the whole movie is like that.  Crystal tries to use psychology to
control DeNiro, DeNiro tries to use force to control Crystal... it's a
great comic tug-of-war, and it makes Analyze This worth seeing, or at least
renting.
Analyze This forces us to ask the question:  What has happened to the
American comedy?  Can we make comedies in America anymore?  Have we lost
our comic heritage?  If Analyze This is the best comedy of the year -- and
it may well be -- is there hope for movie comedies, or must the comedy
genre disappear over the horizon like the Western?.
Think about it.  We're making three kinds of comedies in America right
now:  the Tom Hanks/Meg Ryan romantic comedies, the teenage gross-out
comedies, and Eddie Murphy comedies.  That's it.  Robin Williams and Jim
Carrey are busy doing introspective special effects movies, Steve Martin
and Bill Murray are doing small parts in smaller movies nowadays, and Mel
Brooks has dropped off the face of the earth.  The funniest actor working
in Hollywood right now may very well be Jackie Chan.  Think about it.
Because real comedies like Analyze This and In and Out and The Big Lebowski
are so rare these days, it's sad to see what happens when they fail.
Analyze This fails because it can't go far beyond the pairing of its two
top characters.  There's nothing to link the conversations between Crystal
and DeNiro together.  Half the movie is Crystal being pulled away from
whatever it is he's doing to have another conversation with DeNiro.  It's
almost as if Crystal is a yo-yo and the only suspense in the movie is how
far he will be able to get away before DeNiro tugs on his string again.
Although the movie elicits a good supporting performance from Joe Viterelli
as DeNiro's messenger, it wastes performances from Lisa Kudrow and Chazz
Palminteri as Crystal's fiancee and DeNiro's rival, respectively.
There's nothing really wrong with Analyze This.  It's a decent enough
comedy with two great comic actors strutting their stuff.  It's got a few
laughs, here and there, which is great.  The problem is that there aren't
enough laughs, anywhere, and that's a problem that one movie can't solve by
itself.

Author
Christian Pyle
When mob boss Paul Vitti (Robert De Niro) has a panic attack, he seeks therapy
from psychiatrist Ben Sobol (Billy Crystal); hilarity ensues.  Director Harold
Ramis' new comedy "Analyze This" has lots of fun with this premise as the very
different worlds of Paul and Ben collide.  There are subplots to keep the plot
moving:  Paul is about to be rubbed out by a rival gangster (Chazz Palminteri);
Ben is about to marry Lisa Kudrow.
The plot is interestingly similar to HBO's new series, "The Sopranos."  There,
also, a mob boss has a panic attack and starts seeing a therapist.  While "The
Sopranos" aspires to realism, "Analyze This" offers a cartoonish sketch of the
mob.  
However, despite its distance from reality, "Analyze This" is great fun.  De
Niro obviously enjoys the self-parody in playing a comic gangster (I wonder if
Brando got the same charge out of "The Freshman").  Although he rarely does
comedies, De Niro has considerable comic skills.  His Paul Vitti is as funny
when he's vulnerable as he is when he's threatening.
Crystal's job is to react to the outrageous actions of Vitti and his
slow-witted henchman Jelly (Joe Viterelli).  (In this regard, the De
Niro-Crystal interplay is something like Crystal's scenes with Jack Palance in
"City Slickers").  Actually, that's our job, too-and there's plenty to laugh
at:  Ben rear-ends a mob car, and the trunk pops open to reveal a man
bound-and-gagged; Ben's wedding is interrupted by a man being thrown off a
balcony; Ben has to represent Paul at a mob conference.  As a general rule, I
don't like Crystal's movies-too soppy for my tastes-but I laughed long and loud
during "Analyze This."  
Š 1999 Christian L. Pyle
">http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Christian+Pyle>

Author
Kleszczewski, Nicholas
When cinema's history books are written, Robert De Niro would definitely go
down as one of this generation's greatest actors.  Great as he is, however,
he won't be noted for his versatility.  A cursory look at his filmography
shows him typecast as (A) a mafioso/hoodlum (_Taxi Driver_, _GoodFellas_),
(B) ordinary schmoe (_Deer Hunter_, _Falling in Love_), or (C) comic
personality (_Brazil_, _Midnight Run_).  Shakespeare, he isn't.  
_Analyze This_, to my memory, is the first film he's made where he tries to
reconcile all three personality types in one film.  He's a tough
gangster-type, who really is an ordinary schmoe, only to a comic extreme.  
De Niro plays Paul Vitti, a tough mob boss who is starting to get panic
attacks, days before a huge mafia "convention."  He secretly pulls himself
to a psychiatrist (Billy Crystal) who is terrified to get involved, and who
is planning to get married that week.  Complications ensue.  Hilarity is
blueprinted.  The comic apex is how De Niro totally breaks down and cries
like a baby in these sessions.
You'd think De Niro could pull it off.  Not quite.  The result is terribly
disorienting.  The opening scenes have him playing "Mr. Tough Guy," but
later, we see he's _really_ somebody who has panic attacks and low
self-image.  Sure, it's funny, but it leaves a sour aftertaste.  Are these
two caricatures from the same person?  I'm pretty good at suspending belief,
but this I just don't buy.  
Worse off, there's no real logical impetus as to why Vitti is getting
scared, around now.  He's had to deal with his adversaries his whole life,
and certainly the fear that he would be killed by an assassin's bullet at
any given moment carries far more tension than facing a competing
mafioso-boss (Chazz Palminteri).  And is there any guilt within him, for all
the crimes he's committed in the past?  No.
Because I can't accept this premise, the movie collapses.  Simple as that.
Billy Crystal tries hard, but face it.  This is a role _anybody_ could play.
He's just the straight-man here, being continually usurped by De Niro and
occasionally funny dialogue from his patients.  
Did you know Lisa Kudrow is in this film?  Wasted.  Bill Macy?  Wasted.
Molly Shannon?  I don't even remember who she played.  A cameo from Tony
Bennett?  Been there, done that, burned the t-shirt.
The film's saving grace is played by heavyweight (literally) Joe Viterelli.
In perhaps the most understated performance in the film, he singlehandedly
is both menacing and endearingly comic, moreso than De Niro.  He gets the
laughs, and doesn't have to change his character to do it.
In summary, AT has a few laughs going for it, but if you're lucky, you've
seen them in the previews.  Previews are good like that.  They rat-tat-tat
the jokes and the assumption is that the film would do the same for the
entire two hours.  They don't carry the burden of actually making sense.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Analyze This (1999)
Robert De Niro, Billy Crystal, Lisa Kudrow, Joe Viterelli, Richard C. 
Castellano, Chazz Palminteri, Bill Macy. Screenplay by Peter Tolan and 
Harold Ramis and Ken Lonergan. Directed by Harold Ramis. 105 minutes.
Rated R, 3.5 stars
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com 
Let's get the basics out of the way. "Analyze This" is a very funny film. 
The raucous tale of a New York mob boss seeking therapy from a reluctant 
psychiatrist contains a number of mistakes (I'll carp about those in a 
minute), but still delivers big laughs on a consistent basis. Robert De 
Niro is wonderful, taking his classic gangster persona and giving it just 
enough of a twist to make the humor work. As for Billy Crystal, this film 
marks the first time in several years where I didn't have an overwhelming 
desire to climb into the screen and strangle him. For me, that's saying a 
lot.  
You see, Billy Crystal owes me, for stealing precious hours from my life 
with crap like "Forget Paris," "City Slickers 2," "Fathers' Day" and last 
year's wretched "My Giant," not to mention the numerous times he tortured 
me while hosting the Academy Awards, parroting a seemingly endless stream 
of tired Borscht-belt gags while smirking as if he'd just invented the 
fucking wheel (pardon the crudeness - - I'm simply trying to get you in 
right mood for the obscenity-laced movie). Thankfully, Crystal tones it 
down here. By the time, late in the story, where he finally does break 
into shtick, it's relatively easy to tolerate.
"Analyze This" brings together two wildly separate subcultures when 
mobster Paul Vitti (De Niro) enters the life of psychiatrist Ben Sobol 
(Crystal). Suffering from frequent panic attacks and crying jags, a real 
hindrance to an underworld kingpin, Vitti demands the full attention of 
Sobol, and if that means interrupting the therapist's wedding or sending 
a thug into the shrink's bedroom, so be it.
The production was directed and co-written by Harold Ramis (best known as 
the freakiest member of the "Ghostbusters"), a man with a real gift for 
crowd-pleasing comedies, including "Meatballs," "Caddyshack" and the 
bittersweet "Stuart Saves His Family." At his best, as in "Groundhog Day,
" Ramis can inject a nice message into a high-concept premise without 
diluting the comedy. At his worst ("Multiplicity"), he takes one joke and 
beats it to death.
"Analyze This" is one of his better efforts. Eschewing any messages or 
morals, Ramis simply goes for the laughs this time around and, for the 
most part, gets them. De Niro, parodying his many mob roles, plays a 
great steamroller of a man, trying to maintain his gangland machismo even 
while his emotions run rampant. De Niro takes risks with his performance. 
He doesn't just bawl, he blubbers, and his early crying jags come 
perilously close to overacting. But later, even while making the same 
ludicrous wailing noises, the great actor uses subtle changes in 
expression to effectively convey the genuine pain his character is 
feeling. A great deal of the humor comes from his awkward efforts to 
cooperate with the therapeutic process. In one scene, he acknowledges 
that he had considered rubbing out a key character, then helpfully adds 
"but I was feeling very conflicted about it." 
Had Ramis dug a little deeper, the comedy would have been more resonant. 
Even with suitable henchman (including a great turn from Joe Viterelli as 
Vitti's thick, lumbering sidekick), Ramis' portrayal of the mobsters is 
too superficial. Chazz Palminteri, playing Vitti's arch rival, is little 
more than a cardboard cut-out. 
The characters on Crystal's side don't fare much better. Lisa Kudrow, who 
gets better with each film, is given scant screen time (she makes every 
line count though, including one where she deliciously sneers "Oh great, 
my wedding is ruined because you have problems!"). Subplots involving her 
menacing father, as well as Crystal's dad, a neglectful pop psychology 
writer, are introduced but never revisited. And the genuinely sweet 
relationship between Crystal and his son deserves far more attention than 
it is given.
The film's biggest liability, though, is its timing. Just weeks ago, HBO 
introduced "The Sopranos," a brilliant new series about modern-day 
mobsters prominently featuring scenes between a crime-lord and his 
therapist. The show covers the same turf as "Analyze This," including the 
gallows humor, but with far greater depth, richness and elan. So my 
recommendation is as follows: enjoy "Analyze This" for what it is, then 
turn on "The Sopranos" and savor a great show exploring similar themes 
with far more success and, thank God, without Billy Crystal.

Author
Ross Anthony
I gotta tell you, I was preparing to wince. I mean the previews didn't look
too promising and the ad in the paper made the two top name actors look like
they were pleading for our forgiveness for making such a stupid movie. And
De Niro, I just didn't know if I was ready to see a film hero make a fool of
himself.
My premonitions were all in vain. "Analyze This" is a respectably funny
piece of work. Crystal was as good as ever, and De Niro didn't let me
down -- even when he cried like a big thug baby. In fact, I'm very impressed
with him for taking that kind of risk (and also for not making a buffoon of
himself). Who else could have played the part of a Mafioso gang boss gone
all mushy funnier than an actor that we all hold with such high and hardened
wise-guy esteem?
I think you know the story, gangland boss Paul Vitti (De Niro) goes soft
(under more than one type of situation) so he hires (loosely kidnaps) a
shrink (Billy Crystal) to put his head back together. Wonderfully neurotic
Lisa Kudrow plays Billy's wife to be.
As I left the theater, I overheard a couple discussing the film ... "It was
good, but not great." Be that as it may, let me tell you -- not only did I
laugh a lot, but I went home with a nagging desire to play a Tony Bennett or
Louis Prima CD.
Starring Robert De Niro and Billy Crystal. Directed by Harold Ramis. Rated
R.
Produced by Paula Weinstein and Jane Rosenthal at Village Roadshow/Warner
Brothers.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Jerry Saravia
This is a mob movie parody that actually delivers more laughs per minute than
most straight comedies. "Analyze This" is a pleasurable movie experience, and a
real hoot; a grandly hysterical comedy that pokes fun at all the expected mob
cliches, and is guaranteed to offend everyone (including some mobsters). 
Billy Crystal stars as a psychiatrist, Ben Sobel, who offers therapy to
divorcees and couples. One day, he has an accidental fender bender with a
mobster's car - Crystal offers his business card in case the guy changes his
mind about filing a suit. "Forget about it. I said forget about it," snarls
Jelly, the mobster (Joe Viterelli). Of course, Jelly does not forget when he
notices that his boss, Paul Vitti (Robert De Niro), is suffering from headaches
and is not performing up to par on the job. After all, he's Don Vitti, one of
the major crime bosses in New York City. 
Jelly suggests that Paul visit the psychiatrist. Once he's there, the Don
intimidates Ben by telling him that he didn't see his face in the papers and
doesn't know him. Ben agrees but his life turns upside down when he starts to
counsel Paul. Analyze This steals ever narrative device you can imagine from
classic mob films like "The Godfather," "GoodFellas," and "Casino." There's the
voice-over delivered by De Niro, the typical mob kisses and hugs, shoot-outs in
restaurants, several comical "whackings", and Tony Bennett songs playing all
the while. All of this is done with style and grace. 
Just as graceful and ingratiating as ever is De Niro, a proven potent comic
force ("We're No Angels" and "The King of Comedy") who steals every scene he's
in. He mugs mercilessly and whimpers incessantly - there's one touching scene
where he sobs over his father's death. De Niro is as fit, trimmed, and handsome
as he was in "Casino" - no wonder he originally wanted Martin Scorsese to
direct. 
Billy Crystal has been on the sentimental bandwagon ever since "City Slickers,"
but here he learns a vital lesson: less is more. With a bespectacled look and a
curly beard, Crystal lightens up the screen with his pleasing charm and nuanced
timing. He learned the great trick - to pause with a glance before delivering
the punch line. Here he is pitch-perfect in one of his most memorable screen
roles to date. Crystal's last scene as he mimics a swaggering, posturing
Italian mafioso will leave you incredulous with laughter. 
Unfortunately, there is one major flaw: the casting of Lisa Kudrow as Laura,
Ben's fiancee who keeps getting interrupted at every wedding opportunity by
Paul's henchmen. Kudrow does well, but isn't given enough to do. This is a real
shame, considering there could have been some winning byplay between De Niro
and Kudrow, but the three or four writers listed seemed to have nixed the idea
of supplying more than one scene between them. Still, there are enough comic
zingers, one-liners, and subtle humor to compensate. Besides, you have the prim
Chazz Palminteri as the rival mob boss, Primo Sindrone. 
"Analyze This" may not be great shakes or worthy of being placed in the annals
of great comedy classics, but it is as satisfying and entertaining as any other
comedy I've seen as of late. And that's that. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or
at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Ryan Davis
        Robert De Niro's been in such brilliant films as `The
Deer Hunter,' `Taxi Driver,' `GoodFellas,' and
`Raging Bull.' He usually portrays cold and apathetic characters
that if they show emotion at all, it's rarely, if ever,
humorous. While he remains one of the best actors alive, his attempts
at comedy haven't always worked, remember Mad Dog and Glory? But
more recently he has shown a turnaround, following up the excellent
`Wag the Dog' with this, his newest, `Analyze This.'
`Analyze This' is from talented writer/director Harold Ramis,
the man behind such comedy classics as Animal House, Caddyshack,
Ghostbusters, and many more funny films. He employs a great cast and
leads Billy Crystal, De Niro, and Lisa Kudrow to unusually good
performances for a comedy. The script is not as sharp as it could be,
the material has to be stretched out a little too much, but the actors
cover well for the faults. The film revolves around Paul Vitti (De
Niro), a middle aged mobster who is having trouble dealing with all
the stress in his life. He is having a mob war with a rival family
headed by Primo Sindone (Chazz Palminteri) which is leading to all
this extra stress in his life.  Paul begins to have panic attacks,
which distract him from his work.  Completely by accident Paul bumps
into Dr. Ben Sobel (Crystal), a psychiatrist, whom he recruits to be
his personal `head doctor.'
        While Ben doesn't think this is a good idea, he isn't
given much choice in the matter. He becomes an employee of
Mr. Vitti's. When Ben goes on vacation to Mimi to get married, Paul
packs his bags and follows him to Florida. Ben's fiancée, Laura
played nicely by Kudrow, doesn't like the idea of her soon-to- be
husband having mob ties.  But it's not over yet because Ben is
about to get tangled in the middle of a FBI investigation.
`Analyze This' is a fairly original film and while it provides
only a few big belly laughs it keeps your smiling and laughing most of
the way through. De Niro makes the movie with his overemotional
gangster, stealing every scene he's in. But Crystal holds his own
with his best performance in recent memory. All in all an
entertaining, funny film worth seeing.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
David Nusair
Starring Robert DeNiro, Billy Crystal, Lisa Kudrow
When I originally saw the trailer for "Analyze This" a few months ago, I
must admit, I thought it looked kind of lame.  And then when the
commercials started popping up a week or two ago, I thought it looked
outright bad.  But then when "Analyze This" finally opened a few days ago,
an odd thing happened.  It got great reviews.  Critics were proclaiming it
"hilarious" and a "dead-on parody of mob movies".  Well, with praise like
that, I figured, it must be good and so I headed off to the theater.  You
know that expression that says always trust your gut instincts?  Well,
turns out that expression is more valid than I ever gave it credit for.
"Analyze This" is slow, unfunny, and badly acted.  Don't get me wrong, I
think that DeNiro is one of the top ten greatest actors of the century,
but he is just out of his league here.  I think the problem is he didn't
quite know how to approach this material.  He plays his character, mob
boss Paull Vitti, somewhere in between the realm of comedy and drama.  If
he had played the character straight, along the lines of Leslie Nielson in
the "Naked Gun" series, he probably would have been a lot more successful. 
As it is, though, he plays the character completely serious at some
moments, and for laughs at others.  This doesn't work.  It creates
an uneven character that never breaks out of the DeNiro mold; you always
know it's him.
And the movie is badly paced, too.  It never takes off.  It just crawls
from one scene to another without any forward momentum.  I think the blame
for this should be placed on the script.  It's obvious the writer had a
good idea for a movie, mob boss faces breakdown and needs the services of a
psychiatrist, but once this is established, the movie doesn't really go
anywhere.  The formula of the film seems to be this:  Billy Crystal says
no to DeNiro, DeNiro forces him, and much wackiness ensues.  This formula
of sorts is repeated several times throughout the movie.
I've said it before and I'll say it again:  The only thing that matters to
me in a comedy is whether or not it's funny.  If "Analyze This" had been
funny, the pacing and bad acting wouldn't have bothered me.  I would have
been too busy laughing to notice.  But as it is, I only chuckled a few
times.  The only really funny scene is a dead-on parody of "The
Godfather".  Sadly, though, I don't think anyone in the audience I saw it
with realized it was a parody, because I was the only one laughing.
But my sense of humour, I have come to realize, is vastly different from
the general population.  I loathed "There's Something About Mary", yet
loved "BASEketball".  Now, if you want a movie that *I* think is funny, go
out and see "Office Space".  It's full of genuine laughs and won't leave
you glancing at your watch every 10 minutes, as "Analyze This" did.
-- 
David Nusair                                http://chat.carleton.ca/~dnusair"As I have pointed out before, Andre Rousimoff's portrayal of a giant in
"The Princess Bride", Richard Dawson's portrayal of an obnoxious game show
host in "The Running Man", and Courtney Love's portrayal of a junkie hooker
in "The People vs Larry Flynt"."
        -R. Wiley on the all-time biggest Oscar snubs

Author
Aaron Michaels
Directed by Harold Ramis. Written by Peter Tolan, Ramis & Ken Lonergan.
Running time: 106 minutes. Rated R (for language, a scene of sexuality
and some violence).
Analyze This stars Robert De Niro and Chazz Palminteri who have both
used up a good amount of their film careers playing mobsters. It just
seems to be the characters they are offered. This time around they get
to put a little satire into the mix to produce one funny mobster
picture.
Ben Sobol (Billy Crystal) is a psychiatrist who is having a tough time
in life. He can't stand how pathetic and uninteresting the people who
come to his office are. His son spends all his time listening in on his
conferences with the patients also. The only bright spot in his life is
his upcoming marriage to his girlfriend Laura (Lisa Kudrow).
Don Paul Vitti (Robert De Niro) is also having a tough time. He is
having problems with anxiety attacks and crying at sappy TV commercials.
This is horrible because people can't be afraid of a crying mobster. He
calls upon Ben to cure him. This messes up Ben's wedding plans and turns
his life
upside down.
Robert De Niro does a wonderful job playing his usual mobster character
with a twist. His crying scenes caught me very off guard and got quite a
few laughs. Billy Crystal also does a good job and redeems himself after
My Giant and City Slickers 2: The Search For Curly's Gold.
Director/Co-Writer Harold Ramis does a fine job highlighting many scenes
and not over doing them. He has done this before with the very good
pictures Groundhog Day and Caddyshack. Other directors would have
overused the comedy or gangster parts of the movie and seem lopsided,
but Ramis balances them very well. The pacing of the film is also very
well done and the film is over before you know it.
The film does however overuse a couple of scenes dealing with the FBI
trying to track down Vitti. This type of sub-plot has been used over and
over again for a long time. Also the film, although has a good many
solid laughs, isn't hysterically funny like Ramis past pictures. Maybe
it was hard to make
more fun of the mobster business though.
Analyze This is a fine comedy that, although a little predictable at
times, does offer some comedy greats teaming together and is quite
enjoyable.

Author
DeWyNGaLe
For years, Robert DeNiro has played mob bosses in some of my favorite
films of all time.  Now, in Analyze This, he is playing the same role,
in a very different way.  DeNiro plays Paul Vitti, a mob boss with a
problem.  His emotions bring him down.  He suffers anxiety attacks,
one after another.  Whenever he kills someone, let alone hurt their
feelings, he breaks down.  He cannot stand to watch people be upset or
suffer.  Worrying about his health, he sees a doctor to learn nothing
is wrong with his heart.  DeNiro decides he is going to see a
psychiatrist to help him with his problems.  The psychiatrist he sees
is Ben, played by Billy Crystal.  Ben is very scared to have Paul
Vitti as a patient, considering Paul is one of the most feared and
famous mob bosses in world.  Ben is getting ready to be wed to Laura,
played by the hilarious Lisa Kudrow.
Seeing Ben, Paul gains a lot from very little.  It doesn't take much
to please Paul at all.  Some very funny sequences occur when Ben and
Paul are talking about Paul's problem.  Ben is trying very hard to get
to the core of the problem with Ben.  He thinks that it has a lot to
do with the death of his dad, who was also a famed mob boss.  As Paul
and Ben see each other more and more, Paul needs Ben more and more.
Paul will hunt down Ben anytime of the day, anywhere, including Ben's
wedding, to find him and get help with the emotions he is feeling at
that moment.
Robert DeNiro's talent has gone to waste in this film.  DeNiro is one
of today's best actors, and his performances are always top notch.  It
was in Analyze This as well, but unfortunately, he wasn't given a
whole lot to work with.  Robert DeNiro needs to choose his films more
wisely, and not take part in films that are going to waste him.  Billy
Crystal is really in a slump.  In his past few films, he has been
horrible.  In Analyze This, he isn't bad, but he certainly isn't back
to where he used to be.  His talent was also wasted in the film.
Lisa Kudrow's talent was also totally wasted in the movie.  She was
hardly in the film at all, and when she was she didn't get any funny
lines.  Kudrow has a lot of potential as a hysterical person, and she
will have a wonderful career, but they should have brought her into
the movie a lot more.  At her wedding, when she explodes at Paul for a
death at the wedding, she gives the type of performance from her I
like to see.  She seemed like her character Michele, in her best film
to date, Romy And Michele's High School Reunion.  This is the only
sequence with Kudrow that works, and unfortunately, it wasn't very
long.
It was a disappointment that all three of the lead actor's talent went
to waste.  The concept for the film was good, the cast was there, and
a lot of potential was there.  All of the requirements for a laugh
riot were there, but the characters were not written well enough or
interestingly enough to succeed.
Don't get me wrong, Analyze This wasn't bad, it's just that it wasn't
worked to it's potential, and when that happens with a film, I do not
think highly of it.  If the stars were different, and they weren't as
superb as the actors who did star in it, I would have probably thought
more of the film because I knew that they worked to their potential.
The movie was a good one, not bad, it was just disappointing.  Before
viewing the film, I thought it would be hilarious.  It turns out that
the cast doesn't mean a thing in films these days.
The Bottom Line- Such a great cast.  Such a huge disappointment.

Author
Matt Prigge
Director: Harold Ramis
Writers: Peter Tolan, Harold Ramis, and Ken Lonergan
Starring: Robert DeNiro, Billy Crystal, Lisa Kudrow, Joe Viterelli,
Richard C. Castallano, Chazz Palminteri, Kyle Sabihy, Bill Macy, Leo
Rossi, Max Casella, Molly Shannon, Tony Bennett
The early buzz on "Analyze This" has already deemed it the Best Film of
1999, and strangely enough, not more than two months into this year,
this is what we have to single out as the best film so far.  The first
couple months of the year are filled to excess with films left over from
last year that were originally supposed to get a nice, pre-January
release amongst the rest of the winners, and luckily enough we get to
see films that were released only partially before January to take
advantage of a potential Oscar nomination that are still being released
(I believe Boorman's much-touted "The General" is due in a couple
weeks).  Then there are the other kinds of films -- the ones that were
actually supposed to be released in '99 and weren't actual holdovers
because of a lack of studio support, and these films luckily enough show
that they actually are good films, although this kind of film is
extremely rare.  And so we have "Analyze This," one of the first 1999
release on purpose, and one which, while isn't going to be topping
either my best or worst lists at the end of this year, it is currently
topping my best-of-99 (for the record, this list consists of this and
"Payback"), although I doubt that it'll occupy that place for longer
than a couple weeks at best.
Oft hilarious, and boasting a silly premise that would cause Ivan
Reitman to blush, "Analyze This" is a suprisingly smart and original
comedy without ever actually being drop-dead great.  Like several films
of its kind, it's not funny in a totally consistent way and several
elements don't exactly work.  Unlike those kinds of films, it covers its
bases by being consistently clever and managing to stretch out an
otherwise lame premise into an hour and forty-five minutes of celluloid
without ever feeling tiresome or losing steam.  The premise, if you
haven't heard it yet, is the kind that sounds exactly like a studio
pitch: a mob boss goes to a jewish therapist.  It drops two actors known
for filling those stereotypes with life and, best of all, with box
office returns (though not all the time): Robert DeNiro, playing the
uptight mafiaso, and Billy Crystal, playing the nervous analyst.  You
can almost hear the oo's and ah's from studio heads when you hear this.
Next, they bring in a director known for lightweight comedies, Harold
Ramis (they could have easily gotten Frank Oz or, yeah, Ivan Reitman),
shoot it, do an ad campaign, and watch the money roll in.
Of course, "Analyze This" hasn't been released yet, and for all I know,
it could be another in a recent line of bombs for Crystal or another
mediocre quasi-hit for DeNiro, but nevertheless, this is a film designed
almost from a Hollywood mold.  For the most part it plays like that, but
that it's actually successful as a clever and witty piece of americana
comedy is what makes it better than, say, "Kindergarten Cop" or "Twins,"
just to name two films that once scored with audiences with ridiculous
premises and are now looked down upon with regret (well, at least by
me).  I may regret saying this, but I doubt I'll ever hate myself for
enjoying the hell out of this flick.  "Analyze This" scores by making us
actually seeing a reason why these two very different stereotypes would
come together: a mob boss undoutedly has a whole lot of stress built up
over the years, and "Analyze This" almost seems to be jumping on the
bandwagon of "Grosse Pointe Blank," and saying that if anything, the
latter half of the '90s is a time not for everyone to be a wild
neurotic, in search of an analyst to make him (or her) feel better about
themselves, including gangsters.
DeNiro's character, one Paul Vitti, has a whole lot of stress, and at
first seems too stubborn to take care of it logically (he has a doctor
rubbed over a bit when he tells him he had a panic attack and not a
heartattack), but when one of his henchmen (Joe Viterelli, the mob boss
from "Bullets Over Broadway") has a small car accident with a therapist
(Crystal) and is given his card to perhaps pay for any damages, Vitti
decides to go ahead with it.  The therapist, Ben, is himself a little
bored with his job, tired of hearing overly neurotic patients (one of
them being a wonderfully whiny Molly Shannon), but is still reluctant to
have a mob boss as one of his patients, indeed his primary patient, not
the least because Vitti's sudden strike of anxiety coincides with his
upcoming wedding to a Miami-based meteorologist (Lisa Kudrow).  And when
Vitti forces Ben to help him, interupting several key moments in his
life (his wedding.  twice.), he discovers that the FBI is on to him and
wondering who he is and what his connections are to Vitti.  Ben never
becomes exactly joyful that he's helping Vitti (except when he finally
learns some cold hard truths about his past that are oh so freudian),
but Vitti doesn't care because all he wants is a quick psychological fix
before his big bosses meeting in a couple weeks, where he has to be able
to pull himself together emotionally and show what a big, powerful,
tough man he is, not the weeping sap that he turns into every now and
then.
Among many things, "Analyze This" promises the hilarious, priceless
sight of DeNiro weeping uncontrollably several times (once during a
maudlin commercial) along with the toughness that DeNiro can bring to
any role, both which are used to comic effect.  And though it's mighty
humorous to see DeNiro showing good spirits and parodying his macho,
testosterone toughness in movies like "Raging Bull" and "Goodfellas,"
and though he's great, Crystal nearly upstages him in one of his five
best performances.  Nervous but rigid, controlled yet flustered, Crystal
is absolutely priceless, and by being so reserved, he's much easier to
intake than in other more over-the-top and slightly unbearable
performances, where he's constantly trying to win you over with an
overly-anxious energy paired with rip-offs of vaudevillian jokes
("Forget Paris," I'm looking your way...).  Together, they may not be
the next Abbot and Costello or even Matthau and Lemmon, but they're
opposite personalities and the way they respect eachother's respective
personality traits makes "Analyze This" into a rather smooth and
digestible comedy.
The screenplay's not half bad either: there are plenty of lovely
one-liners, that's sure, and the official first funny joke concerning
the Internet that I've heard, but there's also a surprising amount of
nice story development there too, and none of the subplots really seem
to be overbearing or not milked well enough (save for bits and pieces
with Kudrow, who's underutilized for as talented as I think she is...and
yes, I realize she's a "Friends" cast member co-starring in a movie, but
let's face it, she's the one with the good deal of movie smarts).
Subplots involving the FBI and a vindictive fellow mob boss (Chazz
Palminterri) are used nicely, and most terrific of all, the film never
ever resorts to sappy sentamentalism.  Everything's handled with the
correct tone of light-handedness (even the violence is non-shocking),
and Ramis and company make sure we can't take a second of this seriously
(when you see films like these, you really feel grateful when it doesn't
succumb to sappiness).
If there's anything I object to about it, it's that there are times when
it goes too over-the-top, most of all including bits of interuption he
has in his life, and most of all, an admittingly humorous scene towards
the end, but one that still felt too far-fetched, even for an otherwise
light comedy (cough that one up to lazy jokemaking, I guess).  But
otherwise, "Analyze This" is a surprisingly original comedy: one that
takes a totally off-the-wall premise, and not only makes it very funny
and very clever, but also keeps working on it, exposing a shocking
amount of intelligence and consistent wit, and never makes you feel like
a moron for laughing at it.  I know this will sound like a dramatic
overstatement, but I really haven't left a flat-out comedy feeling this
good since "There's Something About Mary" (though for the record, "Mary"
was funnier and even more intelligent - in fact, you could say "Mary"
was the really good version of "Analyze This," only more naughty
jokes).  So I guess, at least for now, "Analyze This" is the best film
of 1999.  Though that's probably gonna change, unless the apocalypse
really is coming up.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
