Title
Review for Dead Presidents (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Although the movie's story is hardly new, it still is able to
create anger and arouse emotions.  It is about Vietnam  and it is about
the Black situation told with a straightforward inevitability.  We can
see it all coming.
     We have a Black family living in the Bronx, NY in 1968, with
father (James Pickens, Jr.) and mother (Jenifer Lewis), concerned
parents sitting around the kitchen table.  Anthony Curtis (Larenz
Tate), eighteen, is announcing that he will not go to college upon graduation
from high school.  His brother is an attorney.  Anthony says he is
joining the Marines along with his two best friends, Skip, (Chris
Tucker) and Jose (Freddy Rodriguez).  In addition to his family whom he
will be leaving, he also leaves his girl friend, Juanita, (Rose
Jackson).
     In the Marines, he and his friends are sent to Vietnam where they
find themselves placed on reconnaissance patrol, about as dangerous as
missions can get.  While the war pictures are like those we have seen
many times before in other films, it serves to remind us of what it was
like (as much as a movie can do) and also serves to show us how
heroically Anthony performs under fire.  A few months after his arrival
in Vietnam he learns that he has become a father; Juanita has given
birth to a baby girl.
     Fast forward to 1972 and Anthony, with sergeant stripes, returns
home only to find that not only is he not greeted as a hero, but he is
berated for having fought "the White man's war," and that he cannot
even get a job that will support his family.  Black revolutionaries
urge him to join with them but he does not see that as a solution.
     Juanita, meanwhile, keeps harassing him to do something to change
their financial situation.  In desperation, he and friends decide to do
a heist of an armored truck that picks up "dead presidents" at the Post
Office to take to Washington DC for burning.  For those (like me) to
whom the term is new, it refers to the pictures of Washington, Lincoln,
etc. on our paper money. Despite his upbringing he succumbs to the
temptation to turn his life around with this one robbery ... which
it does.
Directed by the fraternal twins, The Hughes Brothers, (Allen and Albert)
from some real life events.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1995
U.S. Availability:10/4/95 (limited); 10/6/95 (wide)
Running Length: 2:00
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, profanity, sex)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Larenz Tate, Keith David, Rose Jackson, N'Bushe Wright,
      Chris Tucker, Freddy Rodriguez, Bokeem Woodbine
Directors: Allen & Albert Hughes
Producers: Allen & Albert Hughes
Screenplay: Michael Henry Brown based on a story by
            Allen & Albert Hughes and Michael Henry Brown
Cinematography: Lisa Rinzler
Music: Danny Elfman
U.S. Distributor: Hollywood Pictures
     Although three-quarters of DEAD PRESIDENTS (the title refers to
the portraits on money) takes place in the Bronx, it's the segment away
from New York that drives the story.  There have been any number of
Vietnam tales--Oliver Stone has made a career out of that time and
place--but none with quite the perspective of the Hughes Brothers'.
This is the story of a black man who goes off to war as a relative
innocent, and returns a decorated hero whose only scars are inside.
His re-acclimatization to civilian life is difficult, but, unlike some
of his friends, he never turns to drugs, and isn't averse to working
hard to earn a living.  Sometimes, however, good intentions and a
valiant effort aren't enough.  In detailing one man's actions and their
consequences, DEAD PRESIDENTS isn't just an African American tragedy --
its impact is universal.  People of any color can sympathize with the
plight of Anthony Curtis and understand, if not agree with, the
eventual choices life forces him to make.
     DEAD PRESIDENTS opens in 1969, as Anthony (Larenz Tate) is about
to graduate from high school.  Not wanting to go to college, but
needing to get away from home to find himself, he enrolls in the Marine
Corps, and heads off to Vietnam, leaving behind a middle-class family,
a pregnant girlfriend (Rose Jackson), and a mentor/small time crook,
Kirby (Keith David), who is like a second father.  Joining Anthony in
the military are two of his close friends, Skip (Chris Tucker) and Jose
(Freddy Rodriguez).  When Anthony finally comes back to the Bronx in
1973, after two tours of duty, he discovers that returning to "normal"
life isn't easy or pleasant.
     Although DEAD PRESIDENTS isn't as intense or wrenching as the
Hughes Brothers' debut feature, MENACE II SOCIETY, the scope is
different.  In addition to being a period piece, this film is concerned
with the detailed examination of one character--a decent, diligent,
upright young man whose morality and judgment are twisted by the
pressures of his environment.  DEAD PRESIDENTS is also somewhat
different from most of the vast number of cinematic Vietnam experiences
because its focus is on how the overseas trauma contributes to the
reconstruction of a man's character.  DEAD PRESIDENTS isn't awash in
originality, but its black perspective hasn't yet been overdone, and
the Hughes Brothers' add their unique imprint to the narrative.
     Larenz Tate, who played O-Dog in MENACE, reunites with the twin
film makers in their second feature.  His role here requires greater
range (although less intensity), and he carries it off with aplomb.
The remainder of the cast is as strong, featuring standout performances
by Keith David, N'Bushe Wright (as the sister of Anthony's girlfriend),
and comedian Chris Tucker.  Tucker's work is noteworthy, as he manages
to provide a fair amount of comic relief without compromising the
viability of his character.
     Even though DEAD PRESIDENTS is more about the effects of poverty
than those of racism, only the most naive viewer could completely
dissociate the two.  Nevertheless, the Hughes Brothers don't overtly
introduce race as an issue.  Instead, this is about the failure of
society, and how desperation, more than greed, can lead to radical and
violent acts.  The film is not perfect--certain sequences are awkward
or drawn from stock, and many of the supporting characters are
stereotypes--but solid storytelling and tight pacing push DEAD
PRESIDENTS through its weak spots.  The result not only reaffirms the
Hughes Brothers' ability as film makers, but shows they can go beyond
the limits of the urban street drama they presented so forcefully in
MENACE II SOCIETY.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Ted Prigge
Directors: Allen and Albert Hughes
Writer: Michael Henry Brown (based on a story by Allen and Albert Hughes
and Michael Henry Brown)
Starring: Lorenz Tate, Keith David, Chris Tucker, N'Bushe Wright, Freddy
Rodriguez, Bokeem Woodbine, Rose Jackson
"Dead Presidents" is a film that yearns for greatness, to be taken as an
enigmatic condemnation of American warfare the way a film like Hal Ashby's
"Coming Home" or Michael Cinimo's "The Deer Hunter" is.  It has an epic
kind of feel to it, a big budget, young stars playing people who are
haunted by a war they didn't really have to fight, and people who are
systematically beaten down by the system.  It features lots of heartache, a
downer of an ending, and even some nasty bloodshed.  But in the end, it
just feels like they forgot to add something in there, but it still comes
out as a pretty good film nonetheless.  It's just not going to be "The Deer
Hunter."
"Dead Presidents" tells the story of Anthony (Lorenz Tate), a young man
growing up in Brooklyn in the late 60s, and is presented in three parts: a
coming of age section, a Vietnam and its impact section, and a big heist
section.  The film starts off wonderfully, and for the first half hour
shows us the younger life of the character, setting up his character,
establishing some supporting roles, including Kirby (Keith David), his big
father figure and owner of the local small-time booking agency to which
Anthony works for; Skip (Chris Tucker), a motorcycle-mouthed pal of
Anthony; and Juanita (Rose Jackson), who dates and sleeps with him.
But Anthony yearns for different things than college, and soon enlists in
the army and is soon sent to 'Nam, where he fights for years upon years
(with Skip in his platoon, of course).  When he finally goes home, he meets
his son from he and Juanita's one night of bliss before he went off to war,
and soon has to marry her and get a job.  But times are tough, and soon
Anthony's life is falling apart.  Desperate for cash, he gets together a
group to do a heist on an armored truck, including Kirby, an old war pal
turned preacher, and Juanita's sister, Delilah (N'Bushe Wright), now a
radical against the government.  Of course, this is only brings him more
problems.
The chief problem the film has is the lack of details about everything,
especially surrounding the heist, which is a fantastically executed,
visceral experience that feels cheap once you realize that these characters
have no real reason for being there in the first place.  What's Delilah
doing there anyway?  What motivation does she have for picking up two
revolvers and capping a cop?  At least Anthony and Skip have had war
experience, where they were forced to kill men they barely knew in cold
blood.  But still, why is Anthony doing a big heist anyway?  The film's
exclusion of these details in this part, and in basically all parts, makes
it feel like there's something missing.
What the film does well, though, is paint an intriguing portrait of people
who were coaxed into a war, then spit out by the government, then screwed
over again by the same people.  This kind of thing undoubtedly happened
many times, just not in this extreme way.  But the film seems too blatant
about making this point in its final scenes where a distraught Anthony
screams about how the government screwed him over.  Maybe an exclusion of
this shouting would have been more effective.  I mean, who wants some film
talking down to us anyway?
And the film starts off well, but goes slightly down hill as it goes on. 
The Vietnam section is very good, very authentic, but maybe a tad
nihilistic (what about that scene where that man steps on a land mine?) and
slightly cliched.  I've seen tons of war movies, and something has to be
slightly different other than more graphic violence to distinguish it from
the others.  And the drama that ensues between Anthony and Juanita never
feels very realistic - we never know much about their relationship, and the
fewd over getting a job feels forced and cliched.
But the Hughes Brothers can direct a scene or sequence.  They have an
almost Scorsese-like hypnotism to some of them, and fill the film with an
amazing soundtrack of late 60s/early 70s soul and funk that undertone the
film with energy and mood.  And they can really create sequences that seem
very lifelike, filled with lots of human humor, like a scene where Anthony
and Juanita are in bed and he discovers she's been stuffing her bra.  Or a
scene where Kirby gets into a fight with a man, and the man pulls off his
prosthetic leg.  And a final scene where cops seem to be coming from
everywhere is breathtaking and frightening.  If anything, "Dead Presidents"
is a film about moments.
In the end, "Dead Presidents" is a failed attempt, but not an awful movie
in any respects.  I loved how truthful it was in its early scenes, and the
fact that it didn't take an easy route by preaching about how the
government persecutes African Americans.  This is, after all, a film about
how the government screwed over everyone in the war, regardless to race,
color, or creed.  It's not that it's very flawed, but that it doesn't feel
like it's really finished.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
