Title
Review for Un héros trčs discret (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Pedro Sena
The French have a knack for unusual stories. This one is another one of
those.  And, while its subject matter is serious in many ways, at a bad time
in their history, somehow they manage to get some humor and intelligence
added to it, and we end up enjoying it. Such is French film. It can be dark
comedy, and often this is vicious and vitriolic that it renders the work
rather obtuse and left behind.
Or it may be a comedy making fun of comedies, in which case the humor often
comes off as obscure and no one understands it.
This film could easily fit anywhere between comedy and tragedy. Somewhere,
in the middle are the films that try to tell stories about France's
involvement in WWII, which often is considered a non-involvement, in hope of
preventing itself from being totaly destroyed by the Germans, or anyone
else. To help with these efforts, the French organized "La Resistance" which
co-operated with the western anythings for a long period of time. The
question is, the film brings about by accident, where does it start and end?
But the obvious reason for it is clear. Survival of the fittest and the
cleverest, if not for themselves, at least for their families.
Albert Dehousse has an advantage over some people. He does his homework, and
rehearses his act, and prepares himself for many eventualities, which is not
quite the case in others examples. We are learning by the various interviews
in the film, that there were many people that lived this kind of life, and
that enjoyed some success in these things. Some were not so obvious, but
others were pretty obvious. But Albert's case, if not any different from any
one else, shows that he has the gift of staying cool under fire, and
eventually finds himself working for the French resistance, in the later
stages of the war, when their greatest job was to flush out those who had
defected to the German German side. He does very well in this job, because
he has the steel nerves of any superior officer, at least on the outside,
and displays the intelligence and efficiency that brings about some respect
and support within his own ranks, where many are upset that this outsider,
with no visible record has passed them all for a post.
One day, though, he has to perform the ugly duty of ordering the killing of
his own country men, who have been caught in German uniforms. And this sets
about his "resignation" from his post, and admittance that he was a fake.
The French authorities are embarrassed, but realized the amount of work this
man apparently has done for them, and decide to let him go.
But another impropriety, the smaller one he overlooked, is the one that
lands him in jail. He had married before he disappeared in the middle of the
war. And in Baden-Baden, he married again. And a judge saw fit to throw him
in jail for three years.... of all things.
While the film, not any kind of spectacular production per se, is
fascinating, as a study of the times in France, it also shows how confusing
the whole thing was. And this combination, can be frightening for the simple
minded film goer that is not used to thinking ahead, or suspending any
belief long enough to find their way out of any situation. The dialogue in
this film is critical and it is magnificently written and designed to
display what it has taken for these people to survive.  Cunning, clever,
answers, vague, and reversed, the actual answer is never given, and this
seems to be a slightly intellectual attitude that many French love to take
in the sidewalk cafes, and evening discussions. But it works, for them, and
they were capable of using it for their own survival.
This is a very good film. It is very talky, and dependant on the quality of
the translation of the sub-titles, because there are nuances in the wording
of it that change the meanings all around. These are difficult for foreign
audiences, and yet, even with the subtitles, this makes it through. But,
nevertheless, it makes for an ok exercise, because likewise the characters,
in the film, who are being "swindled" by the changing of the truth and the
reversal of the questions, so is the audience. We are watching something,
that we do not know how to take at all.... except as another story, being
told in retrospect, by an elder Dehousse ( Trintignant ), with some
interviews by many people who may have been around at the time as public
figures of some sort. The film tries to use some of the "facts" from these
findings, but they are shady at best.
So people like Albert Dehousse, survived, and even did their duty for the
country in a bad time. Wether they were part of the Resistance or not, if
this film is any indication, one could say that Albert was. This had been
one of the most important questions, since it became the definition of a
hero, or not. But, the whole thing does not take away from the fact that
Dehousse could make up stories based on truth and whatnot. What made his
special, is that he took the hint from a writer in the beginning, he borrows
the story and then "blends" in. In many cases, in one that helped him
display his ability to command, was one that pretty much summarized where
many failed. A group of people, all memorized the same story. And Dehousse
realizes that it is a story, and arrests these people, because the same
story was in a magazine that they all read, right in front of them. And
Dehousse, takes hi scue, and immediately adds the support of someone under
his command, as a way to distract the obvious attention on him, as a person
that did not deserve the post in the first place. As it turns out, the
French authorities, probably had the right man at the post, because all the
others were fighting each other for points and superiormanship, which at
times, seems to have undermined their own work.
With some very good acting by Mathieu Kassovitz,  and a very good supporting
cast, this film does in a small anount of time, what most films really can
not do. It tells a story and then some.
Very good film, with some very entertaining exchanges, and stories. It is
also, a look at a very peculiar time in France's history.
Reviewed by Pedro Sena. Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1997. All Rights Reserved.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     As World War II draws to a close, Albert Dehousse (Mathieu
Kassovitz), a simple salesman in occupied France, dreams of having been
something more important.  And turning dreams into reality, he
convinces his countrymen that he was actually a valiant member of the
French Resistance.  With a few facts and a lot of chutzpah, he succeeds
beyond his wildest dreams.  He becomes such an enormous and mysterious
hero that people begin doting on his every word.
     If A SELF MADE HERO (UN HEROS TRES DISCRET) sounds like a hundred
other films (Tony Curtis's THE GREAT IMPOSTOR and Peter Sellers's BEING
THERE come immediately to mind), it is.  The difference is in the
execution.  The script by Jacques Audiard and Alain Le Henry, based on
the novel by Jean-Francois Deniau, confuses the viewers by swirling a
host of supporting characters past them in a blur.  The first half of
the film is hopelessly muddled with the latter half being relatively
better.
     Exacerbating the problems of the narrative, Jean-Marc Fabre's
cinematography pans the camera in a constant twirl, and most of the
first half is so dark that it is hard to see the expressions on the
actors' faces.  Juliette Welfling's erratic editing adds to the overall
obfuscation.  Even the editing of the newsreel footage is so choppy
that it becomes difficult ascertaining what is happening.
     All of this notwithstanding, the premise of the show has great
promise.  The film, which garnered many French cinematic awards last
year, has taken over a year to get a U.S. distributor.
     Although the film spends much of the time trying to be humorous,
it rarely succeeds.  It works better in its serious moments, but its
attempts at poignancy are muted by the chaos of the storyline.
     In the later part of the film, Albert emerges from the story's
cloudy beginning.  But by then, your interest in this much told tale
may have waned.
     A SELF MADE HERO runs 1:47.  It is in French with English
subtitles.  The movie is not rated but would be an R for war carnage,
brief nudity, and a little profanity.  The film would be fine for
teenagers.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Mathieu Kassovitz, Anouk Grinberg, Sandrine Kiberlain,
      Albert Dupontel, Nadia Barentin, Jean-Louis Trintignant
Director: Jacques Audiard
Producer: Patrick Godeau
Screenplay: Alain Le Henry and Jacques Audiard from the book by
      Jean-Francois Deniau
Cinematography: Jean-Marc Fabre
Music: Alexandre Desplat
U.S. Distributor: Strand Releasing
In French with subtitles
     Have you ever wished that you could become someone else?  That,
without regard for the consequences, you could shed your current
personality like an old shirt and slip into something more comfortable? 
If so, then you'll be intrigued by the premise of A SELF-MADE HERO,
director Jacques Audiard's smart, fascinating, satirical meditation on
the flexibility of identity.
     The film opens in modern-day France, with an unseen interviewer
asking questions of a seventy-something man named Albert Dehousse
(international film icon Jean-Louis Trintignant).  As Albert begins to
talk about his past, we see it unfold on screen -- his childhood in
rural, pre-World War II France, his life during the German occupation,
and, finally, how he rose to prominence in the wake of the Allied
liberation.  And, while A SELF-MADE HERO's narrative traces Albert's
life during the 1940s, a pseudo-documentary overlay offers occasional
commentary and observations from those who once knew Albert.
     In Lambersart, France during 1944, twenty-six year old Albert
(Mathieu Kassovitz) lives his life as if no war is under progress. 
Despite childhood dreams of going into battle and becoming a great hero,
he is content to marry a pretty blond (Sandrine Kiberlain), take a job
as a salesman, and stay out of the Germans' way.  Then, after the
Liberation, he learns that his father-in-law was an important member of
the Resistance, and, feeling overwhelmed by inadequacy, Albert flees
Lambersart for Paris, where, with the help of a mysterious friend named
"The Captain" (Albert Dupontel), he re-invents himself as a high-ranking
member of the Resistance.  Through a combination of hard work, good
fortune, and brashness, Albert makes the right connections and ends up
as an important player in the post-war order.  But, when he falls in
love with the vivacious Servane (Anouk Grinberg), he wonders about the
psychological penalty of keeping the truth from her.
     A SELF-MADE HERO has an extraordinarily perceptive script that asks
a lot of complex questions but doesn't insult its audience by offering
simple answers.  At the same time, it's a lot of fun.  Audiard has
designed this film as part-drama, part satire, and there are times when
the movie's pointed comedy is worth more than a perfunctory chuckle. 
And the often-ironic "documentary interview" segments, which add a layer
of verisimilitude to the project, open a window onto how modern-day
Parisians view their history of fifty years ago.
     Best of all, Albert's story is genuinely interesting.  He's a
fascinating character whose self-propelled transformation is a pleasure
to watch.  Mathieu Kassovitz (the director of HATE, who is just
functioning as an actor here) does a superlative job conveying the many
layers of Albert's personality:  his early desperation, his growing
confidence when he realizes that his scheme can succeed, and his
uncertainty when he realizes that his decisions have the power of life
and death.  Top-notch supporting performances are turned in by Sandrine
Kiberlain and Albert Dupontel (both of whom were nominated for Caesars),
as well as Anouk Grinberg.
     Albert isn't the only individual with an ambiguous identity.  His
late father's reputation is clouded by uncertainty.  Did he, as Albert's
mother claims, die as a war hero fighting for his country, or, as town
rumor asserts, was his death the result of unchecked drinking?  And,
later in the film, after Albert has established his reputation, he is
sent to Germany to weed out collaborators posing as work camp inmates. 
His success at that job is the result of his own intimate knowledge of
how to invent a convincing life story.
     At the heart of A SELF-MADE HERO is a simple question:  Who am I,
and can I be a different person?  The Captain indicates that there's no
such thing as a fixed identity -- losers can successfully disguise
themselves as winners, cowards as heroes, and devils as saints.  It's
all a matter of confidence and dedication.  Albert notes that "the best
lives are invented", and goes on to prove his words by actions.  This
concept has great appeal today, when so many feel uprooted and unsure of
who they are or where they're going.  A SELF-MADE HERO offers an
ambitious portrait of one man who used an alternative path to realize
his dreams only to discover that the richest fiction can never truly
supplant reality.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
