Title
Review for Adanggaman (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Forget Spielberg's Amistad.  Pretend John Singleton's Rosewood never
happened.  Take all the video copies of Beloved and.okay, maybe that's going
too far.  The point is that most films we've seen about slavery are the same
story over and over and over again.  Sure, they make you mad and tug at your
heartstrings (and cause white people to feel really uncomfortable for the
better part of the ride home...until "All-Star" comes on the radio), but
most follow the same formula, which is why the quality of the genre has
gradually taken a nosedive since Roots aired on television.
Enter Roger Gnoan M'Bala's Adanggaman, a somewhat exciting new film from the
Ivory Coast that breaks the lame American cinematic slavery mold.  It's set
entirely in Africa (Guineau, to be exact) during the late 17th century, and,
at least from its first few scenes, doesn't seem like it's going to deal
with slavery at all.  Adanggaman starts with a young couple having sex; the
guy is Ossei (Ziable Honoré Goore Bi), and his father is forcing him to
marry a different girl.
After being mercilessly beaten by his father for carrying on with this other
girl, Ossei packs up his bow and best pelt and hits the road.  He returns a
few days later, only to find his village torched, his father dead, and most
of the others missing.  What Ossei doesn't know is that his missing
neighbors have been captured by an extremely well-organized group of giant,
bloodthirsty female warriors.  These Amazonesque women work for the
power-hungry King Adanggaman, who, in turn, sells unsuspecting villagers to
the Dutch for guns and rum.
The rest of Adanggaman follows Ossei's fight to free his family from the
King's steely grip.  His journey includes befriending a faith-healer with a
warrior daughter, for whom Ossei falls.  The shockingly brutal film also
teaches certain slave auction protocol, like that the bidding begins with
sheep, then moves on to cows, then goats.  Then, and only then, can you bid
with yams.
1:30 - Not Rated but contains nudity and sexual content
