Title
Review for D.O.A. (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Robert Dorsett
     For those of you who sort of liked FRANTIC's idea (style, "normal guy in
jeopardy" plot), but didn't feel compelled to write in a story during the
boring execution of the film, the new movie, D.O.A., should be most welcome.  
     The story revolves around Dexter Cornell, portrayed by Dennis Quaid.  He
plays a burned-out English professor at a "large southern university" (the
movie was filmed in Austin, Texas).  Early in the film, he manages to swallow 
a rare, fatal, slow-acting (24-48 hours to live) poison ("phosphorous 
chloride") during a drinking binge.  To make it worse, his wife is murdered, 
and he's the prime suspect.  The rest of the movie is dedicated to him trying 
to figure out who's trying to ruin his day.
     D.O.A. succeeds everywhere that FRANTIC failed.  It has a good story.
Good pacing.  It has more sophisticated commentary and humor.  It has a much
more imaginative visual style.  Quaid, to me, is a much more believable
"everyman" than Ford (in this role, at least; I generally like Ford's
performances), and displays a greater acting range (ever notice how Ford seemed
to only have one expression--pained--during FRANTIC?).  In short, it's a true
mystery, rather than a travelogue.  We're given a cast of suspects, and are led
along a fairly logical process of deduction.  None of the fantastic gaps of
credibility that plagued FRANTIC (including the worst, that Ford's character
would "go out" on his own after such a short time).  My only gripe is that the
ending should have had more punch.  

Author
Shane Burridge
Remake of 1950 thriller is snappily directed, features popular lead
actors (Dennis Quaid, Meg Ryan), and has a great premise, but is
ultimately torpedoed by a misconceived script.  Quaid is an English
professor (and has-been writer) on a Texas campus who finds out that
he has been fatally poisoned.  With only 24 hours left to live he
tries to find out who is responsible.  While I thoroughly enjoyed this
on first viewing, it doesn't hold up so well the second time around. 
Story, which belongs to the =91what would you do if the world was going
to end in ten minutes=92 school of speculation, treads the path a number
of us would no doubt choose - what Quaid wants is answers.
What drives D.O.A. is the notion that fear of death can be taken to a
further stage - the fear of dying without meaning or reason.  In fact
Quaid is more preoccupied with solving the mystery behind his imminent
death than  the physical act of dying itself.  
The most puzzling thing for Quaid (and the audience) is the crime=92s
motive.  There is no apparent reason why anyone should want to kill
him.  This intriguing element is one of the best things the film has
going for it until the denoument, which is so absurd it undermines the
whole premise.  Worse, it trivializes Quaid=92s death.  There are other
glitches, most obviously that by the time the bodies start piling up
(and there=92s way too many for such a weak motive) there=92s not a lot of
suspects left over to pick the murderer from.  There=92s also a
convoluted exposition scene with Charlotte Rampling that for all
purposes is irrelevant to the main story.  Nor am I convinced about
the neccessity for Meg Ryan=92s character.  Her brief interlude with
Quaid supposedly reminds him of the quality of life that he has let
slip by - but does anybody really need this just before they=92re about
to die?  On a purely filmic level, however, the film succeeds, and 
there are enough inventive moments to make it interesting.  A 
promising cinema debut for Annabel Jankel and Rocky Morton - with all 
its plot holes it might have been a good idea for them to push style 
over content even further.
