Title
Review for City Lights (1931)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"City Lights" has been billed as Charlie Chaplin's
masterpiece.  I can't agree with that description,
as several other Chaplin films that I have seen, made
both before and after "City Lights", appear to be
clearly better.
Chaplin again plays his tramp character, the one with
the baggy pants, cane, and black hat.  He falls for
a blind but sweet flower girl.  He befriends a millionaire 
(Harry Myers) who is sour when sober, but generous when 
drunk.  Chaplin attempts to use the rich man's wealth for 
the benefit of the flower girl (Virginia Cherrill).
The tramp, as always, gets into trouble in "City Lights".
His adventures aren't as interesting and amusing as in
some other Chaplin films, especially "The Gold Rush" and
"Modern Times".  The exception is a hilarous boxing scene,
which has a desperate-for-funds tramp avoiding a quick
knockout with various clever gags.  But some other
scenes don't work as well, such as the tramp accidentally
swallowing a whistle and thereafter making uncontrollable
whistle noises.
Cherrill was an unknown when cast for "City Lights".
Chaplin discovered her at a boxing match, where she was
in the next seat.  Cherill was probably a very nice person,
but she lacked the energy that other heroines in Chaplin
films had, such as Georgia Hale or Paulette Goddard.
There may be some spoilers in the next paragraphs.
I find it difficult to believe that an operation could 
restore the flower girl's sight, especially in 1931.  When 
she can see, and realizes that a tramp has been her benefactor
instead of a wealthy man, the film ends on that bittersweet
moment.  This emotion does not suit the tramp's character,
who always has his ups and downs but never loses his spirit.
A recurrent theme in "City Lights" is separation and reunion
of the tramp with Myers.  At night, Myers drinks heavily 
and regards the tramp as his best friend, the tramp
having saved his life.  But at dawn, when Myers is sober,
he has lost both his sense of humor and his memory of the
tramp.  The millionaire character is hard to accept
as anything but a plot device for Chaplin to be alternately
rich and poor while courting Cherrill.
"City Lights" remains a good movie with many clever moments,
but its reputation as one of Chaplin's best films does not 
appear to be deserved.
