Title
Review for City Hall (1996)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     This straight-forward corruption tale is wholly unremarkable, save
for a few good scenes and the occasional insight into the arena of
municipal politics.  Four writers-- including Nicholas Pileggi (CASINO)
and Paul Schrader (TAXI DRIVER)-- are credited with this Big Apple fable
of how a New York City Deputy Mayor (John Cusack) and his boss (Al
Pacino) deal the with the ever-expanding problems caused by the acci-
dental shooting of a young black boy in Brooklyn.
     The casting of Pacino is dead-on, but John Cusack is a loss.  He's
a lightweight and doesn't belong at the center of such a serious story.
The supporting cast-- which includes Danny Aiello and Martin Landau--
fares a little better, when the script isn't ignoring them.  (Aiello, in
particular, has a dandy confrontation with a mob boss played by Tony
Franciosa.) Director Harold Becker (MALICE) keeps everybody busy and
that adds to the illusion of dramatic tension, of which there is none.
Most disappointing is the missing sense of grandeur.  For such a big
town, CITY HALL sure feels small.
--
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Christophe Boone
Opens nationally Friday, February 16, 1996
        No mayor can ever be liked by everybody, especially the mayor of 
New York City.  No matter what services he claims to have brought to the 
city, there is always something behind him to make him corrupt.  CITY 
HALL tries to paint a portrait of the perfect mayor, but winds up falling 
short.
        One rainy afternoon in Brooklyn, on the corner of Broadway and 
Marcy, a detective meets up with a mob screw up that he tried to put away 
two years ago.  Something goes wrong, bullets fly, the cop and the 
mobster lie dead, and a six year old is caught in the crossfire.  Whose 
bullet hits him is a little ambiguous, but watch closely and you'll know.
        News in the city travels fast.  Deputy Mayor Kevin Calhoun (John 
Cusack) learns from an aid of the incident and cuts the Mayor's (Al 
Pacino) speech short.  Calhoun is down home boy from Louisiana spouting 
quotes from Huey Long and Harry S Truman, only trying to do what is right 
and find the truth.  He idolizes the Mayor, John Pappas, Time cover man, 
and one of the finest mayors ever to grace this office with his 
presence.  Together, they start a crusade to find out why these killings 
took place.
        Along the way, Calhoun runs into Marybeth Cogan, a lawyer 
assigned to protect the widow and her chances of receiving her husband's 
pension.  She believes that Calhoun is out to tarnish his name and expose 
him as corrupt.  They make an unlikely pair that should have no romantic 
spark.  Well, the writers couldn't resist at the end in one of the lamest 
conclusions I have seen in a while.  Can you say reshoots after poor test 
showings?  Together, these two become detectives doing police work that 
should be left to IA, but they seem to only have one moment of 
brilliance.  The rest is left up to Calhoun and Cogan, which in and of 
itself is hard to swallow.
        CITY HALL remains almost too ambiguous at times.  For the normal 
American audience, many people are going to be confused as to why there 
are so many twists and turns, and where are they all leads.  A central 
theme to this film is that when one doors closes, another one opens, or 
rather, the other way around.  Unfortunately, from the beginning, the 
audience knows something is wrong, but each twist could result in a dead 
end at the answer.  The film continues to plow through its own dead ends.
        The biggest problem with this film is the screenplay.  Cusack 
turns in a strong performance, much improved since his days as a high 
school slack in BETTER OFF DEAD and ONE CRAZY SUMMER.  His potential from 
SAY ANYTHING is coming into fruition.  Al Pacino plays Al Pacino, and one 
wonders if the audiences will ever tire of him.  Bridget Fonda smiles 
nicely, and bobs her hair, that's about it.  Upon closer examination, 
however, there is a reason why the credits do not precede this film.  
Four separate writers are credited with penning this script:  newcomer 
Ken Lipper, Bo Goldman (SCENT OF A WOMAN), Nicholas Pileggi (GOODFELLAS, 
CASINO), and Paul Schrader (TAXI DRIVER, RAGING BULL).  Three well known 
writers on a not-so-worthy script.  If I had to guess, I'd say that 
Lipper wrote it, and the studio saw potential, so they passed it from 
one hand to the next.  Their strategy did not pay off.  This film was 
supposed to arrive in theatres in December, but the studio pulled out, 
exposing their lack of confidence in this film among the holiday 
competition.  The plot lines do not weave a complete story, but run 
parallel instead.  One character says it best, "The sweater unravels."
        For Cusack's performance alone, it might be worth a look, but I 
have reservations.  This is not Pacino's best, and Bridget Fonda has 
still not found her breakout role, if it ever comes.  But, CITY HALL is a 
worthy rental, so save the $7, and spend the $3 in a few months.

Author
Christopher Null
     There's two things I dislike:  politics and long, boring speeches. 
CITY HALL has plenty of both, and while Al Pacino is almost cool enough to
make me think politics can be okay, it's got so many long speeches that I
started looking for the remote control after the third or fourth one.
     CITY HALL is a drama/thriller with most of the thrill sucked out of
it.  After a ridiculously convoluted opening, filled with the weak
voice-over of the Deputy Mayor of New York City, Kevin Calhoun (John
Cusack), we find ourselves embroiled in the world of Mayor John Pappas
(Pacino).  As the film opens, we find a cop and mobster killed in a
shoot-out, taking with them the life of a six-year old boy.
     The ensuing investigation turns up evidence of corruption in the
judicial system, focusing on Judge Walter Stern (Martin Landau, whose
talents are wasted here) and in politics, with show tune-singing official
Frank Anselmo (Danny Aiello) under the gun.  Helping Calhoun in his
inquiries is attorney Marybeth Cogan (Bridget Fonda, also wasted, but with
a cool haircut)--with whom he develops the requisite love interest.
     CITY HALL has all the elements of a great film except one:  *a
script.*  Four writers worked on the film, and that was obviously three
too many.  As a result, the storyline is completely limp.  There's no
suspense at all, and you'll see the one measly plot twist coming a mile
away (not that it makes any sense, just that it's obvious).
     And oddly, the remainder of the film is superbly crafted.  The
ensemble cast is nearly flawless, especially Cusack as the go-for-it
right-hand man who has no life outside the Mayor's Office.  And after
almost two hours, Al Pacino really *is* the Mayor of NYC.  The cityscapes
of New York are awesome on the big screen, as well, and the witty humor
that punctuates the film does a good job at relieving the tedium from
watching the film's lifeless story.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://cca2.carrington.com/emporium/
-Screenwriter / Novelist / Publisher
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Al Pacino, John Cusack, Bridget Fonda, Danny Aiello, David Paymer, 
      Martin Landau, Tony Franciosa
Director: Harold Becker
Producers: Harold Becker, Ken Lipper, Charles Mulvehill, and 
      Edward R. Pressman
Screenplay: Ken Lipper, Nicholas Pileggi, Paul Schrader, and Bo Goldman
Cinematography: Michael Seresin
Music: Jerry Goldsmith
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     There's nothing quite like watching screen veteran Al Pacino 
overact, something he accomplishes with unparalleled style and verve.  
Such grandstanding won him an Academy Award for SCENT OF A WOMAN after 
decades of finely-tuned performances failed to get him past the 
nomination stage.  In CITY HALL, there are a few of these over-the-top 
moments, including one wonderful, pulpit-pounding tirade where you're 
just waiting for the "hoo-ha!" that never comes.  Yet, in the context of 
this unspectacular tale of political wheeling, dealing, and corruption, 
Pacino's "spotlight scenes" become the film's only memorable moments.  
He's no closer to top form here than in either HEAT or TWO BITS, but he 
still draws the camera like a magnet.
     CITY HALL is an example of what happens when there are too many 
writers.  As with last year's OUTBREAK (in which the numerous script 
doctors were uncredited), subplots start vying with each other for 
screen time and the bridge connecting them becomes dangerously unstable.  
Here, the least interesting -- a thriller with John Cusack set up as the 
hero -- comes out on top.  Shunted aside is a potentially more 
interesting examination of the political machinations that go into the 
day-to-day business of running a city.  
     The city in question is New York, and the mayor is John Pappas 
(Pacino), the best man to preside over the five boroughs since 
Laguardia.  His hand-picked deputy, Kevin Calhoun (John Cusack), handles 
all of Pappas' leg-work:  gathering background information, doing damage 
control, and putting in appearances at certain social events.  When a 
cop and a six year-old boy are killed in a North Brooklyn street 
shooting, and the mayor refuses to distance himself from the potential 
fallout, Calhoun swings into action.  His investigation uncovers high-
level corruption involving one of the city's most respected judges 
(Martin Landau), a political boss in South Brooklyn (Danny Aiello), and 
a reputed mob chief (Tony Franciosa).
     Of course, putting aside the question of what the deputy mayor is 
doing playing a "gumshoe", the various elements of CITY HALL's 
thriller/mystery aspect come together a little too neatly to be readily 
acceptable.  We also never get much sense of danger or tension.  Kevin 
is like someone putting together a jigsaw puzzle -- all the pieces are 
on the table, so we know he'll eventually fit them in place.  Along the 
way, he gets some help from Marybeth Cogan (an underused Bridget Fonda), 
a lawyer representing the slain policeman's widow.
     There are times when CITY HALL sparkles, but rarely do these 
instances relate to Calhoun's investigation.  The mayor's struggle to 
erect a bank exchange, along with all the attendant favors called in and 
trade-offs made, lends a realistic flavor to the proceedings.  When CITY 
HALL works, this is the sort of thing that propels it.  The main story 
isn't overwhelming, but at least the background is rich and varied.
     Despite the presence of three top-line actors and a fine supporting 
cast, CITY HALL never lives up to its promise.  There's too little grit 
and too much predictability, and even the central character, Calhoun, is 
never better than half-developed.  Director Harold Becker (SEA OF LOVE, 
MALICE) keeps CITY HALL well-paced, so boredom never threatens.  Even 
so, as political thrillers go, this one stands below the likes of even 
Kevin Costner's NO WAY OUT, and isn't close to the same category as ALL 
THE PRESIDENT'S MEN.  There's not enough substance or energy here to 
warrant more than a lukewarm recommendation.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net, jberardinell@delphi.com
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Andrew Hicks
        If they really wanted a title to sum up the movie, they'd 
change the "C" in "City" to an "Sh." As you can guess, it wasn't quite 
the viewing experience I expected. Al Pacino is excellent as always, 
but is relegated to the background of the movie to deliver key speeches 
from time to time. The real star of the movie is John Cusack, with 
Bridget Fonda and Danny Aiello rounding out the cast. All three give 
good performances, but the story itself (and its poor pacing) brings the 
movie down.
        CITY HALL tells a story of government corruption on the 
local level, corruption that unfolds when an off duty cop buying 
cocaine from a mobster's son gets in a shoot-out with the mobster's 
son, resulting in both their deaths and the accidental shooting death of 
a small child. That's the only action in the movie. The rest of the time 
we see Mayor Pacino giving speeches at press conferences and 
funerals, while Deputy Mayor Cusack plays detective in his spare time, 
solving the mystery of the murder.
        The mystery doesn't lie in the murder itself but in the 
murderer--the mobster's son. A little investigative snooping by Cusack 
reveals that, at the mobster's son's trial, the recommended sentence 
was twenty to thirty years, but for some reason he got off with 
probation and was therefore able to cause the death of the innocent 
kid. Who in the New York political hierarchy pressured the judge into 
changing the sentence? Which official did the mobster bribe? Do we 
care? I certainly didn't. In fact, the best part of the movie, for me, was 
when I went out to the concession stand and bought a Cherry Coke 
and some nachos. I paid with a twenty but didn't get any change back.
        I won't bore you with the details of Cusack's search or his 
ongoing sexual tension-fueled feud with Fonda, the lawyer 
representing the dead cop's wife, who hired Fonda to dispel charges 
that her husband was corrupt. I won't tell you about Aiello's character, 
the influential Brooklyn man involved in the conspiracy. And I'm sure 
not going to discuss the movie's message, that it's impossible to 
survive in politics without succumbing to compromise and corruption.
        CITY HALL just wasn't my cup of Cherry Coke. It moved 
slowly, taking forever to reach its conclusion and, once it did, was 
anti-climactic. As you can probably guess, the ending involves a long 
speech from Pacino, who by this point in the movie seems more like 
the president of a high school debate club than an actual character. 
The story itself might have worked as a one-hour episode of "Law and 
Order" or a similar show, but not as a feature-length movie.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Ken Lipper, who wrote the original screenplay, helps give the
film an air of authenticity.  Lipper used to be a deputy Mayor when
New York City's mayor was Ed Koch.   Lipper knows the ins and outs of
running a city such as New York and surely was of valuable help to
Director Harold Becker, along with the other screenwriters, Paul
Schrader, Nick Pillegi and Bo Goldman.   Given the air of truth
coupled with some very fine acting,  and real dialog, CITY HALL  is a
gripping winner.
     The City is well-run until, in a shootout between a drug-dealer
and a policeman, a young black child gets fatally shot.   Little by
little we learn that the confrontation  may not be all that appears on
the surface.   For one thing, the drug-dealer is a small timer but
related to the Mafia chief.   It is then further revealed that a
tangled web is somewhere involved in the killing.
     The black population is understandably angry.   This is hardly
the first innocent child to get killed in an exchange of police/gang
crossfire.    The buck stops at the desk of Mayor John Pappas (Al
Pacino).    How many more kids are going to be killed?  In the film's
finest, most moving scene, Mayor Pappas appears at the church where he
has been told to stay away.   And do not go near the coffin.   Despite
those warnings, Pappas shows up, and to a hostile black audience, he
delivers a fiery speech.  This is from the heart.  This is real.  And
the anger of the audience is turned around to where the Mayor is seen
as the one person who can and will change the way things have been
previously run.    It is a most moving speech and Pacino gives it all
he has got which is plenty.
     Assisting the mayor in every way is the very honest deputy, Kevin
Calhoun, (John Cusack).   Cusack, too, in his underplayed manner
greatly helps enhance the film. Marybeth Cogan (Bridget Fonda) is the
attorney for the dead child's family.   Danny Aiello is the chief
mafioso, Martin Landau is a judge, David Paymer is the city's
attorney.  With a cast like that, all at their best, it is no surprise
that the film is superb.   Do not miss this one.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Al Pacino, John Cusack, Bridget Fonda, Danny Aiello, David
Paymer, Martin Landau, Tony Franciosa Director: Harold Becker
Screenplay: Ken Lipper, Nicholas Pileggi, Paul Schrader, and Bo
Goldman
Sitting in the confines of polished stone walls and marble floors, the
mayor of a town like NY makes his daily decisions amidst the whispers
of his trusted counsellors. Behind the white-washed smiles of these
white collared workers, everything seems perfect and in place. No one
is expecting the unspeakable to happen when a distinguished police
officer confronts a known drug dealer.
Gunfire between the dealer and the law. Both men drop dead amidst the
flurry of bullets, but not before a small boy falls victim to a stray
bullet of crossfire.  The city mourns. The questions asked only leads
to more questions unanswered. Why was this dangerous drug dealer given
only a probationary sentence, when in fact he deserved a ten to
twenty. So we travel the road of corruption, in this journey of
ascension. With each step travelled and each clue uncovered, we find
questions which can only be answered by the pinnacle of
hierarchy. Here it is revealed, the greyness of power and the greeness
of money. Where those with whom we place our trust, can only provide
reasons for further injustice and false hope.
This movie is a long sit, with more dialogue than action to slow it's
momentum.  But fine performances from a charismatic Al Pacino as the
city Mayor, John Cussack as his inquisitive deputy, and a small side
role for Bridget Fonda the attorney.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CITY HALL brings to mind hard-edged 1950s urban expose's like ON
THE WATERFRONT and THE EDGE OF THE CITY.  And Jerry Goldsmith has
underscored the similarities by giving the film a big, brash, jazzy
score in the style of Leonard Bernstein.  That score may be the best
thing about the CITY HALL and sets the tone for everything that is to
come.  At heart CITY HALL is a mystery, but the mystery is not what
makes the film work.  It is the glue that holds the film together, but
this is really a picture of modern politics in New York City or any
multi-ethnic metropolis.  Certainly the mystery keeps the story moving
forward--sometimes not as fast as would be wished, but it does keep it
moving.  But the active ingredient is the setting of the story, giving
us an inside look at a political machine, how it maintains power, how
it relates to a multitude of different ethnic groups, and how politics
influences the decisions made.  And this is a film that is not dumbed
down for the audience.  The dialogue may at times be a little hard to
follow, but it has a ring of realism and keeps the audience on its
toes.
     New York City Mayor John Pappas (played by Al Pacino) has his
hands full with the fallout from a street shoot-out.  A policeman and
the nephew of a notorious crime lord killed each other and took with
them an innocent six-year-old black boy.  The Mayor sends his
assistant, Kevin Calhoun (John Cusack) to keep a lid on things and also
to investigate just what happened and why.  Young-looking but
perceptive, Calhoun traces the causes of the incident to organized
crime, to a local political boss, and to a mysterious judge.  The
investigation goes deep and, not surprisingly, turns up more than what
the mayor's office wants found.
     It is not a good sign when there are four names on the screenplay,
but it may not be so bad if they are four good writers.  In this case
included are Nicholas Pileggi of GOODFELLAS and CASINO.  We also have
among the four dark stylist Paul Schrader.  The cast is similarly
power-house, but perhaps not such a good investment.  An over-rated Al
Pacino gets the top billing that John Cusack deserved and plays the
same feisty character he always plays, overpowering too many lines.
His delivery damages the effect of the film's centerpiece, a sermon
from the mayor on the death of a young boy.  Cusack still seems a
little young for his role, but it may be just that people are getting
into politics earlier.  Bridget Fonda brings her quirky smile to an
under-written role that seems like an afterthought.  To no surprise the
most memorable and natural acting is from Danny Aiello as a cagey and
adept neighborhood councilman who positions himself as everybody's
friend.
     Harold Becker, director of police films like THE ONION FIELD, THE
BLACK MARBLE, and SEA OF LOVE, gives the CITY HALL a nice texture and
feel of immediacy.  Rate this one a low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
