Title
Review for Stranger Than Paradise (1984)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Kevin Patterson
Jim Jarmusch has been quoted as defending his often meandering films on the
grounds that since life has no plot, there is no reason that film or
fiction should either. He's got a point, and I suppose it would be easy to
see his 1984 film STRANGER THAN PARADISE simply as an expression of this
idea, in that it follows a trio of characters who never really do much of
anything.
I've seen three Jarmusch films now (the other two being NIGHT ON EARTH and
DEAD MAN), and I think that, aside from his knack for dropping in on
characters at uneventful moments of their lives, he also has a talent for
writing dialogue between characters who aren't quite communicating. NIGHT
ON EARTH was an episodic collection of cab rides in which the driver and
passenger(s) were on separate wavelengths in one way or another, and DEAD
MAN followed a mild-mannered accountant and a nomadic tribesman who were
brought together by a bizarre and dangerous turn of events and who didn't
quite know what to make of each other. Characters who would normally nod
politely at each other and pass are, in Jarmusch films, forced into
extended contact with each other, with the result being an interesting and
sometimes amusing form of subtle conflict.
In STRANGER THAN PARADISE, those characters are Willie (John Lurie), a
Hungarian immigrant who has lived in New York City for the past ten years;
his friend Eddie (Richard Edson); and his cousin Eva (Eszter Balint), who
has just recently left Hungary and is on her way to Cleveland to live with
her Aunt Lottie (Cecilia Stark). Because her aunt is in the hospital when
she arrives, she needs a place to stay for ten days, and ends up at
Willie's apartment. Willie is mostly annoyed by her presence, and when they
do talk, it's about things like how American football is played and why a
TV dinner is called a TV dinner. Eddie shows up and seems to like Eva, but
nothing really develops, and then she heads off to Cleveland as planned.
The film jumps ahead to a year later, and Willie and Eddie are bored with
their life in New York City. They go to Cleveland on vacation, but spend
most of their time doing inconsequential things like playing cards with
Aunt Lottie or going to the movies with Eva and her friend from work. They
decide to take Eva to with them to Florida, where they almost run out of
money from betting on dog races (though Willie wasn't too keen on this in
the first place--"I just, uh, don't like the idea of...dog races," he
objects at one point). Fortunately Eva comes up with some money at the last
minute through an amusing coincidence.
Of course, if I took this premise to a Hollywood producer and pitched it as
a script, (s)he would probably look it me as if I'd lost my mind. But what
Jarmusch has discovered is that these odd little moments in the lives of
ordinary people can be just as entertaining as murder mysteries or alien
invasions. The subtle conflicts and personality differences between the
three characters, which never even develop into a full-scale argument, are
strangely engaging and never boring or repetitive.
Willie and Eddie get along, for example, but their friendship is still
pretty shallow, and when they spend hours on end in a car together, it
results in humorous moments of conversation like, "Willie, you never told
me you were from Hungary." "Yeah, so what?" "Well, I thought you were an
American...say, you think Cleveland will look anything like Budapest?" At
one point Jarmusch keeps his camera on them for several minutes straight
while they do nothing but drink beer and stare at the floor. Eva, whose
arrival in the United States is probably the catalyst of this film if it
can be said to have one, is also interesting for her calm yet blunt
honesty. When Willie tries to get her to watch football, she says it's a
stupid game, and when he buys her a dress she doesn't like, she tells him
straightforward, "I think this dress is kind of ugly."
It would be wrong to say that STRANGER THAN PARADISE succeeds despite its
lack of a plot and its deadpan characters. It succeeds *because* of them,
turning what would normally be narrative weaknesses into virtues and
showing us that three people sitting around not doing much of anything can
be just as much fun to watch as James Bond infiltrating a mountaintop
fortress to save the world. It's certainly not overwhelming (nor should it
be), but I can think of few other films in which a director managed to get
so much out of so little. I can imagine a sequel twenty years in the
future, in which Willie, Eddie, and Eva are still just sitting around
playing cards, watching TV and generally killing time. And I can also
imagine myself first in line to see it.
