Title
Review for Zusje (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Martyn Winkler
     Zusje premiered in 1995 at the Dutch Film Festival.  This low budget,
independent movie surprised all the festival's visitors and managed to
win the Golden Calf for Best Picture, bypassing favorites such as
Antonia's Line.  To make things worse, it had broken many unwritten
rules in the Dutch film industry.  First, Zusje was shot and edited on
video, and later blown up to 35 mm film.  Secondly, the film's financing
did not come from the Dutch Film Fund.  Normally this would mean an
immediate death for the project.  The young makers of Zusje managed,
though, to raise a sufficient amount of money and successfully submitted
it to the Dutch Film Festival.
     In many ways Zusje is innovating and daring.  The entire film was shot
from the point of view of one of the main characters: Martijn (played by
Maarten Zomer, voice over by Hugo Metsers Jr., cinematography by Bert
Pot).  He enters his sister's life (Daantje, played by Kim van Kooten)
with a camcorder, stating he wants to make a documentary about her.  She
is surprised to see him, and hesitates to let him in her apartment.
After Martijn has passed through her front door, we start learning about
her life, her friends, and her interests.  Her boyfriend does not
appreciate Martijn's snooping around in his personal life.  A rivalry
between the two young men arises, both wanting Daantje for themselves.
Martijn plays a foul game trying to win Daantje's heart again.
     The relationship between brother and sister is not without friction,
but Daantje is fascinated and controlled by her brother, and cannot let
go of him.  Their ambivalent behavior towards each other hints to a
traumatic event in the past, which is gradually revealed to us during
the film.  In the end Martijn wants to be able to look at Daantje
without using a camcorder.
     Zusje is a fast-paced film, giving an accurate depiction of life among
young adults in Amsterdam.  The director, Robert Jan Westdijk, has a
gift of telling a story without unnecessary details.  The acting is of a
surprising high level, with one actor standing out.  Roeland Fernhout is
brilliant as Ramon, Daantje's boyfriend, adding charming, hilarious, and
three dimensional traits to this character.  The cinematography is
excellent.  It is well lighted and utilizes a very 'naturalistic'
handling.  It is not for the squeamish, though.  After the 90 minutes
some might feel slightly nauseated by the fast swerving and turning of
the camera.
     The makers of Zusje have succeeded in producing a contemporary movie.
It is a reflection of today's fast-paced world and the importance of
television and video.  When Daantje threatens to destroy Martijn's
videotapes, he pleadingly responds: "Don't do it.  Don't you
understand?  If you destroy them, everything might as well not have
happened."  In todays world, something only exists if it has been caught
on videotape.

Author
Pedro Sena
LITTLE SISTER is a hard film to sit through, for many people not used to
film makers that love to take a total subjective point of view, for the
duration of the whole film. Not very many people have ever done this.
This film takes this point of view literally, and stays with it through the
end, which is a rarity in film making. For that alone, this film deserves a
special mention. It is difficult to find films that are capable of doing
this without ever having to go to the tripod for a standard shot. There  are
none of these in this film. The whole thing is hand held, and for what turns
out to be a superb reason, and magnificent conclusion, although some
will be terribly squeamish about it.
LITTLE SISTER, is the story of a brother and sister that have been close
friends for a long time, and at one time on her ninth birthday, perhaps a
little too close. But all of their adventures has been caught on film, by
mom and dad, and later by Martijn, who has taken up the camera for real,
although he does not discuss, or ever mention, that getting into film is
what he is about. The film suggests a slight abusive obsession
at first, and then begins to soften the stance once the story gets deadly
serious.
The older brother, still, appears attached to his younger sister, now a
woman, and he follows her around, in a rougher style than that of Mike
Leigh, another film maker for subjective ideals. Martijn keeps the camera up
close to his sister for the whole film, and follows her around.
Eventually it creates a few difficult situations, by walking in when she is
making love to her boyfriend, and also doing a no-no, later on, which
causes the transition in the film.
Eventually, the situation gets around, and Martjin, is forced to try and
figure out why he has become the way he has. He has failed in his
relationship or marriage ( not clear ), and the reason may have been that he
never got a sense of what it felt like to hold someone you really like, in
this case the situation going back to when his sister was nine years old,
and they got caught in the same bed.
The film now enters a very touchy area. And it takes the older sister to
literally sacrifice herself to try and help her brother. As it turns out,
however improper the situation is, it does not go beyond the point of no
return, and the suggestion is that Martjin has learned something, and that
Daantje, is finally freed of her brother with the camera in hand, who  tried
to break the relationship with her boyfriend, in what may have  amounted to
jealousy.
And in a fitting end, after the real touching, and touchy fifteen minutes,
Martijn gets up and out of the bed to turn off the camera for the last time.
For once, he was not abusive, and we can see that he has changed. He may not
have conquered his fears, but his following his sister and bothering her is
over for sure. She had to go through a rather uncomfortable moment which
might have turned the wrong direction, but it did not, and her way of
helping her brother displays a little bit more of love and care for him than
he has through his obsessive behavior.
At this point we can only hope that things get resolved, but there is no
reason to think that they will not.
It is clear that in those areas, sexual mores and attitudes are a bit easier
than the Christian morality found in many other parts of the world. But,
regardless, there are some things that affect individuals, and this film
keeps it strictly "individual", mostly because of its camera style.
While, very often, the camera can be a bit odd, and off the mark,
nevertheless, this is the strong point for this film in its desire  to make
a point. The point may be just this one person and his behavior have to
learn a lesson, and he does. The relentless use of the camera, to see things
like the eye truly does, is a refreshing style, over that of the average
film. And the director and actors seem to be aware of this and take it upon
themselves to make sure that this drama develops seriously and force a
serious conclusion to it.
It is the danger in these conclusions, that one, or both, could wind up
dead, but Daantje has succeeded where her brother has failed. His childlike
playfulness has been used as an excuse for his insecurities, and his choice
of moments defines that there is something there that he is in dire need to
resolve with his sister, although it may not be pleasant. His sister gives
in, but she doesn't fall apart at all. She is the stronger of the two, and
does not use a camera to hide behind her fears.
An absolutely riveting film, that is very difficult to accept and appreciate
because of its immediate link to what may be an incestuous relationship. But
I don't know that two children should be punished for a moment of innocence,
which may hurt them later, and in this case hurt Martijn seriously. And in
the end, when the situation has to come to a head, we are teetering on the
edge of our seats, scared shitless of what the outcome may be.
The film suggests here and there that the brother and sister have had a
connection before, but I really do not see that any of these moments were
any more than a teasing, or pleading to get attention, by Martijn.
Strong film that turns the tables mercilessly. Content may be inadvisable to
some. Other than that, it is very well done and thought out. Exceedingly
well designed by the director to bring about a turnabout ending to the
story.
Not for everyone due to subject matter of implied incest. Excellent film
otherwise.
