Title
Review for Wild at Heart (1990)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Greg Goebel
     I walked into David Lynch's BLUE VELVET without much in the way of
forewarning or familiarity with Lynch's earlier films, and had my head
totally twisted around for the better part of a week as a result.  So
when I went to see his latest, WILD AT HEART, I was better prepared.
This time I was only mildly confused and distressed.
     WILD AT HEART concerns the adventures of two dedicated lovers, Lula
and Sailor, who are on the run from Lula's mom, a woman who is roughly
similar to the Wicked Witch of the West and is portrayed very
specifically as such.  Mom is a truly evil character, made no less so by
the mind-shattering guilt she feels over her crimes, but nothing can
stand in the way of Lula's and Sailor's love.
     If this sounds vaguely like THE PRINCESS BRIDE -- you know, "true
love will always find a way" -- well, it is, if you can imagine THE
PRINCESS BRIDE with very graphic (and moderately imaginative) sex,
EXTREMELY graphic violence, a vision of human beings that does not
exclude their bodily functions, villains so evil that they literally
invoke a sense of fear and revulsion, a large supporting cast of
psychoes, freaks, and weirdos -- some dangerous, some not -- and a
general air of sleaze, corruption, and kitsch.
     If this sounds strange, it is, but Lynch fans understand; if you
don't understand, watch out.  Like BLUE VELVET, being asked the
question:  Is this a good movie?  -- causes confusion.  Some people will
like it, some people will hate it, but everyone will admit that it is
DIFFERENT.
     Next question:  Did I like it?  Well, there were certainly things
to like: Lynch has a way with visual imagery, and his use of flame as a
recurring image in this film is riveting.  Laura Dern as Lula is a
stunning heartbreaker, and Nicholas Cage as Sailor is a sympathetic
character ...  and the VILLAINS!  MY GOD!  Darth Vader is a silly
fantasy -- these people are sick, cruel as snakes, and vividly REAL --
not merely remorseless but actually amused by inflicting pain and
wreaking destruction.  (In this context, William Dafoe gets to play a
character about as far removed from JC as possible -- Dafoe has been
somewhat typecast as a saintly type, I wonder if Lynch found it amusing
to play him against that -- and Isobella Rosellini gets a small part in
which she shows that even the sleaziest style cannot hide what a
knockout she is.)
     Lynch also has a way of generating passions, too, a sort of way of
getting underneath the characters' and the audience's skin that I'm not
sure if I care for or not -- it's vivid but seems a little like
voyeurism at times.  I remember a colleague saying how unreal it was
when at the end of a TV show all the characters would be sitting around
chatting after being through enormous turmoil as if nothing had happened
-- when in reality they'd be carrying the weight of the events for years
or the rest of their lives.  In Lynch's universe that's what happens,
and we see into the character's deepest nightmares -- as in Lula's
heartbreaking memory of a childhood assault.
     There were things to outright dislike, though.  The film tended to
drag a little, and it could've stood to have had a few scenes cut that
detracted from its dramatic build -- particularly the little
side-stories about one psycho or another.  And sometimes it goes too
campy, also undermining its build -- and Lynch's preoccupation with
weirdness sometimes goes beyond his unusual sense of aesthetics into
something like affectation, too self-consciously and "traditionally"
avante-garde, as if he is throwing these things out just to confound the
sort of film analysts who like to reduce stories to pointless
meanderings about meanings and symbology.  Granted they're more than
fair game, but it also seems somewhat dishonest, like playing games with
the viewer.
     So, as far as recommendations go, you pays your money and you takes
your chances.  There's only one recommendation I would make:  Don't take
the kids or someone who is squeamish.

Author
Kevin Patterson
"Wild At Heart" is at its roots a pretty typical story of runaway lovers:
Sailor Ripley (Nicholas Cage), an ex-convict, and his girlfriend Lula (Laura
Dern) drive across the country trying to avoid Lula's cruel mother and the
hitmen she has sent after Sailor as well as Sailor's parole officers. Along
the way, they stop in the usual seedy backwater towns where they stay in the
usual flea-bag hotels and confront the usual perverted psychos. The premise
may not have been original, but it still could have made for a provocative
film if it had been executed properly.
Well, bad news: it wasn't, at least not consistently. Perhaps after the
success of "Blue Velvet," screenwriter and director David Lynch thought he
could make any story involving sex and violence into a compelling and powerful
film, and there are certainly plenty of both in this movie. But what made Blue
Velvet Ęwork so well was its mind's-eye view through its lead character
Jeffrey Beaumont, as he descends from quiet small-town innocence into a dark,
frightening world and ultimately fights his way back out. In "Wild At Heart,"
however, the characters of Sailor and Lula are not developed to that extent.
They just seem like two more crazies along the way, albeit likeable and
relatively benign crazies ("relatively benign" meaning "not twisted and
psychotic" in the context of this film). The story is presented as mostly a
curiosity, a far cry from the poignancy of "Blue Velvet." As a result, a few
of the more graphic scenes seem pretty gratuitous, as if Lynch were being
risque simply for the sake of being risque and not because the story was
driving him in any particular direction.
Furthermore, Lynch's talent for surreal moods and downright absurd behavior is
sometimes misused here, as much of the Lynchian weirdness operates at a
tangent to the main story rather than as part of it. It is as if, having shot
all the scenes most essential to the basic plot, someone told him he had
another thirty minutes of film left and he used it all on quirky but somewhat
irrelevant scenes like a delirious car accident victim looking for her keys
and purse as she bleeds to death. There is another scene in which the camera
lingers on some slowly undulating curtains on a balcony - a Lynch trademark -
but we never see what is going on behind those curtains, nor does it seem to
serve any purpose in setting the mood for what happens next. Watching "Wild At
Heart" is almost like watching a failed attempt to make a "David Lynch movie,"
as if a novice director set out to copy Lynch's imagery and then didn't know
what to do with it.
As a result, what we have in "Wild At Heart" is a film that, while somewhat
disappointing and a bit unfocused, is not without its merits - Sailor and Lula
certainly make for entertaining and sympathetic leads, and theirs is if
nothing else something of an uplifting love story in that they somehow manage
to make it through what can only be described as the road trip from hell. And,
however misguided Lynch's use of his usual absurdism here, it does lead to
some genuinely funny moments. In one sequence, Lula, disgusted by all the bad
news of murders and violence on the radio, stops the car, hysterically
demanding that Sailor put in a music cassette as the two of them break into a
goofy, chaotic dance routine on the side of the road. Lynch favorite Jack
Nance also makes an appearance, delivering a drawling, inane discourse on the
psychological nuances of talking about dogs ("Mentally, you picture my dog . .
. but, I have not told you the type dog which I have!").
Perhaps this movie is best viewed not as serious art, like most of Lynch's
other films, but as nothing more than a quirky and occasionally
stomach-churning adventure movie that, while not very sophisticated, is still
decent entertainment if you have nothing else to do for a couple of hours.
Visit my Film Reviews page at http://members.aol.com/KTPattersn/reviews.html

Author
Dragan Antulov
Once I was asked why I don't give highest grades to the
recently released films. The answer is rather simple - too
many times I had been blown away after watching the film for
the first time, only to see more and more flaws with each
subsequent viewing. As a result, many films that I used to
call masterpieces now seem overrated to me. So, in order to
spare myself of critical embarrassments, I tend to be
cautious and give highest grades only to those films that
pass the test of time.
One of such examples is related to the career of David
Lynch, American director who used to be rather obscure
figure in the film world, known only among lovers of "artsy"
cinema. His unexpected success with TWIN PEAKS television
series brought him to the mainstream audience, and being
Lynch fan became fashionable. At the apex of his popularity,
in 1990, he directed WILD AT HEART, strange combination of a
road movie, melodrama and black comedy which would bring him
his first "Palme d'Or". But his stunning success was marred
with very vocal minority that booed his film at the Cannes
Film Festival. Such event foreshadowed the strong division
among the critics when they discuss this film -some hail it
as genuine Lynchian masterpiece, and some call it cheap
exploitation of his mainstream popularity. At first, I was
blown away with this movie and thought of it as one of the
best films of 1990s, truly remarkable event. Later, I began
to see its flaws and now I don't see it as especially
important chapter in the history of cinema.
The plot of the film is based on the novel by Barry Gifford.
Sailor Ripley (played by Nicolas Cage) and Lula Fortune
(played by Laura Dern) are couple whose passionate love to
each other withstands all the challenges, including bizarre
attempt on Sailor's life that ended with Sailor serving two
years for manslaughter. Sailor gets out of prison and Lula
agrees to come with him to California. While two of them
head west, stopping in flea-bag motels in Deep South, Lula's
psychopathic mother Marietta (played by Diane Ladd)
desperately wants to separate them and hires services of
private detective and her part- time lover Johnny Farragut
(played by Harry Dean Stanton). However, her motive is not
just the well being of her daughter; Sailor used to work for
Marcello Santos (played by J.E. Freeman), local crime boss
who also happened to be Marietta's partner, both in business
and bed. While Santos' men join the pursuit in order to
silence Sailor, the couple is faced with more immediate
problem. Sailor and Lula run out of cash and get stranded in
small town in Texas, so Sailor is accept the offer by
menacing-looking criminal Bobby Peru (played by Willem
Dafoe) to take part in one of his capers.
Initial success of WILD HEART could be explained with the
strong impact felt by the first-time viewers. Even those
members of the audience who used to be familiar with Lynch
and his style of filmmaking, including the author of this
review, were caught by surprise when exposed to the very
original way he approached the story and the characters.
Naturally, Lynch used unusual editing techniques, camera
angles, suggestive photography and haunting musical score by
his composer Angelo Badalamenti to create dark and surreal
atmosphere, which actually helped the not so original plot
(doomed lovers on the run). But, the most interesting thing
in WILD AT HEART is barrage of shocks - Lynch bombards us
with unexpected events and character traits, often
challenging the endurance of the more squeamish audience.
For example, the lead character of Sailor in the beginning
of the film is attacked; he reacts with the most savage (and
very graphically depicted) act of violence. Only few scenes
later, he reacts to the similar act with equally irrational
and almost surreal chivalry. Few people like Lynch are ready
to combine so contrasting elements in the same movie, and
even fewer are ready to use them in the same scenes. One
second we are subjected to the sappiness, chivalry and
child-like innocence that belong to fairytales, only to be
brought down to earth with foul language, graphic violence,
explicit sex and, of course, Lynch trademark scenes
featuring various forms of physical and mental deformity.
That barrage of shocks and unexpected twists keeps the
viewers at their seats - they simply must see what is going
to happen next.
Unfortunately, somewhere in the second part of the film,
shock begins to wear off, some of those bizarre twists and
characters begin to look predictable and repetitive, most
notably numerous WIZZARD OF OZ references (except the last
surreal scene). Lynch also loses the sense of rhythm, there
are many scenes that go nowhere or should have been trimmed
a bit. The dialogue is also often weak, at least compared
with BLUE VELVET, Lynch's true masterpiece. Finally, after
two hours, some viewers begin feeling that Lynch didn't take
this film too seriously; whole purpose of WILD AT HEART
seems to be to Lynch's parody of himself and his cult of
filmmaking. One of the last scenes, with its ironic homage
to Kurosawa's YOJIMBO, foreshadows the incoming reign of
another cult favourite who had based his reputation on such
homages - Quentin Tarantino.
Whether Lynch took plot and characters seriously might be
debatable, but the cast definitely put great efforts.
Nicolas Cage played one of the great roles of his career -
Sailor Ripley is strange combination of street thug with the
heart of gold and Elvis impersonator. Cage managed to make
him both funny and human in the same time; we both laugh at
him and sympathise with his plight. Unfortunately, his
partners weren't up to the task, mostly due to Lynch's idea
to have his characters as bizarre as possible, and his
directing probably encouraged overacting. Laura Dern puts
too much effort to make her Lula as different as possible
from squeaky-clean all-American girl from BLUE VELVET; the
result is creature that engages in chain-smoking, swearing
and torrid sex and, unfortunately, has disturbing tendency
to make rather unappealing facial expressions. Her mother,
played by Laura Dern's real mother Diane Ladd (who deserved
"Oscar" nomination for this role) plays one of the most
embarrassing incarnations of evil in the history of cinema -
sex-crazed, drunk and downright stupid creature, way below
the high standards set by Wicked Witch of the West. Even
Willem Dafoe, who probably enjoyed opportunity to play Bobby
Peru, character as far away from his best- known role of
Jesus as possible, seems wasted here. His character appears
too late to stick in memory compared with deformed and
demented villains played by Grace Zabriskie and David
Patrick Kelly. Always reliable Harry Dean Stanton, who plays
only comparatively normal character in the film, is
tragically underused. Luckily, there are many Lynch's old
associates that improve impression about film with
interesting and memorable parts in cameos - Jack Nance,
Sherilyn Fenn, Isabella Rosselini and Sheryl Lee.
All in all, WILD AT HEART has some flaws, yet it is still
one fine example of Lynch's directorial talent. Evident
imperfection of this film shouldn't be the reason to discard
it with the same zeal as it was hailed as masterpiece ten
years ago. WILD AT HEART is still an interesting piece of
cinema and it can still provide intense viewing experiences,
at least for those who watch it for the first time.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
