Title
Review for Pręt-ŕ-Porter (1994)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Marcello Mastroianni, Sophia Loren, Kim Basinger, Danny Aiello, 
          Anouk Aimee, Lauren Bacall, Michel Blanc, Anne Canovas,
          Jean-Pierre Cassel, Rossy De Palma, Richard E. Grant,
          Rupert Everett, Kasia Figura, Teri Garr, Linda Hunt,
          Sally Kellerman, Laurent Lederer, Ute Lemper, Tara Leon,
          Lyle Lovett, Chiara Mastroianni, Tom Novembre, Stephen Rea,
          Sam Robards, Tim Robbins, Julia Roberts, Giorgianna Robertson,
          Tapa Sudana, Lili Taylor, Tracey Ullman, Camille Vivier,
          Forest Whitaker 
Directors: Robert Altman 
Producer: Robert Altman 
Screenplay: Robert Altman and Barbara Shulgasser 
Cinematography: Pierre Mignot and Jean Lepine 
Music: Michel Legrand 
Released by Miramax Films 
In English, French, and Italian with subtitles 
     One wonders whether Robert Altman arrived at that conclusion
before or after the much-anticipated READY TO WEAR was complete.
Despite some delicious moments, this sluggish, overlong, halfhearted
satire feels like a movie that wanted to go somewhere but never got
there.  With punches pulled and fangs capped, this look at high fashion
is not at all what was expected from the director of THE PLAYER, one of
the most vicious and biting sendups of the last two decades.
     First of all, there are far too many characters.  A cast list like
the one above looks good on paper, but no actor gets more than a
handful of scenes, which leads to a pervasive sense of apathy regarding
almost everyone.  Who cares if Marcello Mastrioanni's mysterious Sergio
finds his lost love (Sophia Loren)?  Neither of them seems any more
substantial than the garments worn by the models in the climactic
fashion show.
     At least three of the subplots could have been excised
altogether.  One involves Tim Robbins and Julia Roberts as American
journalists thrown together in the same hotel room.  Another pairs Teri
Garr and Danny Aiello as a couple with a "dark" secret, and a third
follows New York Times reporter Lili Taylor as she researches a story.
Eliminating these might have streamlined READY TO WEAR to make it more
palatable.  It certainly would have cut down the running time.
     It's not that Altman can't work with a large cast--he did an
admirable job in SHORT CUTS.  The problem here is that his stories
aren't particularly well-focused.  The best scenes are often those
where dialogue overlaps and the various subplots intersect.
     That's not to claim there's nothing effective in READY TO WEAR.
In fact, three of the stories are vintage Altman.  One, involving the
cutthroat machinations of three fashion magazine editors (Sally
Kellerman, Tracey Ullman, and Linda Hunt) to woo a sleazy superstar
photographer (Stephen Rea), has a bite to it.  The attempts of fashion
queen Simone Lowenthal (Anouk Aimee) to keep her empire out of the
hands of a cowboy boot maker (Lyle Lovett) takes a pointed turn that
leads to the scene almost everyone seems to be talking about.  And Kim
Basinger single-handedly skewers the shallow manner in which the news
media obsesses over fashion.
     Nevertheless, READY TO WEAR doesn't have enough substance to
justify its length, nor does it possess enough raw humor to leaven the
flat spots.  The jokes are inconsistently funny, with some being worth
giggles, some eliciting hearty chuckles, and some prompting little more
than shrugs.
     Altman is a marvelously talented director.  There's no denying
that.  Films like M*A*S*H, NASHVILLE, THE PLAYER, and SHORT CUTS have
proven his skill several times over.  And, while READY TO WEAR is far
from his best work, neither is it equivalent to much of the trash
present on so many multiplex screens this season.  The fashion industry
can heave a sigh of relief that Altman has spared it the full force of
his guns.  This film isn't likely to provoke much outrage from anyone
except those expecting something as searing as THE PLAYER.  READY TO
WEAR keeps its jabs clothed, and by the time it strips away the layers
of covering (both literally and figuratively), it's a little too late.
The above represents the opinions of the author, and not necessarily those of
Bellcore or any organization within Bellcore.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com) 

Author
Frank R. A. J. Maloney
     READY TO WEAR (PRET-A-PORTER) is a film produced and directed by
Robert Altman.  It was written by Altman and Barbara Shulgasser.  The
cast includes Kim Basinger, Sophia Loren, Marcello Mastroianni, Richard
E.  Grant, Stephen Rea, Julia Roberts, Tim Robbins, Whitaker Forest,
Sally Kellerman, Anouk Aimee, Linda Hunt, Tracey Ullman, Lauren Bacall,
Danny Aiello, Tom Novembre, Lili Taylor, Jean-Pierre Cassall, Michel
Blanc, Lyle Lovett, Teri Garr, Jean Rochefort, Rupert Everett, and many
celebrity cameos.  Rated R for nudity. 132 minutes.
     READY TO WEAR may be the most misunderstood film of 1994.  Most
reviews have called it a satire, a parody, an attack on the fashion
industry.  Whatever Altman's intentions, the resulting film--which
had its original title translated from French to English and had nearly
an hour of its original running time cut, both at the last minute, by
spineless marketeers--is not an attack, but a paean to and a
celebration of the human condition.  It is joyful, uplifting, amazing
in its deep compassion and wise understanding of what being human is
all about.  Like Walt Kelly's Pogo (or was it Porky Pine?) Altman says
"don't take life so seriously, son, it ain't permanent anyhow." Or
Kelly's even more famous, "We have met the enemy, and he is us."
     READY TO WEAR is no more an attack on fashion than THE PLAYER was
an attack on the film industry; both films hold an artifact of our
shared culture up to the light but only so we can marvel at this absurd
toy which so reflects our own absurdity.  Does anyone doubt that Altman
loves the flicks after seeing THE PLAYER?
     Fashion, with all its absurdity, contradiction, and extremism, is
a human invention and as such stands as an illuminating symbol of all
human lives, all human inventions.  And the last fashion show in the
film is the best of all, full of dignity and hopefulness, as bold and
touching a statement of optimism as I've seen in years.  A review
quoted in the display ads for this film spoils this moment somewhat,
but take it from me that that spoiler misses this point by as wide a
mark as virtually all other comments I've seen about the film.
     The film moves me over and over again.  Just seeing Sophia Loren
at age 60 more beautiful and magnificent than ever doing a loving strip
tease for her greatest co-star, Marcello Mastroianni, here reunited on
the screen for the first time since the late 70s; the strip tease
itself is an homage to another such scene in their great film
YESTERDAY, TODAY, AND TOMORROW (1964), the results being appropriate
different thanks to the intervening three decades. (Other older great
beauties and great women, still by no means superannuated, film are
used also in the Altman film to counter the almost childish models and
fashion's and culture's love of youth--beauties such as Anouk Aimee and
Lauren Bacall and a particularly wonderful Sally Kellerman who manages
to recall her role as Hotlips Hoolihan in Altman's M*A*S*H in one
moment of self-exposure.)
     Another great delight in READY TO WEAR is Kim Basinger, never
before much of a favorite of mine, who here creates the memorable Kitty
Potter, a cable-TV fashion reporter with a Texas accent and
sorority-girl gestures.  Kitty knows nothing that isn't written on her
cue cards, but at the end she at least knows that she will never
understand "this bullshit," as she says.  Her brevet replacement does
understand and helps us do so, too.  But to say much about that here
would be to give away one of the major moments of the film.
     Also to be recommended is the team of Julia Roberts (another
perennial no-show on my list of favorite Hollywood women) and Tim
Robbins.  They are funny enough to get a film of their own together.
The situation that throws them together and keeps them together is a
little improbable, all the way round, but it provides such good clean
fun that one ought not to complain too loudly.
     Forest Whitaker, Tom Novembre, and Richard E. Grant are three gay
designers and particularly Whitaker and Grant go way over the top.
Normally, I would probably be less sanguine about the fops and faggots
routine, but here it is leavened by an opportunity to see beneath the
posing and affectation for a moment or two.  In addition, we have the
real-life designer Jean-Paul Gaultier, he of the many piercings, doing
interviews and being altogether wonderful, balancing somewhat the
actors' extremism.
     On the other hand Stephen Rea is the perfect little shit as the
hot Irish fashion photographer who seems determined for some reason to
destroy his career; perhaps the rest of the part was lost on the
cutting room floor, as the saying goes.  And perhaps Altman will give
us a director's cut on video later so we can see all the treasures
thrown away in the name of marketing.
     For me, the visual appeal of the film was very high indeed.  The
fashions are great fun and in some cases really exciting, although the
best dressed woman in the film is Loren with vintage haute couture and
vast hats right out of Fellini, who always loved a good fashion show
and a really big hat.  The Paris locations are wonderful, too.  It is
the appeal of the fashions that for me is one of the signs that READY
TO WEAR is not the vicious satire it is being called by the
professional reviewers.  Of course, the fashions are often ridiculous,
but they are always creative and amusing, and so very human.
     There are many treasures here--the canine fashion show, for
example, and the transvestites' dinner party--indeed, even after seeing
the film twice in one day, I was still grinning through it all,
laughing out loud occasionally (as when, in Kitty Potter's words, Loren
is being attended in a fainting spell by "two fashion doctors," and
leaving the theater moved and touched and near to tears of happiness.
     Let me be one of the few who recommend READY TO WEAR
(PRET-A-PORTER) to you.  It is worth any price of admission you must
pay and it will repay you over and over again.

Author
Brian Koller
"Ready to Wear" was Robert Altman's disappointing
successor to 1992's "The Player".  This time,
Altman targets a prestigious fashion show in
Paris, with the message that everyone involved
in the fashion industry is shallow, conceited and
eccentric.  Even assuming that this sweeping
stereotype is correct, it is insufficient grounds
for a film that is over two hours long.
Another problem with "Ready to Wear" is the
ensemble cast.  There are so many characters that
it is difficult to remember who is what, much
less identify with any of them.  Much of the
comedy also falls flat: a recurring gag is a man
stepping in dog-doo, something that one would
more expect from a Leslie Nielsen vehicle.
While "Ready to Wear" fails as a comedy, it is
not a complete waste of celluloid.  There is the
parade of naked supermodels at the film's end (in
this case, forgetting to rewind the video is doing
the next renter a favor).  There is a vaguely
amusing subplot involving Tim Robbins and Julia
Roberts as strangers 'forced' to share the same
hotel room (with predictable results: poor Lyle
Lovett, who has a bit part and looks lost).
Despite a lack of structure and an absence of
plot, the film is only occasionally truly boring.
Other subplots have Sally Kellerman, Linda Hunt
and Tracey Ullman playing fashion magazine
publishers, each of whom are desperately trying
to hire photographer Stephen Rea, who is more
interested in taking embarrasing photographs
of them.  Sophia Loren is romanced by Marcello
Mastroianni (the scene where she strips is a parody
of their corresponding scene in 1964's "Yesterday,
Today and Tomorrow") and has a husband who gets
murdered.  And the cast goes on and on: there's
four gay fashion designers who cheat on each other,
Kim Basinger is a witless reporter, Danny Aiello
is a cross dresser, Lauren Bacall and Teri Garr
show up for no discernable reason, lotsa others
whom I don't recognize, and a dozen or so
disinterested fashion models.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Dragan Antulov
For the author of this review clothing is primarily the
invention that protects human body from the natural
elements. In some occasions clothes can be the source of
aesthetic pleasure, but such instances are too rare to
justify the phenomenon of modern fashion industry. Teen
models that promote anorexia, bulimia, self-mutilation and
heroin use; outfits that can be worn only by masochists,
exhibitionists and other sexual perverts; instant stardom
for people who create clothes that average person can't
afford; and billions of dollars that could be spent for
things like sheltering cyclone victims in Bangladesh - all
that can be seen as a symptom of decline of Western
civilisation and, in light of it, people might even have
some understanding for Bin Laden and his ilk. So when Robert
Altman made satirical attempt on fashion industry in 1994
film READY TO WEAR, the author of this review greeted that
effort with enthusiasm.
Like in most of the best known Altman's films, there isn't
anything resembling clear plot. Just like in NASHVILLE or
SHORT CUTS, there is a series of loosely connected subplots
dealing with large number of characters that happen to be
one place at a particular time. In this case, the place is
Paris, where crcme de la crcme of fashion industry - models,
designers and media - gather for one of two annual fashion
shows. This is an opportunity for Altman to show us whole
variety of unusual characters and present hypocrisy,
depravity and pointlessness that rule supreme in that world.
For many people, including the author of this review, READY
TO WEAR was a disappointment. Script by Altman and Barbara
Schulgasser is at times really mean towards fashion
industry, but the edge, that used to be so effective against
Hollywood in PLAYER, is missing. Perhaps this is due to the
fact that Altman and Schulgasser had less knowledge of
fashion industry than of Hollywood. Loose structure of this
film works against it - some subplots and characters are
effective, and some aren't and only makes this film longer
than it should be. Some characters (including celebrities
playing themselves in cameo roles) appear for no apparent
reason. The stories are often interrupted with
quasi-documentary footage of fashion shows and,
consequently, film looses its pace. The thing that saves
READY TO WEAR are the actors who seem to have great deal of
fun playing outrageous and often pathetic characters
(especially Richard E. Grant and Forest Whitaker as two gay
designers or Marcello Mastroianni and Sofia Loren as old
lovers). The other thing is ironic, not so subtle but
nevertheless very effective ending that would undoubtedly
please some male members of the audience. In any case, READY
TO WEAR, despite being a disappointment, still presents us
with an interesting look towards one of the most visible
phenomena of modern culture.
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian

Author
Raymond Johnston
Directed by Robert Altman
Starring: Anouk Aimee, Marcello Mastroianni, Sophia Loren,
          Kim Bassinger, Stephen Rea, Tim Robbins, Julia Roberts,
          Lauren Bacall, Sally Kellerman, Danny Aiello
     Altman has developed a unique style.  His classic films all have
large ensemble casts juggling several intertwining storylines at once,
often talking at the same time.  After taking on the world of politics
in NASHVILLE and the disintegrating California social structure in
SHORT CUTS, lampooning the vapid world of Paris fashion just doesn't
seem to be a worthy enough subject.  Fluff, dissected and scrutinized,
is fluff.  There is very little more to know about it than can be seen
at first glance.
     READY TO WEAR, or PRET A PORTER as the film's title sequence still
says, only has a chance of being moderately satisfying compared to
Altman's classic essays on society.  It does succeed for the most part,
landing at least in the upper half of Altman's work, but least
satisfying of his efforts since his "comeback" with VINCENT AND THEO,
but better than his last Paris lensed outing, BEYOND THERAPY.
     His stories this time are much more loosely connected than last.
In SHORT CUTS a thread of cause and effect could be traced from one
character to the others, Lily Tomlin's accident to the parents to the
cake maker and so forth.  In READY TO WEAR, one simply has to be in
Paris on the days covered to be included in the story.  Several of them
could be removed completely with no effect on the storyline.  Where
characters in SHORT CUTS often delved into their deepest emotions,
READY TO WEAR is all cheap shots, one line barbs.  Nothing in the film
is deep or heartfelt.  Simply as a comedy, it is difficult to tell what
the jokes about the fashion world even are, since the world is so close
to self-parody anyway.  An unpleasant vein of scatological humor runs
through the film as well.
     After a so-so first hour, filled with protracted set-ups and
introductions, the film gets somewhat better.  After what seems to be
an endless bit of airport arrivals and hotel check-ins, several plots
emerge, mostly concerning petty backfighting between different
designers, models, photographers and magazine editors.  Once the
characters and their own personal vacuous goals are established, the
stories get going quickly as a maze of rehearsals and shows that one
either must be seen or not be seen at.  Doing the seeing for us is Kim
Bassinger as Kitty Potter, an MTV-type fashion reporter who seems to be
everywhere trying to get a straight answer from anybody as she reads
her questions from cue cards.
       The ensemble cast for the film is huge.  Many real Paris fashion
icons play themselves, and lent their creations to be used in the
film.  The cast is a who's and who's not list of international talent.
Stephen Rea gives his best performance to date as a jaded photographer
in a stand out role.  European art film stalwarts Marcello Mastroianni,
Sophia Loren, Anouk Aimee and Jean-Pierre Cassel bring warmth to their
story, and it is a large portion of the film.  Lauren Bacall, Lyle
Lovett,  Tim Robbins, Julia Roberts, Teri Garr and Danny Aiello are
among several stars really wasted in side stories that never get to be
quite amusing enough.
       By the end, more of the stories hit than miss.  It becomes
amusing to see what new depths of shallowness some of the characters
will sink to in their petty back stage games.  Even the message scene
at the end is amusing for its shallowness at making a deep statement
about fashion.
     Compared to most of the films that came out of Hollywood this
year, READY TO WEAR is better than most, but once it is over it is as
forgettable as last year's platform shoes.  Ultimately it is as shallow
as the world it is commenting on.
