Title
Review for Cobra (1925)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David M. Arnold
A Retrospective Review by David M. Arnold
I puzzled over this film for a long time after viewing it.
I couldn't quite figure out what the point was.  Was it some
sort of morality play?  A lesson on virture?  I finally
concluded that it must have been an attempt to capitalize on
it's star's (Rudolph Valentino) innate magnetism to women --
a romantic fantasy.
Count Rodrigo Torriani (Valentino) is young, handsome and broke.
He has the misfortune of being cursed with irresistiblity
to women, who are drawn to him like moths to a flame.  He has
squandered his inheritance by bestowing cash settlements on
women as compensation for the hearts he has broken.
Rodrigo is befriended by wealthy American antiques dealer
Jack Dorning (Casson Ferguson), who hires Rodrigo to come
to New York and to join his firm as an expert on Italian
antiques.  Jack's lifestyle is as dull as Rodrigo's is
exciting.  Elise (Nita Naldi), niece to a wealthy patron,
and Mary Drake (Gertrude Olmstead), Jack's executive
secretary, make up a complex menage-a-quatre.
I can't discuss my thoughts about this film without giving
away some of the plot, but I'll try to be as oblique as
possible.  Suffice to say that one of the women is virtuous
and the other one is not.  The old Double Standard is in
full vigor, and the non-virtuous one is damned for living
the same lifestyle as Rodrigo, to whom the film give smirking
approval.  Finally, the virtuous one prevails and gets
Her Man, although modern viewers might feel it was the
wrong man.
Rudolph Valentino (stage name for Rodolfo Pietro Filiberto
Raffaello Guglielmi di Valentina) made about a dozen films
after he became a star in "The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse"
(1921).  "Cobra" was the next to the last film he made before
his untimely and unexpected death in 1926 at age 31.
Valentino was one of film's earliest bona-fide heartthrobs,
and a mob of mourners at his New York funeral nearly turned
into a riot.
"Cobra" is one of Valentino's lesser works, although not
really due to any fault of his own.  His major contribution
is to be broodingly handsome in a number of stagey scenes
in which characters enter, deliver their lines (or, what
pass for lines in a silent film), and then leave.  Valentino
was once again paired with Nita Naldi, one of the silent
era's premier sex symbols.  Valentino and Naldi sizzled in
"Blood and Sand" (1922).  The fire between them in "Cobra"
has been damped down to a feeble smolder, and they get only
one unconvincing smooch.
Director Joseph Henabery has an impressive filmography of
long-forgotten films, many of them 2-reelers.  He is most
recognizable to silent fans as an actor who played Abe
Lincoln in "Birth of a Nation", and Admiral Coligny
in "Intolerance".
The film tackles the topic of adultery with a directness
that the Hayes office would expunge from Hollywood a mere
10 years later.  But, it is so hampered by the silent form
that the it never quite delivers.  I am a fan of silent film.
My list of 5 all-time favorite films includes two silents.
A silent film can be awe-inspiring ("Thief of Bagdad",
"Metropolis"); it can be lyrically beautiful ("Sunrise").
"Cobra" is neither, and its technique with static camera
placment is most un-cinematic.
My biggest complaint with "Cobra" is that the film doesn't
have a coherent moral vision.  The title is derived from
Rodrigo's belief that the victim of a cobra is nonetheless
fascinated by the snake, and succumbs somewhat willingly.
Woman is Rodrigo's cobra, making him the victim who willingly
succumbs out of fascination for his enemy.  However, when
Rodrigo eventually overcomes his self-destructive obsession,
he is smacked down. In the film's final scene, Rodrigo returns,
chastened, to Italy but only after sacrificing own happiness
in gratitude to his friend's generosity.  The fact that
Rodrigo returns unattached keeps the fantasy alive -- Rodrigo
is still available.
I watched the new Image DVD of "Cobra", a disc that suffers
from less than pristine picture quality, and a total lack
of any extra material that might help the viewer put the
film into some sort of historical context.  It appears
to be the only Valentino film as yet (9/1999) to appear on
DVD.  This seems strange to me, since stronger films like
"Blood and Sand" or "The Shiek" are more representative of
his work.
I can recommend "Cobra" as a curio to film fans who want
to round out their silent film experience.  And, as a
reminder that the silent era, too, had its share of clunkers.
Essay Copyright (C) 1999 David M. Arnold.  All rights reserved.
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.
