Title
Review for Jackal, The (1997)
Number of Reviews
21

Author
Boyd Petrie
Starring: Bruce Willis, Richard Gere, Sidney Poitier, Diane Venora, and Mathilda May.
Oh how I wish I could have seen Kevin Jarre and Chuck Pfarrer work out
the screenplay for THE JACKAL.  They must have read the novel, or even
worse, just watched the previous film version, and then thought,
"Let's focus most of the film on THE JACKAL!"  I haven't read the
book, but I know that it must have been better than this.  THE JACKAL,
which ripped its premise from a 1973 production of THE DAY OF THE
JACKAL, is a film which wants to try something new, to show us the
criminal's mind work as he sets up for his next target.  However, we
have seen it before, and done much better (IN THE LINE OF FIRE).
Unfortunately, the film focuses so much attention on The Jackal (Bruce
Willis) that we begin to care for him more than the good guys.  I must
admit that I did like one of the heros, but she is left with a smaller
part than all the male characters in the film.
THE JACKAL opens promisingly, with a title sequence similar to that of
SEVEN.  In the background, we see some historical war scenes composed
of poorly edited television broadcasts.  The music, by Carter Burwell
(FARGO, and others), is moody and well done.  But once actors start
appearing on screen, THE JACKAL doesn't just slow to crawl... it comes
to a halt.  A glimmer of hope shines when Sidney Poitier arrives, but
left with a small scrap of a role, that glimmer is snuffed out.
Opening with a scene which is quickly forgotten, Valentina Koslova
(Diane Venora, HEAT) and FBI Deputy Director Carter Preston (Poitier)
try to arrest a Russian terrorist (I assume, as they never quite tell
us).  The Russian terrorist ends up dead, and as cliched as it might
be, his brother wants revenge.
The brother hires The Jackal to show America something they would
never forget.  The Jackal is assigned, with a $70 million price tag,
to assassinate a high-ranking U.S. Government official.  Who is it
exactly?  We aren't sure, and we don't find out until late in the
film.  This is supposedly added for suspenseful purposes, but instead,
with the recent discoveries surrounding the certain official nowadays,
we wish The Jackal would succeed and kill the official.  But listening
to the audience's reaction, I guess most people will find this movie
entertaining and fun.  Well, it is fun, for a little while, and only
at the end.  So why has this big name cast signed on for this film?
I'm not quite sure, with the exception of Bruce Willis who must have
thought it would be fun to portray a bad guy.  Luckily, Willis has so
much fun that we begin to get involved in the film--but only with his
character.
THE JACKAL follows two different story lines, trying to draw an
indistinct line between them.  We are forced into watching a
cat-and-mouse game, except from both sides.  We see The Jackal setting
up his project, and we also see Carter Preston trying to find The
Jackal.  My question is, how did Mr. Preston know The Jackal was
planning something?  Maybe they explained it to us, but if they did, I
was probably trying to make sense of what occured just prior to that
scene.  Here is a movie which plays out with all the information
exposed to the audience (with the exception of who is being targeted),
while the characters are left in the dark for most of the film.
Despite this, and ironically so, THE JACKAL remains one step ahead of
us, making us think back, trying to clear up holes and messy dialogue
from previous scenes.  A lot of the dialogue is spoken with Russian or
other accents, and we can't quite tell what is being said.  Many of
these lines come from Richard Gere, who has an extremely distracting
Irish accent.  His lines come across as a slur of words, and the
audience is left struggling to make sense of it.  Gere does manage to
get most of his lines across well, but some of the important ones are
said so quietly, we can't distinguish them.  Thankfully, Gere doesn't
show up until the movie's setup has been completed (but we are still
confused).
As the antagonist, Bruce Willis shows a terrific side to his acting
talent.  We have seen him play good guys in the DIE HARD series and
TWELVE MONKEYS, but we have never quite seen him as sadistic as this.
I found his performance to be hugely entertaining, and whenever the
movie went back to the chase side, I was disappointed.  Now, I'm not
saying I like rooting for the bad guys, but when there are no good
guys to cheer for, who else is there?  Furthermore, The Jackal
reminded me of Val Kilmer's character in THE SAINT (which was actually
worse than this film).  His character kept changing appearances,
showing Willis' wide range of acting skill.  As mentioned previously,
I wish they could have found a better target for the film, because I
had no emotional connection to the target themselves.  Another reason
for this is the physical resemblance of the two officials (in the film
and in real life).  Willis' suave style gives a lot of depth to his
good character, and therefore gives the most respectable performance.
The only hero I was actually rooting for was Major Koslova (Venora).
Her no-nonsense attitude is something most of the male figures needed
in the film.  Remarkably, the acting isn't the worst thing in the
film.  The plot is, which is rather disgraceful to the premise.
Setting up a premise with this much hope is one thing, but to shoot it
down in the next hour and fourty-five minutes is another.  I can't
recall another film in which I have actually noticed most of the plot
holes while watching the movie.  Usually I will discover them while
thinking about it afterwards (and usually I will forgive the film for
these if it was entertaining enough), but these were too obvious to
not notice, and the film wasn't very entertaining.  How did The Jackal
get the gun off of the boat?  How did the protagonist find Declan
Mulqueen (Gere)?  Despite all these questions, the more obvious
questions relate to the characters themselves.  Who was the Russian
terrorist?  Who was his brother?  What purpose did the homosexual have
in the movie?  Who were those hijackers?  All questions, with little
answers.
Director Michael Caton-Jones has given us a very slow-paced action
film, with little depth to pull us in.  Jones admirably left a lot of
blood out of the film, which so many action films like to show us.
Normally I like to see the violence, but I have realized, with this
film, that a lot of it isn't necessary to witness.  That isn't saying
there isn't blood and gore, but it is a heck of a lot less than say,
STARSHIP TROOPERS or THE PEACEMAKER.  Unfortunately, Jones never finds
the right tone or pace for the film to move along.  We are left
wanting more... of anything, in fact.  More violence could have even
helped.  More action would have been nice.  Even though this is a
suspense/action film, put more coherent action scenes in.  It's hard
to believe that this is the director who gave us that beautifully
orchestrated sword fight in ROB ROY.
THE JACKAL is rated R for strong violence and language.  In fact, the
language was extremely disturbing from the very start.  Normally
language doesn't disturb me in a film, but THE JACKAL's constant use
of it in the first ten minutes caught me off guard.  Perhaps the
reason I was disturbed is because I didn't know who the guy was, or
what he had done wrong.  Overall, I would say that THE JACKAL fails in
most areas.  It does have a few elements of fun, but mostly because of
Willis.  Not many actors can portray evil while portraying a sensitive
side.  However, I still tend to wonder why he hesitated in killing the
woman.  Sensitive?  Oh yeah, kinda gets you right there, doesn't it?
Reviewed by Respect (respect@aros.net)
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html

Author
David Wilcock
Running Time: 124 minutes (2 hours 4 minutes)
Starring Bruce Willis and Richard Gere
Directed by Michael Caton-Jones
A remake of The Day of the Jackal (1973), Michael Caton-Jones (Rob Roy,
1995) violent, though occasionally entertaining film is pretty average.
Bruce Willis plays an assasin simply known as The Jackal. His latest job is
to kill an important member of the U.S.A government, and F.B.I agent Cater
Preston (Sidney Poitier) and an ex-terrorist Declan Mulqueen (Gere) try to
stop him, helped by a russion major Valentina Koslova (played well by Diane
Verona) It's a simple cat and mouse chase, featuring lots of 'toys for the
boys' (i.e a very big cannon, loads of guns) and a few twists along the way.
Although the film is fun for the first 20 minutes, with Willis putting on a
variety of disguises, much like Val Kilmer in The Saint (1996) but when
Gere is introduced into the film, it goes rapidly downhill. Quite frankly,
it's Gere who ruins the whole picture. His Irish accent is terribly
unconvincing, and his character dull, and not intresting at all. In fact,
the audience will probably warm more to The Jackal, who is supposed to be
the bad guy! Willis is great fun at being evil, seemingly having a good
time in the film. His character is just not evil enough, though, although I
doubt Willis could ever pull off pure evil, he's got a 'good guy' image
attached to him. If someone like Christopher Walken (Batman Returns, 1992)
or Al Pacino (The Devils Advocate, 1997) was playing him, I have a feeling
the Jackal character would have had that extra edge.
Poitier is pretty much on auto-pilot as the F.B.I agent, with a pretty much
average performance. There's nothing outstanding with his performance, yet
there's nothing really bad with it either. However, Verona is fun as a
russian major, with a good accent, and also some excellent acting. She
deserves to be in a film better than this, as she is pretty much wasted
here (like Charlzie Theron in The Devils Advocate, 1997) She defintely has
the best performance in the film. 
Michael Caton-Jones direction is average, although some scenes do have some
tension, such as a tense situation featuring the Jackal and Valentina
inside a house. But, like most of the cast, he seems to be on autopilot,
directing most of the scenes in a safe fashion. He dosen't really attempt
to pull off any tricks, he just directs the action. And that's the problem
with the whole film, really. It plays it terrible safe. It dosen't attempt
to try anything new, yet it dosen't really do anything wrong. This is stuck
right in the middle of 'average' With only Verona, and to a certain extent,
Willis having fun, The Jackal is actually less fun than it could of been. 
The music is quite good, however, usually re-inforcing what is on screen.
The effects are O.K also, including a quite good scene in a subway tunnel.
But, generally, The Jackal is one of the most average films I've seen. I
can't heavely fault it, yet I can't really commend it either. Resonably
entertaining, average Hollywood fare.

Author
Chad Polenz
1997, R, 124 minutes [2 hours, 4 minutes]
starring: Bruce Willis (The Jackal), Richard Gere (Declan Mulqueen), Sidney
Poitier (FBI Deputy Director Carter Preston), Diane Vernon (Major Valentina
Kolovska); written by Chuck Pfarrer; produced by Michael Caton-Jones, Sean
Daniels, James Jacks, Kevin Jarre; directed by Michael Caton-Jones; based on
the screenplay "The Day Of The Jackal" by Kenneth Ross.
Seen Tuesday, November 18, 1997 at 7:10 p.m. at The Glenwood Movieplex
Cinemas (Oneida, N.Y.), theater #1, by myself for free (press pass). [Theater
rating: *** - good sound, good picture, good seats]
They say there's only a certain amount of plots that any story can use. I'm
sure I've seen them all by this point, and the movies never cease to amaze me
in their efforts to convince me I haven't. Watching nearly every minute of
"The Jackal" I constantly felt a sense of Deja Vu, as if I'd see it all
elsewhere. But what's really scary is the fact I had seen most of it in films
just as mediocre as this.
The film wastes no time in setting up its premise and revealing itself as
the generic thriller it is. The first scene takes place in modern day Moscow
where we witness an attempt to arrest a mobster by tough Russian cop Major
Valentina Kolovska (Vernon), FBI Deputy Director Carter Preston (Poitier),
and a slew of police in full riot gear. When the mobster actually tries to
escape and is killed in the process, it's symbolic how this film will go
about developing its story.
The Russian "Godfather" gets word of the incident and becomes so enraged he
kills one of his own men (a la James Bond-villain/Darth Vader-style), and
hires "The Jackal" (Willis), supposedly the world's best hitman, to
assassinate a top American official as payback.
It's bad enough there are remarkably few details here, such as why the U.S.
and Soviets are working together, or even how Kolovska got a distractingly
ugly scar on her head, but what's really annoying is how serious the film
presents itself. Like every other "high-tech" thriller, there's lots of
technical jargon here to make it seem realistic, but the pacing is so quick I
missed even the most general plot details. For example, I can't describe how
the FBI learns of The Jackal and his plan because I didn't understand it
myself. 
>From this point on, the sense of Deja Vu really started to kick in. At
first, the story works much  like "The Saint," only from the opposite
perspective, as we follow The Jackal from Europe to Canada and see how he
fakes his IDs and constantly disguises himself (although how he smuggles in a
huge artillery gun is conviently left out). Meanwhile, Preston and Kolovska
team up and try to convince a convicted terrorist (a la "The Rock"), Declan
Mulqueen (Gere), to help them find The Jackal. Do I really have to tell you
how poorly explained this element is and how much blackmail is used as
justification for the plot?
Most of the film shifts back and forth between The Jackal's clever
assassination plan, and Preston, Kolovska, and Mulqueen's efforts to track
him. It's a generic cat-and-mouse story which walks a fine line between
realistic detective work (a la "The Fugitive"), and the same old governmental
thriller stuff (a la "Patriot Games"). I was surprised by the attempt at
detail made here, and some it was actually quite interesting. 
Unfortunately, as is the case with most modern thrillers, once the film
showed potential for authenticity and intelligence, the cliches and action
sequences take over. First there's a pointless scene of The Jackal testing
his gun's remote targeting system on the hillbilly who made it for him
(played by the funny, but typecasted, Jack Black). Then there's a chase scene
at a crowded regatta, the revelation of a leak within the FBI, and a sudden
realization The Jackal will kill Mulqueen's long lost love (who of course
plays an important role in the end).
The final act is unoriginal to say the least. Mulqueen realizes The Jackal
isn't after the director of the FBI, but the First Lady. It's all downhill
from there as the film uses the most worn out of cliches such as the
last-second, life-saving-dive-in-slow-motion, and the man-against-man chase
through subway tunnels and all the danger that could be involved in that
situation. Not to mention the beyond predictable ending.
Note to Hollywood: if you insist on making movies like "The Jackal," which
recycle and rip-off, at least do so with good movies. 

To receive Chad'z movie reviews directly via e-mail, send e-mail to
ChadPolenz@aol.com with "subscribe" in the header.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE JACKAL  (1997) * Directed by Michael Caton-Jones.Written by Chuck
Pfarrer, from the screenplay of "The Day of the Jackal" by Kenneth
Ross.Photography, Karl Walter Lindenlaub. Editing, Jim Clark. Production
design, Michael White. Music, Carter Burwell.  Produced by James Jacks,
Sean Daniels, Caton-Jones, Kevin Jarre. Cast: Bruce Willis (the Jackal),
Richard Gere (Declan Mulqueen), Sidney Poitier (Carter Preston), Diane
Venora (Valentina Koslova), Mathilda May (Isabella), J.K.Simmons
(Witherspoon),Jack Black (Lamont) et al. A Universal release.123 min. R
(much graphic violence)
A: I know. Sidney Poitier, who, in his 70s, looks great and is full of
authority. He's the FBI's Deputy Director Carter Preston, who is managing
(have the new Russians no pride?) raids against the post-Soviet Mafia.
Q: You mean Sicilian or Italian-American gangsters?
A: No, I mean post-Gorbachev Russians (alas, too true) who live in
decadent, vulgar luxury, and whose savagery makes the original Mafiosi look
like Quaker Oats.
Q: Is it possible for an American to command Russian officials?
A: I doubt it. Yet the movie invents a Politically and Feministically
Correct adjunct to Poitier. She is Colonel Valentina Koslova, a brilliant,
uniformed, gun-toting-and-shooting lady, a Scarface (wounded in action),
and as played by Diane Venora, the best thing in the film.
A: Army Intlligence,I guess --but she is now with the MVD. Or so I heard
from the very loud loudspeakers of the theater as they put out DTS sounds.
Q: What's MVD? Sounds like Music Video to me. Or a disease.
A: It stands for the Ministry for Internal Affairs .Not affairs of the
heart --but in the line of various secret and political polices. Under the
last Czars the secret services were called the Okhranka. With the 1917
Bolshevik Revolution the main secret police was the Cheka, run by Feliks
Dzerzhinsky. A few years later it was reorganized as OGPU (State Political
Administration) and led by the same man. In 1934 it   became the NKVD
(People's Commissariat for Internal Affairs) which, during WWII, begat the
MGB (not the car but the Ministry of State Security), which became the KGB
in 1954. And...
A: Sorry. I thought you might be interested....To proceed. A ruthless gang
boss whose brother was killed in an FBI-MVD raid, swears revenge, hires
lone gun super-killer the Jackal to terminate with extreme prejudice a VVIP
of the US Government. The fee is $70 million.
A: Not when you compare it to what the Willises, Schwartzeneggers,
Stallones and other plastic action puppets make per movie, or the cost of
disaster flicks, it's not all that much. To resume, the Good Guys and Gals
hear about this; Poitier recruits IRA terrorist Declan Mulqueen (Richard
Gere) by springing him from a murderous maximum security prison where the
Irishman has been for eight years, and promising a safer jail later on.
Q: What's has an IRA operative got to do with the Jackal?
A. Truth to tell, this is as fabricated as everything else in the movie and
as murky as most political debates. It gets eventually explained (sort of).
Since the Jackal is a mysterious man of a thousand faces (disguises which a
9-year old could spot); since Declan has worked with him; since Declan has
uncanny abilities to read the Jackal's mind; since he holds a grudge
against him, and so on ad absurdum, Declan must become part of the
Russian-US-Irish triumvirate of hunters.
Q: Quite a partnership. I bet you all three become friends, as they would
in any hack movie.
A: Right you are. No sweat. The real problem is for Gere to keep up his
mild Irish accent and add facial expressions -- about 4 or 5 throughout the
film. Willis has just one, plus a couple in the last minutes. Poitier is
limited by his role to about two Venora has several, plus a good accent.
Q: What next? I bet you that the climax is one of those "mano a mano"
fights between Gere and Willis?
A: The developments jump from one absurdity to the next. You're right about
the finale. But from the start no cliche goes unexploited. The film is a
big yawn.Much of it is like an ad for minivans.  Improbabilties and
impossibliities of character,timing, plot, quick changes of clothes or
uniforms, gadgetry, etc. are legion. About 720.
A: The film proper lasts around 120 minutes (7,200 seconds). With something
dumb and/or outrageous popping up every 10 seconds, we get 720.
A: Yes, and worse yet for those who know the original The Day of the
Jackal(1973), in which the killer was played with wonderful aplomb,
presence and credibility by Edward Fox. The source book, by Frederick
Forsyth, was a great thriller partly based on fact, the would-be
assassination of France's General De Gaulle. The movie version was a
beautifully constructed thriller made by a great director, Fred Zinnemann
whose films include The Wave, The Search, The Men (Marlon Brando's debut),
High Noon, The Member of theWedding, From Here to Eternity, A Hatful of
Rain, A Man for All Season, Julia.
Q: You mean it's dumb to remake a near-classic?
A: I do, especially with such a dumb script too. Director Michael
Caton-Jones (now 40) made a small splash with his first feature Scandal, on
the British Profumo/Christine Keeler sex and politics affair. He then
directed Memphis Belle, a docu-drama inspired by one of the greatest
documentaries ever made (by William Wyler, in 1944). It was about the US
airmen of the 8th Army Air Force, and their raids over Germany. Those
magnificent young flyers, their guts, the horrible losses of lives, their
talent and more made of them my personal heroes in a war that had so many.
I confess that I cannot see this masterpiece (named after one plane)
without tears swelling up. But Caton-Jones trivialized and Hollywoodized
the subject.
Then he made the ho-hum comedy Doc Hollywood. His other feature, This Boy's
Life, I couldn't bring myself to see. Now he repeats the remake mistake
with The Jackal.

Author
Michael Redman
GERE, WILLIS, POITIER CHASE EACH OTHER AROUND THE WORLD
When the Soviet Union imploded, the western countries lost their shadow. With
the United States friendly with the Russians, we no longer had an entity to
blame for the world's problems. This showed up in Hollywood films as the
communist government was no longer the easy bad guy.
It's time to rejoice because we've found our new villain. Now it's no longer
the Russian government who sends killers out into foreign lands, it's the
Russian _Mafia_. A perfect solution, it combines the dread of organized crime
and the still-present uneasiness with the former Eastern Block countries. Best
of all, the villains are still foreigners: fear of the other always plays best.
So it is a crime lord in Moscow that sends legendary hitman the Jackal (Bruce
Willis) to assassinate a highly placed US government figure in retaliation for
the death of his brother during a nightclub raid. The FBI is at a loss as to
how to protect the target from someone they're not sure even exists.
Coming to their rescue is former IRA operative Declan Mulqueen (Richard Gere)
who is temporarily released from prison to assist FBI agent Carter Preston
(Sidney Poitier) and Russian  Major Valentina Koslova (Diane Venora).
Mulqueen's ex-girlfriend Basque terrorist Isabella (Mathilda May) is the only
person who has seen the elusive Jackal. (Presumably there is an exclusive
international terrorist club somewhere where the three met.)
The film follows two parallel tracks as the Jackal prepares for his $70
million hit and Mulqueen attempts to locate him while Preston makes sure that
the Irishman doesn't slip away. Crossing numerous borders and donning various
disguises for both himself and his mini-van, the killer is always one step
ahead of his pursuers.
Being very loosely based on the same book the 1973 thriller "The Day Of The
Jackal", comparison between the two films is inevitable. There is no doubt
that the original is the better movie, playing the story for suspense rather
than the current action/adventure. As a mystery, "The Jackal" has enough holes
in it to ruin the tale, but if you can accept it for what it is, there's
entertainment to be had.
Holes?  Let's see…A pivotal clue for Mulqueen is so obscure that he must
possess psychic powers to pick it up. For a 20-year veteran that can command
the big bucks, the Jackal is an incredibly poor shot. The final scene between
Gere and Willis occurs in a location that should be mobbed with police, but
it's just the two of them. Willis' disguises usually look like Bruce Willis
and are just as interesting as Val Kilmer's in "The Saint". (And lest you
misunderstand, that's not a compliment.)
But the three stars are fun to watch. It's good to see Gere in something other
than a business suit. Willis has a mixed history in picking projects, but his
characters are always watchable. Poitier is by far the superior actor, but has
limited screen time.
The problems in logic are flaws, but don't ruin the experience. Occasionally
there are movies that transcend their blemishes. This is one of them.
[The appeared in the 11/20/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana]

Author
Steve Kong
The Jackal is the longest two hours I've spent in a theatre in recent
memory. I'm not sure what to call this movie. It could be a thriller, but
it doesn't thrill. It could be an action film, but there's not enough action.
The Jackal is an assassin that nobody can identify. As one FBI agent
reports, they don't even know if The Jackal really exists. The movie
follows two stories in parallel; one follows a group of good guys who are
trying to protect a government official against The Jackal. On this team is
the Deputy Director of the FBI, Carter Preston (Sidney Poitier), Major
Valentina Koslova (Diane Venora), and an IRA sharpshooter Declan Mulqueen
(Richard Gere). It is this story line is the one that is lacking and slows
the movie to a grinding halt. The other story line follows The Jackal
himself. This is the more interesting story line, and like in Heat, this
story line made me cheer for the bad guy more than I did for the good guys.
Bruce Willis seems to be having a great deal of fun portraying a bad guy.
And though his character is the master of disguise, no matter what disguise
Willis dons, he's still Bruce Willis. That's OK though, this part of the
film was fun.
The Jackal, next to being a master of disguise, is a man of gadgets. He's a
high-tech guy who uses the Internet to conduct illegal business, he uses a
cell phone, and his high-tech weapon is remote controlled from his
notebook. With all of this under his belt though, The Jackal did some
pretty stupid things during the film. I won't spoil it, but the character
of The Jackal conflicted with itself.
Chuck Pfarrer (Hard Target) who scripted this version of the 1973 The Day
of The Jackal builds up the story slowly and the pay-off is just not there.
The script is too predictable. I sat through the film mentally predicted
what would happen next, and not to my surprise, I was always right. The
script also takes huge skips in logic and the pace of the film gives the
audience too much time to find these skips of logic.
The action in the film, whatever there was, was flat and bland. The part
that I loved and made me chuckle, though wasn't supposed to, was during an
action sequence where Gere's Mulqueen is forced to hug a light post, he
sure does grimace well. At least with Pfarrer's Hard Target script there
was John Woo at the helm and the action was enough to pull that film out of
the hole (it had two things going against it, one was the weak script and
the second was Jean-Claude Van Damme). In The Jackal though Michael
Canton-Jones is unable to find anyway of pulling this film out of the hole.
Not everything is bad; there are some good things about this film. First
off, Willis is a joy to watch. Many people wonder why people -- like myself
-- like this guy, I think it's just because he is fun to watch, especially
during this film. The second thing I liked was the opening credits with its
SE7EN-like title sequence and music. Poitier does a great job with his part
and is the only person on the good guys' team that is likeable.
The Jackal is a slow moving predictable film that doesn't have the pay-off
to have an audience wade through its two hours. Though Willis is very
enjoyable, his story is only half of the film and the other half of the
film you'll just be saying to yourself, "Get back to The Jackal, these guys
are boring." Skip The Jackal, it's not worth the two hours spent in the
theatre.

Author
Walter Frith
A lot of people will criticize 'The Jackal' for the fact that Bruce
Willis is a high paid movie star and the cynics will take pot shots
at him by putting down this movie.  In reality, Willis is a very
talented actor who happens to be a movie star.  He should have been
Oscar nominated for 'Pulp Fiction', 'Nobody's Fool' and '12 Monkeys'
but as his career becomes more and more seasoned, Willis will get
recognized like Clint Eastwood and Sean Connery were and they were
not thought of as serious actors when they were in their thirties or
even when they were into their forties.   Although Willis may never
win an Academy Award just as the same might happen to Harrison Ford
and Tom Cruise, Willis will probably get noticed from the Academy
eventually in some form of a nomination.  For others, they will
examine 'The Jackal' closely and find that they have a terrific
thriller on their hands because although Willis is the bad guy this
time around, the movie belongs to Richard Gere just as much as it
does Willis.  Willis is  a chilling and icy assassin with no
conscience and this profile puts Willis in a whole new light.
'The Jackal' is a remake of the 1973 film 'The Day of the Jackal'
which was based on the best selling novel by Frederick Forsyth and
was directed by legendary movie maker Fred Zinnemann who made such
classics as 'High Noon', 'From Here to Eternity' and 'A Man for All
Seasons'.  That film was about the attempted assassination of French
leader Charles de Gaulle and this time the targeted quarry is in
America.  This remake by director Michael Canton-Jones isn't quite
as good but it is a standout on its own merit and has an extremely
convincing profile of an assassination set up.  I've read some
reviews that accuse this one of being overbearing and heavy handed
by saying that too much time, effort, planning and machinery is put
into pulling off the final result.  But let's be honest.  Movies have
to take some license from time to time with the obvious to make it
worthy of the admission price and when your target is a high profile
figure, it just may take a lot more planning than the average mind
thinks it will.
Willis is an American assassin for hire who takes an assignment for
the Russian Mafia to kill a major U.S. figure when the Russian crime
boss' brother is killed in an arrest attempt in which an FBI official
(Sidney Poitier) is involved.  What better way to get revenge on the
Americans by striking back and making a powerful statement by
assassinating someone important.  Sidney Poitier enlists the help of
an IRA terrorist (Richard Gere) who knows of Willis' past and with
the aid of Gere's former lover, a Basque terrorist (Mathilda May),
they help hunt down Willis.  Another Russian agent (Diane Venora)
plays a key role in helping the good guys.
'The Jackal' was filmed in several locations around the world and
has a pace which is mysteriously low key which will be mistaken as
being flat and the cool and lethal profile of Bruce Willis' character
makes it work.  Sidney Poitier hasn't appeared much in motion
pictures in recent years since 'Sneakers' in 1992 and he really is a
classic actor who should be seen more.  Richard Gere is on a roll. 
His recent turn in 'Red Corner' and now his convincing role as a
former IRA terrorist has provided him with his best work in years. 
I never looked at my wrist watch once during the film and 'The
Jackal' doesn't drag for a second and is a perfect thriller for
contemporary audiences who will embrace it while some won't
recognize its merit and will knock it not because it's a bad film
but because they will draw comparisons from the original and that's
a shame.
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Martijn van Turnhout
Wil je actie, dan zit je bij Bruce Willis goed. Na het meesterwerk "Die
Hard", maakte hij ook nog "Die Hard 2", "Die Hard With A Vengeance",
"Twelve Monkeys, "The Last Boy Scout" en nog vele andere films. Je ziet
het, met name actiefilms behoren tot zijn favoriete genre. Vandaar dat
hij nu de hoofdrol speelt in "The Jackal", waarin hij het moet opnemen
tegen Richard Gere en Sidney Poitier. 
De film begint in Rusland, waar we kennis maken met de Amerikaanse
FBI-agent Preston(Sidney Poitier) en de Russische agente Koslova (Diane
Venora), die op zoek zijn naar Terek, een Russische schurk. Terek wordt
al snel gevonden in een ongure disco, waar hij ter plekke gearresteerd
wordt. Helaas spartelt Terek fel tegen en hij valt Koslova aan. Koslova,
ook de makkelijkste niet, schiet hem meteen dood. Dat kon ze beter niet
doen, want Terek's broer, een machtige man, wil nu wraak nemen en huurt
daarvoor The Jackal (Bruce Willis)
in. The Jackal vertrekt naar Amerika om de baas van de FBI, Donald
Brown, op te zoeken en neer te knallen. Een soort 'waarschuwing' voor de
FBI dus. 
Preston en Koslova horen van deze snode plannen en zoeken daarom in de
gevangenis Declan Mulqueen (Richard Gere) op, een IRA-terrorist met een
duister verleden. Mulqueen kent een andere terroriste
(Mathilda May), die weet hoe The Jackal eruit ziet. En dat is wel
handig, want The Jackal staat bekend om z'n talloze verkleedpartijen,
bedoeld om z'n achtervolgers steeds op een ander spoor te zetten. 
Wie op zoek is naar een verfrissende, originele actiefilm, kan "The
Jackal" gerust overslaan. De vermommingen van Willis werken onbedoeld op
de lachspieren, net als het zogenaamde 'Iers' accent van Gere. Het
verhaal barst van de onlogische situaties en ook de clichés
worden niet vergeten. Zo schakelen Russische schurken onverklaarbaar
over naar de Amerikaanse taal en laat de slechterik zoals gewoonlijk een
cryptische boodschap achter die z'n achtervolgers weer een eindje verder
helpt. Been there, done that. 
Maar er zitten ook enige pluspunten aan deze film. Diane Venora is
perfect als de stoere Koslova. Zo goed zelfs, dat veteranen als Gere en
Willis door haar in de schaduw gezet worden. Ook de climax is goed
gelukt en de onverwachte wending op het einde van de film helpt daar
veel bij. 
Wil je een leuke film met Bruce Willis zien, wacht dan tot de zomer op
"Armageddon". Of zie je toch liever Richard Gere? "Red Corner" is dan de
film voor jou. Zoek je een film met weinig actie en een mager verhaal?
Dan moet je "The Jackal" gezien hebben, want, afgezien van een paar
goede momenten, heeft deze film weinig te bieden. 
And you can find my film reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Martijn+van+Turnhout

Author
Matt Petras
        What do you do when you absolutely must have someone killed,
when you need the best. You hire the person that is least known, but
has all the necessary skills to do the job right. You hire the Jackal.
The man that the CIA can't even prove to exist. What do you do if you
are the target of this Jackal, well to put it in the bluntest of terms
you die, unless you get really lucky. If you're the FBI, you pray to
find some sort of clue as to who the Jackal is, former colleagues,
enemies, and if you are lucky you'll find one.
Now you have a bit of an idea what this movie is about. The
plot of this movie is well, weak to say the least. There are gaps left
right and center. On more than one occasion you find things out that
make the story sound well, less than fresh. For example the three main
assassins in this story just happen to know each other, that's still
OK. That two of them should be lovers, that's a bit unbelievable in
that profession but it still works. That the two main male characters
are mortal enemies, all I have to say is *yawn*. This is what happens
when Hollywood puts its spin on things. That plot line has been used
so many times its not countable. Although I am not 100% if its been
used in this fashion, never the less it shines through in all its
unoriginality. Also if you are going to make a movie that is based on
a movie, you might want to look at the original source. I do have to
say one thing about the plot. The build up was well done and flows
pretty well. The ending, well I'll leave that for you to decide but I
did not like it. Too predictable, and I may have just ruined the whole
movie by telling you those two words. Somethings just seem to happen
in this movie, if it was done well like it was done in the beginning
then yes this would have turned out to be a really good movie. 
The build up for this movie was good, that is about the only
real thing about the plot, that worked well. OK, it wasn't that great
either, it was a bit too long and too drawn out for a plot that needed
some more work. It raises the expectations of the viewer too much for
the ending that ensues. The style this movie follows at the begging is
really effective but this is not carried through unfortunately. The
characters for the story would have been more believable if they
didn't become so clique.
The acting for this movie is actually pretty decent for the
most part. I think that the casting for the parts was actually done
fairly well and personally I cannot find a better bad guy for this
movie. Bruce Willis played the bad guy in this movie admirable for the
most part and the build up and general beginning left nothing to be
desired, again shoddy plot ruined what seems to have been a good
performance. Richard Gere, also played his part decently, although his
heart doesn't seem to be in it as much. Some of his mannerisms just
don't come off as that of an assassin. Sorry Mr. Gere(if you ever see
this) I think that you could have done a better job with this, even
though the accent must have been hard to accomplish. 
All in all, I would not recommend this movie too much. It is
something of an action movie that tries to become a thriller. It is a
pretty fun watch and if you don't pay too much attention to the
details you might enjoy it. But then again, isn't that why you go to
see movies? I wouldn't recommend this movie all that much, mind you it
is an OK watch and you get what you paid for. Some suspense, some
action and two major names of the movie industry. The movie isn't
nearly as good as it could have been. I rate this movie *{1/2} / 4.
The potential was there.


Author
Harvey S. Karten
   John Wilkes Booth, Sirhan Sirhan, Gavrilo Princip, James
Earl Ray, Lee Harvey Oswald--all succeeded in assassinating
their political targets.  But all were caught and punished.  In
the movie, "The Jackal," IRA terrorist Declan Mulqueen
(Richard Gere),  responsible for the death of several British
subjects, was likewise caught and imprisoned.  Only the
Jackal (Bruce Willis) has succeeded in removing his marks
from the scene and getting away with it, the only thing held
behind bars being the millions upon millions of dollars he has
accumulated from the wealthy men who have given him
assignments.  Though he could have retired to the tennis
courts and golf courses long ago, he is a professional killer
who gains great delight in doing his job.  When he is given
$35 million in advance of a killing with the promise of another
$35 mil after the deed is done, he could easily have taken the
money and run.  But the Jackal, like the animal for whom he
is named, derives as much pleasure from the hunt as from
the kill. 
   Based loosely on Fred Zinnemann's 1973 British-French
thriller "The Day of the Jackal"--about the intricate plan to
assassinate French leader Charles De Gaulle on the Champs
Elysees--Michael Caton-Jones's film plays by the numbers. 
Annoyingly enough, it recycles the age-old flaw of so many
murder plots: when the villain gets the drop on the pursuers,
he could easily go away the winner, but takes so much time
meditating on the imminent murder he is himself deleted. 
Despite its formulaic format and absence of witty dialogue
"The Jackal" has some things going for it, notably the weapon
which the title character uses to execute his target and the
disguises he assumes to get into the United States and work
his way to the victim's zone.
   The story opens in Moscow where a group of Russian
militia together with agents from the American FBI raid a night
club and kill a Mafia chieftain who, in a most uncool manner
curses out the officials before his public.  Determined to get
revenge on the United States for its part in the slaying of this
gangster, his brother hires the Jackal (Bruce Willis) to take
out a prominent target in the U.S.--$35 million before, an
equal amount after the execution.  Director Michael Caton-
Jones has quite a bit of fun dressing Willis up in an
assortment of wigs and mustaches, all designed to ease his
way into the U.S. and manipulate his victims.  In some scenes
Willis is unrecognizable with thick mustache, five-day growth
of beard and long hair, in others he is his usual handsome
self though he switches from gray hair to light brown to dark
coloring.  Caton-Jones has much less fun with the good guy,
Declan Mulqueen (Richard Gere), an IRA terrorist being held
in a maximum security prison, who is offered the chance for
either a pardon or a transfer to a country-club jail if he will
assist the FBI in tracking down the Jackal.  Gere goes
through the motions mechanically, holding on to his Irish
brogue throughout the movie, but otherwise coming across as
a colorless individual who never shows the passion he should
about gaining revenge on the criminal who at one time shot
his girl friend, killing her fetus.
   "The Jackal" from time to time draws on the 007 genre,
apparently filmed in Moscow, London, Montreal, and
Washington, highlighting the killer's intricate strategy in
sneaking into the U.S.--by flying to Montreal with a false
Canadian passport, buying an expensive boat, and sailing as
part of the Mackinaw-Chicago race.  Equally amusing is his
purchase of a super gun which can shoot several rounds per
second and discharge minor missiles as well.  At one point he
coats the back of his van with a deadly poison, which, when
touched by one of his enemies, causes the man's gruesome
and violent death.
   Diane Venora plays the most captivating character, a
rough-tough Moscow agent with pronounced facial scars who,
if not mercifully shot in this movie would surely have been
done in by lung cancer.  When she is not huffing and puffing
on a cigarette she is busy lighting another.  You wonder how
much the tobacco industry contributed to the making of this
movie: why else provide the mostly young audience with such
a chain-smoking role model?
   For all we know, weapons such as the one used by the
Jackal exist today, but they are most likely in the hands of the
governments of the great powers than in those of an
individual.  Willis gets to send out a great deal of firepower by
simply tapping a few keys on his laptop, giving new meaning
to those ads in Tuesday's New York Times for ever-more-
powerful computers. Rated R.  Running Time: 119 minutes. 
(C) 1997 Harvey Karten

Author
Cheng-Jih Chen
I recall this article in the NYT Magazine.  It was about the lack of
villains Hollywood can rely on.  After World War Two, they could show
Nazis in film: instant bad guy, especially with those spiffy Gestapo
uniforms.  Similarly, we had American Indians in Westerns, another
group that can be readily identified by appearance or accent.  Now,
with the advent of political sensibilities, and with the long distances
we are from World War Two, it's a bit hard to come up with readily
identifiable villains.  The article noted that Arabs have been used a
few times, then South American drug dealers, and before the bubble
economy burst, the Japanese.  We no longer have a consistently reliable
national villain, but must make do with a changing cast of ethnic or
professional types.  The Chinese may be next year's flavor, given the
random political tensions, as well as Hollywood's antipathy towards the
PRC.  I imagine a day when we can safely and seriously show the Cold
War science fiction film, Battle Beneath the Earth, in which the Red
Chinese dig tunnels under America, and start sprinkling atom bombs
under the US Heartland.  Surely a metaphor of insidious Communists.
But for now, it's only really fit for Mystery Science Theatre.
Among the flavors of recent years is the Russian Mob.  In this updated
version of "Day of the Jackal", the assassin's paymaster is a mobster
out to revenge his brother's death at the hands of the Russian Militia
and the American FBI.  But the principal villain, Bruce Willis, is
known more for his technocratic efficiency at assassinations, not for
ideological fervor.  He's a contract killer, belonging to no cause
beyond his own enrichment, a member of no ethnic identity save perhaps
a bland Western cosmopolitanism.  In contrast, the hero, Richard Gere,
is described as a fiery nationalist, a former IRA sharpshooter.  He
doesn't rely on technology to do the job -- he in fact gives up a laser
sniper scope at one point and relies on old-fashioned optics -- but is
carried through by passion and conviction.  Despite the current vogue
in creating folk heroes out of the IRA, I find it interesting that a
positive symbol of nationalist fervor is placed in contrast to the cold
blooded and rootless professional.  Technocrats aren't in favor.
In any case, I saw "The Jackal" this morning.  The original film
featured an assassination attempt on Charles de Gaulle.  But times hav
changed: the music has been updated to a Nine Inch Nails-influenced
soundtrack, and the target of the assassination is an American.
Arguably, people here in the US wouldn't care all too much if a
Frenchman is blown to bits.  I haven't seen the original movie, but I
suspect this new film features more spiffy electronics than the
original, simultaneously violating the Iron Law of Bandwidth (think
full motion video on a cell modem) and fulfilling our expectations that
computers shown by Hollywood will be miraculous beasts.
Oh, in reaction to a complentary lack of good sense about Heavily Armed
Bad Guys that we saw in, say, "Starship Troopers" (i.e., the bugs have
claws, but we'll just run right into them), let me note that when you
have a gun the size of a sofa pointed at you, the sensible thing is to
get really close to it, perhaps ducking under it or walking to one
side, as it can't hit you then.  One of the characters failed to follow
this somewhat obvious idea.
Another thing the Jackal does is the "you're about to die, so I'll tell
you the plan."  It's not as direct or obvious as a James Bond
supervillain, but it's there.  Along with a Monster that Wouldn't Die
moment.  As well as extraneous killing -- especially considering that
he's a professional assassin who shouldn't leave too much of a track --
just to show what kind of bad ass he is.  But I don't think I'll spoil
anything mentioning this.
But it's not a horrible movie.  It's reasonably good, though meant more
for video tape than $8 in a theatre.  See it at matinee.
Oh, Richard Gere's barogue is really strong at first, but then becomes
barely noticeable.  This is odd, since the film was most likely shot
out of order.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
Believe it or not, the real Jackal lives to this day and is currently safely 
tucked away in a high security prison.  The 1973 film The Day of the Jackal was 
a critically acclaimed account of the true story of a professional assassin 
(code-named The Jackal), on a mission to kill the French president during the 
early 1960's.
Bruce Willis and Richard Gere star in the modern re-make The Jackal, which 
unfortunately is not historically accurate and only very distantly related to 
the original story.  
The Jackal (Bruce Willis) has been hired to kill an important figure in the US 
government. Declan Mulqueen (Richard Gere) is our hero in this story; who is an 
underground operative released from jail to help the FBI track down this deadly 
killer.  This is easier said than done, as The Jackal is a master of disguise 
and is constantly changing appearances and disappearing without a trace.  Along 
with the FBI's Deputy Director (Sidney Poitier) and a dedicated small team, 
Mulqueen must track down The Jackal before his job is complete - although his 
target, location and identity are unknown
For thrills and spills, The Jackal supplies plenty of impressive action scenes;
but any film that is related to a true story should make sure not to let what 
is popular control what is historically accurate.  This alone is the films 
biggest downfall, as it shows no respect or consideration for the 1973 hit - 
and thankfully through legal procedures the "Day of" was forcefully removed 
from the films title.  Even Edward Fox, who played the leading role in The Day 
of the Jackal, refused to have a cameo role for old time's sake. 
Director Michael Caton-Jones (Rob Roy, Memphis Belle) would have been far 
better off to have made The Jackal a stand alone film rather than delve into 
the harsh world of re makes, where anything that is made is automatically 
compared to its predecessor.  
What he has created, however, is highly entertaining action film that not only 
lets us witness an explosive screen duo but also shows Bruce Willis kissing 
(eep) another man. 


Author
Jeremiah Rickert
     I had not seen the film this was based on, I am sure this was a plus.
I have never been a fan of Richard Gere, so I have to admit I was a bit
negative going into to this film.  
     The plot concerns an attempted assassaination, contracted by a
Russian mafioso, in retaliation for the death of his brother, who was
killed in a joint FBI/MVD (the post Soviet version of the KGB) raid on a
nightclub as part of an investigation. The head MVD agent, Col. Valentina
Koslova (Diane Venora), and the head FBI agent on the scene Carter Preson
(Sidney Poitier) are immediately targets for the mafia, however, instead
they decide to get their revenge on the Americans in a more spectacular
way. They send in the Jackal (Bruce Willis) to convey their message of
revenge in a brutal and public manner for the incredible sum of $70
million in cash.  The premise is a bit hokey for three reasons.  1.  The
FBI does not function outside the United States, the CIA maybe.  2.  $70
million in C-A-S-H?  That would be a LOT of money, even with $100 bills,
and incredibly difficult (doesn't matter who you are) to raise anywhere
without attracting a lot of attention, especially in Russia.  3.  I seems
to me that the mafia would be more able to reach people within Russia than
in the U.S.  Why not take care of the people who did the raid?  That said,
I did enjoy the film.
     No one knows what the Jackal looks like, but they do know that he
exists.  The KGB apparently used him for jobs, but all those who have seen
him are dead, or impossible to find, except for one, a woman who knows his
face named Isabella.  (Mathilda May).  In order to find her, however, they
need her former boyfriend Declan Mulqueen (Richard Gere) a former Irish
Republican Army assassain who is incarcerated in the United States.  (how
convenient).  He agrees to help them find Isabella in return for his
freedom, which is never really given, but he seems to have personal
reasons to go after the Jackal as well, so he decides to help them,
revealing that he has seen the man as well.  Lucky for the good guys,
Declan is an expert on the Jackal's techniques, and the race is on to
find out who his target is, and how he's going to carry out the hit,
before he has a chance to do it.
     The plot keeps one guessing, which is rare these days in a lot of
films.  Unfortunately, the Jackal seems to be predictable enough that
Mulqueen can follow his trail easily.  It seemed like tracking him didn't
take as much effort as it could have, there seems to be no doubt that they
will catch up with the Jackal, and since the movie is only about 2hrs
long, you know you won't have to wait that long.  
     The direction by Stephen Hopkins (Blown Away, Ghost and the Darkness,
Predator 2) is adequate, but rarely top notch.  The performances, however,
are all very good.  Willis seems subdued throughout the film, but really,
a killer who has "been in the business for 20 years" is not going to have
a really distinctive personality.  Poitier is at his intense best, as is
Mathilda May as the former criminal Isabella, who is trying to escape her
checkered past, happy to be in a stable family situation, but a bit
unhappy in a might-as-well-settle-before-I'm-dead way.  Diane Verora, as
the scarred former KGB agent has the strongest performance.  She seems to
have a cold detachment from her humanity, brought on by the combonation of
her job and her disfigured face.  However, Mulqueen seems to breach that a
bit, and Venora manages to make the character change in a very very subtle
manner.  She has never thought about a relationship she says because men
are not attaracted to her scar, but Mulqueen seems to connect with her,
and it's very very faintly acknolwedged by her, that is what makes her
stand out.  There was no overt attraction between the two which could
cheapen it, and I found it very entertaining and well-written.  It was a
part of the flim that really avoided cliches.
     The pacing of the film was pretty good also.  Instead of long drawn
out scenes, punctuated by a flurry of action, like recent films The
Peacemaker and to an extent, Starship Troopers, the film is paced rather
evenly, chugging along at a pleasant gait that doesn't leave you gasping
for air, or snoring in your seat.  There was a lot of technological jargon
and hardware that got a bit old, but at the same time, used the internet
in a way that seemd more real than most films that utilize the information
superhighway.  (The Net, and Hackers).  The finale of the movie was also
refreshing because again, it lacked those things which have become cliche
in recent years in action films:  The crescendo of music which peaks then
pauses for a bit, enough for the hero to recite a one-liner, (Hasta La
Vista Baby! Time's Up! Bad Dog! Assimilate This! to name a few recent
examples) and then proceed to kill the bad guy in an overblown way.
(lowering him into molten metal, placing the bomb in his pants, shooting
him with a cannon, and blowing up the piece of hardware he's attached to,
respectively with the cliches above).  I was very pleased that the Jackal
did not sink to that level.  
(Below is a minor spoiler, so don't read on if you haven't seen the film,
my rating by the way, is the film was worth $2.50 of the $3.50 I paid for
it)
     In the end of the film, I would have to say there is no president in
the history of this country that would not have pardoned Mulqueen, or
shortened his sentence, or something like that.   I mean
really!  Talk about making up for your past wrongs!  Maybe they were
trying to avoid the cliche again, but they went to far on that one.    
Once again, of the $3.50 I paid for the flim, it was worth $2.50
(c) 1997 Jeremiah Rickert
--

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Bruce Willis, Richard Gere, Sydney Poitier, Diane Venora, Mathilda
May, Tess Harper Director: Michael Caton-Jones Screenplay: Chuck Pfarrer
based on the motion picture screenplay THE DAY OF THE JACKAL by Kenneth
Ross
If I could sum this movie into a single word, it would be SLOW. If I had
the pleasure of renaming THE JACKAL it would become THE TURTLE. I
haven=92t seen an action thriller with so little action and so few thrill=
s
since the days I was a connoisseur of budget movies made for television.
Even with two popular stars like Willis and Gere, this movie still
suffers from a lack of charisma, charm and character. It=92s hard to pump
life into this dead animal of a movie, when the only thing going for it
is an overdone scavenger hunt between two middle-aged Hollywood stars.
The plot is simple. Assassin extraordinare, THE JACKAL (Willis) has been
contracted to kill somebody important. When I found out who it was, I
yawned and went back to snooze. This movie is so quiet that you could
have a good 45 minute nap between the 1st and 2nd bullet, a 30 minute
doze between the 2nd and 3rd bullet, before finally being rudely awoken
by a sudden spurt of loud explosions, frenzied firing and frantic
screaming. Some people would say save the best till last, I call it post
mature ejaculation =96 too loud and very messy.
In this movie Bruce baby doesn=92t have to worry about the missing hairs
on his head, or the flab on his tum. He is THE JACKAL, the man with a
hundred faces, a thousand smiles, a million disguises, but hey Bruce
you=92ll never fool us into believing you=92re a Super Model. His nemesis=
,
IRA sharp shooter Gere, is as authentic as serving somebody Earl Grey
when they asked for Irish Coffee =96 sadly miscast.
In conclusion, THE JACKAL is as mysterious as a fart in a crowded room,
as action packed as pointing a finger at an unsuspecting victim and as
thrilling as getting away with it. A very disappointing effort overall.

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Bruce Willis, Diane Venora, Richard Gere, Sidney Poitier
Synopsis:
A hit man who goes by the name of ‘Jackal' (Bruce Willis) is hired to
kill a politician who is to make a speech from a podium in front of a
hospital. Instead of staking out a sniper position on a nearby building,
Jackal gets fancy. He flies to Quebec and purchases a giant Gatling gun
(a swiveling machine gun with several barrels that can fire thousands of
rounds a minute). Of course, as a foundation for the gun, he purchases a
super strong metal alloy stand and a minivan, plus special expensive
uranium bullets and a remote control computer device that enables him to
use his ball-point pen as a joystick. He also sprays special poison on
the door of the van in case anyone tries to get in. Finally, Jackal
purchases a yacht so he can sail the Gatling gun into the United States
undetected. Typical of the logic the authorities use to catch the Jackal
are statements like: "There's a 3000 mile border between Canada and the
US. The criminal could be anywhere! Hmm. Why don't we try checking the
Chicago Yacht Club?" So they send 30 agents to the yacht club, and sure
enough, there's the Jackal, and a gun battle ensues. Will the
authorities catch Jackal before he commits murder?
Opinion:
The writing often makes or breaks a movie. Good movies are able to
ensnare you in the plot, until you're on the edge of your seat and
committed to seeing the movie through to its conclusion. Not-so-good
movies consist of two or three action-packed scenes introduced by
irrational jumps in logic and connected by long stretches of pointless
wandering around. In ‘The Jackal' the talents of stars Poitier, Willis,
and Gere, and Venora are not enough to rescue a poorly written script,
although the two or three action scenes are good, if you can wait around
long enough for them.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Posing as a handsome, gay professional that master of disguises,
the Jackal, hits on a young government official.  After some boozy
flirting, the Jackal plants a pair of big kisses on him, gets the guy's
business card and leaves, promising to call him sometime.  The card and
the contact are part of the Jackal's elaborate assassination scheme.
He's collecting all the necessary materials for the big day.
     Bruce Willis, one of our most uneven actors, gives a terrific
performance this time as that shadowy figure known as the Jackal.  At
first even the FBI is not sure whether the Jackal is a real person or
just a myth.  With a new identity and look every five minutes in the
picture, it is no wonder that the Jackal has remained so elusive.
     Although the new movie THE JACKAL by ROB ROY's director Michael
Caton-Jones acknowledges Kenneth Roth's screenplay for THE DAY OF THE
JACKAL in the credits, it shares little of the story.  Both movies are
about assassinations of a political figural by a terrorist known as the
Jackal, but the similarities basically end there.
     The story opens with a joint US and Russian police operation in
Moscow.  A scar-faced Major Valentina Koslova, played with unwavering
intensity by Diane Venora from HEAT, kills one of the Russian Mafia
kingpins in a nightclub raid.  This infuriates the dead man's brother,
who hires the Jackal to kill an important American in retaliation.  All
we know of the target's identity is that the Jackal says he will have
to go into hiding forever after the kill and hence demands and receives
$70,000,000 as his fee with half payable upfront.
     Sidney Poitier in one of his better recent performances plays FBI
Deputy Director Carter Preston.  Preston teams up with Major Koslova to
track down the Jackal before he makes the big hit.  As the sincere
ex-IRA hit man named Declan Mulqueen, Richard Gere manages to keep his
Irish accent consistent and believable.  Mulqueen is temporarily
released from prison to help Koslova and Preston track down the Jackal
since Mulqueen is one of two living people known to have ever seen the
Jackal.  Although Gere slightly underplays an already underwritten
role, he gives a quite credible performance.
     The problems with the movie almost undermine it on several
occasions.  The script heaps several unnecessary leaps of faith on the
audience, most surrounding the lack of seriousness American law
enforcement officers place on the threat of a major assassination.
More than once, when a place should be crawling with cops, Mulqueen has
to go mano a mano with the Jackal.  And the well executed ending is
flawed by an illogical rabbit pulled out of a hat.
     The director does not get the show's motor in gear for over half
an hour.  After he does, he lets it slip into neutral too often in the
non-action scenes.  In most thrillers, consider the television "Prime
Suspect" dramas, for example, the police's planning scenes are full of
tension and energy.  In THE JACKAL, by contrast, there is a certain
ennui to the proceedings.
     All of this notwithstanding, whenever Willis is on the screen, the
movie hums.  The writing is smart in the way the Jackal creates his
disguises and switches back and forth seamlessly.  The military
hardware he assembles for the kill and the stealthy way he transports
it is fascinating.  Willis approaches his part with the serene
confidence of a killer who murders without hesitation.
     Even though the assassination attempt is telegraphed from early
on, its execution will undoubtedly send chills up your spine.  At THE
JACKAL's best, as it is in the last half hour, the movie has you on the
edge of your seat.  The problem with the film is that too often you may
find yourself slumped back in your chair during the frequent slow
interludes.
     THE JACKAL runs a little under two hours.  It is rated R for some
profanity and a few gory scenes.  It would be fine for teenagers.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     THE JACKAL is a high-tech, low-believability thriller, starring
Bruce Willis as the title character, an expert assassin and master of
many disguises, who's contracted by a Russian mob boss for a hit on the
head of the F.B.I.  One of the few who can actually identify the Big J.
is a former I.R.A. operative (Richard Gere), imprisoned in the U.S. and
ready to cut a deal if it means a chance to get out and about and maybe
escape, or see his old girlfriend (Steven Tyler lookalike Mathilda May),
or, hell, just be awarded a transfer to a minimum-security prison.  So,
the guy with the good looks and giggle-inducing accent is paired with a
pair of agents, one from Washington (Sidney Poiter) and the other from
Moscow (Diane Venora).  And a-travellin' they go, trotting the continent
for clues, while their target gets ever-closer to his quarry.
     As a loose and largely unremarkable remake of THE DAY OF THE
JACKAL, the film has a few things going for it.  Let's see...  several
of the action sequences are legitimate pulse-pounders, even if they
rarely serve the story well.  The scenery and spacious sets are also
quite eye-catching.  (However dumb the story becomes, you *do* feel like
you're going places:  Moscow, Helsinki, London, Montreal, and, in one
head-scratching shot of Willis aboard an Outer Banks ferry, a trip from
Chicago to the suburbs of D.C. by way of Morehead City!) And then
there's Bruce, the coolest cat on the block and the only guy in the
movie who has a pair.  (Gere looks good and that's about it.  Poitier
brings grace, but not enough weight.  Only Ms. Venora displays the
requisite intensity required of their roles.)
     On the suck side, the finale runs long, the plot has too many
holes, and the tone, at times, skirts dangerously close to camp.  (The
high low point?  I gotta go with Bad Death Scene #1.  You may need to
leave the theater for that one.) And, let's see, some of the effects are
weak, such as a blue-screen bit set in a subway tunnel.  (But doesn't
Gere grimace convincingly?) Oh, and, Heaven help us, there's even a
stranger-in-the-house sequence-- the same scene I swear saw in SWITCH-
BACK, KISS THE GIRLS, and I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER.  Sigh.  Well,
at least Willis' disguises are fun.  His portly Canuck is a sight, eh?,
but be back from the bathroom before Bruce hits a gay bar as a frisky
swinger.  Even if it (and its follow-up scene) fails to amuse, at least
you'll know what they're talking about, when the inevitable outrage
erupts.  Directed by Michael Caton-Jones (ROB ROY).

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Bruce Willis, Richard Gere, Sydney Poitier, Diane Venora, 
      Mathilda May, Tess Harper
Director: Michael Caton-Jones
Producers: James Jacks, Sean Daniel, Kevin Jarre, and 
      Michael Caton-Jones
Screenplay: Chuck Pfarrer based on the motion picture screenplay 
      THE DAY OF THE JACKAL by Kenneth Ross
Cinematography: Karl Walter Lindenlaub
Music: Carter Burwell
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures
     The public relations people at Universal Pictures are going out of 
their way to emphasize that THE JACKAL is not a remake of Fred 
Zinnemann's 1973 masterpiece, THE DAY OF THE JACKAL.  While 
acknowledging that this new motion picture is based on the original, 
producer James Jacks stressed that the first film's "central premise 
[serves] as the basis for a whole new suspense thriller."  Actually, the 
more distance the studio places between the two films, the better, 
because the 1997 production can't hold a candle to the 1973 release, and 
an attempted comparison only makes the new Bruce Willis/Richard Gere 
vehicle look worse.  Anyone who believes the least inspired remake to 
star Willis was LAST MAN STANDING (a re-working of A FISTFUL OF 
DOLLARS/YOJIMBO) may have reason to re-think that position after seeing 
this movie.
     What has survived?  Not much, and certainly not any sense of true 
suspense.  THE DAY OF THE JACKAL was a real white-knuckler.  THE JACKAL 
is so lifeless that there are times when it's in danger of putting the 
audience into a coma.  The central idea -- about an expensive assassin 
being hired to kill a high-profile target -- remains the same.  This 
time, the Jackal is played by an uncharismatic Bruce Willis, whose 
interpretation does little to efface the mark left by Edward Fox.  
Beyond the bare-bones plot skeleton, however, screenwriter Chuck Pfarrer 
has changed a lot, albeit little for the better.  And director Michael-
Caton Jones, who did wonderful work on both SCANDAL and ROB ROY, fails 
to connect with this material.
     On this occasion, the Jackal is a high-tech killer.  His arsenal 
includes state-of-the-art, computer-controlled weapons, he's plugged 
into the Internet, and he uses a cellular phone.  Like Val Kilmer in THE 
SAINT, he's a master of disguise, although Willis is recognizable no 
matter what color his hair is, what clothes he's wearing, or how much 
makeup he has on.  The Jackal's target is a highly-placed person in the 
United States -- perhaps the director of the FBI, and his asking price 
for the hit is a cool $70 million.  For that, he will do the deed then 
disappear forever.
     But a deputy director at the FBI, Carter Preston (Sydney Poitier), 
knows that something is up, and he suspects that the Jackal, an almost-
mythical killer (at one point, Preston states: "We've never been able to 
prove if he even exists"), may be involved.  So, along with Major 
Valentina Koslova (Diane Venora), a member of the Russian police force 
involved in the case, Preston seeks the aid of Declan Mulqueen (Gere), 
an IRA terrorist serving a prison term for weapons violations.  Mulqueen 
has knowledge that's vital to stopping the Jackal, but there's a catch -
- he won't divulge it unless his demands are met.  Eventually, Mulqueen 
is out of jail, albeit in FBI custody, and the chase is on.
     The problem is that the chase, which should be a taut nail-biter, 
is dull.  Yes, it zips from country-to-country, globe trotting from 
Moscow to Helsinki to Montreal to Washington D.C. to Chicago, but, aside 
from a few interesting explorations into the complexity of the Jackal's 
methods, there's very little of interest here.  In the original THE DAY 
OF THE JACKAL, the buildup was the payoff.  Here, it's just filler while 
we're waiting for the predictable final show-down between the two leads.  
And, if you can't guess how that turns out, you don't see many movies.  
     In the place of genuine tension, THE JACKAL resorts to bloody 
violence.  Plot contrivances abound as well.  Aside from the gaping 
holes in logic, there's the simple matter of the Jackal's supposed 
intelligence.  I say "supposed," because there are times when he comes 
across as a borderline-moron.  During the course of the film, he has 
several chances to kill Mulqueen, but what does he do instead?  Stares 
at him for an inordinately long time, then smirks once or twice -- 
that's the method of a Hollywood invention, not a believable expert.  
Mulqueen, on the other hand, makes so many brilliant leaps of intuition 
that one suspects him of having a direct link to the Psychic Network.
     The two lead characters, the Jackal and Mulqueen, are described as 
"ice" and "fire."  It's easy to see Willis' performance as icy -- the 
Jackal is completely emotionless throughout.  Gere, on the other hand, 
doesn't do much to infuse Mulqueen with tangible passion, although the 
actor is better here than in his recent anti-Chinese flop, RED CORNER 
(and his Irish brogue is an improvement over some of the recent accents 
we've been subjected too).  In supporting roles, Sydney Poitier exudes 
more dignity than the film deserves, and Diane Venora is credible as a 
tough-as-nails MVD officer.  Mathilda May has a small role as an old 
flame of Mulqueen's who knows the secret of his connection to the 
Jackal.
     THE JACKAL starts strongly, but it doesn't take long for the film 
to devolve into a series of familiar formulas.  And, without a sense of 
mounting tension or at least a few interesting characters, the movie's 
trajectory propels us into a realm of burgeoning boredom.  Despite being 
30 minutes shorter than its 1973 inspiration, this incarnation feels 
three times as long.  When it comes to animals, THE JACKAL is just a dog 
in disguise.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Michael Caton-Jones
Writer: Chuck Pfarrer (based on the screenplay "The Day of the Jackal" by
Kenneth Ross," which was in turn based on the novel by Frederick Forsyth)
Starring: Bruce Willis, Richard Gere, Sidney Poitier, Diane Venora,
Mathilda May, J.K. Simmons, Richard Lineback, John Cunningham, Jack Black,
Tess Harper
About an hour or so into "The Jackal," a character wandered around as
people were being shot at in a big suspense sequence, and one of the
audience members in the theatre I saw it in shouted out "I hope she gets
killed now!"  At that point it hit me: I didn't care for any of the
characters being played by actors I didn't really like.  When the sole
reason you care about a character being played by Sidney Poitier in a
suspense film is because he's being played by Sidney Poitier, you know
something's rotten in the state of Denmark.
Every year, a couple films like this are released.  You know: the cheap,
action packed international espionnage film, featuring a semi-promising
premise, some big-name actors (usually Bruce Willis), and the hopes that
some audience members will forget the Cold War ended several years ago. 
This was the third one of '97, following the very lackluster "The Saint,"
which featured an amoral costume changing Bond wannabe; and the
surprisingly fun "The Peacemaker," featuring Clooney and Kidman trying to
stop an almost untraceable villain.  "The Jackal" tries to mix both
elements.  And you thought "The Saint" was bad.
"The Jackal" is loosely (VERY loosely, I hope) based on the 1973 Fred
Zimmerman classic that I've yet to see, "The Day of the Jackal," which
featured (apparently) a suave hitman called The Jackal, played by Edward
Fox, trying to assasinate Charles DeGaule.  Well, welcome to the 90s, where
a sorta suave hitman, also called The Jackal (Bruce Willis), trying to kill
the head of the FBI...or is he?  
After being hired by a Russian mob lord as a bit of vengeance for the
murder of his brother (killed in the opening scenes), the Jackal romps all
over the Northen Hemisphere, from Helsinki to Virginia, setting up an
elaborate scheme wherein he'll be able to assasinate this person and still
get away to live in seclusion.  And like The Saint, The Jackal changes his
look over and over and over again to elude people.
The agent working on the case, Cater Preston (Sidney Poitier - yes, that
Sidney Poitier), working with a Russian agent, Valentina Koslova (Diane
Venora - Lady Capulet from "Romeo + Juliet"), gives up early on and meets
with an ex-IRA man, Declan Mulqueen (Richard Gere, putting up some tight
competition between himself and Brad Pitt for worst fake Irish accent of
'97) who's in a Massachusetts jail, but who has apparently seen The Jackal,
who has been eluding the law forever.  Soon, he's out working with the two
untrusting agents, and trying to help them catch him.
There are numerous problems with the film, and which one is the biggest one
is pretty impossible to put a finger on.  The film is supposed to be a big
suspense thriller, but save a couple moments, the film never achieves
suspense, or even a sense of intrigue.  Sure, the big assasination attempt
is a bit cool looking and even slightly tense, but every other scene in the
film is too short and too dull to register.  The film never picks up enough
to become a thrilling experience, or even an entertaining one.  It doesn't
help that the plot is designed to be complex, but falls into so many
problems, like plot holes and unbelievable circumstances.
The script of "The Jackal" is a complete mess, mostly because it can't
decide what it wants to focus on.  Is this a film about a man trying to
find redemption by catching a nasty killer?  Is it a film about a nasty,
amoral hitman who's in everything for the money?  Or is it a combination of
both?  "The Jackal" aims for the latter, but never focuses in on either
character.  The connection between the two feels completely edited, so much
that in a scene when The Jackal turns around and notices Declan, you wonder
how he recognized him so fast.  The worst part is the little past they try
to give Declan, most notably his relationship with an old girlfriend,
Isabella (Mathilda May), given so little screen time that you almost forget
her character exists until she pops up every now and then.
The supporting characters are worse.  Sidney Poitier is given a completely
unplayable role, that of a man who is just stern sometimes, and other times
more giving and likable.  What is Poitier doing here?  He's one of the best
living actors!  Does he really need to waste his time doing drivel like
this?  Diane Venora's Russian character is almost as bad, with a cigarette
perpetually in her mouth, and a plastered on expressionless facade.  It's
not that anyone's bad here; it's that they have nothing to do.
The plot is a joke, feeling like it was pasted together by someone in
post-production who dropped each scene on the floor and pasted them
together quickly so it could be released on time.  The Jackal himself is
not even much of an international villain.  There are several times where
he's in a tight situation and makes things worse for himself, the only
explanation being that the filmmakers wanted to toss in a cheap thrill. 
Take a scene where he's being followed by some agents into a parking
garage: he quickly sprays his car another color, and adds a solvent that if
touched kills the person who touched it.  Doesn't killing someone ATTRACT
more attention than it does DISTRACT?  And does he think dying his hair
bottle blond makes him fit in in a public place?  Geez!
Is there anything good here?  Well...a couple things.  I did like Willis's
icy expressions; he may not have been real suave or anything, but some of
his looks are worth a chuckle.  Richard Gere has a couple of good moments,
making his character as likable as he possibly could have.  And a couple
sequences are kicky in that kind of proposterous, completely inane but fun
kinda way, most notably: a sequence where he tests out a new gun on an
annoying gun builder (Jack Black); and a bit where he seduces a gay
Washington man, which has its share of a couple good jokes, most particular
a kiss by Willis.  But none of these elevate the film any higher than it
could go; they're just little distractions along the way to amuse us mildly
then toss us back into the world of dullness and stupidity that is "The
Jackal."
Director Michael Caton-Jones (who directed the far superior "Rob Roy") has
made a film that is made very couple months, one that is unentertaining,
unintriguing, and pretty much cold, but will nevertheless make money
because, hey, the trailers do make it look like it may be fun in that kind
of retro-Clancy kinda way.  Every now and then, the filmmakers get it right
("Clear and Present Danger," which was enormous fun in that smart kinda
way), but "The Jackal" is an example of when they go completely wrong.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews, go to http://surf.to/joblo
Semi-remake of the 1973 film, THE DAY OF THE JACKAL, this thriller
about the internationally renowned terrorist known as "The Jackal" is
brought to us by director Michael Caton-Jones, famous for 1995's ROB
ROY and THIS BOY'S LIFE (8/10) with the young Leo DiCaprio. This was
one of two "Jackal" films to come out in 1997. The other was THE
ASSIGNMENT (7/10) starring Aidan Quinn.
PLOT:
The Russian mob hires the Jackal to assassinate someone high up the
U.S. political ranks. The FBI and Russian police work together to
identify, find and arrest the Jackal, but come up empty. With few
alternatives remaining, they recruit help from a jailed Irish terrorist
who has already seen and met the Jackal. This is when the international
chase begins.
CRITIQUE:
Overlong, action-less, semi-interesting but mostly boring so-called
"thriller" which showcases some solid acting performances by Poitier
and Gere, but does very little else to keep the audience awake. I have
not seen the original movie upon which this movie was based, but word
on the street is that it is one of the best thrillers ever! This film
on the other hand, has very few thrills in it, a couple of small scenes
of action, and sprinkles of intrigue. It's basically just a chase movie
that reminded me a lot of THE SAINT (7/10), with all of the clever
costume changes, and THE PEACEMAKER (5.5/10), with its cat-and-mouse
hunt around the world.
I was pleasantly surprised to find Richard Gere finally stretching his
acting abilities by actually playing a character other than a rich,
smug guy in a nice suit! I also liked his Irish accent and his
ever-popular salt-and-pepper hair. Sidney Poitier also lent some much
needed credibility to this project, and pulled off a strong performance
as the FBI agent struggling to find the Jackal. Willis didn't do much,
but it wasn't really his fault, since the script didn't really call for
him to do much more than switch disguises every now and again (Oh yeah,
and he also got his Canadian accent down pat, by adding an "aye" at the
end of his sentences.)
Despite all of these negative points, and the film lasting about thirty
minutes past its welcome, I wasn't totally bored at any point, and did
like the international aspect of the plot. I also dug the fact that the
final scene of the movie was shot in the exact Metro station that I
used to stand in every day of my life for three years during my years
of College. Ahhhh yes...the sweet, sweet memories. But enough about me!
The bottom line is that this thriller does not provide many thrills or
suspense, but does offer a semi-interesting plot and some decent
performances from Poitier and Gere. Having said that, if you want to
see a better Jackal movie, toss some coins the way of THE ASSIGNMENT
(7/10), and have yourself a good time!
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
This film was originally slated to be released as THE DAY OF THE
JACKAL, but was later changed.
Bruce Willis' full name is Walter Bruce Willis. He was born on the 19th
of March 1955, in Idar-Oberstein, West Germany. His song "Respect
Yourself" reached number five on the music charts in January of 1987.
Bruce received US$15Million dollars for his role in ARMAGEDDON
(7.5/10), and US$5Million for his role in the original DIE HARD (8/10).
He had three children with his ex-wife Demi Moore (they divorced in
1998 after 11 years of marital bliss). Their names are Rumer, Scout
Larue and Tallulah Belle.
Bruce grew up in New Jersey and waited tables and tended bar for a
living until he began to get roles in plays. He broke into the business
when he was seen tending bar in New York by a casting director who
liked his personality & needed a bartender for a small movie role.
Christopher Reeve was offered US$1Million for the lead role in AMERICAN
GIGOLO (6.5/10), but turned it down. John Travolta also turned down the
lead in this film (which later went to Richard Gere), and AN OFFICER
AND A GENTLEMAN (8/10) (which also went to Gere.)

Author
Curtis Edmonds
Writing a screenplay for a thriller is hard. Harder than pouring
concrete under the Texas sun.  Harder than building a bridge over
troubled waters. And incidentally, a whole heck of a lot harder than
writing a movie review.
Thrillers are all variations on a theme. You have a smart, resourceful,
and powerful Bad Guy, who has a goal he has to meet. You have a noble
and brave Good Guy, who has to protect the innocent, kill the Bad Guy,
and not get killed himself in the process. The trick of thriller writing
is doing all of this in an interesting and novel manner. This simple
formula can lead to            classic movies like North by Northwest,
High Noon, or Silence of the Lambs, or big summer blockbusters like Men
In Black, The Fugitive, or Air Force One, or it can lead to utter dreck
like Masterminds, Event Horizon, Kull the Conqueror.... is
anyone else getting depressed here?
Point is, it's not enough to follow the formula. You've got to throw in
something extra, something good and new and better than the last
version. Something to surprise and move all of us people who buy the
tickets and the popcorn and the Happy Meals. This is a hard thing to do,
but it is absolutely necessary in every way. Without that something
extra -- whether it's a great plot or a well-written screenplay, or
great special effects or great locations or great casting or great
performances or great big hungry dinosaurs -- the movie fails. That's
why The Jackal, with all its starpower, with all its budget, with all
its hype, gets a big fat F.
Bruce Willis is the Bad Guy, the Jackal, a legendary killer for hire.
Richard Gere is the Good Guy, a former IRA assassin with a vendetta
against the Jackal. The Jackal is trying to kill someone. Gere is trying
to stop him. Will Gere be able to stop the assassination in time and
kill the Jackal? (I'll give you three guesses, and the first two don't
count.) There are no surprises awaiting the audience in The Jackal, no
moment when you say to yourself, "I wonder what happens next?"
The script for the Jackal isn't ripped straight from today's headlines.
It's ripped off, straight from an episode of Millennium. Throughout the
movie, we learn what the Jackal's plans are and how he intends to
accomplish them. No surprise. The fun of a movie like this should come
from Richard Gere figuring out what the Jackal's plan is and developing
a clever plan to foil the Bad Guy. Instead, we get two (count 'em, two)
scenes where Gere is sitting in an FBI conference room somewhere and
instantly divines the Jackal's plan just as if he's Frank Black (or more
likely, just as if he's been handed a copy of the script). And we never
get more than a superficial clue as to why Gere has had this flash of
insight. It's like Gere's character is psychic, but neither he nor the
FBI (or the screenwriters) seem to know it. And just like in Millennium,
the Bad Guy has an overwhelming need to go after the people the Good Guy
cares about, whether or not they are important to what he's trying to do
or not. What's more, in the last half of the movie, the Jackal,
supposedly a super-smart professional terrorist who never makes a
mistake, comes down with a major case of the stupids.
As for the performances... Bruce Willis manages to get through the whole
movie without a wisecrack, which is a major achievement, but not enough
reason to see the movie. His disguises are good, but not as good or as
interesting as Val Kilmer's in The Saint. Richard Gere is made to talk
the entire movie in an Irish accent, which detracts from his otherwise
lifeless and dull performance. Sidney Poitier is probably the most
disappointing element in a overwhelmingly disappointing movie -- not
that his performance is bad or anything, it's not, but it is sad that
Hollywood won't use this talented actor in any part other than an FBI
agent (Shoot to Kill, Sneakers).
Writing a good plot and a good screenplay, like I said, is hard, but it
can be done. It wasn't done here. It is our job as consumers to reward
good screenplays and to denounce bad and uninteresting ones. Do not go
see this movie. You'll only encourage the producers to make more just
like it. Instead, stay home and rent Day of the Jackal, or In the Line
of Fire, or a fire safety video, for crying out loud. Anything other
than The Jackal, which lives up to its name by gnawing the dead bones of
other, better movies.
The Hollywood Stock Brokerage and Resource
Your Guide to the Hollywood Stock Exchange
http://www.hsbr.org/brokers/blueduck/
"Are you kidding?  No jury in the world would
convict a baby for murder.  Well, maybe Texas."
