Title
Review for Far and Away (1992)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Michael K. Ellis
     This is a mini-review.  If you are looking for a short capsule
summary, you should look in some of the other reviews of FAR AND AWAY
posted here.  My review is meant as a contrast to the favorable reviews
posted here so far.  My advice is to avoid this movie like the plague.
     I don't understand why FAR AND AWAY has received so many good
reviews.  It's possible I didn't see the same film that everyone else
saw, since I can't really understand why anyone would *like* this film,
much less recommend it to anyone else.  The problem is, Ron Howard has
made a romantic film very much in the tradition of the romantic films of
the 1930s and 1940s.  It has a very broad, sweeping theme anchored (and
I do mean anchored, as in sinking quickly) by a love story.  The best
example of this is probably GONE WITH THE WIND.  The major problem with
FAR AND AWAY is that all the elements you would have found spread out
over several of those movies in the 30's and 40's are contained in the
movie.  It's so busy going from cliche to cliche that it misses out on
some very interesting subplots, all of which are far more engrossing
than the romance between Cruise and Kidman.
     I suspected something was very, *very* wrong with this movie when
it started out with the father being brought home dead by his good
friend, the town drunk.  That's right, the first thing this movie does
is play right into the old 'Irish sot' stereotype.  Now, stereotypes can
either be funny (like much of WHITE MEN CAN'T JUMP) or they can be
pathetic.  This was, to my mind, pathetic, and it didn't really get any
better from there.  Cruise, in his attempt to kill his landlord, falls
head in love with the landlord's daughter (Kidman), and we're off on the
road of cliches, including the dastardly love interest, the unlikely
romantic relationship between Cruise and Kidman, the voyage to the new
world, the long process of getting to know each other, the injury, the
return, the separation, and the whole rest of the mess.  There was
nothing new about this movie, there wasn't even a fresh reworking of the
story.  About the only thing missing was Kidman's character being tied
to the train tracks (or a log in a sawmill) by the dastardly love
interest.  And let's examine the dialogue.  "Now we can go out and get
the land of your dreams, and we can finally be married, Shannon."  I
forget what company has been making commercials with the "widows and
orphans" scenes straight out of old line movies, but those weren't any
more cornball than this.  As for the ending, it was without a doubt the
*worst* final scene I have ever had the displeasure of viewing in any
movie I've ever seen.
     So, did the movie have any redeeming values?  Yes.  The scenery was
gorgeous, and both the social situation of the Irish in Boston and the
great land rush rang dead on true to me (although both were a little on
the romantic side).  The bare-knuckle boxing scenes were, in their own
way, more graphic and powerful than the boxing in any of the ROCKY
movies after the first one.  I have no idea how they filmed that without
someone getting badly injured.  The same goes for the land race, which
was, after the buffalo hunt in DANCES WITH WOLVES, the most incredible
bit of re-creation I've seen.  If the movie had stayed with *these*
types of scenes and subplots, rather than the inane and cliched
Cruise-Kidman relationship, I would have considered my admission price
(matinee, mind you) well spent.
     I should say one other thing about this movie.  There is nothing
unobjectionable about this movie, in a "moral" sense.  It has (minimal)
swearing, no sex, and no "unwholesome" scenes.  I've seen Disney
cartoons that were more controversial than this film.  For that reason
alone I expect it will end up cleaning up at the box office.  If there
was ever a movie made for the "moral middle-class" of America, assuming
such a thing ever existed, this was it.  Dan Quayle recently made a
comment about "elite" society and "the rest of us."  Well, I don't know
how many "rest of us" there are for Quayle to hang with, but I'd bet
they all love this movie, and take their kids to see it.  I'd rather sit
through something with more intellectual content than a soap bubble,
thanks.
     On the -4 to +4 scale, I rate this a -2.  I'll give it some credit for
the subplots, but the movie itself is a mess.  Go see it if someone
gives you a pass for it free, and concentrate on the pretty scenery.
Don't bother waiting for video, either.  The only reason to see this
movie at all is so you can be blown away by that scenery, and it will be
much diminished when it moves to video, robbing this film of whatever
character it has now.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     (Spoiler warning: This film could not be adequately described without
telling more of the plot than I usually like to tell.  It is clear early on
where this film is going.  However, if you prefer not to read details of the
plot, be warned.)
     The summer is off to a roaring start with the return of a type of film
we have not seen in a while, a big sprawling spectacular historical novel in
cinematic form.  This is a film in the grand tradition of epics like THE
UNTAMED, which took Tyrone Power and Susan Howard from Ireland to a trek
across South Africa with the Boers.  It is rare enough these days to see an
historical film set in another century.  FAR AND AWAY sweeps the audience
from the tenant unrest in Ireland in 1892 to the Irish slums of Boston to a
brief sequence in the Ozarks and finally to the Oklahoma land rush.  The
land rush race of 1893 is eye-poppingly brought to the screen on a scale
rarely seen on films any more.  Along the way the viewer gets a pleasurable
history lesson about conditions in Ireland, Boston, and Oklahoma of a
century ago.  FAR AND AWAY is *a lot* of film.  It is 140 minutes of story.
     The story opens in western Ireland.  There tenant farmers live and die
in abject poverty, owing everything they have to absentee landlords.  Many
of these landlords never even saw the properties that made them rich.
Joseph Donelly (played surprisingly well by Tom Cruise) has dreams of
escaping his poverty and owning his own lands.  His dreams change when the
rent collector indirectly kills Donelly's father and then intentionally
burns Donelly's home.  Donelly leaves home, intending to find and murder his
landlord Daniel Christie (played by Robert Prosky).  Christie turns out to
be a likable fellow and Donelly a completely incompetent assassin.  Soon
Donelly is a patient being cared for by Christie's family in Christie's own
house.  Donelly particularly is interested in Shannon Christie (played by
Nicole Kidman--Cruise's real-life wife).  Shannon fancies herself a very
modern woman and has dreams of running away to America, where they are
giving away free land in Oklahoma and where she can be the equal of any man.
It is no surprise to the audience that she is eventually off to America with
part of the family treasure and with Donelly in tow as a sort of servant--at
least that is what she thinks he is.
     The longest chapter of the story is set in the Irish immigrant slums of
Boston, where the couple go from riches to rags to riches and back to rags.
The historical re-creation here is beautifully done.  We see the immigrant
population and the brothels.  Donelly and Shannon are forced to pose as
brother and sister and share a room in a brothel.  Shannon plucks chickens
and barely makes enough money to cover the rent, while Donelly is adopted by
a local bully (played by Colm Meany of STAR TREK: THE NEXT GENERATION) and
groomed as a bare-knuckle boxer.  Donelly has a meteoric career as a boxer-
-reminiscent of too many other of Cruise's films.  Eventually the couple is
dragged apart by poverty.  Donelly tries a minor stint laying railroad track
in the Ozarks before he decides to head west and find his land in Oklahoma.
They once again meet up for the largest and most famous of the Oklahoma land
rushes, the Cherokee Strip race.  (Ever wonder what Cherokee Strip Day
commemorated?)  The Cherokee Strip was a six-million-acre strip of land
between Kansas and Oklahoma bought from the Cherokee Nation for $8,500,000.
It was partitioned into plots of land, and at noon on Saturday, September
16, 1893, the race for land began.  The first person to get to one of the
plots and replace the marker flag in it with his own flag owned it.  One to
a customer.  This was the best known of the Oklahoma land rushes, attracting
100,000 settlers ("boomers").  A settler could be shot for being a "sooner,"
cheating and going to a plot of land sooner than noon.  Sooners are,
however, commemorated in the state nickname: The Sooner State.  The Cherokee
Strip land rush has been depicted in films several times before--most
notably in the 1931 film CIMARRON, based on the novel by Edna Ferber and
which won the Oscar for best picture.  However, for once budget constraints
seem to have been a small issue.  Aerial shots of the rushing boomers
indicate the land rush was recreated for FAR AND AWAY on a massive scale.
     While the film has the feel of a novel, it was in fact based on an
original screenplay.  The screenplay was done by co-producer Bob Dolman.  It
was based on a story by Dolman and by director Ron Howard.  This is purely a
Hollywood product, story and screenplay, which makes it all the more
surprising that the result is so pleasing.  There are a few false moves, the
worst coming in the final seconds of the film, but general the writing is
quite good.
     Tom Cruise does well with a script that involves many of his talents.
Both his boxing and his horse-riding are surprisingly good and done in large
part apparently without doubles.  The Irish accent at first seems strange
coming from Cruise, but only because his own inflection is familiar.  Had I
not seen him before, I would probably accept the Irish accent as his own.
Kidman's talents also seem more than sufficient for her role.  Robert Prosky
never turns in a bad performance, of course.
     Because there is so much to see in this film, it was shot on extra-wide
65mm film stock.  That would not be uncommon for a special-effects-oriented
film but is most unusual for a film with few or no visual effects.  Just one
more reason FAR AND AWAY is a good buy in a movie ticket.
     Kudos to Ron Howard for the best and most entertaining film I have seen
so far this year.  I give it a +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.  It's nice to be
enthusiastic about a Hollywood studio film once in a while.

Author
Craig Good
     By now nearly everybody has heard that Ron Howard's FAR AND AWAY is
the first film to be shot in 70mm in nearly twenty years.  I'm happy to
report that it looks wonderful (if you don't see this in 70mm you'll be
sorry).  I'm even happier to report that the gorgeous cinematography is
completely at the service of the story.
     FAR AND AWAY gets of to a bit of a slow start, but by the time the
action moves from Ireland to Boston and the second act kicks in it
really works.  The last act is nearly all done literally on the run.  I
saw the film in a sleep-deprived state and it kept me awake, alert and
interested all the way through.
     Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman each turn in excellent performances.
Cruise infuses his character with real fire once the script catches up
with him in Boston.  Kidman gets the more interesting role of the
character who goes through the most changes, and she's equal to it.
They both create thinking, feeling, believable characters who fall in
love on the way to their dreams.  The screenwriting and direction show
respect for our intelligence as they let the love story play out almost
entirely in the subtext, a most refreshing thing in a world of
how-about-breakfast-and-what-was-your-name-again movies.
     Their physical attraction is clear, but then who wouldn't be
attracted to people who look like Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman?  By
bypassing the nearly requisite and quite misnamed "love" scene Hollywood
loves to dish out when writers don't want to think, Howard, Cruise and
Kidman deliver the much more romantic and interesting process of two
people learning to love each other in spite of, and at times because of,
their faults and differences.  The love story is woven through the
process of reaching the Oklahoma land rush, and the independence that
owning land represents.  Just like so many real people, they
occasionally lose sight of the goal and get sidetracked.  As strong
characters, the conflict only makes them stronger.
     Howard's direction also delivers humor, action, and a world peopled
by desperate eccentrics.  His America of the late Nineteenth Century is
at once welcoming and frightening, dangerous and full of promise.  The
casting is good all around, and fans of "Hill Street Blues" should get a
particular kick out of Nicole Kidman's screen parents.  FAR AND AWAY is
a film which, if you are at all interested in seeing, should be seen on
the biggest screen and in the best theatre you can find.

Author
Frank Maloney
     FAR AND AWAY is a film direct by Ron Howard, from a script by Bob
Dolman.  It stars Tom Cruise, Nicole Kidman, Thomas Gibson, and Robert
Prosky.  Rate PG-13, due to language, violence, subject matter.
     FAR AND AWAY has quite rightly been described, as it was in the
Seattle P-I, as an historic romance novel, of the Danielle Steele
variety, come to the screen.  Gothic romances have been with us for
decades, but this may be a new subgenre for the films.  It is far less
interested in history than it is in romance, and little things like
historical verity, reality, even probability and the normal passage of
time are likely to be swept aside by the rush of superhuman emotions,
mostly restrained until the last scene.
     This is not to say that FAR AND AWAY is not as enjoyable a piece of
cornball as you're likely to encounter for some time.  It has some of
that old epic sweep, it has pace and movement that only bogs down once
-- and that for a little romantic interlude -- and it has wonderful set
pieces.  And like all of Ron Howard's films it is safely sanitized and
irrepressibly wholesome.  Even the whores are as safe and clean and
friendly as the Ladies' Sewing Circle.
     I think it is profitable to see FAR AND AWAY as acts of contrition
on the parts of Howard (for BACKDRAFT) and Cruise and Kidman (for DAYS
OF THUNDER).  This film is vastly superior to either of those, although
the fire photography looks mighty familiar.
     Howard and writer Bob Dolman have given us an old-fashioned
narrative that is rousing, funny, and uplifting, and heartwarmingly
romantic.  Howard has used his 70-millimeter process (Super Panavision
70) to wonderful effect, especially in the really big, really sharp
territorial shots, and most especially in the Land Rush sequence, which
is rousing as all hell and full of details glimpsed for a second or five
in the pell-mell onslaught of people, animals and landscape.  I also
enjoyed the bare-knuckle fight sequences; one cannot help but cheer
Cruise on to victory each time he strips off his shirt.  Of course, it
is all shameless, predictable, and shallow.  But what the hell!  it's
also great fun.
     Cruise and his wife Nicole Kidman do creditable jobs with their
roles.  I am beginning to think, though, that Howard for all his
facility is not a woman's director.  It certainly seemed to me that a
great opportunity was passed up in the creation of Shannon's character.
She could have been a truly fascinating woman, instead she remains only,
half-understood, half-realized.  Cruise, on the other hand, appears to
have taken his character about as far as the script would allow.  Of
course, it is possible that he is a better actor than she, but it's not
a pretty thought and one which I am loathe to entertain.
     The supporting actors are a mixed bag, generally good, but uneven.
Robert Prosky who played Shannon's land-owner father was pretty close to
perfect, a man whose desire for freedom was every bit as strong as it
was submerged by his wife's powerful personality.  I don't have many of
the cast members' names in front of me.  The part of the wife was
excellent, however, and grew in an interesting way.  The main heavy, the
estate manager (was that Thomas Gibson?), is probably too dark, too
heavy, too one-sided to be interesting, but the actor gave it his all
and made us feel some serious animosity toward character.  I have more
of a problem with the Irish villagers in the first part of the movie,
viz., they are so darn cute.  This is Howard cleaning up history for us,
I fear, just as he managed to de-odorize the Irish slums of New York, as
well as pass up an opportunity or two to show how really rotten the
system was that used and owned the immigrants to the benefit of the
bosses.
     I was most distressed, however, to see the incredibly short shrift
Howard and Dolman gave to the Native Americans whose land was being
stolen from them to make the Land Rush possible in the first place.  We
have a -- what?  -- five second shot of three Indians, one wearing part
of a U.S. cavalry uniform, watching the white settlers line up for the
start of the Rush.  I think they might spared a line or two of dialog to
set the record straight.  That the Cimarron Strip was the last of Indian
Territory, that major treaties were being broken one more time, that the
land was already occupied.  And so forth, and so on.  Familiar you say?
Sure it is.  And worth repeating every once in a while.  Like the story
of the Holocaust, the World War II Holocaust, that is.
     But still, and despite the above, or maybe because of it, Ron
Howard has given us a rip-snorting, rootin'-tootin' epic of the Irish in
America, by extension of all immigrants, an epic that sweeps us along
and entertains us mightily.
