Title
Review for Man Who Fell to Earth, The (1976)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David M. Arnold
I now have two Nicholas Roeg films in my collection:  
"Walkabout", and "The Man Who Fell to Earth".  Both 
DVD's (new from Criterion and from Fox Lorber) sustain 
the promise of the new digital videodisc medium:  
Videophile quality releases at affordable prices.
"The Man Who Fell to Earth" is a science fiction film 
starring David Bowie as a lone alien from a dying planet 
who arrives on Earth in search of water. The film is 
probably more important to David Bowie fans than it is 
to SF fans since it launched Bowie's career (such as it 
is) as an actor.  
As a science fiction film, TMWFTE is a mixed bag.  Like 
"Walkabout", the theme of the film is the collision between 
modern, Western culture and a simpler, more innocent alien 
culture that ends up losing that innocence.  And, if you 
are a SF fan looking for dazzling effects: You will be 
disappointed -- TMWFTE is more like "Solaris" or "Gattaca" 
in that it explores ideas rather than providing action-packed 
SF adventure.  And, since the action takes place on Earth 
in the late 70's to early 80's, there is no opportunity to 
craft a deeply textured, future or alien world along the 
lines of "Blade Runner" or "Dark City".
Roeg's films are beautifully photographed.  Having seen 
TMWFTE before as a worn-out, panned and scanned rental copy 
on VHS, I very much appreciate the wide screen presentation 
on the Fox Lorber DVD that showcases Roeg's master touch for
composition.  
The film starts with what looks like stock footage from 
NASA of a space vehicle launch, only presented upside-down 
to look like on object's flaming entry into Earth's 
atmosphere.  Then, after a splash-down in a South-Western lake, 
we catch a glimpse of the Visitor (Bowie).  He has taken 
the guise of a British expatriate by the name of Thomas 
Jerome Newton, complete with a (presumably) forged UK 
passport. We see him enter a swap shop and hock a gold 
ring for twenty dollars.  Then, we see him sit by a stream, 
guzzling water.  He takes out a loop of string that holds 
hundreds of similar rings.  Soon he has enough money to 
travel to New York and hire patent attorney Oliver 
Farnsworth (Buck Henry).  Newton has technology for sale.
Together, Newton and Farnsworth build a massive, monopolistic 
technology corporation,sort of what MicroSoft would be 
like if Bill Gates were also into petrochemicals, for the 
purpose of amassing resources enough to build another 
spacecraft for his return flight to his homeworld of Anthea.
Along the way, Newton hires Nathan Bryce (Rip Torn), 
a philandering, burned out college chemistry professor 
with an eye for the coeds in his classes, to be his 
propellants expert.  He also falls in with Mary-Lou 
(Candy Clark), a simple-minded, alcoholic motel maid, 
and they begin a relationship.
Eventually, the Government suits move in to bust up 
Newton's monopoly.  All his closest friends betray him, 
and he is taken to a "place" where Government doctors 
attempt to prove or disprove his origin from another 
planet.  In doing so, they so damage him  that he may 
never return.  (Newton's abode while in the hands of 
the Government doctors evokes a Bizzarro vision of Dave 
Bowman's hotel-room zoo cage in "2001: A Space Odessy".)
On the plus side, the film is very intelligently 
organized, and delivers the various layers of the plot 
obliquely and non-linearly.  I always enjoy an film 
that doesn't insult the viewers' intelligence (I did 
NOT, for example, enjoy "Independence Day".)  Bowie 
is absolutely correct for the character of Newton:  pale, 
gaunt, androgynous, he looks like he might really be an 
alien.  I also like the score, with musical references 
to Gustav Holtz's "The Planets", as well as more pop
selections.
But, the film has some serious flaws.  Roeg's artsy 
camera and editing work sometimes get in the way of 
telling the story (as it also did in parts of "Walkabout").  
My biggest beef is with the amount of sexuality in the film.  
The DVD listed the film as "unrated", but it would get a 
strong "R" rating (perhaps "NC17") today, for long scenes 
of full frontal female nudity, and glimpses of full male 
nudity. Granted, some sex in the film is appropriate, 
especially to lock in the character of Nate Bryce, and 
to explain Newton's relationship with Mary-Lou (and to 
explore a sexual relationship between an earthling and an 
extraterrestrial). Enough is enough -- there's an extended 
scene of rough sex play between Newton and Mary-Lou 
involving a gun that I found painful to watch and felt added 
nothing to the story.
Finally, this may be taken either as a plus or as a minus:  
The story is ambiguous enough to support an entirely 
different interpretation (that Newton is really a delusional 
genius hailing from good old Terra Firma, who only imagines 
himself an alien.)  In a Nicholas Roeg film, you can never be 
sure that what you see is real or imagined, past or present.
Review copyright (C) 1998 David M. Arnold.  All rights reserved.
A film's not about what it's about.  It's about how it's about
what it's about.  -- Ebert's Law
