Title
Review for October Sky (1999)
Number of Reviews
36

Author
Jon Popick
Some people can pinpoint an exact moment that changed their lives
forever.  For Homer Hickman, it was watching the Russian rocket Sputnik
race across the sky on a starry night in his small West Virginia mining
town.  Homer's life was never quite the same.
Like the other kids in Coalwood, Homer's future was pretty much mapped
out for him before he was even born - graduate high school, work in the
mines, get black lung and die before he hits 50.  And because his father
(Chris Cooper, Lone Star) ran the mines, Homer's inescapable fate seemed
even more likely than most.  That's why his friends and family were so
surprised when Homer pursued his new rocketry hobby with such a fervent
intensity.
With the singular goal of winning the National Science Fair (and the
college scholarship attendant thereto), Homer spends all of his free
time trying to launch a rocket high and straight into the sky.  His
father ignores him, his jock brother laughs, and his mother can only
warn, `Don't blow yourself up,' in A Christmas Story fashion.
Well, he almost does blow himself up on his first attempt, so Homer
drafts the school nerd, Quentin Wilson (Chris Owen), to help with the
chemistry end of things.  The next launch was a bit more successful,
with the rocket becoming airborne, but also dangerously zipping through
a crowd of workers at the mine.
Having been banished from further rocket experiments on company land 
which pretty much made up the entire town of Coalwood  Homer and his
friends hike eight miles to the outskirts of town to test their latest
projectiles.  Using money raised by selling parts of an unused railroad
track, they build a launch pad and an observation shack to safely view
the dangerous blasts and, with some help from the mine metal shop
workers and their spunky teacher (Laura Dern), they begin to make real
progress.  And as their rockets grow in both size and intellect, so do
their methods of detonation and the size of the crowds that initially
gather to mock, but end up walking away slack-jawed and dumbfounded.
The boys are adorable and charismatic in a Teen Beat sort of way and,
for all I know, could actually be members of the pop faves N-Sync. Homer
(Jake Gyllenhaal) is more than believable as an everyday kid fighting
the usual battles of the average teenager, but also sensibly mixes in
the fear elicited by the mine's constant presence, a weight that is
always hanging just above his head, ready to crush all of his hopes and
dreams.  Chris Cooper capably handles the role of the crusty, distant
dad while Laura Dern's `follow your dreams' schoolteacher is just a
throwaway role.
Director Joe Johnston's (Jumanji) use of the mine as a parallel of Hell
is very effective in this heartwarming true tale of this small-town boy
that eventually became a NASA employee.  The script is well-paced and
hits its only stumbling block when it throws in a mine union strike that
has little to do with the overall plot.  The closing credits include
actual footage of the young boys and their later launch attempts, which
helps to drive home the power of this story.  But I couldn't help
thinking, `What if it was cloudy that night when Sputnik sped by?'

Author
Greg King
A beautifully wrought, touching and sensitive coming of age
tale set in small town America in 1957, October Sky is one of the most
satisfying and enjoyable films of this year.
This inspiring film is based on the true story of Homer
Hickham (played with great insight and charm by Jake Gyllenhaal, from
Homegrown, City Slickers, etc), who eventually became a NASA engineer.
Homer grew up in Coalwood, West Virginia, a company town centred
around the coal mining industry.  Like his father, and most of his
friends, Homer seems destined to a life working in the pits.  It seems
that the only way to break out of this grim, preordained cycle is to
win a football scholarship to an out of town college.  Until the
Russians launch Sputnik, the first manned space rocket.  As Homer
watches the space craft race across the night time sky, he is inspired
to become a rocket scientist.
With three school friends, including his best friends Roy Lee
(William Lee Scott) and O'Dell (Chad Lindberg) and the school geek
Quentin (Chris Owen, from American Pie), Homer begins experimenting
with rockets.  Most people in town view this fool hardy activity with
scepticism, especially Homer's dad John (Chris Cooper, from Lone Star,
etc), the foreman of the mine.  Only his sympathetic teacher Miss
Riley (Laura Dern) encourages Homer in his pursuit.
The beautifully written script from Lewis Colick draws a
symbolic contrast between Homer, who is looking forward to the future,
and his strong-willed father, who is still stuck in the past.  John is
angered by Homer's decision to seek a life beyond the mines, and the
tense conflict between the pair threatens to tear the family apart.
The superb performances of Gyllenhaal and Cooper bring a solid
emotional punch to this estranged relationship.
October Sky is all about following your dream, and remaining
true to that ideal no matter what obstacles are put in the way.  The
film's affirmative and inspiring message is backed up by some positive
values, strong writing, and wonderful performances from a solid cast.
Director Joe Johnston (Honey, I Shrunk The Kids, Jumanji, etc) eschews
the special effects and technical gimmickry of his previous films in
favour of some solid emotional and human drama.

Author
Michael Dequina
To a certain extent, Joe Johnston's fact-based film is every bit the piece
of manipulation its advertising suggests.  In 1957, after seeing the Soviet
satellite Sputnik traverse the October sky (we have a title!), young Homer
Hickam (Jake Gyllenhaal) and a group of fairly nondescript friends (with
the exception of ubergeek Quentin, played by Chris Owen) is inspired to
take up rocket science.  The problem is, he's just a kid in a small West
Virginia coal mining town (aptly named Coalwood), and his father (Chris
Cooper), who runs the mine, wants nothing more than for Homer to follow the
family and town tradition of mining.
Lewis Colick's script goes through familiar paces: Homer runs into a
series of obstacles in pursuing his dream, but he keeps at it, egged on by
a kindhearted teacher (Laura Dern) and others.  But as manipulative as the
film is whenever the proceedings threaten to degenerate into treacle,
Johnston pulls back; as such, the unforced and honest power of the emotion
ever so quietly sneaks up on you by film's end.  This understatement and
sensitivity extends to the actors, especially Gyllenhaal, one of the rare
young newcomers who actually displays some real promise.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Joe Joohnston
Cast: Jake Gyllenhaal, Chris Cooper, Laura Dern, Chris Owen, William
Lee Scott, Chad Lindberg, Natalie Canerday
Screenplay: Lewis Colick (book by Homer H. Hickam Jr.)
Producers: Larry J. Franco, Charles Gordon
Runtime: 108 min.
US Distribution: Universal
Rated PG: language, alcohol use, thematic elements
Copyright 1998 Nathaniel R. Atcheson
The brilliant opening shots of October Sky present to us Coalwood, West
Virginia, a small mining town subtly crushed beneath news that the
Soviet Union has launched the first satellite, Sputnik.  In Coalwood,
every grown man works in the mines, and just about every grown woman is
a housewife.  The quiet first shots introduce a world very few of us
understand -- they show us a group of people who feel helpless against
an international force that appears to be technologically superior.  
October Sky isn't about the Soviet Union, but the launch of Sputnik
inspires a young man named Homer Hickam (Jake Gyllenhaal) to build
rockets.  He doesn't want to build real rockets (not yet, anyway); he
simply wants to create something that shoots into the air.  So he rounds
up his friends, Roy Lee (William Lee Scott) and O'Dell (Chad Lindberg),
hires the class nerd (Chris Owen) to help him with the math, and starts
building rockets.  This, of course, is not what Homer's father, John
(Chris Cooper), wants.
John is one of the head coal miners, and is proud of his job.  He wants
Homer to work in the mines, just like everyone else, but Homer won't do
it -- he wants to go in space.  John works against his son, but not out
of meanness:  he simply resents what his son is trying to do. 
Meanwhile, Homer and his friends are helped along by Miss Riley (Laura
Dern), a high school teacher who gets them to enter a national science
fair when it becomes clear that their rockets are successful.
October Sky is an immensely moving film, one that frequently forced me
to hold back sobs.  It's based on the true story of NASA engineer Homer
Hickam, and features one of most colorful arrays of characters to appear
in any film in the last few months.  Brought to life by inventive
direction from Joe Johnston and subtle, layered performances from a
wonderful cast, October Sky is that rare teen-angst movie that has all
of the necessary pieces for serious drama.  Even more odd is that the
pieces are properly assembled.
Well, maybe I shouldn't call it a teen-angst movie.  On the surface,
though, it truly is in the spirit of the recent Hollywood teen flicks. 
Homer is a teenager for most of the picture, and the film dabbles in the
usual assortment of peer pressure and parental conflicts.  What sets
October Sky apart from the others is . . . just about everything. 
Superficially, the movie looks great:  the aforementioned opening shots
are of the best in the film; Johnston is a talented visual artist, and
Coalwood is observed in a somber, ponderous tone.  The film feels
temporally authentic, and, though I was born two decades after the
events of this film take place, I felt like I understood it.  It made
sense to me.
This ties in with the setting; Johnston recognizes what the time period
did to the people, and the current events in the background effectively
staple the film and hold it together.  One of the most interesting
moments has the residents of Coalwood standing outside, waiting for
Sputnik to pass overhead so they can steal a glance.  It's quite a
moving moment, and, when Homer sees the satellite, his transition from
Indifferent to Rocket Builder is clear and instantaneous:  he wants to
go into space.
Of course, the transition wouldn't be effective if Gyllenhaal weren't
such a terrific actor.  I've never seen him before, but he carries the
largest role in the film with grace and dignity that most actors his age
lack entirely.  He also works well with the other actors, particularly
Cooper and Natalie Canerday, who plays his mother.  Cooper, who was so
good in Lone Star, is very powerful here; certainly the most relieving
aspect of October Sky is that the father isn't demonized into oblivion,
as so many fathers in films like this are.  His motives are always
clear, and he does do nice things for his son -- the conflict there is
real, and it's realized.
The picture works on many levels, but I was most often taken with the
little details.  Homer's mother has some of the best scenes in the film;
her quiet, almost unnoticeable attraction to Myrtle Beach adds to the
nice development of her character; the scene in which her husband goes
into the mines to save someone shows us a brief moment that speaks
worlds about her character:  "If he dies in there, I won't shed a
tear."  Only in a film this good could minor characters be fleshed-out
so clearly. 
It's necessary that Homer get stopped along the way -- there need to be
characters who try and hinder his progress.  But there are a few too
many; the police arrest him, the school principal doesn't like what he
does, his father obstructs him, and the other kids in school all make
fun of him.  I realize that the story is "based on a true story," but
one or two of these frustrating subplots could have been abandoned with
no harm done to the story at all.  Otherwise, however, October Sky is a
truly excellent film.  Aside from giving us a brief history lesson on
Sputnik, it presents to us a group of characters who earn our sympathy. 
Based on this film, I feel a little better knowing that the real Homer
Hickam is out there working for NASA.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
There is a certain character we've seen many times before in American
cinema. He is the unlikely hero; a boy who perseveres enough to pursue his
dreams. In OCTOBER SKY, that character is Homer Hickam. The movie is based,
however loosely, on Homer's autobiography, "Rocket Boys". It is the story of
a boy from Coalwood, West Virginia, who witnesses the launching of Russia's
Sputnik rocket into the October sky in 1957, and is immediately obsessed
with building one of his own. In an early scene, Homer, not cut out for
football, tries out for the team anyway, and recieves a comment from his
coach who tells him that he just doesn't give up. Homer doesn't make the
team, but we have evidence that he is not an ordinary boy. That is why when
he tells his parents that he wants to build a rocket, it comes as no
surprise. Homer, influenced by a school teacher(Laura Dern), gets 3 friends,
including the school nerd, Quentin(Chris Owen), to help him build this
rocket. Soon, even after a few failed launches, they are the talk of the
town. These nerds have become the new jocks. Cheerleaders skip a football
game in order to cheer the rocket boys. Everyone in town is interested.
Everyone, that is, except for Homer's father, John Hickam.
John is the head of the coal mining corporation that is the sole purpose of
Coalwood. Only the football players get college scholarships; everyone else
goes to work in the mines. John is very disappointed that Homer is
interested in this "dumb rocket business", and wants him to follow in his
footsteps. Homer, of course, wants to do something different, being the boy
that he is. The father-son relationship at the heart of OCTOBER SKY works
very well for most of the film, because of the great performance of Chris
Cooper. Cooper, from John Sayles' LONE STAR, is used to playing roles in
which he is a quiet outsider. His perfromance in OCTOBER SKY is exactly the
opposite. As John, Cooper shows depth and talent rarely seen in big name
actors. Relative newcomer Jake Gyllenhaal, whom I've had the pleasure of
seeing in one of his school musicals, is also quite good, but he is
outshined by Cooper.
>From what you have read above, you are probably under the impression that
OCTOBER SKY is a excellent, moving film. But the sad truth is, OCTOBER SKY
is predictable, melodramatic, and overly sentimental. There are moments in
OCTOBER SKY in which I was thinking about just how much of Hickam's book was
actually put into this film. This film is so predictable and by-the-numbers,
that I kept hoping for some kind of originality to appear. Also, writer
Lewis Colick(GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI) pushes all the wrong emotional buttons
in trying to get us to like OCTOBER SKY. This wouldn't be all that
disappointing in another movie, but watching this one, you can tell that
there is a touch of greatness trying to break out of this sugary-sweet mess.
But I have to give props to the producers of OCTOBER SKY, for showing us the
first '99 film with even a little ambition. 
review by the Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
www.angelfire.com/mo/film.html 


Author
Ernest Lilley
October Sky Universal Pictures
Review by Ernest Lilley
Editor - SFRevu (http://members.aol.com/sfrevu)
Cast: Jake Gyllenhaal (Homer Hickam) , Chris Cooper (John Hickam), William Lee
Scott (Roy Lee), Chad Lindberg (O'Dell), Chris Owen (Quentin), Laura Dern (Miss
Riley), Natalie Canerday (Elsie Hickam) 
Director: Joe Johnston / Screenwriter: Lewis Colick / Producer: Charles Gordon 
In October 1957 the coal industry was declining, rock and roll was rising, and
all over the world people looked up to see man's first satellite streak across
the night sky. A Russian satellite named Sputnik.
While most Americans trembled with fear or anger, a few felt another sense -
wonder. OCTOBER SKY, is a true (nearly) story based (mostly) on the memoirs of
Homer Hickam, who was 17 years old when Sputnik went up, and living in a West
Virginia coal town. Homer got the sense of wonder out of it. Suddenly the
future wasn't something you read about or watched on TV. Suddenly for Homer, it
was something you had to be part of. 
His brother is a local football hero and his dad is the mine supervisor. He's
nothing special, not a jock, not a genius, just a bit of a dreamer. The kind of
dreamer that can change the world if he finds the right dream. And for Homer,
that dream is building rockets and the world is Coalwood, West Virginia.
The first rocket blows up his mother's garden. Rather than accept failure,
Homer makes the ultimate sacrifice - he teams up with the school's oddball geek
Quentin, and forges a rocket building team out of a group of friends. Along the
way, lots of things blow up. The rockets do it. The miner's union does it. The
principal does it. His dad really does it. But after a while, things start to
take off - spectacularly, and a band of outcast boys gets a chance to carry the
hopes of a small town toward the stars. So to speak. Actually it's a science
fair, but it's really a lot more than that. 
And along the way, they launch rockets.
Not hobby shop, paper tube and pre-made ceramic and cardboard engines like you
can buy today. Ones made out of seamless steel tube with machined steel nozzles
that arrow into the sky like javelins hurled at the heavensusually. Early on,
stability isn't their strong suit.
There's a lot of coming of age stuff in the movie. In fact, the producer
decided to make it the point of the movie. Taking hold of a dream, believing in
yourself, sharing vision, risking failure. The whole feelgood deal. Which was
good. But the rocket launches should have been the star of the film. Of course,
I'm sure that was done in the name of broader appeal, and maybe this means you
can take a date along and both find something in the film. Much as I like
feeling good, I would have liked it if they'd kept in a bit more of the stuff
that makes my heart race - Sex, Rockets, and Rock and Roll.
The book, hastily re-titled OCTOBER SKY, after its release as ROCKET BOYS
(reviewed in SFRevu Jan '99 http://members.aol.com/sfrevu) pulled a lot fewer
punches. Teenagers discovered the things teenagers always discover, to their
parents' horror, Jocks tear down what nerds build and in general it's a rougher
ride for the rocket boys. I liked the book's version a lot better. The
challenges were tougher, the success sweeter, and the rockets louder. 
In a way, OCTOBER SKY is the real revenge of the nerds, except that instead of
defeating the people who laugh at them, Homer, Quentin, and the others manage
to draw them into their dream as well. And yes, that's the real trick. Yes,
that's the lesson more valuable than how to mix rocket fuel out of moonshine
and potassium over an open fire. 
The movie is good, though it slows down in places. The book is great, and for
me time reading it passed unnoticed. Do both. Go see OCTOBER SKY when it opens
this weekend. Go read the book now that it's a paperback. Then, after the movie
is over and the book closed, go start a dream of your own. Just remember not to
blow yourself up.

Author
Ryan Davis
        A small town boy makes it big isn't exactly the most
original of ideas, far from it. Although there is something about the
story of seventeen year old Homer Hickman (Jake Gyllenhaal) and his
friends trying to get out of their small mining town, that is quite
charming.
        Inspired by the launch of the Sputnik and scientist,
Dr. Werner Von Braun, Homer and three of his friends decided to build
a rocket. They hope to be able to win their local science fair and be
able to go on to the national competition. At the nationals there are
many colleges handing out scholarships, which would be their only way
out of their town.
        With the help of several of the local townspeople and their
teacher, Miss Riley (Laura Dern), they start building rockets. After
lots of misfires, they start to learn more and more about
rocketry. Soon their rocket launches become well attended by the
townspeople and they are all very proud of the boys. All except
Homer's father, John Hickam, who is played skillfully by Chris
Cooper. John wants his son to follow his footsteps, in the coal mines,
but Homer wants nothing to do with it.
        `October Sky' is an inspiring film and an entertaining
one, even if its corny. The acting is kind of weak; most of the kids
are quite bland. The script is good and tight; there are very few slow
parts. But, altogether, it's a good film suitable for the whole
family.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Walter Frith
I often say that the reason why the movies continue to dominate year
after year and set new box office records is because they know how to
play on our sub conscious minds better than any other medium.  Music
used to be that way but has lost sight of its traditional and deepening
roots.  The movies often take us to places far away and beyond our
imaginations and often make us feel that we'd love to be up there with
our heroes on screen.  In each given year, the films generally nominated
for the Best Picture Oscar and the ones that usually win, are films set
in the past and teach us something about history --- not just to prepare
us for where we're going but to bring us closer together with other
generations who lived back then.
'October Sky', a true story, has all the elements a young person can
identify with.  Whether your a part of today's youth or a participant in
it from years gone by, this film has everything.  A jealous but decent
man for a father, not wanting to see his son turn out better than
himself in life.  A wise and inspiring teacher who is a constant
reminder that life is all about choice.  Best friends who stand by your
side and work through the tough times --- having just as much to gain or
lose as you do, and through it all, the determination to do something
with your life despite who you are and where you come from.
Jake Gyllenhaal stars as Homer Hickam, a young man from Coalwood, West
Virginia who doesn't want the life of a coal miner and would eventually
go on to be a premium rocket scientist at NASA.  After hearing about
numerous accidents and a few deaths as a result of work in the mines,
Homer wants a better life for himself and is fascinated by rocket
science.  His hero is Werner von Braun, the man who helped the United
States develop advanced space techniques and eventually gain world
superiority by putting a man on the moon.
The story of 'October Sky' begins in 1957 and the Russians have become
the first country to put a man in space and determined to develop their
own space program during the cold war, the U.S. must stay competitive
with their enemy.  Inspired by this, Homer and his friends (William Lee
Scott and Chad Lindberg) begin in their own front yard building
rockets.  They eventually enlist the help of one of their class mates
who is the school nerd (Chris Owen).  He has no friends, wears glasses
and always has his nose stuck in a book.  He knows quite a bit about
physics and general rocket propulsion and helps out a great deal.  Their
first few experiments are disastrous.  They destroy a fence, almost kill
someone when the rocket gets sent out flying hazardously among the
town's general population and are arrested when one of their rockets is
suspected of starting a serious fire.  They find a deserted open rock
patch about 8 miles from town, and erect a flag and small shack to
continue their experiments.
Jake is inspired by a teacher (Laura Dern), whom he deeply respects, and
conflicts heavily with the ideas of his father (Chris Cooper), a foreman
in the coal mines, about how the course of his life should be taken.
Eventually winning many science contests puts the boys in competition
for the national finals in Indianapolis, Indiana where Homer gets to
shake hands with Werner von Braun and doesn't even realize it.
At a time when so many people are generally unhappy with their lives,
this film takes you to new dimensions and says that anyone can do
anything they want with their life and while that sounds like a tired
statement, this movie demonstrates that we need a constant boost to make
us feel better about ourselves.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm
For browsers without java enhancement or if you experience problems with
the above link, go to:
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/mainpage.htm

Author
Jamie Peck
OCTOBER SKY
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
Talk about a movie having its cake and eating it, too. Said hype had 
"October Sky" pegged as "inspirational" and "uplifting," and it turns 
out that neither adjective is a misnomer. This is probably because the 
tale's factual roots - taken straight from Homer Hickam's autobiography 
"Rocket Boys" - have been unexpectedly maintained in a genre fond of 
pounding narratives into predictable, cliche-littered schmaltz. That's 
not to say every story development is unexpected and every character is 
a complete original, but the magic in "October Sky" stems from how these 
seemingly straight-from-stock situations and supporting roles are 
treated: humanely. 
The year is 1957 and high school-aged Homer (played by Jake Gyllenhaal) 
is pretty much stuck on an adamantly preordained path in the footsteps 
of his mine superintendent dad ("Lone Star"'s Chris Cooper), a 
stone-faced type with a soot-stained legacy he feels Homer must 
continue. But when Homer spies the Soviet satellite Sputnik passing 
overhead on its historical orbit, a passion for science is awakened - a 
passion that puts him at odds with his direly disappointed pop. 
Nevertheless, Homer recruits two pals (William Lee Scott and Chad 
Lindberg) and the class nerd (Chris Owen) to help him in his own 
rocket-building missions. 
This father figure is where "October Sky" begins to depart from the 
expected route of coming-of-age stereotypes. In such films, the 
authoritative parent usually exists only to provide resistance to the 
protagonist's aspirations, but Cooper and screenwriter Lewis Colick 
essay a distinct individual whose reluctance to accept his son's chosen 
path is entirely believable. Gyllenhaal is just as vital to "Sky"'s 
success, so full of unactorly charm and candor that he makes Homer's 
wonder and eventual heartbreak immediately palpable. And as Homer's 
sweet mama, newcomer Natalie Canerday is so natural in her scenes that 
it's hard to believe she's not the real thing. 
Speaking of authenticity, "October Sky"'s final reel gets a little 
crowded with several extraneous subplots - like the illness of Homer's 
encouraging teacher (effective Laura Dern) - but atoning for the 
quick-to-shift focus is that each actually had a hand in shaping an 
array of lives. Even furthering the impact is a concluding montage of 
grainy home movies from the '50s, providing glimpses of the cast's 
in-the-flesh counterparts and updates on where they are now. Some are 
sad and some are surprising, but none is more fitting than the road 
traveled by Homer Hickam. No fair spoiling it if you already don't know, 
but here's a hint: The sky's the limit. 

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     It is October 1957 in Coalwood, West Virginia and there are
virtually two different worlds--worlds that never touch each other.
One world is the town's coal mine.  The Olga Mining Company runs that
and it is the town.  Most boys know from an early age that when they
get old enough they will go down in the mine to work.  The other world
is what they read about in the papers.  It is where amazingly the
Soviets just put a satellite called Sputnik in orbit around the whole
planet.  And for nearly the first time the two worlds touch.  There
right over Coalwood is a light shooting across the sky.  Homer Hickam,
Jr. (played by Jake Gyllenhaal) sees the satellite go overhead, and
nothing will ever be the same for him.  There overhead is a piece of
the outer world, put there by a rocket.  Homer gets some of his buddies
together with the school nerd and they decide that they are going to
build their own rockets.
     This is the story of the four boys who dedicate themselves to
building and launching their own rockets.  Naming the rockets Auks
after flightless birds they soon find that launching rockets not only
can be the ticket to get them out of town, it really has to get them
out of town.  The town is owned by Olga and they are not allowed to fly
rockets from Olga's property.  Instead they find a slate hilltop eight
miles from town and set it up as their launching base.  They begin to
get the materials and money they need by any means, fair or foul.  This
includes stealing spikes from abandoned railroad tracks and selling
them.  But there is tremendous resistance in the town to doing anything
as strange as building rockets and they come into conflict with the
school, with the police, but most of all Homer Jr. comes in conflict
with his father, Homer, Sr., superintendent of the Olga mine.  [Note:
to avoid confusion, Homer, Sr.'s name is changed to John in the
screenplay.]
     "John" is played by Chris Cooper in an ironic piece of casting.
Cooper is most familiar for his role as the coal mine union organizer
in MATEWAN.  In this film he is cursing that same union.  But the
conflict between Homer and his father forms the dramatic core of the
film.  It is in the love-hate relationship between Homer and his father
that the film gets its strongest resonance.  Homer's relationship with
an inspiring teacher, Miss Riley (Laura Dern), while also strong, falls
into more familiar territory.
     OCTOBER SKY is directed by Joe Johnston who directed THE ROCKETEER
and JUMANJI.  The screenplay is by Louis Colick, based on the book
ROCKET BOYS by Homer Hickam, Jr.  Hickam claims to be pleased with the
adaptation of his book and even points out that the two titles are
anagrams.  For acting credit, the honors go mostly to Chris Cooper as
Homer's father.  Laura Dern and Jake Gyllenhaal are just a little too
good-looking for their roles as films of the original people
demonstrate at the end the film.  However, Coalwood, filmed in a
Tennessee coal town really does capture the look of West Virginia in
the 50s.  [I say this as someone lived in West Virginia for a while in
the 1950s.  Okay, I was very young, but I still remember the look of
coal country.]
     OCTOBER SKY is a powerful look at a young man's drives to become a
scientist.  It is also a moving portrait of a father-son relationship.
I rate the film an 8 on the 0 to 10 scale and a low +3 on the -4 to +4
scale.
     MINOR SPOILER: There are some odd touches that should have been
cleared up in the script with some explanation.  Why did the boys never
look at the object the police were holding until AFTER they proved it
was not theirs?  For that matter why did the police never notice that
the object they were holding was professionally built and not made by
amateurs.  Also were both younger and older brother high school seniors
in the same year, as they seemed to be?  This seems possible, but
unlikely.

Author
Bob Bloom
 The joy of imagination lies in its lack of limitations.
 You can toil in the deepest, darkest coal mine in West Virginia and still
dream of reaching the stars.
 To transform imagination into reality takes determination, self-confidence
and the courage to listen only to that inner voice, tuning out the
nay-sayers all about you.
 This is the lesson of October Sky, a genuine, inspirational story based on
the life of rocket scientist Homer Hickam.
 Hickam was born and raised in one of those coal mining towns that dot West
Virginia. In Coalwood, a young man had only two choices - play sports well
enough to earn a college scholarship or, after graduation, take your place
in the mines digging out the coal while breathing in the deadly black dust.
 But Hickam and three of his friends found inspiration as well as an escape
by watching the skies.
The year was 1957, and the Soviet Union had just launched Sputnik. What
director Joe Johnston's film, based on Hickam's autobiography, Rocket Boys,
does so well is capture the moods created by this momentous achievement.
 Many felt paranoia, that the Soviets would use this satellite to rain
nuclear missiles down on the United States. Others felt nothing, that space
was, well, just space, so let the Soviets play around all they wanted. We
had problems here on Earth to solve.
 Others, though, were visionaries. They could see ahead, that Sputnik was
just the first small toehold into a journey into a vast unknown that could
ultimately culminate with men escaping the confines of their planet.
 The success of Sputnik fired the imagination of Hickam and his friends,
Quentin, Roy Lee and O'Dell.
 Using scraps and bits and pieces of metal and other materials found in
their basements, garages and around Coalwood, the four set out to build and
launch a rocket of their own.
 After many failures, and much derision from townspeople, they succeed.
 Their idealistic teacher, a sturdy, compassionate performance by Laura
Dern, enters them in a science fair, which they win. This victory propels
Homer and his friends to the nationals.
 But October Sky is more than a story about four young men and their
obsession with rockets. It is also the tale of a father and son, trying to
bridge a generation and cultural gap created by the environment around
them.
 John Hickam is a mine official, who is proud of the work he has done. His
family has been coal miners for generations, and he sees nothing wrong with
his youngest son following in his footsteps.
 He sees Homer's devotion to his rocketry as a mere hobby, a passing fad.
The older Hickam doubts his son's ability to use his newly acquired
knowledge to escape what he sees as the boy's destiny.
 This is a gulf young Homer must overcome with the same grit and
determination he applies to his rocket experiments.
 Lewis Colick's script cannot avoid all the cliches inherent in such
situations, but he brings such sincerity to the proceedings that you tend
to overlook them, even as you realize you've run across them before.
 The true find of October Sky is young Jake Gyllenhaal as Homer. This is
young Gyllenhaal's breakthrough performance, much as A Boy's Life set
Leonardo DiCaprio on his course.
 Gyllenhaal's Homer is fierce in his doggedness to succeed, yet touchingly
vulnerable. He is driven not by ego but by seeking the approval of his
father.
 More than anything else, he wants his father to recognize that what he is
trying to do is worthwhile.
 Chris Cooper, who has given some fine performances, notably in John
Sayles' Lone Star, is touching, unyielding and exudes the strength of a
Sequoia as John Hickam. But he also is wise enough to accept and embrace
his son's chosen path in order not to lose him.
 Mark Isham contributes a strong score that helps keep the film at an even
pace, while Fred Murphy's cinematography captures the grime and dirt that
covers Coalwood.
October Sky is a bit schmaltzy and predictable. But that shouldn't keep
anyone from enjoying this true-life saga of a boy whose dreams could not be
confined by either gravity or convention.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or a
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
LARRY MCGILLICUDDY
Rating: **1/2 (out of 4) 
Directed by Joe Johnston 
Starring Jake Gyllenhaal, Chris Owen, Laura Dern, Chris Cooper, 
William Lee Scott, Chad Lindberg, Natalie Canerday 
October Sky is a very frustrating film. Parts of the film are 
enormously entertaining. But the script is filled with too many age 
old cliche's about small towns, father-son feuds, and underdog 
heroism. Yes, I've been pretty kind to films such as Varsity Blues, 
which contains the very same cliche's. Then again, Varsity Blues 
never aspires to be a great uplifting film. It just intended to be 
fun, and on it's own level it succeeded. A brain dead cliche isn't so 
bad when you're making a fun, trashy, sports picture, but when you 
try to tell an uplifting true story and aspire to be the next Stand 
By Me it's unforgivable. 
Homer Hickam is a young man who aspires to be more than a career coal 
miner. He wants to get out of his small town, but the only way people 
are usually able to do that is through a football scholarship, as 
Homer's brother does. As established early in the film, Homer is no 
great athelete, and of course his brother receives favorable 
treatment because of this. Homer is inspired by physicist Werner Von 
Braun, and decides he wants to build a rocket. The problem being that 
Homer has about as much mathematical knowledge as he does football 
skill. 
Homer and his friends recruit a scrawny, awkward, social outcast 
named Quentin to help them out. Together, they begin work on building 
a rocket that will fly. These scenes are by far the most entertaining 
in the film. The four friends are wellplayed by a fine cast of young 
actors, and Jake Gyllenhaal is nothing short of terrific in his wide-
eyed, determined portrayal of Homer. If the film had just focused on 
this aspect of the story, it would have been quite an acheivement. 
Unfortunately, the filmmakers bother us with a moronic father-son 
subplot. In Varsity Blues, it was equally moronic, but it took up 
very little screen time. In October Sky, it fills up just as much 
time, if not more than the rocket building scenes. Homer's father is 
a career coal miner, and he wants his son to join the business. He 
constantly belittles Homer's attempts to build a rocket. All of this 
nonsense has been done before, and better, and in less screen time. 
Here it takes up basically the entire second act. 
The cliche's start pouring in during the third act. Homer's 
inspirational teacher Miss Riley becomes ill. Homer's father is 
injured in a coal mining accident, and Homer must take his place in 
the mines. A ludicrous subplot about a coal miner's strike provides 
an unnecessary roadblock towards the end of the film. The other kids 
have subplots about abusive stepfathers and living in poverty. 
Why did the filmmakers have to do this? There was some great material 
here, so why did they feel the need to drown the audience with 
cliche's? I would have preferred a straightforward narrative dealing 
primarily with the rocket building and the friendships between the 
young boys. Teen romance subplots could have been expanded, and an 
examination of the relationship between Homer's parents would've been 
interesting. The film certainly has it's inspirational moments, but 
throws it all away in the name of utter predictability. 
Larry McGillicuddy - The Cinemaniac
Reviews at http://members.xoom.com/lmcgill/movpage.htm

Author
Steve Rhodes
It's 1957, and, in the true story OCTOBER SKY, 17-year-old Homer Hickam
has three simple goals.  He wants never to have to work in the town's
coal mine, he'd like to find a girlfriend and he is obsessed with the
idea of building a rocket.
The big event of the year is the Russian launch of a man-made satellite,
Sputnik, which orbits the earth for the first time.  Even in backwoods
West Virginia in the town of Coalwood where the story takes place, the
whole town goes outdoors to gaze at the night sky in hopes of catching a
glimpse of Sputnik.  People sense that this is a seminal event that will
alter the course of history.  (The locals in the funny and heartwarming
script by Lewis Colick, based on Homer H. Hickam, Jr.'s book, aren't all
so impressed.  "Let 'em have outer space; we have rock n' roll," one
teenager declares nonchalantly.)
The movie captures perfectly the hopelessness of a "dying town with a
dying mine" and the hardworking, blue-collar workers that live there.
Actually, blue-collar is a misnomer for mineworkers.  They get so black
with coal dust by the end of their shift that the color of their collars
is as indeterminate as the color of their skin.
As the tenacious idealist Homer Hickam, Jake Gyllenhaal gives a winsome
performance that will have you rooting every second for him to achieve
his dreams.  There is only one known way out of Coalwood, which is to
get a college football scholarship - something his brother Jim (Scott
Thomas) is hoping for.  Without this, young boys are condemned to live
there forever, working in the mine that kills you slowly or quickly,
depending on how lucky you are.  Your lungs are certain to give out
eventually, but you may die in an accident before then.  The young women
appear to have no exit route.
Energetic 1950's songs, like the ironic "That'll be the day when I die,"
enliven the scenes, and the humorous script keeps the story firmly out
of the maudlin area.  The upbeat film has a genuineness and poignancy
that will touch your heart.
Sputnik changes Homer's life forever as it inspires him to build a
rocket, just like NASA's Werner Von Braun - to whom Homer writes
progress letters, which Homer reads in voice-over.  He enlists the help
of his two best buddies, Roy Lee (William Lee Scott) and O'Dell (Chad
Lindberg), and of the school's resident nerd, Quentin (Chris Owen), to
build rockets.  Quentin, a social pariah because of his bookishness, is
shocked that Homer would even speak to him.
The boys' teacher, Miss Riley, played wonderfully in a key supporting
role by Laura Dern, encourages their efforts.  She suggests they enter
the regional science fair, which Coalwood students have never won, since
from there they could go to the national science fair.  And the first
place winners of the national science fair receive college scholarships.
The principal ridicules the whole idea, telling Miss Riley, "Our job is
to give these kids an education, not false hopes."
Walking 8 miles to their launch site, since that is the closest land not
owned by the mining company, they fire their series of rockets.  The
story contains just enough technology discussions without becoming
pedantic.  Their rocket disasters - some explode on ignition and others
turn into dangerous horizontally flying projectiles - are
sidesplittingly funny.
Homer's biggest deterrent is his own father, John, from whom Homer gets
his persistence and strong work ethic.  Homer, however, gets little love
or support.  As the long-time manager of the mine, John is a tough but
fair-minded type, with emphasis on the former.  Chris Cooper, in a
performance that dares to be unlikable, plays the father with just a
hint of a heart of gold.  John constantly ridicules Homer's scientific
endeavors.  The ever-busy John, who always makes time for Jim's football
games, is just about the only person in town who doesn't go occasionally
to "The Rocket Boys'" launches.
Even if the outcome is never really in doubt, the story takes several
quite surprising twists on its way to a satisfying conclusion that will
cause many a teary eye.  Even if you feel like you've seen similar
fictional stories before, they rarely have this emotional wallop.  Be
sure and stay for the epilogue, in which old color movies of all of the
lead characters are shown.
OCTOBER SKY runs 1:40.  It is rated PG for mild profanity, brief teen
sensuality and alcohol use, and for some thematic elements.  The movie
would be fine for kids around 9 or 10 and up, depending how interested
they are in serious movies.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, February 19.
In the San Jose area it will be playing at the AMC and Century theaters.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: February 19, 1999
Starring: Jake Gyllenhaal, Laura Dern, Chris Owen, William Lee Scott,
Chad Lindberg, Chris Cooper, Natalie Canerday
Directed by: Joe Johnston
Distributed by: Universal Pictures
MPAA Rating: PG (language, brief teen sensuality and alcohol use, some
thematic elements) 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1999/october.htm
Since 1990, the dramatic picture has undergone a certain change of
style. Now, instead of emphasizing feel-good stories replete with
characters of noble virtues, the screenplays and direction point toward
human struggle and sorrow. This realist tendancy can be inspiring at
times, as 1993's SCHINDLER'S LIST shows. Most of today's mainstream
drama, however, creates an overabundance of emoting that can turn off
members of the audience. That's why pictures like OCTOBER SKY, which are
a throwback to the good ol' dramas of yesteryear, are such a welcome
relief in contemporary cinema. 
The movie is based on the true story of Homer Hickam (Jake Gyllenhaal),
a teenager in the 1950's company town of Coalwood, West Virginia. It's a
well-known fact that the only boys to make a name for themselves are the
ones that get out of the town on football scholarships; the rest grow up
to work in the coal mine. The mine, which is run by Homer's father
(Chris Cooper), is not the place for Homer, however. After watching the
Soviet satellite Sputnik shoot across the October sky in 1957, Homer
feels a connection with the outside world -- as he puts it, "Anyone in
the world could look up and see the same thing I did." Drafting two of
his best friends and the brainiac outcast, Homer begins to construct
rockets. With the help of their history teacher, Miss Riley (Laura
Dern), and several mine workers, the four are soon bound for great
things. 
October Sky is a skillfully crafted film, and most of that credit must
go to director Joe Johnston. Johnston -- whose career in the film
industry includes everything from directing well-known titles like
JUMANJI and THE ROCKETEER down to an uncredited role as a Death Star
trooper in STAR WARS -- certainly knows what he's doing here. He molds
characters which are true to life and also fun to watch into a plot that
is straightforward and robust. He does not push any barriers, but
instead adopts a conservative style of filmmaking which enhances the
film's charm. His finesse brings out elements which might otherwise be
lost -- such as the relationships between Homer and various mine
workers, or the silent struggle between Homer's mother and father. 
The cast is well chosen, although the true bright spots are the
supporting roles. Laura Dern (JURASSIC PARK) lends a strong performance
in the role of the history teacher, giving the boys the support and
guidance they need. Her role is instantly likeable. Chris Cooper (THE
HORSE WHISPERER), as Homer's father, is less likeable -- even downright
despicable at times -- but his turn here gives gravity to the movie.
He's definitely a driving force in Homer's life, and his more humane
moments give the piece a certain dynamic that is commendable. 
The script is generally cheerful, projecting the boys' endeavors in a
lighthearted manner. There are moments when it becomes predictable --
such as the train tracks scene -- and there are moments when it
sacrifices orginality for the need to come up with an emotional plot
twist. It highlights the essence of youth, however, and for its
exceptional job at this it can be forgiven other missteps. 
OCTOBER SKY should be a success with audiences. Although it doesn't have
the appeal of current teen flicks like VARSITY BLUES or SHE'S ALL THAT,
it certainly holds an undeniable quality that older crowds will lean
towards. It's a welcome change to the dramatic genre, and one that
everyone should see. 

Author
Ryan Ellis
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
Pure honesty and boyish enthusiasm are two traits that far too
many films in this decade don't care to embrace. As a result,
recurring criticisms of countless pictures is that they're not
believable, they're unlikable, or the whole project is just plain
stupid. With all the mega-movies about disaster and imminent
death (which seems to automatically require a $50 million budget
for the outrageous special effects alone), the proverbial 'Little
Movie That Could' is often overwhelmed and forgotten by the
ticket buyers.
So, here comes "October Sky" with its message of dedication,
love, and hope. It's a good movie, and I don't mean that to
provide a bland analysis. I mean "good" in the sense that it's
got a good heart with wonderful intentions. There's no real
villain here or some higher goal to destroy people or things.
Sure, it has some special effects, but this is one time where
they help the story along, instead of dominating the dog-eared
script. Not once do you sit in the theatre mulling over how the
folks at Industrial Light and Magic did this or that. You're too
busy engrossed in the lives of the small town and its coal miner
mentalities.
Based on the book, "Rocket Boys" by Homer H. Hickam Jr., "October
Sky" chronicles the day-to-day hardships of Coalwood, West
Virginia. It's the fall in 1957 and Russia has just launched
"Sputnik" into orbit. Young nobody Homer Hickam (Jake Gyllenhaal,
who is earnest and well-cast) seems to be floating through life
until he sees the satellite shooting by their small community up
in the sky. He's captivated with the idea of getting into space
and rockets become his full-time passion. He and his chums, Roy
Lee (William Lee Scott) and O'Dell (Chad Lindberg), make friends
with the town geek, Quentin (Chris Owen). The four boys
enthusiastically study and learn and fail in their attempts to
get a rocket to successfully shoot off into the wild blue yonder.
Meanwhile, Homer's father, John (Chris Cooper), runs the town's
coal mine. Mining is his life and he thinks it should be Homer's
life, too. The obvious conflict is father vs. son, but it's also
about the desire to shoot for the heavens and keep out of the
ugly pit of hell--up vs. down. Now, that's not to say that John
Hickam is the devil. He's a hard man, but a good man. He treats
most people right, but he's tough on his family, especially the
passionate Homer. John is sternly against his son's hobby (or is
it an obsession?) and pushes him to get into the mining business.
After being blamed for a forest fire caused by a "rocket", their
equipment is confiscated and they are forced to stop
experimenting. Glumly, they accept their fate and temporarily
quit.
Homer never gives up on his dreams, though, even when he has to
fill in for his father on the job. After John saves the lives of
a dozen men (but nearly loses his eye and his life), he's laid up
for a few weeks. Homer realizes his obligation to the family and
goes to work in the coal mines. He doesn't like it, but he's a
natural miner. Meanwhile, Miss Riley (Laura Dern), the boys' high
school teacher, continues to inspire them (particularly Homer) to
do something great with their lives. She wants them to enter the
National Science Fair and is only satisfied when they do. Because
this is based on a true story, it has a positive ending with some
bittersweet aspects, too.
In the middle, this film loses its focus on Homer's rocketeering
efforts and gets into the family conflicts. Near the end, as the
miners strike and the town looks to be crumbling, family tensions
increase until everything blows. While those scenes are
necessary, the film's strength is in its laugh-out-loud humour,
warmth, and ingenuity of the boys and their rockets. Ironically,
I softly criticize the filmmakers for forgetting about the rocket
exploits, yet these family scenes were the ones I could best
understand. Still, it's not easy to watch a story of a boy and
his father who cannot relate and don't get along because that's
my story, too.
Director Joe Johnston has made a fine film here--better than
"Honey, I Shrunk The Kids", for instance, which was also a sweet
movie about families and technology. Johnston uses the technical
aspects well in conjunction with the story in "October Sky". One
of the most important facets is the support for the "Rocket Boys"
by the entire community as they willingly help the boys out in a
heartfelt, but honest way. This film is not sappy or manipulative
and it's bound to bring a tear to the eye at the resolution,
especially if you can relate to these people like I can. Rockets
and mines are the metaphors. Love, forgiveness, and hope are the
messages. When "October Sky" isn't entertaining you, it's
touching you.
USELESS TRIVIA--Producer Charles Gordon also produced "Field Of
Dreams", a movie with a very strong element of father/son forgiveness 
and acceptness.


Author
Aaron Michaels
Hello everyone. This is my first review posting on the
rec.arts.movies.reviews newsgroup. Please give me any criticism you
have. Thank you and enjoy my review of...
Directed by Joe Johnston. Screenplay by Lewis Colick (based on book by
Homer J. Hickam Jr.). Running time: 108 minutes. Rated PG (for language,
brief teen sensuality and alcohol use, and for some thematic elements)
October Sky is a great movie. It's family friendly, grandparent
friendly, and it's a film you can recommend to almost any aged
person. It funny, touching, and a great made film.
October Sky is the true story of Homer Hickam (Jake Gyllenhaal) who is
interested in rocketry after watching the Russian spacecraft Sputnik
fly through the "October Sky" over his small town in West Virginia. He
starts making plans which his friends Roy Lee (William Lee Scott) and
O'Dell (Chad Lindberg) to make a small rocket that will, hopefully,
fly.  They find they need more help with the technical elements of the
rocket building so they ask for help from the neighborhood smart kid
Quentin (Chris Owen). Together the four start a journey that will
hopefully get them out of the small mining town they live in.
Homer's father John (Chris Cooper) is the town's best miner and
expects his son to continue his tradition. So Homer has many scenes
that are tense with his father. Homer's teacher Ms. Riley (Laura Dern)
encourages him to make a great rocket and to get out the town on a
scholarship.  Both are storylines that play along with the boy's
journey.
Director Joe Johnston who has made great films before, like Field of
Dreams, puts a great feeling into this film. He doesn't overuse or
underuse a character through the whole film. Homer is the main
character but he doesn't steal screentime from any of his friends or
family. I have a feeling this project meant a lot to Johnston because
this type of film would probably be through into made for TV territory
without the great screenplay by Lewis Colick and Johnston's big
status.
Many will complain that this is film is full of cliches and plays with
the storyline like a well produced made for TV movie. I thought of
October Sky cliches as if they weren't there then it wouldn't be quite
as enjoyable. If Homer and friends failed and ended up wasting the
rest of their lives in the mine breathing in the black smoke then it
wouldn't a good movie would it? Also this is based on a true story so
we know this is humanly possible for these teen's to pull off what
they did.
My only complaint with this film is that it came out way too early in
the year. Come the 2000 Academy Awards (it feels very weird saying
that) it will be forgotten by many the nominators. This film should be
nominated a couple of times. The cinematogery is beautiful taking full
advantage of the surroundings of the small town. The acting is top
notch and I'd love to see Gyllenhaal, Cooper, and Dern get the
nomiantions they deserve.
How about that Gylenhaal. A unknown to me has shown a type of charm
and great acting I haven't seen since River Phoenix. Pray he doesn't
end up making teen horror films in the future. I can't wait to see his
next film though.
October Sky is a film that will inspire kids and teens to make
something great out of their lives. I'm not saying they will go out
and build rockets but I am saying that this is a film they will
remember when time to choose a job comes around.

Author
Long Che Chan
Today, most of the teenage flicks are about high schoolers getting into
grotesque, drunken situations involving sex, drugs, booze, and
violence.  While Welcome to the Dollhouse did it all sensibly,
Jawbreaker, Varsity Blues, and the like are all examples of the
teen-flick norm today.  Out of this junk comes a movie based on a true
story and while it isn't exceptional or particularly fresh, it is a
great change of pace from the ultimately drab and cynical movies that
are coming out of the studios aiming for teenage audiences.  The story
feels old and used, but it is moving.  I admit to not wanting to see
this movie- the commercials promised melodrama.  While October Sky is
melodrama, it is better than most because its intentions are good   At
the end, the drama is overdone, but its emotion is sufficient.  Maybe
I'm praising October Sky because I'm sick of what the usual teenage
movie has to offer.  The movie isn't exactly master filmmaking, it
sometimes falls into the Ditch of Melodrama Normalcy, and Laura Dern
doesn't do anything I can perceive as strong.  I'll know in a few years
time when I look back on this film.  Right now, I can't deny that I was
uplifted and enjoyed the story of Homer Hickam (Jake Gylenhaal), a young
man aspiring for the stars.
October Sky centers on Homer, who is surrounded by a small town and
narrow-minded townsfolk.  With the sight of Sputnik, a Cold War
milestone, Homer has become interested in rockets and science.  His
father (Chris Cooper in a fine performance) is both disappointed and
angry that his son is interested in these subjects.  Young men in this
town stay there, unless they get a football scholarship elsewhere.  It
has always been tradition for the men to work in the coal mines.  Homer
looks at the mine as the Place of Evil and Blackness- when his father
gets sick in the middle of the film and he must take over his job and go
down into the mines, the look on his face shows more than reluctance- he
looks up into the sky as if his father and God have betrayed him.
Urged on by his teacher Miss Riley (Laura Dern), Homer convinces his
friends Roy Lee, O'Dell, and a science nerd, Quentin to help him make a
rocket that would be Science Fair potential.  This rocket may be their
ticket out of the crumminess of their native town.  Homer, a boy who's
math grades are waning, is the most determined of the group- he studies
trigonometry and all sorts of math subjects to help in his building of
the rocket.  There is a fire in his eye when he feels his rocket will
blast off into space.  His hopes for entering the Science Fair are
dashed by the discovery that his rocket may have lit a forest fire.  The
fire in his eyes dies and he succumbs to his parents' wishes- he works
in the mines.
I saw this movie in the dollar theater and there was a wretched man
screaming at the top of his lungs "jerk" whenever Homer's father had a
disagreement with him.  The script and Chris Cooper, thank heaven, don't
make Homer's dad a stereotype-bad-guy-underestimating-parent, but a man
confused by new thoughts, like Topol in Fiddler on the Roof, or Rock
Hudson in Giant.  He wants the best for his son- but he wants the best
on his terms.  He believes that people should stick with what is normal,
what is common and ordinary and you can't blame him.  We can't always
understand him when he so cruelly represses  Homer's dreams of
rocketry.  His fights with Homer usually don't go beyond
mainstream-movie father-son arguments- it is usually when they're not
fighting that the film succeeds.  There is an especially stirring scene
in which Homer asks his father to come to one of the rocket launches.
His father doesn't want to, in any way, support this ambition of his
son's, but he doesn't want to let his son down.  There is no screaming
or shouting, just an uneasiness about the scene.
The later brawls between Homer and his father are what you would expect-
an exchange of "You wanna get out of this town so bad, then go!" and
"Yeah, I'll go, and I won't even look back!"  These scenes have their
emotional qualities, but they're primitively done, not that I expected
something on the lines of Orson Welles.  The movie gets you in such a
mood that, when it finally ends: when the father and son finally
connect, when the whole town pitches in to help Homer win the fair,
you're elated by this young man's strength- the fact that he broke
through the barriers set by parents and townspeople and mediocrity, the
barriers many people never cross, the barriers I bet Homer's father
wished he had crossed.  When October Sky is bad, it assaults us (maybe
assault' is a bit too strong) with its lack of ambition and its
ordinariness, and that is why I don't always admire it.
Homer Hickam now lives in Cape Canaveral training astronauts for NASA.
October Sky is not about rocketry, but about facing obstacles and
beating the odds against you.   I wish more kids had seen it.  The only
people I saw in the theater were senior citizens.  The movie has lots of
heart and good intentions and I wish people could see this instead of
the uncouth and presumptuous trash that brings the execs the dough
nowadays.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
October Sky (1999)
Jake Gyllenhaal, Chris Cooper, William Lee Scott, Chris Owen, Chad 
Lindberg, Natalie Canerday, Laura Dern, Scott Miles, Scott Thomas, 
Courtney Fendley, "Big Frank" Schuler, Kailie Hollister, Jeff Galpin, O. 
Winston Link. Screenplay by Lewis Colick, based on the book "Rocket Boys" 
by Homer H. Hickam Jr. Directed by Joe Johnston. 108 minutes. 
Rated PG, 4 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com 
Think of "Hoosiers," with a science fair subbing for a basketball game as 
the grand finale, and you'll have an idea of what to expect from "October 
Sky," an earnest, inspirational throwback to the pre-ironic days of 
filmmaking. How refreshing to watch idealism and sentimentality presented 
onscreen without the usual cheap manipulative tricks so beloved by 
Hollywood schlockmeisters. Admittedly, "October Sky" is at times a bit 
too pat, but given the sheer good will engendered by the movie, that flaw 
is easy to take.
The story, based on Homer J. Hickam Jr.'s memoir, "Rocket Boys," begins 
on a brisk night in 1957, when the residents of Coalwood, West Virginia 
watch the Russian satellite Sputnik glide across the starry October sky. 
Inspired by the sight, and the U.S. efforts to keep up with their Cold 
War rivals, young Homer Hickam decides to start building rockets of his 
own, much to the dismay of his father, the mine superintendent for the 
company town's only industry. Along with a few friends, Homer forms the 
"Big Creek Missile Agency" and pursues his dream, encouraged by a teacher 
who believes the boys might have a chance of winning the National Science 
Fair in Indianapolis and securing the college scholarships necessary for 
them to escape life in the mines. 
The film has two story arcs, both well-traveled but satisfying 
nonetheless. One is a tale of perseverance, chronicling the boys' dogged 
efforts to succeed through study, experimentation and hard work. The 
other eloquently details one young man's quest to be his own person, even 
while he continues to desperately crave the approval of his father. In a 
letter to his former high school, the real Homer Hickam stated he wrote 
his book "for all of us who watched our parents sacrifice in a million 
ways every day so that we might have a better life. It was written for 
all of us who observed by deed every day how much our parents loved us 
but never experienced it through touch or word." If you found that 
statement corny rather than moving, this may not be the film for you. 
"October Sky" captures the look and feel of a tiny '50s coal-mining town 
so well that the golden-oldies soundtrack seems unnecessary and intrusive.
 The cast does fine work making the town come to life. Laura Dern is 
effective as the boy's teacher and Natalie Canerday gives a great 
performance as Elsie Hickam, a fiercely devoted mother and wife who hates 
Coalwood. Even while battling for her family, she paints a beachside 
mural on the kitchen wall, a small act of defiance against this town of 
soot, hacking coughs and lives of resignation. 
As Homer, Jake Gyllenhaal nicely straddles the line between wide-eyed boy 
and fiery young man. He makes Homer a 20th Century Huck Finn, with a 
personality born of his mother's dreams and his father's backbone. Chris 
Cooper, in the film's most crucial role, plays John Hickam with grit and 
intensity, tempered by a hint of sadness in his eyes. As a superintendent,
 husband and father, John Hickam is firm and not always fair, but he 
truly believes himself a reasonable man operating in the best interests 
of those around him. While you will certainly understand Homer's 
frustration with his father, you'll also realize why he cherishes him so. 
After watching "October Sky," I bought and read "Rocket Boys," partially 
because I wanted to spend more time with the Hickams, but also to check 
the accuracy of the film, which seemed almost too slick to be true. 
Indeed, the movie makes some changes. The six rocket boys in the "Big 
Creek Missile Agency" are condensed into four characters. Homer's mother 
was considerably more assertive, and his father quietly more helpful, 
than portrayed in the film. An incident with the law which casts a pall 
over the boys for a goodly portion of the movie was actually resolved in 
one afternoon. And as for one of the few images in the film that looked 
contrived, a shot of a defeated young Homer gazing upwards at Sputnik 
while a mine elevator lowers him into the bowels of the earth, well, 
let's just call it poetic license and leave it at that.  
The liberties taken by the filmmakers didn't really bother me, though. 
The movie is true to the essence of the book and, most importantly, it 
does not dishonor Homer's parents, John and Elsie Hickam. That matters, 
because it shows that the people behind "October Sky" adhere to the 
values they espouse. As with "Hoosiers," "October Sky" may move some 
facts around and throw in a fictional subplot, but it maintains the 
integrity of the true story behind the celluloid. 

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        "October Sky" is a cinematic testament to the power of dreams,
and why they make life worth living.  Based on the true story of four
teenage boys who strove to make their lives extraordinary, the film
is uplifting, involving, and triumphant.  It's a tale rooted in the
tradition of emotional filmmaking; in a some ways, I was reminded
of a teenage "It's a Wonderful Life."
        It's October 1957, and seventeen year-old Homer Hickam (Jake
Gyllenhaal) is, like the rest of the nation, captivated by the launch
of the Soviet Union's Sputnik satellite.  Most of his fellow
townsfolk in the small mining community of Coalwood, West Virginia
see the device as something to fear ("Are they gonna use it to drop
bombs on us?" frets a nervous housewife).  But Homer is not a typical
teen, and his imagination embraces the scientific possibilities now
stretching out before mankind.  So taken with these eye-opening
new ideas, the impetuous youth soon embarks on a quest to build
a rocket.
        Most of his friends think he's crazy, but Homer finds a trio
of allies who share this unusual dream: the cocky Roy Lee (William
Lee Scott), his friend O'Dell (Chad Lindberg), and the brainy Quentin
(Chris Owen), whose knowledge of physics and chemistry far exceeds
their teacher's.  Working with supplies "borrowed" from local
businesses, the boys soon turn an abandoned lot into their own
personal Cape Canavrel as they construct their model rocket, which
they christen AUK1 (a tounge-in-cheek gesture: an auk is a small,
flightless bird).
        The name is an unfortunately apt one, and the boys suffer
numerous hardships while attempting to get the device ready in
time for the county (and hopefully national) Science Fair.  They
have the drive to keep trying, however: Homer in particular sees
the AUK project as not just a hobby but a possible means of
escape from the trap of Coalwood.  He desperately wishes to
attend college, but the only way he could afford it would be to
win a football scholarship, as his brother Jim did.  Homer is not
the athletic type, however, and so AUK becomes his driving force
and a powerful symbol: not only does he hope the rocket will soar,
he hopes it will take him with it, right out of Coalwood, with an
academic scholarship attatched.
        Although his mother Elsie (Natalie Canerday from "Sling
Blade") and his teacher Miss Riley (Laura Dern) are both
supportive in this new endeavor, Homer's father John (Chris
Cooper) thinks the boy is wasting his time.  Father and son do
not relate well, and on a certain level that's the main story
of "October Sky": how two vastly different people learn to
respect each other and set aside their differences.  The film
handles their relationship smartly, as we watch the two men try
to comprehend each other's motives.  John expects Homer to follow
in his footsteps and work in the town's coal mine; Homer dreams
only of the stars and his precious rockets.  John doesn't realize
that his own driving passion for mining is just as strong as
his son's love of rocketry, and one of the best scenes occurs when
Homer accuses his father of loving the mine more than he does
his family.
        The relationship between father and son becomes the story's
emotional cornerstone.  Their lives are an interesting juxtaposition:
the scenes with Homer and his friends testing their prototypes in
the great outdoors contrast sharply with the dark, claustrophobic
shots of John working in the mine.  It's no surprise that they have
trouble relating to each other: their worlds don't overlap in the
slightest.  If the final reconciliation between Homer and John
reeks a bit heavily of saccharine, it's still effective when seen
in context with the film as a whole.
        "October Sky" contains a wealth of characters, most of whom
are well developed-- not surprising, since the film is based on a true
story.  (A nice touch: the closing credits contain Super 8 footage of
the real people the story is based on.)  But sadly, Roy Lee and O'Dell
are given only token attention here, and seem to be included only to
be
historically accurate.  Neither boy does anything of consequence.  I
would've liked to learn more about them, but alas, they're both too
shadowy and insubstantial to get a handle on.
        If we remove the inconsequential characters, the film is
basically the tale of Homer and Quentin's quest to build a rocket.
On a larger level, it's also the story of one boy's coming of age,
and how he found the courage to struggle ahead in the face of
adversity.  In that sense, "October Sky" is as big and glorious
as its title.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please
write to: joefilm-subscribe@listbot.com
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Zach McGhee
At the core of October Sky, there is the overly convoluted and melodramatic
story, shoved down the throats of its audience, about four high school kids in
a small town trying to win a science fair. Thankfully, the film itself has much
more depth and integrity than can ultimately be described. 
The film starts in the late 1950's, just as the Russians launched Sputnik, a
satellite that would orbit the Earth continually. Indeed, the race for the moon
had begun, but it would be a few years before that happened. The mission of the
moment was to gain confidence in the United States once more, that we could
redeem ourselves as the most technologically advanced. The movie, however,
takes an unusual route to do so. 
In Coalwood, West Virginia, the town's name has definite meaning. The boys all
grew up to be coal miners, the girls all coal miners' wives. On occasion, one
boy would get a ride out of town on a football scholarship, but such occasions
were few and far between. Too small for the latter category, Homer Hickam (Jake
Gyllenhaal) is less than enthusiastic about his predetermined profession, but
can do little to change his destiny. 
Homer's father (Chris Cooper), however, sees no exception in the line-up of
forthcoming coal-miners, and as superintendent of the mine, will see his son
follow him in his footsteps. Regardless of whatever ambitions Homer may have,
they are irrelevant in a world as local as their's. 
But, one night, as Sputnik flies over the Coalwood October sky, Homer sees what
the possibilities are. In that instant, Homer's dreams grow beyond capacity. He
wants to know more about space, and satellites, and rockets. In the following
weeks, he searches out the school outcast, Quentin (Chris Owen), in a desperate
desire to learn. With Homer's other two friends (William Lee Scott, Chad
Lindberg), who are a bit reluctant at first, but soon follow Homer's ambition,
they begin. 
Cannibalizing Homer's basement, much to his father's dismay, they assemble as
many rockets as possible. However, after suffering a few casualties (i.e. his
mother's white picket-fence), they are forced to find another refuge to
continue the realization of their dream. Soon, the rockets succeed, flying
higher and higher each time. The Rocket Boys, as they came to be known, also
developed quite a cult following, with Homer's father notably absent. 
The beauty of October Sky is its ability to maintain an intricate balance
between the many issues it faces. The relationship between Homer and his
family, his father in particular, is one of the most well constructed pieces of
film in years. Typically, film has shown fathers and sons as bitter enemies,
nothing more. In October Sky, their relationship is brought to terms, as both
show obvious resentment, but ultimately love, towards one another. While the
story may be about four boys who make rockets, its heart is to succeed in life,
and realize your dreams. 
The film's imagery is visually stunning, not because of a location or fancy
15th century costumes, but because of how real and true it is. The cast is
generally excellent, with Gyllenhaal leading the way to perfection. The script,
coming from the real Homer's novel, is solid in every detail. 
While we may have to put up with a few movies like The Avengers or Armageddon,
every once and a while a movie comes along that reminds you why you pay $7
every week or two. October Sky is one of those movies. 
[Rated PG for language, brief teen sensuality and alcohol use, and for some
thematic elements.] 

Author
Ross Anthony
Across a starry October sky in 1957 a single object shined like a shooting
star in slow motion over the little town of Coalwood, West Virginia. This
spark, the Soviet satellite Sputnik, ignited the wick-like gaze of one
miner's son, Homer (Gyllenhaal); lighting in him a burning desire to become
a rocket scientist. The rest of the mining community had spent much too much
time underground, "Maybe it's a missile," one older gentleman figur's. The
reply, "Naw, droppin' one on this place, just be a waste of a bomb." The
younger generation was no more open-minded, "Let 'em have outer space -- we
got rock and roll!"
No passion for coal mining digging inside him, and a push over on the
football field, Homer had finally found something to shoot for, "I'mma build
rockets." Unfortunately, Homer's "John Wayne" father (Cooper) had no idea
how to respect a son who couldn't mine or stop a running back. This is the
major conflict. Will the adolescent son be strong enough to sell his lofty
dreams to a father who only dreams of coal?
The plot follows the usual formula, so that were it a rocket, one could
predict within a matter of feet where it would land. But don't let that stop
you from coming' out to view "October Sky". The acting is strong, the
direction tight, the music and cinematography dramatic. It's a solid
engaging film.
Starring Jake GyllenHaal and Chris Cooper.
Directed by Joe Johnston.
Produced by: Charles Gordon and Larry Franco at Universal/Charles Gordon
Rated PG.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
James Sanford
There are undoubtedly thousands of kids in America who are growing up in
dismal situations similar to that of Homer Hickam, the young hero of
"October Sky," and for them, this movie could provide a much-needed shot
of inspiration.
After all, the real-life Hickam managed to use his brain to escape a
trap of a small town, at a time when the only possible way for boys like
him to get to college was on a football scholarship. His is a story that
says there's no shame in being smart, and it could easily lead younger
viewers to think seriously about what they want to do with their
futures.
But far from being a sermonette about the virtues of  education,
"October Sky" is spirited, exciting entertainment that delivers on any
number of levels - and you don't have to be a youngster to enjoy it.
 Taken from Hickam's book "Rocket Boys," the screenplay by Lewis Colick
skillfully sidesteps most of the potential pitfalls of such a
rags-to-rockets tale and, on the occasions when it stumbles upon a
cliche, "Sky" usually finds a way to reinvent it.
 As played by Jake Gyllenhaal - he looks like a friendlier, more
emotionally balanced Robert Downey Jr. - Homer is remarkably easy to
identify with, an athletic underachiever who lives in the shadow of his
older brother Jim (Scott Miles), a star with the Big Creek Owls football
team. Most of his friends have problems of their own: Roy Lee (William
Lee Scott) is regularly devastated by his alcoholic stepfather; O'Dell
(Chad Lindberg) lost his father in a mining accident; brainy Quentin
(Chris Owen) is regarded as an object of ridicule by his classmates.
And, as the name tells us, the boys' hometown of Coalwood, W.Va., offers
exactly one occupational opportunity.
 With the October 1957 launch of Sputnik by the Soviet Union, "things'll
never be the same again," says Homer's teacher Miss Riley (Laura Dern).
She's talking about the international balance of power, but she might as
well be referring to the lives of Homer and company, who challenge
themselves to build a working rocket of their own in the face of
overwhelming skepticism, particularly from Homer's dad (Chris Cooper)
who regards the conquest of space as "a novelty."
 "Sky" works as well as it does because of a feeling of total conviction
from everyone concerned, from director Joe Johnston ("The Rocketeer,"
"Jumanji") on down. Barry Robison's production design offers a vividly
drab depiction of 1957 West Virginia, from the well-weathered bleachers
adorned with the motto "for our Owlstanding fans" to the mine elevator
that looks like a man-eating prison cell. Sincerity rings in the acting
of Gyllenhaal, Dern and Cooper, while the scene-stealing Scott and
Natalie Canerday as Homer's mom who dreams of tropical paradises turn
their
supporting roles into little triumphs. James Sanford

Author
Alex Fung
OCTOBER SKY (Universal - 1999)
Cast: Jake Gyllenhaal, Chris Cooper, Laura Dern, Chris Owen,
      William Lee Scott, Chad Lindberg, Natalie Canerday
Screenplay by Lewis Colick, based on the book "Rocket Boys" by
  Homer H. Hickam
Produced by Charles Gordon and Larry Franco
Directed by Joe Johnston
Running time: 108 minutes 
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   Judging by what made it to the screen in OCTOBER SKY, it quickly
   becomes clear why Universal greenlighted a film based on the memoir
   of NASA engineer Homer H. Hickam Jr. -- if we're to believe the
   events depicted in the picture, his story as an ambitious adolescent
   trapped in a dying West Virginia coal mining town plays exactly like
   a Hollywood movie.  Other than a few touches (I can envision studio
   executives pensively musing "Now, does he *have* to be named Homer
   Hickam?"), this tale of a teenager struggling against adversity
   adheres to the conventional inspirational drama formula so closely
   that the "Based On A True Story" opening title card seems as much of
   a shield against skepticism as it does a selling point.
   In today's market, this modest film feels like a throwback: an
   unabashedly earnest, clean-cut bit of storytelling which reveals its
   colours as surely as the movie's teacher will gently chide students
   mercilessly teasing the resident science kid by drawling "He's right,
   y'all."  Set in 1957 in the relatively-isolated town of Coalwood, the
   picture follows the story of Homer Hickam (Jake Gyllenhaal), a teen
   who becomes inspired by the launch of Russia's Sputnik satellite and
   starts to build his own rockets, enlisting the help of friends Roy
   Lee (William Lee Scott), O'Dell (Chad Lindberg), and math whiz
   Quentin (Chris Owen).  Coalwood is a mining town through and through,
   where the only visible means of escape is via a football scholarship
   like Homer's older brother Jim (Scott Miles); everybody else is
   relegated to an unpromising life down in the mines.  While Homer's
   dreams are buoyed by his supportive teacher Miss Riley (Laura Dern),
   who suggests that competing in the regional science fair may net
   college scholarships and a way out for the rocket boys, he's
   dissuaded and disparaged at every turn by his stern father John
   (Chris Cooper), who tidily happens to be the town's mine supervisor
   and considers Homer's ambitions to be foolhardy.
   While director Joe Johnston employs frequent usage of the easy
   contrast between Homer's skyward aspirations and the gloomy depths of
   the mine, he also diffuses the grimy claustrophobia of the depressed
   milieu with the old-fashioned wholesomeness of the community; this is
   a place where a girl can scamper up to our young hero, bat her eyes,
   and sigh "Golly, Homer, it sure was exciting watching your rockets go
   up!" without any ironic or tongue-in-cheek connotations.  If the
   period dress and liberal use of archetypes wasn't enough to remove
   any residual doubt of its aim to depict an ostensibly simpler, more
   innocent time, the film lazily establishes the era by deluging the
   soundtrack with wall-to-wall classic rock 'n' roll.  (A montage of
   comic misfires is unimaginatively set to "Ain't That A Shame?")
   Although the utterly pedestrian OCTOBER SKY is a textbook example of
   cookie-cutter filmmaking, there's nothing much to really fault with
   Mr. Johnston's workmanlike helming or the sincere, capable
   performance of young lead Mr. Gyllenhall, but it's all so generic
   that it's easy to resist.  The story's trajectory is so unwaveringly
   apparent that there's no sense of wonder to accompany the shots of
   characters gaping at their amateur rocket blasts, and the film is
   riddled with such cardboard stereotypes and typecasting that I found
   it difficult to invest much emotion in their plights.  Just when John
   seems ready to cross the line from strict authoritarian to unfeeling
   tyrant, you can count on him to reaffirm his gruffly loving nature by
   performing a good deed, and as helpful teacher Miss Riley, Ms. Dern
   so earnestly strains to light a fire under her students that I
   expected her to pull a facial muscle.  While the picture is
   reasonably pleasant, it's narratively stupefying -- a shot of a
   disgusted John throwing a spent rocket into the trash is a given, and
   it's inevitable that an oft-mentioned legendary outsider makes a
   fleeting appearance -- and the syrupy score by Mark Isham
   condescendingly serves as an emotional guide for the audience.
   Ironically, for a picture about a boy whose hard work and ambitions
   sent him shooting for the stars, OCTOBER SKY is depressingly
   unambitious.  For all its good intentions, it's telling that the home
   video footage which closes the picture is infinitely more touching
   and awe-inspiring than the preceding hundred-odd minutes of
   celluloid.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"X-FILES fans come up to me in malls expecting me to be able to fill them
 in on the whole conspiracy.  Half the time I have no idea what they're
 talking about." - Martin Landau

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Universal Pictures
 Director:  Joe Johnston
 Writer:  Lewis Colick, on Homer Hickam Jr.'s novel, "Rocket Boys"
 Cast: Jake Gyllenhaal, Chris Cooper, Laura Dern, Natalie
Canerday, Chris Owen, William Lee Scott, Chad Lindberg
    Joe Johnston made a name for his special effects
work in razzle-dazzle movies like "Raiders of the Lost Ark"
and "Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom."  He continued
his forte by directing the fanciful "Honey I Shrunk the Kids." 
You can scarcely believe that this same person is at the helm
of "October Sky," which has as conventional a structure as
you can find in any film, enough so that it could easily be
featured on prime-time TV.  Yet this standard "based-on-a-
true-story" tale works.  "October Sky" has stature as an
inspirational drama because it appears to replicate with
integrity a true story about a kid who later became a NASA
scientist, a position he holds to this day.  At the same time it
shuns the cheap sentiment of the soaps while avoiding the
obligatory hipness that makes so many Sundance entries
seem cut from the same cloth.  This is the sort of film that
may be bypassed by the high-school set intent on seeing yet
another video game on the big screen.  More's the pity,
because "October Sky," based on Homer H. Hickam Jr.'s
novel "Rocket Boys" and successfully adapted to the screen
by Lewis Colick, could inspire a whole generation of young
people who have no substantial heroes of their own.  Proving
that you've got to be a rocket scientist to get along with all
the pretty girls.
   Director Johnston takes us back to 1957, the year that
Sputnik caused alarm throughout the U.S. and fostered a new
interest, however fleeting, in the study of sciences throughout
the land.  As folks look up to the starry sky near the film's
opening and actually see the Soviet accomplishment, they
give vent to their feelings, usually expressed in cliches such
as "we have enough problems right here on the Earth."
   "October Sky," though, presents a sympathetic view of
people often considered hillbillies and hicks by those living in
more sophisticated areas than Coaltown, West Virginia, a
town which was formed, named and wholly owned by the
company running the mines.  The boys address their fathers
as "sir," the town appears to have only one drunk, and the
kids in school are polite except to the one boy, Quentin
(Chris Owen), whom they prochronistically label a geek. 
When Homer Hickam (Jake Gyllenhaal) takes an uncommon
interest in the space travel introduced by the Russian ship,
he begins a letter-writing campaign to Werner von Braun,
then stationed in Cape Canaveral and, together with his pals
Roy Lee (William Lee Scott), Quentin, and O'Dell (Chad
Lindberg), gets to work on building a model rocket.  Through
trial and error, the quartet fail consistently (in their first
attempt they blow a hole in the Hickam family wooden fence)
until they discover the best fuel and the appropriate shape to
make the rocket's nozzle.
   The real story, however, takes place within Homer's family,
as his dad, John Hickam (Chris Cooper), looks at best with
indifference at his son's hobby.  John, who has worked his
way up in the mines to become the superintendent, has
hopes that Homer would follow in his footsteps and eventually
rise to become a supervisor himself, but in doing so John
comes into conflict with Homer's supportive teacher, Miss
Riley (Laura Dern), who is hostile to the mining profession
and wants her pupils literally to rise above the quarry.
   "October Sky" affords a powerful boost in stature for
science and math, the two subjects that are avoided by so
many kids today because they are considered either difficult
to irrelevant.  Just watch how the hero is able to discover the
exact spot in which one of his lost rockets landed by using
trigonometry! One has to look today to the specialty high
schools such as Bronx Science and Stuyvesant and Hunter
High in New York City to find lads as motivated to succeed in
a demanding pursuit as these four.  Kids today, more than
ever before, are being raised in single-parent homes and in
households that provide them with little or no sustenance
beyond the advice to "get out there and make a lot of
money."  Learning for its own sake has long taken a back
seat to the notion of work as simply a means to an affluent
end, which makes "October Sky" all the more heartening.  
   Director Johnston works with a cast that could not better
represent the genuine people from a poor, backwoods who
caused such a stir by their ambition and perseverance.  Chris
Cooper is altogether believable in the role of Homer's dad,
alternately disapproving and sanctioning his son's aspiration,
while Jake Gyllenhaal--accustomed to playing the son in
movies like "City Slickers" and the TV episode "Bop Gun"
from the series "Homicide: Life on the Streets"--is
spellbinding.  His is the glow that comes from a person when
he is reaching for the sky and determined to elude anyone
and anything in his way. Lewis Colick's dialogue is as square
as the majority of Coaltown's people, though he occasionally
tosses in some terms that were not likely used in 1957 such
as "geek," "it's cool," and "if your father was alive he'd kick
your ass."  
   When football captains take a back seat to rocket
scientists, the audience will have to settle for the suspense of
an awards ceremonies of an Indianapolis science fair, which
substitutes for the winning touchdown in the final two seconds
of a game.  Brains are paramount, Braun provides the
inspiration.  If you're amenable to this, "October Sky" should
furnish you the appropriate uplift. 

Author
Scott Renshaw
OCTOBER SKY
(Universal)
Starring:  Jake Gyllenhaal, Chris Cooper, Chris Owen, William Lee Scott,
Chad Lindberg, Natalie Canerday, Laura Dern.
Screenplay:  Lewis Colick, based on the memoir "Rocket Boys" by Homer
Hickam Jr.
Producers:  Charles Gordon and Larry Franco.
Director:  Joe Johnston.
MPAA Rating:  PG (profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  108 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     OCTOBER SKY is a tough sort of film to get people to look at clearly.
Touted in its marketing campaign as "inspirational" and "triumphant" --
usually code words for "sentimental" and "heavy-handed" -- it could easily
lead more cynical movie-goers to dismiss it sight unseen as mawkish
foolishness.  Others, of a more feel-good nature, will think they have
seen a great film simply because, well, it makes them feel good.  It's
hard for both potential sets of viewers to get a handle on why OCTOBER SKY
works -- it avoids most of the traps the former group fears, while
delivering the satisfying emotional resonance the latter group desires.
     Set in 1957, OCTOBER SKY tells the true story of Homer Hickam (Jake
Gyllenhaal), a 17-year-old high school junior in the mining town of
Coalwood, West Virginia.  Lacking the football skills of his older brother
Jim (Scott Miles), which has been the only way out for most Coalwood
youth, Homer seems destined to work in the coal mines like his father John
(Chris Cooper).  That's until the extraordinary event of October 1957 --
the launch of the Soviet rocket Sputnik -- inspires Homer to work on his
own rocket.  Recruiting classmates Quentin (Chris Owen), Roy Lee (William
Lee Scott) and O'Dell (Chad Lindberg) to assist him, Homer sets out to
create a rocket that will land him in the National Science Fair.
Unfortunately, Homer's primary detractor is an important one:  his father,
who believes Homer's quest is a fool's errand.
     This, of course, is the cue to begin your typical triumph of the
spirit, winning-against-the-odds, kids-wiser-than-their parents
crowd-pleaser.  In some ways, the elements in OCTOBER SKY are quite 
typical:  a determined young hero, societal obstacles, a big climax at a
competitive event.  Yet there are enough ways OCTOBER SKY is _not_ typical
to make it surprisingly effective.  Director Joe Johnston, best known for
special effects-driven films like JUMANJI and THE ROCKETEER, lends energy
and humor to the montage of failed initial attempts at rocket flight.  The
production creates a complete, convincing picture of its small-town world,
treating its characters with a clear-eyed realization that they're neither
simple hicks nor salt-of-the-earth country folk.  And there's something
fundamentally, unconventionally appealing about a film where teenagers are
obsessed with an intellectual pursuit, a film where the protagonist proves
his innocence of a suspected crime by using a mathematical formula.
     It is also unconventionally appealing to see a father-son
relationship treated with such sensitivity and intelligence.  Certainly it
helps that an actor as subtly gifted as Chris Cooper is playing John
Hickam.  Too many actors would have made him a gruff thick-head who
converts to understanding just in time for a big hug; Cooper makes John's
stubbornness both caring and slightly dismissive of a boy acting smarter
than his own pa.  Jake Gyllenhaal is equally enjoyable as Homer, making
his fascination with rocket science an expression of his desire to explore
the universe beyond Coalwood.  The interactions between John and Homer
form OCTOBER SKY's emotional backbone, and nearly every one of them is
pitched at a level of conflict which seems honest rather than
movie-conflict shrill.
     There are a number of occasions when OCTOBER SKY does begin to feel
like its more convention-bound cousins.  There is an obligatory romantic
sub-plot for Homer which appears and disappears so quickly that there
hardly seems to be a point; an illness experienced by Homer's favorite
teacher (Laura Dern), while historically accurate, further bogs down the
narrative.  The last half-hour of OCTOBER SKY is not nearly as well-paced
as the first hour, dragging out Homer's journey to the National Science
Fair, but that doesn't detract from the film's many pleasures.  OCTOBER
SKY is inspirational, and it is triumphant; it's also smart, well-written,
and well-acted.  This one shows that feel-good movies don't also have to
be feel-dumb movies.

Author
Michael Redman
Denial is not just a river in Egypt -- sometimes it's the key to success.
Although current wisdom says that living in that body of water is a bad idea,
at times you have to look reality square in the face and ignore it. Of course
most of the time, you'll probably fail, but every once and a while, a miracle occurs.
Seventeen year-old Homer Hickam (Jake Gyllenhaal) is looking for that miracle.
Growing up in the West Virginia coal mining town of Coalwood in 1957, his
future is seemingly carved in carbon. The only way for boys to escape their
coal dust covered fate is a football scholarship and Homer is no jock. The
most he can hope for is to follow in his father's footsteps as mine superintendent.
Then the Soviet Union launched the tiny Sputnik. Those two or three of who are
still alive and have memories of that day can recall the buzz. The world
realized that things had changed forever. Mankind was no longer imprisoned on
the ground.
Homer's eyes are filled with stars as he stares into the night sky watching
the satellite zoom across the cosmos. He wants to build rockets. And he wants
to escape Coalwood.
Getting ahead in the tiny company town is a tough job. His father discourages
him. The high school principal doesn't think it's a good idea, "Our job is to
give these kids an education, not false hopes." Like many educators, he wants
to prepare Homer to fit in as a good worker.
The junior rocket scientist has one adult ally. His teacher, Miss Riley
(played convincingly albeit low-key by Laura Dern) encourages him to enter the
local science fair. If somehow he were to win the national competition, he'd
have a ticket to college.
Homer crosses a well-defined high school cultural barrier and talks local nerd
Quentin (Chris Owen) into helping him. Rounding up his other buddies, Roy Lee
(William Lee Scott) and O'Dell (Chad Lindberg), he starts gathering supplies.
Mix teenage boys with explosive chemicals and you can imagine the results.
Things blow up right and left. Rockets crash time after time. But slowly the
boys refine their project. Their friendship is heartfelt and reminiscent of
"Stand By Me".
Homer's desire to thwart his destiny is illustrated vividly when he gazes
longingly up to the sky as he descends into the depths of the earth in a
mining elevator. His future lies either buried under tons of dirt or in the stars.
His relationship with his father, John (Chris Cooper from "Lone Star" and
"Matewan") is a complex one. John disapproves of Homer's pie-in-the-sky
dreams. At the same time he's angry because Homer thinks he can be better than
his father, he is reluctantly proud of his son's accomplishments. Gyllenhaal's
scenes with Cooper are realistic in a way that any male with a father can
relate to.
Some of the other relationships aren't quite as realized. Homer's girlfriend
problems are a very minor part of the story and only serve to take up time.
The situation seems to be included only to fulfill the obligatory romance
portion of cinematic formulas.
A couple other sub-plots also serve to slow the film down a bit. A forest fire
and Miss Riley's illness, while presumably historically accurate, feel extraneous.
Based on a true story, the film is a vision of real people. It would have been
easy to present the townies as ignorant hillbillies, but instead, thankfully,
we are shown men and women trapped by their circumstances. Their hopes are
defined by the company.
Surprisingly the down-to-earth tale is directed by Joe Johnston, responsible
for the effects-driven "Jumanji" and "Honey I Shrunk The Kids". Johnson shows
a skill for presenting a touching movie that was missing in his previous films.
Homer is told repeatedly that he can't succeed. Fortunately for him, he
decides to do it anyway. Occasionally we have to turn a blind eye to the facts
and jump off the proverbial cliff. Otherwise we'd never fly.
(Michael Redman didn't start writing this column when Sputnik was launched,
but he did begin looking up. Email locations of promising cliffs to Redman@indepen.com.)
[This appeared in the 2/25/99 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at Redman@indepen.com.]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review: http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive: http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman
Y2K articles: http://www.indepen.com/

Author
Edwin Jahiel
OCTOBER SKY (1999) *** Directed by Joe Johnston. Written by Lewis Colick,
based on the book "Rocket Boys," by Homer H. Hickam Jr.. Photography, Fred
Murphy. Editing, Robert Dalva. Production design, Barry Robison. Music,
Mark Isham. Producers,  Charles Gordo,  Larry Franco. Cast: Jake Gyllenhaal
(Homer Hickam), Chris Cooper (John Hickam), William Lee Scott (Roy Lee),
Chris Owen  (Quentin), Chad Lindberg (O'Dell), Natalie Canerday (Elsie
Hickam), Laura Dern (Miss Riley) et al. A Universal release. 100 minutes.
PG
>From the title, this somehow sounded to me like a Russian film, probably
because the classic movie on the 1917 Russian Revolution, Ten Days that
Shook the World, is called October in Russia. But October Sky is not a
Russian movie. Yet it all started with the Soviet Union launching, on
October 4, 1957, the first satellite ever, Sputnik.
The Space Age began in a sensational way. Sputnik made the Russians proud
to the point of haughtiness. It  scared Cold War America. It gave a huge
boost to the US. space program. And, as in millions of places on earth, it
had the whole population of Coaltown, West Virginia, crane its collective
neck to watch that incredible point of light travel in the October sky.
The boost was not limited to American and other  scientists. In Coaltown,
for example, it fired up the imagination of  high schooler Homer Hickam,
the son of John and Elsie. Coal mine superintendent John radiated
authority, brooked no nonsense or errors from his men, and was totally
devoted to his profession.
Coaltown was just that, a small, modest community where just about all
males were coal miners and all the fathers took for granted that their sons
would become miners. Because Homer's brother Jim was a local football star,
he might get an athletic scholarship after graduation. But Homer? He did
play football but regularly got creamed by the other teams. He took his
punishment  bravely, unflinchingly, stoically,  like a real mensch -- a
term that would puzzle Coaltowners.
As Homer, Jake Gyllenhaal is likable, nice-looking, well-mannered but
essentially just a face in the crowd. Sputnik changes all that. It becomes
for him something like his  Road to Damascus, where Paul the Apostle had
his sudden revelation that made him a Christian. Homer, encouraged by his
teacher Miss Riley, sets out to build a working rocket.
He enlists two of his schoolmates, both "regular guys," then Quentin who
has a high I.Q.,  is exceptionally strong in many areas of science, reads
voraciously and experiments. As the class --if not all of Coaltown's --
nerd ( "a geek" say the students), he is shunned by others as a weirdo. He
keeps to himself. Even Homer's two original collaborators are surprised by
his choice of a fourth musketeer.
But the team is a good one, bonds quickly, works well. They are nicknamed
The Rocket Boys by a population which in its majority sees the fellows as
nutty, time-wasting eccentrics engaged in "all that nonsense,", the very
words of Homer's father.
The kids are not discouraged. Homer doesn't say "I Have a Dream" but could.
Against the odds, the quartet scrounge for materials, build one rocket
after another, meet failure after failure, but also make progress,
doggedly, as they learn from their mistakes --until they triumph. All the
while, the unexpected keeps happening, as does, in Homer's life and
travails, the semi-expected, the inflexible opposition of his dad. Thank
God for the understanding of his sweet, smart and helpful mother, warmly
played by Natalie Canerday..
Since I do not know the source book, the best seller memoir "Rocket Boys"
by Homer H. Hickam Jr. who went on to become a science engineer at NASA, I
cannot tell which poetic-filmic liberties the movie took. Homer Hickam is
said to have been pleased by the movie.
Bits of audience manipulation are unavoidable, but no drawbacks. One
example. A nice metal-worker who had been helping the boys suddenly quits
his job to become a miner. He is older but he has debts and can earn twice
as much by going down the shaft. The scene is touchingly true. But then, as
he checks in (or is it out?) he hangs up his miner's medallion No 723 on a
board. The camera zooms in on it. Any experienced filmgoer will tell you
that something bad will happen later, and that the camera will re-zoom on
tag No 723.
The main shooting was in the town of Petros, Tennessee, in the Knoxville
area, since  Coaltown is no more. The reproduction of the place, times and
people is superior. What also emerges in a near-documentary way is the
hard, pathetic life of the coal mining community. The miners and their
families seem to take their lot  for granted. It is late into the film when
Union protests emerge. Even so, there is little that is militant (the Us
vs. Them --the mine owners-- element) in the story.
The characters have been beautifully cast. Laura Dern as the school
teacher, a smart, helpful and unprovincial West Virginian has a supporting
(in every sense) role which takes her into new directions. Ironically,
Chris Cooper, as Homer's able but intransigent and anti-union father,  had
the lead role as the United Mine Workers'  strike organizer (and hero) in
historically true Matewan (1987), that superb  film by John Sayles about
the coal-mine wars in Matewan, West Virginia, during the 1920s.
Most everything rings true in this realistic yet feel-good picture. It is a
family movie in the  sense of its PG rating, and a family movie in its
depiction of the Hickams.  But the inevitably sad background of the miners'
life not only is not underlined but it is balanced by a great deal of
upbeat parts and humor concerning the Rocket Boys. They are the first to
admit that "we're just a bunch of hillbillies," yet they pursue a dream
that is as far from redneck-ism as can be.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Joe Johnston.
Cast: Jake Gyllenhaal, Chris Cooper, Chris Owen, William Lee Scott, Chad 
Lindberg, Laura Dern, Natalie Canerday.
1999 - 108 minutes
Rated PG (for mild profanity).
Reviewed February 20, 1999.
"October Sky," a film directed by Joe Johnston ("Honey, I Shrunk the 
Kids," "Jumanji"), had a fair amount going against it. For one, Johnston 
previously had specialized in mostly special effects-laden productions; 
it's film studio was Universal, who recently released the painfully 
manipulative "Patch Adams," and the story, judging from the trailer, 
could have easily gone the same easy route into utter corniness. 
Fortunately, "October Sky" appears to have been written instead with a 
great deal of care by Lewis Colick, and therefore comes across as a 
realistic portrait of a certain moment in time. The film is based on a 
true story, by the way, and also unlike "Patch Adams," appears to have 
stayed very, very close to what actually happened, instead of taking 
noticable liberties in exchange for cheap, artificial melodrama.
Set in Coalwood, West Virginia, circa 1957, "October Sky" begins on the 
monumental day of Oct. 5 when Russia beat the Americans to space with 
their first satellite, called Sputnik. Homer Hickum (Jake Gyllenhaal), a 
teenager whose father (Chris Cooper), a stubborn coal mining supervisor 
in the town, clearly favors his older brother who has just gotten a 
football scholarship to college, knows that he was not meant to be a 
miner, and doesn't want anything to do with it. Soon, inspired by 
Sputnik, Homer acquires his two buddies (William Lee Scott, Chad 
Lindberg) and the class brain, Quentin (Chris Owen), to begin to make 
small rockets. Their understanding and friendly school teacher, Miss 
Riley (Laura Dern), encourages them to enter the state science fair 
because she truly believes in them, and Homer automatically sees this 
opportunity as a way to possibly get away from his ultimate dead-end 
existence as a coal miner (the winner of the state goes on to the 
country, and the person who takes first place gets a college 
scholarship).
Although "October Sky" follows a fairly predictable pattern, the film 
turned out to be first-rate, thanks to the delicate and innocent way 
that the story was told, and in the satisfying way that the characters 
were handled. The subplot involving Homer's stern father could have 
easily characterized him as a one-dimensional jerk, but instead, played 
terrifically by Chris Cooper, who also stood out in John Sayles' 1996 
film, "Lone Star," we learn that he does care about his son, even if he 
has a difficult time showing it. Quite a few moments between father and 
son are finely-tuned and ring with a resounding truthfulness that you 
don't often see in mainstream films today. Also making an impression are 
Gyllenhaal, in his first major feature film role, who acts as our 
likable and sympathetic protagonist; Natalie Canerday, as Homer's loving 
mother who becomes torn between her feuding husband and son; and Laura 
Dern, radiant as always, in the relatively small, but touching role of 
Miss Riley, a young woman who sees teaching as a pointless means of work 
if she can't inspire and help her students get out of their nearly 
unavoidable destinies to become miners. It is ultimately in the exact 
performances and writing that are the primary reasons "October Sky" 
works so well. 
If there is one subplot in the film that could have been dealt with in a 
more gratifying manner, it is that of Homer's crush on his older 
brother's girlfriend, and another girl who does like Homer, even though 
he mostly ignores her. This almost same exact situation was far more 
satisfying in the recent brilliant motion picture, "Rushmore." One 
slapstick-style sequence that seems out of place shows the four boys, 
early on, testing out their rockets, only to see them fail in some way; 
the way that the scene was filmed and edited together, played to the 
tune of a '50s song, didn't really seem to belong in the context of the 
rest of the film.
These, of course, are mostly insignificant criticisms when compared to 
the whole of the film, which is a rare film that does not short-change 
its characters or their plight in any way, nor does it trivialize them. 
In its surprisingly effective, subtle concluding moments when we find 
out the fates of all the characters, shown with home-movies of the real 
people the film was based on, I had realized that "October Sky" was made 
by a group of filmmakers and actors who cared deeply enough about the 
people and true accounts that the story was based upon that they in no 
way attempted to add a bunch of flashy extra stories that would make the 
film more accessible or commercial to a wider audience. Good for them.
     - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
       Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org
The week after the release of 'Blast from the Past' (set partly in the 
early 1960's), 'October Sky' opened in American theaters.  Set around 
the time of the Sputnik launch, 'Sky' is the superior of the two films.
The opening shots establish the story in the town of Coalwood, West 
Virginia in October of 1957, scenes of Americana drifting by - a barber 
paused in his shaving of a patron, folks gathered in a diner, all 
listening to reports of the shot heard and seen around the world, the 
start of the space race.  The camera settles in a classroom of Big Creek 
High School, where Miss Riley (Laura Dern) tells her charges that the 
Russian launch is a milestone in history.  Some students are cynical, 
and later we hear one comment, "Let 'em have space.  We have rock 'n' 
roll!"
Seventeen year-old Homer Hickam (Jake Gyllenhaal) loses himself in 
dreams of rockets after the townspeople are held spellbound by the 
actual satellite moving across the sky, disappearing behind a wooded 
mountain.  When Homer makes up his mind to find out all he can about 
rocketry, he enlists the help of the school nerd, Quentin (Chris Owen) 
and two old buddies, Roy Lee (William Lee Scott) and O'Dell (Chad 
Lindberg).  Their first attempt is a cylinder filled with bottle rocket 
powder, a contraption that takes out a goodly section of Mrs. Hickam's 
white picket fence.  What follows is the boys' determined efforts to rig 
and launch a workable missile.  John Hickam (Chris Cooper), manager of 
the town's industry, the Olga Coal Company, forbids anything related to 
rockets on company property.  So the foursome walks the eight miles to 
Snake Root, where they construct a pad on a massive slag pile.
A good deal of humor accrues when the launches fail again and again.  
The homemade rockets explode in various manners - before they leave the 
ground, a few feet in the air, or after a series of mis-aimed - and at 
times dangerous - short flights.  Of course the boys meet various 
obstacles, including continued resistance from Homer's dad, and a run-in 
with the police.  Will they succeed even in entering the regional 
science fair, an event that Miss Riley says may lead to the national 
fair, and on to possible college scholarships?  In other words, will the 
boys stumble upon a way out of a future of toil and black lung disease, 
of living in company houses in a town that exists, literally, to mine 
coal?
Director Joe Johnston and screenwriter Lewis Colick make good use of 
this theme of taking a shot at the American dream.  Their story moves 
logically, if a bit predictably, the boys meeting and outsmarting one 
problem after another.  Perhaps we believe in their successes so readily 
because we are told early about the true basis for the film.  Homer H. 
Hickam Jr. wrote the memoir 'Rocket Boys', and the historical tone set 
by the plot events serves to convince viewers of accuracy.
Tinged by nostalgia, the film shows us several sides of American life.  
We watch the boys grow through an important stage, one which pits them 
against the trials of young manhood.  Yes, it's a cliché when they try 
to get a leg-up on their way out of dreary futures, but their plights 
are all the more poignant because of the time: we ask ourselves if these 
conditions could have existed so recently.
A result of solid casting, the acting in the film is outstanding.  Laura 
Dern is the biggest name but has a smallish part.  Though her accent 
sounds like it comes from parts south of West Virginia, Dern is 
thoroughly convincing as a teacher gutsy enough to stand up to a 
principal who says, "We're here to give these boys an education, not 
false hopes."  Chris Cooper is a veteran character actor who plays John 
Hickam as a hard man. Our distance toward him changes continuously.  We 
dislike him when he busts a company machinist for helping Homer weld a 
steel washer onto a rocket;  we like him for his strange reveling at 
being good at what he does - knowing the mine like a man, and saving 
many men from crippling or fatal accidents.  Cooper plays well an 
average-looking man up thrown in against not only a tough job, but his 
son's vision of a life that doesn't include coal mining.
But Jake Gyllenhaal is the big discovery here.  This young man has no 
trouble pretending the camera isn't there.  His looks and mannerisms are 
thoroughly American - tough, independent, fun-loving.   He also carries 
scenes without overshadowing the actors around him.
The photography is mostly seamless, getting the job done without calling 
too much attention to itself.  There is a shot that lingers just too 
long on the maw of the mineshaft elevator - the hole down which the 
lives of Coalwood's men disappear.  Other scenes are edited masterfully, 
especially the montages of the boys' mishaps.  Long shots of rocket 
ascents inspire the proper awe.
The score is punctuated by period songs, early rock and roll standards 
that help set the mood even faster than the vintage sedans parked all 
over the streets.  Important scenes are frequently accompanied by a lone 
violin wavering between classical air and fiddle piece.
Why is 'October Sky' better than 'Blast from the Past'?  Their different 
natures would warrant a much longer review.  The main point of 
comparison is the handling of mid-century America.  'Blast from the 
Past' picks and chooses film clips about the Cuban missile crisis and 
sets that highlight early 60's interior decoration, all in service of a 
romantic comedy with big name players.  'October Sky' is a smaller film 
that shows slices of grittier realism, a vehicle that recalls a time 
filled both with prosperity and anxiety.  Although the last several 
minutes are filled with too many plot twists, and perhaps try too hard 
to avoid sentimentality, 'October Sky' is a strong addition to the canon 
of truly American tales.


Author
Kleszczewski, Nicholas
When _Star Wars_ came out some twenty years ago, the image of traveling
throughout the stars has become a commonplace image.  When the Millenium
Falcon moves throughout the stars, we see constellations, meteor
showers, and cool space-ships.  When Han Solo goes light speed, the
stars change to bright lines, going towards the viewer in lines that
converge at an invisible point.  Cool.
_October Sky_ offers a much simpler image--that of a single white dot,
traveling horizontally across the night sky.  Was it really only forty
years ago, when Sputnik was launched, and that before then, no
satellites ever existed?  Have we become so technologically advanced
that we have forgotten that it was nearly two generations ago where
people stood outside to breathlessly see a then-technological
achievement, even though it was from the Russians?
It sounds hokey, but when that scene occurs near the beginning of
_October Sky_, I found myself caught up with the enthusiasm of Homer
Hickam, played by Jake Gyllenhaal.  Determined to make a dent in the
space race, he becomes transfixed with his desire to make a rocket that
could fly like the best of them.
It is films like this that we know the ending as we buy the ticket.
When lovely teacher Miss Riley (played by Laura Dern), suggests that he
enters his findings into the National Science Fair, we know exactly who
is going to win.  But the joy in a film like this is in the little
details.
For example, Homer is clearly not the strongest student in his class.
If he has any strengths whatsoever, it is an undeterring vision, and a
good organizer.  It means that he may have to lose his reputation by
associating with the nerdiest kid in school, who knows more about rocket
science than he does.  It means that if his father forbids him to shoot
rockets on company property (that is, the entire coal-mining town), he
must walk eight miles one way, just to set up the rockets, which will
fail, fail, fail, and fail again.
Homer+s Dad is played by Chris Cooper, a favorite actor of mine since
_Lone Star_.  Here he plays the antithesis of the character he played in
_Matewan_: instead of organizing union rallies, he is the head of the
coal-miners, who is constantly wringing his hands against the unions.
This is will be one of the great unnoticed performances of the year:
note how multi-dimensional his character is.  He is his son+s last
nemesis, as one who most likely interferes with his son+s dreams.  But
he truly loves his son, and wants to see him succeed the only way he
knows how.  Through coal-mining.
Because of his character, we can see how far we+ve come.  The revolution
of modern technology has allowed for us to see society advanced at a
rate far faster than any generation before us.  We don+t understand that
there were the generations from the industrial revolution who knew of no
other way to raise a family.  The paradigm was shifting under the
father+s feet, and he knew of no other life.
So _October Sky_, far from being merely a feel-good inspirational film,
offers much food for thought.  And this is the best type of
inspirational film; the one that you take something with you.
BTW, the final image of the film is just as simple, is as strong a
contrast as the aforementioned horizontal-moving white dot against the
night-sky background.  Another commonplace image, to be sure, but it
must have been breathtaking forty years ago.

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) I liked OCTOBER SKY and was moved by it in all the right
ways. But it's a movie that doesn't stand up to review very well.
Two-dimensional characters and a trite story (even though it's based on
a true story) almost force me to give it a lower rating than my heart
says it deserves.
While the miners of the town descend into the coal mines, high schooler
Homer Hickam (Jake Gyllenhaal) looks up to the stars to try to see
Sputnik. His first glimpse of the orbiter sets his resolve: someday he
will build rockets and satellites too.
Homer knows just enough about rocketry to know that he can't pursue it
alone. Since his coal-mining hometown has a definite lack of rocket
scientists to serve as mentors, he decides to sacrifice his social life
to befriend Quentin (Chris Owen), the redheaded nerd. Two other friends
of Homer's join them, rounding out their foursome. With Quentin's smarts
and Homer's enthusiasm, they should be able to launch a rocket in no
time.
The rocket boys master the basics pretty quickly, and they even manage a
meager launch or two. But each accomplishment presents new challenges.
The next rocket has to be bigger, fly farther, or have more control.
They boys hit several snags, and their solutions always delight. To
solve one problem, Quentin bones up on volatile chemistry until
inspiration strikes. Another problem is solved by befriending some of
the miners who have access to metal lathes.
In the meantime, a subplot involving Homer's differences with his father
(Chris Cooper) adds some too-harsh conflict to the film. Homer's father
is completely overbearing and totally inflexible. He's dead-set against
Homer's dreams of rockets. Based on a true story or not, the sharp
antagonism was too strong for this movie.
In fact, his father was so caricatured (blame the script, not the actor)
that I was reminded of a Monty Python sketch. Graham Chapman plays a
stern, hard-working, blue-collar poet. This poet refuses to stand by
while his mamby-pamby son throws away his life to follow his dream of
becoming a coal miner. It's a funny reversal of the cliché that this
movie perpetuates.
In spite of Homer's dad, the boys finally get a few really good rockets
launched. But OCTOBER SKY sticks to the formula and takes their dreams
away, once and for all. A forest fire spread from where one of their
rockets landed, and the boys are arrested. All seems lost, so Homer
gives up rocketry and high school to get an early start on coal mining.
The film actually takes us down into a coal mine (surely it was a set).
I mention it because it is something I have NEVER seen in a movie
before. From HOW GREEN WAS MY VALLEY in 1941 to BRASSED OFF two years
ago, there have been lots of movies about coal miners. But never have I
actually seen INSIDE one of the mines, -- seen how cramped, black, and
precarious the mine itself feels. October Sky gets bonus points for
these scenes.
But if that were the end of the story, we wouldn't be watching it on a
big screen, would we? In fact, the boys find a way to clear their names.
They calculate the flight time of their rocket, do a little geometry,
and track down the rocket that was alleged to have started the fire.
They found it in a stream. (Strictly speaking, they never could have
found their rocket from the information they had in the movie. They knew
flight time and direction, but not the angle at which the rocket was
launched. Without that, there's no way to measure distance.)
Like I said, the movie doesn't review well. The plot is trite, the
conflict feels forced, and even the math doesn't work out perfectly.
But Homer's story was moving, and all the more so because his goal was
scientific achievement. In movies with this success-story plot, the hero
often wants to become a great athlete or a famous performer. Homer's
dream was more unusual and somehow less selfish.
Ultimately, the emotion of the story simply worked for me, and I'll
never be able to put my finger on just why. 
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.moviehabit.com

Author
Tom Ripley
October Sky is a highly entertaining film, a mix in equal parts of
Stand By Me, Iron Will & The Right Stuff.  Based on the memoir of NASA
scientist Homer Hickam, this feel-good film tells the true story of
four West Virginia coal town boys fascinated by the October, 1957
flight of Sputnik.
Dreaming of scholarships and a life after high school not involving
decades of heavy labor in the mines, the four friends set about
learning the fledgling field of rocketry on their own.  Despite an
inauspiscious beginning (they blow up the Hickam's white picket
fence), the boys keep at it, learning a little more with each
successive failure.  In a scene highly reminescent of The Right Stuff,
we're treated to an increasingly hysterical montage of exploding
rockets.  Equally amusing is the scene in which the four raise cash to
fund their experiments, borrowing parts from a closed-off section of
railroad and selling them off as scrap metal.
All this fascination with outer space nonsense eventually leads to
trouble with Hickam's down-to-earth mine foreman father, expertly
played by Chris Cooper (perhaps best known as the sheriff in John
Sayles' Lone Star).  Hickam, Sr. is strict, but fair in his own way;
it is to Cooper's credit that this portrayal doesn't come off as the
typical one-note father who just doesn't get it.
With this father-son friction providing the dramatic tension through
the film's mid-section, the boys continue their quest for a rocket
that will work, alternately aided & hindered by sympathetic mine
workers (notably a far under-used Ilya Baskin), a strike that
threatens to shut down the entire town, a science teacher with a
problem (Dern), & accusations of starting a forest fire with one of
their wayward rockets.  Reality ultimately intrudes on their dream,
when Homer's dad is injured in a mine mishap, & Homer has to give up
both school and rocketry to support the family by working in the
mines.  Though his spirit may be down, his mind is not, ultimately
leading him to a realization that gets him out of the mine and back to
the rockets.
The events that follow -- including a trip to Indianapolis for a
national science fair -- are a bit telegraphed, but by then you're
willing to forgive the film just about any faults.  Director Joe
Johnston proves here that he doesn't need heavy FX to tell a good
story.  After the visual excesses of Honey, I Shrunk the Kids, The
Rocketeer & Jumanji, this must have felt like a vacation.
It feels like one for the audience as well.  October Sky is the kind
of inspiring, triumphant film that Hollywood regrettably just doesn't
make anymore.  Kudos to Universal for seeing it through to the screen.
October Sky, based on the book Rocket Boys by Homer Hickam,
opens nationwide on February 19th.  Running time is 1:40, with a PG
rating for mild violence and language.

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "OCTOBER SKY" (Universal Pictures)
"Until I began to build and launch rockets, I didn't know my home town was at war with itself over its children, and that my parents were locked in a kind of bloodless combat over how my brother and I would live our lives"....is what Homer Hickam, a high school boy in Coalwood, West 
Virginia, wrote in "Rocket Boys," a memoir which forms the basis for this
 wonderful, new coming-of-age film. When on October 4, 1957, the
Russians launched Sputnik, heralding the dawn of the Space Age, it
inspired Hickam (Jake Gyllenhaal) to look to the stars rather than
into a bleak future in the coal mines. Working with three high school
friends, and inspired by rocket pioneer Dr. Werner Von Braun, Hickam
begins to design and launch a series of rockets at his own "Cape
Coalwood," a slag heap - much to the disgust and dismay of his father
(Chris Cooper), the mine superintendent. Only his teacher (Laura Dern)
supports him, supplying a book on rocketry and encouraging him to
learn trigonometry to gauge the range of the shots. Everywhere, Homer
Hickam looks there are seemingly insurmountable obstacles blocking him
from his goals of becoming a rocket scientist, yet earning his
father's acceptance and approval. Nevertheless, he doggedly pursues
his soaring dream which, eventually, becomes a fulfillment of the
hopes of the close-knit, rural town. Adapted for the screen by Lewis
Collick and directed by Joe Johnston ("Jumanji"), this is a remarkably
rich, s ensitive, heart-warming family drama. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "October Sky" is a triumphant 10, the first "must
see" movie of 1999.  And there's a post-script. In Feb., 1998, the
real Homer Hickam took an early retirement from NASA, where he worked
as a space engineer, training astronauts on the space shuttle.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
OCTOBER SKY (1999) *** Directed by Joe Johnston. Written by Lewis Colick,
based on the book "Rocket Boys," by Homer H. Hickam Jr.. Photography, Fred
Murphy. Editing, Robert Dalva. Production design, Barry Robison. Music,
Mark Isham. Producers,  Charles Gordo,  Larry Franco. Cast: Jake Gyllenhaal
(Homer Hickam), Chris Cooper (John Hickam), William Lee Scott (Roy Lee),
Chris Owen  (Quentin), Chad Lindberg (O'Dell), Natalie Canerday (Elsie
Hickam), Laura Dern (Miss Riley) et al. A Universal release. 100 minutes.
PG
>From the title, this somehow sounded to me like a Russian film, probably
because the classic movie on the 1917 Russian Revolution, Ten Days that
Shook the World, is called October in Russia. But October Sky is not a
Russian movie. Yet it all started with the Soviet Union launching, on
October 4, 1957, the first satellite ever, Sputnik.
The Space Age began in a sensational way. Sputnik made the Russians proud
to the point of haughtiness. It  scared Cold War America. It gave a huge
boost to the US. space program. And, as in millions of places on earth, it
had the whole population of Coaltown, West Virginia, crane its collective
neck to watch that incredible point of light travel in the October sky.
The boost was not limited to American and other  scientists. In Coaltown,
for example, it fired up the imagination of  high schooler Homer Hickam,
the son of John and Elsie. Coal mine superintendent John radiated
authority, brooked no nonsense or errors from his men, and was totally
devoted to his profession.
Coaltown was just that, a small, modest community where just about all
males were coal miners and all the fathers took for granted that their sons
would become miners. Because Homer's brother Jim was a local football star,
he might get an athletic scholarship after graduation. But Homer? He did
play football but regularly got creamed by the other teams. He took his
punishment  bravely, unflinchingly, stoically,  like a real mensch -- a
term that would puzzle Coaltowners.
As Homer, Jake Gyllenhaal is likable, nice-looking, well-mannered but
essentially just a face in the crowd. Sputnik changes all that. It becomes
for him something like his  Road to Damascus, where Paul the Apostle had
his sudden revelation that made him a Christian. Homer, encouraged by his
teacher Miss Riley, sets out to build a working rocket.
He enlists two of his schoolmates, both "regular guys," then Quentin who
has a high I.Q.,  is exceptionally strong in many areas of science, reads
voraciously and experiments. As the class --if not all of Coaltown's --
nerd ( "a geek" say the students), he is shunned by others as a weirdo. He
keeps to himself. Even Homer's two original collaborators are surprised by
his choice of a fourth musketeer.
But the team is a good one, bonds quickly, works well. They are nicknamed
The Rocket Boys by a population which in its majority sees the fellows as
nutty, time-wasting eccentrics engaged in "all that nonsense,", the very
words of Homer's father.
The kids are not discouraged. Homer doesn't say "I Have a Dream" but could.
Against the odds, the quartet scrounge for materials, build one rocket
after another, meet failure after failure, but also make progress,
doggedly, as they learn from their mistakes --until they triumph. All the
while, the unexpected keeps happening, as does, in Homer's life and
travails, the semi-expected, the inflexible opposition of his dad. Thank
God for the understanding of his sweet, smart and helpful mother, warmly
played by Natalie Canerday..
Since I do not know the source book, the best seller memoir "Rocket Boys"
by Homer H. Hickam Jr. who went on to become a science engineer at NASA, I
cannot tell which poetic-filmic liberties the movie took. Homer Hickam is
said to have been pleased by the movie.
Bits of audience manipulation are unavoidable, but no drawbacks. One
example. A nice metal-worker who had been helping the boys suddenly quits
his job to become a miner. He is older but he has debts and can earn twice
as much by going down the shaft. The scene is touchingly true. But then, as
he checks in (or is it out?) he hangs up his miner's medallion No 723 on a
board. The camera zooms in on it. Any experienced filmgoer will tell you
that something bad will happen later, and that the camera will re-zoom on
tag No 723.
The main shooting was in the town of Petros, Tennessee, in the Knoxville
area, since  Coaltown is no more. The reproduction of the place, times and
people is superior. What also emerges in a near-documentary way is the
hard, pathetic life of the coal mining community. The miners and their
families seem to take their lot  for granted. It is late into the film when
Union protests emerge. Even so, there is little that is militant (the Us
vs. Them --the mine owners-- element) in the story.
The characters have been beautifully cast. Laura Dern as the school
teacher, a smart, helpful and unprovincial West Virginian has a supporting
(in every sense) role which takes her into new directions. Ironically,
Chris Cooper, as Homer's able but intransigent and anti-union father,  had
the lead role as the United Mine Workers'  strike organizer (and hero) in
historically true Matewan (1987), that superb  film by John Sayles about
the coal-mine wars in Matewan, West Virginia, during the 1920s.
Most everything rings true in this realistic yet feel-good picture. It is a
family movie in the  sense of its PG rating, and a family movie in its
depiction of the Hickams.  But the inevitably sad background of the miners'
life not only is not underlined but it is balanced by a great deal of
upbeat parts and humor concerning the Rocket Boys. They are the first to
admit that "we're just a bunch of hillbillies," yet they pursue a dream
that is as far from redneck-ism as can be.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Jamey Hughton
Everyone I talked to loved Patch Adams, and yet the critics completely
lambasted it. Here is a movie that I'm sure the movie-going public and
professional critics can agree on. They're saying that October Sky is
the first great movie of 1999, and they're right.
This is the true story of Homer Hickam (Jake Gyllenhaal), a young boy
in a small West Virginia coal mining town who is obsessed with
building a working rocket. His influence is the Russian satellite
Sputnik, a landmark achievement that he sees pass, consequently, in
the October night sky.  His father (played by Chris Cooper), driven by
generations of coal miners in the family, views Homer's rocket
chemistry as nonsensical and wants him to follow in his footsteps.
The only support Homer gets is from his friends and his teacher, Miss
Riley (Laura Dern), who eagerly assists him as his dream unravels.
Joe Johnston manages to press all the right buttons that a director
possibly could, turning this basic formula movie into an uplifting,
heartwarming piece of modern day entertainment. It's absolutely no
surprise that the movie is produced by the same people as Field of
Dreams. It's that good.
October Sky could have easily failed if everything didn't click
appropriately. The first mission was to get a believable actor to play
Homer, the young real-life hero who now works at NASA. This is where
the filmmakers struck gold. In casting newcomer Jake Gyllenhaal as the
teenager brave enough to follow his dream, Johnston made the best
decision of his career. Young Gyllenhaal is a sensational find, and
the movie simply glows whenever he's on camera. This puts everything
to rest, because he's in nearly every scene in the film.
Another wise move was to put Homer's rocky relationship with his
father ahead of even the main story. Cooper has a familiar role and
speaks familiar dialogue, but his situation is so believable that all
signs of deja vu are quickly pushed aside. Laura Dern is also playing
somewhat of a stock character. Her role may be the one weak spot the
film has, but in the same sense she performs very well with the
material she's given. Everyone involved deserves a pat on the back for
making this movie.
There's truly never an uninvolving moment in this two-hour gem, which
has far more than the designated amount of laughs and smiles needed to
register. If you're looking for something entertaining on a Saturday
afternoon, you couldn't do much better than seeing this. October Sky
is the best movie Hollywood has presented so far this year.
Jamey Hughton was a 1999 Writing Finalist in the YTV Achievement Awards
and writes a Published Weekly Column in The StarPhoenix (Saskatoon, Sk.
Canada).

Author
Matt Williams
October Sky is a rare oddity in cinema:  a self-proclaimed "uplifting"
film that is actually uplifting!  Based on the autobiographical book by
Homer Hickam, Rocket Boys, October Sky tells the struggle of four boys
reaching for their dream.
It's 1957, and for the boys of Coalwood, West Virginia, there's not much
hope of a rosy future.  Coalwood is a coal mining town, and, except for
the few lucky ones who manage to escape on a football scholarship, most
of Coalwood's boys are destined to work in the mine. But, in October
1957, an event happens that sparks one boy to dream. The launch of the
Soviet satellite Sputnik sets Homer Hickam (Jake Gyllenhaal) to dream a
future of rocketry and space travel.
Of course, Homer's parents (Chris Cooper and Natalie Canderday) aren't
quite sure what to make of their son's unusual interests.  Homer gets
his strongest encouragement from Miss Riley (Laura Dern), a teacher in
his school who also informs him about the scholarships offered to the
winners of a national science fair.
And so, with stars in his eyes, and thoughts of scholarships in his
head, Homer enlists the help of three other boys (William Lee Scott,
Chad Lindberg and Chris Owen) and begins to build a rocket.  But, do
these four backwoods boys even have the slightest hope of escaping their
destiny?
There is a lot that could have gone wrong with October Sky.  Nearly
every sequence flirts with becoming syrupy and cliched.  However,
miraculously, October Sky avoids nearly all of these pitfalls, making
the exact right moves at the exact right times.  A film emerges which
manages to be powerful and moving without slipping into the gauzy haze
of nostalgia or sliding down the sugarry slope of sappiness.
Jake Gyllenhaal is outstanding as the kid at the center of this film.
>From the outset of the film, he is immediately likable, and never seems
too corny or brainy as to alienate the audience. Unfortunately, while
October Sky focuses on Homer, the other three kids get the short end of
the stick.  They remain little more than placeholders reading "insert
friend here".
Of the adults in the film, Chris Cooper is the most fully realized
character.  The film never paints him as merely the villainous parent
standing in the way of his child's dreams, but, instead, shows the
multihued portrait of a man who wants the best for his family and town,
but is too stubborn to realize what that is.
Director Joe Johnson deserves much credit for successfully navigating
the many obstacles that October Sky manages to dodge. However, there are
still a few occasions when he allows things to proceed just a step too
far.  Scenes which were natural and inspiring start to become contrived
and artificial.  However, these lapses are minimal, and Johnson quickly
steers the movie back on course.
The problem with many so-called "uplifting" films is that they attempt
to force their mediciney goodness down your throat.  October Sky never
resorts to that level, and yet, manages to become a truly uplifting film
purely on its own merits.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases
