Title
Review for This Boy's Life (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  4/7/93
Running Length:  1:59
Rated:  R (Mature themes, language, sexual situations, violence)
Starring:  Leonardo DiCaprio, Robert DeNiro, Ellen Barkin
Director:  Michael Caton-Jones
Producer:  Art Linson
Screenplay:  Robert Getchell from the novel by Tobias Wolff
Released by Warner Brothers
     The story of THIS BOY'S LIFE is based on the autobiographical book
by Syracuse University professor Tobias Wolff.  It tells of his early
life in Salt Lake City, Seattle, and Concrete (Washington).  Tobias
(Leonardo DiCaprio) and his mother Caroline (Ellen Barkin) travel from
place-to- place, continually trying to start a new life.  In Seattle,
Caroline meets Dwight (Robert DeNiro), who seems like the perfect
choice for a husband.  However, when Tobias spends a few months with
Dwight and his children in advance of the wedding, he learns that there
is a dark side to his potential stepfather-to-be.
     There isn't much that can be said about the plot of a story that's
based on a person's boyhood adventures.  No one but Tobias Wolff knows
how much dramatic license was used in writing his memoirs, but THIS
BOY'S LIFE has an unmistakable ring of truth to it.  Every boy who has
grown up in America will surely recognize much of himself - both good
and bad - in Tobias.
     Pacing is important to a movie like this, and the creative team
behind THIS BOY'S LIFE have done an excellent job keeping the story
tight and moving.  The editing of the film is impressive - over an hour
of footage was cut from the final version without any apparent loss of
continuity or flow.
     Leonardo DiCaprio, whose only previous credit is the television
series GROWING PAINS, shows ability here that the confines of a weekly
sit-com did not allow.  DiCaprio, while certainly not one of the best
child actors to come along in recent years, does a highly credible job
as Tobias.  He is especially good at portraying anger, although his
range for other emotions is limited.
     Robert DeNiro gives yet another strong performance.  This role is
more "typical" of him than that in MAD DOG AND GLORY, with the actor
portraying a strong man who means well but is plagued by a dark,
violent inner nature.  Dwight is not evil, but his means and methods
are often reprehensible.  When he says that he has Tobias' best
interests at heart, we believe him, but it quickly becomes apparent
that the way he intends to teach Tobias is nothing short of inhumane.
     With her latest pictures (this one and John Tuturo's MAC), Ellen
Barkin is trying out more challenging and less typical roles.  THIS
BOY'S LIFE gives her an opportunity to sink her teeth into a
relatively-meaty female role (something sadly lacking in too many
movies today).  Barkin's Caroline, while not the center of the story,
is far from a token character.  In the end, she is as critical to
everything that happens as Dwight and Tobias.
     Numerous themes are explored by THIS BOY'S LIFE.  The most obvious
is that of dominance and subservience.  Dwight believes in triumph
through physical and emotional force.  He will insult and beat up
anyone to make it clear that he is in control.  At one time or another,
he feels a need to assert his power over everyone: his children, his
wife, and Tobias.
     Another motif of THIS BOY'S LIFE reminded me strongly of one of
the themes of THE CRYING GAME.  One of the lines repeated in that movie
is "It's in your nature."  THIS BOY'S LIFE deals with the question of
what a person's nature is and whether or not it can be changed.  Tobias
is forever trying to make himself into a "better person," but it
becomes clear as the movie unfolds that changing one's nature is not a
simple matter.
     Ultimately, THIS BOY'S LIFE works because we get to know the
characters, understand their circumstances, and empathize with their
dreams.  There's a lot of material in this film to reflect upon.
Because of the real-life nature of THIS BOY'S LIFE, certain story lines
are left dangling while others are resolved in a most un-Hollywood-like
manner. The film is enjoyable and emotionally-stirring.  Of recent
movies, it reminds me most strongly of A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, if not
in content, then at least in general atmosphere.  This is a
coming-of-age story with more realism and feeling than many other
movies of its ilk.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Lon Ponschock
Directed by Michael Caton-Jones
>From the life of Tobias Wolff
Stars Leonardo DeCaprio, Robert Deniro, Ellen Barkin
     We've all seen the countless interpretations of "John Boy Walton
Leaving the Mountain to Go Away to a Better Life at the University",
whether it was actually The Waltons, CROSSING THE BRIDGE or a myriad of
other films about getting away from home.  Some of these are
sentimental like  that old tv show where everyone is good and kind and
the way God planned it.  Others as in THIS BOY'S LIFE tell the story of
what it is like to live isolated with a stepfather who could kill you.
     I don't know how deeply this notion effects others: this
primordial fear in a Freudian sense of death at the hands of someone
much bigger than you when you are young.  I think it effects us all...
especially boys.
     Tobias Wolff uses his real name in the telling of his life in
Washington State with his mother and his stepfather and stepdad's
children.
     It is not an easy story to watch.  And De Niro as Dwight the
stepdad really makes you hate him.  That's what the truly superb actor
can do: to be so over the top-- to take the risks of looking foolish
and also treacherous, vain, conniving, cruel and a thousand other of
emotions and traits.
     Leonard DiCaprio as young Tobias is the star of the picture
though.  And Ellen Barkin as his mother shows what it is like to be a
free spirit caught in the 50's who settles down with Dwight to give her
teen aged son a home.
     So this is a good film.  It is not a comfortable film...  but it
is a good film.  What THIS BOY'S LIFE gave me was really only one scene
in the picture: the scene where the boy will either live or die at the
hands of the stepdad.
     And the rage that that produces... the helplessness, bitterness
and anger in the inability to defend yourself.  Those images go very
deep.
     Melodramatic?  I'll tell you a secret as I sometimes do here:  I
was never any good at distinguishing what middle class white people
consider high drama as opposed to the low life monkey shines of people
I actually knew or emotions I actually felt.
     So when you see that signature file which closes these writings,
think if that as well.
