Title
Review for Deliverance (1972)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Ryan Davis
        Sure there are many films that are called classics. But once I saw
this, I knew where a number of newer films got some of their most impressive
scenes. Unfortunately, the newer movies seem to execute them better than
Deliverance.
        Not to say Deliverance isn't a superb film, it is. But I have been
spoiled by Tarantino's rendition of the, ever so famous, squeal like a pig
scene. For the time this scene must have seemed very shocking, but now it just
seems antiquated.
        The story involves four men who decide to go on a weekend long canoe
trip, in southern Georgia. They meet some strange inbreed locals, who along
the way cause some trouble with the group. In what appears to be a life or
death situation one of the locals is killed and the group must dispose of the
body. Now scared, they begin their journey to the end of the river so they
can get home. However, don't expect it to be a leisurely trip.
         The performances of the four men (Jon Voight, Burt Reynolds, Ned
Beatty, and Ronny Cox) are very impressive. Burt shows the same acting talent
here, that he displays in the more recent "Boogie Nights". Ned is also
standout as the poor overweight salesmen, who is sodomized by a hillbilly
man.
        John Boorman's direction is rather impressive. Although when compared
to today's, it may seem rather conservative. Vilmos Zsigmond's beautiful
cinematography does stand the true test of time, and is just as brilliant now
as it was then.
        Its hard to believe this movie was shot for a mere two million dollars,
something that could never be done today.  And even if this movie has not aged
as well as some, it certainly is a must see because of its originality and
maybe Ned squealing like a pig.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Author
Walter Frith
It's hard to imagine that director John Boorman's harrowing and
hauntingly symmetrical film 'Deliverance' is actually a quarter of a
century old.  Released in 1972 and nominated for three Academy Awards,
Best Picture, Best Director and Best Film Editing (I can't believe
there were no acting nominations), it tells the story of four Georgia
businessmen (Burt Reynolds, Jon Voight, Ned Beatty and Ronny Cox) out
for a weekend of fresh air and the best that nature has to offer and
instead they encounter the worst it has to offer.  The film builds
momentum slowly like a roller coaster riding its tracks to the top and
then releases its fury of adventure and nightmarish commentary on the
human conscience.
The quartet of actors mentioned (it was the film debut of Beatty and
Cox) set out on an expedition to enjoy each other's company and the
company of the outdoors and all is well until they become separated and
Voight and Beatty are left to the tender mercies of two sadistic
mountain men who aspire to violently beat, humiliate and rape them.
Rescued by Reynolds and Cox, one of the mountain men is killed in the
process and the main characters have to decide what to do with the
body.  From that point on they really get to know each other's killer
instinct for survival and primal weakness to be preyed upon.  The real
star of this picture of Reynolds.  Void of a moustache and the
trappings of a 'Smokey and the Bandit' atmosphere Reynolds proved his
acting ability head and shoulders above the rest of the cast as his
portrait of a man who will do anything to survive is both chilling and
brave in the same breath.
Jon Voight is a rather sombre character in the film, perfect to match
Reynolds' personality and Beatty and Cox are equally impressive in
their film debuts as a rape victim and a man lacking the intestinal
fortitude of surviving the conflict of man vs. man.  If you can find a
widescreen version of this true American classic, rent it.  Its scenery
needs to be fully enjoyed to appreciate the entire film and
'Deliverance' is about as realistic a picture as any I have ever seen.

Author
David Landers
RATING: *** 1/2 out of **** - 8.0 out of 10.0
CAST: Jon Voight (Ed Gentry), Burt Reynolds (Lewis Medlock), Ned Beatty
(Bobby Trippe), Ronny Cox (Drew Ballinger)
DIRECTOR: John Boorman
CERTIFICATION: R (USA) for violence, language, and shocking situations
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1972
ACADEMY AWARD NOMINATIONS: Best Picture, Best Director (Boorman), Best
Film Editing (Tom Priestley II)
Everyone's heard about this movie, and more specifically, *the* scene.
Everyone's heard the famous barnyard animal quote squealed (no pun
intended) over and over.  And everyone's got to admit that they will never
travel down a river again without thinking of DELIVERANCE.  Good!  That's
what you're supposed to do!  Oh, if you are one of the ones who hasn't
seen this yet, or you (somehow) haven't heard about what happens, here's
your spoiler warning.
DELIVERANCE was a real shocker for it's time (1972).  Major advances were
being made in films, and DELIVERANCE made its own advances when it
introduced a new horror into the film industry.  When it was first
released, it literally shocked the audiences.  It was something
that, for the most part, had really never been seen on the big screen
before (among wide-release films with an R rating).  But by today's film
standards and in today's world, such scenes as the one in DELIVERANCE can
be reproduced in a way that isn't as shocking, although they can be even
more graphic (e.g. PULP FICTION).  PULP FICTION did it in a way, and
expanded on it in a way, that it could even be interpreted as funny.  But
in 1972, DELIVERANCE was no laughing matter.
The story centers around a group of four Atlanta men who decide to take a
rafting trip down a backwoods river in Georgia while the river is still
there and in its glory.  The initial leader of the group is Lewis (Burt
Reynolds in his prime), a real outdoorsman and more of a Daniel Boone-type
then any of the others.  Joining him are Ed (Jon Voight), Bobby (Ned
Beatty), and Drew (Ronny Cox).
The group's first objective is to find someone(s) to drive their cars down
the river to the point where they will end their trip.  They make
arrangements with a few mountain men, who accept $40.00 for the task.
Drew also has the famous "dueling banjos" competition with a local who is,
let us say, genetically challenged.
The men then set off down the river, with Lewis, also the master at
canoeing, leading the way.  Everything seems to be going fine, until the
two canoes split up, leaving the unexperienced Ed and Bobby alone.  They
encounter two hillbillies, armed with a shotgun, who captured them.  Ed is
tied to a tree while Bobby is sodomized by one of the men.  Ed nearly
receives the same cruelty, but Lewis arrives just in time to fire an arrow
through the rapist's back.  The other hillbilly gets away, and the men
have to decide what to do with the dead body.  Disposing of dead bodies
is done rather frequent throughout this film.
While attempting to make a quick "paddle for it", both canoes tip over.
Drew, who was without a life jacket, was possibly shot and cannot be
found.  Lewis suffered a rather nasty compound fracture during the
incident and is in serious condition.  This leaves Ed and Bobby.  Ed
decides to go out and look for the remaining hillbilly, alone, with the
bow and arrow.  The question arises if he will be able to handle himself,
as he horribly botched a first shot attempt at a deer, to which his
comment "I wonder how anyone could kill a living thing" will have more
meaning in the future.
DELIVERANCE is definitely a wild ride (oops, I'm doing it again).  It is
extremely tense at some points and very dramatic.  It's definitely one of
those "must see" movies and should be considered one of the classics of
its decade.


Author
Steve Rhodes
"Machines are going to fail," Lewis Medlock (Burt Reynolds) warns Ed
Gentry (Jon Voight).  "Systems are going to fail.  Then survival."
No, he's not talking about the year 2000 software problem.  In director
John Boorman's classic 1972 film, Lewis is generally weary of everything
electrical and mechanical.  He's a macho, but pensive, guy who is taking
three of his buddies, Ed, Bobby Trippe (Ned Beatty) and Drew Ballinger
(Ronny Cox), on a canoe trip down a wild river.  A manmade lake will
soon bury the river, so they will be among the last people who get to
ride down it.  DELIVERANCE is a chilling tale of the four men's fight
against evil men, the forces of nature and their own limitations as
humans.
Famous, Oscar-winning cinematographer Vilmos Zsigmond (CLOSE ENCOUNTERS
OF THE THIRD KIND), in San Jose to accept the Maverick Spirit Award from
San Jose's Cinequest Film Festival, chose DELIVERANCE as the movie he
wanted to show after receiving his award.
Before the movie he spoke about its filming, telling us how physically
exhausting the shoot was.  They had to take canoes every day to get to
the filming location.  Because of the danger, they had planned to use
stuntmen extensively, but the footage that made it into the final cut
has the stuntmen in only a few, brief, rock climbing scenes.
They made a decision to film all of the river scenes only on overcast
days, so they could get just the right threatening look that they
wanted.  This was a financial risk since they had no idea if they would
get enough overcast days.  Sometimes they had to wait for hours for a
little cloud to block out the sun before they could roll the cameras.
Another consideration was where to mount the cameras during the key
scenes on the river.  After several experiments, they found that
enclosing them in plastic and mounting them as close to water level as
possible produced the best results.  In addition they used long lenses
which magnified the effect of the speed and the action, thus
intensifying the drama.
The movie opens disarmingly as Drew, on his guitar, plays a
good-spirited, impromptu duet with a young, backwoods, mountain boy
playing his banjo.  This hauntingly tranquil banjo music will reappear
periodically during the movie as will scenes of the placid sections of
the river.  And there will be peaceful shots of roaring campfires and of
the river at twilight, all to provide sharp contrast to the horror of
their journey.
When things first go just slightly wrong, Ed suggests that they play
golf instead of taking the canoeing vacation -- advice that they will
all wish that they had taken.  When they finally venture out on the
river, Bobby has a simple question.  "Which way we goin'?" the neophyte
asks.  "I think downstream would be best, don't you?" quips Lewis.
Having Zsigmond present at the screening made us more conscious than
normal about the cinematography.  Even though we were watching a washed
out, old print, the brilliance of his techniques were still easy to
recognize.  Consider just two examples.  As Lewis drives his car way too
fast through the dense woods, frightening Ed, Zsigmond lets their faces
be partially obscured by fast moving leaves reflecting on the
windshield, thus making the speed seem palpably dangerous.  In the
burial scene, Zsigmond shows how the men are reduced to animals.
Focusing in on their hands and faces as they dig the grave, the once
civilized men have been reduced to their basest instincts.
The viscerally gripping film, which begins with a foreboding peace, ends
with a frightening one.  All appears well, but it isn't and never will
be for the men who survive.  They will forever after be haunted by
nightmares of their journey.
DELIVERENCE runs 1:49.  It is rated R for intense violence, graphic gore
and rape and should be considered NC-17, a rating that they did not have
at the time of the movie's release.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Lately, I've been reviewing an assortment of old movies 
dating back to 1937, and have sparked quite a backlash of comments 
from fans of old movies I've ripped up (FORBIDDEN PLANET OF 
THE APES in particular). A few people have told me I don't like 
these movies because I'm watching them now, as opposed to forty 
years ago, when they didn't seem so stilted and cheesy. They say 
now that I've seen hundreds of newer films that have drastically 
improved on special effects and turned certain plot lines into 
cliches, I can't watch the old ones without thinking of what's 
come later to top it. And of course they're right.
        One person's e-mail comment summed it up best -- I 
have a 90's bias. I naturally prefer the look of a movie from my 
lifetime (1978 on) as opposed to the ridiculous costumes of the 
70's, the out-there decor of the 60's, the terrible sci-fi effects of the 
50's (FORBIDDEN PIE-PLATE PLANET fans take note) and so on, 
even if there is something undeniably dream-like and artistic about 
black-and-white films that Technicolor can't achieve. There are 
movies from those decades I love, but I'm sure they don't seem as 
good in 1996 as they did when they were originally released. And 
I didn't see them when they were originally released because I hadn't 
even been conceived then.
        Unfortunately, I didn't see all these movies in chronological 
order, which means when you go from the special effects of 
JURASSIC PARK or TWISTER to something like FORBIDDEN 
PLANET, you're not impressed. Even the "four-star" movies like 
DELIVERANCE don't seem incredibly great to me. Here's a movie 
that takes almost forty-five minutes to get to one exciting scene and 
then spends the rest of the movie coming down from that. I've seen 
enough of the newer, short-attention-span action and thriller movies 
that when a movie coasts on the strength of one sequence, it doesn't 
earn a four-star rating in my book.
        DELIVERANCE is still a highly-watchable film, if just to 
see an underwear-clad Ned Beatty being violated by two backwoods 
rednecks. Burt Reynolds, in one of his very few worthy cinematic 
appearances (before he'd be relegated to "Evening Shade" reruns 
on The Family Channel and those SMOKEY AND THE BANDIT 
sequels), plays a macho man who gets a few of his buddies (Jon 
Voight, Beatty and Ronny Cox) together for a weekend canoe trip 
down a river wild.
        But this is no Meryl Streep-reclaiming-her-lost-youth flick; 
the river set-up is just an excuse to get them into an unpopulated 
area of the Deep South. We already know from the five-minute 
"Dueling Banjoes" scene at the beginning that the people 'round 
these parts are just plain odd and, when Voight and Beatty get out 
of their canoe to wander through the woods for a while and the 
"Dueling Banjoes" song starts up again on the soundtrack for 
the eighth time, we know something's about to happen.
        That's when the one nail-biting scene in the entire movie 
comes up and Voight and Beatty are under the mercy of the two 
rednecks, in a scene that undoubtedly inspired the creation of 
Quentin Tarantino's Maynard and Zed characters in PULP 
FICTION. (There I go again, making comparisons between old 
and new movies.) After that, it's an hour of anti-climax as Voight 
and Beatty must transport a wounded Reynolds down the river 
and dodge an angry redneck.
        Don't get me wrong, this is a good movie; I was just 
expecting more from it than just the one scene. That's the only 
time it becomes a four-star movie. The rest of the time it hovers 
somewhere between two-and-a-half and three-star status. Reynolds 
contributes an interesting performance toward the beginning, as the 
man obsessed with violence and nature. That's when you get to 
thinking maybe the rest of the movie will have the other three trying 
to escape a psycho Reynolds and his even nuttier hairpiece, but after 
the big rape scene and Reynolds' getting shot, he drops out of the 
movie.
        DELIVERANCE becomes Voight's movie for the last third, 
and he plays a notably less macho character than usual. On paper, 
you'd think Voight would be cast in the Reynolds role and vice 
versa, but by the end you realize his range extends far beyond the 
shoot-em-up action hero. It's good stuff... for the 70's.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50 of a Century!
