Title
Review for For Love of the Game (1999)
Number of Reviews
28

Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) Sam Raimi made his name in over-the-top horror films.
He broke into the mainstream with movies like DARKMAN and THE QUICK AND
THE DEAD, but they still had a hint of the macabre. Even A SIMPLE PLAN
had the trademark Raimi quirky darkness. But now that Raimi's directed
Kevin Costner in a sentimental baseball movie, what's next? A G-rated
David Lynch movie? Wes Craven directing a touching drama?
Costner plays Billy Chapel, a pitcher who's been with the Tigers his
entire, 19-year career. The owner, Roy Wheeler (Brian Cox) confides to
Billy that he's had to sell the team and that the new owners will trade
him away next season. If Billy would quit, it would sweeten the
unsatisfying business of selling the team.
Billy's pitching arm is in constant pain and he's not getting any
younger. His girlfriend Jane (Kelly Preston) stood him up last night and
this morning she told him she is leaving him for good. His team stinks
this year and today's game means nothing to the Tigers. Billy realizes
that after today, his life as he knows it will fade quickly and
unglamorously away.
He resolves not to give in. He resolves to fight the only way he can, by
playing ball.
For seven innings, the film shows his life in flashback as he broods on
the owner's request, his brilliant career, his relationship, and his
love of the game.
Come the eighth inning, Billy realizes he's in the midst of a perfect
game. If he can get past six more batters, he will have the perfect
reason to retire, and maybe follow his girlfriend to England.
For a large part of the movie, the emotion works. (FOR LOVE OF THE GAME
has been called a tearjerker, and not unfairly.) Costner's not the most
aggressive of actors, but the low-key brooding was well within his
grasp. His relationship with Jane seemed genuine and caring. His
relationship with baseball was particularly convincing.
However the character of Jane was not given a life of her own. She was
more a plot device than a person. She's a single mother who lives in New
York as a freelance writer for beauty magazines. I know single mothers
and I know freelance writers. You do not feed two mouths on a
freelancer's salary, especially in New York.
Her career aside, there are other places where her fights with Billy are
clearly written for the plot, rather than arising from the characters.
Billy says to her face that his personal trainer is more important to
him than she is, something even the crudest of males would know not to
say. Later, Jane, in return, snaps at him and angrily dumps him. It's
clear that they fight, but it's not clear why either one of them,
individually, would. The only explanation is that the plot needed more
conflict.
The supporting characters were pretty good, considering how small a role
each one played. Jena Malone (from Contact) played Jane's daughter
Heather, both as a 13-year old and a college freshman. ** played Birch,
Billy's former teammate and current opponent, with just enough
exaggeration to make him stand out. And John C. Reilly (BOOGIE NIGHTS,
WHAT'S EATING GILBERT GRAPE?) gives another very good performance as a
strong supporting player.
FOR LOVE OF THE GAME was well directed by Raimi (who managed to sneak in
a little blood and some talk of disfigurement). Small details give away
some of the thought that went into each scene, like the jeers of the
crowd while Billy pitches, or the constant presence of autograph seekers
in New York City.
In spite of some obvious flaws in a very important area, namely
character development, the emotion of the story plays pretty well. The
sentimentality isn't for everybody, but if you're interested in seeing
it, go for it.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.moviehabit.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Supposedly, just before you die, your entire life flashes before your
eyes.  Something similar happens to aging baseball pitcher Billy Chapel
(Kevin Costner) in the aptly named, FOR LOVE OF THE GAME.
Throwing what may well be his last game, his entire life flashes by him
as he struggles with over-the-hill muscles to eke out one last valiant
effort.  He is "40 years old, arm weary and achy," says the game's
announcer.  This last game of his, perhaps, just perhaps, might even be
one for the record books.  Then again, maybe not.  His arm gives out
quickly these days, and he's been only 8-11 this season.
Some people stop to smell the roses.  For Billy, it's a well-worn
baseball mitt that has the aroma that excites his nose.  Knowing that
his last day on the mound has arrived, he even pauses in a packed
stadium to gaze upward at the clouds that have graced his many days at
the ballpark.
Earlier that day, he came to realize that his career was coming to an
end.  The owner of his team, the Detroit Tigers, told him that the team
was being sold.  He recommended that Billy retire because, otherwise,
the new owners planned on trading him anyway.  A Tiger all of his life,
this was a devastating blow.  Grimacing, Billy closed his eyes and
lowered his head into his hands.
To add insult to injury, his girlfriend of the past 5 years, Jane Aubrey
(Kelly Preston), told him that she was leaving him for a job in London.
"Billy, this ain't your day," his long-time friend and catcher Gus
Osinski (John C. Reilly) tells him.
Directed with an inviting poignancy by Sam Raimi (A SIMPLE PLAN), the
movie charms with its old-fashioned story of love.  Costner, in one of
his best performances in years, creates a character who earns our
respect and our sympathy.  In his subtly emotive turn as an aging
superstar, he manages to make his pain palpable without ever letting
things dissolve into schmaltz.  Still, you may want to have your
handkerchief at the ready since the story has the potential to reduce
you to tears as it did several in our audience.
FOR LOVE OF THE GAME is more a love story than a sports story.  Billy is
in love with the game and with his girlfriend, but if forced to choose,
Jane would up second.  Structured as a series of flashbacks, Billy's
life is told as he pitches his last game.  A good sports movie becomes
an even better study of a man and his two loves.
Jane, an innocent looking girl-next-door type, works at a New York
fashion magazine writing articles such as "Scents and Sensibilities."
Their affair has carefully structured rules so that they see each other
when he's in town for a game, but they are otherwise free to see anyone
they like.  These rubrics end up causing them much grief.
The chemistry between the two lovers is genuine, and their attraction
rises above the sexual.  A typical conversation between them has her
amazed at his knowing the exact number of games he has lost in his
career.  "You count them?" she asks with surprise.  "We count everything
in baseball," he remarks, showing that he thinks his profession is too
pedantic.  "That's all we do."
As they get to know each other better, her questions become more
pointed, as she delves deeper into his psyche.  "Have you ever got your
heart broken?" she wants to know.  "Yeah, when we lost the pennant in
'87," he replies, not even realizing that she was speaking of love of
another human being.
Lovingly filmed by John Bailey with the twinkling glow of New York at
night and with the warm colors of a baseball game, the movie is
invitingly sentimental and nostalgic.  Paced with the same slow rhythms
of a baseball game itself, which will either delight or annoy you, the
picture never fails to entertain.  It may not belong in quite the same
league as THE NATURAL or FIELD OF DREAMS, but it's certainly a hit.
Even if it may not quite be a home run, it's an awe-inspiring triple
that'll have you cheering and maybe even weeping.
FOR LOVE OF THE GAME runs a little too long at 2:18.  It is rated PG-13
for brief strong language and some sexuality.  The movie would be fine
for kids around 10 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 10, was visibly bored during the movie.  He gave it
just a single *, complaining that it was too predicable and the
flashbacks were too hard to follow.  His friend John, age 11, gave it **
1/2 but had trouble figuring out what was a flashback and what wasn't.
John's twin, Steven, liked the movie and gave it ***.  All of them felt
a bit uncomfortable when the characters discussed with whom they were
sleeping.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Walter Frith
Kevin Costner was on top of the world at the end of the 1980's.  He had 'The
Untouchables', 'Bull Durham' and 'Field of Dreams' all on his list of
accomplishments and he still would win two Oscars for directing and
co-producing 'Dances With Wolves' in 1990 and would give his best
performance ever in 1991's 'JFK'.  How things change.  By the end of the
1990's, Costner has had a string of turkeys and/or lukewarm projects far
below his potential.  'Waterworld' and 'The Postman' would bring him severe
ridicule (although I thoroughly enjoyed and rated 'The Postman' highly).
All actors struggle at some point in their career but it's been an 8 year
struggle for Costner now and things don't get any better with 'For Love of
the Game'.
In this film, Costner plays Billy Chapel, a 19 year pitching veteran of the
Detroit Tigers.  The opening credits show newspaper headlines and home
movies of Chapel's early life throwing the ball around with his father and
his rise from the little leagues to the minor leagues to the major leagues.
Set for a place in the hall of fame, Chapel is about to come face to face
with his most important game ever as he takes the mound at the loneliest
place in baseball, as a visiting player at Yankee Stadium.
As he is the midst of pitching a perfect game, Chapel reflects on his past,
predominantly on his 5 year relationship with a writer named Jane Aubrey
(Kelly Preston) and her teenage daughter (Jena Malone).  Costner's
reflection on the past is not an easy one since he met face to face with
Jane on this game day and she tells him she is ending their relationship and
moving to London to accept a better job.
When I first read about the plot for this film where Chapel reflects on his
past while possibly pitching a perfect game, I assumed we would see Billy
Chapel in his glory days as a player and the many things that a pitcher
remembers.  Winning his first World Series, hitting his first batter, being
involved in his first bench clearing brawl and his overall relationship with
baseball and his fellow team mates.  Instead, the film takes a shallow and
overly repetitive turn and reflects only on Costner's romantic past with the
woman in his life so the film turns out to be more about the needless
romantic sub plot instead of about the game that Costner says he loves.
This is a major disappointment, especially to people such as myself who
truly love baseball.
Using baseball as a metaphor for 'Field of Dreams' worked because that film
possessed a dream like quality about life's transcending moments of regret,
the desire to fulfill dreams and the question of whether there is another
world after this one.  It was a film that had hypnotic beauty and looked
very original.  'Bull Durham' was an authentic look at life on the road in
the minor leagues but the film was riddled with too much sexual innuendo and
I have never really enjoyed it very much as it failed to nail down what it
was REALLY about.
'For Love of the Game' is written by Dana Stevens based on the novel by
Michael Shaara and is directed with ordinary tendencies by Sam Raimi who
made 1998's 'A Simple Plan' which was very depressing but was better film
making than this movie which has absolutely no memorable qualities
whatsoever and is just another exercise in telling another love story which
neither convinces us that the people involved really care about each other
nor does it do anything for the game of baseball.  Incidentally, if you've
seen a particular clip from the advertising spots for the film and know the
plot going in, it won't be too hard for you to figure out whether or not
Chapel gets his perfect game.  If Costner is smart, maybe he will make a
truly authentic baseball movie to celebrate the game he is crazy about.
Maybe a biography of a famous player would be a good idea.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Edwin Jahiel
FOR LOVE OF THE GAME  ***  Directed by Sam Raimi. Written by Dana Stevens from
the novel by Michael Shaara.  Produced by Armyan Bernstein, Amy 
Robinson.  Photography, John Bailey. Editing, Eric L. Beason, Arthur 
Coburn. Production design,  Neil Spisak. Music, Basil Poledouris. 
Cast: Kevin Costner (Billy Chapel), Kelly Preston (Jane Aubrey), John 
C. Reilly (Gus Sinski), Jena Malone (Heather), Brian Cox (Gary 
Wheeler), J.K. Simmons (Frank Perry), Vin Scully & Steve Lyons (as 
themselves), Carmine D. Giovinazzo (Ken Strout), Bill Rogers (Davis 
Birch), Hugh Ross (Mike Udall). A Universal release. 137 minutes. 
PG-13
Does America love baseball? Has Kevin Costner had box-office hits 
with the baseball films Bull Durham and Field of Dreams? Has been 
unlucky with  some recent movies --except for Tin Cup where he plays 
a golfer? Is The Pope Catholic?
So it made good sense to do a third baseball picture. He is Billy 
Chapel, the Detroit Tigers ace pitcher and prime Hall of Fame 
candidate. Now he's in New York for a game at Yankee Stadium. His 
shoulder hurts. His soul hurts as he is told that his team is being 
sold. He's 40, getting older by sports standards. He has 19 years of 
pro playing behind him. And his heart is breaking because his girl, 
magazine writer Jane (Kelly Preston)  announces that it's all over 
between them; that he really needs no one; that his real love is 
baseball; that  in a few hours she's off to England where a dream-job 
is expecting her.
That's the set-up. From here on out it's flashbacks and flashforwards 
that would be artsy and tiresome (but can be a tad tiring)  except 
that Sam Raimi --who directed The Evil Dead but caught us by surprise 
in 1998 with the so-different A Simple Plan-- manages his script and 
his team (of actors) with a sure-hand and an obvious passion for The 
Game.
Five years ago Billy and Jane first met. They met cute, but it's 
funny and fresh. Their relationship is charted back and forth, 
surprises abound, there's even a surprise young girl, Heather (Jena 
Malone) who livens, warms up and helps crystallize the lovers' 
on-off relationship. More, I cannot say, since this is sports movie 
but also a character-driven picture. It has its own levels of 
suspense, in personal and in sports matters.
There are some clever inventions (events, scenes, sequences), whether 
in rainy New York, sunny Florida or the snowy West. The plot is 
highly manipulative of course, as it plays with the characters' 
actions and reactions, and with the audience's response to what is 
on the screen. The tricks of the trade, both filmic and baseballic, 
are out in force. But they are well handled, keep your attention and 
do not ever get boring. Even the music score by Greek-American 
Poledouris, though generic/romantic, skirts the bombastic repetitions 
by Greek-Greek composer Vangelis in that popular sports-movie 
Chariots of Fire.
All this would still be high-class routine stuff, were it not for the 
superb scenes in the ballpark, their mise-en-scene, their 
photography, the realistically filmed crowds : excellent, imaginative 
photography, sound-mixes, editing that coordinates people and actions 
in the diamond and off it. We get the players, the raucous fans, and 
we get the iffy  but touching thoughts of Billy during his mind games 
with the opponents. He's fighting (under physical and psychological 
handicaps) for his team, his good name, and his exit from the Tigers 
(he'll be traded, no matter what happens).
The movie treats its players with a glove (not kid, but still), as we 
only see and hear rather comradely things with no trace of 
locker-roomitis. The closest to a nasty presence is a young Yankees 
batter who looks satanic. Billy foils him again and again. But the 
game is a gem of excitement and suspense.
The players (in both senses) are very good, although there is no true 
depth in the affair, the setbacks and the Fun With Bill and Jane. 
Costner has the right physique for the role, but it  does get a bit 
redundant as we watch him suffer. Kelly Preston is convincing as a 
real person, as opposed to one playing a part. She does not want to 
be a groupie, but the presumed intensity of the affair is made 
somewhat ho-hum by three things: the lightning fast, out-of-character 
(hers) speed of her initial sex with Billy; our knowledge that so 
many male sports figures are incorrigible woman-collectors; and the 
studio-imposed carnal cuts in order to get a PG-13 rating. Young Jena 
Malone is beautifully cast as she matches perfectly Preston's looks.
The winningest side of the film is the great edge-of-the-seat footage 
which works both on baseball lovers and on non-aficionados.

Author
Christopher Null
     My brother says I shouldn't review sports movies.  Because I'm not
a sports fan, he says, I can't be objective.
     He may have a point, but I don't think FOR LOVE OF THE GAME is
fundamentally a sports movie.  Sure, suit Kevin Costner up in a baseball
uniform and you might think you're looking at another FIELD OF DREAMS,
but FOR LOVE OF THE GAME is something we don't see a lot of.  Allow me
to explain.
     On the last day of a losing baseball season, veteran Detroit Tigers
pitcher Billy Chapel (Costner) gets the news that he's going to be
traded *and* that his girlfriend is ditching him to move to London.  The
information devastates Chapel, so he decides to take it out on the
baseball diamond, steeling himself up for the game of his life.
     Before you know it, we're watching Chapel edge closer and closer to
the near-impossible perfect game:  9 innings, 27 batters, no hits, no
walks, no men on base.  And while Chapel struggles inning after inning 
against the Yankees, against the coach, against his aching body and mind
 he relives the last five years of his life through flashback.
     The flashbacks include the meeting of his on-again off-again
girlfriend Jane (Preston), befriending her daughter (Malone), his ups
and downs with his old buddy and standby catcher Gus (Reilly), getting
injured, getting better, and basically living the life of an aging
ballplayer.
     Back at game time, Chapel realizes he's made some mistakes, and
this final match becomes a shot at redemption.  Everyone watching the
game somehow seems to realize this, and through those nine innings, all
lives are invariably altered.
     If it sounds like a powerful film, that's because it is.  Director
Raimi is a master at pulling strings, and no expense has been spared at
coaxing the tears out of you.  All the players are perfectly suited for
their roles, with special marks for Reilly and Costner, who gives his
best performance since JFK in 1991.
     But it isn't too far into FOR LOVE OF THE GAME that you start to
realize a couple of things.  First, that the baseball game is far more
dramatic and interesting than the flashbacks.  (The film is obviously
adapted from a novel, and sometimes it feels like the flashback pages
are being shot verbatim.)  Second, that the whole thing is a ploy to
manipulate you into getting over-emotional.  There are points when you
want to spit, the movie is so saccharine.
     But this GAME is just so compelling, it's hard not to put those
flaws aside and just let yourself be washed over by this movie.  I may
be a victim of Hollywood mind games, but at least I enjoyed myself.
Director: Sam Raimi
Producer: Armyan Bernstein, Amy Robinson
Writer: Dana Stevens
Starring: Kevin Costner, Kelly Preston, John C. Reilly, Jena Malone,
Brian Cox, J.K. Simmons
http://www.universalpictures.com/forloveofthegame/
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999, ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Author
Joy Wyse
Starring:        Kevin Costner, Kelly Preston, John C. Reilly
This is the third time at bat for Kevin Costner in a movie centering on
baseball.  Bull Durham and Field of Dreams were both memorable features,
but For Love of the Game isn't up to his batting average.  The movie
doesn't exactly strike outIt's more of a balk.  In his defense, it is
obvious that Costner loves baseball and he is quite good at it.  The home
movies at the beginning of the film are actual home movies of him as he
played catch with his father and went on to become a little league player. 
The storyline begins when Costner, as the forty-year-old pitcher Billy
Chapel is faced with the question of retirement.   He is scheduled to
pitch in this final game of the season for the Detroit Tigers, his team
for his entire eighteen-year career.  It is basically a `throwaway' game. 
They are out of contention for the title.  The only reason for winning is
to beat those New York Yankees.  The camaraderie between Chapel and his
catcher, Gus Osinski played wonderfully by John C. Reilly, is the real
`feel-good' part of the movie.  They understand each other. 
This could have been a much better movie if they had concentrated on the
baseball and ignored the love interest.  There was absolutely no charisma
between Costner and Kelly Preston, who plays Jane Aubrey, his girl-friend
of five years who decides to leave him on this crucial day.  
We keep suffering through flashbacks of how they met, fought, made up,
fought again, etc.  Even at the end of the film, the affair isn't really
resolved.  It's just too syrupy, too sweet, and too long.
All in all, it's a fairly good movie.  There's nothing offensive about
it.  There is a shot of Costner in his jockey shorts, but there's no
nudity.    Billy and Jane sleep together, but there are no sex scenes. 
The only touchey-feeley is when the manager pats him on the butt during
the game.
If you like baseball, you will like this film, mainly because of some
novel scenes, such as the times when the roar of the crowd is silenced and
you hear Billy mentally talking to the batters.  I do want to see this
again and I want my husband to see it.  I give it a B+.

Author
Ross Anthony
Like New York's Yankee Fans, you might want to root against Kevin Costner as
Detroit Tigers' aging pitcher Billy Chapel in another silly love story at
the baseball diamond. And for the first couple of innings you'd have good
reason to heckle. But like the aching Chapel, "For Love of the Game" slowly
pulls itself out of a sluggish slump. Sliding in slow motion under your
skin, it gradually pulls you from that slouched near-sleep position to the
edge of the bleaches ... baited and waiting on that last pitch.
Unlike most sports films, this one starts rather promptly into the
proverbial "big game." His lover (Preston) bails, his owner sells the team,
and the next day after a sleepless night Chapel steps up to the mound in
what could very possibly be his last pro game. Such a hurried start leaves
the viewer wanting for traditional character setups; fear not, the bottom of
each inning provides ample time for reflection. These "flashbacks" bring you
up to speed on what looks like a possible no-hitter for a guy who throws for
the love of the game.
Unfortunately, the film ends as it begins -- that last pitch is a fading
sinker (metaphorically speaking). Engaging and well directed in the middle,
but weak on beginning and end; Costner and Preston give outstanding
performances throughout. While it still hits above average, a different
climax may have made this a very fine film.
Save yourself a few bucks and quench your appetite for a good baseball love
story: rent "The Natural" with Robert Redford now and "For the Love of the
Game" around Christmas.
For Love of the Game, Copyright Š 1999. Rated PG-13.
Starring Kevin Costner, Kelly Preston, John C. Reilly, Jena Malone.
Directed by Sam Raimi.
Screenplay by Dana Stevens.
Produced by Armyan Bernstein and Amy Robinson at Universal/Beacon/TIG.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Eugene Novikov
"Haven't you ever loved anything that much?"
Starring Kevin Costner, Kelly Preston, John C. Reilly. Rated PG-13.
As Waterworld and The Postman prove, Kevin Costner fares better, both
cinematically and financially, when he surrenders the director's chair
to one of his betters and constrains himself to merely being the star.
In For Love of the Game, Costner's triumphant return to baseball (see
Field of Dreams and Bill Durham), the man behind the camera is Sam Raimi
(The Evil Dead, A Simple Plan), an unpretentious yet sublimely confident
auteur with an amazing range (he went from cheesy horror to crime drama
to baseball romance). Raimi's latest is also the best we've seen from
Costner since Tin Cup; an engaging, interestingly structured drama
nearly botched by its denoument. Those who seek to have an unabashedly
positive memory of the film would do well to leave right after its
baseball game centerpiece, the place where it should have been cut off.
For Love of the Game has a baseball backdrop but it is not a "baseball
movie". It's about Billy Chapel (Costner), a great pitcher in the
twilight of his career, who has just been told that he is being traded
from the Detroit Tigers; the team he has played with for some 19 years.
At the same time, he finds out that Jane (Kelly Preston), his long-time
girlfriend decided to leave him. As he goes into his last game of the
season, his last game with the Tigers and possibly his last game, he
remembers and examines important moments in his roller coaster
relationship, discovering more about it than he did during its course.
They met when he saw Jane's car stalled on the side of a highway, with
Jane kicking the living headlights out of the poor vehicle. Being a nice
guy, Billy stops to help, and this being Hollywood, he invites her to go
to a baseball game with him. One thing leads to another and they wind up
together in Billy's hotel room. Now that they've slept together, he
thinks, they're in a relationship, but not so fast: Jane shuns the idea,
wanting to make sure she does not become a "groupie".
After being chased enough times by Billy, she gives it up and the three
(Jane has a daughter) move in together. They are doing wonderfully until
he badly hurts his arm in a woodshop accident. He is determined to make
a comeback and return to the mound; his trainer and his girlfriend are
doubtful and less than supportive. Without thinking the matter through,
Billy explodes and makes Jane leave; an action he comes to regret and
attempts to reconcile.
The love story is told almost exclusively through flashback, the film
cutting back and forth between it and the all-important baseball game
(in which, by the way, Chapel tries for a perfect game). It's not the
most original style of storytelling, but it works because Raimi
effectively and subtly injects the flashbacks with a common theme.
Indeed, up to the last ten minutes, I had a sneaking suspicion that this
might be that rare Hollywood love story that's actually about something.
It built up enough momentum that I was ready for a conclusion to drive
its point home. Instead, what has been a compelling tale of a man
learning to depend on himself turns into a banal, typical, hollow
romance.
This cruel bait-and-switch can only detract from the film to a certain
point. Despite its eventual thematic inadequacies it remains a perfectly
entertaining Tinseltown production. Under the sure direction of Sam
Raimi, it's a lot of fun to watch, even if it's not much else. The
suspense of the baseball game is genuine (though the trailers
thoughtlessly gave away the result) and the romance feels real (most of
the time). There is a fight scene (relationship quarrel, not martial
arts) that is so well-written it's devastating.
Kevin Costner does his job in a relatively straightforward role; though
he has his moments and though I can't point out anything specifically
wrong with what he does, he still tends to fall short of outstanding.
His character is engaging but not really because of Costner's
performance. Kelly Preston, on the other hand, is wonderful. We can
understand why a man would be so interested in her, because we are
equally enchanted. Jane's daughter, played well by Oscar winner Anna
Paquin, is an unusual character because she is not strapped with the
cliche of hating her mom's new boyfriend; a refreshing occurence as
almost all movie kids in a single-parent home are required to despise
their parent's new love interest.
I enjoyed this movie so much that I watched with my hands on my head in
desperation as it grossly undermined itself in the last act. It kept
itself from being anything beyond a solid and entertaining but typically
empty mainstream drama. It's a fun movie -- I recommend it for that --
but little more.
Š1999 Eugene Novikov
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   So you want a woman to like you, to feel desire for you? 
Forget yohimbe and Spanish fly.  Instead, become highly
successful, preferably a celebrity.  Females are attracted to
alpha males the way felines are captivated by catnip.  If
you're a rock star--or even just a major-league baseball
player--don't be surprised if you're surrounded by groupies,
people who will offer you everything they have for the mere
thrill of being with you, of having your renown rub off on
them.
   "For Love of the Game" is about a celebrity whose girl
friend is no groupie.  She's not greatly impressed by her
man's name and fame but is nonetheless in love with him.  
Something keeps them apart, the typical motif of just about every
romantic comedy or drama. In films of this nature, the leading
man and principal woman have a passion for each other, but
a barrier is put in the way of their happiness.  Each time they
feel the potentiality of getting together for good, something
stands in the way.  In "For Love of the Game"--about a 40-
year-old pitcher for the Detroit Tigers whose life comes
simultaneously to a professional and amorous crossroad--a
woman's unwillingness to share her man with his love of the
game is that obstruction.  
   Sam Raimi, whose writing and direction run the gamut from
cult horror works like "The Evil Dead" to surreal comedies like
"The Hudsucker Proxy," appropriately casts Kevin Costner as
the middle-aged ball player who has just been traded from
the Tigers and is engaged in what may be the last game of
his flourishing career.  On the mound against the New York
Yankees, Billy Chapel (Kevin Costner) meditates upon a
romantic attachment of the past five years, talking to himself
each time a Yankee comes to bat.  Already assured a slot in
the Cooperstown Hall of Fame, he wonders whether he will
himself strike out in the love department.  Jane Aubrey (Kelly
Preston) has assured herself a slot in his mind and has fallen
for this larger-than-life fellow, but she is not particularly
impressed by baseball and needs a full-time husband and not
one who is regularly besieged for autographs and importuned
by other women.  The movie recalls Hal Ashby's messy,
disjoined 1985 story "The Slugger's Wife," about a baseball
star who falls in love with a singer.  The singer, played by
Rebecca De Mornay, is not awed by the role of a player's
wife who must dutifully follow her hero around and sit in the
box seats with the other players' wives.
   "For Love of the Game" has a script that is not so much
lame as it is predictable and sticky.  A feel-good movie in
every sense ("Waterboy" for a more mature audience), "For
Love of the Game" is overlong at (count 'em) 137 minutes, a
span that allows Raimi to display Costner winding up and
throwing curves and speedballs as incessantly as those
automated games in theme parks.  Whenever Yankee
Stadium is not in the foreground, Raimi focuses on the off-
again, on-again relationship of Billy and Jane, who approach
and depart like two dogs, each unsure of the other, who
advance and retreat in a comic dance of indecision.
   Billy Chapel is about to pitch that most uncommon of
rarities, the perfect game.  Reminiscing on his life, he takes
us back to his youthful days when he had acquired a love of
the game, his dad playing catcher to the little-leaguer and
encouraging the boy's dream of becoming a big-time hurler. 
The major portion, however, deals with his relationship over
the past five years with Jane Aubrey, whom he meets on the
highway when he stops to help her fix her disabled auto. 
Inviting her to watch him in what turns out to be her first
baseball game, he is wrapped up in himself, unaware that
she is not as immersed as he in the game and that she is
embarrassed to sit with the players' wives (where she
overhears one whispering about her being yet another of
Billy's girl friends).  Following Michael Shaara's posthumously
published novel, Dana Stevens's script tracks the progress of
the romance, as Jane appears enchanted with Billy's tight-
lipped demeanor but annoyed by his lack of focus on her and
on her teen-aged daughter Heather (Jena Malone).
   While Costner and Preston display reasonable chemistry
together, their dialogue is as pat as the ballpark scenes  are
formulaic.  Raimi waxes sentimental in both areas, showing a
Billy Chapel who is determined to pitch only to his best friend,
catcher, Gus (John C. Reilly) and concerned to the point of
mushiness about his wavering girl friend.  The film does not
display the sharpness of Ron Shelton's 1988 "Bull Durham,"
largely because the script does not allow Preston to project
the charm of Susan Sarandon--who in "Durham" performed
as an intellectual groupie who is determined to mature one
ball player each season.  Well-lit, capably photographed
(especially in tracking Billy's whizzing fast balls), "For Love of
the Game" is watchable enough but ultimately forgettable.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "FOR LOVE OF THE GAME" (Universal Pictures)
It's Kevin Costner's third time at bat with a baseball movie
("Bull Durham," "Field of Dreams") and, once again, he's got a real
winner in this romantic sports drama. Costner plays Billy Chapel, a
aging Detroit Tigers pitching ace who's caught in a personal and
professional dilemma as he pitches what may be his finest - and last -
game at New York's Yankee Stadium. He's 40 years old, arm-weary and
aching, and he's just discovered that the Tigers have been sold and
the new owners plan to trade him. Plus, his long-time girl-friend,
Kelly Preston, is about to leave him, reasoning: "You don't need
me. You and the ball and the diamond - you're perfect together." As
his buddy/catcher (John C. Reilly) says, "Billy, this ain't your day."
During the game, as he pitches to different hitters, Billy replays -
in flashback - the vignettes that led up to this pivotal moment in his
19-year career. Based on Michael Shaara's novel from which the
contrived, predictable plot was lifted, Dana Stevens has written a
character-driven, well-crafted, if overly serious, screenplay, and
director Sam Raimi ("A Simple Plan") smoothly blends nostalgia with
suspenseful action. His intricate meshing of crisp sound and intense
silence is superb. Kevin Costner is heart-wrenching, imbuing Chapel
with texture and intensity, giving one of the best performances of his
career.  Unfortunately, his pairing with Preston totally lacks
chemistry - and Preston's character is frustratingly underwritten and
indecisive - but young Jena Malone, as her funky daughter, is vibrant
and impressive. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "For Love of
the Game" is a relentlessly entertaining, All-American 8. On a
personal note, I'm not a baseball fan - but I was on the edge of my
seat, ready to cheer out loud during the final inning.

Author
Homer Yen
Among the many trailers that I've seen over the past few weeks, the one
that had generated the most interest for me was Kevin Costner's latest
release.  The preview is a wonderful, stately presentation of an aging
baseball star that is approaching the most important crossroads of his
life.  It hints that this will be an uplifting, glorious story.  But
like so many other great-looking previews, the film itself fails to
deliver what it promises.  In this case, what bogs this film down like
an overweight player is a distracting love story that sends it into
foul territory.
Billy Chapel (Costner) has had a long and storied career.  He has
pitched with the Detroit Tigers since he first entered the majors more
than 15 years ago.  In that time, he has garnered every major award
there is in baseball.  But now at 40 years of age, his dream may be
coming to an end.  He struggles with some very difficult decisions,
including possibly retiring and deciding what to do about his long
relationship with girlfriend Jane (Kelly Preston).  Chapel has always
been a fighter, and his will and independence has made him a better
baseball player than boyfriend.  Jane laments, "you can win or lose all
by yourself.  You don't need me."  Her relationship with Chapel has
been more than frustrating at times.
Chapel is scheduled to pitch the last game of the season against the
powerhouse New York Yankees.  He has quite a lot to think about.  He
struggles to keep his mind focused during this important game.  I found
it interesting how the filmmakers illustrated the mindset of the
pitcher. As he readies his delivery in front of 50,000 screaming fans,
Chapel mentally squelches out all sound from his mind.  Meanwhile, he
visually blurs out everything except his ultimate target, the catcher's
mitt that awaits the pitch.  Chapel shows us that pitching is more than
just throwing hard.  It's about placement and about psyching out the
batter.  The baseball sequences are well thought out and would even be
enjoyable to those who don't know a thing about the sport.  The drama
is heightened effectively by the poetic play-by-play passages spoken by
veteran announcer Vin Scully.  
In between innings, he recounts the last five years of his life since
first meeting Jane.  We see his first encounter on the side of the
highway as he tries to help her with her broken down car.  We see her
upset over the fact that she can only see him when he comes into town
to play the Yankees.  And we see their relationship develop into a
one-sided affair.  Jane is very levelheaded and grudgingly accepts her
second place status to Billy's love with baseball.  But second place
isn't good enough.  
I am marginally recommending this film on the strength of the baseball
story and Costner's affable insouciance.  However, too much time is
wasted on his relationship with Jane.  Costner has great appeal, and I
can see how some kind of love angle must be a part of his films.  But,
the love story seems to happen completely outside the framework of the
film.  Jane has very little to do with his internal conflict nor does
it really impact the path that he ultimately chooses.  This is not
Kelly Preston's fault, who tries to add life to a flatly written
character.  The heart and soul of the story should have revolved around
Chapel's loyalty to his team, his uncertain future, and his passion for
the one thing that has made the last 15 years of his life a
dream-come-true.  Is this movie called "For Love of the Game" or "For
Love of the JANE"?  As with Costner's other baseball-themed films (Bull
Durham, Field of Dreams), "For Love of the Game" ably manages to evoke
the majesty and spirit of America's past time as magically as the '86
Mets.  The love story, however, fizzles.

Author
Steve Lipson
        When one thinks of typical plots for movie romances, the love triangle 
frequently comes to mind. It would seem to be the perfect story line for 
whatever genre the filmmakers aim for: the tension in a romantic drama over 
which couple ends up together, the merriment in a romantic comedy as the 
main characters try to one-up the other to win the affections of their 
object of desire. Kevin Costner obviously knows the inherent appeal of this 
scenario, as two of his most popular romantic comedies ("Bull Durham" and 
"Tin Cup") fit comfortably into the conventions of the love triangle. In a 
way, Costner's latest film falls into this same tradition. The romantic 
comedy/ drama "For Love of the Game" stars Costner as a man forced to choose 
between the two main loves of his life. Only this time, one of these objects 
of affection is not a person but a concept. This twist in the typical love 
triangle scenario elevates the motion picture and enables it to easily 
compensate for the predictability which all too often permeates romantic 
comedies.
        At its heart, "For Love of the Game" features a romantic triangle between 
Billy Chapel (Costner), Jane Aubrey (Kelly Preston), and the game of 
baseball. Costner stars as a major league pitcher near the end of an 
illustrious 19-year career. It would seem that Billy enjoys the ideal 
life--a beautiful girlfriend, tremendous wealth and popularity, the 
opportunity to work doing what he loves--but his stability and happiness 
suddenly becomes uprooted on the second to last day of the season. The owner 
of his team approaches Billy in his hotel room and informs him that he plans 
to sell his team, the Detroit Tigers; worse, the new owners intend in the 
off-season to trade Billy away from the organization he has given his heart 
and soul to for the past two decades. Billy now faces the option of 
retirement rather than appearing disloyal to the fans and team he loves. But 
thoughts such as these quickly become secondary in his mind to potentially 
worse news: his girlfriend of five years, fashion writer Jane Aubrey, 
announces that she plans to leave him to accept a position in London. She 
has finally realized that baseball means far more to Billy than she ever 
could. All these troubles weigh on Billy's mind as he takes the mound that 
night, determined to do his best in what may be the last game of his career.
        The bulk of the story alternates between Billy's pitching performance 
against the New York Yankees on this momentous yet troubled evening and 
flashbacks to events in the last five years that show how Billy reached this 
low point in his life. The baseball scenes are very well-done, with 
play-by-play by real life baseball announcers Vin Scully and Steve Lyons 
increasing the realism. (Although the filmmakers seem to have conveniently 
ignored the "five-and-ten rule," which would make some of Billy's troubles 
moot. See below.) But the game itself ultimately takes a back seat to the 
unique love triangle, and fortunately it is in the more emotional scenes of 
the film where superb acting and directing combine to overcome the 
limitations of the subgenre.
        It would be unfair to single out either Sam Raimi's inventive direction or 
the performances of Costner and Preston for the movie's success. "For Love 
of the Game"'s best scenes invariably blend both of these elements for their 
considerable power. Raimi is best known for his unconventional direction of 
thrillers and horror movies like "A Simple Plan" and "Evil Dead," and his 
skill shows here especially through his fascinating use of subjective 
visuals and sound. For the movie to work at all, it must be clear that 
Costner's character feels intense love for both Jane and the game. 
Initially, Billy's love of baseball stands out much clearer in the viewer's 
mind. Raimi's scenes of Billy on the mound cut between two different shots: 
closeups of Costner's face exhibiting intense concentration with full-body 
low-angle shots of Costner making the pitch. Most significantly, all sound 
disappears as the ball is thrown; Billy fails to even notice the background 
noise as his whole mind is focused on achieving success in the game. These 
subjective uses of sound and camera angle cast Billy as he sees himself: a 
heroic loner proud to take his team on his shoulders and give his all for 
the game. Costner's penetrating gazes and impressive physique complement 
Raimi's direction perfectly.
        Nevertheless, a flashback scene most clearly emphasizes Billy's apparent 
conviction that his love of baseball exceeds his love of Jane. Following an 
incident at his mountain home in which Billy seriously injures his pitching 
arm, the audience sees him rushed to a helicopter. Jane is most concerned 
for Billy's safety and well-being; Billy's only worry appears to be how this 
accident will affect his pitching career. As Billy is being lifted onto the 
helicopter, we see the emphatic, determined look in Costner's eyes as Billy 
tells Jane that his trainer is the most important person to him right now. 
Preston's face immediately registers a deep sense of hurt, and this 
isolation is given concrete expression by Raimi as the transparent 
helicopter doors immediately slam shut between the camera and Preston. As 
this memorable scene continues, we see the gulf between Billy and Jane 
metaphorically get wider as alternating point-of-view shots show the 
helicopter taking off and Jane staying mournfully behind. Shots such as 
these which depict separation between characters are not uncommon in movies; 
nevertheless, Raimi invests this scene with added force by his unique camera 
movement. As the camera in the helicopter travels up and away from Jane in a 
diagonal direction, we sense Billy's apparent abandonment of her all the 
more palpably.
        Given this attitude of Billy's, it is not surprising that Jane decides to 
leave him. Only after he learns the news does he finally realize how much he 
needs her. Again, strong direction and acting allow Billy's transformation 
to appear convincing. As he pitches what may well be the final game of his 
career, Raimi shows the aforementioned heroic shots of the pitcher. But 
alone in the dugout, a far different Billy emerges. Frequent close-ups of 
Costner reveal an anguished expression, as Billy painfully reminisces back 
on the unfortunate course of his relationship with Jane via memories that 
spark the flashback sequences. I am probably not giving too much away to say 
that Billy wins the game, a glorious conclusion to his illustrious career. 
But Billy does not feel happy. One memorable shot takes us back to his hotel 
room, but unlike the considerable camera movement earlier in the film, this 
shot is entirely static. It depicts the enormity of the room, with Billy 
just a small pathetic figure sitting on the bed. Again, Raimi makes 
impressive use of subjective sound. We witness total silence and 
motionlessness for a long stretch of time, until finally a sound starts to 
swell up on the soundtrack. It is the sound of Billy crying. Without Jane, 
and despite his incredible success at baseball, Billy feels as isolated and 
alone as ever.
        "For the Love of the Game" adheres to most of the conventions of romantic 
comedies, but because of the unique nature of the love triangle, they do not 
feel forced. Of course, we all know the typical outline of romantic comedy 
in which boy meets girl and then boy and girl break up. But unlike most 
movies of this genre, where the separation between the two lovers is caused 
by a silly contrivance, here the events surrounding the breakup are entirely 
believable. We are entirely convinced of Costner's deep love of the game of 
baseball, so his choice that his career is more important to him than his 
girlfriend (in the helicopter scene) does not seem unreasonable. Rather than 
silly misunderstanding, the drifting apart of Billy and Jane comes from 
heartfelt emotion.
        And, finally, lest I mistakenly leave the impression that this movie is a 
downer, let me hint at the conclusion. Again owing to the unique nature of 
this romantic triangle, the object of desire does not need to decide between 
two flesh-and-blood suitors--thus disappointing one of them and perhaps 
leaving audience members unhappy with the choice. Because one of the figures 
in this triangle is an intangible idea, it is possible that Billy can keep 
his devotion "for love of the game" without sacrificing his human love in 
the process.
        Note: "The five-and-ten-rule" states that any major league baseball player 
who has served in the majors for ten years, the last five of which were for 
the same team, has the right to veto any trade in which he would be 
involved. Thus, since Billy meets these qualifications, he need not have 
worried about being traded away by the new owners in the real world of 
baseball. But given the emotional power of this film, I would suggest that 
even a committed baseball fan should have no problem suspending their 
disbelief in this manner.


Author
James Sanford
         Over a decade ago, Kevin Costner cemented his star status by
appearing in two of the best movies ever made about baseball, "Bull
Durham" and "Field of Dreams." So "For Love of the Game," which finds
Costner returning to the ballpark, arrives with considerable baggage.
Will it be a sexy comedy like "Durham" or a world-class tearjerker like
"Dreams"? Neither, as it turns out, although the film dabbles somewhat
shyly in both genres.
 Instead, "Game," which features some of the glossiest
photography since Doris Day retired from the screen, is one of those
stories in which an aging pro has to decide whether to bow out with some
degree of dignity or keep on fighting in the hope of recapturing his
glory days. Billy Chapel (Costner) has been a Detroit Tigers pitcher for
19 years and his perpetually aching body is telling him it may be time
to hang up his glove for good. Just prior to a game in New York against
the Yankees, Billy gets the word the Tigers have been sold and he's
about to be traded, prompting plenty of soul-searching on the mound and
at least one flashback per inning.
 But rather than reflecting on his career, Billy spends the
afternoon pondering his l-e-n-g-t-h-y relationship with journalist Jane
(Kelly Preston). Though the movie insists theirs is an affair to
remember, the evidence presented onscreen is wholly unconvincing. For
the past five years it seems these two have been engaged in some games
of their own, dropping in on each other with no advance notice so they
can feel awful when they get rebuffed, carrying on going-nowhere phone
conversations and spending a few fleeting moments in bed together
whenever their schedules allow. Oh yeah, and they also apologize -- a
lot: "I'm sorry about what I said that day at the condo," "I'm sorry I
didn't call," etc.
 Last week's episode of HBO's "Sex in the City" offered a
perfectly accurate (and unprintable) name for this kind of arrangement;
suffice to say it had nothing to do with love. The copious footage
devoted to Billy and Jane's encounters might have been easier to sit
through is there was any magic between Costner and Preston, but they're
acting in two different films.
 Like Robert Redford, Costner is a romantic who only truly comes
to life opposite a strong female co-star. Pair him with the saucy Susan
Sarandon in "Durham," feisty Amy Madigan in "Dreams" or the jittery Rene
Russo in "Tin Cup," and he's motivated to work to keep up. With a less
secure leading lady such as Olivia Williams in "The Postman" or Jeanne
Tripplehorn in "Waterworld," Costner can barely even feign interest.
 That's exactly what happens in "Game." Preston, a genuine ball
of fire back in the days of "Drugstore Cowboy," has since become a
curiously affected actress who always seems to be imitating someone
else. In this case, she's doing her best faux Meg Ryan and she's so
caught up in determining the proper way to wrinkle her nose she seems to
forget who she's sharing the screen with. Consequently, Costner fades
out.
 Not for a moment do you believe Billy and Jane belong together
anywhere outside a hotel suite. Costner actually turns out to have more
chemistry with John C. Reilly, playing catcher/confidante Gus. "Game"
improves substantially when it concentrates on the friendship between
these two veterans who can still remember when baseball was about more
than salary caps, TV rights and corporate sponsorship.
 Occasionally, writer Dana Stevens' ("City of Angels") dialogue
has some of the zing of Ron Shelton's smart-mouthed "Durham" script and
there are a few genuinely intriguing passages in which Billy does
something called "clearing the mechanism," a mental process that shuts
out all the chaos around him and allows him to focus solely on his
pitching. These scenes are also the only parts of the movie that seem to
have engaged director Sam Raimi's interest; there's very little evidence
of his generally audacious style anywhere else. James Sanford

Author
Steve Rhodes
Supposedly, just before you die, your entire life flashes before your
eyes.  Something similar happens to aging baseball pitcher Billy Chapel
(Kevin Costner) in the aptly named, FOR LOVE OF THE GAME.
Throwing what may well be his last game, his entire life flashes by him
as he struggles with over-the-hill muscles to eke out one last valiant
effort.  He is "40 years old, arm weary and achy," says the game's
announcer.  This last game of his, perhaps, just perhaps, might even be
one for the record books.  Then again, maybe not.  His arm gives out
quickly these days, and he's been only 8-11 this season.
Some people stop to smell the roses.  For Billy, it's a well-worn
baseball mitt that has the aroma that excites his nose.  Knowing that
his last day on the mound has arrived, he even pauses in a packed
stadium to gaze upward at the clouds that have graced his many days at
the ballpark.
Earlier that day, he came to realize that his career was coming to an
end.  The owner of his team, the Detroit Tigers, told him that the team
was being sold.  He recommended that Billy retire because, otherwise,
the new owners planned on trading him anyway.  A Tiger all of his life,
this was a devastating blow.  Grimacing, Billy closed his eyes and
lowered his head into his hands.
To add insult to injury, his girlfriend of the past 5 years, Jane Aubrey
(Kelly Preston), told him that she was leaving him for a job in London.
"Billy, this ain't your day," his long-time friend and catcher Gus
Osinski (John C. Reilly) tells him.
Directed with an inviting poignancy by Sam Raimi (A SIMPLE PLAN), the
movie charms with its old-fashioned story of love.  Costner, in one of
his best performances in years, creates a character who earns our
respect and our sympathy.  In his subtly emotive turn as an aging
superstar, he manages to make his pain palpable without ever letting
things dissolve into schmaltz.  Still, you may want to have your
handkerchief at the ready since the story has the potential to reduce
you to tears as it did several in our audience.
FOR LOVE OF THE GAME is more a love story than a sports story.  Billy is
in love with the game and with his girlfriend, but if forced to choose,
Jane would up second.  Structured as a series of flashbacks, Billy's
life is told as he pitches his last game.  A good sports movie becomes
an even better study of a man and his two loves.
Jane, an innocent looking girl-next-door type, works at a New York
fashion magazine writing articles such as "Scents and Sensibilities."
Their affair has carefully structured rules so that they see each other
when he's in town for a game, but they are otherwise free to see anyone
they like.  These rubrics end up causing them much grief.
The chemistry between the two lovers is genuine, and their attraction
rises above the sexual.  A typical conversation between them has her
amazed at his knowing the exact number of games he has lost in his
career.  "You count them?" she asks with surprise.  "We count everything
in baseball," he remarks, showing that he thinks his profession is too
pedantic.  "That's all we do."
As they get to know each other better, her questions become more
pointed, as she delves deeper into his psyche.  "Have you ever got your
heart broken?" she wants to know.  "Yeah, when we lost the pennant in
'87," he replies, not even realizing that she was speaking of love of
another human being.
Lovingly filmed by John Bailey with the twinkling glow of New York at
night and with the warm colors of a baseball game, the movie is
invitingly sentimental and nostalgic.  Paced with the same slow rhythms
of a baseball game itself, which will either delight or annoy you, the
picture never fails to entertain.  It may not belong in quite the same
league as THE NATURAL or FIELD OF DREAMS, but it's certainly a hit.
Even if it may not quite be a home run, it's an awe-inspiring triple
that'll have you cheering and maybe even weeping.
FOR LOVE OF THE GAME runs a little too long at 2:18.  It is rated PG-13
for brief strong language and some sexuality.  The movie would be fine
for kids around 10 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 10, was visibly bored during the movie.  He gave it
just a single *, complaining that it was too predicable and the
flashbacks were too hard to follow.  His friend John, age 11, gave it **
1/2 but had trouble figuring out what was a flashback and what wasn't.
John's twin, Steven, liked the movie and gave it ***.  All of them felt
a bit uncomfortable when the characters discussed with whom they were
sleeping.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org
Sam Raimi's baseball romance "For Love of the Game" is a likable movie with 
likable stars, though I'm sure it's not the film event Universal Pictures is 
hoping it will be.
I wonder, what scenes were cut out, what expletives excised, which angered 
Kevin Costner to the extent that he is skipping the talk shows?  I'm 
curious, is all, as I am almost sure that the movie would need more than a 
little doctoring to raise it from its current B-picture status into the A 
range.
Costner here plays Billy Chapel, 19-year veteran of the Detroit Tigers, a 40 
year-old pitcher who's surely headed for the Hall of Fame.  Over the opening 
credits we watch Billy playing baseball in home movies shot in his 
childhood, many featuring his tall father teaching him the game.  (Sound 
familiar?  Think "The Natural.")  We know Billy loves the game, but he seems 
to be having problems with the other love of his life, Jane Aubrey (Kelly 
Preston), a fashion writer based in New York City.  On the day of the last 
game of the season, Billy wakes up with a hangover, only to have to chase 
Jane to Central Park and discover she is London-bound to accept a 
long-awaited editorial position.  So all throughout the last game of the 
Tigers' mediocre season - and perhaps the final game of Billy's career - he 
broods on his failed relationship with Jane.  Will he be able to climb out 
of his late-career doldrums?  Will he and Jane finally alter their 
long-distance, oft-interrupted affair?
The format of the game as framing device just does not work.  The pace of 
the extended flashbacks is just too slow, and the segments of baseball are 
just too predictable.  In a way the film sags because of another clichéd 
conceit - baseball as life.  It's appropriate that this crucial game is 
broken up by segments showing the various facets of the relationship between 
Billy and Jane;  but so many long breaks punctuating shorter baseball stints 
become tiresome.
What the film does nicely is portray a positive role model in Billy Chapel.  
Everything this guy does is exemplary, except some nasty treatment he throws 
Jane when his pitching hand is severely injured.  Sensitive, handsome:  the 
perfect catch is what Billy amounts to.  This somewhat trite 
characterization is actually pleasing to watch, considering the rotten 
apples spoiling so many contemporary stories.  And Costner is good in the 
role.  Well into his forties, he seems in good shape, and the unshakable 
subtlety he lends to the role saves many of the scenes from the flatness 
caused by the script.
As Jane, Kelly Preston delivers a nice enough performance, except that she 
too suffers from Dana Stevens' screenplay.  It's too long for one - the 
movie weighs in at two hours and seventeen minutes.  Further, many of the 
scenes build a fine tone of characterization, only to fall into flatness 
because of the ill-fated attempt to avoid cliché.  What happens is the 
hackneyed plot points are merely postponed, and events we think will happen 
end up taking a longer time to happen.  Jane, for instance, shows 
ambivalence after sleeping with Billy on the first date.  This ambivalence 
grows until we doubt the two will ever reconcile.  This delay may indeed 
result in dramatic tension, but we are simply teased too many times to care 
by the time the climax final nears.
John C. Reilly is good as the confidant - Billy Chapel's craggy-faced 
catcher.  He has a relationship with Billy similar to that between Steve 
Carlton, the Phillies ace, and his favorite ball-stopper, Tim McCarver, 
whose career spanned four decades.  Reilly's friendly Gus Osinski saves many 
scenes, and the guy plays a believable and sentimental drunk.  He could have 
conditioned more the role, though.
Another strong supporting role is turned in by Jena Malone as Jane's 
daughter Heather.  Jane is a single mom, and worries constantly about guys 
being turned off by the idea of a ready-made child (another familiar 
situation in films!).  Malone does a remarkable job in portraying Heather as 
(roughly) a 13 year-old, and then as a college student at USC.  What a gap!
The movie does take a few risks that make it better than average.  There's a 
neat motif, a sort of reverse deep focus when Billy blocks out the stadium 
noise, his "mechanism" cutting in and the crowd around him blurring into 
silence:  this is a sort of cinematic synethesia.
Not as good as the aforementioned "The Natural" or Costner's triumph, "Bull 
Durham," "For Love of the Game" takes its time for a relationship to be 
developed and thwarted many times over.  The result is a pleasant but rather 
weightless film.  What Costner should do is stop hitting with a fungo bat, 
and step up to the serious plate of an art film, an independent venture that 
would put his integrity and his career back on track


Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
For Love of the Game (1999)
Kevin Costner, Kelly Preston, John C. Reilly, Jena Malone, Brian Cox, J.K.
 Simmons, Vin Scully, Steve Lyons, Carmine D. Giovinazzo, Bill Rogers, 
Hugh Ross. Screenplay by Dana Stevens, based on the novel by Michael 
Shaara. Directed by Sam Raimi. 137 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
One of the best moments of the '98-'99 season of "The Simpsons" came when 
young Lisa visited the video section of a superstore and paused in front 
of a TV set showing the DVD version of "The Postman." The commentary 
track for the epic dud featured star and director Kevin Costner 
apologizing to viewers for the film. Upon closer examination, Lisa 
discovered it wasn't really a commentary track at all; Costner himself 
was standing behind the television set, personally telling each passerby 
how very, very sorry he was for foisting such a disaster on the public.   
Hopefully, "Waterworld" and "The Postman" have taught Kevin Costner that 
he is far better playing likable, flawed regular guys in down-to-earth 
settings than disaffected loners in post-apocalyptic societies. But then 
again, isn't that true for most of us?  
In "For Love of the Game," Costner revisits the world of baseball which 
has served his career so well. "Bull Durham" explored the nuts and bolts 
of life on the minor league circuit, while focusing on a raucous romantic 
triangle between Costner, Tim Robbins and Susan Sarandon. "Field of 
Dreams" waxed poetic on the majesty and mystical beauty of the sport, 
taking a moving look at the nature of regret along the way. While not 
nearly as strong as either film, "For Love of the Game" is still one of 
Costner's best recent efforts.    
The production opens with a nice title montage of photos and home movies 
depicting young Billy Chapel (Costner) learning the rudiments of the game 
from his dad, playing Little League ball and eventually becoming a 
superstar pitcher with the Detroit Tigers (the images are from Costner's 
own childhood and the older couple seen in the stands later in the film 
are his real-life parents). 
We join the adult Chapel in the autumn of his career, on a particularly 
momentous day. The aging vet has just learned that his team is about to 
be sold and part of the deal includes his being traded to San Francisco. 
As if that wasn't enough, Billy's girlfriend Jane (Kelly Preston) is 
leaving him. "You don't need me," she says, hours before her scheduled 
departure for London. "You and the ball and the diamond - - you're 
perfect." Dejected and hung over, Chapel heads for the ballpark to pitch 
what might very well be the last game of his career. While memories of 
his rocky five-year relationship with Jane flash through his head, Billy 
focuses totally on throwing as hard and true as possible, blanking out 
everything from the jeering Yankee fans to the scoreboard itself. 
And so goes the 137 minute feature, jumping from the game to numerous 
flashbacks of Billy and Jane. Director and baseball enthusiast Sam Raimi 
("A Simple Plan") is at his best during the game sequences. He presents 
major-league play from a first-person perspective with great 
verisimilitude, with Chapel verbally sizing up each opponent before 
firing fast balls and curves through the air like bullets. The images are 
searing and, even though the outcome of the game is easy to anticipate, 
Raimi establishes and maintains a sense of tension that is totally 
engrossing. 
The only problem with the game segments comes from the inclusion of 
overly obvious remarks from play-by-play announcers Vin Scully and Steve 
Lyons like "He's not just pitching a game. He's pitching against time. 
He's pitching against age." Thanks, fellas. We would never have figured 
that out on our own.
The many romantic flashbacks are less dynamic, but achieve their goal of 
depicting a couple who have trouble with trust and commitment. Baseball 
is everything for Billy and, though he cares deeply for Jane, he cannot 
take his eyes off the ball long enough to give their relationship the 
attention it requires. As for Jane, after building a successful career 
and raising a daughter on her own, she is wary of becoming the "other 
woman" in Billy's love affair with the game. Costner and Preston are 
effective in their roles, but because the two characters are so tentative 
in the area of romance, their interactions lack electricity. Both actors 
display more chemistry with Jane's teenage daughter Heather, nicely 
played by Jena Malone. 
Even though the less-than-sizzling romance hits most of the clichés of 
the genre (including two scenes that appear simply as excuses for MTV pop 
song moments), Costner and Preston succeed in rising above the sometimes-
tired dialogue. John C. Reilly also provides strong support as Chapel's 
catcher and best friend (At one point, Billy teases his overprotective 
pal by referring to him as "the ugliest wife in the league").
Though uneven and occasionally sluggish, "For Love of the Game" is a 
surprisingly satisfying hybrid of an old-fashioned sports film and a 
contemporary date movie. It's nice to see a story with the message that, 
regardless of age, we all still have the capacity for greatness and 
growth. While the film is the least of Kevin Costner's baseball trilogy, 
he has nothing to apologize for this time around.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Range. What exactly is it when a director is said to have "range"? Well,
before you go to see this movie, please go rent EVIL DEAD 2 (8/10), a
classic horror movie from director Sam Raimi. It contains camera tricks
galore, an over-the-top script, a hand which lives on its own, and plenty of
blood. Sam Raimi is also the director of this film, which features baseball,
Kevin Costner in chinos, and plenty of gooey love and romance stuff. Now
THAT'S range!
PLOT:
An aging baseball player gets dumped by his girlfriend and asked to consider
retirement by management right before what may be his last trip to the
mound. As he begins to pitch towards a perfect game, he also looks back at
his career, and more importantly, the special moments of his relationship
with his girlfriend.
CRITIQUE:
Reflective, syrupy and effective adult, romantic drama which deals
eloquently with a man torn between his affection towards the game of
baseball (i.e. his career) and his ability to open up to a woman for whom he
cares deeply (i.e. his love life). Do you have to like baseball to like this
movie? Not at all. Would it help you enjoy this movie more if you liked
baseball? Probably. This film is definitely not about baseball as much as
BULL DURHAM and FIELD OF DREAMS were, but it does manage to spend quite a
bit of time on the game in question. In fact, I could have done without some
of the baseball scenes, which made me feel like I was watching a
play-by-play game at times. The announcers were also welcome to some extent,
but their voice-overs sure became irritating after a while. But I digress,
since the meat of this film lies in the relationship built between the two
people in the movie, Costner and Preston, and it is handled with much care
and affection. Raimi also proves that he has an excellent ear for cinema
with some pointed scenes featuring the "power" of a pitcher's concentration.
Wonderfully crafted.
I also liked the way the film intercuts the progression of Costner's bid for
a perfect game, with the reflections upon his relationship with this woman
whom he appears to adore. The romance is constructed diligently with genuine
believability, with both actors extremely effective in their roles.
Admittedly, I never considered Kelly Preston anything more than Mrs.
Travolta, but goddamn if she didn't have me sniffling in this film. She and
Kevin light up the screen with their affair, and I found myself relating to
many of the issues which plagued their relationship as well. If you have
ever been in a relationship which competed with your career for the top spot
in your life, you will certainly appreciate many of the sentiments
realistically delivered in this romantic tale. It definitely could have been
cut by about twenty minutes, but all in all, the film made me cry like a
baby, further appreciate the talents of director Raimi, and extend kudos to
Costner who delivers one of the finest performances of his career (The
poignant scene in his hotel room after the game is an ironic and powerful
twist). This is definitely an adult drama featuring many moments of
heartfelt emotion, and despite not being for everyone, it may just be the
best romantic drama since 1997's AS GOOD AS IT GETS (8/10), and certainly
worthy of a comparison to the strength of JERRY MAGUIRE (7.5/10).
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Actor Kevin Costner graduated from the California State University at
Fullerton with a degree in marketing. Note that the scene in which Costner
sees a vision of his parents in the crowd, is in actuality, his own parents
from real-life. Costner was not afraid to voice his disapproval of
Universal's "trimming of the film" due to the length and PG-13 rating.
Kevin's middle name is Michael. His ex-wife's name is Cindy Silva. They were
married for 16 years and have three children together.
Kelly Preston was born and raised in Hawaii. Her real name is Kelly Palzis.
As a result of her father's position with an agricultural firm, the family
moved first to Iraq for one year and then to Australia for two years. It was
while she was a teenager in Hawaii that Preston appeared in television
commercials and began to develop an interest in an acting career. You could
see her topless in the teen comedy SECRET ADMIRER starring C. Thomas Howell,
and SPELLBINDER. Nice breasts. She also lived with actor Charlie Sheen from
1989-90. She was accidentally shot in their apartment in 1990 .
Soon thereafter, she settled down with actor John Travolta in 1991, with
whom she has a son named Jett.
Actress Jena Malone, who plays the daughter in this film, also played the
daughter in STEPMOM (6/10) with Susan Sarandon. She's pretty good.
Director Sam Raimi was originally approached to direct the Arnold
Schwarzenegger movie END OF  DAYS, but was more interested in this film
because he is a gigantic baseball fan, and wanted a chance to present his
own tribute to the game which he loves. Raimi's brother Ted Raimi plays one
of the doormen at the gallery in this film. Sam Raimi formed Renaissance
Pictures with his two College buddies, producer Rob Tapert and actor Bruce
Campbell. They are the group behind the TV shows "Hercules: The Legendary
Journeys" and "Xena: The Princess Warrior". Producer Tapert recently married
the Xena star, Lucy Lawless.
The baseball scenes which took place in Yankee Stadium used between 800 and
2000 extras for the crowd shots, while the rest of the audience was to be
filled in with computer graphics.
This film is based on the novel by author Michael Shaara. Shaara's son Jeff
found the manuscript of FOR THE LOVE OF THE GAME among his father's works
after his death, ensuring its publication after the man's untimely death in
1988.

Author
Chuck Schwartz
Within the first ten minutes of For Love of the Game, Detroit Tigers
pitching ace of 19 years Billy Chapel (Kevin Costner) is informed that
his team is being sold and that he is being traded to San Francisco as
part of that deal. He is offered the choice of retiring with dignity,
but he only has a day to consider his decision. In an unrelated move, he
gets dumped by the love of his life, who is leaving for a job in London,
and will miss the Big Game. As Chapel suits up to pitch what could be
his final game as a Tiger, Cranky sat in his seat thinking, gee, I
betcha he pitches . . . [think about it for a second. It's so damned
obvious that my college screenwriting professor would've slapped my
hands with a ruler.]
It doesn't matter. Neither does it matter that I've laid out as much of
the story as I have. For Love of the Game is Costner's third baseball
movie; he's scored twice before with baseball themed flicks and his
record continues to be perfect with the latest, and presumably last
(unless he decides to try on a manager's uniform) four bagger story. For
Love of the Game is a much smaller story than Bull Durham or Field of
Dreams; it's the story of one man trying to figure out what's really
important to him, his life (baseball) or his love. Or maybe a way to
balance both.
As the Tigers take the field for the last game of the Season against the
New York Yankees, in the House that Ruth built, Chapel sorts out the
previous five years in his mind. His random meeting with Jane Aubrey
(Kelly Preston) and the rocky start to their relationship. Its ups and
downs. The player friends that deserted Detroit by going free agent. The
players who weren't good enough to survive a season. A couple of
personal crises that threatened both career and love. When these lapses
draw him away from the reality of the moment, Chapel has his partner
teammate, catcher Gus Sinski (John C. Reilly) to draw him back to
reality.
It's a character driven story, and the only character we get to see
develop and change is the one who is central to all the lives of the
story. Jane and Gus and Chapel's parents all serve to mirror particular
points in this man's journey; it's a role that Costner has played
perfectly before and he does so again. Writer Dana Stevens and Director
Sam Raimi has properly balanced Costner's flashbacks against the current
events of the game in progress. Even if you guess the outcome early on,
the events of the game are so well choreographed that you'll be sucked
into a fannish appreciation. The audience I sat with broke into
spontaneous applause twice as the game played out.
It's a small story. An adult popcorn movie whose only flaw is the almost
nonstop use of songs to drive the emotional elements of the movie along.
The sound mix is so bad that the lyrics drown out the dialog; every time
a song comes up it draws attention from the story. It was overkill for
me, but I paid almost ten bucks to see the flick in a theater whose
speaker cones were cracked, so the mix may not be a problem for you.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to For Love of the Game, he would have
paid...
Cranky has a teevee critic friend that saw For Love of the Game in a
private room last week, and hated the thing. I walked in recalling
Costner's most recent bombs, but walked out with warm fuzzies. The rest
of the crowd, especially the women, were making negative comparisons
between Kelly Preston's role and Susan Sarandon's (from Bull Durham).
That's apples and oranges to me, folks. Even with that negative, the
overall reaction to the flick was positive.
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 1999
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Stephen Graham Jones
The trick in a movie with a title like Love of the Game is to, by the end of
the movie, redefine 'game' so that it refers not so much to sports but to
the main character's life situation. Thus winning or losing the game means a
little more. It's a common enough trick, from Rocky to Happy Gilmore to
Varsity Blues. Or, talking Kevin Costner, Tin Cup. Which is to say Love of
the Game is, as the title also suggests, a love story, or, more
specifically, a love triangle--aging superstar Billy Chapel (Costner),
freelance writer Jane Aubrey (Kelly Preston), and America's favorite
already-romanticized (Field of Dreams) past-time.
None of this is unexpected. What is a surprise, though--for those who didn't
read Michael Shaara's novel--is how Love of the Game isn't structured over
the length of a season, as with Bull Durham, but instead uses the last game
of Billy Chapel's season as a springboard into everything that's gone
before. Meaning yes, the bulk of the movie happens in the movie's past. It's
all flashbacks, occasioned by pained expressions from the dugout, reached
through soft dissolves, all that, which has the effect of gradually making
this 'last' game more and more important. Or, of making us realize how
important it is. Which is all good and fine.
The problem with non-linear approaches like this, however, is that--unless
every flashback is both a surprise and absolutely necessary narrative
exposition, qua Tarrantino--it can get old real fast. As in repetitive. As
in every scar and every comment has an explanation. In Love of the Game,
they're all explained, which is a little bit of overkill. And you can tell
when the explanations are coming, too, which doesn't help any, and doesn't
do anything to subtract from the occasionally nauseous levels of nostalgia
already circulating. But then it a movie about baseball. And it is Kevin
Costner.
And it is--in spite of all this 'ghosts of Christmas past' feel--a
dramatically sound movie: the 'story of them' (Billy Chapel and Jane Aubrey)
is a strong little story, with no real bad guys, lots of bad luck, all the
things we've liked since When Harry Met Sally, Forget Paris, all those. And
this 'story of them' does catch up with the present-story very nicely (see:
without intruding), in a way that gives us no real choice but to care,
to--as with any date-movie--beg for the happy ending. However, unlike most
date movies, Love of the Game doesn't wholly give itself away until the
closing frames.
But of course Billy and Jane aren't the only two characters here in search
of restoration. Everyone in the movie wants to be redeemed, and, like
dominos, they more or less are, which is a little too picture-perfect for
comfort. Which isn't to say you're not happy for the minor characters when
they get 'redeemed,' it just feels a little cheap immediately afterwards.
Perhaps it's meant to be all about the moment, though, in which case it's a
success.
The thing is, though, there are so many moments, better than two hours of
them. Which would be fine is Love of the Game were epic in scope, like, say,
Dances with Wolves, Waterworld, orThe Postman, but it's not. Or, it tries
hard to be more sweeping than it is. Meaning it's a little inflated. And
this simply because every picture in it has a story. But so be it. It is
satisfying in other ways. There is a definite Unforgiven-feel, of the aging
hero proving himself in high style, which America so loves. And there is a
seriously magical moment when director Sam Raimi cues Bob Seger when Bob
Seger is exactly what's needed, which manages to keep us from dismissing the
rest of the movie, on the off-chance that there might be another magical
moment like that, more chances to cry. Love of the Game is full of them.
(c) 1999  Stephen Graham Jones
for more like this, check out http://www.cinemuck.com

Author
Bob Bloom

 For Love of the Game (1999) 1 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Kevin Costner
and Kelly Preston. Directed by Sam Raimi
 In baseball parlance, Kevin Costner already has hit a home run and a
triple with "Field of Dreams" and "Bull Durham."
 In his newest outing in uniform, "For Love of the Game," Costner has just
managed a scratch single.
 "For Love of the Game" is a soapish weeper filled with clichés. It is as
predictable as a hit-and-run situation.
 And yet it has moments that ring true despite its mawkish nature and a
lead character who, while not as blue-collar noble as a Crash Davis, is
flawed but likable and heroic.
 Billy Chapel (Costner) is a 40-year-old pitcher for the Detroit Tigers at
the twilight of a Hall-of-Fame career. He has pitched for the Tigers for 19
years, through good times and bad.
 Now, the team's owner is selling the franchise because he has become
disillusioned with the game. "I wanted to leave the team to my kids," he
ruefully tells Chapel, "but, hell, they don't even like baseball."
 He has sold the Tigers to a corporation, and one of the first moves of the
new owners is a plan to trade Chapel to the Giants. That is, unless Chapel
decides to call it quits and go out while he is still on top.
 As Chapel takes the mound for the next to last game of the season, he
looks back on his career and his life - and especially on his involvement
with Jane (Kelly Preston), a magazine writer-single mom whom he met when
her rental car broke down and he stopped to help her.
 As the game progresses, we see that Chapel is fulfilling that rarest of
baseball feats - the perfect game, retiring every batter he faces.
 Bone tired and with a sore shoulder, Chapel reflects on his life between
batters and between innings, recalling the good times and bad.
 The screenplay by Dana Stevens, adapted from a novel by Michael Shaara,
does not offer any surprises, twists or turns.
 Yet, to Costner's credit, his star power raises the film from mediocre to
acceptable. He knows how to wear the skin of the superstar athlete who
treats his celebrity status and the perks that come with it with a casual
acceptance, an air of matter-of-factness.
 During spring training in Florida, he has his own condo. When traveling
with the team on the road, he has his own suite.
 When he slices his hand, he asks Jane, who rushed him to the hospital, to
call the team's trainer because at the moment he is the most important
person in Billy's life, the only one who can help him through this crisis.
 Billy does not even realize how such words cut Jane. His life is focused
on the diamond.
 Preston does her best to breathe some backbone and life into Jane. She
does show her to be a strong, capable woman, so one wonders why she
continually pines for Billy.
 But "For Love of the Game" is really nothing more than a vanity piece, a
star vehicle for Costner.
 And somehow it works. Despite all the distractions - the overripe,
too-literary commentary by the legendary Vin Scully, Chapel's too
self-conscious interior monologues - "For Love of the Game" holds your
attention.
 Even such hoary lines as "This should have been the biggest night of my
life, but it wasn't because you weren't there," as spoken by Costner fail
to make you winch.
 "For Love of the Game" won't be remembered as the worst baseball movie
ever made - "The Babe Ruth Story" or "Major League 3: Back to the Minors"
can battle for that distinction.
 This movie is like a late-season game between two second-division teams
going nowhere - it's meaningless, but if you're a fan, you still can enjoy
the action on the field.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Billy Chapel is having a bad day.  He's been told that the Detroit
Tigers, for which he's had, until recently, a spectacular pitching career,
will soon be sold.  He's been told that, come season end, he'll probably be
traded to the Giants anyway unless, of course, he opts to retire.  And to
cap it all, he's just learned that his girlfriend has taken a job overseas,
and is scheduled to fly out on the next plane to London.
        The forty-year-old baseball player, who holds a nineteen-year
history with the Tigers, is in New York for the season finale against the
Yankees when the string of bad news comes down.  Standing there on the
mound, "the loneliest place on earth," Billy contemplates his life through
a series of flashbacks while pondering the decision to call it a day.
        Every once in a while, Kevin Costner makes a baseball picture to
make up for the poor decisions and lackluster performances that plague his
other films.  For every "Waterworld" and "Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves,"
there's a "Bull Durham."  For every "'Postman" and "'Bodyguard" there's a
"Field of Dreams."  With "For Love of the Game," Costner (who plays the
sanguine Billy Chapel) once again proves that if you stick him in a
baseball movie, they will come and come again.
        Costner is very good in this film; he clearly has a passion for
America's favorite pastime.  Fortunately the usually flamboyant director
Sam Raimi ("A Simple Plan") shows remarkable restraint in allowing that
passion to shape the story, rather than his own show-offy camerawork.
        Kelly Preston, whom you might remember from "Jerry Maguire," gives
Billy's "blonde of the week" a delightful balance.  Preston's Jane is
naďve, sensitive, forthright, and demure, afraid of committing to someone
of Billy's stature while at the same time unable to resist his considerable
charms.  She's "never had a love story," according to her teenage daughter
Heather, who's nicely played by a well-cast Jena Malone ("Stepmom").
Costner and Preston's relationship evolves naturally, from the time he
first spots her with her broken-down car on the freeway, to when they fall
into each other's arms at the airport.  It's a familiar story but here it's
played out with sophistication and real human depth.
        Although "For Love of the Game" is essentially a love story with a
baseball setting, such is the dramatic energy of the narrative that when
Billy finds himself in the middle of pitching a perfect game, the clichés
dissolve into poignancy and you find yourself caught up in the excitement.
The moment when Billy throws his final pitch is palpable, and that's as
much a tribute to the actor as to the writer and director.
        The writing by Dana Stevens, based on Michael Shaara's novel, is
always intelligent, powerful and absorbing, and Basil Poledouris provides a
lovely and effective score that never once gets in the way of the
principals.  On the baseball diamond, the film has that poetic quality
shared by all the great baseball movies--"Bang the Drum Slowly," "The
Natural," "Eight Men Out" ... as well as those two previously-mentioned
Costner vehicles.
        Do not, however, dismiss "For Love of the Game" as "just another
Kevin Costner baseball movie" because as Kevin Costner movies go, baseball
or otherwise, it's one of his best.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Edwin Jahiel
FOR LOVE OF THE GAME (1999) ***  Directed by Sam Raimi. Written by 
Dana Stevens from
the novel by Michael Shaara.  Produced by Armyan Bernstein, Amy 
Robinson.  Photography, John Bailey. Editing, Eric L. Beason, Arthur 
Coburn. Production design,  Neil Spisak. Music, Basil Poledouris. 
Cast: Kevin Costner (Billy Chapel), Kelly Preston (Jane Aubrey), John 
C. Reilly (Gus Sinski), Jena Malone (Heather), Brian Cox (Gary 
Wheeler), J.K. Simmons (Frank Perry), Vin Scully & Steve Lyons (as 
themselves), Carmine D. Giovinazzo (Ken Strout), Bill Rogers (Davis 
Birch), Hugh Ross (Mike Udall). A Universal release. 137 minutes. 
PG-13
Does America love baseball? Has Kevin Costner had box-office hits 
with the baseball films Bull Durham and Field of Dreams? Has been 
unlucky with  some recent movies --except for Tin Cup where he plays 
a golfer? Is The Pope Catholic?
So it made good sense to do a third baseball picture. He is Billy 
Chapel, the Detroit Tigers ace pitcher and prime Hall of Fame 
candidate. Now he's in New York for a game at Yankee Stadium. His 
shoulder hurts. His soul hurts as he is told that his team is being 
sold. He's 40, getting older by sports standards. He has 19 years of 
pro playing behind him. And his heart is breaking because his girl, 
magazine writer Jane (Kelly Preston)  announces that it's all over 
between them; that he really needs no one; that his real love is 
baseball; that  in a few hours she's off to England where a dream-job 
is expecting her.
That's the set-up. From here on out it's flashbacks and flashforwards 
that would be artsy and tiresome (but can be a tad tiring)  except 
that Sam Raimi --who directed The Evil Dead but caught us by surprise 
in 1998 with the so-different A Simple Plan-- manages his script and 
his team (of actors) with a sure-hand and an obvious passion for The 
Game.
Five years ago Billy and Jane first met. They met cute, but it's 
funny and fresh. Their relationship is charted back and forth, 
surprises abound, there's even a surprise young girl, Heather (Jena 
Malone) who livens, warms up and helps crystallize the lovers' 
on-off relationship. More, I cannot say, since this is sports movie 
but also a character-driven picture. It has its own levels of 
suspense, in personal and in sports matters.
There are some clever inventions (events, scenes, sequences), whether 
in rainy New York, sunny Florida or the snowy West. The plot is 
highly manipulative of course, as it plays with the characters' 
actions and reactions, and with the audience's response to what is 
on the screen. The tricks of the trade, both filmic and baseballic, 
are out in force. But they are well handled, keep your attention and 
do not ever get boring. Even the music score by Greek-American 
Poledouris, though generic/romantic, skirts the bombastic repetitions 
by Greek-Greek composer Vangelis in that popular sports-movie 
Chariots of Fire.
All this would still be high-class routine stuff, were it not for the 
superb scenes in the ballpark, their mise-en-scene, their 
photography, the realistically filmed crowds : excellent, imaginative 
photography, sound-mixes, editing that coordinates people and actions 
in the diamond and off it. We get the players, the raucous fans, and 
we get the iffy  but touching thoughts of Billy during his mind games 
with the opponents. He's fighting (under physical and psychological 
handicaps) for his team, his good name, and his exit from the Tigers 
(he'll be traded, no matter what happens).
The movie treats its players with a glove (not kid, but still), as we 
only see and hear rather comradely things with no trace of 
locker-roomitis. The closest to a nasty presence is a young Yankees 
batter who looks satanic. Billy foils him again and again. But the 
game is a gem of excitement and suspense.
The players (in both senses) are very good, although there is no true 
depth in the affair, the setbacks and the Fun With Bill and Jane. 
Costner has the right physique for the role, but it  does get a bit 
redundant as we watch him suffer. Kelly Preston is convincing as a 
real person, as opposed to one playing a part. She does not want to 
be a groupie, but the presumed intensity of the affair is made 
somewhat ho-hum by three things: the lightning fast, out-of-character 
(hers) speed of her initial sex with Billy; our knowledge that so 
many male sports figures are incorrigible woman-collectors; and the 
studio-imposed carnal cuts in order to get a PG-13 rating. Young Jena 
Malone is beautifully cast as she matches perfectly Preston's looks.
The winningest side of the film is the great edge-of-the-seat footage 
which works both on baseball lovers and on non-aficionados.

Author
Scott Renshaw
FOR LOVE OF THE GAME
(Universal)
Starring:  Kevin Costner, Kelly Preston, John C. Reilly, Jena Malone.
Screenplay:  Dana Stevens, based on the novel by Michael Shaara.
Producers:  Armyan Bernstein and Amy Robinson.
Director:  Sam Raimi
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, adult themes, brief gore)
Running Time:  138 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     To paraphrase Garrett Morris as Chico Escuela from the old "Saturday
Night Live," baseball been bery, bery good to Kevin Costner.  Arguably his
two strongest performances -- in two of his strongest films -- have come
when he was dealing with baseball:  BULL DURHAM, and FIELD OF DREAMS.
There's something about Costner, some combination of his convincingly
athletic build and his aw-shucks, laconic manner that makes him
well-suited to tales of our peculiarly mythologized national pastime.
It's only natural that he'd want to return to the diamond for a film like
FOR LOVE OF THE GAME.  Could he maintain his perfect batting average,
even playing a non-hitting American League pitcher?
     The short answer is yes, though it's more of a solid single than
FIELD OF DREAMS' ground-rule double or BULL DURHAM's inside-the-park home
run.  Costner stars as Billy Chapel, a one-time great Detroit Tigers
pitcher now 40 years old, staring down the end of a career and the end
of a relationship. On the last day of a disappointing season -- the same
day that his long-time girlfriend Jane (Kelly Preston) announces she's
moving to London for a job as a magazine editor -- Billy learns that he
will be traded to another team unless he retires.  Over the course of that
evening's game, Billy reflects on his career and his five years with Jane,
almost unaware that he has a chance at throwing the pitcher's dream: a
perfect game.
     FOR LOVE OF THE GAME is deftly constructed as perhaps the ideal date
movie -- it's a love story that also happens to be a baseball movie.  In
the flashback segments, we watch the arc of Billy's romance with Jane,
including his acceptance of Jane's teenage daughter Heather (Jena Malone).
Though Costner is plenty agreeable in his easy-going way, it's Preston who
really sells the romantic side of the story.  She gives a bright,
appealing performance as a woman whose tentative steps into a relationship
with a professional athlete all feel momentous to her.  The chemistry
between Preston and Costner is solid, but there's a nagging sense that
there's much more to know about Billy.  The absence of any previous
romantic history for Billy robs the love story of context; it's hard to
see the person he was, so we can feel for the person he needs to become.
     Some of that context is provided by the baseball sequences, which are
satisfying in their own right.  They're less about the game than they are
about Billy's intensity and gamesmanship: his ability to "clear the
mechanism" and remove all external distractions, his internal monologues
about the batters he is facing, his almost old-fashioned respect for the
game.  Though there are a couple of technical blunders -- a scoreboard
that shows no hits for both teams shortly before the announcer says the
Tigers have two hits -- the game sequences do their job as character
development.
     Still, it's sometimes difficult to lock into the fate of Billy and
Jane's relationship, not because of the distractions of the game 
sequences, but because Billy remains so enigmatic.  In one sense, that
mystery gives FOR LOVE OF THE GAME an intriguingly different romantic
tone, since Jane remains oblivious to Billy's focus on baseball until an
injury causes him to turn that intensity against her.  In another sense,
that mystery could simply be a distraction from a viewer's confidence that
these two people actually belong together.  
     Make no mistake, FOR LOVE OF THE GAME is fundamentally satisfying --
it can't help but be with _two_ big payoff scenes -- and well-acted.
Director Sam Raimi delivers the crowd-pleasing goods, and the film
delivers more laughs than you might expect.  I only wish Billy Chapel had
been more of a complete character, and less one of those baseball icons
Costner has exploited so successfully in other films.  The game continues
to be bery, bery good to him.  It just could have been better.

Author
Jamey Hughton
I might as well go out and say it: I like Kevin Costner as an actor.
Some may argue he has little range, but that only assists in adding an
everyman appeal to the endearing actor. After taking such a lashing for
his post-apocalyptic bomb The Postman, Costner has returned to a subject
that has brought him much success: the American past-time of baseball.
For Love of the Game proves that, with Kevin Costner and baseball, you
really can't go wrong.
Joining an actor who is very experienced in this category is a director
who is not. Sam Raimi, best known for his gore-splattered Evil Dead
series, has made an amazing transition within the past few years. A
Simple Plan, his chilling tale of small-town crime, was widely hailed as
one of 1998's best films. And now Raimi (a fan of baseball himself) has
taken the reins of a project that is a total contrast to his 80's horror
films. It looks like the dedicated director may have success in any
genre (with exception of western, which he attempted in the ill-fated
The Quick and the Dead).
Costner plays aging Tigers' pitcher Billy Chapel, who is told by the
owner (Brian Cox) that the franchise has been sold. Pondering
retirement, Chapel steps out on the field at Yankee Stadium to pitch
what could be his final game. The spectators in New York greet the
pitcher with disgust (`Chapel, you suck!!!' and `You couldn't pitch a
tent!'), but he uses his concentration to block everything out. Chapel
begins to look back at his long and successful career, which also
revives memories of romance and family - mainly involving Kate (Kelly
Preston) and their relationship ups and downs through the years.
A friend of mine commented that he would have liked less Love and more
Game from the film, and I would have to agree. The baseball action is
used sparingly, but it captures the spirit and excitement of the great
game. The romance between Billy and Kate contains a few fundamental
flaws, but the stars have palpable chemistry and play their boundaries
perfectly. This is easily Costner's best performance in years. The
actor's undeniable appeal allows us to look past the lack of information
about Chapel's past. We see (unnecessary) flashbacks of his parents, but
know little about them. There is also great work from Preston, Jena
Malone, and John C. Reilly as a loyal catcher named Gus Sinski.
Raimi adds a swift momentum to any given situation. For Love of the Game
is solidly entertaining from beginning to end, which causes a refreshing
absence of flashing Indiglo watches during the show. The director
supports the material so well, perhaps with the one exception: a rushed
ending that denies the audience room to breath. The script Raimi has to
deal with is dependable but problematic. All the flaws seemed to be
drowned out by the consistent, reliable pace, which links romantic
flashbacks to the present game with seamless precision.
For Love of the Game also has wide appeal. Anyone who enjoys baseball
will be glued to their seats. I was a little disgusted to see a few
sports clichés - such as a couple of close calls involving hits that
just tail off into foul territory. But when Chapel begins to work on a
perfect game, Raimi handles the tension and unease perfectly. Romantic
film buffs will also love it, as will any Costner fan that still exists
(I hope there are still a few). Needless to say, this film is sure to be
a widespread crowd-pleaser for all ages.
I still prefer Field of Dreams, a wonderful fantasy that honors baseball
like a religion, to Costner's latest entry. But For Love of the Game is
an actual, genuine `good movie' from the Hollywood factory. I thoroughly
enjoyed it's loving tribute to a great game, and anyone with similar
feelings is sure to agree.
 Contact Jamey at:  movieviews@hotmail.com

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
"For Love Of The Game" (1999) 
Rated PG-13; running time of 120 minutes
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Title?0126916 
Official site: http://www.universalpictures.com/forloveofthegame/ 
Written by: Dana Stevens, based on the novel by Michael Shaara 
Directed by: Sam Raimi
Starring: Kevin Costner, Kelly Preston, John C. Reilly, Jena Malone, 
Bill E. Rogers, Greer Barnes
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 1999
There's something about Kevin Costner and uniforms--especially of the
baseball variety. He wowed us (at least this part of "us") in "Bull
Durham", and came back for more in "Field Of Dreams"; and now, he gives us
"For Love Of The Game". The question remains: did he knock this one outta
da park, or was it a swingandamiss?
The Story (WARNING: some spoilers contained below)
Ever since he was a wee lad, Billy Chapel lived for the game of baseball;
after spending his whole professional career as a Pitcher for the Detroit
Tigers [native-Detroiter-Bammer will rant about this later,] in the last
game of what a teammate describes as "the end of a shitty season", he
reaches down deep and lives in "the zone", potentially pitching a perfect
game. He finds himself at a crossroads when the love of his life threatens
to leave him. The question is, who is that love: his girlfriend Jane
Aubrey, or Baseball itself?
The Upshot
I have no Deep Abiding Love for baseball. Truth to tell, it bores me
silly, as do most sports. And let me go 'head and get my promised rant out
of the way: for a movie that proclaims the Glory of being a Tiger,
whythell was Detroit so totally shunned in this flick? Bad enough that
e-v-e-r-y friggin game they played was an Away game; they couldn't do
Detroit the honour of mentioning its name more than once or twice, even
just in passing? It was very noticeable to the crowd that watched with me
(I was surprised there were so many there for this sneak preview), and my
husband ranted about it when I got home, even though he didn't watch with
me. This aspect of the movie dulled the authenticity of it all for me; had
Chapel been made a Yankee instead of a Tiger, I could've dug it, but there
was no real Tiger Pride as far as I could see.
Now that that's out of the way, I'll surprise you a wee bit: I liked this
flick. And strangely, I don't quite know why. To be sure, it seemed to do
everything it could to insure that I wouldn't like it, from the
Detroit-less Tigers, to being a baseball movie to begin with--and
especially because of Kelly Preston.
Kelly Preston. Man, that chick was hard to deal with. At once seeming way
too young for Chapel, and very outclassed in the acting department by even
Costner (who doesn't deserve all the flack he gets. Some, but not all); in
the end, she grew on me, maybe becase Chapel turned out to be such a prick
[y'all shoulda seen the typo I made on the first draft of this review!
But, as is my way, I digress.] My major Issue with her was that she
looked, and acted, more like a Valley Girl than a Noo Yawka. She seemed
too flighty at first, and her character began as unsympathetic for me (we
see Jane stand-up Billy just before his Big Game, as she tells him she's
going to London because "you don't really need me"; "Get over yourself!",
I mumbled quietly to the screen), but as the movie progresses, she seems
to "grow up" in fits and starts, though some of the crap she takes from
Billy throughout had me wanting to shake her and wake her dumbbutt up. In
the end, though there could've been better choices of actresses for her
role, she acquits herself adequately enough.
And Costner, The Man Hissef; what of him? I'll put it like this: he wears
his uniforms well. And that's no backhanded compliment; though he looked
too old for the part, I could Believe him as a ballplayer. The shots of
him (and his double) on the diamond were beautifully done by the
cinematographer (it's hard to describe, unfortunately; you'll have to see
it for yourself to know what I mean), especially the "clear the mechanism"
scenes. And even when the pseudo-Philospher that's apparently inherant in
all baseball players, came to the fore, I didn't run Yelling And Screaming
from the theater. Costner's Billy Chapel seemed Real to me, and though
overall, "Bull Durham" was a much better flick for him (Costner's "How do
you like to be kissed?" line couldn't touch his Bull Durham characters' "I
believe in..." speech to Susan Sarandon, on a good day), Kevin should be
able to loose the ghosts of "The Postman" past with this one; until his
next Big Flop, at least.
As for the story itself, I am again surprised that I wound up being
interested in it. There was very little actual conflict, and what there
was, seemed contrived. The baseball game itself was just a set-up for the
flashbacks which told the story--or was it? Hmmm...even if it were,
though, the "conflict" in the game itself was light; and yet, still
effective. I loved the character of Gus ("the ugliest Wife in the league";
played by Reilly), and I found myself rooting for Billy's every pitch,
straining to hear his "conversations" with the stadium crowd, his "worthy
opponents" on the other team, and most of all, with himself--despite my
lack of enthusiasm for baseball. And at the end of the game (I won't give
it away, but needless to say, there were no real plot twists), I cheered
right along with the rest of the crowd--on screen, and off. The
simultaneous love story was rather bizarre, too; there was nothing there
at all to grab onto from either the characters' standpoint or for Joe
Viewer, until the appearance of one of Jane's family members (Heather, who
I found quite charming, in spite of my reservations about that kind of
character being added to Save The Day; perhaps because Heather was played
nicely by Malone). And oddly enough, that whole plot took on a different
Feel from there; it became softer, sweeter; it became interesting. It
threatened to lose my interest when Preston's lack of acting skills got in
the way again, but the whole timbre of the movie changed with that one
scene. I blushed at their "will you still love me when..." telephone
conversation--having remembered one very much like it after I fell in love
with my now-husband. Recognition of Self, when watching a movie, generally
being A Good Thing...
"For Love Of The Game" was no "The Natural", but at least it was no
"WaterWorld" either. If you need a Feel-Good movie right about now [I did:
just before I went to see it, my wallet was stolen], you could do much
worse. And coming from me, that's about as good a compliment that a film
not on the same level as, for instance, "The Matrix", can get.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]
As a Black woman, I see the "Black Factor"--things that affect me as a
"consumer of color"--in many aspects of life; movies included. Whether
from the standpoint of noting Black (and other "minority") cast and crew
members (if any), to the (lack of) focus toward "people of color" (dag, I
hate that term), to the out-and-out antagonistic attitude toward Us
(Jar-Jar, anyone?), the "Black Factor" (BF) is something that plays as
much a role in my film enjoyment as any other aspect of the movie itself.
As has been noted Elsewhere about the lack of Blacks in new TV series this
Fall season (there's an article in the 7/30/99 issue of "Entertainment
Weekly" that I highly recommend, titled "White Wash"), it's much easier
depicting an integrated workplace than it is to show folks of different
races hangin' out after hours--but what if that workplace was the sports
arena, as it is in this flick? I'd postulate that in those cases, there'd
be the usual hand-wringing by The Powers That Be over How To Handle The
Race Issue: "Well," I hear The Powers thinking; "should we show the team
lineup as a reflection of what we actually see in real-life sports, or
should we add a White [or Black, as the case may be] guy in the mix?
Should we trip all over ourselves to include a Black [White] Friend? Oh
how do we get The Black Dollar in to see this one?!?"
Fortunately, that postulation in this case, would be wrong. That mindset,
and the slippery slope it begets, didn't seem to be at the forefront in
this movie, for the most part. The Black players clearly had a
Relationship with Billy, but so did the rest of the team (those that were
featured, as well as the team in toto). Billy respected Davis Birche
(Rogers) a former teammate of his that happened to be Black (whose wife
Keisha--played by Sheila Lussier--also had an effect on Jane), and though
the little time they spent on their personal relationship felt a little
clumsy, it wasn't focused on long enough to make the problematic part of
modern entertainment--showing White and Black folks together in
non-workplace settings--become an Issue. And I still have the feeling that
if it were (this being a movie drama, not a TV sitcom), it would've been
done well. At any point, there was no big deal made of the fact that
either Davis, or Mickey Hart (Barnes), a current teammate who he gave some
sound advice to, in the role of OldSchooler, were Black. And that, in this
instance, was A Good Thing.
Bammer's Bottom Line 
My problems with the flick notwithstanding (Kelly Preston at times; the
DAMNED ANNOYING Fox TV announcers--I think all sports announcers should be
fined for stoopidity when they keep yammering on; likewise, the DAMNED
ANNOYING "instant replays"--not only did they not look real, they were
simply unneeded, having added nothing to the story), there was something
about this film that Reached me. I didn't mind being less $6 for the sneak
preview that I saw. That may not sound like much of a movie
recommendation, so look at it this way: I wouldn't mind seeing it again,
even if only as a second-run flick; "Chill Factor", and its ilk, I
wouldn't see again if you paid me. Can ya diggit?
"For Love Of The Game": Though I have no love for the game of baseball,
this flick stands out for me if only because it was the first new one I've
seen in awhile that didn't plain Suck. Maybe my standards are too low
lately because of that, but what the heck; unless you're an certified
Costner-hater (or if the thought of seeing even fictionalized baseball
gives you gas), go check it out.

Author
Michael Elliott
Christian Critic's Movie Parables - http://www.christiancritic.com
DIRECTED BY:      Sam Raimi
STARRING:         Kevin Costner, Kelly Preston, John C. Reilly, Jena Malone
WRITTEN BY:       Dana Stevens
RATED:            PG-13 for brief strong language and some sexuality
SCRIPTURE
REFERENCES:       James 1:8, Luke 12:29-31, Isaiah 26:3
They call it "batting a thousand."  For the third time, Kevin Costner
(THE POSTMAN) turns to the game of baseball for the setting within which
to tell a multilayered story and for the third time, connects for a hit.
In BULL DURHAM, he played an aging minor league catcher tapped to hone a
promising young talent for the majors.  In so doing, he taught Susan
Sarandon a little about love.  In FIELD OF DREAMS, he played an aging
baseball fan, who listening to voices, built a baseball diamond in his
cornfield.  In so doing, he taught James Earl Jones a little about hope
and believing.
In FOR LOVE OF THE GAME, Mr. Costner takes on the role of an aging
pitcher playing in what could quite possibly turn out to be his final
game.  During his illustrious 19 year career Billy Chapel has been the
mainstay of the Detroit Tigers organization.  Just prior to the final game
of a somewhat dismal season, he finds out that his girlfriend of five
years is leaving him and that his team has been sold to parties who may
wish to trade him.
As he takes the mound against the Yankees in what should be a meaningless
game, the thoughts that run through his mind are played out on the screen
for us to view.  Alternating between what's happening in the game and what
has happened in his past, For Love Of The Game tells the story of an
"old-school" ballplayer reflecting on his life in and out of the sport.
As the movie progresses, we, along with Billy, begin to realize that this
game is taking on an import that reaches beyond statistics or the
scoreboard.
Based on the novel by Michael Shaara, director Sam Raimi (A SIMPLE PLAN)
and screenwriter Dana Stevens (CITY OF ANGELS) present a film which is
surprisingly paced much like the game itself.  It is slow at times but
always moving, with just enough "highlight reel" moments to make things
interesting.
Kevin Costner adds another "Aw shucks" adult boy scout characterization
to his resume with his portrayal of Billy Chapel.  But there is something
about this "too good to be true" ballplayer that will immediately appeal
to the baseball purist.  Throughout everything else in his life --
mistakes he has made or regrets he may carry -- the one constant is his
"love of the game" of baseball.  The business surrounding the game may
have changed over the years, but his love for it hasn't, nor has the rules
by which he plays.
Kelly Preston (HOLY MAN) plays Jane Aubrey, the woman who tries to have a
relationship with a man whose first love involves eight other men.  Miss
Preston is quite touching in her performance as a woman, scarred by the
past and scared of the future.  She is sure that she loves Billy but she
is uncertain if he will ever love her enough.  Her confusion regarding the
unusual "love triangle" in which she finds herself is genuine and
heartfelt.
John C. Reilly (NEVER BEEN KISSED) is Gus, the compassionate catcher and
sounding board for Billy.  Jena Malone (STEPMOM) completes the cast of
central characters as Heather, the troubled teen aged daughter of Jane.
There is a reason baseball is known as "America's Pastime."  The game
reaches us on a level few other sports can, evoking memories and emotions
that will never be forgotten.  At its purest level, baseball is a
wholesome, family-oriented game that can both entertain and inspire.
The game is also rife with spiritual or biblical lessons and analogies
and has long been used as subject matter for sermons and teachings in many
biblically based ministries.
To point to just one example: throughout the game, Billy demonstrates an
uncanny ability to block out the distractions of the ballpark in order to
focus completely on his task at hand...pitching to whichever batter is
opposing him.  He calls it "clearing the mechanism."  God calls it
singleness of mind and it is just one key to success that the Bible
teaches us.  There are more... many more... that we may study and apply to
live a life more than abundant.
Three is a number which biblically signifies completeness of a unit.
With FOR LOVE OF THE GAME as the third installment to his baseball movie
trilogy,  Mr. Costner completes a wonderful tribute to a wonderful game.

Author
Greg King
FOR LOVE OF THE GAME (M).  
(Universal/UIP)
Director: Sam Raimi
Stars: Kevin Costner, Kelly Preston, John C Reilly, Jena Malone, Brian 
Cox, J K Simmons, Carmine D Giovinazzo, Larry Joshua
Running time: 137 minutes.
For the first time in a decade Kevin Costner returns to the
baseball diamond.  One would assume it's a sure-fire recipe for
success as two of his better movies - Field Of Dreams and Bull Durham
- have involved the sport of baseball.  While he may not exactly hit a
home run with his third time at the plate he doesn't strike out
either!
For Love Of The Game is almost two movies in one as it mixes
some exciting baseball action with the formula of the romantic drama.
It's a mix that proves unexpectedly compelling for much of its length,
but at over 130 minutes it loses momentum.  You don't need a detailed
knowledge of the intricacies of baseball to appreciate For Love Of the
Game, but you do need a bit of patience to endure the long and
eventually tedious flashback sequences tracing the romantic saga that
occupies half of the film's running time.
For nearly twenty years pitcher Billy Chapel (Costner) has
been the heart and soul of the Detroit Tigers.  A horrific injury to
his arm threatened to cut short his career, and he has only recently
returned to the team.  The long time owner is selling the team, citing
corruption and the increasing corporatisation that is destroying the
game as reasons for his departure.  Part of the deal involves trading
Chapel to arch rivals, the New York Yankees.
In possibly his final game in the sport to which he has
virtually sacrificed everything, Chapel has to make a momentous
decision - to quit while still on top or to continue with another team
and possibly watch his career decline.  Can Billy's ageing body and
aching arm also stand up to the strain to allow him to pitch the
perfect game and go out on a high?
The film unfolds in two strands - the defining baseball match,
and a series of flashbacks charting the romance between Billy and Jane
(Kelly Preston), a journalist who provided him with a perspective of a
normal life outside the game.  However, Billy's single minded
determination to heal his wound and return to the game eventually
created a rift in the relationship as Jane grew tired of coming second
to his love of the game.
Costner gives one of his best performances for some time here,
and projects the type of heroic brooding image with which he first
established himself.  He's more credible in roles like this than as
the saviour of a post-apocalyptic world!
For Love Of The Game is an uncharacteristic film from Sam
Raimi, a director better known for his gloriously apocryphylic horror
movies (The Evil Dead, etc) and his flashy, comic book-like visual
style.  Raimi's direction here is unusually restrained.  He manages to
suffuse the narrative with plenty of suspense as he takes us inside
Chapel's head for the strategy of this crucial game.  Raimi manages to
bring his usual visual flourishes to the film, and brings the baseball
sequences alive.  For Love Of The Game is quite manipulative,
especially in its use of Basil Poledouris' evocative, occasionally
stirring score.
Even those not normally fond of sports themed movies may find
themselves sucked in by the suspense and the rich emotional
undercurrents at play.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Sam Raimi.
Cast: Kevin Costner, Kelly Preston, Jena Malone, John C. Reilly, Brian Cox.
1999 - 138 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for profanity and sexual situations).
Reviewed September 18, 1999.
What can really be said about "For Love of the Game," Kevin Costner's third 
(and most likely final) film in his "Baseball Trilogy," aside from that 
Costner probably should have stopped while he was ahead? Mixing every cliche 
that could possibly have been dreamt up, the film is such a sappy, 
self-important mess that, by the time the supposed-to-be moving climax 
crawled around, I almost felt physically sick by the overpowering syrup that 
had been thrust upon me in the last 138 minutes. Moving at a lugubrious, 
needlessly slow pace, and with characters that couldn't possibly be any less 
underwritten and lifeless, the film is ultilmately a cinematic dead zone, and 
one of the most ineptly-written high-profile pictures of the year. The fact 
that Sam Raimi, director of 1982's cult horror classic, "The Evil Dead," and 
1998's taut thriller, "A Simple Plan," is at the helm here only disheartens 
you to an even greater extent.
"For Love of the Game" is a flashback-laden heart-tugger (read: 
patience-puller) with one of the most drug-out framing devices I have seen. 
Beginning in NYC where 40-year-old pro baseball player for the Detroit 
Tigers, Billy Chapel (Kevin Costner), is set to take on the Yankees, he 
unexpectedly has an early-morning confrontation with his girlfriend of five 
years, Jane Aubrey (Kelly Preston), who tells him that she is taking a job in 
London, and will be on the six o'clock flight out of New York. Later, Billy 
discovers that the Tigers have been sold, and his contract has run out, so 
this impending game with the Yankees quickly is transformed into a 
life-altering moment for him. A lot is riding on him pitching well, and as 
the crowds from the stands yell out to him that his career is over, the first 
of about six or seven elongated flashbacks begin (and this is at least at the 
30-minute mark!). Oh, it almost slipped my mind; while waiting on her delayed 
flight at the airport, Jane can't seem to escape the game that is playing on 
every television in the lobby and cafe, and reluctantly is swept away in it, 
along with just about every other person in the whole airport. Exchanging her 
flight for a later one so she can see the last few innings, Jane begins to 
have doubts if she should even leave, after all. To make a long story short, 
the flashbacks begin five years before, when Billy and Jane first meet and 
hop into bed together that same night. Because of his constant moving-around 
due to his profession, Jane only gets to see him once every few weeks or even 
months, and, truth be told, they don't really seem to ever even like each 
other, but they stick things out--through the good and the bad. All of this 
takes place in the first year or two after they meet; the next three years 
that led up to the present-day story, however, are practically skipped over, 
and the conclusion, which you will be able to predict from the first five 
minutes, includes Billy winning the big game, his own self-worth, and, yep, 
you guessed it, the girl. 
If Kevin Costner really does have a love for the game of baseball, why would 
he agree to make something so shamelessly weepy and manipulative, in which 
not more than one or two scenes are even credible, and the rest is pure 
fantasy-land? The baseball game sequences are overblown and offensively 
exploitative, just in order to get the audience to cry from sympathy, and 
then joy. Instead of giving the viewer the benefit of the doubt that they 
will be able to figure out Billy's inner conflict, screenwriter Dana Stevens 
deserves to be locked in a vault somewhere, as two sport commentators are 
written to say things like, "40-year-old Billy Chapel is pitching against 
time," as the music score swells and the last inning comes to a close. After 
winning, we get shots of Yankees fans who had previously been hounding him, 
say things like, "You pitched alright, Billy Chapel. You did good!" [Insert 
rolling of eyes and smacks to the forehead here]. Do Stevens or director Sam 
Raimi actually believe that they made a worthy film that is truthful to the 
characters and the story? If so, their views are severely distorted from 
reality.
If the sports scene are inanely-portrayed, the romance flashbacks aren't much 
better. Instead of developing the relationship between Billy and Jane, what 
we get is one make-out/mild bed scene right at the start, and in almost every 
other scene between the two, they are either fighting or arguing or the 
subjects of an elaborate music montage that signals the passing of time. 
Since there are no less than five montages in the film, shouldn't Billy and 
Jane have been old, gray-haired fogies by the climax? Scene after scene we 
watch these two attractive stars, but without a trace of any sharp writing to 
support them, aside from conversations that are linked exclusively to the 
plot, what we really have are two attractive stars who have zero chemistry 
and are so dull and uninteresting as individuals that pairing them up means 
only one thing: a motion picture disaster.
Kevin Costner is adequate as Billy Chapel, who has "mid-life crisis" written 
over his forehead like a neon sign, but why should we care about someone with 
no distinguishable qualities or interests, outside of baseball? Kelly 
Preston, an underrated actress whom I have defended several times with her 
last few pictures, finally has a real clunker here. Obviously some of the 
fault must lie in Raimi's first real embarrassing directing job, but Preston 
overacts and whines her way through her non-descript role, and is so annoying 
that I can't believe anyone would be able to stand being around her character 
of Jane for longer than five minutes, let alone five years! Always off on 
trips, when we find that Jane actually has a teenage daughter, Heather (Jena 
Malone), midway through, it comes as somewhat of a surprise. Frantically 
calling Billy up on the phone, Jane tells him that Heather has run away to 
her father's home in Boston. Weighing in all the evidence, I don't blame 
Heather, as her mother obviously doesn't care about her, and is always 
skipping town, leaving her home by herself for long periods of time. 
Additionally, Jane literally only says two lines to Heather, her very own 
daughter, in the whole film: "Don't ever run away again," and, "Would you 
like some spaghetti?" That's it, and I'm not exaggerating. 
As Heather, Jena Malone (1998's "Stepmom") gives the only performance in the 
film that is worth mentioning in a positive manner. At only 13 or 
14-years-old, Malone is believable as she ages in the film from a young teen 
to a college student, and is given the one and only good scene, in which she 
spots Billy while at the University of South Carolina, and has a brief, warm 
exchange of words with him. So strong is Malone, in fact, that it is sorely 
disappointing to find that she is otherwise wasted and thrown to the 
way-side, so that we can instead watch two dim-witted stick figures fall 
(artificially) in love.  
"For Love of the Game" piles on the cheese and corn and honey-sap so thickly 
that the film, at times, seems to be in danger of being smothered to death, 
which would have been fine with me. Without anything smart, witty, exciting, 
or truly romantic to offer, one is left wondering not only who the film was 
made for (only the most undiscriminating viewers could be won over by this 
"product-on-autopilot"), but what exactly the point was. In a late scene in 
which Billy sits on a bed and weeps, we are supposed to feel sorry for him, 
but why? A popular veteran baseball player who has just won the game of his 
life, should we come to the conclusion that he is crying for Jane, and if so, 
why? She has no admirable personality traits, and he would be better off 
without such an uptight priss. Of course, I could also say he has no 
admirable personality traits, and she would be better off without such an 
uptight priss. The only question that "For Love of the Game" left me 
pondering was, how are we supposed to care about two central characters who 
would be far better off joining screenwriter Dana Stevens? You know, locked 
away in that vault I mentioned. 
