Title
Review for Sweet Sweetback's Baadasssss Song (1971)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Earthy, experimental, difficult, shockingly frank (even for
1997!), and ultimately refreshing story of a black man on the run from the
cops.
The first few minutes of SWEET SWEETBACK'S BAAD ASSSSS SONG (yes, I checked
-- that's the correct number of Ss) are without dialogue, just eerie
montages of sounds. A young boy, obviously malnourished, is taken in and
fed up by several loving mother-surrogate figures. Then one of them takes
the boy to bed for a sexual initation (underneath the title credits) that's
far more confrontatory and shocking than any ten BASIC INSTINCTs --
probably because it has the directness and clumsiness of real life,
something we're not used to seeing on screen. This is one tough movie to
swallow, no matter who you are, but that probably reflects more on how
pallid and unchallenging movies have gotten lately. (I suspect the sex
scenes in movies like EL TOPO and SALO would probably melt the synapses of
most modern audiences.)
The plot is simple but not simpleminded. Sweetback, hassled by two white
cops who are apparently just looking for an excuse to beat up on a black
man, breaks his bonds and runs like hell. Along the way he moves through a
good many of the kinds of environments that we are only just now being seen
in a more serious light in the movies -- or at all, for that matter: the
slums, the missions, the ghetto. In other, lesser, movies, Sweetback would
be machine-gunning everything in sight and the end credits would roll over
a pile of bodies; in this one, we get taken on a kind of a tour of the
depressing and anarchic world that Sweetback takes for granted.
SSBAS first appeared in 1971 and was promptly rated X ("by an all-white
jury", as director Melvin Van Peebles crowed in his legendary ad
campaigns), and it's hardly surprising why. There's a good deal of sex in
the movie, but it's handled in a way that's unsettlingly frank -- a
frankness that spills over into the rest of the movie. In one scene,
Sweetback visits a friend's house in the hope of getting sanctuary there,
and the other man chats him up while on the toilet. We're not used to
coming this close to people in real life, let alone in the movies --
especially not people who are not made out to be glamorous.
The movie is also full of experimental stylistics that are relatively
unused today, but probably because of that seem curiously fresh and new in
Van Peebles' hands. One scene, in which a man is interrogated by the cops,
is loaded full of menacing energy as they fire off a gun inches from his
ears, and suggest his deafness through a cleverly edited soundtrack.
Another note: SSBAS is not so much anti-white (that would be too easy) as
anti-authority, and as the movie goes on to demonstrate, authority exists
in many forms -- governments, churches, and even the paranoid inside of
one's own mind. SSBAS is ultimately about thirsting for freedom -- and it
looks like we could use a little more of that in our movie diet, God knows.

Author
James Kendrick
Director: Melvin Van Peebles || Screenplay: Melvin Van Peebles ||
Stars: Melvin Van Peebles (Sweetback), Simon Chuckster (Beetle),
Hubert Scales (Mu-Mu), John Dullaghan (Commissioner), Rhetta
Hughes (Old Girl Friend), Mario Van Peebles (Young Sweetback),
John Amos (Motorcycle Guy) || MPAA Rating: X
Melvin Van Peebles' "Sweet Sweetback's Baadasssss Song" was a
watershed moment in the history of American cinema and the black
movement. It was released less than a decade after the Civil
Rights Movement had begun and almost twenty years before the
Rodney King incident. Its violent and highly sexualized revenge
tale of a macho black hustler fighting back against white
oppression and winning was something that had never been seen on
an American movie screen before. In style, content, and how it
was conceived and produced, "Sweet Sweetback" was a cinematic
revolution, whether or not one agrees with its subject matter.
Van Peebles, a black American who first gained recognition by
writing novels in France, built "Sweet Sweetback" from the ground
up almost entirely by himself. Because no studio would dare fund
such a film, he was forced to raise all the money himself. The
movie ended up costing about $500,000, part of which was put up
by none other than Bill Cosby. Van Peebles cut costs by hiring
non-union labor and taking on most of the film's responsibilities
himself. He wrote the script, scored the music, edited and
directed the film, as well as starred in the central role.
He was also a brilliant entrepreneur who always found a way to
make an extra buck. For instance, when the MPPA slapped the film
with a dreaded X-rating, Van Peebles not only threatened to bring
a lawsuit against Jack Valenti and the MPAA, but he also
developed a little marketing scheme: he coined the phrases "Rated
X by an all-white jury," which he put on the movie posters to
help advertise the film. He also printed the phrase on tee-shirts
which he had no problem selling.
The storyline in "Sweet Sweetback" is deceptively simple. It
takes place in Los Angeles, and Van Peebles stars as the title
character, a tough male hustler of few words who grew up in a
brothel, and makes money by doing what he does best: having sex.
One day, he agrees to go with a couple of amiable white cops down
to the station to make it look like they're bringing in suspects
on a politically-charged case involving murder. However, on the
way to the station the cops arrest a young black revolutionary
named Mu-Mu (Hubert Scales), who they proceed to beat viciously.
Acting out of complete impulse rather than political motivation,
Sweetback fights back and beats the cops to the brink of death.
The rest of the film follows Sweetback as he evades the cops on
his way to eventual escape in Mexico. Although the repetition of
watching Sweetback run gets a little old by the end of the film,
this plot allows Van Peebles' camera to roam the darker side of
L.A. - the ghettos, alleys, and back-street whorehouses that
other films had always overlooked.
Van Peebles' entire point in making the movie was to secure on
celluloid a vision of the black experience in America that other
filmmakers had ignored. At the beginning of "Sweet Sweetback," he
offers this epigraph, which is a traditional prologue used in
medieval times when a messenger brought bad news: "Sire, these
lines are not an homage to brutality that the artist has
invented, but a hymn from the mouth of reality..." Van Peebles
wanted to make sure that his vision was one of reality, not of
exaggeration.
Of course, with today's abundance of rap and hip hop music that
sings the same ode to black inner-city life, as well as films by
Spike Lee, John Singleton, and the Hughes Brothers, "Sweet
Sweetback" doesn't seem all that revolutionary. It is important
to remember that this film must be viewed in the context and time
period in which it was made. At that time, "Sweet Sweetback" was
so controversial that only two theaters in the entire United
States would play it. Distributors were petrified of a film that,
in Van Peebles' words, gave the black audience "a chance to see
some of their own fantasies acted out - about rising out of the
mud and kicking ass."
Of course, once it caught on, it caught on big. "Sweet Sweetback"
is now considered to be the film that kicked off the
blaxploitation era, although Van Peebles disassociates
"Sweetback" from other movies like "Shaft" (1972) and "The Mack"
(1973), because those were financed by big Hollywood studios.
"Sweet Sweetback" is also the only film deemed mandatory viewing
by the Black Panthers.
However, even if when viewed from an African-American
perspective, "Sweet Sweetback" is certainly not without its
controversies. When it was first released, an article was
published in "Ebony" magazine denouncing the film, while at the
same time the Black Panthers used an entire newsletter to praise
it.
There have been arguments that the victory for Sweetback is
really no victory at all - beating cops and then running away to
Mexico is nothing to be proud of. Others have pointed out that
Sweetback has little to say throughout the film; he has no
political motivations, and therefore the violence and havoc he
wreaks is not rooted in fundamental beliefs, but in personal and
selfish motives. Still others point to the cliché black potency
that stereotypes Sweetback as being good at nothing but having
sex, illustrated in a scene where he gains the respect of a white
biker group by bringing their female leader to orgasm.
Nevertheless, a movie like "Sweet Sweetback" cannot be made
without conflicting points of view. It is a revolutionary movie
not because it's about one man's defiance, but because it put
front-and-center black issues that had never been dealt with
before.  Until that point, American cinema was an almost
exclusively white domain, and with the exception of Sidney
Poitier, all black actors were relegated to specifically black
roles that were important only in relation to whites. The fact
that "Sweet Sweetback" was a movie by black about blacks, was
something new (in the opening credits, Van Peebles lists the
starring actors as simply "The Black Community").
Van Peebles tells an interesting story that goes a long way
toward defining the difference between "Sweet Sweetback" and all
movies that had come before it. When the movie first opened, he
saw it in a theater next to an older woman. Near the end of the
film, when Sweetback is wounded by the police and stumbling
through the Southern California desert, she kept saying to
herself, "Oh Lord, let him die. Don't let them kill him. Let him
die on his own." It was so ingrained in her mind that death was
imminent for any African-American in a movie who rebelled against
white authority, that she couldn't even conceive of the
possibility that the film might end with his successful escape.
And, of course, Sweetback does escape, and the screen fills with
the message: "Watch out! A baad asssss nigger is coming back to
collect some dues."
Beyond the political aspects, "Sweet Sweetback" is an
entertaining picture, which Van Peebles always intended it to be.
He squeezed every drop out of his limited budget, and produced a
film that, although dated now, was technically fantastic at the
time. He shot in rough, documentary-like fashion, while also
utilizing almost every visual and aural trick his technology
would allow him. He makes good use of older techniques like split
screens, freeze frames, reversed color schemes, and overlapping
images. The only time the film ever looks bad is during the night
sequences, because Van Peebles simply did not have the needed
equipment.
Watching "Sweet Sweetback" more than twenty-five years after its
initial release, one realizes that it still has bite. Arguments
can be made that race relations in the United States have made
quantum leaps since the early seventies, but there are still
problems that are reflected in this film. But there is more to
the film than its racial aspect. The legacy of "Sweet Sweetback's
Baadasssss Song" is not only the plentiful amount of art and
music told from the African-American perspective, but more
importantly, the work of every artist who has fought to fund and
produce that which is important to him.
