Title
Review for Haunting, The (1963)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Brian Koller
One of the better haunted house films, "The Haunting"
conveys horror without resorting to violence,
gore, or even special effects.  No ghosts ever
appear onscreen, but we know they are out there,
howling, laughing and banging, in the hallway behind
the door.  And the doorknob is turning!
A cerebral British adaption of the Shirley Jackson
novel, "The Haunting" takes place (naturally) in a
large, foreboding New England mansion with a
history of death and terror.  Psychic researcher
Dr. Markway (Richard Johnson) arrives to prove
the existence of the supernatural, bringing with
him nervous, impressionable Eleanor (Julie Harris),
psychic lesbian Theodora (Claire Bloom), and
cynical Russ Tamblyn, who is heir to the mansion.
What I liked best about "The Haunting" wasn't the
ghost scenes, which promise more than they deliver.
I liked the characters, who behave with consistency
and are well developed.  Markway is torn by conflicting
motives: he wants to study Hill House, but is also
protective of his inexperienced team members.  Theodora
is icy cool and predatory, helping to drive hapless
Eleanor over the edge.  Julie Harris is one of my
favorite actresses, and she plays her bundle of nerves
character without making her overly sympathetic.
Nonbeliever Tamblyn considers his adventure in
Hill House to be one big joke, until... well, you'll
have to see it.
The biggest weakness of "The Haunting" is that
it teases the audience with the presence of ghosts
without ever revealing them.  Why not have the door
fly open, and have an enormous green ghost sweep
around the panic-stricken guests, swirling books
and chairs?  Subtlety is all well and good, but the
film's climax can still be a real horror show.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
John Sylva
The Haunting (1963) by John Sylva    Rating: A
http://members.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html
Robert Wise directs this clever thriller based on the classic novel The
Haunting of Hill House by Shirley Jackson.  The Haunting terrifies you with its
intense, powerful sound and simple visual effects, creating a truly horrifying
experience.  The line from the 1996 film "Scream" best sums up my feelings with
the line, "I'm shakin' in my boots," as The Haunting scared me to the point
where I was in a standstill.  
Hill House, the eerie environment of The Haunting is unbelievable, vast
staircases that seem to be be endless, towering walls with windows, that seem
to be, and might actually be, starting at you, and an exterior that should have
earned The Haunting an Academy Award for Cinematography.  The atmosphere of The
Haunting sends chills down my spine, depicting Hill House a human being, having
windows for eyes, walls for its skin.
Hill House was born bad, as it brought death to many that inhabited it,
throughout its history.  Dr. John Markway isn't one terrified of the legend,
but fascinated by it.  Planning to conduct an experiment to prove the existence
of the supernatural, Dr. Markway chooses Hill House as the environment for his
studies.  Dr. Markway has three individuals involved in his experiment, who
have all encountered the supernatural at a time. The study will consist of
Eleanor, (Julie Harris) the most sincere of the group, a paranoid woman who
believes that Hill House will complete her life, the arrogant Theodora, (Claire
Bloom) and the wise - cracking Luke. (Russ Tamblyn) Upon the arrival of the
four characters, it is safe to say, all hell breaks loose.
The characters of The Haunting are memorable, well developed, as the actors
portraying them give flawless performances.  The relationships between
characters, particularly the Theodora/Eleanor relationship help strengthen the
characters, as the viewer can relate to their feelings, due to wonderful acting
by Claire Bloom and Julie Harris.
Hill House targets Eleanor, sending personal messages to her, to the point of
insanity.  Theodora in particular doesn't respect Eleanor's thoughts, creating
tension among the two, who share a room.  Julie Harris perfects her role,
acting brilliantly as Hill House centers on her, but the screenplay written by
Nelson Gidding has Eleanor hearing voices constantly, which become obnoxious,
as they are overused.
The Haunting is one of the most memorable films I've seen, capturing the terror
that Hill House brings to these four people, simply, but quite effectively,
using a moving, tense score, and the eerie atmosphere.  The film moves out a
slow, intense pace, without violence, but concentrating on the terror the four
feel while inhabiting Hill House.  
The Haunting's foggy resolution is disappointing, leaving many gaps open, such
as what is haunting Hill House, and what becomes of Hill House .  The film's
brief running time of 112 minutes could have been stretched into 212 minutes,
and could have still been satisfactory, explaining more about the birth of Hill
House, the hauntings of Hill House, and the future of Hill House.
Director Wise (The Sound of Music) creates the film which opens up the door for
the "haunted house" genre of horror, with many copycat films following it, such
as The Amityville Horror. (1979)  The Haunting, much like Psycho, messes with
the viewer's mind, turning the fear of ghosts, and cheap motels, into a fun
film which I can't get enough of.
The Haunting overwhelms me, as I find it hard to picture a 1963, black and
white, Rated G movie to be as terrifying as it is.  I recommend this film to
any movie lover, as The Haunting stands as one of the few horror films that
give me goosebumps, and create an insomniac out of me, as I had trouble
sleeping upon the night of my viewing the classic film, The Haunting.
The Bottom Line- A clever thriller, overlooked thriller, which stands as one of
the most terrifying films to date.

Author
Heather Picker
Directed by Robert Wise.  Written by Nelson Gidding.  Starring Julie
Harris, Claire Bloom, Richard Johnson, and Russ Tamblyn.  1963, 112 min., Rated
G.
     In 1963, as movie-goers were being treated to a new Hitchcock experience
that would leave them afraid of birds, director Robert Wise ("The Body
Snatcher," "West Side Story") brought to the big screen a chilling, literate
adaptation, thanks to screenwriter Nelson Gidding, of the classic Shirley
Jackson novel "The Haunting of Hill House."  A haunted house story, how scary
can it be?  Well, it is fairly nerve wracking and lots of fun to behold, in
this instance.  
     Hill House has a long history of depression and death and  it is
supposedly haunted.   Dr. Markway (Richard Johnson) is the expert on the
supernatural who has asked a few people who've had otherworldly experiences or
gifts, to join him in a stay at the house, during which time he'll be
investigating and hopefully observing the reported paranormal events that occur
in the house.   Eleanor (Julie Harris) is an emotionally fragile woman whose
life, until recently, has been consumed by caring for her ill mother, which she
greatly resents but feels somewhat ashamed to admit.   This provides a bit of a
parallel between Eleanor's fate and that of a young woman who was once brought
to Hill House to care for one of it's original inhabitants.
     Theodora (Claire Bloom), who was chosen for her acute sixth sense, is one
of the first screen lesbians to not be written or portrayed as evil and
predatory, which is refreshing.   However, the overtones concerning Theo and
Nell aren't all that subtle at times, which becomes distracting. Rounding out
the group is skeptic Luke (Russ Tamblyn), heir to the mansion.   At first he
cares only about how much money the house and it's possessions will fetch him
(as his aunt puts it, he has intended to live off the house, but never in it),
but that will eventually change.
     Gripping, great entertainment with a bravura Harris performance that many
Sandy Dennis roles evoke.  Bloom's nicely underplayed Theodora, and Tamblyn's
wisecracking Luke were my favorite characters, though Johnson is appropriately
authoritative as Dr. Markway.   Wise employs a visual style that was ahead of
its time, and Gidding's script is first-rate.   Moody lighting and the Gothic
mansion look beautiful, and the story never panders to the "I've gotta see it
to believe it" notion, which makes the suspense all the more delightful.  
Review Courtesy of http://www.thatmoviesite.8m.com
