Title
Review for End of Violence, The (1997)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
France/Germany/USA, 1997
U.S. Release Date: beginning 9/12/97 (limited)
Running Length: 2:02
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Bill Pullman, Andie MacDowell, Gabriel Byrne, Loren Dean, 
      Traci Lind, Daniel Benzali, K. Todd Freeman, John Diehl, 
      Pruitt Taylor Vince, Peter Horton, Udo Kier 
Director: Wim Wenders
Producers: Nicholas Klein, Deepak Nayar, Wim Wenders 
Screenplay: Nicholas Klein 
Cinematography: Pascal Rabaud 
Music: Ry Cooder
U.S. Distributor: MGM
     Wim Wenders' THE END OF VIOLENCE offers the same type of experience 
one could expect from sitting through a David Lynch film with a 
reasonably-coherent narrative (unlike, for example, LOST HIGHWAY).  
Arguably Wenders' most disjointed film to date, THE END OF VIOLENCE is a 
neo-noir thriller that's really more about social decay and human 
isolation than it is about government conspiracies, mysterious murders, 
and missing persons. Unfortunately, it's also too long and too slow, 
and, by the time the end credits have started rolling, it has lost most 
of its energy.
     Wenders' narrative style is not only a little too languid, but it's 
often irritating in the erratic manner that it skips back and forth 
between divergent storylines.  The problem is that Wenders has three 
groups of characters to divide time between, and he often switches from 
one to another just when things are getting interesting.  This is 
certainly not happening by accident.  It's as if Wenders wanted to make 
the transitions as jarring and frustrating as possible.  Ultimately, 
this results in a motion picture that, despite having intriguing 
aspects, is never fully satisfying.
     The greatest amount of screen time is devoted to the story of big 
time movie producer Mike Max (Bill Pullman) and his wallflower wife, 
Paige (Andie MacDowell).  Mike is a hard-nosed guy with an eye on the 
bottom line.  He's never without at least one lap-top and two cellular 
phones.  For him, communication is a means of transferring necessary 
information -- nothing more.  There is certainly no emotion involved.  
His wife has decided to leave him because he never spends any time with 
her, but she lacks the ambition to actually do it.  Then, in one night, 
everything changes.  After Mike is abducted and nearly killed, he takes 
a long look at his life and doesn't like what he sees.  So, with the 
help of a group of Mexican immigrants, he disappears from sight to start 
over.
     Meanwhile, in a nearby observatory, computer scientist Ray Bering 
(Gabriel Byrne) spends his nights gazing through telescopes that are 
pointing down, not up.  Ray is involved in developing a top-secret 
government surveillance project that is supposed to cut down police 
response time to a crime.  However, as the project approaches fruition, 
Ray becomes concerned that, in the wrong hands, it could be horribly 
misused.  His fears are given form one night when he watches from afar 
as two men are gunned down.  
     The third leg of THE END OF VIOLENCE's triangular storyline 
involves the interaction between stuntwoman-turned-actress Cat (Traci 
Lind) and Detective "Doc" Brock (Loren Dean).  These two are brought 
together as a result of Mike Max's sudden disappearance.  Cat owes her 
latest screen test to Mike; Doc, a big fan of Mike's movies, is on hand 
to investigate the case.  Together, they explore what they know about 
Mike's vanishing while developing feelings for each other.  Many of 
their scenes are obviously intended as homages to the great noir 
thrillers of the '40s and '50s, with both Cat and "Doc" dressed and 
acting the parts of the stars of that era.
     How a viewer approaches THE END OF VIOLENCE may determine what he 
or she comes away with.  Anyone expecting a straightforward thriller is 
in for a very big disappointment.  Wenders and screenwriter Nicholas 
Klein aren't interested in answering many of the questions posed by the 
narrative -- in fact, they only hint at possible solutions to several of 
the biggest issues.  And the ending, such as it is, leaves a lot of room 
for interpretation.  On the other hand, if you approach this film as a 
study of the mutability of human nature, the need for redemption, the 
growing lack of meaningful human interaction in the electronic era, and 
the lure of violence, it has the power to involve, if not overwhelm.  
Ultimately, the noir thriller is just the means that Wenders uses to 
explore these issues.  If only he had managed to inject a little more 
life into the proceedings...
     The acting in THE END OF VIOLENCE seems either strangely muted or 
outrageously over-the-top.  Aside from Traci Lind and Loren Dean, who 
are pleasantly enjoyable as they imitate past performances rather than 
create something original, there isn't a single portrayal in this film 
that attracted my attention.  Bill Pullman and Gabriel Byrne are 
subdued, Andie MacDowell is unimpressive (what is it that directors see 
in her?), and the hit man duo of Pruitt Taylor Vince and John Diehl look 
like they have escaped from the set of the latest Coen Brothers' 
production.  
     The film's title is richly ironic because this movie is about the 
proliferation of violence, not its end.  Guns are everywhere in the 
movie, and each change of personality happens as a direct or indirect 
result of a violent encounter.  Mike, who built his fortune making 
violent action movies, rejects his old life as a result of his close 
encounter with death.  Mike's disappearance stirs Paige out of her 
perpetual state of apathy.  Ray's realization that his project is being 
perverted into a killing weapon causes him to hatch a plot.  And Mike 
learns to trust Cat only after a bruising confrontation. 
     Wenders has packed a lot of issues into THE END OF VIOLENCE, and I 
challenge anyone to call the script "dumb."  Sadly, however, unlike the 
director's best work (THE WINGS OF DESIRE), it's neither involving nor 
magical.  THE END OF VIOLENCE offers viewers opportunities to ponder a 
variety of diverse subjects, but its overall entertainment value is less 
than one might hope for.  Great ideas and eye-catching cinematography 
only add up to a wonderful movie when they're contained in a powerful 
narrative.  And that's the one key ingredient where THE END OF VIOLENCE 
falls short.
The website has moved!!
The new address is: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."

Author
Dennis Schwartz

END OF VIOLENCE, THE (director: Wim Wenders; screenwriter: Nicholas
Klein; cinematographer: Pascal Rabaud; cast: Bill Pullman (Mike Max),
Andie MacDowell (Paige Stockard), Gabriel Byrne (Ray Bering), Loren Dean
(Doc Block), Traci Lind (Cat), Sam Fuller (Louis Bering), Pruitt Taylor
Vince (Frank Cray), Nicole Parker (Kenya), Marisol Padilla Sanchez
(Mathilda), Frederic Forrest (Ranger MacDermot), Udo (Zoltan Kovacs),
1997)
This film's narrative promises much to say about how violent man is, as
it uses contemporary L.A. for its location. But in the end, it fails to
deliver the goods; for reasons that are not artistically clear to me,
Wenders decides to abruptly check out of this slow developing non-story
and end it without resolving it satisfactorily. The film seemed to be
oozing completely out of energy and purpose. It made me wonder why
Wenders seemed to be so concerned in the first place with the
socio-political manifestations of a top-secret government project gone
awry and the public being exploited by Hollywood; and then, he
concentrated for most of the film on the usual crime stuff of murder and
missing persons, basically ignoring what he tried so hard to bring to
center stage.
I have always found Wenders to be a bit pretentious; and, at the same
time, alluring. He always seems to bait me into thinking there is
something more to his films than there are. There are exceptions, like
his wonderful film WINGS OF DESIRE, but most of the time I  feel that I
am being intellectually short-changed by such deceptions.This picture is
a perfect example of what I mean.
At first, the story appears to be about Mike Max (Pullman). He plays
this bastard Hollywood movie producer who has gotten wealthy making
exploitive action films and who it seems can't communicate with his fine
looking but empty wife Paige (Andie); he can only communicate
bottom-lines, and is hooked on cellular phones and on computers.
His wife is leaving him because he either constantly ignores her or
dumps on her. Then, the main event of the film takes place, as we
observe on video surveillance, in an observatory with telescopes and
computers and video cameras, that Ray Bering (Gabriel Byrne), who is a
computer expert, is watching two hitmen trying to kill Mike after
kidnapping him. Instead, they end-up dead; and, Mike is found by some
Mexican gardeners as he wanders along the road. He will now live with
them, that is, after telling them he is the famous producer they see on
the news, but is now considered to be a missing person... !
The action turns to following the life of Cat (Traci) who is the stunt
woman Mike gave a big break to, giving her a starring role in his next
film.The cop, Doc Block (Loren), who is investigating the disappearance
of Mike, is suspiciously pulled off the case when he starts asking too
many questions around the set, but stays around long enough to fall for
Cat and  continue the investigation on his own.
The detective's investigation reveals that the video surveillance was a
government plan used to spy on people to cut down on the police response
times to crime; and Byrne, the computer security expert who is setting
this up for the government, is afraid of its inherent dangers, such as
the abuse of power this technology has for society. He has picked Mike,
after just meeting him once at a computer convention in Las Vegas, to
tell him about this classified project. So, it seems that our government
boys are now going after Mike, and Mike tells this to Cat, who tells
this to Doc Block...The most interesting and diverting scenes in this
part of the film concern the poetry performance readings that some of
the movie folks attend. One of the readings is more powerful than
anything that has to do with the story being told. A black woman poet
(Parker) does a poem about being taken sexually by her father.This is
Wenders being the arty Wenders, creating interest by being evocative no
matter what the film calls for. I am not challenging his use of such
scenes, they are wonderful; but, I am put off by his inability to keep
the story from going cold.
The last part of this narrative, has all these parts of the tale come
together for a violent conclusion. It leaves us with the belief that the
violence will not be curtailed, but will go on; therefore, there will be
no such a thing as an end to violence.Thereby, the film's title is the
opposite of what the film really means to say. Or, is it?
Wenders has succeeded in creating a mishmash of images that are
incendiary, but not penetrating enough for us to believe in the
characters of the story, or to follow through on what this film is
supposed to be about. In fact, you might be angrier and more prone to
have a violent reaction to the film, than you would be to believe that
Wenders has taken this film in the direction needed for us to see what
is meant by an end of violence.
He lost me somewhere down the line. It seems to be a film concerned
about government conspiracies and missing persons, but turns out to be
more concerned with societal problems, values, and alienation, and does
not do any of these topics sufficient justice in covering it. This
results in a film that has a few good ideas but goes astray, leaving it
with a disjointed look, that is artistically satisfying to watch but
empty of meaningful inquiry.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Turn on the TV on any Sunday morning--the hours of the
"intellectual ghetto"--and you'll find religious, political, and self-
appointed leaders vocalizing their concern about violence on
TV, in gangsta-rap music, and in the movies.  The big
questions are asked over and over with predictable
responses: "Do violent movies cause violence in real life? 
What is the responsibility of recording studios to censor those
rap songs that emphasize and seem even to welcome
expressions of hate?  What is the role of TV in creating a
culture of violence?  Now, "The End of Violence" does
take on these concerns, but while the film is too cerebral to
evoke the kind of box-office draw of, say, "Air Force
One," its talented, world-class director has no intention of
communicating an arid, academic exercise.  What Wenders
has done instead is to create a complex story which examines
the way a single violent act intertwines the lives of
people who have little in common with one another.  But bear
this in mind: he is not concerned with condemning violence
(don't we all?) or its depiction in films.  He uses an act of
violence to rouse his more ambitious motive: to get beneath
the skin of his characters and to show how a kidnapping
brings lonely, wanting people together and radically alters
their lives.  If he is not entirely successful in capturing our
soul, in quickening the tempo of our hearts and thoroughly
engaging our minds, his film is precious for its originality, for
Pascal Rabaud's moody photography, for its eerie soundtrack
featuring new works by groups like Los Lobos and the Latin
Playboys, and for showcasing the range of Bill Pullman which
he last exhibited so well in the equally complex David Lynch
drama "The Lost Highway."
   Much of the visual imagery highlights the alienating effect of
modern technology: the way computers, telescopes and other
instruments of communication have the ironic effect of
keeping people apart, unconnected.  Mike Max (Bill Pullman),
for example, is a successful producer of highly commercial
action films living on a fabulous Malibu estate, yet his wife
Paige (Andie MacDowell) is about to leave him.  (Though
Mike stands a mere fifty meters from her, she tells him of her
decision via his cell phone.)  Mike spends so much time
networking with the people on the production set of his latest
movie that his wife has not heard from him in two months.  A
man quite different from Mike, Ray (Gabriel Byrne), is working
in an area equally remote from the masses of Angelenos,
engaged in a secret surveillance project high up in an
observatory.  He has blanketed Los Angeles in a network of
hidden cameras which he believes can cut police response
time by 200 percent.  By treating the entire city as though it
were a department store, Ray can effectively zero in on street
crime as it is happening until, the government agents hope,
the criminals will throw in the towel and there will be an end
to violence.  The great irony of the movie is that this very
design triggers Mike's kidnapping and near-murder, puts
Ray's life in danger, and leads to a chain-reaction of events
which alter the destiny of Wenders' characters.
   Like Michelangelo Antonioni whom Wenders obviously
esteems, Wenders has always been concerned with
humankind's alienation, a favorite theme of the 1970s which
formed the motif of films like "Zabriskie Point," "The Anxiety of
the Goalie at the Penalty Kick," "The Left-Handed Woman"
and "Blow Up."  In the last case, director Antonioni shifted his
view of human separateness to photography itself, as a
camera professional is drawn out of his shell when he
photographs an apparent act of violence.  Wenders, like
Antonioni, possesses a feeling that society is breaking down,
a phenomenon that permeates his "The End of Violence." 
But Wenders is concerned primarily not with disorder itself or
society's decline but rather with stripping down people to their
skins so that they can hardly brush against one another
without pain.  Yet despite a surprising, melodramatic event
which concludes "The End of Violence," the movie as a whole
is optimistic. The kidnapping brings together a beautiful stunt
woman, Cat (Traci Lind) and a detective, Doc Dean Brock
(Loren Dean), a pair that would seem unlikely until you realize
that Doc gave up medical school because of his love for
Hollywood films.  "Define violence," challenges Cat, to which
Doc replies, "fear, absence of love, emotional revenge."  The
elements are all present in this film and threaten to undermine
the characters' connections each step of the way.  
   If Wenders does not succeed in condemning the role of
violence in movies (which was not his intention), he does
unfold a work of intricate texture, pitting the glamour of
Hollywood against its sordid realities, and championing an
individual who thinks he has it all but happily relinquishes his
position in favor of the simple life.  He also demonstrates the
love for film which he developed while exposed to
Hollywood's universe during the American occupation of his
native Germany.  Rated R.  Running Time: 122 minutes.  (C)
1997 Harvey Karten

Author
James Brundage
Story by Nicholas Klien and Wim Wenders
Starring: Bill Pullman (Lost Highway), Andie Macdowell (Sex, Lies, and
Videotape), Gabriel Byrne (The Usual Suspects), Traci Lind (My Boyfriend's
Back), Rosalind Chao (What Dreams May Come), K. Todd Freeman (Grosse Pointe
Blank), Loren Dean (Enemy of the State), John Dihel (A Time to Kill), Pruitt
Taylor Vince (Beautiful Girls)
The world is fraught with questions. What created it? Why is it so ugly and
beautiful at the same time? How can things like irony exist? How can a
thriller be entitled The End of Violence? Of those four questions, I can
answer only one, and I can answer it simply. A thriller can be called The
End of Violence if it isn't actually a thriller.
Though containing the psychological tension of a thriller, and plot elements
that would make you believe it's a thriller, it ends up being a character
drama instead. It shows how much we loathe violence, how our culture hypes
on it, and how we forget ourselves while buried in suspicion.
The artistically bold film opens with the question "Define Violence.", which
we are thoroughly unable to do throughout the film. We can only begin to
understand its nature, but not its form.
A man who controls violence's public nature, hotshot Hollywood producer Mike
Max (Bill Pullman), is at the center of a bizarre plot involving a secret
surveillance system around Los Angeles, watching it in an attempt to usher
in The end of violence, but ending up causing more violence in the process.
Overseeing the technical aspects of the project is Ray Bearing (Gabriel
Byrne), a technology genius who wants a simple life. Unhappily married to
Mike Max is Paige Stocklard (Andie MacDowell), a woman trapped in her
unhappy marriage yearning for experiencing life.
When an attempt is made on Mike Max's life, however, everything changes.
The movie is a contrast, a study in ambiguity which is the nature of
violence itself. It is a haunting, spectral image of a violent world that is
still with us, and it will leave you wondering how to define violence, and
waiting, wanting, to see The End of Violence.
