Title
Review for You Only Live Twice (1967)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Andrew Hicks
        The James Bond films starring Sean Connery are usually 
among the best of the entire seventeen-film series, but this one is an 
embarrassment to the 007 legend, if such a thing is possible. It doesn't 
just border on self-parody, it dives headfirst into it, with stronger than 
usual doses of objectification of women and ethnic stereotype. Just 
when I thought the series was making strides for tolerance (I actually 
saw a black guy in THUNDERBALL, or was it just my imagination?), 
we get lines like, "In Japan, men come first, women come second," to 
which Bond replies, "I think I'll retire here." Of course, five seconds 
later he's being massaged by a bikini-clad Japanese concubine and five 
minutes later he's getting laid by one of the same. ("The things I do for 
Mother England.")
        YOU ONLY LIVE TWICE (Whew, what a relief. I get to live 
twice. Here I thought maybe I should stop lying on my ass all day 
watching movies. Now I've seen the light.) is set entirely in Japan, 
with Bond teaming up with a Japanese agent named Tiger. 
SPECTRE's Blofeld is planning to get America and the Soviet Union 
to declare war on each other by sabotaging their space missions. 
Blofeld is played by Donald Pleasence, who was also record exec B.D. 
in The Bee Gees' 1978 suck-fest SGT. PEPPER'S LONELY HEARTS 
CLUB BAND (of course, given The Bee Gees' reputation for tight 
pants and promiscuity, it's better not to ask what B.D. stands for. Big 
Something is my guess...) and Dr. "Pure Evil" Loomis in 
HALLOWEEN 1-2 and 4-6. In YOU ONLY LIVE TWICE we don't 
even see Pleasence's face until the traditional Bond-Is-Trapped-In-
The-Villain's-Underground-Hideout-And-The-Villain-Spills-The-
Entire-Plan-To-Bond-Thinking-There's-No-Chance-He-Can-Escape-
The-Second-Before-Bond-Lights-Up-His-Cigarette-Gun scene at the 
end of the movie.
        Everything that worked in the other Bond movies is laughable 
in YOU ONLY LIVE TWICE. The fistfights, death traps and 
inventions are all less creative and more ridiculous than usual. Even 
the dialogue with lusty secretary Moneypenny, which is witty and 
clever in the other movies, falls short here. (MONEYPENNY: Bond, 
the password chosen for this mission is "I love you." Say it back to me 
so I can be sure you've gotten it.) Bond is still God's gift to women, or 
should I say women are God's gift to him, but seeing him lay three 
different beauties in every movie is starting to make me sick.
        What cracked me up in the first few movies I watched was 
that even the women who hated Bond and were out to kill him still 
ended up in the sack with him, not to mention all the women he just 
met who stopped everything to get horizontal with him. When you 
calculate three woman a movie times seventeen movies and figure in 
the statistic that 25% of people in the world carry some sort of 
venereal disease, Bond should have more than enough to mix, match 
and trade with his friends. And just think of how many illegitimate 
003 1/2's he's probably fathered around the world. That's a hell of a lot 
in child support.
        If you don't have a sense of humor (and why would you be 
reading this post if you didn't?), you'll most likely think YOU ONLY 
LIVE TWICE is stupid. If you do have a sense of humor, you'll most 
likely think YOU ONLY LIVE TWICE is stupid, too, but at least 
you'll be able to laugh at the unintended campiness. And if you're the 
type who makes constant jokes while watching bad movies with your 
friends and family ("You mean with this Friends and Family program 
I can just sit on my toucass and save on long distance?" Sorry, I've 
seen that commercial way too much--and have since put out a hit on 
Whoopi Goldberg as a result.), like an amateur version of "Mystery 
Science Theater 3000," you'll probably actually enjoy watching this 
movie.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     In the opening to the fifth Bond film and almost the last one
starring Sean Connery, an American astronaut is just beginning an EVA
(Extravehicular activity) from his spacecraft.  In shock, the world
witnesses another spacecraft coming up to attack them.  The second craft
swallows the first, cutting off the lifeline for the EVA astronaut and
leaving him to drift forever in space.  The Americans immediately
suspect the Russians and tell them that, if this happens again, they
will consider it an act of war.  The loyal Bond audience knows in an
instant that it is SPECTRE up to its old tricks and not the Russians.
     The 1967 film YOU ONLY LIVE TWICE has arguably its most surprising
moment during the opening credits.  Although it is based on an Ian
Fleming novel, the screenplay is by none other than Roald Dahl, the
classic author of such dark children's tales as MATILDA and JAMES AND
THE GIANT PEACH.  No one could ever read one of his children's books
without being mesmerized by his shockingly bleak but highly literate
writing.  Even more surprising than his being chosen to adapt a Bond
novel is that none of Dahl's gifts for dark humor or sparkling writing
is evident.  Although the script is good, it is a direct descendent of
all of the preceding Bond scripts and breaks no new ground.
ruse, and he lives on to fight the forces of evil.)
     Since the British suspect that the foreign satellite was launched
from Japan, Bond makes his first visit to that country.  In order to
identify himself to the Japanese spy network he is given a password of
"I love you," which provides opportunities, largely underutilized, for
funny encounters.  The one where he accidentally says "I love you" to
someone not a spy never occurs, for example.
     In Q's bag of tricks this time for James is "Little Nellie," a
tiny, personal helicopter with heat seeking air-to-air missiles and many
other gadgets of warfare.  It's so fast moving and highly maneuverable
that four full-sized attack helicopters are no match for its adroitness.
Bond also gets a killer cigarette, and we're not talking about the
effects of second-hand smoke.
     Not all of the technology is as impressive as Little Nellie.  When
SPECTRE's rocket lands, the cheap model looks like a parody of an old
Flash Gordon film.
     Through a make-over Bond is made to appear Japanese.  And he is
trained in the ways of the Ninja.  The not particularly impressive
result is a slightly different Bond with a few new fighting skills.
all in the service of her Majesty's government, of course -- has to get
married this time and to one with supposedly a face like a pig.  The
joke is that she turns out gorgeous afterall.  Why he has to go through
with an elaborate wedding ceremony makes little sense, but this is a
Bond film so logic is largely irrelevant.
     Up until YOU ONLY LIVE TWICE, we only saw SPECTRE's #1 operative's
waist as he strokes his snow-white cat.  This time, played by Donald
Pleasence, he comes out from behind his chair and shows off his
hideously knife-scarred face.
     Connery, who was full of energy and confidence in his previous Bond
outings, seems to be losing heart and interest in this film.  He said
afterwards that he'd "never" do another one.  When years later the
studio made him an offer he couldn't refuse, that show was aptly named
NEVER SAY NEVER AGAIN.
     YOU ONLY LIVE TWICE runs 1:57.  It is rated PG for violence and
sexual innuendo and would be fine for kids around nine and up.
     My son Jeffrey, almost 9, liked this movie but still liked
THUNDERBALL the best and DR. NO second best of the first five Bond
films.  His favorite parts of YOU ONLY LIVE TWICE were the big battle
scene and all of the Ninjas.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Sean Connery, Donald Pleasence, Akiko Wakabayashi, Tetsuro Tamba, 
      Mie Hama, Bernard Lee, Desmond Llewelyn, Lois Maxwell
Director: Lewis Gilbert
Producer: Albert R. Broccoli and Harry Saltzman
Screenplay: Roald Dahl based on the novel by Ian Fleming
Cinematography: Freddie Young
Music: John Barry
U.S. Distributor: United Artists
     Forever remembered as the "Japanese Bond", YOU ONLY LIVE TWICE 
takes 007 to the Far East for his fifth screen adventure, Sean Connery's 
final consecutive appearance as the top British agent (the actor 
returned to the role twice more:  1971's DIAMONDS ARE FOREVER and 1983's 
NEVER SAY NEVER AGAIN).  Unfortunately, this is also among the weakest 
of the early Bond films, although Connery is in peak form.
     The plot is the problem.  It stretches the limits of credibility, 
even as that word is applied to Bond movies.  Blofeld (Donald Pleasence 
in his pre-HALLOWEEN days) and SPECTRE hijack American and Soviet 
spaceships in an attempt to precipitate a war between the superpowers.  
It's up to Bond to uncover evidence that will avert the conflagration, 
and the trail leads to Japan.  There, he's matched up with the ever-
efficient, beautiful Aki (Akiko Wakabayashi) and her boss, Tiger Tanaka 
(Tetsuro Tamba), as he sets out to find SPECTRE's hideout, and the space 
capsules concealed there.
     The first half of YOU ONLY LIVE TWICE is very good, with several 
skillfully-executed action sequences and the development of an 
unexpectedly warm relationship between Bond and Aki.  It's only during 
the second half, as the plot escalates beyond the bounds of 
preposterousness, that the film starts to fragment.  Some viewers enjoy 
007's most outrageous outings; I prefer a little restraint (and I 
emphasize the "a little" part).  Wild chases, neat gadgets, and death-
defying escapes are fine; rockets that swallow up spacecraft are a bit 
too extravagant.  
     The unmasking of Blofeld is a disappointment.  In FROM RUSSIA WITH 
LOVE and THUNDERBALL, he was just an ominous voice, his face carefully 
hidden from our view.  Here, he's seen for the first time, and it's a 
letdown when all we get is a rather ordinary-looking Donald Pleasance -- 
a solid actor, to be sure, but not very good at creating a diabolical 
personality. (The best Blofeld was Max Von Sydow in NEVER SAY NEVER 
AGAIN.)
     Nevertheless, any Bond movie with Sean Connery can't be all bad, 
and there are the usual chases, fights, and amazing stunts -- all 
sprinkled with a dash of Japanese flavoring.  Bond learns what it means 
to be a ninja, and gets an opportunity to put that knowledge to use as 
he zigs and zags, avoiding assassination attempts.  Then there's the 
usual assortment of women, both European and Asian, for Britain's most 
dashing secret service agent to romance.  In short, while YOU ONLY LIVE 
TWICE falls somewhere in the middle of the 007 film heap, it still 
offers that unique brand of wit, style, and adventure that only comes 
with Bond.
