Title
Review for Local Hero (1983)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Adam Bonin
Written and directed by Bill Forsyth
Starring Peter Riegert, Burt Lancaster, Denis Lawson and Peter Capaldi.
MPAA Rating: PG
     Bill Forsyth's LOCAL HERO is one of the most "real" films I have 
ever seen.  While it is fictional, the film's pacing and technical 
aspects give it a sense of authenticity that one does not see in most 
mainstream films.  What Forsyth is able to do in LOCAL HERO is create a 
world that is only bent slightly from our own, a sort of "magical 
realism", in a way that is much more credible than the typical 
manipulative Hollywood fare.  But more than being realistic in its 
characters and movements, it is extremely warm and entertaining as well,
providing the viewer with 110 minutes of pure cinematic pleasure.
     The film's opening sequence, during which the credits are show, 
establishes one half of the film's operating dichotomy between modernity
and the simple life.  The camera tracks the Porsche of Mac MacIntyre 
(Peter Riegert), as he drives to his Dallas office.  By keeping the 
camera fixed on his luxury car, with the gleaming modern skyscrapers in 
the background, cinematographer Chris Menges places a heavy accent on 
the materialistic opulence of Dallas.  The montage within MacIntyre's 
office similarly focuses on the hectic paces of the modern world.  There
is constant cutting on action.  More importantly, long tracking shots 
with a moving camera while Mac moves through the office accentuate the 
frantic nature of office life.  Similar to the office tracking shots in 
HIS GIRL FRIDAY, the camera is like an eyes into the office,
occasionally taking a peek at someone's desk, always looking around for
something interesting.
     Forsyth is particularly adept with visual humor in the opening 
office scenes.  In a repeated gag, Mac is seen talking on the phone to 
an unknown character.  By briefly panning the camera, the mise-en-scene 
also that the person to whom he is speaking is standing only a few feet 
away from him, just beyond a glass wall.  Without saying a word, the 
picture makes a subtle joke about the alienation of people in corporate 
culture and the obsessive relationships we all have with technology.  
The gag is typical of the whimsical eccentricity of the film.
     When we come to Scotland, the visual style of the film abruptly 
changes.  Close-ups and tight shots give way to panoramic long shots, 
and the shots themselves are held longer.  It is as if to say that in 
Scotland, the people themselves do not matter as much as "the big 
picture".  Lush landscapes in extreme long view set the scene, much as 
in Hitchcock's THE THIRTY-NINE STEPS.
     Also setting the scene is the hauntingly beautiful score by Mark 
Knopfler, guitarist and lead singer of the British supergroup Dire 
Straits.  His lilting, lyrical guitar playing sets the mood for every 
scene, yet it is not as obtrusive as Teddy Pendegrass' singing in CHOOSE
ME [note: we had seen the film recently in class].  Knopfler's music
lies in the background of each scene like a supporting character
wandering in and out of view.
     The comic sense of the film is constant throughout the Scottish 
scenes.  My favorite gag was the recurring motorcyclist who sped down 
the street every time Mac was about to cross.  The joke culminated when 
Mac stepped out to cross the street and deliberately waited until he 
passed.  Subtle jokes like this one worked well within the film; the 
more blatant attempts such as the "abuse therapist" tended to be a bit 
excessive.  Put simply, Forsyth is not a member of the Zucker-Abrahams-
Zucker school of comedy (with such films as AIRPLANE! and KENTUCKY 
FRIED MOVIE) and the feel of his films lends itself to more understated,
intelligent attempts at humor.
     The plot of the film itself is fraught with ironic beauty.  A 
Texas oil magnate sends a Hungarian (who is believed to be Scottish) to 
Scotland attempt to negotiate a deal to by the local town bit by bit.  
When he arrives, he become enchanted with the natural beauty of the 
area, while the residents are all-too-eager to capitalize on the value 
of their land and "sell out".  Indeed, it is hilarious to see their 
machinations in trying to feign reluctance to sell, in order to derive 
as much money as possible from the deal.  The town's minister is an 
African missionary named MacPherson.  Every once in a while, a British 
fighter jet zooms overhead.
     Forsyth rounds out the film with a host of whimsical supporting 
characters whose nuances add a great deal to the unconventional milieu 
of the film.  Happer, the oil magnate played by Burt Lancaster, is not a
greedy capitalist but an eccentric astronomer who has a full service 
kitchen next to his office.  Mac's Scottish associate, Danny Oldsen, is 
a hopeless romantic who speaks eight languages.  The rest of the cast is
populated with such oddities as a punk rock girl, a Soviet capitalist, a
sailor who keeps repainted the name on his ship, and a marine biologist 
who may be a mermaid.  All the characters, like the rest of the film, is
played deadpan.  Forsyth's comic timing is impeccable, and he doesn't 
need to force any of the humor.  What he does is put together a mystical
menagerie of well-written characters who interact in logical, realistic 
ways.
     In this manner, the film is very much like the Scottish equivalent 
to the television show "Northern Exposure."  It has a folksy, warm charm
to it, and takes place in an otherworldly unknown that is somewhat 
magical, a Disneyland for the brain.  Indeed, two of the characters in 
"Northern Exposure" seem almost directly lifted from LOCAL HERO: Mac, 
who merely shifts from being Hungarian to Jewish, and the general store 
owner who somehow stocks everything is practically the same in both film
and television.  If only there were a moose wandering the streets of 
town in LOCAL HERO, then we could truly yell, "Copyright!"
     Perhaps the scene which exemplifies the contrasts and ironies of 
the film come late in the movie.  As Mac scans the sky, he sees a bright
light that he perceives to be a comet, and is thrilled.  The camera 
captures in a point-of-view long shot to make us believe, and hope, that
it is a comet as well.  When it comes closer, it turns out to be the 
light from Happer's helicopter, which thrills the townsfolk and 
disappoints Mac.  At that moment, you realize the transformation that 
has taken place in him, having found beauty and happiness in life 
outside of corporate culture.
     In essence, this is the thematic value which resonates throughout 
the film: the rejection of consumerism and materialism in favor of real 
relationships and real joy.  The film's bittersweet ending, while 
certainly somewhat manipulative, nevertheless "feels" right in the film 
and, although it is certainly not a completely happy one, is definitely 
satisfying.  It confirms the audience's natural inclinations to despise 
the alienating culture around them, and the yearning for an alternative 
lifestyle.
     My caveat with the film is with its deux-et-machina, which, albeit 
necessary for the film's tension, nonetheless rings a bit too 
conventional and forced.  I am referring to the introduction of Knox, 
the cantankerous aged beach resident who refuses to sell his land.  He 
simply seems too stereotypical of a role for this film which is 
otherwise filled with such eccentric types.  The film seems to lag 
whenever he is onscreen.
     But this is a minor flaw, and certainly did not diminish from my 
enjoyment of the film as a whole.  It is precisely because of its 
"magical realism" that gives it a feeling of specialness.  It
steadfastly refuses to conform to the conventions of the "clashing
cultures" genre (THE GODS MUST BE CRAZY, BEVERLY HILLS COP) and creates
a warmth all its own.  In these days of recombinant film, where every
film is put together through deals putting together stars, big-name
directors and a three-word concept for a film, LOCAL HERO is a
delightful, refreshing surprise.

Author
Marty Mapes
**** (out of 4) LOCAL HERO is one of my all-time favorite movies. I can
watch it again and again, year after year. Each time I see something
new, and each time I see something familiar. It is my yearly pilgrimage
to Scotland to visit old friends and homey places. 
The setting is a charming small town called Ferness. The town is
geographically and economically isolated. It conists of a small row of
houses, pressed between a cliff and the sea. There is a pub, a tiny
hotel, a church, and one red phone box. 
The inhabitants of Ferness are good, kind, small-town folk. Fishermen
pull a living from the sea and everyone else makes a living however they
can, doubling up on jobs when necessary. They may appear quirky at
first, but once you get to know them, they are no more unusual than your
own friends and family. 
Ferness sounds like an idyllic town, ripe for a fairy tale. The film
does indeed start out that way. There is an uncaring villain who works
for corporate developers. There is a town full of peasants in danger of
losing their charming homes, their rustic land, their simple livelihood
to make way for big business. There is even a mermaid. 
What ACTUALLY happens is less a fairy tale and more human nature. 
A big oil company sets out to buy the scenic little town on a bay in
north Scotland. It plans to replace the town with an oil refinery.
The oil company sends "Mac" MacIntyre (Peter Riegert) from acquisitions
to buy the land. (He's actually Polish, but he's got the right name for
the job.) He'd rather deal over the phone, but the company insists he be
on-site. He arrives and meets Danny (Peter Capaldi), his assistant while
in Scotland, and Marina (Jenny Seagrove), a marine biologist working for
the Aberdeen branch of Knox Oil, who wants to turn the bay into a marine
sanctuary. (She knows nothing of the company's plans, and wouldn't
believe them even if she knew.)
Mac and Danny head up to Ferness where they meet Gordon Urquhart (Denis
Lawson), hotel proprietor, accountant, and barkeep. Mac confirms to
Gordon the rumor that the the oil company wants to buy all of Ferness.
He entrusts Gordon, as the local accountant, to meet with the populace
and work out some numbers for the purchase of the town. In the meantime,
Gordon suggests that Mac take a look around; get to know the place.
Mac spends the day settling in and walking around the beach in his suit
and tie with Danny trailing behind. They spot an old man in the
distance, doing the same. 
The townspeople of this paradise are thrilled at the chance to sell
their land and become instant millionaires. That night, when Mac has to
call home, he learns his name and reputation have preceeded him. He has
become a local hero to these people he'll make rich, and they instantly
take a liking to him. 
The next day Mac has lightened up a bit. He still has his suit on, but
he fits in better. The locals are starting to accept him as part of the
population, and he's even learned a name or two. Eventually Mac slips
farther and farther into the local life. Each scene shows Mac in less
and less formal clothes as he grows more and more fond of Ferness.
Meanwhile, Gordon carries on the business of arranging for the sale of
the land. 
As the deal draws near, the locals call a ceilidh (pronounced "Kay-Lee",
it means town meeting) to socialize and talk about the deal. Everyone
gets drunk and talks about how they will spend their millions. Grizzled
fishermen argue over the relative merits of Mazzeratis and Ferraris. 
Everyone has a great time with the POSSIBLE exception of Mac. Mac has
grown to love this town and its people. The ceilidh only cements the
sense of community that Mac wants in his life, that only the undeveloped
village could provide. Ironically, he will be the destroyer of the
village, and even more ironically, he will be the only one who feels its
loss.  
At the emotional apex of the story, Mac, uninhibited with drink, asks
Gordon to trade with him. Everything. The car, the house, the job. Mac
wants to trade his Porsche, his six-figure salary, and his stock
options, for Gordon's life in Ferness, doing odd jobs, running the
hotel, being the local bartender, and living a simple life. Nothing
comes of the proposition, but it is the point when Mac sheds his shell
and bares his soul. 
The deal is nearly sealed when, the next day, Mac and Gordon get a
shock. Ben (Fulton Mackay), the old man who walks the beach, actually
OWNS the beach, and he won't sell. Mac's boss, Mr. Happer (Burt
Lancaster) flies to Ferness to close the deal himself. 
Happer and Ben, who share an interest in astronomy, become fast friends
and somehow, Old Ben manages to change Happer's mind, at least about the
refinery. Happer still wants to acquire the site, but not to destroy it.
He wants to build an observatory, an institute for scientific research.
Marina was right all along. 
Nearly everyone is happy with Happer's new arrangement. The townspeople
will still get to sell their property. Happer gets his bay. Ben keeps
his beach. Marina gets her laboratory, and Danny gets Marina. 
But not everyone wins. In the most devastating moment of the film,
Happer tells Mac to pack up and head back to Houston immediately to take
care of business from that end. It becomes painfully clear how far Mac
has fallen in love with Ferness-when he gets the order to return, he is
in a sweater, he has five o'clock shadow, and he's eating an orange that
Ben found on the beach. When the film cuts to him in his creaseless suit
and crisp tie, we understand what a transformation he had undergone
while in town.
Mac obeys his boss, but before he leaves he puts his outer shell back
on. He insists on paying for his stay at the hotel, he shaves, he
dresses properly, and his businesslike manner almost conceals the
disappointment in his face. 
He walks into his cold, cramped, fluorescent apartment, smells the sea
shells he brought back, and hangs up the snapshots he took of Ferness. 
He steps out on the balcony and looks out at the bleak neon skyline of
Houston, with its traffic and sirens, longing for the friendly open
streets of Ferness. 
Mac can't return and see Ferness. Work will presumably keep him in
Houston, and development will soon forever change the place.
But I can go back, year after year, and I do. With each viewing, the
simple joy of life at Ferness, and the transitory pricelessness of that
particular time and place becomes more and more dear. 
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.moviehabit.com

Author
Brian Koller
"Local Hero" is a gentle comedy from Scotland.
There's little action or plot, but the script,
characters and direction all have a quirky
irreverence that is charming if not fully
convincing.
Peter Riegert is a young executive sent to
Scotland to buy a small coastal town for its
oil rights.  Burt Lancaster is his boss, but
he is more interested in astronomy than business.
Riegert soon has a goony-eyed sidekick in
Peter Capaldi, who is in love with aptly named
Marina (Jennifer Black).  Riegert finds that
the townsfolk, particularly proprietor Dennis
Lawson, are greedily willing to sell out.
The cinematography of the seashore and ocean is
attractive, and the little Scottish village is
quaint.  The charm of the quiet village life is
contrasted with the frantic corporate lifestyle
of Houston, Texas.  At film's end, Riegert is
obligated to return to Texas, and it clear
that he does not want to go.
"Local Hero" has more than its share of humorous
moments, which unfortunately can't be revealed
without spoiling them.  Other scenes don't come
off as well, especially those involving Lancaster's
abusive shrink (Norman Chancer).  We are to believe
that young and indolent Capaldi knows a dozen
different languages. The whimsy of the script and
eccentricities of the supporting characters can't
fully hide the simplicity of the plot, which
takes us nowhere slowly.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
