Title
Review for Me & Isaac Newton (1999)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
Michael Apted, director of absolutely the best documentary series ever 
made (42 UP and its predecessors), as well a wide variety of feature 
films from COAL MINER'S DAUGHTER to THE WORLD IS NOT ENOUGH, examines 
the world of the scientist in ME & ISAAC NEWTON. As he did in 
INSPIRATIONS, a documentary that looked into the creative processes of 
famous artists like Roy Lichtenstein, Apted gets into the heads of 
scientists to understand what makes them tick and what inspires their 
scientific explorations. The result is completely engrossing, and the 
film is equally accessible to the scientific literates and illiterates. 
Although the comparisons to Errol Morris's FAST, CHEAP & OUT OF CONTROL 
are obvious, Apted takes a completely different approach to the art of 
the documentary. Unlike Morris, who relishes humor in all forms, Apted 
uses it sparingly. Still, Apted isn't above including footage of 
intelligence-test taking pigeons and of old Flash Gordon adventures.
Mixing in footage of the scientists growing up with interviews of them 
at their labs and in the field, the film looks in depth at seven 
scientists. Frankly, fewer would have been better. In a film in which 
few criticisms are possible, the only other one would be that a final 
section that mixes politics with doomsday views of the future feels like 
little more than remarkably unscientific speculation.
Michio Kaku, a theoretical physicist, says that his personal driving 
force was a picture of the incomplete manuscript that Einstein left when 
he died. Kaku had an obsession to finish the work that had stumped the 
great man. "This was more fascinating that any murder mystery," he 
explains, breathlessly. Kaku is a guy who watched Flash Gordon as a 
child and even built an atom smasher in his garage when he was a 
teenager. A man who works on a unified string theory of everything using 
a 10-dimensional hyperspace model, his favorite diversion is ice 
skating. As he zooms across the ice, he says that it is "just me and 
Isaac Newton."
Ashok Gadgil, an environmental scientist who came from India to Berkeley 
in 1973, is a sweet but driven man who looks for solutions that can be 
brought to third-world countries immediately and with standard parts. 
One beautifully simple example we are shown is the use of a cheap 
ultraviolet light for purifying water in third world nations. It was the 
inner workings of a spinning top that was his inspiration as a child to 
explore the world of science.
At our screening, Gadgil told us that they interviewed many scientists 
before they chose these seven. He said that they sent him a tape of 
INSPIRATIONS, which scared him. He isn't comfortable with personal 
questions, and in INSPIRATIONS, Apted kept asking the artists about 
their sex lives. 
Maja Mataric, a computer scientist who emigrated as a teenager from 
Yugoslavia, specializes in robotics. Mataric, who studied art in school, 
has a wide variety of interests besides robots. She even shares her shoe 
designs with us.
Also at our screening, Mataric said that journalists come to her lab all 
of time, usually asking nothing but inane and shallow questions such as, 
"Will robots take over the world?"  Because of this, she didn't 
initially take this movie seriously and didn't even bother watching the 
tape of INSPIRATIONS that they had sent her.
There is a wonderful and little known connection with FAST, CHEAP & OUT 
OF CONTROL that she shared with us. She was finishing up her doctorate 
under robotics scientist Rodney Brooks, when Errol Morris came to MIT to 
make FAST, CHEAP & OUT OF CONTROL. If you look closely, you can see just 
her legs in one of the scenes with the robots in that movie. And some of 
Mataric's graduate assistants' legs appear in robot scenes in ME & ISAAC 
NEWTON.
"Science to me is almost a religion," Gertrude Elion, a Nobel 
Prize-winning pharmaceutical chemist, tells us. "To me, science is truth 
and truth is beautiful." Sadly, Elion died soon after her interview. 
Steven Pinker, a cognitive scientist, talks, among other things, about 
the "Eureka moment" of scientific ideas, which he says studies have 
proven to be a myth. Patricia Wright, a primatologist who lives in 
Madagascar, tells us that "it's the failures that give you the energy to 
make the rest work." Finally, Karol Sikora, a cancer researcher, shares 
with us how he is doing fundamental research on approaches to fighting 
cancer.
"Science is the engine of prosperity," Kaku tells us. A better 
explanation of the New Economy has never been spoken. ME & ISAAC NEWTON 
is the type of film that should be seen by every junior high school 
student, but it has much broader appeal. It is an engrossing film that 
leaves you hopeful and gives you insights that you never knew that you 
were missing.
ME & ISAAC NEWTON runs 1:40. It is not rated but would probably be a G. 
It is fine for all ages, but kids under 10 will likely not be 
interested.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Norm Schrager
Michael Apted, master of the forward-thinking 7 Up series (42 Up has
just been released on video), now offers up a documentary about
ambitious people like himself.  Really ambitious people.
Apted's Me & Isaac Newton brings us inside seven groundbreaking
scientific minds.  We get to know their studies, and we also get to know
them.  But what begins as fascinating documentary greatness fizzles down
to a lengthy, anti-climactic ending.  Insert your own Big Bang joke
here.
The film starts off reflecting Apted's skill as a storyteller and
filmmaker, with an almost wondrous feel to the introduction.  The seven
masterminds explain why they are so eager -- practically desperate -- to
figure out the world.  Meanwhile, appropriate imagery slowly fills the
screen -- a cool, blue universe or a shaking collection of cells, ironic
combinations of the literal and abstract.
Since the scientists interviewed are so diverse in their work, they're
worth mentioning: a nuclear physicist searching for dimensions beyond
the third; a Nobel Prize-winning pharmaceutical chemist; a primatologist
who visited Madagascar and never left; a robotics expert; an Indian man
creating clean drinking water in third-world areas; a cognitive
scientist figuring out how and why we use verbal language; and a leading
authority in the study of cancer.  Man, you could get smart just
standing near these people.
In getting them to the big screen, Apted does a couple of things right:
first, he works within a strong formula, helpful due to the size of the
group (the same size as his 1997 companion film, Inspirations).  First
we learn of the participants' childhoods and early interests (some
stories are a hoot), and we then get a glimpse into their work and the
hopes that have sprung from them.  Second, Apted has really picked the
right people for us to meet.  At least three of them (the physicist,
primatologist, and water chemist) could easily have had substantial,
individual biographies made just about them.
But at a point late in the film, Me & Isaac Newton succumbs to that
liability of all documentaries: it has a filmmaker that appears too
close to the subject matter.  The result, as it seems here, is that
Apted doesn't know when to stop, forgetting that you can give too much
of a good thing.  In my opinion, the scientists provide nothing too
revealing after about 90 minutes, and the movie runs about 20 minutes
beyond that.
But that first hour-and-a-half makes for a classic documentary.  The
subject matter is vital, the people involved are smart, easy to listen
to, and full of energy, and the director carefully weaves the
first-person stories to highlight their variety, similarities, and
originality.  There were at least three times during the film where I
found a revelation or idea to be just incredible.
Why can't we break through to the 10th dimension?  How come we learn
language in a few years, and not thirty minutes?  What is the next
disease to be conquered?  Apted's subjects ask these questions, and
prepare to answer them like very few people in the world.  But why are
they doing so on the big screen?  The film's run is very limited, so one
can assume that the motive is Oscar-driven, and once the movie loses its
punch toward the end, that statue seems unlikely.
For all its meaningful, insightful knowledge, Me & Isaac Newton doesn't
have to be seen in a theater.  I would have been just as happy seeing it
on PBS or Discovery.
Director: Michael Apted
Producer: Jody Patton
Starring:  Gertrude Elion, Ashok Gadgil, Michio Kaku, Maja Mataric,
Steven Pinker, Karol Sikora, Patricia Wright
http://www.clearblueskyfilms.com/documentaries/main/
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
