Title
Review for Wild Bill (1995)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
        The Wild Bill (Jeff Bridges) we are seeing is Hickock but he
is now in the latter part of his life.  Not quite the hotshot he was
when he justly earned the appellation "Wild Bill," and his eyesight
not as focused as it once was, he is still not anyone with whom one
would want to tangle, unless you include the kid Dave Arquette (Jack
McCall) who would like a shot at Hickock who long ago killed Dave's
father.
        Along with Wild Bill we get Calamity Jane (Ellen Barkin).
She may be one tough woman but the keyword is woman and she, among
others, loves Hickock.   Just about everybody loves old Bill.
        One thing you have to say about Hickock:  he knew his Wild
Bill days were over but he would never back down when challenged.
What else could you ask of a man?  Or woman?
        Included in the film for no good reason I could discern are
some pretty good actors in pretty crummy roles:  John Hurt, Diana
Lane, Christina Applegate, Bruce Dern, Marjoe Gortner (as a
bible-thumping preacher; type cast?) and Keith Carradine as Buffalo
Bill Cody.
        Despite everyone's trying real hard to make something of the
film, and Directed by William Hill it gets:

Author
Ben Hoffman
        The Wild Bill (Jeff Bridges) we are seeing is Hickock but he
is now in the latter part of his life.  Not quite the hotshot he was
when he justly earned the appellation "Wild Bill," and his eyesight
not as focused as it once was, he is still not anyone with whom one
would want to tangle, unless you include the kid Dave Arquette (Jack
McCall) who would like a shot at Hickock who long ago killed Dave's
father.
        Along with Wild Bill we get Calamity Jane (Ellen Barkin).
She may be one tough woman but the keyword is woman and she, among
others, loves Hickock.   Just about everybody loves old Bill.
        One thing you have to say about Hickock:  he knew his Wild
Bill days were over but he would never back down when challenged.
What else could you ask of a man?  Or woman?
        Included in the film for no good reason I could discern are
some pretty good actors in pretty crummy roles:  John Hurt, Diana
Lane, Christina Applegate, Bruce Dern, Marjoe Gortner (as a
bible-thumping preacher; type cast?) and Keith Carradine as Buffalo
Bill Cody.
        Despite everyone's trying real hard to make something of the
film, and Directed by William Hill it gets:

Author
Steve Rhodes
     WILD BILL is a biographical movie about the life of Wild Bill
Hickok.  Amazingly, no one dies in the movie.  Well, zillions of people
are shot and forever stop talking, but death involves pain on the part
of the victim and a feeling of emotion by the killer or at least by the
bystanders so whatever it was, it could not have been death.
     Perhaps, WILD BILL is famous writer and director Walter Hill's
homage to the grade B Westerns that I saw as a kid.  On the other hand,
the pretentious cinematography (Lloyd Ahern) and music (Van Dyke Parks)
of this picture is full of great portents leaving little doubt that the
movie has some significant meaning.  What, I still have no idea.
     WILD BILL starts in the Nebraska Territory in 1867.  In the first
scene, Wild Bill (Jeff Bridges) single-handedly kills four armed men
mainly because one of them messed with his hat.  Throughout the show,
many people are killed for touching his hat.  Wild Bill stays in most
of the famous gun slinging towns of the Old West from Abilene to
Deadwood, and he usually becomes the sheriff.  Being the law, has no
effect on his own lawlessness, and he kills everything that moves if it
offends him.  He even accidentally kills his own deputy, again showing
no remorse.  His motto seems to be: if it moves, shoot it.
     The first act of the show is a live version of the mayhem of a
Hieronymus Bosch triptych.  Constant action; constant killing.  People
shooting at the feet of prostitutes to make them dance and people's
ears being shot off to make a point.  Check your brains at the door
because Bill can annihilate up to six people at once even if they all
have their guns at the ready.  You don't want to attempt to analyze the
likelihood of any of the scenes.
     In the second act, we have a lot of melancholy looks between Wild
Bill and his semi-girlfriend Calamity Jane (Ellen Barkin).  We even
have them making love to a loud rendition of The Battle Hymn of the
Republic on a player piano.  But, we are told that "a man of action,
Bill found romance perplexing."
     In the tragic final act leading up to the aces and eights
confrontation with Jack McCall (David Arquette), there is the
foreboding of doom.  Through out the show one of the best parts is the
narration by Charlie Prince (John Hurt).  Hurt's acting is mediocre,
but his rich narration adds a lot of atmosphere.  In case you care, we
learn that Wild Bill was an actor for many years, but "as a thespian,
he was by all reports terrible," which is okay since he was such a good
murderer he did not need another profession.
     The script is the biggest problem with the show.  WILD BILL is not
GANDHI, and Walter Hill should have lighted up some.  Deadwood is
described thus, "Like the Old Testament, Deadwood had become a place of
prophesy and vision."  A little humor would have helped.  The
characters are interesting as caricature, but not as real people.
There is no one in the show that the audience cares whether they live
or die.  Only Ellen Barkin attempts to breath a little life into her
character.  Jeff Bridges, a notorious overactor, is restrained,
interesting, but unreal in WILD BILL.  Diane Lane is abysmal as
McCall's mother Susannah, and David Arquette gives a lifeless version
of McCall.
     There actually is more good to the show than the narration.  The
sets (Joseph Nemec) of the muddy streets, the claustrophobic small
rooms, and the large birdcage style jail are effective in illustrating
the misery of the period.  The cinematography is imaginative although
sometimes too pedantic and certainly too repetitive.  The rust colored
exteriors and the scary nighttime interiors are good in conveying the
image of importance to the show.  The scene transitions are done with
white like the white flash of a gun.  All flashbacks are in grainy and
overexposed black and white footage.  At first, this worked quite well,
but after a while the images are shown on shifting diagonals, and the
overexposure increases until the images are almost invisible.
     The editor (Freeman Davies) loses all control.  There is an
incomprehensible black and white opium induced dream flash back that
goes on forever.  If you need to go to the restroom, do it during this
scene and take your time. Perhaps you want to visit the snackbar as
well and get a popcorn refill.  You will miss nothing, and the scene
will still be going when you return.
     WILD BILL runs too long at 1:38, but for some reason the movie is
intriguing, and I never wanted to leave.  We saw it on opening night at
a totally empty theater so it does not seem destined to be a
blockbuster.  It is rated R for massive killings, general violence, and
sex, but no real nudity.  I do not recommend the show to anyone, but it
would be okay for most teenagers since the violence is more cartoonish
than gory.  I award the movie a single * for no reason other than it
kept my attention, and I did not totally hate it.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Another cryptic period piece, a la PERSUASION.  Well-acted by Emma
Thompson and Cannes Best Actor winner Jonathan Pryce, CARRINGTON is the
story of the unrequited love between British painter Dora Carrington
(Thompson) and eccentric writer Lytton Strachey (Pryce).  They shared a
passion for years, though he was an avowed homosexual who found the
female form rather offensive.  (Their repression knowing no limits,
each maintained separate sexual relationships while always staying very
close to each other.) The fine cast, notably Pryce, and an
ever-interesting story makes CARRINGTON quite watchable, despite a
confusing script that too often misses the nuts-and-bolts of basic
character introductions.  We get the juicy bits, but not always what
comes before.  (Anyone up for a tally of how many times Emma takes
another hop in the sack?  I wonder what Kenneth thought...)
     Here's the hat trick of the season:  Sean Penn writes, directs,
*and* casts former flames Jack Nicholson and Anjelica Huston as former
spouses, each dealing with the death of their daughter (to a drunken
driver) some five years after the fact.  He wants to kill the guy that
killed her; she wants a more peaceful resolution.  Though never
completely coherent as a drama, THE CROSSING GUARD is still a
reasonably compelling film.  The basic conflict carries the story
through the frequent slow spots.  More interesting are the flashes of
philosophy, when Penn pauses to ponder the nature of guilt.
Unfortunately, such insight is intermittent and entirely absent by the
end.  Still, there's that cast.  Huston only has a handful of scenes;
the best work is from Richard Jordan-look-alike David Morse, as the
driver, and Jack, boozed-up and bloated, wasting his nights in a strip
club, and, in one unexpected scene, taking the stage with one of the
girls.
     Writing/directing/producing team Charles Shyer and Nancy Meyers
(NOTHING BUT TROUBLE) return with this wholly unnecessary remake-
of-a-sequel that's also a sequel-to-a-remake.  They up the ante of
FATHER'S LITTLE DIVIDEND (1951) by making the father of the bride both
a daddy and a grandpa.  Mom (Diane Keaton) and Daughter (Kimberly
Williams) pregnant together, and Dad (Steve Martin) doing double-takes
throughout.  In real-life, such an event would take on a demented,
tabloid edge; in Disney's white-picket world, baby baby translates into
a mild form of wackiness that culminates with Martin Short sitting
behind the wheel of an Explorer (what else?) and Dad almost landing on
the wrong end of a prostrate exam.  Are we laughing yet?
     Actually, we *would* be laughing, had these bits not already been
shown in the trailers.  Who's idea was it to give away all the gags?
At least there's Steve Martin, who has more physical grace than most
contemporary screen comedians.  Even in a subdued role in a subdued
movie, he glides through each scene with distinctive flair.  Too bad
the same can't be said for Martin Short and B.D.  Wong.  As the
returning Decorators from Hell, they grate more than they give.  And,
yes, that's "SCTV" veteran Eugene Levy as the Middle-Eastern home
buyer.  Though the marketing staff should be shot--or given trophies;
I can't decide which--FATHER OF THE BRIDE PART II is innocuous
enough.  Relentlessly cheery *and* extolling more family values than
we've seen in several months, there's certainly an audience for this
golden-lit world of healthy babies, selfless spouses, and
happily-ever-after's.
     This cute children's adventure--think THE WIZARD OF OZ meets
BIG--is the perfect (and, perhaps, unintentional) companion-piece to
TOY STORY.  Director Joe Johnson (HONEY, I SHRUNK THE KIDS, THE
ROCKETEER) and Company have created a jungle of computer-generated
animals that live, breathe, and stampede across the screen.  Sure, they
look as fake as they do in the ads, but the prospect of what they
represent is thrilling.  The plot--a mysterious board game causes
demented jungle flora and fauna to appear--is fun enough, but the mind
can only wander and wonder about how this technology will affect future
features.  Such as the sequel to JURASSIC PARK, due in `97.  For now,
(older) kids will eat this stuff up.  Robin Williams is surprisingly
toned-down as the man-child who emerges from the game.  Bonnie Hunt is
appealing as his neurotic playmate who has to resume a game started 26
years earlier.  The story could be a couple shades darker, though.
With better animation and a sharper edge, JUMANJI would qualify as an
instant classic.
     Two hours and two minutes of Woody Harrelson and Wesley Snipes
knocking around as foster-brother transit cops, jerking the chain of
their totalitarian supervisor (Robert Blake, playing *way* over the
top), and creating every manner of subway-related mayhem.  The tone is
abominable and almost wincing in spots.  The plot--involving the
robbery of the car that collects the fares--is equally absurd.  (Any
kid with a train set could handle The Heist better than the authorities
in the movie do.) Woody and Wesley have great chemistry, though, and
that's probably enough for most audiences.  Sheer idiocy.  It'll make
millions.
     Great gimmick; godawful movie.  Joe Everyman (Johnny Depp) has
ninety minutes to kill the person in the photo, says bad guy
Christopher Walken, or his little girl dies.  Here's the gun, here's
the hotel, and here's her itinerary.  Fail to complete the mission, and
your daughter dies.  No problem--we saw this much in the trailer and
it looked good then.  Director John Badham (POINT OF NO RETURN,
STAKEOUT) has also shot the story in "real time," so one minute here
equals one minute there.  Cool.  The problem comes with, well, all the
rest of it.  Instead of leaving Depp alone and to his own devices, the
script has Walken's character hounding his every turn.  Which is
insane.  Any chance of innovation is negated through this, and other
boneheaded plot points.  We threw up our hands and left after 35
minutes of "real time."
     Surprisingly stiff for a romantic-comedy remake, SABRINA still has
its charms.  The old-fashioned plot--involving a pair of wealthy
brothers (Harrison Ford and Greg Kinnear) and their chauffeur's
attractive daughter (Julia Ormand)--takes a while to settle into.
We're asked to feel sympathetic toward a trio of characters who, in the
nineties, come across as either shallow or stupid.  Or both.  Each
projects an innocence, though, that helps to eclipse their flagrant
flaws.  And, after about ninety-minutes of story, they cease to seem
like candidates-for-counseling and begin to function as real
movie-people.  Exceptionally polished, SABRINA is always eye-catching,
even when the story strays down a dead-end alley.  Such as an entire
segment set in Paris.  And how about the pairing of Richard Crenna and
Angie Dickinson as the in-laws-to-be?  We haven't seen them together
since the 1971 TV-movie THIEF.
     The Rod Serling gimmick--the *whites* as the minority race--is
intriguing, but writer/director Desmond Nakano doesn't go anywhere with
it.  Instead of biting satire, or even a revealing, cross- cultural
snapshot, Nakano gives a fired factory worker (John Travolta) a gun and
lets him kidnap the wealthy industrialist (Harry Belafonte) who was
indirectly responsible.  The idea, of course, is that each will share a
better perspective at the end of their ordeal.  And that is the
problem.  Nakano has created an alternate reality that's just *too*
real to believe such a ludicrous plot twist.  In fact, as written, the
entire second-half of the story would be virtually unwatchable, if not
for the extraordinarily humane performances by Travolta and Belafonte.
They shine brightly, and provide the small moments of sanity in an
otherwise absurd story.
     An arty western that's neither romantic nor revisionist, director
Walter Hill's third oater is, from a commercial perspective, dead on
arrival.  Few heroes and fewer heroics are just some of the challenges
to this fictional retelling of the final days of James Butler Hickok.
As superbly played by Jeff Bridges, he's bitter, half-blind, and
all-too-aware that the end is nearer than farther.  (The conflict comes
from his past:  a string of memories that he can't keep back, and the
son of a sweetie who's gunning for the gunslinger.) Leaner and meaner
than most Western wear, WILD BILL stumbles a bit at the end.  Hill
indulges in one too many flash- backs and the rhythm is almost lost.
He rights himself for the finale, though, and wraps with an unusually
tight closing.  Great supporting cast, too, including Christina
Applegate, Bruce Dern, Ellen Barkin, and John Hurt.  Recommended.
Michael J. Legeros - Raleigh, NC
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Check triangle.movies for weekly reviews from MOVIE HELL
