Title
Review for Breaking Away (1979)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Breaking Away" was a sleeper, a low-budget film with
an (then) unfamiliar cast that was released to critical
and commercial success.  The film has many themes
and subplots, but they never get tangled or complex.
Some of the drama (especially in the closing race)
is a bit contrived, but most of it works, as does
most of the comic relief.
"Breaking Away" stars four unemployed teenagers who have
just graduated from high school, and are unsure of
whether to attend college.  Dave (Dennis Christopher)
is fascinated with Italy and cycling.  Mike (Dennis Quaid)
carries resentment against college students from wealthy,
out-of-town families.  Cyril (Daniel Stern) is clumsy,
but gets many good lines.  The fourth and less interesting
teenager (Jackie Earle Haley) gets angry whenever
somebody calls him short,  which seems to happen regularly.
Dave's father (Paul Dooley), a used-car salesman,
disapproves of Dave's embracing Italian culture.
This generation gap leads to many funny situations and
good lines.  Dave's mother (Barbara Barrie) is
blissfully indifferent to Dave's eccentricities or
his father's constant whining.  The score's use
of Italian opera and classical music fits in well
with situations between the family members.
Dave pretends to be a college student from Italy
to win would-be girlfriend Robyn Douglass.
When he tells her the truth, the romance is over,
reinforcing the depiction of the college students as
shallow, preppy snobs.  His fantasy of becoming Italian
ends when an Italian racing team sabotage his bike during
a race.  His character is much more humble afterwards.
Mike's desire to show up the college boys leads to a
500 mile bike race with a "cutter" team competing against
college teams.  Mike, Dave, Cyril and shorty comprise
the cutter team, so-called because their parents were
stone-cutters at one time.  The big race has some
genuine suspense, despite contrived drama concerning
injuries and rapid recoveries.  The race announcer also
has the annoying habit of only discussing the situation
of the cutter team.
Despite its minor weaknesses, "Breaking Away" has
much going for it: good comic relief, a good score,
a winning cast, a good script, and well-developed
themes of inter-generational and inter-class conflict.
"Breaking Away" won the Oscar for Best Writing, and
was nominated for Best Picture, Best Director (Peter
Yates), Best Score, and Best Supporting Actress
(Barrie).
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
