Title
Review for Robin and Marian (1976)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Director Richard Lester has worked with several icons in his career 
(Superman, Butch Cassidy, the Beatles, and the Three Musketeers are 
among the more memorable) and this time around he turns his attention to 
Robin Hood.  As would be expected from Lester, it is not a traditional 
portrayal.  In essence, ROBIN AND MARIAN provides all previous Robin 
Hood films with a final chapter.  Lester and screenwriter James Goldman 
replace images of young heroes galloping through the sward with 
middle-aged not-so-merry men eking out an existence in near-primitive 
conditions.  Story begins with a disillusioned Robin renouncing his 
service to King Richard and returning to Sherwood after many years 
abroad.  After losing his love for king and country he is now free to 
rekindle his desire for Marian.  Ironically, it means he must once again 
become an outlaw, thus also renewing old ties with his former enemy the 
Sheriff of Nottingham.
It's bold of the film to avoid all previous representations of Robin and 
Marian: Robin (Sean Connery) is bearded, has thinning hair, wields a 
longsword more often than a bow, and dresses in shabby, practical 
clothes rather than his more customary Lincoln green.  Likewise, Marian 
(Audrey Hepburn) is not a blushing maiden but a nun, trussed up so 
tightly in habit and wimple that for the first half of the film we see 
only her face.  The younger Hepburn would have made a great Marian 
earlier in the heyday of Hollywood costumers, and it makes sense to 
presume this is why she was chosen for this role (her ten-year absence 
from the screen also suits the 'return' theme essential to the film).  
Yet she is required to play against type, which makes her casting 
confusing.  It's not only Hepburn - all of the characters play against 
type: Marian is shown to be suicidal, the Sheriff is sympathetic, and 
Richard is psychotic.  The only traditional element seen to remain 
steadfast is the romance between Robin and Marian.
Despite John Barry's suggestively romantic score (which Lester wasn't 
happy with) and the prevailing love interest of the leads, Lester's film 
still has that neutral quality found elsewhere in his work - neither too 
grim/realistic, or stylized/lavish.  His trademark humor is also 
downplayed here.  He and Goldman work with their material intelligently 
(although it's too easy to label a film 'revisionist' merely by 
subverting the identities of historical personages), but their film's 
success inevitably boils down to the connection between Connery and 
Hepburn.  As in other Robin Hood stories, they get little screen time 
together, but in this instance it counts: their final scene is entirely 
memorable.  It also brings home one of the primary intentions of the 
film - to break their characters out of archetypes perpetuated by myth 
(not to mention films and books) and present them as real people.  
Film's ending, which would have been unimaginable in the days of Errol 
Flynn, will be offputting to many viewers.  Connery would return as King 
Richard in Kevin Costner's popular 1991 version.  Also with: Robert Shaw 
(the Sheriff), Richard Harris (Richard), Nicol Williamson (Little John).

