Title
Review for True Lies (1994)
Number of Reviews
20

Author
Rob Furr
Wham, Bam, Thank You, Mister Cameron.
     The best way to start off this review is to begin with the
obvious: This is a James Cameron movie, lock, stock, and barrel.  To
movie-goers who haven't been trapped in a cave with a projector and a
35mm print of SHAMPOO for the last eighteen years, that should mean
something.  It should mean that this movie, like all other Cameron
movies(except for PIRANHA II, but we won't talk about that ...) has
excellent, clean cinematography, a strong sense of color, unique action
shots, and tightly integrated special effects.  If you like Cameron's
previous work, there is absolutely no reason you won't like TRUE LIES.
     This is also an Arnold Schwarzenegger movie.  *That* should mean
something as well.  It should mean convincing movie violence, snappy
patter delivered in an unexplained Austrian accent, and, lately,
mind-bending budgets, and, again, Arnold fans will have no trouble
parking their brains at the door and enjoying TRUE LIES.
     That's the obvious.  You should know that even before you walk in
the door, much less before you sit down and let the THX promo destroy
your hearing.  So, even before you pay your six bucks, you know what
you're getting.  A little action, a little snappy patter, and enough
violence to make you want to go beat up Secret Service agents.
     However, there's an awful lot in this movie that I didn't expect.
For instance ...
     This movie has some absolutely jaw-dropping, astonishing comedy in
it.  I cannot think of another movie which has managed to make me laugh
hard enough to injure myself and, at the same time, astonish me with
the sheer movie-making spectacle.  In fact, the biggest, most dangerous
laughs, are, amazingly enough, *not* shown in the previews.
     In combination with the eye-popping comedy (which, to be frank, is
faster and funnier than almost any movie made so far this year, or, in
fact, almost any movie back to, perhaps, YOUNG FRANKENSTEIN,) TRUE LIES
makes every cent of its gargantuan budget appear on screen.  Even in
portions of the movie where no sane director would spend money, Cameron
not only spends money, but makes the money spent *worth it*.
     Furthermore, there seems to be something approximating a plot
lurking deep inside this movie.  While plots aren't as important as,
say, a good villain in these sorts of movies, TRUE LIES has one, and
one that serves its purpose well.  No, it's not HIDDEN AGENDA or IN THE
NAME OF THE FATHER, but, unlike some action movies, TRUE LIES at least
has the decency to not hit you in the face with a blatantly rotten
story line.  Call it the equal of THUNDERBALL, and let it lie at that.
     In fact, that's an important comparison, right there.  TRUE LIES,
to be quite honest, out-Bonds modern Bond.  It has nuclear weapons, a
fiendish organization, lots of disposable terrorists, and (so, okay,
I'm a twenty-three-year-old male.  I have hormones.  I admit it,) two
(count them, two) incredibly beautiful (and well-packaged) female
characters, even though Jamie Lee Curtis does look remarkably like
Annie Lennox for large portions of the movie.  Pierce Brosnan and
GOLDENEYES will have to aim very high to stand a chance of coming up
to the level set by TRUE LIES.
     Last in the list of positive commentary: the actors.  Believe it
or not, Tom Arnold does a good, believable job in this movie.  So does
Bill Paxton.  So does almost everyone, except for, unfortunately, Jamie
Lee Curtis, who doesn't quite seem to have her character down.  It's
not a grating performance, but it doesn't help the suspension of
disbelief much, either.
     So, if you've read this far, you probably think that I think that
TRUE LIES is the greatest film ever made, that I consider it to be
better than CASABLANCA, and so on.  Which, actually, I don't.  It has
flaws, one of which is the occasional extremely slow section.  (Do we
really need to see Jamie Lee Curtis gyrate for *that long*  From a
visual point of view, it was great, especially for people with a Y
chromosome, but it didn't help the movie, or her characterization, much
either.)
     It has the occasional weakly done minor character, like number 7,
or Charleton Heston's character, or the Nefarious Bad Guy himself.
(Plus, it has a thug, who has no lines, but who I would *swear* was
built by Jim Henson's Creature Shop.  The guy looks exactly like one of
the monsters from "The Muppet Show."  Honest.)
     It also doesn't transcend its genre.  It's a very, very good
comedy, a darn good spy/action movie, but it doesn't go beyond that
into the realm of the classic film, like RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK did,
like the original TERMINATOR did, like THE GOOD, THE BAD, AND THE
UGLY did.  It remains firmly in its genre, and seems quite happy
there.
     It's still probably the funniest movie you're likely to see
this summer.
     It's still probably the most spectacular movie you're likely to
see.  Period.  Or, at least, until the *next* Cameron movie.
     And, lastly, it's still highly recommended.  Call it a four-star
three-star-movie, on the Furr Scale (wherein the first rating is the
evaluation, and the second rating is what sort of movie the film was
trying to be.  TRUE LIES was trying to be a three-star movie, and it
did it *very* well.  HEAVEN'S GATE (*, ****,) on the other hand, was
trying to be a four-star movie, but did it incredibly badly.)

Author
Jon A. Webb
     TRUE LIES is the kind of movie LAST ACTION HERO tried to be: a
clever, inventive variation on the action movie.  It succeeds where
LAST ACTION HERO failed because here we actually care about the hero:
he's a real person, with a family, even if his adventures as a spy are
hardly believable.
     Arnold Schwarzenegger plays a spy whose cover is that he is a
insipid computer salesman.  Jaime Lee Curtis, who plays his wife,
believes his cover and finds her life dull enough to consider having an
affair with a used car salesman who pretends to be a spy.
     The plot is a little too cute, like LAST ACTION HERO, but it gives
a minimally acceptable context for the action in the film, which is
where the heart of the movie is.  The important thing is that this
context supports all sorts of jokes that normally wouldn't appear in an
action film.  This, and the incredibly good effects (I'm still trying
to figure out how they made it appear that they blew up part of that
bridge--it couldn't be real, could it?) make this a highly
entertaining film, not only for fans of Arnold Schwarzenegger.
     N.B. To appreciate this film you have to accept the usual conceit
of action films, which is that of the lone good man battling against
evil all around him.  In other reviews I've seen, plainly the reviewer
didn't do this.  If you can't handle stereotypes in the context of an
action film, you won't appreciate this film; you'll find it racist (all
the bad guys are Arab terrorists) and brutal (people die routinely;
women are abused).  Schwarzenegger and Curtis turn in the solid
performances you'd expect of them from their previous work.  Tom Arnold,
who plays Schwarzenegger's side-kick, is a real surprise; he's fresh,
funny, and a good part of the reason the film is so entertaining.  He's
just the right choice for this role, after which he should be taken
seriously as a comic actor.  For example, he'd be a great choice to take
over O.J.'s part in the "Naked Gun" series.
     The direction (by James Cameron) is tight and makes good use of
rapidly improving effects technology.  The script is over-written, with
a little more intellectual appeal than is really necessary.
Schwarzenegger and Curtis are in fine form.  All in all, a fine
effort.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Directed by James Cameron
Written by Cameron, based on a screenplay by Claude Zidi, Simon Michael,
           and Didier Kaminka.
Cast Arnold Schwarzenegger, Jamie Lee Curtis, Tom Arnold, Bill Paxton,
     Tia Carrere, Art Malik, Eliza Dushku, Grant Heslov, and Charleton Heston
MPAA Rating     "R" (for language, gore, violence, and sexual
                     references)
Running Time    141 minutes
     What is James Cameron up to now?  His new movie, TRUE LIES, is
*easily* the most entertaining film of the year.  Forget SPEED, THE
LION KING, and FORREST GUMP, here's a blockbuster that swats those
aside like houseflys.  Talk like a tag line and you'd say that TRUE
LIES is "more exciting than SPEED, more charming than KING, and more
humorous than GUMP."  Unquote.  With T2 talent Arnold Schwarzenegger in
the lead, James Cameron has delivered the best Bond movie that Albert
Broccoli never made.
     TRUE LIES opens in the Alps (!) with secret agent Harry Tasker
(Schwarzenegger) emerging from an icy lake at the edge of a heavily
guarded compound.  Bathed in blue light (of course), he strips off his
wetsuit only to reveal a perfectly pressed tuxedo.  With a dash of
cologne for good measure, Harry steps from the bushes and into the
chateau.  Just like that.
     Inside is a party and that's no trouble with Harry.  He mingles,
he flirts, and speaks six different languages.  He even dances the
tango before the inevitable Hasty Exit.  After a dizzying
foot/ski/snowmobile chase right out of ON HER MAJESTY'S SECRET SERVICE,
Harry hooks up with his buddies to get down to the real business of
tracking a gang of middle-Eastern terrorists who may be in possession
of some stolen nuclear warheads.
     The Wall came down and peace came up and, now, we have bug-eyed
Easterners as the token spy-movie villains.  Stereotypes and all.  Tom
Clancy might complain, but not James Cameron.  His fun starts when
Agent Harry Tasker goes *home*.  No, not to some slinky siren from the
French Riviera, but, rather, to a quiet neighborhood outside D.C.
     At home is Helen (Curtis), a legal secretary with (what she think
is) a boring husband with a boring job.  Together, they have one kid
and one dog, but neither is enough to keep Harry home from "business
trips" and "working late."
     He's an oily used-car salesman who, get this, is masquerading as
spy to seduce Mrs. Tasker!  Harry finds out and, once his neck veins
stop bulging, executes a wicked revenge that leads to such
complications as Helen's induction into "service" and the couple's
abduction by terrorists.
     With enough action and plot for *three* films, TRUE LIES begs the
question:  when is enough enough for James Cameron?  Not content to
make a spy movie, he's also created a *spoof* of a spy movie.  A spoof,
mind you, that's funnier than anything out now.  Watch Arnie butt heads
with a pair of pinschers in the opening scene, if you don't believe
me.
     But *after* the guns and gags have run their course, the film is
still only half-finished.  TRUE LIES is also about jealousy and the
*extreme* reactions of a husband who thinks his wife is having an
affair.  Cameron pulls no punches here; Harry's abusive treatment of
Helen includes one of the strongest scenes you'll see this summer.
     Timely stuff, which begs the question:  why the misogyny?  Has
James Cameron crossed to the other side of the field, after the
fight-back feminism of T2 and ALIENS?  Has the director's personal life
finally soured the "sensitive guy" who's best known for letting his
heroines act tougher than his heroes?
     Jamie Lee Curtis *does* get her due.  Of sorts.  Her empowerment
comes at the end, with a cute coda that has the couple living happily
every after.  But the transformation is slight and nothing at all along
the lines of either Linda Hamilton (T2) or Sigourney Weaver (ALIENS).
     The men fare worse.  Both Arnie and (Tom) Arnold are as far from
PC as can be.  Their collective locker-room wisdom is off-color, to say
the least, but they are no less appealing than, say, any racist
character in a Quintin Tarantino film.  They work in *spite* of their
questionable behavior.
     The chemistry between Arnie and Jamie alone is worth the price of
admission.  Sure, Arnie is a bit stiff for suave, but what range he
*does* have is put to great use, including some of the lengthiest leers
in film history.  Curtis is wonderful and, with her costar, makes TRUE
LIES seem light years away from either HERCULES IN NEW YORK or
HALLOWEEN.  Their best scene is Harry's rescue of Helen from a
speeding-to-its-doom limo.  Watch the looks.
     Tom Arnold is surprisingly solid as Harry's scene-stealing
partner.  He now has a career.  Bill Paxton, who once said some very
bad things to the Terminator, is an over-the-top, raunchy riot as
Simon.  Art Malik, good as the Hissable Villain, gets a great
double-take near the end.  And even Charleton Heston breezes through
with two tart scenes as an agency head.
     Only Tia Carrere sticks out like a sore thumb.  She has the looks,
but the not the chops, to hold her own with these pros.
     Cameron's script, adapted from the little known French farce LA
TOTALE, has more wit than the genre typically permits.  But, then
again, a James Cameron film typically *defines* the genre it's in and
not vice versa.  Watch how deftly the director mixes campy comedy and
sexy sincerity into Helen's strip tease (don't ask).  It's the best
scene in the film.
     Last, but by no means least, are the show-stoppers.  Try a horse
chasing a motorcycle onto the roof of a skyscraper. Or a public
restroom shootout that's a ballet with bullets. Or a great car chase
through the Florida Keys sans section of bridge.  Scene after scene
after stunt after stunt-- all as a fabulous $100 million dollar
reminder of why James Cameron is one of the top technically
accomplished filmmakers on the planet.

Author
Jeff Pidgeon
        "True Lies", the latest effort from James ("Aliens") Cameron, certain-
ly has its (reputed) $120 million on the screen.  Cameron seems to spent a few
weekends watching Jackie Chan films while muttering to himself, "Aww, I can do
that!"  And as spectacle, "True Lies" is indeed hard to match.
        The film starts off well enough with a James-Bond-like escapade --
Arnold flirts with Tia Carrere, (a corporate antiquites dealer) acesses some
computer files upstairs to get some dirt for the plot, and escapes with dozens
of armed guards in various pursuit vehicles.  It's great fun, and the action
and light dusting of humor works well together.  Then the problems start to 
surface.
        We soon learn that Arnold's marriage (to Jamie Lee Curtis, in another
engaging performance) is on shaky ground -- being a super-spy takes up a lot of
your quality time, and the opening escapade made him miss his own birthday
party with his wife and daughter.  We're told that this happens quite a bit,
since Arnold's buddy (Tom Arnold) seems to be in constant backup/support mode,
both in his professional and personal life to a degree.  The marital strain
comes to a head when Arnold discovers that his wife is having an affair with a
used-car salesman (played foot-to-the-floor by Bill "Game Over" Paxton) who is
pretending to be a spy to attract her interest.  It seems Jamie Lee is bored
and wants some excitement in her life.
        What would seem to be a terrific premise -- Spy loses wife to fake spy,
but can't win her back by telling the truth without endangering her life --
begins to unravel in the middle of the film.  Arnold, now in a jealous tiff,
uses the agency's personnel and technology to tail his own wife and discover
who his rival is.  This seems reasonable (since being a spy is what he does for
a living), if excessive (even being as open as he seems to be, he refuses to
confront her with it at the dinner table -- it's more "fun" to break out the 
helicopters, men in camoflage and eentsy-teensy cameras).  He then breaks into
the rival's trailer (an understatement -- it's torn in two by automatic       
weapons' fire) and, "disguised" as a terrorist group, kidnaps both of them.
The car salesman is carted out in the middle of nowhere and threatened -- this
guy is such a scumbag that it does work as comedy -- while the wife is brought 
to an interrogation room (presumably back at the agency) and pumped by the two
Arnolds in order to find out just what has happened in this affair and what
state his marriage is in.  This is also played for laughs, but it comes off as
more manipulative (almost cruel) than funny.  If you're concerned that your
wife doesn't love you any more, jerking her around in such a flamboyant manner
seems like an odd way to show it.  When Arnold asks her if she loves her husband
 and she says she always has and always will, we're supposed to be touched.
It's just hard not to wonder how she would feel if she knew who the interro-   
gator was.
        The charade doesn't stop there -- Arnold basically forces his own
wife (since she's entangled in this situation, she has to work for the agency or
go to prison) into working on a "mission" -- step two of his plan to win her 
back.  The set-up is a "La Femme Nikita" type deal where she is to play the 
part of a prostitute in order to bug the client's hotel room.  Arnold is really
 the client, but she doesn't know that.  Using a recording as a surrogate voice,
he orders her to strip and dance in her underwear.  This is supposed to be ro-
matic (at least in terms of 'spicing up her life'), but it comes off as another
bizarre control game.  Fortunately, the terrorists who have been playing Mum-
bledy-peg during all of this decide to get things underway and capture the two
of them.
        Arnold finally tells Jamie Lee the truth (now that it's mostly unnece- 
ssary), but he's high on truth serum, so any hope of character development is
dashed.  The two of them manage to shoot, stab and flame-thrower their way out
of the enemy camp.  For some odd reason, Arnold can do all the violence he     
wants (odd after his latest attempts to be PC -- "T2" and "Last Action Hero"),
while Jamie Lee's killing is mostly accidental.  This is especially odd after
the strong female leads in Cameron's other films.  Unfortunately, the bad guys
have nabbed the remaining warheads (smuggled to their destination inside 
Persian antiquities -- hence Carrere's role in the plot) and bolted.  The remain
der of the film involves stopping the terrorists with a Harrier air attack on
a bridge, capping off with arnold snagging one of the Harriers to stop the
Crazed Terrorist Guy Capable Of Anything to Keep The Plot Going.  This culmin-
ates in Arnold's daughter being kidnapped, a fight atop the Harrier (which is
truly miraculous) which itself ends with a helicopter, some police cars, the 
villian and at least one floor of a high-rise being destroyed.
        The film as it stands with its bravura action set-pieces is entertain-
ing and funny in spots.  Tom Arnold makes a great sidekick, and I wouldn't be
surprised to see them together again in Arnold's next one.  Overall, though,
the film is just as loud and obnoxious as funny -- there's quite a parade of 
dick/piss jokes, as well as a lot of women-bashing jokes that wear thin.
The script in general is pretty juvenile and not terribly intricate considering
the good premise underneath.  Bill Paxton has one good freak-out.  This is the
third movie to try aggressively mixing action and humor, and it falls somewhere
in between "Demolition Man" (which I felt worked) and "Last Action Hero" (which
was a total wipe-out for me).  Not recommended.

Author
Gharlane of Eddore
TRUE LIES  -- Romantic Comedy's Finest Hour.   ***+ out of four.
     If you've seen any of the "four-walled" TV ads, any of the "Making
Of" one-hour commercials shown in prime time, or the twelve-foot
posters they're using to cover up some of the buildings downtown,
you're aware of this movie, and you probably already have a good idea
of the plot.
     Since it's a re-processed version of a previous movie script by
Claude Zidi, Simon Michael, and Didier Kaminka, there are no huge
surprises; movie is a long, pleasant exploration of scenes and themes
we've come to expect from any "B" spy flick.   What lifts the movie out
of the ordinary is that James Cameron re-wrote the original version of
the script, got some decent production budgeting, and directed at the
top of his typically excellent form.
     TRUE LIES is not a realistic spy movie.  It's a comedy that opens
with an homage to the Connery Bond films, and then goes even a little
crazier.
     Without giving too much of the plot away, Harry (played by Arnold
Schwarzenegger) is what movies call a spy.  (In real life, a spy rarely
carries a gun, or does anything that gets into the papers.)   Harry
pretends to be a computer salesman who's even more boring than Clark
Kent.   He has a beautiful bored wife, an out-of-control teen-aged
daughter, and his life is disintegrating without him even being aware
that he's spending too much time on his job.
     By accident, Harry discovers that his wife is seeing another man, a
man who seems to lead the exciting life of a spy.   He sees red, and
uses the power of his position to toy with the seducer and put his wife
on the spot, trying to get even in a more subtle way than merely
twisting the lout's head off.
     In the process, he discovers how much his wife loves him and how
much he loves her, and precipitates them both into the middle of a
Bondian nightmare involving terrorists in possession of nuclear
weapons.
     There is great humor throughout; Schwarzenegger's command of comedic
timing has been improving steadily for decades, and his screen presence
has come to project as much warmth and humor as physical power and
threat.  This role is a solid step in his career development, a worthy
sequel to his work in THE LAST ACTION HERO, the most under-rated
children's fantasy since THE NEVER-ENDING STORY.
     Jamie Lee Curtis, normally underutilized in dramatic roles, proves
once again that talent and intelligence can make you simultaneously
cringe and get a stitch from laughing.  In one of her best scenes, her
character pretends to be a hooker dancing for someone she thinks is a
paying customer.  Lithely slinking up against a canopied bedstead, she
loses her balance and does a classic pratfall and high-hauteur recovery
that would get a standing ovation from Charlie Chaplin.  In the hands
of a lesser performer, Curtis' part would have degenerated into a
series of low-comedy reaction shot mugging sequences, but her acting
imbues her character with complete believability; she is totally
acceptable as an athletic housewife trying to cope with an incredible
situation.   Even while you're laughing, her character comes across
solidly, as a real person.
     The producers managed to get the cooperation of the U.S. Marine
Corps for the use of a couple of Hawker "Harrier" jets in the climactic
action sequences; these will rank as some of the best high-tech
suspense work put on film in this decade.   The Director of
Photography, Russell Carpenter, already justly famed for his work on
movies like THE WIZARD OF SPEED AND TIME, may well be up for an Oscar
for some of the things he pulled off in this movie.
     Having a national icon like Charleton Heston suddenly pop up in a
perfectly executed role adds to the richness of the movie; his
character is the consummate quintessence of the movie spymaster, a joy
to behold.
     TRUE LIES has topnotch supporting performances by the likes of Tia
Carrere, Tom Arnold, and Art Malik and Bill Paxton.   Brad Fiedel's
music is worthy of mention, since it's light, imaginative, and
contributive.  (Of course, you may wish to bring ear plugs to wear
during the end credits; like most current movies, TRUE LIES suddenly
develops a raucous "rock" soundtrack during the end credits, completely
out of keeping with the rest of the movie, and *not* the product of the
movie's composer.)
     You won't feel like you wasted your time and your money if you
have to see this one at evening-movie prices.   It's worth the trip,
and the photography and production values make it worthwhile to see it
on a large screen, with a 70mm print.   However, this movie is good
enough that it will play well on any size screen; you're not paying for
just the cinematography.   James Cameron Did Good, and this is probably
the Good Movie this summer.
TRUE LIES    ***+   (three and a half stars out of four)
  A 20th Century Fox release from Lightstorm, starring Arnold
  Schwarzenegger, Jamie Lee Curtis; also starring good direction and
  good script from Cameron, and Russ Carpenter's superb photography.
  Rated -R-, primarily due to language and total body count.
  (But, as "Harry" says during the movie, "They were all Bad Guys.")
This is a positive, happy fantasy, and much more fun than anything 
you'll ever see from Disney.   Enjoy!

Author
David Wilcock
            Starring Arnold Schwarzenegger, Jamie Lee Curtis, Tom Arnold,
Bill Paxton and Art Malik
Schwarzenegger stars in one of the silliest films of 1994. Everything in
this film is ridiculous, and the audience suspension of disbelief is pushed
to the limit. Schwarzenegger plays a secret agent who, somehow, manages to
convince his wife (Curtis) thathe is a computer salesman for 15 years. Why
didn't he just come out with it? She probably would have found it more
attractive. And I wish I knew how to keep a secret for 15 years. Anyway,
Schwarzenegger gets involved in a plot involving a terrorist (Malik) and
Curtis also gets mixed up into it. Throughout the film, we also suffers
Schwarzenegger sidekick, played by Tom Arnold, cracking a few jokes.
And this is one long action movie, coming in at 2 hours 20 minutes. Like
most of Camerons films, such as The Abyss, Terminator 2 and the recent
Titanic (which are all over 2 hours, and Titanic is 3 hours 22 mins), every
scene is his favourite
one, and he is never sure what to edit out. Sadly this film is just too
long (but not as boring or tedious as Terminator 2) and if it wasn't saved
by the exciting action at the end, this film would be a waste of time.
Bill Paxton provides some more comic relief as a man who cons women
(including Curtis) that he is a secret agent. There's some funny
Schwarzenegger 'acting' as he tries to show anger, but fails miserably.
There's also a good sequence with Paxton and Schwarzenegger as they drive
in a car. 
The film has some other good things aswell. The action scenes are well
directed, pulling surprises and some big set pieces. Malik is suitably evil
as the terrorist, although most of his screen time is near the end, and we
never see any motivation on why he would want to bomb America, there's just
a quick 10 second sequence of him giving a quick speech. This is not good
enough, and considering the length of the film anyway, a little more time
could of been spent on Malik's character, who is actually quite intresting.
The recent George Clooney vehicle The Peacemaker set up the terrorist
better, and this film should of set up the terrorist like The Peacemaker.
Schwarzenegger's peformance is the usual quick speeches, one liners and
grunting, Arnold is moderatly amusing, Curtis issuitably dorky, although a
dance sequence with her is incredibly embarassing, and Paxton is great fun.
Tia Carrere (Wayne's
World, High School High) is wasted, however, and her character seems a bit
pointless. The special effects (by Digital Domain, who did the effects for
Dante's Peak) are good, especially in the last 30 minutes. The score is
punchy enough, although it's a bit too 'majestic' for this type of film. 
But the screenplay, by Cameron and based on a french film called La
Totatle! is stupid, and some of the scenes would just not happen in real
life. The ending, though fun, is ridiculous. The editing is too loose, with
far too many minor scenes. This film could of come in at 2 hours with a few
cuts, and the film does lag a bit during the middle.
Overall, though, True Lies proves to be just enough fun considering how
long it is, and, in the end, is just a basicSchwarzenegger movie, although
not as good as Total Recall, which is more fun, and not as long. Just about
recommended.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Arnold Schwarzenegger, Jamie Lee Curtis, Tom Arnold,
           Bill Paxton, Tia Carrere, Art Malik.
Screenplay/Director:  James Cameron.
     Was this the same James Cameron?  I thought to myself.  The same
James Cameron who gave us ALIENS, THE ABYSS and the TERMINATOR films?
It was not for want of action that I questioned the lineage of TRUE
LIES; indeed, Cameron continues to define the state of the art in the
genre.  But was this the same man who created some of the strongest
female characters in recent memory, producing such a mean-spirited and
misogynist throwback to the glory days of James Bond?  Although parts
of TRUE LIES work extremely well, its long detour into an unnecessary
and unpleasant sub-plot left me with a very bad taste in my mouth.
     TRUE LIES stars Arnold Schwarzenegger as Harry Tasker, a mild-
mannered computer salesman--at least that's what his wife Helen (Jamie
Lee Curtis) thinks.  In fact, Harry is a government agent with the
anti-terrorist Omega Sector, and has been for all fifteen years of
their marriage.  While in the middle of an investigation, Harry begins
to think that Helen is looking for excitement in an affair with a slimy
car salesman (Bill Paxton), and sets out to find out for sure.  But bad
guys aren't considerate of marital strife, and one particular terrorist
(Art Malik) threatens to place an even darker cloud--mushroom-shaped--
over the Taskers.
     I compared TRUE LIES to the James Bond films, and those
comparisons are both for good and bad.  The opening sequence features
Harry infiltrating a Swiss mansion to obtain computer files, then
dazzling beautiful art dealer Tia Carrere with his tango skills.  When
he is discovered, he flees and ends up pursued by gunmen on skis, a
device used at least twice in the Bond series.  Not that it's a
problem; the scene is sharply executed, and complemented by the
surprisingly entertaining supporting work of Tom Arnold as Harry's
partner Gib.  However, it holds out promise for a witty film based on
action set pieces, and that's not exactly what develops.
     Instead, TRUE LIES takes a sharp left turn into farce, and for
nearly half an hour becomes an entirely different film.  TRUE LIES is
loosely based on the French farce LA TOTALE, but Schwarzenegger is
extremely ill-suited for what this sub-plot asks him to do.  When Harry
suspects his wife of infidelity, he uses all of the technology at his
disposal to find out the truth, and proceeds to misunderstand phone
conversations and catch Helen in awkward but explainable positions.
For all its flash and star power, this segment of TRUE LIES plays like
little more than a $100 million episode of "Three's Company."  But it's
not just that it is contrived and interrupts the flow of the film.  It
also features Harry treating his wife with an astonishing level of
mental cruelty, and it's all played for laughs.  With another, more
plain-looking actor, this treatment might have come off as more
light-hearted.  Schwarzenegger, however, simply looks too angry, and
scenes like Harry's interrogation of Helen which had most of the
audience howling with delight had me literally cringing.
     The spectacular final hour of TRUE LIES is almost enough to tip
the balance back in its favor.  The digital effects which enhance a
harrier jet assault on a Miami highrise are spectacular, and the
pyrotechnics are dynamic.  But I could never lose myself in TRUE LIES
because of the jarring shifts between broad comedy and big action.  It
may be a funnier, more technically proficient film than HUDSON HAWK,
but it belongs in the same genre:  the multi-million dollar caper.  For
many viewers, all that will matter is that Arnold fires of a couple
hundred thousand rounds, a bridge blows up, and there are some solid
laughs.  For me, a film like TRUE LIES could only work with a lighter
touch and considerably less of a nasty edge.  With Cameron delivering
so many of his jokes through clenched teeth, I found TRUE LIES
depressing almost as often as I found it fun.

Author
Chris Klecker
     Well summer is finally over and can I say that it didn't go out
without a few bangs.  The summer of '94 for movies was in fact a gold
mine for theaters all over the world,(at least the ones smart enough to
buy JURASSIC PARK) moreover made last summer look like ISHTAR.  Let's
start with the surprise hit of the season:
1)  SPEED - Starring Keanu Reeves
{rated R for some violence, (a decapitation here and there) and some mild
language}  
     Whoa! Let's start off with a little known fact that this movie
wasn't to be released until July.  So why the early rush?  Watch and
find out.  Keanu Reeves turns out to be cast perfectly in this riveting
installment of the popular terrorist movie brigade.  Keanu Reeves plays
a bomb squad boy scout who is up against a mad bomber; who else but
Dennis Hopper, who is forced to stop a bomb from exploding on the bus.
The trick is, the bomb activates once its speed limit is over 50, then
will detonate if it dips below this speed.  Past the very simple plot,
the movie turns out to be the most totally implausible piece of
Hollywood hardware to hit the screen since T-2.  Do you care?  You
shouldn't.  Even though things happen that can only be possible via
theater, it really doesn't take away from the spirit of the movie.
Just be prepared to be on the edge of your seat for about an hour and a
half.
                                        grade:  A-
     Let's keep this short since I'm almost sure everyone out there is
just sick about hearing the death for Brandon Lee during a take in this
movie.  THE CROW is in fact a very symbolic, gory, and extremely
Gothic.  Mr. Lee plays a slain guitarist who comes back to life to
avenge the death of himself and his wife.  There is in fact only one
scene that takes place in the daylight, after that, you're in the dark,
watching Brandon get shot up about a couple quadrillion times.  Surely
not for all tastes, but if you were into Tim Burton's "Batman" movies
and A NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS, you'll feel right at home with this
cozy birthday treat.
                                        grade:  B+
     Is this it?  Hope so, cause I just about had enough of Axel Foley
and that sicking synth music thing on every soundtrack.  Oh well!
Eddie Murphy returns once again to reprise the role of Detroit police
officer Axel Foley whom I think gets lost while chasing after drug
offenders and ends up knocking on the office door of our Beverly Hills
regular Judge Rhinehold.  I sort of feel sorry for Judge having to come
back and make yet another fool of himself, but hey, I'm not concerned
with Judge.  Okay Eddie, it's your turn.  First off, we see Eddie bust
a drug ring in a chop shop.  Then we see his captain die, yet to be
followed by watching him walk all over the state of California as
though he owned it.  Okay, so was it funny? Yes.  It was funnier than
BHC II, yet it was pitiful and not real original.  Axel has to stop a
Security chief of an amusement park where he counterfeits money in a
secret room.  (Yawwwwwwn.)  Well, Eddie, see you in GOLDEN CHILD II
(heh heh).
                                        grade:  C+
4) MAVERICK - starring Mel Gibson, Jodie Foster     
{I can't remember the rating.  Do you care anymore?}
     One lousy half-hour too long.  Aside from that not a bad movie.
Mel Gibson plays a card-dealing, mule riding sharp-shooter who deems it
a necessity to play in the huge poker tournament with a enrollment fee
of $25,000.  (That's right $25,000.)  Well, Mel has only $22,000; drat,
a few bucks short, and we follow him on his journey to collect the
other $3,000, plus make sure that his lady friend (Jodie) doesn't run
off with the other $22,000.  It ends up being a very silly, yet
entertaining movie to bring your grandparents too, after making the
mistake of telling them THE CROW wasn't that bad.  I can only recommend
this movie if you enjoy Gibson and his wittiness.
                                        grade:  B
     I laughed myself senseless watching this movie.  Don't get the
wrong idea.  It's not that it's stupid, well okay maybe a little out of
its league, but THE SHADOW come on differently than many other movies
you may have seen.  The key it its success was its wit.  Alec Baldwin
is the Shadow.  A man who appears invisible only because he feels like
it.  He clouds the minds of his victims so that all they see is his
shadow.  However, the movie seems to base itself on the Shadow's past,
with the slogan ("Who knows what evil lurks in the hearts of men?") and
billboard header.  Catchy!
                                        grade:  B+
     Another notch on the James Cameron wall of success.  However, this
time he bounced his checkbook.  This $127 million movie was worth the
price, with effects so spell-binding and exciting that you actually
think the director deemed it necessary to destroy the connecting bridge
from the Florida Keys to Miami.  However, if you saw this movie, you
didn't leave happy to see Arnold.  That's Tom Arnold all right, playing
Arnold's partner in the CIA.  It was good to see Tom playing a role
that doesn't make him look like a fool.  Even better, his part was
HUGE!  Arnold plays a working father for the CIA special branch, with a
cover so deep, his wife thinks he works with computers (ditto for the
kid).  Eventually, though he breaks the news to his wife after we have
to bear a somewhat funny subplot where Arnold thinks his wife is having
an affair.  After Jamie Lee Curtis discovers the truth, she forgives
him the instant she nailed 10 Cubans with a machine gun.
                                        grade: B+
7) FORREST GUMP - Starring Tom Hanks
{PG}
     The tear-jerker movie of the movie of the summer that happens to
be the best movie of the summer.  Tom Hanks gives us one of his best
performances as a southern idiot who teaches Elvis to Dance, plays
football for Alabama, fight in the Vietnam war, is given the
Congressional Medal of Honor, starts a shrimping boat, and run over the
United States until his legs eventually got tired.  It was a long movie
but after it's over you won't leave mad.
P.S. Right now I recommend you see ANDRE, for I hear it's very good and
I smash THE CLIENT because I found it totally uninteresting..

Author
John M. Bozeman
     I love a good movie that skillfully unites a variety of genres.
Indeed, the "Lethal Weapon" series, in the mind of this reviewer, is a
modern classic as a result of its brilliant mixing of thriller, comic,
and tragic elements.  Achieving such a blend also appears to have been
the goal of the makers of TRUE LIES, in which an agent for a
super-secret government agency unintentionally finds his family
involved as he fights a ring of crazed Muslim terrorists intent on
setting off nuclear bombs in the United States.
     Our hero, played by none other than Arnold Schwarzenegger, leads
a double life.  Supposedly, he is a mild-mannered computer salesman.
In fact, he is so mild mannered that his wife (Jamie Lee Curtis) is
about to have an affair with a used-car salesman posing as a secret
agent, simply to give her life more purpose and pizazz.  Before long,
however, she finds herself involved in real life exploits, as she
herself is accidentally vacuumed up along with her husband the
terrorists.
     TRUE LIES attempts to combine the elements of thriller and
domestic comedy.  While a number of reviewers have found the movie to
be successful in this endeavor, this one is forced to take a much more
moderate tone.  It is true that there are some genuinely funny moments
in the purposely overplayed scenes, as in the case of Arnie's initial
encounter with his wife's would-be lover.  And some of the chase
scenes--such as a motorcycle-and-horse chase through an expensive
hotel--are also quite entertaining.  But there are also times when the
action veers from the merely highly improbable into the simply
impossible, such as when a dropped gun manages to kill a sizable number
of bad guys while leaving the heros undamaged.
     Also, some scenes dragged on too long, and could have used more
editing.  A couple of these were not only lengthy; they were also
embarrassing and gave rise to a sense of moral outrage, as our "hero"
uses his access to government facilities not merely to follow, but also
to psychologically torture his wife on two occasions.
     TRUE LIES is thus a mixed bag.  Some aspects of the movie are
excellent, but there are also substantial flaws.  I would suggest it is
good for a matinee or a "bargain" theater, but am less enthusiastic
about it as a full price blockbuster.

Author
Roger Snappy Rubio
Starring Arnold Schwarzenegger, Jamie Lee Curtis, Tom Arnold, and
         Charlton Heston
Directed by James Cameron
     Wow!  This movie was an amazing flick.  Jaw-dropping special
effects, action sequences, light-hearted humor, something for
everyone.  Schwarzenegger is on the come-back trail, but this movie
doesn't quite do it yet.  Keep it going, Arnie, you're doing good.
     TRUE LIES is the story of Harry Tasker, a secret agent busy
thwarting nuclear threats and saving the world from certain
destruction, while convincingly lying to his wife that he's a computer
sales representative for fifteen years.  A little implausible, but
pulled off expertly by both Cameron and Schwarzenegger.  TRUE LIES is
based on a French film (the name escapes me right now) of the same
plot.  Arnie suggested that Cameron remake it, and TRUE LIES is the
result.  It took seven months to shoot the entire thing, costing a
reported $100 million.  The result is worth watching.
     Jamie Lee Curtis was not the actress I would have picked for the
role of Helen Tasker, Harry's wife, but she proved me wrong.  Curtis
pulls off both a shy, reserved wife, and later, a sexy, desirable woman
that can play all kinds of roles.  Tom Arnold steals the show with all
the good, snide remarks he has, and finally proves he can act.  Arnie
is back in full form as a gun-toting action hero, and finally
acknowledges not to make fun of the genre that made him famous.  Every
character in this movie has character, which is a trait lacking in most
action movies nowadays, and is a little refreshing.
     TRUE LIES marks the first film where Digital Domain took over for
the digital special effects, and they are a sight to see for their
first outing.  An overall good start for a fledgling special effects
house.  Most of the effects are hard to find, which is the way it
should be.  The use of the effects is outstanding, and nothing looks
too hokey.  You can always tell where they had to use special effects,
but Cameron uses them so well you don't care.
     A definite recommendation.  It's definitely worth full price at
the box office.

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: James Cameron
Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Jamie Lee Curtis, Tom Arnold, Tia 
Carerre, Art Malik, Bill Paxton, Grant Heslov, Elika Dushku, Charlton 
Heston
In the last 30 minutes of "True Lies," we get to see Arnold 
Schwarzenegger take out three-quarters of a camp of evil baddies armed 
with a pistol, a machine gun, and a combination of a machine gun and oil 
pump; see him leap off a dock after running from an incoming rocket 
aimed at him; see a huge bridge in the Florida Keys get blown away; see 
Arnold pull his wife from an out-of-control car, causing her to dangle 
from a helicopter; and see him attack a bunch of nasty terrorists in 
downtown Miami in a huge jet.  I've seldomnly laughed harder.
Ian Flemming once said of the character he created, "Bond is what every 
man wants to be, and knows damn well he can't."  Well, this is very 
true, and the subject of the film, Harry Travers (Ah-nold), is a regular 
everyday joe (with abs of steel) who is married to a career mom (Jamie 
Lee Curtis), has a daughter (Elisha Dushku), and has a busy computer 
salesman job...or does he?  We meet Harry on one of his Bondish missions 
to an elite party in Sweeden where he must do something cool with a 
computer (how it all works is not relevant, as these tiny details are 
never relevant in the Bond films either).  He works as a kind of 
superman, always shooting right on target, never being hit, and being 
able to walk right in front of a car that skids an inch from his face on 
ice.  Then he can shoot a couple bad guys from behind a truck passing 
the bullet through the window.  Then he returns home, sleeps with his 
bored wife, and talks endlessly about "the exciting world of computers."
The film is divided into three acts.  The first one sets up this whole 
premise, where he lies to his wife about his boring job when he is in 
fact leading a great 007-style life, working for a highly secret branch 
of the government.  His current mission has him doing something with 
some bad, insane Middle Easterns led by the great Art Malik.  Also 
included somehow is the very elegant and sexy Juno (Tia Carerre).  But 
this is all secondary to the deal with his wife, who may be cheating on 
Harry with a suave guy who says he's a spy like Harry (Bill Paxton).  
This is in the hysterical second act which is there to stretch the 
premise to its seemingly limitless limits.  How this whole thing comes 
out is one of the true geniuses of this flick.
The third act is composed of Harry and his wife escaping and trying to 
stop the baddies from blowing up downtown Miami with a nuclear weapon.  
This is where many of the coolest stunts occur, with the bridges blowing 
up, and Harry taking on all the baddies with a jet in downtown Miami.  
While this is just breathtaking to look at, in another lesser film, this 
would be just there to look cool and that's it.  In this film, it's not 
only breathtaking, but inspired.
The way this film is handled is with a kind of authentic absurdity.  The 
filmmakers know the storyline is crap, and they handle it that way.  
They seem to revel in the enormous plot holes in the spy storyline.  And 
they seem to take enormous glee in the whole affair subplot that 
dominates the second act.  The action sequences are great to look at and 
downright hysterical.  James Cameron goes for laughs with everything, 
but does not overdo it at all.  The film is subtle in the way that this 
is all looked at with a kind of that's-the-way-things-are attitude, 
which provides for most of the jokes to actually be funny.  While Arnold 
has done the hokey-comedy ("Twins") and the only-occasionally-funny 
("Last Action Hero"), here he gets to do great comedy which is perfectly 
mixed with great action.
Arnold, in fact, has rarely been better.  Yes, at first he seems miscast 
as the husband who has the boring job.  I mean, look at him - he's built 
more than Conan on steroids and talks with an ominous and sometimes 
unintelligable Austrian accent (that's Austrian, not...oh nevermind).  
But he has a great knack for comedy, seeming to almost parody himself in 
his action flicks.  And he has a great sidekick, the surprisingly 
awesome Tom Arnold, who wouldn't be his sidekick if this was "Eraser."
And somehow James Cameron pulls this all off.  He's always been a great 
director, seeming to stretch the action limits in all kinds of 
directions.  And everything looks great and not just like some cool 
special effects.  This is much more satisfying than any of Arnold's 
other action flicks, with exception to the "Terminator" flicks (also 
directed by Cameron).  What results is a cleverly written, beautifully 
executed action/comedy which is adrenalin pumping AND hysterical.  No 
wonder this was one of the most entertaining films of 1994.  I highly, 
highly, highly reccomend this incredible action pic to anyone who's 
tired of the same boring "Eraser"-esque action flick.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
James J. DiBenedetto
     First thing--it's a comic book put to live-action film.  A $100
million (or more, depending on the source) live-action comic book.
It's not realistic in the least, and it's not ashamed.  If you're the
type of person who says "But there were 10 bad guys shooting at the
hero!  How could they all miss him?", you're probably not going to
enjoy "True Lies".  But if you can suspend your disbelief for 2 hours
and 20 minutes, you're in for one hell of a ride.
     The plot is pretty simple: Arnold Schwarzenegger is a spy (working
for some really-ultra-secret outfit called "Omega Sector", powerful
enough that field agent Arnold can get directly connected to the White
House in a crisis), whose job is to hunt down terrorists.  Trouble is,
he's never told his wife (Jamie Lee Curtis), instead telling her that
he's a computer salesman.  The story gets moving as two apparently
unrelated plots develop.  In one, Arn, along with partner Tom Arnold,
are on the trail of a radical terrorist group that might have nuclear
weapons.  This involves infiltrating a high-class party in Switzerland,
and a horse-and- motorcycle chase through Washington, D.C., among other
stunts.  The second plot is more mundane:  Arn thinks his wife is
cheating on him.  Arn decides to find out for sure, using all the
resources at his disposal (wiretaps, bugs in his wife's purse, etc.) to
do so.  And then ... well, things get complicated, finally resulting in a
truly stunning sequence involving helicopters, Harrier jets and people
dangling from a crane hundreds of feet in the air.
     All in all, it's great fun.  The stunts are truly amazing--the
Harrier sequence in particular.  You can see every penny of the $100
million budget on the screen.  And the acting?  Big Arnie is good--he's
mastered these kind of roles--taking himself and the film just
seriously enough not to make it a farce, but no more.  And Tom Arnold,
as the wisecracking sidekick, is surprisingly good.  Jamie Lee Curtis
turns in a fine performance, especially when her character gets
something to do.
     To sum it up, I highly recommend this film.  Just don't think
about it too deeply.
-- 
Dr. James J. DiBenedetto - SUNY Buffalo School of Law Class of 1994
jjd@ubunix.buffalo.edu or jjd3@po.cwru.edu

Author
Jon Ridge
CAST:  Arnold Schwarzenegger, Jamie Lee Curtis, Tom Arnold, Bill Paxton,
       Art Malik, Tia Carrere
DIRECTOR:  James Cameron
SCREENPLAY:  James Cameron
CINEMATOGRAPHY:  Russel Carpenter  /  VE:  Digital Domain
RUNNING TIME:  2:19
RELEASE  --  July 15, 1994
     In the midst of an unusually less-exorbitant summer than past
years have seen comes TRUE LIES, the latest collaboration between two
science-fiction-action minds that marks a change of pace for Director
James Cameron and a return to form for his mega-superstar.  Their part
James Bond-esque thriller opus, part black comedy opens and closes with
manic destruction, and intelligently leaves behind a hugely lame
mid-plot that wouldn't seem to fit in the explosive universe of *any*
gratuitously exciting spectacle such as this.
     It's relatively clear what Cameron is aiming for: An average
working man (Schwarzenegger) living a life of big-time violence by day
and mundane family life by evening.  His wife Helen (Jamie Lee Curtis)
has absolutely no idea the kinds of things he does while they're
apart--running from terrorists across snowy mountainous landscapes in
Switzerland, fist fighting Arabs in bathrooms.  She just knows his
career as Sales Rep. for a computer company is keeping him at work and
away from her and their daughter way too much, too often when it counts
most.  This monologue (apparently derived from a French film) is fine
and good; not terribly original, not terribly without farce.
Unfortunately, Director/Screenwriter Cameron feels it necessary to up
the stakes, supplying a potentially straight-forward action lover's
dream-come-true with a moronic subtext of infidelity that starts
awkwardly and ends up borderline tasteless.
     It seems as though Hellen, the wife Harry Tasker has taken for
granted throughout the 15 years of their marriage, has gotten rather
exhausted with just being the 'good wife.'  She wants to role-play,
find and bring to life the adventure she's inexcusably let pass her
by.  The possibility is handed her by a smug wimp named Simon, who
convinces Helen he is some sort of secret agent when actually he's
nothing more than a lowly car salesman.  Simon rips bravery off others,
gives it his name and delivers the package to women totally bored with
home life and (more to the point) their gutless husbands.  That's his
angle, and it works perfectly.  Only this time Simon has picked just
the wrong woman for his jwa' de' vive' (can you tell I'm not French)
because Helen isn't only loyal and unchangeably devoted, she's married
to the real thing--a super-spy with a pension for brutality.
     Difficult as it is to put up with such debris, we keep trudging
along for we know exactly what will be rewarded us in the end.
However, this black comedy half of the film is worth some negative
comment.  Once Harry finds out what his wife is up to (what he *thinks*
is going on), he appears wind-stripped like nothing any terrorist could
ever culprit.  His esteemed colleague Gib (played by Tom Arnold)
notices and comments that affairs are a part of marriage, but being the
good friend he is wants to cheer up a pal: "We're gonna catch some
terrorists, beat the crap out of them.  You'll feel a hell of a lot
better."  That's funny.  What isn't so cute is Harry's explicit
investigation into his wife's goings-on from that point on; tracking
her, tapping her phone and ultimately--in this film's true low point--
sacking her head, locking her in a dark room and interrogating her.
Helen moves from terror to tears during this out-stretched, difficult
to watch sequence that builds a major wall against any sort of
satisfying outcome the film might want to reach ... might have done so
successfully.  Luckily, the wise-cracking Tom Arnold is around to
smooth the path every now and again.  If not for him, what has to be
some 35-minutes of degrading nonsense (including a husband's sexual
fantasia watching his wife strip-tease around a bed post) would be
intolerable.
     TRUE LIES comes to during its back half, in which Harry has to
save his wife and country from a psychotic Arab liberalist.  Reportedly
this film cost as much as our national debt to make, and it inebriates
us during a fantastic limo rescue scene (Schwarzenegger dangling from a
helicopter and pulling Curtis from an impossibly-moving car, just
before it crashes to the ocean's surface) and an even more spectacular
sequence, featuring Schwarzenegger at the helm of a marine harrier,
that ranks with Renny Harlin's CLIFFHANGER opening as one of the very
best jaw-droppers in film history.
     When Schwarz landed that baby, I wanted to forget what came before
it.  I really did.  But I couldn't.  James Cameron's first (I believe)
production outside the science-fiction realm--in which he's master--is
a mock epic, giving trivial events monumental proportions.  It's not
only unnecessary to the final conclusion ... it's a little sick.  I'm
not sure at what point Cameron lost his way writing this thing, found
it detrimental not to stoop, but despite what's wrong here is a whole
lot to gaze at and laugh at.  TRUE LIES is one humongous detonated
bomb, with no story to back it up.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     TRUE LIES is an incredible show!  It had the energy of a great
powerful Mahler (or perhaps Shostakovich) symphony.  It was in four
parts, and except for the andante 2nd movement, it was one with all of
the horns and kettle drums at full force.  Like Mahler there was even
the light playful little parts in the heat of show as great and
hilarious one liners would send the audience into laughter and then off
we were again into another cliff hanger.
     For those non-musicologists, think of James Bond, but a lot more
believable.  Think of the recent movie SPEED, but give it some heart
and give it even better action shots.
     The set up of the plot is that Arnold Schwarzenegger is a spy but
his wife, Jamie Lee Curtis, thinks he is just a boring old computer
salesman.  As a spy, he is called upon to fight terrorists all over the
world.  The terrorists manage not to pay any attention at all to his
schedule of trying being at home with his wife and teenage daughter for
dinner.  And you thought your day was hectic.
     The only flaw in the movie is the slow 2nd part.  It works pretty
well with the exception of the interrogation scene which has been
called cruel by some critics.  You can judge for yourself.  I did not
care for that scene, but did like the other parts of the movement
albeit not near as much as the rest of movie.
     They spent $160 million on the movie, and it shows.  It has some
of the best and most realistic stunts in a long time.  The script was
very creative and imaginative.  In the movie trailers, you can see
Arnold on a horse chasing a bad guy on a motorcycle through a park,
through a hotel lobby and then on adjoining glass outdoor elevators.
This scene has great tension and yet is funny at the same time in the
movie.  There are many scenes where one must suspend disbelief, but in
this movie it is extremely easy.
     Of the many sidesplitting one liners is the explanation of why the
lead terrorist goes by the name of desert spider.  You will have to see
the movie to find out.  If I explained it, you wouldn't understand.
The director and producer was James Cameron (of Aliens fame).  If you
read the credits you can see how he fired the original 3 screenwriters
and then took over the writing job himself and rewrote their script.
It is terrific.
     I found myself clapping many times at some of the action scenes
during the show and many times I was laughing out loud.  Ditto for
numerous other members of the audience.
     The acting is top-notch all around.  Schwarzenegger is at his
best.  Curtis plays a good wife sidekick role that is varied and
believable.  I was surprised to see Tom Arnold do an excellent job as
the other spy.  Even the daughter (Eliza Dushku) has a small but
important role.  Teenagers I am sure will be cheering loudly for her.
Tia Carrere is a great and gorgeous terrorist helper.
     TRUE LIES runs a fast 2:21 (well edited by Conrad Buff IV, Mark
Goldblatt and Richard A.  Harris).  It is rated R.  Schwarzenegger
kills tons of people but with fairly minimal blood or gore.  I think
teenagers will love this movie, but I would not take a child younger
than 13.
     I recommend TRUE LIES most highly.  I came very close to rating it
****, but in the end I gave it *** 1/2 because the andante was not on
the same par as the rest of the movie.  See this film on biggest screen
you can find.  Too bad it is not available on IMAX.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  This is a mindless situation comedy
     crossed with an even more mindless action film aimed at
     an undemanding audience.  Some of the gags work, more
     often the improbabilities make one yearn for the
     comparative logic, maturity, and subtlety of even THE MAN
     FROM U.N.C.L.E.   Rating: high -1 (-4 to +4).  Spoiler
     section following the review discusses about some
     improbabilities.
     Back when I was in second grade I had fantasies of leading a double
life as a seven-year-old and as a secret crime-fighter.  Boy, it would
really surprise my teacher when she found out who I was when my alter-
ego rescued her from certain death at the hands of evil-doers!  Today I
compliment myself by saying my fantasies were more intelligent than TRUE
LIES.  But deep in my heart I have to be honest.  I know the my
childhood fantasies were childish on only on a par with the new
Schwarzenegger film.
     Harry Tasker (Arnold Schwarzenegger) is a James Bond style spy
(undoubtedly because he is so inconspicuous, particularly among Austrian
body-builders.)  He spends his days having shoot-outs with terrorists
and discretely engaging in wild chases all over Washington DC.  His wife
Helen (Jamie Lee Curtis) never seems to notice the cuts, scrapes,
bruises, and occasional gunshot wounds he must be getting.  She thinks
he is a boring computer salesman.  His daughter Dana (Eliza Dushku)
thinks the old man is pretty dull stuff too.  Boy, are they in for some
surprises when they find out who he really is!  Meanwhile there are
terrorists called the Crimson Jihad, headed by Aziz (Art Malik) and
assisted by Juno (Tia Carrere) who plan to hold up the United States to
nuclear blackmail.  And boy, are they in for some surprises too!  Boy,
what a whiz-bang plot!
     Somewhere there was the seed here for what might have been a good
comedy--in fact, it is loosely based on a French farce called LA TOTALE.
But like Schwarzenegger himself, the film was over-powered by an excess
of excess and just has too many scenes that require the audience to turn
down its thought processes and go along for the ride.  I found my mind
did not have a setting low enough for some of the shenanigans.  On a spy
film credibility scale from Matt Helm to George Smiley, this one weighs
in on the dumb side of Maxwell Smart.  The spy story is just the most
rudimentary "get captured by baddies and fight your way out" plot.
     And just being stupid might be forgivable, but this film is also
mean-spirited and sadistic.  The film asks us to believe that when Helen
knows Harry's secrets she will love him more.  In fact, Harry has
revealed himself to be a vicious sadist toward both his wife and an
acquaintance of hers in ways that also abuse his position as a spy.
Harry is just not a very likable person.  And frankly at times this is
just not a very likable film.  When it is at its best it is at the
mediocrity level of COMMANDO--the sort of film where entire ammo dumps
can be fired at the hero and he never gets a scratch.  But when it also
takes a light-hearted view of its hero terrorizing his wife and others,
TRUE LIES can get unintentionally ugly.
     This is not to say there are not a few funny moments in the film
and a few nice stunts.  Production design is by Peter Lamont who worked
on fourteen different James Bond films and this film borrows more than a
few little touches from Bond films.  Our first view of Tasker, taking
off a wet-suit to reveal neatly pressed evening clothes, is a touch
lifted directly from GOLDFINGER.  Much of the Bond wit is present here.
But Schwarzenegger is nowhere near the actor that Connery or Dalton is.
Curtis can act a little, but does not get a chance in this film that
reduces her to the status of "dumb broad" and "victim."
     This is a film with impressive effects work, the usual jaw-dropping
stunt work, and some fairly witty scenes.  At 141 minutes it can fit
that in and still have room for a lot of very childish storytelling.
The trailer for the film give away free just about everything worthwhile
that this film has to offer.  It certainly seems to be pleasing some
people, including some I respect, but I can give it no better a high -1
on the -4 to +4 scale.
     Last May there was a national scandal about someone on the
President's staff using a helicopter for a quick trip to a golf course.
In TRUE LIES Harry, without authorization, calls assault forces to
intimidate people he doesn't like and to demolish personal property.  He
borrows high-security facilities to play a vicious practical joke on his
wife.  I have to believe that the use of these interrogation rooms would
be closely monitored and that this sort of irresponsibility would end
his career right then.  The situation then continues with that
ridiculous scene in the hotel room. Helen does not recognize that the
silhouette looks like her husband of fifteen years.  It is a little hard
to mistake that Schwarzenegger torso.  Meanwhile Harry has guessed in
advance exactly what words his wife would say and with what timing and
has it recorded on a little tape recorder with such perfect fidelity
that Helen cannot tell it isn't the man in front of her speaking.
     For a heroic character to be of any interest he has to in some way
be vulnerable.  How exciting is it really to see crooks shooting at
Superman?  Harry Tasker goes through the whole film and his worst injury
is getting socked by Helen.  Helen wipes out a dozen terrorists by
accidentally dropping a machine gun down a flight of about twelve
stairs.  In the time it takes to fall three or four waves of terrorists
arrive at the stairs, are mowed down and have time to fall down.  Helen
also makes it through the film uninjured.  Even the worst of the Bond
films do not resort to contrivances this absurd.
     Admittedly some of this is intended as parody but it is hard to mix
scenes of mental torture with light parody and make it work.  This is
just not a film that works.

Author
Chad Polenz
True Lies
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1994, R, 141 minutes [2 hours, 21 minutes]
[action/comedy]
starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger (Harry Tasker), Tom Arnold (Gib), Jamie Lee
Curtis (Helen Tasker), Art Makik (Aziz), produced by James Cameron, Stephanie
Austin, written and directed by James Cameron.
Of all the genres to mix comedy with, action has the most potential because
everything is so over-the-top anyway, it wouldn't be any more unrealistic if
a few jokes and gags were thrown in. This is the appeal and them of "True
Lies:" it purposely exaggerates to amaze us, even if it does get a little
cliche and cartoony at times.
We meet Harry (Schwarzenegger) and Gib (Arnold), two U.S. spies just doing
their jobs of trying to stop international terrorists. The opening scene
immediately establishes the film's lightheartedness and satirical nature, as
Harry speaks Arabic while the subtitles say "'Where's the John?' (in perfect
Arabic)." Meanwhile, Gib waits in "the van" making lots of wisecracks and
one-liners that aren't just recycled sit-com stuff, but truly original and
funny jokes (you don't see stuff like this in a Van Damme flick). Suddenly we
get one of those typical Schwarzenegger scenes where he runs from and
single-handedly disarms 50 terrorists using his bare hands. Yes, we've seen
this before, but this film doesn't make the mistake of taking itself too
seriously, and thus, it's fun.
The basic plot involves Harry and Gib's pursuit of an Arabic terrorist named
Aziz (Makik) who has access to nuclear warheads. But the story skews off on a
huge tangent when Harry realizes his wife Helen (Curtis) is having an affair
with a man claiming to be a spy. What makes this such a coincidence is the
fact Helen herself, nor their daughter know Harry is a spy and not the
computer salesman he claims to be. 
This sub-plot allows for good characterization and some great comic relief
(due mostly to Bill Paxton as Simon, Helen's pathetic suitor), but after a
while the main plot seems to be forgotten about. This is my only real problem
with the film, because its high-tech spy stuff and action had been great, but
the tangent is goes off on lasts entirely too long. Eventually it does come
back to the terrorist-chasing aspect and does so by diving head first into
it, which is somewhat forgivable.
The final act is the action and suspense-driven story you'd expect the film
to become. Getting into the details would be pointless, because much of it is
predictable, but at least it's fun. The film makes no apologies for its
existence and this is why we get nuclear explosions, fantastic car chases,
people dangling from helicopters and airplanes, and gunfights and fist fights
galore.
Special mention must be made to the camaraderie between Schwarzenegger and
Arnold. They're just another "odd couple" or even "cop buddies," they're just
two talented actors in fun, original film.
"True Lies" is the action movie for people who don't like action movies.
It's the movie equivalent of cherry cheesecake, but with reduced fat.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
films critically reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings or quick capsules.

Author
Steve Kong
James Cameron has a reputation for his heavy, serious, special effects
laden films. True Lies is a change from what is expected from him, kind of.
True Lies is by far a bloated film. It starts off well enough, a story
about a super-spy character, Harry Tasker (Arnold Schwarzenegger), who
lives a double life. His two lives consist of one as a super-spy and
another as a father/husband. His priorities seem to be more towards being a
super-spy. He is tracking a bad guy from the Middle East and must stop him
from using the nuclear warheads that possesses.
This would have been a great film, but Cameron, who wrote the script, stops
everything and puts in a story about Harry and his ordinary housewife
(Jamie Lee Curtis). The story follows Harry as he vengefully spies and
follows his wife around trying to find out if she is cheating on him. And
Harry is just not someone we like after what he puts his wife through in
the luxury hotel suite. This whole mid-portion of the film just does not
work, and bogs a rather good action film. The comedy that Cameron tries to
introduce using this portion of the film does not work at all. Moreover it
puts Harry in bad light, making him look like a vengeful abusive husband.
The action sequences in True Lies are complicated and well done. Cameron
shows that he knows how to do action. His highlight action sequences are an
opening escape from a mansion, a fight scene in a bathroom (which strangely
ends up on a rooftop), and an ending Harrier sequence that has to been seen
to be believed. As always, Cameron's action is staged in such a way that
it's over-the-top. Suspension of belief is needed for his action sequences,
and once that is achieved they can be enjoyed.
If Cameron had focused on Harry's problem with the terrorist, this film
would have ended up a fun film. As it stands, at almost two and a half
hours, it's a bit long and the mid-section is not something that is worth
sitting through to get to the action. Is True Lies fun? Almost. Should you
see True Lies? If you have the time to sit through some painfully bad
attempts at humor to get some spectacular action sequences. 

Author
Dragan Antulov
Among all the films made by James Cameron, TRUE LIES is the
least appreciated (with the exception of PIRANHA 2). This
could be explained with the fact that TRUE LIES seem rather
atypical for Cameron and his opus. While almost all other
Cameron's films might have a humorous bit of dialogue or
two, they tend to be dead serious, whether they deal with
time-travelling cyborgs, aliens or doomed ocean liners. So,
when Cameron announced his choice of 1994 project - American
remake of LA TOTALE!, rather obscure French 1991 farce -
many people were surprised. This film, although laced with
spectacular action and other director's trademarks, still
looked like an excursion from Cameron's home waters.
Naturally, the film, although commercially successful, was
misunderstood by the critics who dismissed it as bad or, at
best, unusual moment in otherwise unquestionable career.
The protagonist of the film is Harry Tasker (played by
Arnold Schwarzenegger), agent in Omega Force, supersecret US
government agency that deals with nuclear terrorists. After
retrieving important information during a dangerous raid on
Swiss chateau he returns to his house in Washington D.C.
where he is greeted by his wife Helen (played by Jamie Lee
Curtis), 14-year old daughter Dana (played by Elisa Dushku)
and a dog. Tasker's family doesn't have a clue about his
line of work and for the last fifteen years they are
convinced that Harry works as dull sales representative for
computer company. Harry managed to keep his professional and
family life apart, but this is about to change very soon.
Harry is on the trail of Salim Abu Aziz (played by Art
Malik), leader of dangerous Mideastern terrorists who had
acquired ex-Soviet nuclear warheads and who are about to use
them in order to blackmail US government. This, however,
becomes secondary problem to Harry, who is convinced that
his long-neglected wife has an affair. Against the advice of
his partner and best friend Gib (played by Tom Arnold) Harry
decides to find identity of mysterious lover. His
investigation brings him in touch with Simon (played by Bill
Paxton), used car salesman who tells outrageous stories
about his spy adventures in order to get lonely and
adventure-seeking housewives to his bed. Humiliated Harry
plots spectacular revenge on Simon and his wife, but his
actions would have unforeseen consequences.
Most of the criticism directed towards TRUE LIES came from
those people still unable to accept comedy made with 100
million US$ of budget. When they appraised the film, they
appraised as straightforward action drama and, naturally,
they were less than enthusiastic about action scenes that
defy laws of gravity, common sense or, in some cases, even
good taste. Cameron seemed to enjoy making those scenes as
spectacular as possible, but his decision to go over the top
(horse-motorcycle chase is one of such example) indicate
that his aim was nothing but parody. And not only parody of
Bond films (which receive homage in the opening scene), but
also parodies of 1980s action movies, including some of
those that turned Schwarzenegger into star (COMMANDO,
PREDATOR) and, finally, Cameron didn't hesitate to make
parody of himself. This new, unusual humorous setting seemed
like a good thing for Schwarzenegger, whose role of Harry
Tasker is his best comedic effort so far. His success is
even bigger when we consider that he was partnered by Tom
Arnold, one of top American comedians. Actually, almost
everyone in this film seems comfortable in their roles.
Jamie Lee Curtis has especially difficult task since she
must play various personalities - modest housewife who turns
into irrestisible seductress only to end up as strong,
independent woman Cameron likes to have in his films.
Failure to explain such transformation is probably the
biggest problem of this film, and it wasn't Curtis' fault;
she played her role very well. Villains, on the other hand,
are more cartoons and less characters. This probably doesn't
represent problem for Art Malik, whose Salim is deliberately
played over the top, but Tia Carrere as evil seductress
would be marked as pretty face and nothing more.
Another, more serious, charge against TRUE LIES came from
those who found some of the contents socially unacceptable
in this day and age. The most common accusation was
misogyny. Two male protagonists stalk, kidnap and torture
woman before they subject her to extremely cruel and
humiliating practical joke. For many people, especially
those who take 1990s "political correctness" seriously,
comedy in TRUE LIES failed to justify presentation of such
actions as an acceptable behaviour. Harry, of course, gets
his comeuppance and in the last scenes of the film he is
presented as equal to Helen, but that nevertheless failed to
silence the critics. Another group that viewed TRUE LIES as
controversial were Arabs; portrayal of Arab terrorists as
dirty, unshaven and utterly stupid dark-skinned fanatics
might have looked offensive and stereotypical on the verge
of racism. Cameron again tried to pre-empt the criticism by
creating the character of Harry's trusted and computer-
literate Arab sidekick Faisal (played by Grant Heslov). This
failed to produce desired effect and TRUE LIES is until this
day cited as the most explicit example of Hollywood
prejudices against Arabs and Muslims in general.
However, those viewers who don't care about political
correctness would probably appreciate TRUE LIES as stylishly
done piece of Hollywood entertainment. This combination of
spectacular action and hilarious comedy actually represents
one of the most entertaining films of 1990s. TRUE LIES is
film that definitely doesn't deserve its bad reputation and
almost inevitable slide into oblivion.
Review written on September 10th 2000
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Arnold Schwarzenegger, Jamie Lee Curtis, Tom Arnold, 
           Tia Carrere, Art Malik, Bill Paxton, Eliza Dushku, 
           Grant Heslov 
Director:  James Cameron 
Producers:  James Cameron and Stephenie Austin 
Screenplay:  James Cameron 
Cinematography:  Russell Carpenter 
Music:  Brad Fiedel 
Released by 20th Century Fox 
     A few months ago, when speculation was rampant about who would be
the next actor to nab the role of James Bond, Arnold Schwarzenegger's
name was bandied about as one of the "long shots."  Well, Pierce got
the job, not Arnold, but for those who wondered what a muscle-bound
Austrian 007 might be like, take a look at TRUE LIES.  Only here, the
name's Tasker.  Harry Tasker.
     I have yet to decide whether TRUE LIES is a better comedy or
action film.  It contains heavy elements of both, and plays them
equally well.  Unlike such failed attempts as HUDSON HAWK and LAST
ACTION HERO, however, TRUE LIES is a big, grandiose movie that has an
immense amount of fun while never taking itself too seriously.  A
slightly shorter running time might have been appreciated (one-hundred
forty minutes is too long for even a very good action film), but
overall, I don't have many complaints.
     In the past, James Cameron has proven himself to be a master of
action and suspense.  Titles like THE TERMINATOR and ALIENS speak
volumes about his talent.  His least original film, T2, was still a
rollicking good time, if a little limited when it came to a plot.  Now,
with TRUE LIES, the director has not only reaffirmed his ability to
keep viewers on the edge of their seats, but he has shown himself
capable of making an audience laugh.  One of the best things about TRUE
LIES is that it's genuinely funny.
     The storyline isn't really all that inventive, although it
contains a few original moments.  Arnold plays Harry Tasker, a man who
leads a double life.  At home, with his wife Helen (Jamie Lee Curtis)
and daughter Dana (Eliza Dushku), he's a loving--if somewhat
meek--husband and father.  When he goes off to work, however, he
doesn't travel to the sales office where Helen thinks he has a desk.
Instead, he joins up with his partner Albert Gibson (Tom Arnold) to
save the world.  That includes romancing beautiful-but-deadly women
like Juno Skinner (Tia Carrere) and squaring off against "wacko"
terrorists like Salim Abu Aziz (Art Malik, in a role far from the one
that won him praise in THE JEWEL IN THE CROWN).
     The point of TRUE LIES is enjoyment.  The plot is a little meatier
than that of SPEED, but, until the last forty-five minutes, it doesn't
thunder along at nearly the same breakneck pace.  In fact, the main
"terrorist-blackmailing-the-world" story stays in low gear until the
film is ninety minutes along.  Until then, a lot of time is spent
examining the duplicitous relationship between Harry and Helen.  When
he suspects her of having an affair with a used car salesman (Bill
Paxton), the results are hilarious.
     As enjoyable as the Harry/Helen proceedings are, they start to
drag.  What begins as great comic relief grows tiresome before it gives
way to something else.  After all, with actors of the limited scope of
Schwarzenegger and Curtis, there's little hope of anything dramatic
coming out of this part of the movie.  Better to move on, which TRUE
LIES eventually does.
     Tom Arnold is probably not many people's idea of Arnold
Schwarzenegger's ideal sidekick (uh oh, I've got too "Arnolds" in this
review--how to keep them straight...?).  In fact, he many not be
anyone's ideal Tonto to the big man's Lone Ranger.  Surprisingly,
however, his wisecracking character works.  Had this been a serious
film, Roseanne's hubby would have been hopelessly out-of-place, but
amidst all the multi-million dollar foolery, he's at home.  Comic
relief is his job, and he does it admirably.
     There are the requisite spectacular explosions, coupled with an
expectedly high body count (more people die in the first fifteen
minutes of TRUE LIES than in the whole of SPEED).  This is, after all,
an Arnold Schwarzenegger motion picture, and certain things are
expected.  It certainly delivers a lot more than LAST ACTION HERO did.
     TRUE LIES is an old-fashioned, high-tech, fun time at the movies.
By not trying to "out-DIE HARD" DIE HARD, and relying instead on its
own brand of mayhem and humor, this movie has injected some much-needed
freshness into a genre that always threatening to turn stale.  In
combination, SPEED and TRUE LIES deliver a summer one-two punch that
will leave viewers squirming with excitement and gasping for breath.
     As for Arnold, even though he doesn't say it this time around, we
all know that he'll be back...
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Craig Good
     TRUE LIES owes as much, if not more, to James Bond films as it
does to pure action films such as COMMANDO.  Director James Cameron and
star Arnold Schwarzennegger are each confident and at the top of their
form as they over-deliver the goods in a deft cross between a 007
adventure and an action comedy.  Its not a stretch to say that they
have created a Bond for the 90's, and Pierce Brosnan better pray that
this movie is well forgotten before his attempt at Bond hits the
screen.
     Speaking of praying, Tom Arnold should be spending a good part of
each day genuflecting in the direction of James Cameron's house,
thanking him for saving his career.  One of the most pleasant surprises
in a movie full of them was that Arnold (Tom, that is) was able to play
an engaging character who you really wanted to like for his wit and his
puppy-dog loyalty almost enough to make you overlook his neanderthal
attitudes toward women.  I actually enjoyed the time he spent on the
screen.
     TRUE LIES has at its heart a terrific premise.  What if James Bond
had a house in the suburbs, and his wife and daughter had no idea what
he really did for a living? Suppose further that he were to learn that
his wife was being wooed by a spook wannabe who hoped to score by
providing the sense of adventure missing from her dull life? Its hard
to save the world and still be home in time for dinner.
     Seated behind us at the sneak preview were a couple of guys who
had this exchange during the credits:
     Facetious as it sounds, beneath all of the sound and fury, Cameron
does manage to deliver a love story between Arnold (Schwarzennegger,
that is) and Jamie Lee.  At first infuriated by her affair, he becomes
obsessed, then cruel, and then she puts him in his place.  Meanwhile
there is some great business between Arnold and the fake spy, Bill
Paxton.  Paxton is so deliciously slimy that you almost wish he had
more screen time.
     But screen time is not wasted in TRUE LIES.  This is skilled, deft
filmmaking.  There aren't scenes that don't need to be there, and many
scenes do double duty.  Single-minded focus comes into play only in the
well-crafted and thrilling action sequences.  And there are plenty of
them, ranging from the category of stunts I call "Things I've always
wanted to do" to set pieces which escalate in unexpected directions in
the "take it farther" school of comedy.  During the climactic sequence
at the end of the movie I started to wonder why my jaw was sore.  Then
I realized that I had been clenching my teeth for the past several
minutes.
     TRUE LIES is audacious, tight, and--most of all--great fun.  Like
any Cameron film, it is also big and loud, so treat yourself and catch
it at the best theatre you can.
