Title
Review for Phantasm (1979)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
     For those of you who have seen 'Phantasm' and perhaps its two sequels,
you have to ask yourself a question.  Is it a bad film?  The answer is
definitely "yes".  But guess what?  It's one of the best bad films I've ever
seen.  Sound like a contradiction?  Maybe so but every movie fan has his or
her guilty pleasures.  Even super critics Siskel and Ebert for whom I have a
lot of respect, have admitted to liking certain films that most people despised.
     What 'Phantasm' does is it provides an example of how one man can craft
a film given the opportunity even though he has very little experience or
talent in doing so.  It seems like it's an experimental film, the kind you
would expect to find at a student film festival or on a video store shelf as
one of those forgotten movies that never got a theatre release but went
directly to video.  'Phantasm' did get a theatre release and came out in
1979, just a couple of years before the home video rental market took off.
     It takes place in California where two brothers become involved in a
menacing plot concocted by a funeral home director to abduct the dead from
his nearby cemetery and use them in a slave plot in another dimension apart
from our world.  As bizarre as this sounds, 'Phantasm' plays out like a
nightmarish scenario and has some oddly entertaining scenes involving a
flying steel sphere which performs brain drain and can move with the speed
of the most deadly flying predator.  With other assorted ghouls and gadgets
of terror, the movie is cheesy but indulgently campy and is a cult classic
although the term "classic" is used loosely.
     Director Don Coscarelli was in his mid twenties when he made the film
and acted as the film's writer, director of photography and editor along
with that.  He does what any aspiring young movie maker would want given the
opportunity.  The film looks more like a test product than a full length
feature film.  It does have a sharp villain called 'The Tall Man' played by
Angus Scrimm and 'The Tall Man' was recently inducted into the horror hall
of fame for his notoriety with horror fans.  
     Given its underground success, 'Phantasm' was released a couple of
years ago on laser disc with a new stereo surround soundtrack and in
widescreen format.  It's other two sequels, 'Phantasm II' (1988) and
'Phantasm: Lord of the Dead' but also known as 'Phantasm III' (1994) have a
bigger budget and better special effects and talk of a fourth film is in the
works for you 'Phantasm' worshippers (I know a few) which may be out in 1999.  
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm
