Title
Review for Erotique (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Frank Maloney
     EROTIQUE is an anthology film by three directors, Lizzie Borden,
Monika Treut, and Clara Law.  The casts of their three short films
include Kamala Lopez-Dawson, Bryan Cranston, Priscilla Barnes, Camilla
Soeberg, Tim Lounibos, and Hayley Man.
     EROTIQUE received its world premiere at the Seattle International
Film Festival and I understand is booked to return to Seattle later
this year (in fact I saw a trailer for it last night when I went to
KIKA).  Frankly, the fact that EROTIQUE has found a distributor and
bookings surprises me because the film is so uneven overall.  The first
part has the best story; the second has the highest kink contents; the
third part looks like outtakes from a much longer film.
     "Let's Talk About Sex" is directed by Lizzie Borden and written by
Borden and Susie Bright.  In it, Kamala Lopez-Dawson is an aspiring
actress who is being offered only humiliating roles of hookers and
barmaids who have a sex scene and then never heard of again, because
she's not blonde and anglo.  She supports herself by working in a
phone-sex boiler room.  She rebels against having the same, blonde-big
hooter fantasies imposed on her by customers until she finds one (Bryan
Cranston) who want to hear her sexual fantasies.  The final upshot of
this is a surprising and sexy last scene meeting between the two.  The
scenes in the boiler room, the women who work the phones and the johns,
the man who goads them on to keep the suckers on the line, and calls
they handle are hilarious and interesting.  The fantasy sequences
demonstrate why it is probably imprudent to talk about sexual fantasies
to strangers, but the interactions and growing telephonic intimacy
between Lopez-Dawson and Cranston is sexy and intriguing.  Overall,
this the best segment.
     "Taboo Parlor," directed by Monika Treut, involves two drop-dead
lesbians (Priscilla Barnes and Camilla Soeberg), the younger of whom
has yen for seducing men from time to time.  They go to a ship-board
nightclub in the Hamburg docks (look for Marianne Sagebrecht as the
dance mistress) and find a particularly dangerous stud to take home.
The three-way develops in a direction that surprises him and us, but
him more finally.  In the end, the whole smacks a little of the evil
lesbian of pulp homophobic literature and left me uncomfortable and not
a little puzzled, but the sex was erotic and something of a turn-on, if
that was the point because it was pretty hard to find a point to this
film.
     "Wonton Soup," directed by Clara Law and set in Hong Kong, is the
story of a Chinese-Australian (Tim Lounibos) who is persuaded to return
to his cultural roots and ancient Chinese sexual techniques to win back
his lover (Hayley Man).  The scene where they work their way their the
manual is hilarious, but the rest of it is undeveloped and fragmentary
at best (interestingly, in the trailer there is scene from this story
that is not in the released version I saw).  And as the last part of
EROTIQUE, it makes one exit with a decidedly negative impression of the
entire work.
     I cannot really recommend EROTIQUE, even though some of its parts
are stimulating in one way or the other.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     EROTIQUE (not to be confused with EXOTICA which was released in
the US at the same time) is three unconnected erotic short stories.
They are by three different female directors who give their version of
a sexual fantasy from the woman's point of view.
     Let me warn everyone up front that this is a correctly rated NC-17
show that has wall-to-wall sex.  The meantime between sex in this show
is maybe three minutes.  At the end of the review I want to discuss the
demographics of the audience when I saw it.  You can stop for a second
and speculate now if you like before reading further.
     The first segment is set in LA and is entitled "Let's Talk About
Sex."  It is the story of a woman (Kamala Lopez-Dawson) who works at
one of those sex phone numbers.  She has two problems.  First, she
wants to get a job as a real actress but can not get people to hire
her.  Second, she wants to talk to the callers her fantasy and not
theirs so callers keep hanging up on her and this keeps almost getting
her fired.
     The director of this segment is Lizzie Borden.  She also directed
the excellent WORKING GIRLS (1986).  WORKING GIRLS is a documentary
style fictional film about prostitutes.  I think it is a *** movie as
it portrays a tragically sad but realistic view behind the scenes of a
world few will ever see.  In EROTIQUE, Borden does the only good
directing job, but her segment is still pretty boring in parts.  The
script (Lizzie Borden and Susie Bright) has some funny dialog, but
mainly is lacking any real development.
     The second segment happens in Hamburg and is called "Taboo
Parlor."  It stars Priscilla Barnes and Camilla Soeberg as two lesbians
who decide, for the sake of variety, to find a man for a one-night
stand.  It is written and directed very poorly by Monika Treut.  Other
than a funny bus scene there is little to recommend it.
     The final story is entitled "Wonton Soup" and is set in a gray and
dim Hong Kong.  Most of the action takes place in an expensive, but
spartan apartment with almost no furniture.  The director is Clara Law.
It has Tim Lounibos and Hayley Man as young lovers.  Tim makes the
mistake of trying to spice up his love life by reading one of those 101
possibilities books.  The scene where he tries to practice his new book
learning is the funniest scene in the entire show and the only good
scene in the most boring of the three stories.  The script by Eddie
Ling-Ching Fong is minimalist.
     The acting is pretty amateur.  Kamala Lopez-Dawson was the only
really polished actor.  For a movie about eroticism, I was surprised to
find only the love making performance by Hayley Man to have any real
passion.
     Now for the demographics of the audience.  I saw the show at a
local art house that I go to a lot.  I have never noticed any
particular groups in attendance.  It usually has a cross section of the
local community.  Tonight was different.
     There were a few singles of both sexes and a few couples in the
20s-40s range there.  Most of the theater, however, was filled with
couples and single sex groups of quite senior citizens (70+).  They did
not come in together as any large group nor did the groups seem to know
each other.  I half expected them all to leave when the title came on
declaring that they went in the wrong door, but they all stayed and
listened attentively.  Go figure.
     EROTIQUE runs a little too long at 1:30.  There is no violence,
drugs, drinking, or smoking.  There is tons of very graphic
heterosexual and homosexual sex plus much discussion of all the
possible words to use to describe sex.  This is heavy NC-17 material
and not appropriate for teenagers period.  Although I found several
scenes I liked quite well, the rest of the movie was a vast wasteland
to paraphrase Newton Minnow.  I award the film * for the few good
scenes, but do not recommend it.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
