Title
Review for Bliss (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Michael Dequina
Joseph (Craig Sheffer) and Maria (Sheryl Lee) appear to be the
perfect young married couple, but there's one pesky problem--Maria fakes her
orgasms.  Enter Balthazar (Terence Stamp), a physician specializing in the
healing powers of sex--or, as he's referred to in one scene, "Dr. Fuck"--who
trains Maria and, ultimately, Joseph in the art of achieving spiritual and
sexual bliss.
The international media audience with whom I saw Lance Young's
long-delayed film (it had been held up for a year due to ratings trouble)
could not take the film nearly as seriously as he would have like it to
be--and how could they, especially when a lot of the dialogue inches into
Joe Eszterhas territory (my favorite exchange--Joseph: "I can't come!"
Maria: "Too bad, MOTHERFUCKER!") and the stabs at comic relief play as pure
camp?  It got to the point where the audience started to mock the more
"serious" passages.  When Balthazar tells Joseph, "You have to make love
with love and adoration," someone in the back of the audience started
clapping, and everyone laughed; a similar reaction came when Maria is
finally able to climax.
Bliss finally falls apart beyond repair in the third act, when,
without warning,  the film takes a gravely serious turn, becoming in effect
what can best be described as a lost, alternate reality chapter of Twin
Peaks, Lee's former television series--What if Laura Palmer had lived and
gotten married?  As seen in the Peaks feature, Fire Walk with Me, Lee does
some good emoting, but Sheffer is too much of a lightweight to completely
convince in his big emotional scene with Lee.  Stamp, on the other hand, is
the only one involved in the film with some handle on how ridiculous much of
it is, dispensing his character's carnal wisdom with tongue firmly in cheek.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Lance Young.
Cast: Craig Sheffer, Sheryl Lee, Terence Stamp, Spalding Gray, Casey 
Siemaszko, Lois Chiles, Ken Camroux, Pamela Perry, Leigh Taylor-Young, 
Theresa Saldana.
1997 - 103 minutes.
Rated R (for sex, nudity, and profanity).
Reviewed November 25, 1998.
"Bliss" is an enthralling motion picture, and one of the most 
educational films I've ever seen, but that is where it somewhat runs 
into problems, because it plays as an instructional guide on making your 
sex life better, rather than one that has a thorough story and 
characters.
"Bliss" tells of Joseph (Craig Sheffer) and Marie (Sheryl Lee), two 
newlyweds who are having some trouble relating to each other sexually. 
While at an appointment with their sex therapist (Spalding Gray), Joseph 
is surprised and upset when Maria admits that she has never had an 
orgasm while making love to him, instead faking it each time. Meanwhile, 
at the construction site where he works, Joseph and his coworkers 
delight in spying on an older man, who constantly all day, has different 
women come in his apartment and have sex with him, until Joseph sees 
Maria going in there one day. When Joseph goes to confront him at his 
apartment, he discovers that the man, named Baltazar Vincenza, also 
works as a sex therapist "on the edge of the law," and that Maria has 
been secretly going to him. Baltazar believes that he can help all 
people with their love lives, but that first, his customers must 
understand that the highest point in a sexual relationship is not an 
orgasm, but "emotional bliss."
I don't really want to give anything else away, since there are a few 
surprises that occur towards the end that should be discovered on their 
own, and from reading my synopsis, I am sure it does not sound like your 
usual drama. 
The central storyline between the couple could be described as 
uninvolving, since much of the picture takes place during the training 
sessions between Joseph and Baltazar, but the reason that, "Bliss," is a 
worthwhile film to see is because I feel that I learned a lot from it, 
and the subject was treated in a mature, respectful manner.
Craig Sheffer and Sheryl Lee are both appealing actors, and they are 
very good here, creating a lot of warmth in the scenes they were in 
together. And Terence Stamp is just right as this mysterious man who 
says he has the answer to all people's sexual sufferings.
When I said that, "Bliss," is a worthwhile motion picture to see, the 
target audience I was referring to were people from about ages 16 and 
up. The material dealt with in this film contains many sexually graphic 
sequences, and in order for the true point of the film to be fully 
understood, it really is only for more older viewers. "Bliss," is an 
intelligent and informative instruction guide, but it does not offer 
much more than that, nor should it have to.
     - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
       Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html
