Title
Review for Mimic 2 (2001) (V)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pete Croatto
Mimic 2 isn't an embarrassing rental.  It's about as good as any movie
about a giant, mutant cockroach can be expected to be.  There are a few
entertaining moments, some neat scenery to enjoy, and Jon Polito and
Edward Albert are both in it.  If that last piece of information doesn't
make you want run to the video store with heart-pounding glee, then I
don't know what will.
I didn't see the original Mimic -- the minor summer 1997 hit starring
Mira Sorvino and Jeremy Northam -- even though I worked at a movie
theater that summer and saw more movies than any sane person should. 
The newest installment focuses on one giant, malicious cockroach that
sets its sights on an entomologist named Remy (Alix Koromzay), who
teaches at a decrepit New York City public school.  The cockroach starts
killing off her dates and her co-workers, gnawing their faces off, when
the gruesome killings grab the attention of a hunky detective (Bruno
Campos), who starts having his suspicions and falling in love.  With the
girl, not the bug.
The body count leads to understandable problems at work for Remy, when
her boss (Polito, who is always fun to watch) relates the news of the
killings to parents.  As she packs up her gear and takes a student
(Gaven Eugene Lucas) home, the cockroach comes for them and a teenage
misfit hiding out (Will Estes).  Only a camera (roaches are light
sensitive) and our heroine's textbook knowledge of bugs can save them.
The movie tries to come off as a hybrid of Die Hard and the TV show
Buffy the Vampire Slayer, as director Jean De Segonzac and screenwriter
Joel Soisson fill scenes with lots of ironic, jokey dialogue.  But the
cast doesn't pull off the lines with any humor and though the movie
moves briskly, there's really nothing distinguishable in it.  It's
somewhat suspenseful and filmed with a certain amount of film noir flair
(a shot of a cockroach climbing on the ceiling is particularly
memorable).  The acting is OK; I always enjoy seeing Polito, a feisty
bulldog of an actor.  But Koromzay displays practically no charisma in
her role.  The same goes for the kid actors who are inexplicably thrown
in, probably to get teen appeal.
Still, I find it hard to complete condemn this movie.  There are lots of
goo (the insides of the cockroaches looks like a combination of Fluff
and melted mozzarella cheese), gunfire, and running around for dear
life.  Hell, Eddie Albert is in it.  I didn't think he still existed. 
Mimic 2 is not a great movie, but sometimes you need to see a giant
cockroach movie.  If that's the case, then here you go.  It's like your
first car, it sputters and rocks, but it does what it needs to.
Director: Jean De Segonzac
Producers: Michael Leahy, Joel Soisson
Writer: Joel Soison
Starring: Alix Koromzay, Bruno Campos, Will Estes, Gaven Eugene Lucas,
Edward Albert, Michael Tucci, Jon Polito
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
