Title
Review for Little Boy Blue (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Antonio Tibaldi.
Cast: Ryan Phillippe, John Savage, Natassja Kinski, Tyrin Turner, Jenny 
Lewis, Adam Burke, Devon Michael, Shirley Knight.
1998 - 104 minutes.
Rated R (for violence, profanity, nudity, and sex).
Reviewed December 6, 1998.
"Little Boy Blue," is like one of those old southern gothic mysteries 
from the '50's, where the characters are shrouded in uncertainty, where 
the plot twists come at a rapid pace, but where the story is pretty 
juvenile and silly, except to the people unlucky enough to be in the 
film. This type of film can sometimes be done well (1997's "The 
Locusts"), but without a director and screenwriter that have a firm grip 
on the material, it can turn out disasterously, and that is what 
plagues, "Little Boy Blue."
Just the synopsis of the film threatens to sound ridiculous, but bear 
with me. A teenager just out of high school, Jimmy West (Ryan Phillippe) 
plans to leave his bleak existence in a small Texas town to go off to 
college with his girlfriend of two years, Traci (Jenny Lewis). He 
decides to stay, however, because he is worried about his younger 
brothers (Adam Burke and Devon Michael) and his mother, Kate (Natassja 
Kinski), who works at a bar and is often bullied by his insensitive, 
gruff father, Ray (John Savage). This family, we can tell right from the 
start, is dysfunctional, to say the least. In an early scene, Ray forces 
Kate and Jimmy to have rough sex in the back of his car, which, we 
sense, is a regular occurrence at the West residence. The plot thickens 
when Jimmy begins to suspect that his parents have been hiding things 
from him after he discovers that his father lost his member in Vietnam. 
But if this is so, then how could he and his brother have ever been 
born?
"Little Boy Blue," is so muddled and frustrating in its storytelling 
that I felt like giving up on the film halfway through. I stuck through 
it, however, hoping for some sort of change. Maybe there would be some 
insight on the paper-thin characters, or maybe there would actually be a 
plot thread that had a purpose other than to surrender to the 
conventions of the story. No such luck. 
Instead, what we have here, is a movie that would certainly have felt 
more at home in the 1950's, but that probably still wouldn't work, 
because any way you look at it, it is simply not good. The story jerks 
around all over the place, never stopping long enough so that we can 
grow to care about anyone. Aside from the mystery of the father, Ray, 
the film also includes a mysterious disappearance; a catfish that I 
think is symbolic, but don't ask me about what; murder; revenge; and an 
older woman (Shirley Knight) that enters into the picture late, who, 
before the end, is toting a rifle and blowing away everyone in sight.
"Little Boy Blue," is an independent film that had been floating around 
at film festivals prior to its limited theatrical release this Spring. I 
suspect it took a while to obtain a distributor, and no wonder. It is a 
goofy little thriller with no real purpose of being made, nor any 
obvious talent in the filmmaking department. The pacing is very, very 
slow, and when things picked up, I didn't believe it for a second.
The actors in the film are good, for the most part, but have very little 
to do. Ryan Phillippe, in the title role, has proven that he can be good 
("54"), but nothing happens to test his acting skills. John Savage plays 
the token "bad guy," and adds no depth to his character. The female 
performers fare a little better, but are also plagued with empty-headed 
characters. Natassja Kinski attempts to add some life to her incestuous 
mother character, and Jenny Lewis shows some promise as Phillippe's 
long-suffering girlfriend. 
"Little Boy Blue," does not work as a thriller, as a "slice-of-life" 
drama, as a mystery, or as an old-fashioned 50's movie. The workings of 
the far-fetched plot constantly creak with amateurishness. The actors 
obviously fight diligently to add some spark to the proceedings, but, 
unfortunately, the film itself collapses down around them, and the 
audience is left with 104 minutes of nothing.
