Title
Review for Tucker: The Man and His Dream (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ed Nilges
     This movie dealt with a desperately sad subject in a way that avoided
moral complexities and so much of the sadness.  Coppola's formula seems to have
started in THE GODFATHER.  This is to present characters with moral ambiguity...
mobsters and, in the case of Tucker, entrepreneurs, as completely good people.
Note that I don't think that Don Corleone, or Preston Tucker, were evil people.
I think, however, that Coppola ignores the evil things they may have (almost
unavoidably) done as members of out-groups in his anxiety to portray them as
heroes.
     Tucker was winging it in asking a postwar government (still under almost
Socialistic controls) for a factory to produce his car.  Many things could have
gone wrong; for example, the labor issue is ignored.  Tucker may not have been
able to get enough workers in what was expected to be a labor glut as the vets
returned from the war, but what turned out to be a shortage.  Tucker was taking
a calculated risk.  This could have been interpreted as dishonesty.
     By the end of the Second World War, you needed major bucks to produce
cars.  The era of producing cars in garages had ended.  The government's case
could have rested on the charge that Tucker was dishonest, not as an out and
out con man, but as someone who fooled himself in thinking that a startup would
work in the postwar economy.  The possible validity of such a charge is not
addressed in the movie, for it would confuse audiences.  Tucker is not shown
either agonizing, Hamlet-like, over this possibility, or deliberately ignoring
reality.
     But it is manipulative to make a movie of an American innocent who is
destroyed by those big bad car companies.  It is manipulative because Coppola
is himself part of another big bad system for producing products for mass
consumption...Hollywood.  Interestingly, Coppola likes to think of himself as a
Tucker, with a loyal staff of retainers (each of whom knows his or her role and
never steps outside of it) dedicated to *his* goals...a few years ago, Esquire
published a rather dictatorial memo, from Coppola, in which he stated that the
whole purpose of his studio was to support *him*.  However, his operations
dovetail quite nicely, I'm sure, with the Hollywood system, for otherwise his
films would not be distributed.  In short, Coppola's Zoetrope is really a part
of the system Coppola criticizes.
     There is something unavoidable about this, for it is impossible to make
movies (or cars) without a certain highly-organized and, let's admit it,
dictatorial system.  But that does not reduce the manipulativeness of the
process in the slightest.  When Francis makes a movie and we pay money to see
it, and he presents us with gosh all fish-hooks American innocence, it is, I
believe, incumbent on us to maintain a certain ironic distance.  Tucker was
like any man, a compound of good and evil...and like any entrepreneur perhaps a
bit of an operator.  I don't know.  I do know that he seems, in the movie
itself, to have bit off more than he could chew and to have wasted a lot of
people's valuable time.
     Actually, gosh-all-fish-hooks American innocence is getting to be just a
bit of a geopolitical problem.  We ignore the Palestinians for lo these many
years, we overthrow democracy hither and yon, then we get all flustered when
people hit back and hit back hard.  Boyish grins (a la Reagan and Tucker)
eventually wear thin.  I'm reading a biography of Margaret Thatcher and
(although I am no fan of either), I am saddened by the contrast between Ron and
The Thatch.  Ron dithered in Beirut, and lost 260 Marines; Thatcher made it
crystal clear what the result of Argentine conduct would be in the Falklands
nonsense, and backed up her words with deeds.  She lost only 100 more British
soldiers over a much longer period, and each man who fought knew what the hell
was going on.  The difference is the difference between childhood and
adulthood.
     I am especially saddened that many would-be computer entrepreneurs will
see TUCKER, for the computer industry is currently in somewhat the same phase
of consolidation as was underwent by the auto industry.  Software is reaching a
state of complexity where it may be impossible to go back to the garage to
produce good systems (which is not to say that good systems will be produced by
big companies).  I hope that I am wrong; I hope that the computer industry will
not be dominated by a big three.
     Good cars, cars with seat belts, engines in the back, disk brakes, were
eventually produced, not by entrepreneurs in garages, but by Japanese and
Germans in labor unions in great big factories.  Actually, this is finally
starting to happen in the USA.  In 1981, Ford and the AFL/CIO agreed that
Quality is Job 1, and I now own an 85 Escort that runs great, gives good gas
mileage, didn't cost an arm and a leg, and (gasp) doesn't have a spot of rust
without being Rusty Joned.  This happened because management and the unions
finally got off their butts, under the lash of Japanese competition.  Of
course, I now understand that the Taurus has a lot of bugs...my Escort is an el
Strippo, and the Taurus is a return to the car with a lot of (high profit)
extras, and Rome wasn't built inna day.  Point is, Tucker (and deLorean) had
nothing to do with this.  Management and (gasp) labor unions did it.
     Manipulating the hopes of the little man (to become a big man to his
family), ignoring moral complexity and depth, is what Fascism is all about.  I
like watching Coppola's films, but I am disturbed by what they've always said
about life; that real men prevaricate and kill to protect their families.
Maybe they do, but the function of art is to try to purge us of the Beast
through laughter and terror.  Coppola, like Dostoeyevsky's Grand Inquisitor,
seems to want to saddle and mount the beast (and raise the cup on which the
word MYSTERY is written?).

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Francis Ford Coppola and Lucasfilm in
     top form bring to the screen the story of automotive legend
     Preston Tucker.  The film is a tribute to American creativity
     and a lament about a system that wastes genius.  Jeff Bridges
     refreshingly plays that increasingly rare hero of the screen,
     a man of genius.  Rating: +3.
     Okay, I admit it.  I like stories about engineers and engineering
feats.  My favorite war film is probably DAM BUSTERS.  I liked THE RIGHT
STUFF a lot, even if it in some ways trivialized the space program.  I like
tributes to intelligence and ingenuity, particularly if the ingenuity is in
something other than a better way to clout someone on the head or drive a
car in a car chase.  It is about time filmmakers recognized that some
audiences respect and have interest in other talents than those--perhaps
some skills that can't be tested in a video game.  The problem is that
videogame skills are easy to make exciting on a screen.  Intelligence,
drive, and vision really require a good script.  Francis Ford Coppola's
TUCKER: The Man and His Dream has a good script.  It is the first film I
have seen since THE RIGHT STUFF that has a hero I would call heroic.  Part
of the reason is that both films are about true pieces of history, but also
that both portray a sort of American engineering optimism of the 1940s and
1950s that seems to be very rare today.
     TUCKER is the biography of Preston Tucker (enthusiastically played by
Jeff bridges), who had visions of creating a car of superior design but who
was brought down by the system in a true story that could have come from an
Ayn Rand novel.  It shows the design and the building of the Tucker--a
futuristic car that the entrepreneur wanted to build in the years following
World War II.  This film is the anecdotal story of how Tucker assembled a
design team, financed the project, acquired a factory, and sold the idea of
the car to the public, and finally of the events that led to Tucker's name
*not* becoming a household word.
     A film about creativity should be creative and TUCKER is, in a lot of
different ways.  The film starts out as a public relations film for the
Tucker Motor Company and with no discernible boundaries, segues into the
real story of the film.  Particularly creative are the ways in which the
film visualizes telephone conversations.  And even with the creative
photography, TUCKER creates a period feel.
     And speaking of imaginative things never done before, Coppola manages
to turn Martin Landau's character (Abe) into someone likable and
sympathetic.  With the exception of an abortive effect during the second
season of SPACE: 1999, no one has ever tried, much less succeeded, at making
this wooden actor seem likable.  Landau even looks the part, or at least the
type, something done by no one else major in this film, as Coppola seems
intentionally to tell the audience.  No matter--his characters embody a
spirit that transcends physical resemblance.  Also occasionally they say
things that are intended more for 1988 ears, but always to make a point
well-taken.
