Title
Review for Lost World, The (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Arthur Conan Doyle's novel THE LOST WORLD was only fourteen years
old when it was first adapted to film in 1925, yet the silent version
remains the definitive version.  The story concerns an expedition to a
high South American plateau isolated and insulated from the effects of
evolution, where vicious prehistoric ape-men live together with live
dinosaurs.  Considering the subject matter--the dinosaurs, the ape-men,
the action and adventure--one would think that in the seventy years
since then it would have had much better adaptations, but sadly, with
all its faults, the 1925 film remains the only reasonably faithful
adaptation.  The 1960 version had little respect for the original story
and in addition for dinosaurs it used lizards that were a long way from
resembling the real thing.  I had heard that there was a Canadian
version made, but could not find out much about it until it showed up
in my local video store.
     The film was made in 1992 together with RETURN TO THE LOST WORLD,
a film with the same director and cast.  The director is Timothy Bond
who had directed, in Canada, a chilling 1976 TV-movie, DEADLY HARVEST.
That film depicted in frightening detail the results of a famine coming
to Canada.  The intervening sixteen years must not have been good for
Bond's directorial style.  The realistic style of that film is just
what is missing from his new THE LOST WORLD.
     The film actually starts fairly well with reporter Edward Malone
(played by Eric McCormack) looking for a dangerous assignment and being
sent to interview the obstreperous Dr. George Edward Challenger (John
Rhys-Davies).  Sequences here are taken directly from the book and
raise hopes for a faithful adaptation.  Things start going wrong when
the script moves the lost plateau from South America to Central Africa.
This was done, no doubt, because the filmmakers got a better deal
shooting in Zimbabwe than they could have gotten shooting on the
Amazon.  The story then replaces Doyle's game-hunting Lord John Roxton
with conservationist suffragette and wildlife photographer, Jenny
Nielson (Tamara Gorski) and a thirteen-year-old cub reporter Jim
(Darren Peter Mercer).  Doyle's version of Professor Challenger would
absolutely not abide a woman or a child on the expedition, but someone
felt the film needed kid-identification value as well as a female
role-model.  In this version Challenger is impressed by the plucky
proto-feminist.  In fact, just about everybody turns out to be
wonderful in this version.  Challenger turns out to be wonderful, his
bitter competitor Summerlee turns out to be wonderful.  The wildlife of
Africa is wonderful.  The Africans the expedition runs into are
wonderful.  The rubbery dinosaurs are wonderful.  (Well, the herbivores
are and the carnivores never pose much of a threat.)  The ape-men on
the plateau would never think of throwing their enemies over the sides
of the plateau the way Doyle had envisioned them.  They aren't really
ape-men either, but enlightened primitives who just need to be
understood.  There is one nasty villain in the film--you'll know him
right away because he isn't pretty like the other people.  He's a white
(albeit Hispanic) male, of course.  You can tell just by looking at him
that he is a villain.  It is amazing that this film can be as faithful
to the plot of the novel as it is and at the same time be so lacking in
the novel's dramatic tension.  The story has the right shape, but every
sharp edge has been rounded off and sanded down.
     The effects work is spotty.  A carnivore head at one point is
actually fairly good, but a baby pterodactyl that shows up more often
is horribly cutsey and looks like something out of a cartoon.  At least
the 1960 version never got your hopes up that it would be a good film.
It is bad from the first scene.  The fact that the 1992 film really
does have a few good moments only makes the film more frustrating.  I
rate this version a low 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
