Title
Review for Sidekicks (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Jonathan Brandis, Beau Bridges, Joe Piscopo, Mako, 
           Julia Nicholson-Soul, Danica McKellar, Richard Moll, 
           Chuck Norris
Director:  Aaron Norris 
Producer:  Don Carmody
Screenplay:  Donald G. Thompson and Lou Illar 
Music:  Alan Silvestri
Released by Triumph Releasing Corporation
     Barry (Jonathan Brandis) is an asthmatic kid who lives his life
through a dream world where he fights alongside Chuck Norris to rescue
damsels in distress and defeat the forces of evil.  In reality, Barry
is so feeble that even the task of climbing a rope in gym class is
daunting.  With the exception of Lauren (Danica McKellar), all the kids
in school make fun of him, pushing him around and bullying him as the
mood suits them.  In an attempt to learn how to defend himself, Barry
decides to take Karate lessons.  The first teacher he visits, a
demanding creep named Stone (Joe Piscopo), laughs him out of his
studio.  His second choice, however, a man named Mr. Lee (Mako), agrees
not only to teach Barry the moves, but the philosophy as well.
     Subtle manipulation can sometimes make a good movie better.
Overt, obvious manipulation is guaranteed to sink any endeavor.
SIDEKICKS is such an example.  This film goes out of its way to make
the villains as nasty as possible, while lauding the assets of the
heroes.  Everything builds to a climax where good faces evil.  Guess
who wins.  If you can't, maybe SIDEKICKS is your kind of picture.
     I'll give the movie a little credit--it's not afraid to have some
fun at its own expense.  Joe Piscopo is so over-the-top that his
performance has to be intended by the director.  No one could possibly
be this bad without someone coaching them to be...could they?  There
are a few humorous moments during the course of the film's one-hundred
minute running time, only I'm not sure whether or not I was supposed to
laugh when I did.
     Often a sports-related movie will work because of a likable
character, a believable script, or a strong performance.  SIDEKICKS has
none of these assets, so the final contest at the end is
uninteresting.  At least in a film like GLADIATOR (the first of many
that pops into mind), while there's never any doubt who the winner will
be, at least we care about the victory.  In SIDEKICKS, it doesn't
matter.  None of the characters have enough depth for it to.
     Characterization is brutal.  Everyone is a stereotype, from the
sage instructor to the cute girlfriend.  The kids in school are all
representative of the worst in an American teenager.  Sure, people are
often cruel to misfits, but they're nothing like what's represented
here.  There isn't one character in this film that I could accept as a
real person.  The poor quality of the acting doesn't help, but it's
outdone by an embarrassing script.
     Certainly some of this movie was lifted from THE KARATE KID (to be
nice, I avoid the word "stolen").  Mr. Lee's sermons have a familiar
sound, but they ring false in this story.  THE KARATE KID had a lot
more going for it than SIDEKICKS could ever hope for.
     Most of the action in the film is provided by a series of dream
sequences that have Chuck Norris and Barry shooting their way through
various scenarios.  Despite all the bullets and explosions, no one
seems to get seriously injured.  This is another case of live cartoon
violence, and I'm of the opinion that it's not a good thing.  In the
real world, when shots are fired, people get injured.  Not so in
SIDEKICKS (and a number of other recent films).  Here, death doesn't
seem to be a reality.
     For those that like to laugh at bad movies, this may be one to put
on your list (preferably for video watching).  It isn't dull, so it can
be endured, but anyone who wants to take SIDEKICKS seriously is likely
to be in for a major disappointment.  This film is about as lame as a
movie gets without being downright repulsive.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com) 
