Title
Review for Six Days Seven Nights (1998)
Number of Reviews
28

Author
Matt Williams
It's a traditional setup:  put a man and a woman who seemingly hate each
other into isolation together and love will bloom.  That's the
tried-and-true setup of the new romantic adventure film Six Days, Seven
Nights, which gets the setup right... but doesn't know what to do from
there.
Robin Monroe (Anne Heche) is the busy New York editor at an upscale
fashion magazine. She has little time for romance, but when her
boyfriend Frank (David Schwimmer) invites her to a six-day, seven night
stay at a South Pacific resort, she accepts...just as she does to his
proposal for marriage.
When an emergency photo shoot in Tahiti beckons, Robin finds herself
hiring the services of Quinn Harris (Harrison Ford), the only pilot on
the island.  However, a tropical storm forces their plane to crash, and
Robin and Quinn find themselves stranded on a remote island with little
hope of rescue.
Of course, the island is full of adventure.  From wild animals to
dangerous terrain to modern-day pirates, Robin and Quinn face danger at
every turn.  Will these dangers make them turn to one another?
Harrison Ford and Anne Heche actually make a convincing romantic
couple.  The actors do a good enough job to allow you to get lost in the
characterization, and forget about the actors' personal lives.  Neither
character is written very deep, but both Ford and Heche play their roles
with the appropriate combination of charm and likability.
On the supporting side, David Schwimmer is his traditional whiner...a
role which is easier to take in these small doses.  There to comfort him
is Angelica (Jacqueline Obradors), island entertainer and Quinn's
sometimes girlfriend. She doesn't have much to do beyond the bimbo role,
which she fills nicely.
It seems as if director Ivan Reitman is shooting for a Romancing The
Stone, or The African Queen sort of feel for the film.  But, though the
leads are  appealing, he doesn't have the story to back it up.
Aside from the romance, there's actually very little for the characters
to do.  The film tries to address that by throwing nearly every
shipwrecked-on-a-deserted-isle trick in the book at them (come on,
pirates?), but every obstacle seems overly artificial.
In the end, Six Days, Seven Nights is enjoyable...though more for its
romantic comedy elements than its sense of adventure.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Harrison Ford, Anne Heche, David Schwimmer, Jacqueline Obradors,
Temuera Morrison
Directors: Ivan Reitman
Producers: Ivan Reitman, Roger Birnbaum, Wallis Nicita
Screenplay: Michael Browning
Harrison Ford is getting to the age where playing a male lead, requires
more than just a set of good looks. The perpetually likeable Ford, has
charisma, charm and likeability that will tie him over into the next
century. Playing something reminiscent of the late Cary Grant in FATHER
GOOSE, Ford is a bit of a scruffy, drinking pilot that crashes his plane
on a deserted island, with a perky Anne Heche, fashion magazine editor
on board.
So this story has a Robinson Crusoe feel about it and the first half the
movie is about survival and mostly comic, because of a good series of
one liners between the Heche and Ford. Unfortunately, the final half
falls into a rather round-the-mill, die hard' action flick once the
pirates arrive on the scene. The idea of Anne Heche, being Ford's girl
Friday is quite entertaining, but is she really the right choice for a
good romantic lead? There is some chemistry between Heche and Ford, but
it really should have stayed more on an intellectual level, than a
physical one. The passion aspect of their relationship is as solid as a
half-boiled egg.
David Schwimmer doing his usual rah, rah', I'm such a jerk' persona,
is perfect for his role as the weak-spirited fiancée of the Heche
character. So tt's not surprising that she chooses Ford over him.
Although, no aspect of this movie is exceptional, overall it is well
written and directed and more enjoyable than one would expect. After
all, it is a product of Ivan Reitman and any admirers of his work should
expect a comic side to this movie.

Author
Ben Hoffman
         **************************************
This is a fun movie.  Harrison Ford, as Quinn Harris),  has never been more
charmingly delightful.  His grin is wide . . . and small wonder: he is playing
opposite Anne Heche (as Robin Monroe) who pulls out all the stops; everyone is
going to love her pixielike smile.  For those in showbiz who worried about
Ellen DeGeneres' girlfriend playing the love interest with Quinn Harris
(Harrison Ford): relax!   Both are terrific actors who light up the screen
when the two are kissing, wrestling or just gazing at each other.
Frank, (David Schwimmer) is just right as the man engaged to marry Robin.
He is a nice, try-hard-to-be-faithful, fianc.   True, he has a real battle
on his hands when the very sexy Angelica (Jacqueline Obradors) invites him
to spend the night with her when Robin and Quinn disappear in the storm. Of
course, things happen to make life not that easy but hey, this is the movie
world. Michael Browning wrote a laugh a minute script that sparkles with
humor and keeps the film  entertaining just about every moment.
Robin is an editor for a New York magazine.  David has surprised her with
tickets to a remote Pacific island where they are to have the time of their
lives relaxing on vacation.    Shortly after their arrival, she receives an
urgent call from her boss, Marjorie (Allison Janney) who does not take "no"
for an answer. Robin must come home for just one day to handle an
emergency.
Robin learns the quickest way to get back to New York is to fly to
another island on a little island-hopper of a plane piloted by an
unlikely-looking pilot, Quinn Harris.    At this point writer Browning has
the weather enter the picture. An unexpected storm comes up resulting in a
crash landing on a remote uninhabited island. . . and the fun begins. The
fun even includes pirates.
This all made for a most entertaining evening.

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: June 12, 1998
Starring: Harrison Ford, Anne Heche, David Schwimmer, Jacqueline
Obradors, Allison Janney, Danny Trejo
Directed by: Ivan Reitman
Distributed by: Buena Vista Pictures
MPAA Rating: PG-13 (language, sensuality, brief violence) 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/sixdays.htm
Harrison Ford's track record with romantic comedies has left him a bit
high and dry with fans who saw more in his original, action-adventure
roots (e.g. STAR WARS, RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK). This new conglomeration
of quasi-adventure and romantic comedy, SIX DAYS SEVEN NIGHTS, has Ford
living up to everyone's expectations, and unfortunately, those weren't
high. Although marketed early on as an Indiana Jones-type vehicle in
order to nail the males, and as a smart, snappy romance to nail the
women, it doesn't manage to do anything solid with either of the two
genres. Instead, it comes out a bit limp, which is disappointing
considering the promise and talent involved. 
Director Ivan Reitman (Fathers' Day) heads up three noteworthy stars in
this film about finding love where it's least expected. Frank Martin
(David Schwimmer, of TV's FRIENDS), an extra-sweet and extra-sensitive
guy, takes his girlfriend and soon-to-be-fianceé Robin Monroe (Anne
Heche, WAG THE DOG) on a trip for six days and seven nights at a remote
island paradise in the south seas. However, Robin, a magazine editor, is
called to Tahiti for a photo shoot, the only ride available is with
Quinn Harris (Harrison Ford, AIR FORCE ONE), a grumpy, isolated, aging
pilot of a dilapidated cargo plane. While on the way, the plane is
struck by lightning and forced to land on a largely unknown island, and
the two are forced to brave the tropical wilds and nearby pirates before
reconstructing their damaged plane in a part-MACGYVER, part-A-TEAM
sequence so they can hopefully return home.
Ford, who's by far the most solid of the three principals, is again left
high and dry. His performance in this movie shows that he's looking for
something more from the script, and from the way he moves on camera it's
painfully obvious that he's rather confined. His character - a
pissed-off, tequila-drinking loner - should be a great source of snappy
one-liners; unfortunately, he's more of a wimp than not. Heche, on the
other hand, is full of talk, perhaps almost too much. Her character is
too dynamic, swinging from the loudmouthing New Yorker to the subdued
romantic, and she never provides much chemistry for the relationship
with Ford. In fact, the only palpable feeling of drama comes near the
end, when Robin visits Quinn in the hospital. Schwimmer is adaquate,
although his screen time is nil and he can't make much of it. 
All told, the promise that SIX DAYS shows in the previews is not
delivered upon. The romance here should revolve around a dark comedic
tone, much as it did in the much-funnier GROSSE POINTE BLANK of last
year. It takes quite a bit for a comedy to actually work in situations
such as this, and it's obvious from the first moments of the film that
it's not going to work here. Ford, although he has expressed sentiments
not to, should stick to action-adventure films, and Heche, whose
performance in her last several films has been moderate at best, may
need to work more on big screen performances. This summer, there are
better movies to see.
FINAL AWARD FOR "SIX DAYS SEVEN NIGHTS": 2.0 stars - a fair movie.

Author
Homer Yen
As I sat during the first 15 minutes of this movie, a movie billed as an
adventure/romance/comedy, I could see the signs that this outing would
not be a trip through paradise.  First we meet the diminutive Anne Heche
portraying Robin, an editor of a woman's magazine called Dazzle.  With
an extremely busy schedule, which is a model of chaos, she barely has
time for her wimpy but romantic boyfriend Frank.  Although he lavishes
her with roses and surprises her with a trip to a pacific island
paradise, he doesn't really exude a manliness that would attract any
kind of woman.  Then again, Frank is played by Friends co-star, David
Schwimmer.  Meanwhile, Anne Heche isn't exactly interested in men, is
she?  Perhaps that's the comedic launching point for this exercise in
miscasting.  
In order to reach their final destination, Robin and Frank need to
charter a plane, which is piloted by Quinn Harris (Harrison Ford).
Quinn is a sometimes-drunk beach bum who seems content on living simple
life, which includes trying to pick up women, hanging out with his
voluptuous co-pilot, and eking out a meager existence through his
charter service.  Adventure finally dribbles into the film when Robin is
ordered to attend a nearby photoshoot.  Needing to leave the island, she
enlists Quinn, and off they fly into a nasty storm, which throws them
off course and forces them to land on some uninhabited island.
Realizing that the plane is heavily damaged and that it is unlikely that
no one will find them, Robin begins to ooze with bitchiness.  "Don't you
have any skills," she yells.  "You know, one of those guys you send out
into the wilderness with a pocket knife and a Q-Tip and they build you a
shopping mall?"  Meanwhile, Quinn tries to think of a way for them to
get off the island.  During the next couple of days, they have to trek
through miles of forest and mountainous terrain, avoid being bitten by
snakes and scorpions, and allude pirates (???) that conveniently show up
to try to heighten the movie's level of suspense.  Maybe Quinn can find
a way to save themselves, but even Harrison Ford can't save this
underdeveloped melange of genres.
Here's an example.  There's a beautiful scene when Heche and Ford
lustily kiss on the beach as the ocean tide gently crashes around them ŕ
la From Here to Eternity.  But what led up to this kiss?   Ford's Quinn
is very likable and resourceful.  This ruggedness attracts Robin, which
gives us what, I suppose, passes as the romantic aspect.  But although
Robin is plucky, her acerbic attitude and her uncanny ability to worsen
the situation (firing off their only flare into a tree, opening an
inflatable life raft while in the plane) makes her more of an annoyance
rather than a believable love interest.  And couldn't someone think of a
better crisis situation rather than modern-day pirates?  
There are the occasional chuckles and there are certain moments where
Heche shines and many moments that show us why Harrison Ford is a true
leading man.  But without the presence of Ford and the likable charm of
Heche, this film would find its way into the video store in less time
than the title of the movie.

Author
Jerry Saravia
"Six Days, Seven Nights" is the umpteenth version of "The African Queen" crossed
with Lina Wertmuller's "Swept Away," and a dash of Indiana Jones for good
measure. Or you can look at the film as a combination of highlights from
Harrison Ford's most popular movies. Either way, it doesn't work. 
Harrison Ford is a gruffly airline pilot hired to fly a glamorous fashion writer
(Anne Heche) and her fiancé (David Schwimmer) to Tahiti. Trouble is she is
called in at the last minute to oversee a photo shoot. Once she's on the mini
cargo plane with Ford, they crash-land on another tropical island with no
inhabitants. But wouldn't you know that some drug lords and pirates are there
and spot the bickering twosome and, wait a minute, I thought this was an update
of "African Queen"? Or are we in Indiana Jones territory? 
Ford exudes charisma and strength, but he doesn't have much in the way of
chemistry with Anne Heche (and no, it has nothing to do with her lesbian nature,
though as of 2001, she is considering marriage with a heterosexual). Heche
overacts to the hilt in a performance that demanded more than desperation, but
both characters never seem undernourished or in fear of never being found in a
deserted island. The just bicker back and forth, but it is the kind of bickering
that might work initially if it went beyond mere bickering. Heche almost made me
wish Melanie Griffith replaced her - Griffith's voice is grating to be sure but
it worked in "Working Girl" opposite Ford. 
David Schwimmer is the sort-of-welcome comic relief, but I never believed for a
second that he was in love with Heche (again, nothing to do with her lesbian
nature). Let's it put this way: for a beautiful, vivacious woman like Heche,
there is no contest between Ford and Schwimmer in the romantic lead department.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust668@aol.com

Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair/below average)
1998, PG-13, 101 minutes [1 hour, 41 minutes]
Starring: Harrison Ford (Quinn Harris), Anne Heche (Robin Monroe), David
Schwimmer (Frank Martin), Jacqueline Obradors (Angelica); written by Michael
Browning; produced by Roger Birnbaum, Wallace Nicita, Ivan Reitman; directed
by Ivan Reitman.
Seen June 22, 1998 at 7:30 p.m. at Rotterdam Square Mall Cinemas (Rotterdam,
NY), theater #1, with my brother John for free using my Sony/Loews critic's
pass. [Theater rating: ***: good sound, picture, and seats]
For the past few years a new trend, a conspiracy even, has been infiltrating
the mainstream movie market. Major studios have been producing a growing
number of "fluff" films, or what might be referred to as modern B-movies.
Although not nearly as bad as their predecessors, these pieces of medicore
filmmaking work in the same manner, that is, to simply clutter theaters in
effort to out-do the competition. The trend has been subtle as the films are
made mostly by rookies and flavor-of-the-month actors, but here comes "Six
Days Seven Nights" which could change everything. Not only is it another
generic romantic comedy without the romance nor the comedy, but it separates
it from the rest is the credit of Harrison Ford and Ivan Reitman, and yet
neither come close to working their magic with the material.
As is the case with most fluff movies, this one wastes no time in
establishing the minimum requirements necessary for a story to exist. During
the opening credits we're told the entire backstory as we meet the young New
York couple: Robin Monroe (Heche), a trendy editor at a semi-trashy women's
fashion magazine, and her boyfriend (and soon to be fiancée) Frank Martin
(Schwimmer), who may be the world's first dorky yuppie. The two have been
dating for a few years and are about to take a vacation together at a resort
on a remote tropical island. 
By the time the two arrive at their hotel, the feeling of complete and total
unoriginality is evident. This is worsened when the film decides to form a
plot of sorts by giving the characters something of conflict, which involves
their forced interaction with Quinn Harris (Ford), an old, shady airplane
pilot whose presence is annoying not only to Robin and Frank, but to the
audience as well since it's clear what will happen between which characters,
when, and why.
The first act rushes to get to the film's catch which involves Quinn and
Robin's being stuck together on an deserted (not desert) island. How this
comes about is presented as completely logical, but is really total stupidity.
It's clear the filmmakers don't want to spend too much time on plausibility,
otherwise they might have found less predictable and more believable plot
elements to move the story along.
Cliches don't necessarily equal flaws, and although they are abundant here,
it is the poor script and flat direction which suffocate the film. The cliches
are at least consistent, almost to the point of being satirical, but the way
in which they are employed is the film's problem. The foreshadowing is so
blatantly obvious it's pathetic. Of course an attractive man and woman who
don't like each other and are forced into being together are going to fall for
each other. Of course the junky little plane is going to crash so the
characters are stranded. Of course their lovers back home will get together.
And of course some "funny" things will happen along the way.        
Making a romantic comedy work shouldn't be a difficult task. It's a mixture
of two well-loved genres, but here the two clash so harshly it's painful. The
film's comedic side is basically a combination of every joke currently
availble on "Must See TV." We get the cartoony sight gags, some slapstick, and
lame one-liners at all the wrong times. Its romantic side is laughable as Ford
and Heche are completely out of place. Neither put much emotion into their
acting, probably because they've deserve better and have done much better than
this and thus they have no chemistry. Meanwhile, Schwimmer does his usual
Ross-from-"Friends" schtick, with the constant whining and over-acting. But
it's not entirely the actors' fault, since they have little to work with here.
The plot is weak, the dialogue is worse, and the attempt at suspense by
introducing villains is cartoonish to the extreme. I half expected Scooby Doo
to show up.
Critics often accuse today's films of ripping-off the classics, but with the
case of "Six Days Seven Nights" I really wish it had done so, then there'd be
at least some sign of taste. Just once I'd like to see a film as generic as
this copy the end of "Casablanca."


Author
Luke Buckmaster
Cast: Harrison Ford, Anne Heche, David Schwimmer, Jacqueline Obradors,
Temuera Morrison
Director: Ivan Reitman
Screenplay: Michael Browning
Australian theatrical release date: June 25
It would make my forehead cringe to think of a story more simple than
this: the scruffy pilot Quinn (Harrison Ford) manages to crash a small
airplane in the middle of nowhere with prissy women's magazine editor
Robin (Anne Heche) as the only passenger.  The two then grumble and
groan their way through 6 days and 7 nights; griping and whining at
every problem they encounter (and boy, there are a few).  Meanwhile,
Quinn's sluttish assistant (Jacqueline Obradors) tempts Robin's finance
(David Schwimmer).
Did I mention that it's all based in tropical paradise?  Well, it is -
and these exotic islands come fully equipped with wild pigs, fragile
mountain floors and even their own set of pirates ("You mean Arrgh?").
With much controversy surrounding the film regarding lesbian Heche
giving a "straight" performance, allow me to say this: she does a much,
much better job conveying a straight woman than most straight women do.
The main problem with Six Days Seven Nights does not lie in her
performance, and came to think of it, nor does it with anybody else's.
Ford, Heche, Obradors and Schwimmer all make passable if not pleasing
appearances on the screen; giving a fun sense of improvisation to their
roles.
What limits the film from being an inventive, rewarding feel-easy
adventure is the far too loose script.  Perhaps if writer Michael
Browning had been able to add more creativity to the action scenes,
flesh out some of the characters and give the film a better climax, it
may have been more convincing as both a romance and an adventure.
Like many poorly written mainstream films (Godzilla, Hard Rain and
Independence Day come to mind), the script is awash with one liners -
"I'd better not catch you smiling," Robin remarks when Quinn's hand is
down her pants, trying to remove a snake.  Whilst often hilarious, these
remarks serve as a quick joke, illustrating the fact that it's easier to
create a witty remark than it is to build a genuinely funny scenario.
Perhaps director Ivan Reitman's greatest achievement with Six Days Seven
Nights was taking us on a journey to practically no where, and having
fun along the way.  Having said that, the film is nothing more than some
fun - and although you may often find yourself laughing at it, the humor
alone may just be enough to tide you over until you see a better,
smarter film.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com.au for any
inquiries or feedback
Read more of my reviews at Movie Zone: http://moviezone.alphalink.com.au

Author
Edwin Jahiel
SIX DAYS, SEVEN NIGHTS (1998) ** 1/2  Directed by Ivan Reitman. Written by
Michael Browning. Photography, Michael Chapman. Editing, Sheldon Kahn,
Wendy Greene Bricmont. Production design, J.Michael Riva. Music, Randy
Edelman. Cast: Harrison Ford (Quinn Harris), Anne Heche (Robin Monroe),
David Schwimmer (Frank Martin), Jacqueline Obradors (Angelica), Allison
Janey (Marjorie), Temuera Morrison (Jager), et al. A Touchstone release.
101 minutes. PG-13
Who the director Ivan Reitman is, I know. When the four-year old was
brought to Canada  from his native Czechoslovakia, his genes must have
carried a Czech love of laughter that later, as producer-director, Reitman
transferred to his comedies and farces. The best-known are "Meatballs,"
"Stripes," "Ghostbusters," "Twins," "Kindergarten Cop," "Dave." Whatever
their artistic merit,  most  of them were box-office-busters.
Who the writer Michael Browning is, I cannot find out. Deciphering the
frustratingly less-than-meager information about him in the pressbook for
"Six Days, Seven Nights" seems to say that he has sold some scripts but
that this may be his first produced effort. Watching  "6D7N" however, does
make one thing clear: Browning has seen a lot of Hollywood pics and built
(some might say cobbled) his scenario from more films than you can shake a
schtick at.
Savvy moviegoers could play a parlor game about sources: From Here to
Eternity, Heaven Knows Mr.Allison, Swept Away, Swiss Family Robinson, The
Admirable Crichton, Father Goose, the Flight of the Phoenix, perhaps Sands
of the Kalahari, Butch Cassidy, the Indiana Jones movies, many more. Plus
the hundreds of romantic comedies where tue love begins as antagonism. Plus
those in which X is engaged to Y but it is Z who finally gets X.
Does all this matter? I can't tell. The film plays it safe by being
mainstream stuff for mainstream audiences. It is a no-brainer that  makes
its public laugh a lot. Exacting viewers may dismiss it, yet won't be
bored. The scenery is beautiful, the casting good, the performers
appealing, the dialogue amusing.
New Yorker Robin (Anne Heche pronounced "Haych") is a hotshot assistant
editor at "Dazzle," one of those glossy femme-mags that print articles such
as "20 ways to reduce your derriere, snag a man, make up for travel in
Tierra del Fuego, put down your boss," while inventing statistics about sex
or marriage.
Though frantically busy, Robin accepts the offer of Frank (David Schwimmer)
her boyfriend for three years, to fly to an island paradise in French
Polynesia for the kind of stay that travel brochures (and the movie's
title) advertise. From Tahiti to their final destination, conditions make
the couple go in a small cargo plane, a vintage DeHavilland Beaver,
four-seater puddle-jumper that's like a rickshaw with a propeller. Its
owner/pilot is Quinn Harris (Harrison Ford), who has good looks, a sense of
humor, and, as it turns out, had quit a profitable business for a simple,
idyllic life. Shades of Gauguin and other, real or fictional European
immigrants to the South Pacific.
Coming along is sexy Angelica (Jacqueline Obradors), Quinn's part-time
girl-friend, part-time hoochie-koochie dancer, part-time whatever (not
clear). In the  pricey hotel  on the secluded island, Quinn gets sloshed to
the point of  trying to pick up Robin whom he doesn't remember. He gets
some action with Angelica. Frank comes up with an engagement ring. But into
each life, a little rain must fall. Frantically calling from New York, her
editor wants Robin fly to Tahiti on a pop in and out  assignment.
Robin bribes Quinn, who's not above upping the ante. They get caught in a
storm, crash-land on an unidentifiable, deserted, gorgeous island played by
the Hawaiian island of Kauai where dozens of exotic movies have been shot.
All along there is some nice banter with some good reactions and repartee
Radio communications are kaput. Aha! Ignoring the fact that this is not New
York, smartypants Robin comes up with her cellular phone. Zero results. (I
wish Harrison Ford had said "Toto, I think we're not in Kansas any more.")
You guess the rest,but not its style, which is rather laid back for a
romantic adventure comedy. The cliché antagonism is played way down. So are
the mutual attraction and the dialogue. Heche and Ford are very good with
comedy and in implying more than is actually spoken out. Both get good
mileage from  facial  and body English, with well-directed timing. Heche,
though no great beauty, is pretty, more cute than cutesy, quietly sexy. (A
poster I've seen doubles her actual cleavage!). The sex element is
discreet, limited to such shots as Ford removing a (symbolic?) snake from
the lady's panties; a brief embrace and roll in the surf (cf.From Here to
Eternity); and such..
The couple-in-progress keep their sense of humor throughout their rough
(including major, Indiana Jones, falls and tumbles), near-fruitless
exploration of the spectacular island. Tempers hardly flare. Heche has a
knack for showing her reactions by using just her eyes -- which is easier
said than done.The budding May-November romance pointedly  jokes about
Harrison Ford's age but dismisses it as a factor.
Meanwhile, back at the ranch (the hotel), Frank ogles Angelica as she
dances in a tourist-trap number. Later, as the search for the new Robinsons
fails, Frank and Angelica, now united in worry, get soused and in bed. The
morning after he feels guilty. She consoles him with "It's like after a
funeral, everybody has sex!" His response, an expression of doubt, and
hers, a quizzical "Don't they?" look, get high marks.
David Schimmer's supporting role is well conceived. The loser-to-be is an
Everyman rather than a boob, like, say, Ralph Bellamy's wealthy Oklahoman
yokel in "His Girl Friday." Neither likable nor offensive, Frank is a
cruise-ship sort of romantic, and is sexually aroused in John Doe fashion.
Miss Obradors, who some years back  was plucked from a supermarket checkout
and into TV and a few rather obscure films, does nicely too, except that
she looks and sounds rather like a Latina, not a French citizen of
Polynesia.
Back to the island again. It is preordained that bummish-at-the ages bon
vivant Harrison Ford is also ingenious, will devise ways to survive and
avoid a major danger. The latter reminds me of the old advice given by a
film composer: " When in doubt, go to the Hallelujah chorus from Handel's
'Messiah'". When in doubt with trapped-on-island stories, bring on the
pirates.
Ms.Heche is not, as I've heard it said, a new Carole Lombard. Her style is
distinctly her own. She proves that, cause celebre or not (her lesbianism),
she can make a wickedly good comedienne. Ford who will very soon be 56,
remains as attractive a leading man as ever (the shots of his balding pate
are an uneven -- now you see it now you don't) and one of the very few
performers today who can do no wrong. An experienced pilot, though probably
not "an aviation ace" as the pressbook hypes it, he actually pilots the
plane in scenes shot from a helicopter.
This may be a Kleenex movie, disposable and forgettable, but paper tissues
too have their place in life. The film is a camouflaged, tongue-in-cheek,
mild parody of many oldies. Its deja vu aspects do not bother me. What does
sadden me as an officer in the Language Police is that Ford pronounces
"nucular" for "nuclear," and that the printed information has the star of
"Patriot Games" saying that (sic) "Quinn is an ex-patriot American."
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Although Director Ivan Reitman occasionally misses, as he did with
FATHER'S DAY, he generally hits the mark dead-on, as he did with
GHOSTBUSTERS and DAVE.  His latest motion picture, SIX DAYS, SEVEN
NIGHTS, is a big-hearted movie filled with comedy and romance.  Best
described as a SWISS FAMILY ROBINSON-style love story, the movie stars
Harrison Ford and Anne Heche as two people who go from hatred to love
as they struggle with dire circumstances.  With a marvelous script by
Michael Browning, the story provides ample laughs as well as a few
beautifully tender moments.
     It all starts when Robin Monroe (Heche), the assistant editor of
"Dazzle," is given a ticket to a remote tropical island by her would-be
husband, Frank Martin (David Schwimmer).  He is going to take her away
from her killer work schedule in a frozen Manhattan so that he can pop
the question on a warm beach under a swaying palm tree.  "I want this
to be the most unforgettable vacation of our lives," he tells her in
the movie's most prophetic line.
     They ride the last leg of their flight in a jury-rigged plane
flown by a graying pilot named Quinn Harris (Ford).  Quinn's busty
companion, Angelica (Jacqueline Obradors), looking like one of those
girls that your mother warned you about, comes along for the ride.
     After they arrive, Robin's office demands that she fly to Tahiti
for a day to supervise a photo shoot, so she hires a reluctant Quinn to
transport her.  The plane crashes on an uninhabited island, and most of
the remaining movie is about how Robin and Quinn cope.  Facing
everything from scorpions to pirates, they survive, but just barely.
     "Why aren't you one of those guys with skills?" she taunts him.
"You send them into the wilderness with a Q-tip and a knife, and they
build you a shopping mall."  Finally after one calamity after another,
she allows as how, "I've had just about as much vacation as I can
stand."
     The movie is as good with the physical comedy as the verbal.  In
one delicious scene, Robin freezes in the water when a snake crawls
into her shorts.  The look on both of their eyes as Quinn reaches deep
into her crotch area to retrieve the snake is a sweet mixture of shock,
fright and ecstasy.
     Starting out despising and ridiculing each other, they end up
romantically inclined even if not exactly lovers.  In the show's most
precious and romantic scene, Quinn talks about how much he enjoyed
their brief kissing earlier and muses on how much he'd like to do it
again.  In an age in which actors quickly throw off their clothes and
jump into bed, the intimacy of simple kissing is rarely bothered with
and certainly never discussed.
     There is excellent, albeit subtle, chemistry between Robin and
Quinn.  She's the smart professional with the sexy outfits.  And he's
her opposite, a boozing pilot who is past his prime.  Nevertheless,
they find that circumstances make each attracted to the other.
     (As for Heche's sexual orientation, let it be said that the motion
picture industry is filled with heterosexuals playing homosexuals and
vice versa.  Acting like something they're not is what actors are paid
to do in every film they are in.)
     The movie cuts between Robin and Quinn's hardships and the luxury
that Frank and Angelica are enjoying back at the resort.  Angelica is a
generous sort - "It's like after a funeral, everybody has sex," she
says - so she invites Frank to share his grief with her.
     With Michael Chapman's breathtaking cinematography - the picture
was filmed on Kauai - and Randy Edelman's dreamy music, the movie is
easy to fall for.
     The film's most delightfully ridiculous aspect has to be Robin's
coiffure.  No matter how long they remain stranded on the desert
island, she never has a bad hair day.  She even awakens with fresh
lipstick.  Life in the wilderness with a sexy woman has never been
better.
     SIX NIGHTS, SEVEN NIGHTS runs 1:41.  It is rated PG-13 for adult
themes, mild profanity and cartoonish violence and would be fine for
kids around eleven and up.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Touchstone Pictures/Caravan Pictures
 Director: Ivan Reitman
 Writer: Michael Browning
 Cast: Harrison Ford, Anne Heche, David Schwimmer,
Jacqueline Obreadors, Temuera Morrison
   Without conflict we would have no comedy, no melodrama. 
You can't blame writers and directors of romantic comedy,
then, for putting two opposites together to see what they will
make of their relationship.  In Neil Simon's "California Suite,"
high-strung New Yorker Hannah Warren visits her laid-back
ex, Bill Warren in California, though nothing comes of the
meeting.  In Nicholas Evans's novel "The Horse Whisperers,"
high-strung New Yorker Anne MacLean invokes the skills of
laid-back Montanan Tom Becker.  In the movie version,
nothing much ultimately comes of that, either.  In Michael
Browning's "Six Days, Seven Nights" directed by Ivan
Reitman, high-power magazine editor Robin Monroe (Anne
Heche) requires the services of laid-back charter pilot Quinn
Harris (Harrison Ford).  Quinn has a bimbo dancer girl friend,
Angelica (Jacqueline Obradors) in French Polynesia and is
content with his life, while Robin has a new fiance, Frank
Martin (David Schwimmer) and likes her big-city job.  Quinn
and Robin appear as unlikely as Hannah and Bill and Tom
and Annie to make more permanent arrangements from their
association.
   "Six Days Seven Nights" is billed as a vacation that you
won't find in any travel brochure, though organizations like
Outward Bound might dispute this as would the creators of
Nicolas Van Orton's holiday in David Fincher's "The Game." 
What seems like a brief respite for Robin and Frank on a
resort island near Tahiti turns into a scare-and-affair break for
the newly engaged couple.  Frank and Robin are taking a
honeymoon in paradise BEFORE they marry.  The difference
is that both honeymoon with people other than their fiances.
   The story opens in a New York office of a Cosmopolitan-
style magazine called Dazzle, where Robin is an assistant
editor whose boy friend surprises her with a couple of tickets
to Polynesia. After arriving, they hire rugged, uncomplicated
charter pilot Quinn Harris to take them on a small hop to a
place not to far from Tahiti.  When Robin is begged by her
boss in New York to take a quick assignment in Tahiti, she
hires Quinn once again for the extra trip, reluctantly, since the
plane is a heap apparently left over from World War II and
Quinn is not too skillful at holding his liquor.  When an
unexpected storm downs the plane in a deserted cove just
short of Tahiti, Quinn and Robin must make do, living off the
land, while they await help that may never arrive.  Chief
among their hardships is a series of skirmishes they endure
with a small band of pirates equipped with Uzis and missiles,
while boyfriend Frank, who remains safely behind, is seduced
by Quinn's girlfriend, Angelica.
   The picture is the essential male fantasy: the handsome,
womanizing, man caught in the middle of nowhere with a
beautiful young and lively woman.  Though Robin goes
through the motions of ribbing Quinn for his inability to get her
to her destination, you can see that she has eyes for this guy
who is much older than her fiance but unlike him does not
wear a stick in his back.  Anne Hache may surprise gossip
columnists who have said she would not be able to play
romantic leads with a man.  Her chemistry with Harrison Ford
is powerful, occasionally sentimental, but chiefly of the merrily
teasing variety.  When the adorable Ms. Hache's eyes light up
under her closely-cropped locks, you may think of Lillian Gish
playing the ingenue Anna Moore in D.W. Griffith's "Way Down
East," though at heart she is every bit the urban sophisticate
with a witty line for every mishap.  "Aren't you one of those
guys they send out in the wilderness with a Q-tip and a
pocket knife and they build you a shopping mall?" she
heckles while Quinn tries to fix the plane.  Quinn replies, "I'm
the best pilot you'll ever see," but is trumped by Robin's "I've
flown with you twice and you crashed half the time."  When
Quinn acts to remove a snake that has crawled up Robin's
shorts, she is not displeased but warns, "Don't let me catch
you smiling."
   The scenes involving the keystone pirates are downright
silly and Mr. Ford is out of his element in his type of comedy. 
We're embarrassed to see him falling flat-out drunk in a bar
where he hits on Quinn, too blind to realize that she is not a
stranger but the woman who hired him that very day to fly her
to the island.  As a whole, the movie is too lightweight even
by summer standards, though Michael Chapman's camera
captures all the rugged beauty of the Hawaiian island of Kauai
(standing in for French Polynesia) and might lead many
theatergoers to change their vacation plans.  What's that
Aloha plane doing in Tahiti, anyway?
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 98 minutes.  (C) Harvey Karten
1998

Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
Member of the 'Online Film Critics Society'
http://smart.sbay.com/ofcs/
Tom Cruise, #3 on the list of box office stars who have generated the
most income for the studios at a take of 1.51 billion dollars.  Tom
Hanks, #2 at 1.52 billion and Harrison Ford is #1 with a take of 2.08
billion dollars.  After all the years Harrison Ford has been around,
I've never seen a guy who can be so likable, even when he makes a bad
movie.  Born in 1942, his early roles in 'American Graffiti' (1973) and
'The Conversation' (1974) had him in gear as an interesting looking
character actor who was about the same age as I am now.  Then, of
course, his breakthrough film, 'Star Wars', had him engulfed in the full
context of success and the phrase, "never looking back", can rarely be
applied as strongly as in the case of Ford, who later took on the
challenge of a leading man and 'Raiders of the Lost Ark' made him a full
fledged superstar.  Thankfully, Tom Selleck's schedule made him
unavailable as Indiana Jones and stories I've read from multiple sources
said Harrison Ford was Oliver Stone's first choice to play Jim Garrison
in 'JFK'.
'Six Days, Seven Nights' has Ford under the direction of Ivan Reitman,
the man who made Arnold Schwarzenegger funny in such films as 'Twins',
'Kindergarten Cop' and 'Junior'.  Too bad Sylvester Stallone's voyage
into comedy was a disaster.  Maybe Reitman can do something for his
career later on.  In 'Six Days, Seven Nights', Ford looks entirely like
an everyday common man playing his role with a likable quality in a
mediocre film.  Ford plays a somewhat broken down commercial pilot who
lives in the South Pacific who meets a New York City magazine editor
(Anne Heche) and her fiancee (David Schwimmer).  He flies them to their
eventual destination and Heche and Ford later travel alone as Heche's
boss asks her to interrupt her vacation and make a 15-hour stop over in
Tahiti to do a magazine layout.
As they are flying, a violent storm kicks up forcing them to turn back
and upon doing so, the plane is struck by lightning and they crash land
on a deserted island in a 'Gilligan's Island' type of scenario.  Spoiled
with her bottled water, business lunches and NYC lifestyle, Heche can't
comprehend this disaster and asks Ford what he's going to do.  There are
some clever lines as Ford talks about the plane's landing gear and says:
"Sure, I'll just glue it back on".  Her sarcasm is not to be out done as
she says: "I've flown with you twice and you've crashed half the time".
Her best line is when she asks Ford if he's "One of those guys.  Those
handy guys who, when you give them a pocket knife and a Q-tip, they
build you a shopping mall."
Their isolation on the island puts them into an unpleasant confrontation
with some modern day pirates.  They also deal with the conflict of each
other's opposite tendencies, the humourous pratfalls of inexperience in
their situation and the unexpected situations in nature.
I couldn't quite get my mind around the fact that I was watching some
scenes straight out of movies such as 'Butch Cassidy and the Sundance
Kid', 'Romancing the Stone' and others and while pleasant enough in
content, the movie is a one time deal you want want to re-visit and
while Ford isn't quite upstaged by his female companion, Heche is still
more believable in her role and gives a better performance.  I was
surprised.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) 6 DAYS lacks originality. The whole thing is unabashedly
made from a cookie cutter. In this type of formula movie there is a danger
that you might be bored while "clever" moviegoers next to you predict
dialogue and actions. On the other hand, this type of film never has any
real danger of being utterly awful. It's a safe bet for a summer movie;
disposable, lightweight, and a decent distraction for two hours. 
Robin (Anne Heche) is on a tropical vacation with her potential fiancé
(David Schwimmer) when she is called away, just for 18 hours, to take care
of a project at work. The only pilot she can find is the coarse unrefined
drunkard (Harrison Ford) who flew her in. Halfway back to her job, a storm
comes up and causes them to crash on a deserted island. The two have to set
up house long enough for the search and rescue crew to find them. 
Robin thinks Quinn (Ford) is uncouth and Quinn thinks Robin is a stuck-up
prig. Naturally, they fall in love. Meanwhile, Frank (Schwimmer) and Quinn's
busty companion Angelica (Jacqueline Obradors), distraught over the possible
deaths of their loved ones, seek solace in each other's arms. Everything
works out perfectly for the great square dance of romantic comedy (don't
forget the false endings!). 
Still, the movie is pretty enjoyable, rated just above your average romantic
comedy. The first redeeming factor is the casting. Ford and Heche have a
pretty good chemistry. It's not a sexual chemistry; it's their banter and
their complementary strong wills that make them a good pair. Ford is showing
his age, but he still looks good, and he's got that grin that makes him
perfect for this movie. Heche holds her own against Ford, and thankfully,
her part was written just right. She was not a helpless porcelain woman, nor
was she a cold fish in need of thawing out. (Ugh, I I just quoted LOST IN
SPACE. Somebody kick me.) 
The dialogue is well written and well suited to the characters. There is a
scene in which a snake swims up Robin's shorts. Quinn comes to her aid, but
he doesn't just pull the thing out. The two stand hip-deep in water and talk
about the situation for a while. Each moment they delay is another moment of
tension, broken by a funny line, a double entendre, or a charming smirk. Yet
in spite of this obviously contrived situation, the humor never seemed forced. 
Another redeeming factor was the location and cinematography. The film was
shot on the island of Kauai in Hawaii, which allowed for lots of great
travelogue cinematography. In fact, this movie made me realize how rewarding
outdoor location shooting is and how rare it has become. Veteran
cinematographer Michael Chapman was not afraid to dwarf the characters with
the scenery. Often our heroes are small dots on a lush beautiful landscape.
I found myself surprised by how many medium and long shots there were in
this film, which probably goes to show that I have become used to the
cheaper technique of using a single long shot cutting straight to a closeup.
Chapman broke from that trend and it really paid off. 
Finally, I was pleased that the movie had a good heart. Frank and Angelica,
(Quinn and Robin's counterparts) were nice, likeable people. They were not
jealous or selfish or greedy. Sometimes a film will make the old
boyfriend/girlfriend insanely jealous or cruel so that we can root for the
heroes to end up together. Instead, Reitman allowed the CIRCUMSTANCES make
us root for the heroes to fall in love. The old lovers had their flaws, but
they weren't reduced to two-dimensional villains. 
6 DAYS is no instant classic, in spite of the qualities it has going for it.
But these qualities do help lift a formulaic plot from mediocre to
enjoyable. It's not original, but it's a decent distraction for two hours.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Curtis Edmonds
by Curtis Edmonds -- blueduck@hsbr.org
Six Days, Seven Nights is one of those movies that give critics a bad
name.  Movie critics like originality.  Critics -- even inexperienced
ones like myself -- have seen so many, many movies that original movies
stand out more in their minds.  Movies that aren't original tend not to
get reviewed very well.
Six Days, Seven Nights is not an original movie.  It thumbs its nose at
originality, it picks its teeth at originality, it uses its keys to
scratch the paint job on originality's car.  Six Days, Seven Nights
happily, gleefully, rips off everything from Casablanca to The African
Queen to The Fugitive (Harrison Ford breaks the all-time career record
for jumping off impossible heights and surviving).  That's just the part
with Ford and Anne Heche stranded on a remote tropical island:  the
subplot involving the hapless David Schwimmer is lifted completely out
of a Friends episode.  The plot is so thin and transparent you could use
it to wrap compact disks.
It would be fair to call Six Days, Seven Nights a shallow, unoriginal,
uninspired, summer popcorn feature.  But it would not be fair to call it
a bad movie.  Although the criticism aimed at Six Days, Seven Nights is
well-earned it misses the point.  This is a fairly good movie that
manages to be entertaining and fun despite its obvious failings.
The best thing about Six Days, Seven Nights is Harrison Ford, who almost
single-handedly redeems the movie from the depths of badness.  Ford
displays a dry, cynical wit reminiscent of his Indiana Jones
performances.  I've always felt that Ford is at his best playing a rogue
and that his recent roles as Jack Ryan and as the President in Air Force
One haven't really allowed him to display that side of his character.
It's nice to get to see him play someone disreputable, and his role as a
scruffy cargo pilot gives him the opportunity.
Anne Heche has equal billing with Ford and deserves it.  The only thing
I didn't like about her earlier effort in Wag the Dog was the short
shrift that the movie gave its supporting characters.  Heche was
convincing as a ditzy press aide in that movie, and it's good to see her
given more screen time.  She knows what to do with it, too, holding her
own with Ford in the comic banter that ensues when Ford's plane crashes
on a spectacularly beautiful South Pacific island that looks to be the
size of Michigan.  Heche manages to be cute and funny even when her hair
is completely wrecked -- a rare thing in Hollywood.
Much has been made about the relationship between Ford and Heche in Six
Days, Seven Nights.  What I liked most about the movie was that their
conversation almost seemed improvised, as if the individual who wrote
the script sort of left blank spaces for the actors to pencil in
whatever lines they wanted to.  The dialogue between Ford and Heche is
the best part of the weak script, and it's nice to picture the actors
making up dialogue as they go along.
Critics are people who look at movies and say that the glass is half
empty, rather than half full.  However, there's just enough in this
particular glass to give a positive recommendation to Six Days, Seven
Nights, a movie that manages to be fun and entertaining in spite of
itself.  Relax, kick back, and pass the popcorn.
Movie Reviews: http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Curtis+Edmonds
Hollywood Stock Exchange: http://www.hsbr.org/brokers/blueduck/
"Are you kidding?  No jury in the world would
convict a baby for murder.  Well, maybe Texas."

Author
Jeremiah Rickert
Starring: Harrison Ford, Anne Heche, David Schwimmer, Jacqueline Obradors
Directed by: Ivan Reitman
     Any film with Anne Heche manages to glom headlines because of her
public relationship with Ellen DeGeneres.  The film probably needs as much
help as it can get, despite the box-office friendly Harrison Ford and
Friend's puppy dog David Schwimmer rounding out the leads.  My first
reaction when I saw the preview for this film was "Romancing the Stone"
but without the on-screen chemistry of Turner and Douglas, and for the
most part, I was right.  
     The plot is fairly thin, relying on the interaction between
characters to drive it for the most part.  Some of their banter is funny
and cute, but the two big leads, a fashion editor played by Anne Heche
(Volcano, Wag the Dog, Donny Brasco) and a grizzled charter pilot played
by king of the box office, Harrison Ford, just don't quite seem to mesh
right on the screen, and I got the impression that if they hadn't kept
tripping and falling into each other's arms, they wouldn't have had any
relationship at all.  Their lives intertwine when Ford's Quinn flies
Heche's Robin and her fiance Frank played by David Schwimmer (Friends,
Pallbearer, Breast Men) to an island paradise where Frank has chosen to be
the place of their engagement.  They seem oh-so-happy together in
paradise, with the prospect of a long and happy married life before them.
However, because Frank arranged with Robin's boss to get the week off in
the first place, it turns out that she knows where to reach them and Robin
gets asked to fly over to Tahiti for a quick photo-shoot.  She (and $700)
convince Quinn to fly her to the shoot and leave behind his buxom island
beauty Anjelica, played by Jacqueline Obradors (Problem Child 3, Red Sun
Rising). 
     Unfortunately, or fortunately, depending on how you look at it, they
are forced to crash land because of a storm, and then all sorts of bonding
takes place.  All hope seems lost, especially when Robin accidentally
shoots their only flare into a palm tree.  With the landing gear damanged,
the radio fried, and no apparent hope for rescue, they decide to explore
the island, which leads to two scenes that seem almost purposefully
plucked from Romancing the Stone, a mud-slide-ride, and the discovery of a
crashed plane.  Luckily the plan is a Japanese pontoon boat, and LUCKILY
there happened to be a hack-saw in the plane.  The final nudges to the
plot involve some rather nasty pirates and Frank's infidelity with
Anjelica.  
     This film could have worked if the chemistry between the leads had
been better.  For some reason Ford and Heche don't really click.  They
seemed fine individually, but don't really go together.  Ford at times
reminded me of Dennis Quaid in Great Balls of Fire, making some of the
same faces and such, but really I thought the two of them did fine in
their individual roles.  Schwimmer plods through his role as the
apparently sweet and romantic frank.  However, it seems like he has so
little personality when he's away from his sitcom pals.  My theory is that
the cast of Friend's has a collective borg-esque personality, and when
they're alone they only have a tiny fragment, not enough to make a
convincing performance at anything.  (at least so far)  Ajelical also
comes up as a cliche and the two of them seem like a perfect pair.
     Reitman is primarily a comedy director and there are some funny
moments in the film, however some of them fall rather flat (like the
pirates blowing themselves up).  I also got a little bit tired of Heche's
nipples in just about every scene she was in.  It almost seems like they
should have gotten some billing or some stunt credit or something.  My
final major beef was with the amount of convenient equipment he happened
to have on board the plane, including a come-along which is just what
every pilot carries I'm sure.  I almost felt like humming the A-Team
themsong.  
     Overall, the film was all right, I'm sure Ford's star-power will
carry the film to decent returns.  I'm not sure if Heche is star power
yet, but she's certainly well-publicized.  I was disappointed by the lack
of chemistry between the leads, especially when it seems like that was the
thing driving the film on, the supporting case was pretty much
window-dressing as well, plodding through their roles with a seeming lack
of interest.  There were some good laughs, but the action and the
apparently coruncopia of hardware in his plane were a little too much for
me to swallow.
Of the $6.75 that I paid for this, it was worth about $3.00
--

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Harrison Ford, Anne Heche, David Schwimmer, Jacqueline Obradors, 
      Temuera Morrison
Directors: Ivan Reitman
Producers: Ivan Reitman, Roger Birnbaum, Wallis Nicita
Screenplay: Michael Browning 
Cinematography: Michael Chapman
Music: Randy Edelman
U.S. Distributor: Touchstone Pictures
     The scenery is great, the actors are appealing, and the special 
effects are suitably low-key all that's missing from Ivan Reitman's SIX 
DAYS, SEVEN NIGHTS is a plot with a moment's originality.  This movie 
takes chunks from ROMANCING THE STONE, THE AFRICAN QUEEN, FROM HERE TO 
ETERNITY, and even "Gilligan's Island", throws them into a blender set 
on "puree," and hopes we won't recognize the familiar taste that 
results.  Actually, there are moments when Harrison Ford and Anne Heche 
almost make us forget that we've seen all this before.  Their tropical 
island romance has its high points, and certain early portions of the 
film hint at an unfulfilled promise.  Then the pirates show up.
     Being stranded on an island is a common fantasy.  It's also one of 
those things that no one in their right mind would want to have really 
happen.  In keeping with this notion, everything in SIX DAYS, SEVEN 
NIGHTS is neat, sanitary, and relatively pleasant.  There are fresh 
peacocks ready to be skewered and eaten.  No one develops diarrhea after 
drinking the water.  The indigenous life appears to be relatively 
harmless (a scorpion and a snake both take a liking to Heche, but 
neither appears predisposed to turn nasty).  All-in-all, it appears to 
be the perfect place to spend a vacation.  Until those pesky pirates 
turn up, that is.
     The story is predictably thin.  A young, newly-engaged couple, 
Robin (Heche) and Frank (David Schwimmer), are spending a romantic week 
at a tropical island resort in the South Pacific.  Despite being on 
vacation, Robin, an assistant editor for DAZZLE magazine, is only a 
phone call away from her boss, and, when duty makes demands, she finds 
herself in need of a quick flight to Tahiti.  For $700, a local fly-by-
the-seat-of-his-pants pilot, Quinn Harris (Harrison Ford), agrees to 
leave behind his buxom playmate, Angelica (Jacqueline Obradors), and 
transport Robin to her destination.  However, it's not a smooth trip.  
Along the way, the duo encounter a storm, their plane is hit by 
lightning, and they crash land on a deserted island.  For the next 
twenty screen minutes, they pass the time by getting to know one 
another, tossing around sexual innuendoes, and starting to fall in love.  
Then the pirates sail into their verdant paradise.
     Led by ONCE WERE WARRIORS' Temura Morrison, these guys are big, 
bad, greedy, and stupid.  Their purpose is painfully evident -- they're 
on hand to add some action to the proceedings.  Who wants to spend 
ninety minutes watching Quinn and Robin grow closer over cozy peacock 
dinners?  So, instead, we get rubber raft chases, a foot race through a 
forest, and a fist fight.  All of this formulaic action isn't remotely 
exciting; the only thing it successfully accomplishes is padding out the 
running time so that the movie clocks in at a "reasonable" length.  
     The normally-laconic Harrison Ford shows more spunk here than in 
many of his recent outings.  This is an ego-feeding role:  Quinn not 
only gets the girl (who's about half his age) and saves the day, but he 
is also given the opportunity to engage in the kind of physical exertion 
that would kill many men 20 years his junior.  Anne Heche makes for a 
decent, if not superlative, romantic sparring partner.  She and Ford 
aren't exactly Hepburn and Tracy, but they trade barbs effectively and 
develop enough chemistry to keep us from going to sleep.  In supporting 
roles, David Schwimmer manages not to be painfully annoying and 
Jacqueline Obradors flaunts her obvious assets (which have nothing to do 
with acting talent).
     I suppose in this summer of moribund movies, it's possible to do a 
lot worse than SIX DAYS, SEVEN NIGHTS for light, escapist entertainment.  
Despite being a complete failure when it comes to action/adventure 
stuff, the movie is adequate as a romantic comedy.  And, while the 
screenplay isn't top-notch, it offers a few genuinely funny one-liners 
and a couple of scenes of surprisingly effective dialogue.  Ever since 
GHOSTBUSTERS, director Ivan Reitman has been a bankable name in 
Hollywood.  Sometimes, however, the on-screen talent he attracts for his 
movies is better than the material they're asked to work with.  SIX 
DAYS, SEVEN NIGHTS, although not deserving to be numbered among 
Reitman's worst missteps, is a perfect example of this.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Harrison Ford, Harrison Ford, David Schwimmer, Jacqueline
Obradors
Ingredients: Boyish old island rascal, young female magazine exec, true
love
Synopsis: 
In this romantic comedy, a spunky, career-oriented gal named Robin (Anne
Heche) and her nerdy boyfriend Frank (David Schwimmer), decide to take a
vacation to a remote tropical island in French Polynesia. Harrison Ford
plays Quinn, a divorced exec who has gotten rid of his business and now
lives a simple life as an island bush pilot. 
When a business emergency requires that Robin fly off the island, she
hires Quinn, but the two get stranded alone on a deserted island when
their plane is damaged in flight. To make matters worse, they are
attacked by pirates. On the bright side, they are falling in love. 
Can a 56-year-old islander and a 28-year-old yuppie get along, much less
fall in love?
Opinion:
Usually in the summer, we expect to see a Harrison Ford adventure movie.
But SIX DAYS, SEVEN NIGHTS is not an adventure movie; it's a fluffy,
lighthearted, romantic comedy reminiscent of camping. 
Imagine the kind of situations you'd put in a comedy involving two
people on a funny camping trip: running around lost with maps in hand;
equipment that doesn't work; bad luck weather; a situation involving a
snake; grass skirts from GILLIGAN'S ISLAND; falling from great heights
and plopping down safely in water. It's all there in SIX DAYS, SEVEN
NIGHTS. The movie even throws in a lost World War II plane. While not
meant to be realistic or even remotely original, it's all an excuse to
show how a man and a woman might quibble and argue their way into
falling in love. 
So the only important question is, do Harrison Ford and Anne Heche have
the chemistry for it? He's country; she's city. He's island; she's
mainland. He's laid back; she's a go getter. He's 56; she's 28. Do
opposites attract? In the movies they do. Ford and Heche deliver.
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Jon Popick
Meeting its relatively low expectations, the new action-comedy (or
`academy') Six Days, Seven Nights offers very little in terms of
originality, excitement or romance.  And I say low expectations because
the script from a first time writer (Michael Browning) and the director
is the recent lobotomy victim responsible for last year's reprehensible
Father's Day (Ivan Reitman).
The story could be written on the back of a matchbook  dumb-girl and
dumb-guy go to Hawaii; dumb-girl gets a call from her boss and has to
fly to another island with pilot old-guy; their planes crashes and they
fall in love.  That's it.  No cannibals on the island, no radios made
out of coconuts and no giant spiders.  I will say with no shame that
Gilligan's Island was more groundbreaking in terms of desert seclusion.
Actually, Six Days comes off as a bad hybrid of Gilligan and Romancing
the Stone.
The dumb-girl is named Robin Monroe (Anne Heche, Wag the Dog).  Her
first encounter with old-guy Quinn Harris (Harrison Ford, Air Force One)
is at the airport as he prepares his prop engine plane to haul Robin and
her dumb-boy beau Frank Martin (David Schwimmer, Friends) to a remote
Pacific vacation haven.  The scene bares a striking resemblance to an
earlier Ford film, as Robin repeatedly questions the ability of Quinn's
aging craft to safely deliver her to their destination (think Solo, Leia
and the Millenium Falcon in Star Wars).
Thirty minutes later, Robin and Quinn are stranded on what I can only
explain as the biggest deserted island in the history of the world.  Why
would something this huge and beautiful remain undeveloped by
conscienceless vacation kingpins?  I dunno either, but these two duds
predictably use the setting as a backdrop to bicker and then fall in
love.  YAWN!
Their only foil, other than the script, is a ship full of dirty pirates
led by Broken English's Temura Morrison.  These pirates would apparently
rather see Robin and Quinn dead than harmlessly stranded on the island.
Now that I think about it, I would also rather see them dead.
Back in civilization, dumb-boy Frank thinks his fiancée is dead and
quickly proceeds to flog Quinn's piece of ass wife six ways from
Sunday.  If these two were stranded on the island, Frank could have
knocked her out with a coconut, used her carcass for a boat and rowed
back home, using her ample bosom as personal flotation devices.  If
anyone cares, her name is Angelica and she is played by Problem Child 3
star Jacqueline Obradors.  I didn't think anyone cared.
While Ford looks good for 64, his acting skills leave something to be
desired.  His range is microscopic and his best acting is done when his
character is unconscious.  You know there's big problems when Schwimmer
outshines you.  Another huge flaw is the lack of chemistry between Ford
and Heche, who handles her role a bit more capably despite being young
enough to be the daughter of her wooden screen co-star.
The scenery is quite lovely and keenly shot by Michael Chapman (Raging
Bull).  But, the big finger of shame points fully at producer/director
Reitman, who has plummeted from the upper echelon of Hollywood comedy
creators (Animal House, Stripes) to the lowly depths of uninspired,
by-the-numbers Hollywood crap.  Flush it away, America.  Flush it twice
- just to be sure.

Author
David Wilcock
RUNNING TIME: 1 HOUR 40 MINUTES.
STARRING HARRISON FORD, ANNE HECHE AND DAVID SCHWIMMER
DIRECTED BY IVAN REITMAN
    Director Ivan Reitman, who brought us the brilliant Ghostbusters (1984),
and the not so brilliant Fathers Day (1996), seems to back on good form with
this entertaining comedy. Anne Heche and David Schwimmer play happy couple
Robin and Frank, who take a holiday to a island of Tahiti. Robin works for a
magazine in New York, and when she is called back from the island for an
important photo shoot for the magazine, she has to use the services of Quinn
Harris's (Harrison Ford) airline. The two, obviously, don't get along, and
when Quinns plane crashes on a remote island, Quinn and Robin must learn to
get along for a few days. Comedy and mayhem, plus romance, occur, all in
true Hollywood fashion.
    Six Days, Seven Nights is light, breezy entertainment, which places no
demands on the viewer. Harrison Ford is surprisingly able at comedy, and is
pretty funny. His character is a cross between Indiana Jones and Bill
Murray, and comes off well. Anne Heche, Ellen DeGeneres girlfriend at the
moment, also proves to be fun, and luckily never starts to annoy.
Thankfully, there's also chemistry between them, making them a fun couple to
watch. David Schwimmer is good as Robin worrying boyfriend, and he tries
(and generally succeeds) to not be Ross from T.V's Friends. He also has the
funniest scene towards the end. So, Six Days, Seven Nights gets off to a
good start with funny actors. Director Ivan Reitman is also good, proving
competent with both the comedy/romance, and the action scenes. The comedy is
funny, and the action can get exciting.
    Writer Michael Riva may be cutting it a bit close with the Romancing The
Stone (1981) references, but generally the film breezes along. Sadly, the
script never reaches the high point the audience expects. Although it has
many opportunities, it never reaches quite the fever pitch the film should
achieve. Still, there's some good one liners, some tense action, and the
romance is never overly sentimental (mainly due to Ford's ruggedness.) Six
Days, Seven Nights also looks good, with the island looking pretty
impressive, and some nice special effects, especially during the storm which
causes Quinns plane to crash. There's also a good soundtrack, with a toe
tapping tropical feel, composed by veteran Randy Edelman.
    Six Days, Seven Nights, in the end, turns out to be a non demanding,
slightly cliched, yet always entertaining film, something Hollywood (and
especially Ivan Reitman) specialize in. In fact, the film is completely
crowd friendly, with a major star, undemanding jokes, romance and adventure.
Six Days, Seven Nights main aim appears to be to please everyone, and in the
end it does that. Although it's no classic, and 20 minutes after the film
you probably would have forgotten about it, while watching the film Six
Days, Seven Nights is loud, dumb and fun. Definitely worth watching. (Try to
watch it with a large crowd, it adds to the entertainment.)
OVERALL RATING=***1/2 OUT OF *****
REVIEW BY DAVID WILCOCK
DAVID WILCOCK
david.wilcock@btinternet.com
Visit the Wilcock Movie Page!
http://wilcockmovie.home.ml.org -OR-
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/9061
Recieve Wilcock Movie Page Reviews via E-MAIL
Send a blank E-MAIL to wmp-reviews-subscribe@makelist.com to
join the mailing list!

Author
James Sanford
        On paper, at least, the idea must have looked like it couldn't miss:
Harrison Ford plays a grizzled pilot named Quinn hired to fly cosmopolitan
Robin (Anne Heche) to Tahiti, and when they crash, the two must fend off
myriad dangers on an uncharted island. Think of a "Romancing The Stone" and
"African Queen" with just a trace of the sexual politics of "Swept Away"
thrown in.
Now lower your expectations - drastically.
"Six Days, Seven Nights" is the sort of movie that looks lovely and comes
across nicely in clips, but ultimately proves to be neither erotic, exotic
or even exciting.
There's nothing glaringly awful here, just a lot of underachievement from
some people who can do - and have done - better. That said, "Six Days" is
painless enough to sit through if all you're looking for is two hours of
gorgeous tropical scenery and the odd bit of action.
Films like this rely heavily on star power, and Ford and Heche turn out to
be a far cry from Humphrey Bogart and Katharine Hepburn. In fact, they're
not even close to Michael Douglas and Kathleen Turner.
Part of the blame rests on their shoulders. Ford does not seem to be
terribly engaged by his shallow character, and Heche, though charming in her
laid-back moments, tends to mug and screech to get laughs. She also
continually plunges into the water in a variety of semi-transparent white
tops, to no great effect. Ford and Heche are working at opposite extremes,
and though they're on the screen together, it doesn't feel like they're in
the same movie much of the time.
Then again, writer Michael Browning hasn't given either actor much to work
with in terms of witty lines or romantic moments. Shortly after being
stranded, Quinn and Robin take turns getting into each other's pants, as he
removes a water snake from hers and she retrieves a flare gun from his.
Unfortunately, neither situation generates any sizzle or much in the way of
big laughs.
Neither do the antics of David Schwimmer and Jacqueline Obradors as Robin's
wormy fiance and Quinn's voluptuous fling-of-the-moment. Their subplot shows
signs of having been severely curtailed, probably an act of mercy.
Near the start, "Six Days" shows a welcome satiric streak, introducing Heche
as a put-upon assistant editor at a magazine called Dazzle, which features
stories with such enticing headlines as "Your derriere: Five ways to tame
the beast." But that soon evaporates as the movie spends its best jokes
early on, struggles vainly to establish Ford and Heche as a credible couple,
then elects late in the game to throw in machine-gun-toting pirates and
explosions as a kicker.
Director Ivan Reitman does what he can to establish a buoyant tone for the
film, and he's fairly successful. But in the final analysis,
"Six Days" is neither a true adventure nor a good comedy, neither sexy nor
suspenseful, neither fish nor fowl. One thing is certain, though: See it
tonight and you will have forgotten all about it by this time next week.
James Sanford

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Ivan Reitman
Cast:  Harrison Ford, Anne Heche, David Schwimmer, Jacqueline Obradors,
Temuera Morrison, Danny Trejo
Screenplay:  Michael Browning
Producers:  Roger Birnbaum, Wallis Nicita, Ivan Reitman
Runtime:  
US Distribution:  Hollywood Pictures
Rated PG-13:  language, adult themes
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
Movies like Six Days, Seven Nights make me mad because talented people
like Harrison Ford, Anne Heche, and Ivan Reitman put a lot of hard work
in to a script worth about ten cents.  The script was written by Michael
Browning, and he decided that, instead of thinking up new ideas, he'd
rehash a lot of cliches, omit even the slightest bit of character
development, and then throw in drug-dealing pirates to provide for a few
high-level action sequences and explosions.  There are good scripts out
there that high-profile actors can make (see The Truman Show, for
instance).  Six Days, Seven Nights is simply a waste.
Let's see . . . we have to get Harrison Ford and Anne Heche alone on an
island.  So, how do we do that?  Well, we'll make her a feisty magazine
editor, and we'll make him a crusty old pilot.  But wait, she has to
have a fiancée; that can be David Schwimmer.  But wait, if she has a
fiancée, how will she and Harrison Ford crash on the island alone?  I
know!  They'll get to their vacation spot, and then she'll get called
back!  Yessssss!  So, they'll crash on the island, and that will be
funny for about five minutes.  Shucks.
Oh, I've got it!  We'll throw in a distracting subplot in which her
fiancée has sex with a really attractive woman who acts like a bimbo,
and then he can feel guilty.  Then, when Anne Heche kisses Harrison Ford
(they have to kiss, because otherwise nobody will want to see the
movie), it will be a vindicated action, because her fiancée will already
have cheated on her!  Then, for no obvious reason, they'll accidentally
run into pirates who try to kill them.  Oh, yes!  I feel so good about
this story.  Instead of using characterization to propel the events, it
will be completely random, and yet totally predictable!  Imagine that.
Don't get me wrong -- Six Days, Seven Nights is not a boring picture;
Ford and Heche both do a great job.  The sparks fly between them, and so
most of Browning's inane dialogue is drowned out by the actors' sheer
force of talent.   Almost every scene between them has energy that the
performers bring to the screen, and I found myself laughing pretty
hard.  Schwimmer is also funny, and manages to milk all of his scenes
for whatever he can get.  And Reitman, who has made some good films, at
least tries to make things exciting.  Even though the pirate subplot is
profoundly dumb, I was prepared to be pleasantly sidetracked by the
action sequences.
It's just when I start to think about the story that my contempt for
this film surfaces.  The picture feels like it's been hacked to pieces
-- I wouldn't be surprised if five or six inept subplots have been
edited out completely.  The ones that are here are as bad as they come
(I think I let out a very audible groan when they get the first glimpse
of the pirate ships), and I'd just like to shake the producers by the
shoulders and scream, "Why did you pick this awful script!?"  
The film is outright stupid, but some of the elements are subtly
horrifying.  For instance, take the subplot in which the Schwimmer
character has sex with the bimbo, and then feels really guilty.  This is
a serious problem in real life, but Six Days, Seven Nights reduces any
chance of complexity to a weak plot device:  his actions are what makes
it okay for Heche to kiss Ford.  In a script that lacks even a glimpse
of intelligent subtlety, I find it odd that such a strangely insulting
device ended up in the story.
This is summer movie season, but that doesn't mean our movies have to
be dumb.  1998 so far has been one of the worst years in recent memory
for summer blockbusters.  When I was in line for Six Days, Seven Nights,
I heard the woman in front of me ask for "two tickets to that new
Harrison Ford movie."   Why didn't she know the name of the film?  I
suppose she just didn't care.   What bothers me even more is that the
people who make these big-budget pictures don't realize that their films
are becoming parodies of themselves.  Good actors should sign to good
scripts, and if Hollywood insists on making flicks to rake in cash, they
least they could do is assume that we'd like to spend our money on a
story worth more than ten cents.

Author
Alex Fung
SIX DAYS, SEVEN NIGHTS (Touchstone - 1998)
Starring Harrison Ford, Anne Heche, David Schwimmer,
  Jacqueline Obradors
Screenplay by Michael Browning
Produced by Ivan Reitman, Wallis Nicita, Roger Birnbaum
Directed by Ivan Reitman
Running time: 101 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned.
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   SIX DAYS, SEVEN NIGHTS is one of the summer's early disappointments,
   an utterly pedestrian effort which plays it so safe that the stunt
   actors wind up taking more risks than the screenplay does.  It's an
   uninspired rehash of the old Bicker-Bicker-Bicker-Smooch formula, and
   even if the smooch here comes in the form of an homage to the famous
   FROM HERE TO ETERNITY beach clinch, the film's escapist plot barely
   contains enough viable material to sustain interest.
   Establishing scenes quickly introduce Robin Monroe (Anne Heche), an
   ambitious young associate magazine editor who's whisked away from
   Gotham for a romantic South Pacific vacation by her amorous beau
   Frank Martin (David Schwimmer).  After happily accepting a moonlight
   marriage proposal, Robin is summoned to oversee an emergency one-day
   photo shoot in nearby Tahiti and commissions laid-back charter pilot
   Quinn Harris (Harrison Ford) to take her there in his beat-up
   DeHavilland Beaver.
   Miracle of miracles, Robin and Quinn happen upon an unexpectedly
   vicious storm while en route, and are forced to crash-land the plane
   on a deserted tropical island after a lightning strike fries the
   aircraft's electrical system.  Stranded with no means of
   communication to the outside world, the squabbling pair are left to
   fend for themselves, while back at the hotel, Frank and Quinn's
   sultry young girlfriend Angelica (Jacqueline Obradors) fret, worry,
   and make eyes at each other.
   An unabashedly formulaic adventure-comedy backdropped by noteworthily
   lush scenery, the film is written at a TV sitcom-level and features
   individual scenes which play breezily and make for cute,
   trailer-ready excerpts, but fail to gel as a whole.  Our protagonists
   aren't confronted by sufficiently challenging or ingenious obstacles
   in order to pique viewer attention on the adventure front (it's
   telling that the two inexplicable appearances by pursuant pirates
   seems almost arbitrary), while the flirty banter zinging back and
   forth between the duo falls far short of being endearing, registering
   as cute at best.  And the less said about the vapid Frank / Angelica
   subplot, the better.
   Credit the agreeable presence of the film's two leads for salvaging
   the production to the point of watchability.  Mr. Ford and Ms. Heche
   share an easy, unforced chemistry, and are best as Quinn and Robin
   inevitably gradate from quarreling antagonists to mutual admiration.
   Mr. Ford has a pleasant charm about him; it's fun to watch him
   contort his deadpan face and dryly utter a sarcastic witticism, and
   Ms. Heche makes for a pleasantly feisty combatant.  The star power
   present easily surpasses the quality of the film's material.
   "Aren't you one of those Guy guys?" Robin demands of Quinn as they
   survey their bleak situation.  "You know, one of those guys who they
   send out in the jungle with a Q-Tip, and come back and build a
   shopping mall?"  And while Quinn rolls his eyes and demurs, it's a
   given with this sort of film that the hero ultimately does
   demonstrate some MacGuyver-like aptitude.  SIX DAYS, SEVEN NIGHTS
   handles this obligation with a hootworthy plot development in its
   homestretch -- the discovery of a handy piece of equipment so
   preposterous in its convenience that it deflates any sense of
   investment one may have built for the dilemma faced by our heroes.
   To unfairly drop a hokey pat solution from out of the blue places the
   entire proceedings in a dubious light.
   Michael Browning's screenplay for SIX DAYS, SEVEN NIGHTS faithfully
   abides by genre conventions, vaguely aping conflicts and scenarios
   from such predecessors as ROMANCING THE STONE and THE AFRICAN QUEEN
   (also, an early scene which sees Quinn prepping his creaky bucket of
   bolts and assuring Robin of its flightworthiness interestingly echoes
   to Han Solo doing likewise in STAR WARS), but for the most part, the
   snappily suggestive dialogue is forgettable and the strong narrative
   drive is lacking.  To its detriment, it's got all of the shadings of
   similarly-themed earlier works, but none of the spark.
   Director Ivan Reitman does what he can, treating the audience with
   panoramic tropical visions and keeping the proceedings moving along
   briskly.  It's surprising that such a big-budget Hollywood production
   features some startling artificial visual effects works, such as that
   of the storm sequence.
   Ultimately, SIX DAYS, SEVEN NIGHTS suffers because of its eagerness
   at palatability, its resolute target of mainstream appeal.  Absent of
   any flair or genuine excitement, the film trods through the
   conventions of a tired formula with little except the winning
   performances of its lead actors to garnish much attention.  "I want
   my life to be complicated," confesses Quinn at one point.  If only
   the film shared similar sentiments.

Author
Michael Dequina
In recent years, Harrison Ford has been such a grave screen presence,
scowling through the likes of Tom Clancy's Jack Ryan series,
_The_Fugitive_, and last year's smash _Air_Force_One_, that one wonders if
the rogue charm that made him such a superstar had been completely drained
from his system.  Apparently, it was just lying dormant.  With Ivan
Reitman's enjoyable romantic comedy/adventure _Six_Days,_Seven_Nights_, the
lovable scoundrel is back, giving audiences a fresh reminder of why Ford is
one of the most enduring and popular modern screen icons.
Ford plays Quinn Harris, a carefree and slightly slobby (endearingly so)
pilot in the Tropics whose broken-down plane crashes in a storm, stranding
him and his charter, New York magazine editor Robin Monroe (Anne Heche), on
a deserted island.  Of course, the sophisticated Robin and the
salt-of-the-earth Quinn are at odds long before the plane goes down, and
all manner of hostile repartee is exchanged between the two from their
first meeting.  While some of the lines fall flat, the formulaic motions
work because of the unexpectedly electric chemistry between Ford and Heche.
 Both actors, who have largely done serious works as of late, seem
liberated by the lack of dramatic weight on their shoulders, and they
deliver their zingers, as weak as they sometimes are, with beguiling abandon.
Naturally, there's nothing like a life-threatening crisis to bring two
people together, and Quinn and Robin's warmup to each other is sped up even
further by the arrival of some bloodthirsty pirates.  Granted, some
conflict needed to be introduced on the island, but this tacked-on
development from writer Michael Browning is a bit too obviously thrown in
for the purpose of adding gratuitous action scenes.  But the point is to
get the two together, and their newfound affection causes complications for
both, but mostly Robin, who came to the islands on a vacation with her
fiance Frank (David Schwimmer), who frantically awaits her return on the
home island.
Reitman, and old, reliable hand at breezy comedies, keeps the pace brisk
and capably handles the more action-oriented sequences.  His big
accomplishment, however, is bringing the old, smiling Ford back.  As
appealing and charismatic as he always is, Ford hasn't been quite this
charming and affable in years; he's obviously having a blast, and the
audience cannot help but have one along with him.  Holding her own is
Heche, whose scrappy character never becomes the screaming ninny she
initially promises to be (as the plane goes down, she frantically pops
stress pills).  She can take her lumps, physical and otherwise, just as
well as Quinn, making her a formidable foil and ideal match.
Formulaic and light as a feather, _Six_Days,_Seven_Nights_ could be cited
as a classic example of the summer "popcorn" movie season's lack of
substance.  It's certainly fluff, but it's unpretentious, undemanding,
and--most importantly--fun fluff that goes down as easily as a frothy pina
colada on a balmy tropical beach.  Pass the popcorn.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Jamie Peck
SIX DAYS, SEVEN NIGHTS
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
The story is a no-brainer -- Ford stars as gruff but loveable island 
aviator Quinn Harris, while Heche is career-minded but loveable New York 
magazine editor Robin Monroe. Robin, on a tropical vacation with fiancé 
Frank (David Schwimmer), gets assigned to supervise an emergency photo 
shoot in nearby Tahiti, so she reluctantly hires Quinn to fly her there. 
The plane crashes during a terrible storm, and they immediately find 
themselves stuck in a deserted paradise with few ideas on getting back 
to civilization. A series of unpleasant, often hilarious catastrophes 
leaves little choice but for both members of this unlikely odd couple to 
fall for each other. Meanwhile, back at the resort, Frank is tempted 
himself by Quinn's shapely female tagalong (Jacqueline Obradors). 
That subplot obviously exists to get us rooting for the Quinn-Robin 
pairing, and while it makes for a few good laughs early on, it 
eventually becomes a contrived distraction from the far more engrossing 
misadventures of Quinn and Robin. And since the film spends most of its 
time with the castaways, this flaw is only a minor inconvenience. 
Director Ivan Reitman keeps the pace brisk. At a slim 101 minutes, "Six 
Days, Seven Nights" never wears out its welcome, where a lesser film 
could have felt like it was as long as its title. Michael Browning's 
clever screenplay allows for plenty of notable one-liners (my favorite, 
taken in context, is "You mean _arrrgh_ pirates?"), and though it 
essentially boils down to one mishap after another, they're all quite 
engaging. Even the movie's more "serious" moments are played with a 
wink. 
Heche has been under undeserved fire over whether or not her private 
life with Ellen DeGeneres would affect the "believability" of "Six Days, 
Seven Nights"' heterosexual pairing. (So she's a lesbian. So what. Deal 
with it.) Of course it doesn't, and here, her naysayers are proved wrong 
in a big way. In fact, her chemistry with Ford is what really makes the 
film click; these opposites attract with the utmost, endearing 
electricity. At one point, when the two are discussing the likelihood of 
romantic interest, Heche asks Ford how old he is. After several wrong 
guesses ("Forty-five? _Fifty_?"), he whispers his age to her. "You still 
look good," Heche stammers. "I still _am_ good," Ford replies. She's 
good too, and together, they make "Six Days, Seven Nights" one memorable 
ride. 

Author
Paul Foley
Retrospective: Six Days, Seven Nights
In Movieland, when a man and a woman who hate each other
get stranded together, they must inevitably fall in love.  This
charming and nonsensical idea is the heart of this eminently
likable film directed by comic mastermind Ivan Reitman.
Like Bogart and Hepburn in The African Queen, Harrison Ford
and Anne Heche are an unlikely pair who are thrown together
by circumstance.  Instead of a steam launch, their vehicle is a
single-engine airplane, and instead of Africa, the setting is the
South Pacific.  But the story is every bit as delightful and
improbable as the John Huston classic.  To make this kind of
thing work, the dialogue has to sparkle and the two stars have
to have chemistry.  Six Days scores on both counts.
Harrison Ford's Quinn is a superannuated adolescent who
chucked it all and moved to Tahiti.  He runs a charter business
that consists of one airplane, but he is mostly just a
beachcomber.  Anne Heche's Robin is an editor for a fashion
magazine,  vacationing in the islands with her fiance.  Anne
and Harrison are off on the wrong foot right from the start,
when she makes fun of the little single-engine tail dragger, his
pride and joy,  that he intends to take them up in.  `Where's its
mommy?' she asks.  Sarcasm is her stock in trade; she's had a
lot of practice, and she's very good at it.  Harrison neatly sums
up her character when, having been shot down by another of
her verbal barrages, he simply says, `you're from New York,
aren't you?'
Unexpectedly having to fly back to fly back to Tahiti for a
fashion shoot, the pair run into bad weather and crash land on a
deserted island, where they can go about the business of hating
one another full-time.  With mutual recriminations mixed in to
spice things up.  He still insists that he's the best damn pilot
she's ever flown with; she points out that she's flown with him
twice and he's crashed half the time.  She begins to mellow
however when she discovers he's handy to have around when
there are snakes.  And scorpions.  She's pretty capable herself,
and saves both of their lives at one point.  In short, they need
one another.  It's not long before they want one another, too.
Harrison Ford, his age notwithstanding, can still pull off boyish
charm.  Amazing.  Anne Heche more than holds up her end,
and she has a real gift for comedy.  The plot of this movie is
tried-and-true Hollywood formula.  No surprises there.  In
order for it to work, the two principles have to deliver the
goods.  And they do.  It's sexy and it's funny ... who could
want more?
But there is more.  These characters actually have some depth.
Quinn is a guy who has pulled back into his shell, who makes a
pretty convincing case that he really is satisfied with
diminished expectations.  Robin is the kind of person who
can't rest until she has gotten him to open up.  So she prods
him until finally, over a dinner of barbecued peacock (!) he
begins to tell her his life story, the `better way of life' he has
found, simple, uncomplicated, unambitious, `the life every
man dreams of.'  `Yeah,' she responds, `until they're twelve.'
Her wit is a little too quick, her tongue a little too sharp.  She's
immediately sorry, but the damage has been done.  It's an
oddly touching moment, and it raises a theme that is returned
to later in the movie, when the two are returned to civilization.
(I'm probably not spoiling any great surprise when I reveal that
they don't leave their bleached bones on that desert island.)
The question is, what do this incompatible couple do then?
Him, who wants his life uncomplicated, and her, who craves
complication?  Or as Quinn puts it, `I'm not going to New
York to become your secretary, and you're not going to stay
out here and become my copilot, so where does that leave us?'
Writing satisfying, believable endings is hard.  This movie has
one, and I'm not going to spoil it by telling.  Rent this movie.
You won't be disappointed.

Author
David N. Butterworth
        The most satisfying thing about "Six Days Seven Nights" is the
print ads.
        Harrison Ford is shown pounding through river water with his shirt
unbuttoned to the waist right there alongside Anne Heche, whose blouse is
similarly--and predictably--agape.
        While this might represent an equitable first in terms of a film's
publicity materials, "Six Days Seven Nights" doesn't waste much time in
pointing out--via Ford's character Quinn Harris--that Robin Monroe's
(Heche) breasts are, in fact, "too small."  The audience is in a unique
position to argue this fact given that Heche's chest is prominently on
display in the film--covered, but under such skimpy tops that one doesn't
need a copy of "Gray's Anatomy" to hand to figure out exactly what it is
we're looking at.
        Add to that fixation the fact that the filmmakers have written
Quinn's "assistant" Angelica (Jacqueline Obradors) as a buxom brunette who
exposes herself (back to camera, thus upholding the film's PG-13 rated
tone) to Robin's fiancé and you've got yourself a lightweight yet
singularly top-heavy movie that could have benefited from an ounce of
subtlety.
        Ooh yah, broad is what we have here.  If the thought of Heche
telling Ford not to smile as he attempts to fish a snake out of her shorts
makes you smile, then perhaps this movie is for you.  They're not the worst
pairing in the world, but Bogie and Hepburn bickered a lot better in "The
African Queen" (and he never once felt her up from what I can remember).
Heck, even Michael Douglas and Kathleen Turner made a mismatched duo more
deserving of an occasional chuckle in "Romancing the Stone."
        What's perhaps most intriguing about "Six Days Seven Nights" is
that Heche was cast shortly before going public with her romantic
involvement with "Ellen"'s Ellen DeGeneres.  The timing of this revelation
puts the on-screen chemistry between Heche and Ford under more scrutiny
than it can withstand--in the back of our minds we're all wondering what
Indiana Jones is doing running around in the jungles of Macataya with
Hollywood's latest lesbian.
        "Forced" is probably the best word to sum up "Six Days Seven
Nights."  The slightly neurotic New York glamour mag editor and her beau
(David Schwimmer) on a week's vacation in the South Pacific.  The grizzled,
middle-aged pilot who likes his life on the simple side.  The emergency
photo shoot that puts the two of them on a short plane hop to Tahiti
together (can you think of *any* reason why the David Schwimmer character
would have stayed behind?).  The storm.  The forced landing.  The broken
landing gear.  The realization that they're going to be stuck on this
island paradise for quite some time now and had better learn to get along.
The wacky adventures with wild animals, pirates, and a "but I thought you
were dead, honey!" boyfriend.  Etc.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, go to http://surf.to/joblo/
>From the man who brought us GHOSTBUSTERS and TWINS, comes a story
starring Han Solo, Harrison Ford, and the woman presently dating TV
star Ellen DeGeneres, Anne Heche. Director Ivan Reitman straps himself
behind the camera for this fuzzy piece of ROMANCING THE STONE
(7.5/10)-lite.
PLOT:
Loving, romantic man takes his lady of choice to an exotic island for
some time alone together. While there, she gets called away on
business, and is taken to Tahiti, by a carefree and wayward pilot.
During a storm, their plane gets hit by lightning and crashes onto an
unknown island. Stuck with one another, the duo attempt to find a way
back to civilization, and gradually get to know each other better.
CRITIQUE:
Mindless fluff piece does not pass itself off as anything more than a
simple 95-minute exercise in mild comedy, overly precise romance,
decent chemistry and a non-threatening adventure. I enjoyed this movie
on the whole because I was able to rest my brain for a quick little
while, and allow myself to follow the misadventures of two charming
actors, whose fate never seemed like much of a mystery to me. The film
was easy to digest, well enough to enjoy along a round of tasty hot
nachos, and perfectly paced as to never allow you to fully grasp the
generic nature of its essence.
Kudos go out to both Harrison Ford and Anne Heche, who luckily for the
audience, seem to have sparked off a few rays of charm into their
characters. The opposite can be said of David Schwimmer, who still
cannot seem to play anything but that dolt-headed puppy-eyed love
schmuck from his hit TV show "Friends". That aside, I was impressed by
his character's real struggle over extra-curricular sexual activities,
and the actual conscience that he displayed in its aftermath. Unlike
many men in other movies, this character showed us that a man isn't
always ready to jump into bed with a chesty knockout at a drop of a
dime, but that morals, ethics and one's conscience always play a
revolving part in any such decision.
Overall, the film doesn't have many standout scenes to write home
about, but does offer some beautiful shots of the island's panoramic
possessions, along with some engaging performances by its leads. You'll
laugh, you'll sigh, you won't fall asleep and you'll forget about the
whole thing in the morning. If these are some of the elements that you
are looking for in a short film mixed in with a little adventure, then
this one's your bag o' nuts! If not, skip this, and your life will
forever be the same for having missed it. 
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Perhaps the most fateful casting of Harrison Ford's career was for a
role that he very nearly passed up. A promising young director named
George Lucas offered him a supporting part in his film AMERICAN
GRAFFITI (7/10), but Ford walked off the set in disgust when he learned
that he would be paid only $485 a week, less than half what he was
earning at that time as a carpenter. Luckily, he changed his mind when
the studio offered him an extra fifteen dollars a week. He also got the
part of Indiana Jones in RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK (8/10), after
Spielberg and Lucas could not schedule filming of the movie around
their first choice's TV schedule, as Tom Selleck had a commitment to
his hit TV show "Magnum P.I.".
Harrison's wife is a screenwriter in her own right, and counts E.T.
(8/10) and Martin Scorsese's KUNDUN among her handful of credits. In
fact, in 1996, Harrison was listed as one of 50 people barred from
entering Tibet, after Disney clashed with Chinese officials over the
film KUNDUN, which his wife wrote.
Anne Heche's father, Donald Heche, was a choir director in a Baptist
church who frequented gay bars at night. Heche found out about her
father's double life at the age of twelve, as he lay dying of AIDS. "I
watched my dad disintegrate from AIDS because he was ashamed to be what
he wanted to be," Heche relates. He died the following year. In 1991,
she won a Daytime Emmy for playing Outstanding Younger Actress in a
Daytime Drama Series for TV's "Another World".
Actress Jacqueline Obradors, who plays the playful Angelica in this
film, was discovered by a producer while she was working as a grocery
store clerk.
Director Ivan Reitman was born in Czechoslovakia, but brought up in
Canada.
David Schwimmer graduated from Northwestern University. His mother is a
lawyer who took care of Roseanne's first divorce.

Author
Scott Renshaw
SIX DAYS, SEVEN NIGHTS
(Touchstone)
Starring:  Harrison Ford, Anne Heche, David Schwimmer, Jacqueline
Obradors, Temuera Morrison.
Screenplay:  Michael Browning.
Producers:  Ivan Reitman, Wallis Nicita, Roger Birnbaum.
Director:  Ivan Reitman.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (adult themes, profanity, violence)
Running Time:  101 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     All right, let's get this out of the way:  Anne Heche is a lesbian.
Coverage of SIX DAYS, SEVEN NIGHTS has focused so heavily on this point --
and on the corollary question of whether Heche would be "credible" as a
heterosexual romantic interest -- that you might suspect the title had
been changed officially to SIX DAYS, SEVEN NIGHTS WITH LESBIAN ANNE HECHE
PLAYING A HETEROSEXUAL.  Never mind that audiences didn't seem to have
a problem finding heterosexual actor Tom Hanks "credible" as a gay man in
PHILADELPHIA.  Never mind that presumably no one would have a problem
finding a different 28-year-old woman "credible" as the romantic interest
of 55-year-old Harrison Ford.  And never mind that most Hollywood scripts
consider a "credible" romance to be any pairing of actors of the opposite
sex, character development be hanged.
     SIX DAYS, SEVEN NIGHTS is an unsatisfying Hollywood trifle, not
because Heche doesn't date men, but because the script is a disaster.
Heche plays Robin Monroe, a New York magazine editor whisked away to a
week-long tropical vacation by her long-time boyfriend Frank (David
Schwimmer) so he can pop the question.  Unfortunately, work intrudes on
paradise, forcing Robin to hop a cargo plane to a photo shoot in Tahiti
with rough-around-the-edges pilot Quinn Harris (Harrison Ford).  En route
the plane is caught in a violent storm, forcing Quinn to make a crash
landing which strands the pair on a deserted island.
     Naturally, Quinn and Robin are polar opposites who share an almost
instant antagonism.  Naturally, they grow closer as they struggle 
together.  It's one of filmdom's most enduring set-ups, but there's one
rather important thing missing from this version:  the faintest
understanding of Robin's motivation for getting involved with Quinn.
Screenwriter Michael Browning presents Robin and Frank's relationship as
nearly-ideal during their screen time together, with Frank practically a
fantasy figure out of the women's magazine Robin works for -- he's
romantic, spontaneous and willing to commit.  That leaves Robin's reasons
for leaping into Quinn's arms fairly suspect; though Quinn assures her
late in the film that their connection isn't just "something that happens
when two people are alone on an island together," that's really the only
explanation which doesn't make Robin's behavior extremely off-putting.
Even the token attempt to make Frank part of the problem is ill-conceived,
tossing him into a drunken, grief-stricken tryst with a voluptuous dancer
(Jacqueline Obradors) after he believed Robin to be dead.  It's not
chemistry that's missing in the relationship between Robin and Quinn --
it's sympathy.
     In a valiant attempt to distract the audience from focusing on the
characters' deficiencies, Browning and director Ivan Reitman amp up the
action quotient by pitting our protagonists against pirates.  Yes, that's
right, pirates.  It's the kind of sub-plot which sends the mind reeling
into hypothetical meetings where studio executives offer "helpful"
suggestions:  "You know, it's great that they're stuck on this island
together so they can fall in love, but we're not sure about the whole
lesbian thing, so how about if pirates chased them, and shot at them, and
then at the end there was a big explosion?"  For a film desperately in
need of more character development, SIX DAYS, SEVEN NIGHTS wastes valuable
minutes on a ridiculous forced conflict which contributes nothing to the
story but one gag from Heche:  "You mean 'arrrghh' pirates?"
     SIX DAYS, SEVEN NIGHTS actually contains a few amusing gags, with
both Heche and Ford -- long under-appreciated for his comic timing --
scoring some comic hits.  They just have almost nothing to work with,
squirming around with absurd situations and stick-figure characters.  The
film's few simple pleasures, including the lovely Kauai scenery, are lost
in the search for some reason to root for these people ending up together.
The fact that there's nothing "credible" about the pairing of Robin and
Quinn has nothing to do with Anne Heche's choice of real-life romantic
partners.  It has everything to do with her choice of scripts.
