Title
Review for Sex: The Annabel Chong Story (1999)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
"I believe that sex is good enough to die for," Annabel Chong says,
talking about why she was willing to set the (short-lived) world record
for a gang-bang by having sex with 251 men in 10 hours.  Like the rest
of Gough Lewis's sensationalized but shallow documentary, SEX: THE
ANNABEL CHONG STORY, her brave boast doesn't hold up under examination.
The men either wore condoms or were HIV-tested porn stars, and Annabel
is just an exhibitionist who doesn't care much about anything other that
getting attention.
The documentary, however, tries with little success to paint a
completely different portrait of Annabel -- that of a modern-day
feminist.  Annabel, the film suggests, is in the porn industry for a
variety of reasons from the oppression of having to grow up in strict,
Christian Singapore to her rape in London.  Like much of the story, the
devil is in the details.  Her rape in London, for example, starts, she
tells us, with her enjoying consensual sex with a stranger in a filthy,
trash disposal area.  She says how excited she was when he brought in
his friend.  After others came along, it got out of hand and was
frightening for her, so she paints herself as a victim.  She doesn't own
up to causing some of her own difficulties.
Unlike the thoughtful and insightful THE GIRL NEXT DOOR about porn star
Stacy Valentine, this documentary is built with one cheap shot after
another.  It even opens with the king of schlock, Jerry Springer.  He
asks Annabel why she did her famous sex extravaganza, and she gives that
classic non-answer of "well, why not?"  The movie is filled with such
bad questions followed by even worse non-responses.  "What sort of
artistic statement were you making?" one fawning TV talk show host asks
Annabel.
Perhaps my least favorite throw-away question is the one that the
director asks Grace's mother.  (Grace is Annabel's real name.)   He
wants to know if Grace has always been an overachiever.  Guess, what?
The mother says, "yes."
There are many good questions that could have been asked.  One was how
Grace, a woman with a horrible set of teeth, a modest body, no acting
acumen and little to recommend her, ever made it in the porn business in
the first place.  Another might be, what was it that attracted men
enough to have them rent her tapes before the marathon sex session which
brought her notoriety.  This crude movie is more concerned with a quick
buck, so such informative questions are avoided.
The movie, which drones on and on, with one talking head after another,
feels like it will never end.  The movie concludes in a long and boring
segment set mainly at Grace's home in Hong Kong, where she cries as she
tells her mother that she'll make her proud again.  (Annabel's lack of
credible acting ability really shows through in these scenes.)  One
wonders if the director is trying to make the audience feel Annabel's
exhaustion during her sexual Olympics, as he drags out his movie way
past it's natural ending point.
A little mirth in such a dull movie would have helped.  It does,
however, contain one extremely funny bit of self-deprecating humor.  The
male porn star of a movie called "The Oral Majority," talks about
Annabel's sexual stunt.  "It's just giving porn a bad name," he
complains.
SEX: THE ANNABEL CHONG STORY runs a very long 1:26.  It is not rated but
would be NC-17 for strong sex scenes and language.  The film would not
be acceptable for those under 19.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Christopher Null
     The funny dilemma about SEX: THE ANNABEL CHONG STORY is this:
Annabel Chong (aka Grace Quek) has one of the more interesting porn star
bios around.  Born in Singapore, raised in London, and studying at USC,
she decided almost on a whim to go into adult movies, culminating in the
starring role of THE WORLD'S BIGGEST GANGBANG, wherein she had sex with
251 men in 10 hours.  Getting inside this head would be fascinating...
but documentarian Gough Lewis does such a bad job of it we leave the
theater more confused than anything else.
     Annabel's story is an atypical one as porn starlet studies go.
She's got a real head on her shoulders, she's a rabid spokesperson for
feminist rights, she seems really nice in person, spends time with her
family, and has some of the worst teeth in show biz.  But the strangest
part is that Annabel doesn't seem to be in it for the money.  In fact,
she still doesn't have the 10 grand for her "performance" in GANGBANG,
which she continually expresses nothing but nostalgia over, saying it
was a glorious "moment" she experienced between the men and herself.
     Annabel gets stranger from there.  One minute she's pounding her
chest about women's rights, the next she's a ball of gibberish.  The
more one listens to her, the less coherent she sounds... in fact, she
ends up being exactly what you'd expect a porn star to be like.
     Lewis doesn't play up much of this, instead preferring to dwell on
disease issues, an invented rivalry with Jasmin St. Clair (who broke
Annabel's record with 300 men a year later), the tired issue of "her
parents don't know!", and the minutiae of Annabel's twisted version of
feminism.  Little that she says makes sense, and most of the laughs in
the film are at her expense.  (Though wildly entertaining are her
detractors, who think her "experiment" has somehow cheapened the adult
industry.)
     While the stars of movies like THE GIRL NEXT DOOR are much
shallower, SEX blows every opportunity to get inside the twisted head of
its subject.  Then again, maybe there was nothing to see inside there in
the first place.  Oh well.
Director: Gough Lewis
Producer: Hugh F. Curry, David Whitten, Gough Lewis
Starring: Grace Quek / Annabel Chong, John Bowen, Ed Powers
---
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
