Title
Review for Dick (1999)
Number of Reviews
17

Author
Chad Polenz
Dick
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair/below average)
1999, PG-13, 94 minutes [1 hour, 34 minutes]
[comedy]
Starring: Kirsten Dunst (Betsy Jobs), Michelle Williams (Arlene Lorenzo), Dan 
Hedaya (President Richard `Dick' Nixon), Will Ferrell (Bob Woodward), Bruce 
McCulloch (Carl Bernstein); written by Andrew Flemming, Sheryl Longin; 
produced by Gale Anne Hurd; directed by Andrew Flemming.
Seen August 6, 1999 at 4:40 p.m. at Crossgates Cinema 12 (Guilderland, NY), 
theater #25, by myself for free using my Hoyts season pass. [Theater rating: 
***: good picture, sound and seats]
    `Dick' is not a film meant for the theaters. It's not that it's super 
raunchy or in bad taste or the like, it's just a made-for-television movie 
that somehow got promoted to feature film status. You can practically hear 
the Hollywood suits glancing over the script thinking `Ooh, this is so funny 
and witty. Why haven't we done this before?'
    The truth is everything in `Dick' has, in fact, been done before and a 
lot better too. 
    The basic premise is a tired idea, but since it's a political satire 
there's a sense that a witty, zingy, hilarious satire is about to unfold. 
Unfortunately, the closest the film comes to creative comedy is through a few 
new `Dick' jokes (and I don't mean the nickname for Richard). Everything else 
is mostly there to fill in for a minimum running time.
    Kirsten Dunst and Michelle Williams star as Betsy and Arlene, two high 
school students who happened to be in the wrong place at the wrong time when 
the Watergate break-in and the elaborate scandal following take place back in 
the early 1970s. The film is meant as a laugh-out-loud comedy so the basis 
for the jokes throughout the entire first act and most of the film in general 
deal with the fact that these girls are too stupid to understand what's 
really going on. When they find themselves being interrogated by Nixon's 
goons there's little to laugh at here. It's not a case of the girls thinking 
they're in big trouble for mailing a letter so close to midnight (which would 
have been remotely funny), it's a case of them being considered serious 
threats to national security which goes completely over their head. Playing 
off characters' idiocy is one thing, but these girls aren't dumb enough to be 
obnoxiously funny (a la `Dumb & Dumber') and aren't smart enough to see what 
is so blatantly obvious.
    To their credit, the contrived screenplay and poor performances by every 
working actor in Hollywood don't help much either. Dan Hedaya, the king of 
Hollywood working actors, co-stars as President Richard `Dick' Nixon, one of 
the most easy-to-make-fun-of figures in modern history and yet there's just 
nothing that goes `spoof' here. Hedaya's performance tends to flip-flop - 
first he's nice, likable as a cartoony image of Nixon, but later he's a 
totally different person - malicious and mean-spirited and disappears for 
large blocks of time (wouldn't you think the actor playing the title 
character would get just a bit more screen time?)
    The story follows Betsy and Arlene and their bimbotic (is that a word?) 
adventures as they find themselves being flattered by Nixon and have a ball 
being `official White House dog-walkers,' and `secret youth advisers,' which 
they proceed to tell everyone about despite Nixon's plead with them to keep 
it quiet. What a shock that no one believes them. 
    And so the film runs around in circles with Betsy and Arlene continuing 
to accidentally uncover more dirt on the Watergate scandal without realizing 
it, while at the same time dealing with even more ridiculous subplots. For 
example, Arlene finds herself more attracted to Dick than Bobby Sherman, 
which I suppose could symbolize a more recent case of a young woman being 
attracted to the president, but just isn't believable at all. Then there's 
the factual events that are attempted to be explained through the girls' 
actions, such as their tipping off of Washington Post reporters Bob Woodward 
(Ferrell) and Carl Bernstein (McCulloch). When the two call the `Commie 
muck-raking bastards' they think of it as a joke, yet go so far as to reveal 
the names on a CREEP list (`It must be a list of creeps' they say when they 
first find the list... stuck to G. Gordon Liddy's shoe!). Later, when they 
take the `prank' a step further, their pseudonym of `Deep Throat' comes from 
the porno movie Betsy's brother was caught attending.
    Much of the film is more of this material - corny, trite, unfunny satire 
that comes across as a comedy with a identity crisis problem. Is it a 
straight comedy? Is it an insightful satire? Having the girls' 
marijuana-laced cookies be the catalyst to many of Nixon's biggest decisions 
and accomplishments (withdrawing from Vietnam, avoiding a nuclear war with 
Russia) is a funny idea and sounds like something easy enough to carry out 
and have more zing than Miracle Whip mayonnaise, but it just doesn't happen. 
It doesn't even go the route of bawdiness or raunchiness, it's just plain 
boring (I laughed maybe four times at some slapstick jokes, but the other 
people in the theater didn't laugh at all). 
    It's easy to pin the blame on the film's co-writer and director Andrew 
Flemming for botching what should have been a cakewalk film, but that really 
wouldn't be an honest criticism. Instead, I think everyone is at fault here: 
the actors for failing miserably at their portrayals (as talented as Dunst 
and Williams may be, they never seem like high school students nor hippies) 
and the casting directors for making the film one big sitcom-star-o-rama; the 
costume, makeup and production crew for making the 1970s look a helluva lot 
like the 1990s; the music supervisor for using the same old soundtrack songs 
(it plays more like an homage to `Reservoir Dogs' than a real establishment 
of the music of the era); the cinematography for making the sheer look of the 
film drab and static... even the credits feel ripped-off from `Austin Powers' 
(there's thousands of fonts available, they couldn't find another one to 
use?)!
    Maybe there's just nothing left of the Nixon and hippie era worth 
spoofing.
---------------------------------
Please visit Chad'z 
Movie Page - over 230 new and old movies reviewed in-depth, not just 
blind ratings and blather capsules.
Associate member of The O.F.C.S. (Online 
Film Critics Society)

Author
Steve Rhodes
Do you remember Deep Throat?  No, not that Deep Throat.  (Our audience
went into little ripples of nervous laughter every time the name was
mentioned.)
Is your knowledge of President Richard "Dick" Nixon and his Watergate
scandal detailed enough that you can recall all of the major
participants and their precise roles in this national tragedy?
If so, then you are in the target audience for Andrew Fleming's DICK --
assuming that you like teen satires.
With perhaps the most limited demographics for a movie this year, DICK
is going to have a hard time appealing to those with less than a
completely firm grasp of Watergate history.  Most of the jokes work only
if you remember exactly how each of the people looked and acted.  Saul
Rubinek, for example, does a masterful turn as Henry Kissinger, but his
performance is funny only if you can remember Kissinger well enough to
pick up the subtle nuances of Rubinek's mannerisms.
Andrew Fleming and Sheryl Longin's clever script posits that the
identity of the secret Deep Throat, who was sort of the Linda Tripp of
that scandal, was none other than the "official White House dog
walkers," two 15-year-olds named Betsy Jobs (Kirsten Dunst) and Arlene
Lorenzo (Michelle Williams).  The story answers other questions about
the scandal as well.  The famous 18 1/2 minutes of blank tape was due to
Arlene's having left a love note and song (her rendition of the Olivia
Newton-John song "I Honestly Love You") to her would-be boyfriend,
President Nixon.  He erased it figuring that even the hint of an affair
with a young White House aide could get him in more trouble than the
cover-up of a third-rate burglary.
Dan Hedaya plays President Nixon as a lovable ditz.  Looking like a
cartoon version of the infamous president, Dan Hedaya gives a remarkably
sympathetic portrayal of a man riding through a political hurricane of
his own making.  The president gives Betsy and Arlene some bogus jobs
when they stumble into the burglary and its cover-up.
Of the nice casting, none is better than Dave Foley (A BUG'S LIFE and
BLAST FROM THE PAST) as Bob Haldeman.  Looking comically creepy, Foley
furrows his brow while interviewing Betsy and Arlene in order to
determine their intentions.  "Ladies, when you think of your president,
do you think friendly thoughts?" he interrogates them across a
conference room table in the White House.
The humor tries its best to be topical.  After Nixon resigns, the girls
figure that nothing like this will ever happen again.  "It's going to be
different now," Arlene decides.  "They'll never lie to us again," Betsy
agrees.
The period costumes of wildly colorful clothes for the kids and
awkwardly bad suits for the adults are a treat, but most of the movie is
just a curiosity piece.  In between sporadically funny scenes, you keep
wondering why they made it at all.
Some of the choices for humor are quite bizarre.  The film makes those
two journalistic icons, Bob Woodward (Will Ferrell) and Carl Bernstein
(Bruce McCulloch), into two comedic buffoons.  Woodward and Bernstein as
a doofus duo?  The mind boggles.
DICK runs 1:35.  It is rated PG-13 for sex-related humor, drug content
and language and would be acceptable for kids 10 and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 10, gave it **, complaining that the plot was
stupid.  He said that Dave Foley and the girls did a good job, and he
found the clothing interesting.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Who would have thought that two naive teenage girls could make
the misadventures Richard Milhous Nixon into a political satire? But
that's just what happens when Kirsten Dunst and Michelle Williams, two
bubble-brained 15 year-olds, unknowingly cross paths with the
Watergate burglars, watching G. Gordon Liddy's plumbers squad during
their infamous break-in at Democratic National Headquarters. When
Liddy (Harry Shearer) spots the duo the next day on a White House
tour, as they accidentally stumble into a paper-shredding project,
Tricky Dick (Dan Hedaya) steps in, appointing them as Official Dog
Walkers and Youth Advisors. They wind up in the Oval Office, where
they discover a tape recorder momentarily left unguarded by
Presidential secretary Rose Mary Woods (Ana Gasteyer). What does one
of our blithe heroines do with it? What any infatuated teeny-bopper
would do: record herself singing an Olivia Newton-John ballad to the
Commander-in-Chief. The kind-hearted girls argue foreign policy with
Henry Kissinger (Saul Rubinek) and persuade the President to end the
Vietnam War by feeding him spiked cookies. Then, of course, they tip
off egomaniacal "Washington Post" reporters Bob Woodward (Will
Ferrell) and Carl Bernstein (Bruce McCulloch), divulging the CREEP
list which they find stuck to Liddy's shoe. Director Andrew Fleming,
who co-wrote the script with Sherlyn Longin, cleverly mixes fact and
fiction, evoking the giddy blonde bimbo movie tradition, setting it
amidst a Presidential scandal, and punctuating it with '70s pop
music. While it may resemble several "Saturday Night Live" skits
edited together, nevertheless, on the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Dick" is a sly, sweet, screwball 7. It's corny but comical romp
through revisionist history.

Author
John Carroll
Dick, starring Michelle Williams, Kirsten Dunst, Dan Hedaya, Will Ferrell,
Bruce McCulloch, Dave Foley, Jim Breuer and Ana Gasteyer.  Directed by Andrew
Fleming.  1999.
   With the supposed "teen revolution" hitting movie screens everywhere, it is
a shame that such trash as Drive Me Crazy is overshadowing and outgrossing
sharp and witty films such as Dick.  While the premise is a little crazy, Dick
is able to keep its audience laughing through a strong supporting cast that
looks a lot like a Lorne Michaels reunion.
   The two lead roles go to Michelle Williams of TV's popular Dawson's Creek
and Kirsten Dunst, who has recieved raves from such films as Drop Dead Gorgeous
and also her guest role in NBC's ER.  Williams plays Arlene, a ditsy 15 year
old high schooler.  Dunst, not to be outdone, plays an equally ditsy high
schooler by the name of Betsy.  The film takes place during the presidency of
Richard Nixon, in the 1970s.  Arlene and Betsy start off as two outsiders in a
disco world, but slowly evolve.  Unfortunately, as their characters evolve,
they get less and less funny.  Luckily, Lorne Michaels's graudates step in to
carry the load.
   Lorne's reunion in Dick includes current Saturday Night Live stars (Will
Ferrell and Ana Gasteyer), past SNL stars (Jim Breuer, Harry Shearer) and the
stars of Kids in the Hall: Brain Candy (Dave Foley, Bruce McCulloch).  These
cast members provide the slick and slightly irreverent humor that fuels Dick,
especially when Dunst's and Williams's characters lose the charm and hilarity
that they possessed at the beginning of the film.
   Dick starts off fast and furious.  Despite the old "dumb blonde" cliche,
Dick capitalizes on the sheer stupidity of the two main characters, Betsy and
Arlene.  They get their chance to meet Preisdent Nixon when they accidentally
see a confidential list of Nixon paying off certain high office politicians. 
They become "official White House dog walkers."  Plain and stupid comedy like
this is a constant throughout the first half of Dick, and it works due to the
irresistible charm of the lead characters.  Dick never goes political, except
for one funny sequence cocnerning Nixon's thoughts on the war.
   As Dick progresses, however, Andrew Fleming (who directed and wrote the
screenplay) puts his two main characters under metamorphasis.  They hear
Nixon's racial remarks and decide to not put up with it anymore.  While this
may seem like the right thing to do character-wise, it leaves an empty space in
this film because Fleming seems to forget he is directing a comedy.  Enter Will
Ferrell and Bruce McCulloch.
   Ferrell and McCulloch play Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein, the Washington
Post reporters who originally broke the Watergate scandal.  While not as funny
as Dunst and Williams originally were, Ferrell and McCulloch are able to
suffice for the rest of the film.  Dan Hedaya, who portrays President Nixon to
a dime, gives a strong performance throughout the film.  Fleming seemed to have
trouble transitioning his characters from good to bad (or vice versa), all
except for Nixon, which is why Hedaya is able to give such a strong
performance.  He moves from the mischievous Nixon, trying to cover up
everything, to a paranoid president looking out for every Tom, Dick and Harry
coming his way.  Hedaya's presence is welcome, and such a versatile actor is
very beneficial to such a young cast.
   Dick, overall, is a decent comedy.  The cast is picture-perfect, whether it
be the Lorne Michaels crew pitching in their efforts, or the young duo of
Williams and Dunst portraying their ditsy, out-of-touch 70s high schoolers. 
Dan Hedaya steals the show as Nixon, and had Fleming been able to keep his
characters the same, or transition them better, Dick could have been as great
as 1999's other comedy studs, Bowfinger and Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged
Me.
Final Verdict: B-
The Movie Page- http://moviepage.hypermart.net/
Reviews, Previews, News and So Much More!

Author
James Sanford
         In Woody Allen's "Crimes and Misdemeanors," a pompous filmmaker
notes that "comedy is tragedy plus time." Arriving only days before the
25th anniversary of President Richard M. Nixon's resignation, "Dick"
attempts to mine humor from the Watergate scandal, an event most of us
who lived through it do not remember as being particularly uproarious.
Although it eventually suffers a typically 1970s energy crisis, this
satire of the early Seventies has its moments, thanks to the
considerably charms of Michelle Williams and Kirsten Dunst as a pair of
airheads who become unlikely White House insiders.
 Although Dunst has proven her mettle as a comedienne before --
she was one of the few assets of the woebegone "Drop Dead Gorgeous" --
Williams' knack for getting laughs is a minor revelation since she
certainly hasn't had many chances to show it off as the hard-partying
Jen on TV's "Dawson's Creek." But she's thoroughly delightful here as
Arlene, a nerdy 15-year-old who abandons her crush on Bobby Sherman ("he
cares about people, but also about nature and ecology") to devote all
her time to worshipping the President. Eventually, this
Monica-in-training will go so far as to croon a tuneless cover of Olivia
Newton-John's "I Honestly Love You" into one of Nixon's many hidden tape
recorders. Betsy (Dunst) is slightly brainier, although you wouldn't
want to live on the difference.
 During a field trip to the White House, the duo accidentally
stumbles upon evidence of the bumbled Watergate burglary and are grilled
by the paranoid H.R. Haldeman (Dave Foley), who asks them if they think
"friendly thoughts" when they think of Nixon. After assuring him of
their loyalty, Betsy and Arlene are appointed Presidential dog walkers,
which gives them the chance to share their views on foreign policy with
Nixon (Dan Hedaya) and Henry Kissinger (Saul Rubinek). "I just think
people would like you better if you stopped the war," Arlene tells
Nixon, who decides to heed her good advice.
 The first two-thirds of "Dick" are often clever, with oodles of
great background music (Hot Butter's "Popcorn," Stories' "Brother
Louie," etc.) and amusing clips from TV of the period, including Alka
Seltzer's classic "I Can't Believe I Ate the Whole Thing" spot. The
wardrobe department obviously had a field day putting Dunst and Williams
into a series of polyester nightmares, most of which look like a cross
between K-Mart and the counterculture.
 Unfortunately, around the time our heroines realize they've
been betrayed by Tricky Dick and his associates, the movie begins to
seem more silly than funny. A gag about marijuana-laced cookies is run
into the ground, an attempt to make fun of Bob Woodward and Carl
Bernstein never really works and the story comes to a disappointingly
feeble finale. Williams and Dunst, however, remain bubbly and beguiling
throughout, adding some much needed zest to what turns out to be a
rather half-baked comedy. James Sanford

Author
Scott Renshaw
DICK
(Columbia)
Starring:  Kirsten Dunst, Michelle Williams, Dan Hedaya, Dave Foley, Bruce
McCulloch, Will Ferrell, Saul Rubinek, Jim Breuer, Harry Shearer.
Screenplay:  Andrew Fleming and Sheryl Longin. 
Producer:  Gale Anne Hurd.
Director:  Andrew Fleming.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, drug use, adult themes, adult humor)
Running Time:  94 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     This may be a first in my six years as a film critic:  I'm going to
give the bulk of the credit for a film's success to the casting director.
The film is DICK, a political/historical satire with a sporadically
amusing script and competent enough direction -- in short, the stuff of
fairly average entertainment.  If DICK pushes over the edge of
average-ness, it's because the cast dives into the material with such
gusto that the film finds sparks of inspired comedy.  Casting director Pam
Dixon Mickelson has stocked DICK with such a wealth of talent that it's
fun just watching them stroll into the shot.
     The premise is silly high-concept stuff, centered around two high
school best friends in Washington D.C. circa 1972 -- simple-minded Arlene
Lorenzo (Michelle Williams) and even more simple-minded Betsy Jobs
(Kirsten Dunst).  Through exaggerated circumstances, the girls become
witnesses to the break-in at the Watergate Hotel, though they have no idea
what they've seen.  Bob Haldeman (Dave Foley), however, isn't so sure, and
thinks it would be a good idea to keep an eye on the girls to determine
what they know.  Thus Arlene and Betsy find themselves "official
dog-walkers" for President Nixon (Dan Hedaya) himself, welcomed into the
inner circle at the White House.  As the Watergate scandal unfolds, the
girls find themselves involved in virtually every key event, while
generally remaining blissfully unaware that they're making history.
     The gag is pretty thin to begin with, and it's not even particularly
original.  DICK 's insistence on plopping the two teens into every pivotal
moment of the second Nixon administration turns it into a distaff FORREST
GUMP -- some marijuana-laced brownies lead to fruitful arms-limitation
talks with Brezhnev; a recorded message from the girls turns into an
18-1/2 minute gap; a well-placed scolding leads to the resignation of
John Dean (Jim Breuer); their encounters with Woodward (Will Ferrell) and
Bernstein (Bruce McCulloch) turn them into "Deep Throat."  It's all good
for a few knowing chuckles, but once you tune into the pattern, you can
see virtually every joke coming from several minutes away.
     What you can't necessarily see coming is the appeal of the
performances.  The key players in the administration are all played with
zest by a wonderful comic cast -- Hedaya as a tragically unhip Nixon,
Harry Shearer as a paranoid G. Gordon Liddy, Breuer as the guilt-stricken
John Dean, Saul Rubinek as an insecure Henry Kissinger.  More entertaining
still are Ferrell and McCulloch as Woodward and Bernstein, playing the two
reporters as feuding glory hounds with a relationship somewhere between
sibling rivals and closeted lovers.  And in the middle of this who's who
of sketch comedy alumni, Michelle Williams and Kirsten Dunst have
tremendous fun with their ditzy characters.  Dunst may be the more
accomplished actress of the two, but it's Williams who gets the juicier
part of a teen who develops a secret crush on Nixon.  There's nothing
quite as incongruously funny as Arlene's fantasy of a scowling Dick riding
across a beach on a white stallion.
     It would have been nice if Andrew Fleming and Sheryl Longin's script
had found more scenes to match that one for sheer goofiness value.  Too
often it gets a bit lazy, opting for yet another historical coulda-been or
one of many comic uses of the name "Dick."  DICK hits a few dead spots,
but whenever it starts to lag it gets a jolt from the energetic cast.
Remember the name Pam Dixon Mickelson if you happen to be casting a comedy
any time soon.  It's nice to have someone who can gather an all-star team
for the comedic equivalent of slow-pitch softball.

Author
Ross Anthony
No, it's not about that! A generation ago (or so), old guys named Richard
used to like to be called Dick -- as a nickname see.
Set in 1972, two dippy fifteen year old girls stumble into the oval office
and are made official presidential dog walkers and later ... "Secret Youth
Advisers" to the president. Misunderstandings across their generation gap
with Nixon seemly dictate Tricky Dick's fate. If you're too young to
remember -- he's the president that got canned.
All of this occurs in a Forest Gumpy kind of way. But the girls, though
amusing, aren't as lovable as Tom Hanks in the aforementioned role. Nor is
their plight as endearing, making "Dick" -- Gump-lite.
I didn't start laughing until I saw Kissinger, however from there after I
enjoyed myself. Perhaps better appreciated by the over forty crowd, "Dick"
will make an excellent renter.
Of considerable muse: Nixon taking leave of office to Carly Simon's "You're
So Vain." His helicopter riding off to those lyrics is eerily apropos.
Starring Kirston Dunst and Dan Helaya.
Screenplay by Andrew Fleming and Sharyl Longin.
Directed by Andrew Fleming. Produced by Gale Anne Hurd at Columbia.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Brian Matherly
Cast: Kirsten Dunst, Michelle Williams, Dan Hedaya, Will Ferrell, Bruce 
McCulloch, Teri Garr, Dave Foley, Jim Breuer, Ana Gasteyer, Harry Shearer, 
Saul Rubinek, Devon Gummersall, Ted McGinley, Ryan Reynolds, G.D. Spradlin, 
French Stewart
Written by: Andrew Fleming and Sheryl Longin
Directed by: Andrew Fleming
Running Time: 100 minutes
Date Reviewed: August 8, 1999
A new entry in the "revisionist history" genre of filmmaking, Dick
suggests that two not-too-bright teenage girls are the cause of the
uncovering of the nation's biggest presidential scandal.  Kirsten
Dunst and Michelle Williams star Betsy and Arlene, who while trying to
deliver a fan letter from Arlene's Watergate hotel room, accidentally
stumble across G. Gordon Liddy (played dead-on by Harry Shearer) and
the infamous break-in.  When they recognize Liddy later on during a
White House field trip, they are ushered into a conference room,
questioned as to what they know, and leave as official presidential
dog walkers.  The girls manage to unwittingly uncover every bit of the
Watergate scandal while performing their duties, but have no clue as
to what they are getting involved with.  When they discover that Nixon
(another dead-on performance by Dan Hedaya, who actually favors Nixon
slightly, unlike Anthony Hopkins) has been abusive to Checkers, the
presidential dog, thanks to the conversations that he always recorded,
they quit and become disillusioned.  During a prank phone call the
girls make to Woodward and Bernstein, events are set into motion that
eventually lead to the president's resignation.
This film starts off promisingly with an aged Woodward and Bernstein
arguing with each other on an obvious Larry King-type talk show
(featuring a cameo by French Stewart) about revealing the identity of
"Deep Throat".  From there, we are subjected to bodily function humor
and just about every bad "dick" joke one can derive from this type of
supposed comedy.  At one point, the girls are having to scream over a
high school band playing on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial.  The
band manages to stop right as Dunst screams "You have to stop letting
Dick run your life!" much to the horror of everyone standing within
earshot.  Several other variations on this wordplay surface all
throughout the film.  If this movie had been smarter I would have been
less likely to fault it's juvenile bathroom humor, but it's not.  The
film was apparently made for relatively younger people because every
major player in the Watergate scandal is introduced and shoved down
the audience's throat in the least subtle way possible.  I don't
recall Oliver Stone's Nixon having to pander to it's audience, but of
course that film wasn't a comedy aimed squarely at a 13-20 year-old
film going audience.
The only redeeming thing about this movie is it's remarkable
supporting cast.  I wanted to see more of Ferrell and McCulloch's
Woodward and Bernstein.  Those two characters are the sole basis for
my rating.  I wish they had been given more screen time, but
unfortunately, they are only relegated to the final half-hour.  Their
constant bickering and fighting over trying to get the story are a
major highlight, especially McCulloch's constant thwarting of
Ferrell's attempts to gather information from the girls (who, in the
course of the narrative are revealed as Deep Throat, so named thanks
to an ill planned trip to a porno theater by Betsy's brother).
The other members of the cast are excellent in their portrayals of
their particular characters, but are given nothing to work with.  I'd
like to see the same cast portray these characters in a script more
suited towards their comedic abilities.  As for the two leads, Dunst
and Williams can definitely do better.  They come off as what could
best be described as Romy and Michele:The Early Years in this
particular film, a highly dubious distinction at best.  Stay through
the first half of the end credits though, to see an interesting scene
involving Dunst and Williams suggestively sucking on lollipops
emblazoned with the title of the movie.
An excellent idea marred by poor execution, Dick could have been a
great movie.  Less of the juvenile humor and more of the smarter
comedy displayed by the Woodward and Bernstein scenes, could have made
this film a wonderful satire of the Nixon presidency as seen through
the eyes of two naive fifteen year olds.  As it stands though, Dick
offers nothing but what filmmaker Kevin Smith so accurately defines as
"dick and poopie" jokes.  And that, to me, does not make a funny
movie.  [PG-13]
Brian Matherly -- bmath2000@hotmail.com
The Jacksonville Film Journal
URL:http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Š 1999 of The Jacksonville Film Journal.  No reviews may be reprinted 
without permission.


Author
Akiva Gottlieb
rated PG-13
Columbia Pictures
starring Kirsten Dunst, Michelle Williams, Dan Hedaya, Will Ferrell, Bruce
McCulloch, Teri Garr, Dave Foley, Jim Breuer, Harry Shearer, Saul Rubinek
written by Andrew Fleming and Sheryl Longin
directed by Andrew Fleming
Richard Nixon, America's most controversial president, has been given
the Oliver Stone once-over, and has had Forrest Gump ruin his career,
but he has never been the subject of a comedy...until now. Andrew
Fleming's hilarious "Dick" is the contrived story of Betsy and
Arlene(Kirsten Dunst and Michelle Williams, respectively), two
dimwitted teenagers living in Washington, D.C. during the tenure of
Richard Nixon(played to comic perfection by character actor Dan
Hedaya). When the two stumble upon the Watergate scandal, the title
character offers them the job of being official White House
dog-walkers and secret youth advisors; but they're not allowed to tell
about anything that they witness while on the job. However, when they
learn that "Dick" is really a racist who hates his dog, they begin to
comply with two Washington Post reporters(Will Ferrell and Bruce
McCulloch) to help rat Nixon out of the presidency. The storyline
requires a suspension of disbelief, but the good acting and good lines
help "Dick" become quite a fun satire. The cast, peppered with SNL
alumni, is excellent, never being too serious or at all
unfunny. "Dick" is a movie about teens that adults will enjoy because
of the 70's nostalgia, and because of the many Watergate jokes that
may fly over the heads of the film's targeted younger audience. It's
too bad that "Dick" didn't rush out of the gate at the box office, but
hopefully it can find its niche through word-of-mouth.  Enjoy it, but
don't take it too seriously.
a capsule review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://teenagemoviecritic.8m.com 


Author
MR JONATHAN RICHARDS
     "Dick" is a very funny 95-cent idea diluted by inflation to a
buck and a half.  There are good jokes and performances, but it's
essentially sketch humor stretched out to fill feature requirements.
The goodwill purchased by the early laughs goes a long way toward
carrying the flat stretches.  Eventually, though, there's no avoiding
the fact that things have run aground.  There's a noticeable gap in
amusement, and it extends beyond the legendary 18-1/2 minutes.
     Despite the fact that the central characters are a couple of
teenage girls, the appeal of "Dick" will be primarily to those old
enough to appreciate the minutia of Watergate trivia; if plumbers,
duct tape, and Rosemary Woods and the 18-1/2 minute gap mean nothing
to you, parts of this movie will be as impenetrable as puns in
Chinese.
     Betsy (Kirsten Dunst) and Arlene (Michelle Williams) are
teenyboppers in Washington DC with a serious thing for Bobby Sherman
(if you're under thirty-five I'm already losing you.)  When they sneak
out of Arlene's Watergate apartment at midnight to post a letter to
the pop idol's fan club, they tape a door to the building's garage for
purposes of re-entry.  At the same time a third-rate burglary is in
progress at the Democratic National Committee offices upstairs.  When
a security guard finds the taped lock he calls the cops, and sets in
motion the irresistible tide of events that will eventually sweep
Richard M.  Nixon from office.
     The girls get separated from their class on a White House tour,
meet the President and his minions, and wind up with a gig as official
dogwalkers for the mutt everyone insists on calling Checkers.  From
this vantage point they have a chance to observe plenty of chicanery
and dirty tricks around the Nixon White House, and even bring in some
specially baked cookies from home that influence world leaders and
events.  They develop a meaningful relationship with Woodward and
Bernstein, and the rest is history, of a sort.
     Dunst and Williams are squealy, girlish fun, but the best of
"Dick" belongs to the man who plays him, Dan Hedaya.  With his hunched
shoulders, bristling eyebrows, and dark jowls he seems born to the
role of Tricky Dick, and he makes Nixon entertaining enough that you
almost want him back again on Watergate's 25th anniversary to kick
around some more.
     "Dick" is uneven satire.  The high points are probably enough to
make the trip worth while, but be prepared for long stretches of
tedium.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Columbia Pictures/Phoenix Pictures
 Director:  Andrew Fleming
 Writer:  Andrew Fleming & Sheryl Longin
 Cast: Kirsten Dunst, Michelle Williams, Dave Foley, Dan
Hedaya, Harry Shearer, Saul Rubinek, Jim Breuer, Will
Ferrell, Bruce McCullough
   Andrew Fleming has a super concept going for him with
"Dick."  Splashing a revisionist interpretation of one dramatic
incident in U.S. history across the screen, the co-writer and
director of this satire re-writes the Watergate chapter and by
doing so, explains one of the great unsolved mysteries of a
top political scandal:  the source called Deep Throat that
exposed the president's connection to the burglary of the
Democratic party headquarters.  As a stroke of imagination,
the story brings to mind "All the President's Men."  But to a
greater degree think of Ivan Reitman's movie "Dave," in
which the U.S. president is incapacitated by a stroke and the
look-alike title character (played by Kevin Kline) takes his
place, winning over the public, the press and even the First
Lady.  In its farfetched premise, Dave proves that the most
complex national questions all have simple, homespun
answers, and even solves the problem of the national budget
with the advice of his local accountant.
   There's a difference between "Dave," which was 
implausible and yet successfully related, and "Dick," a
likewise improbable yarn, which is not.  "Dave" had superior
actors like the inimitable Kevin Kline and the impressive
veteran of stage and screen, Frank Langella.  "Dick" features
two gifted performers who have come quite a way for their
age, but to my knowledge are both under 21 and have not
matured into convincing thesps.  A more important weakness,
though, is that Fleming overlooks the concept that satire must
be grounded in a recognizably realistic portrayal of
characters, but the director portrays Pulitzer-prize winning
journalists Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein as a couple of
awkward kids who clown around with each other in much the
way that the far younger principals of the movie do.  While
Fleming does not make saintly characters of the heroes of
the tale, he paints all with an equally derisive  brush.  Not
only the journalists, but the girls who expose the president's
betrayal of his office, their parents, and even the squeaky-
clean Henry Kissinger are all bimbos, bozos, and assorted
unformed personalities.
   Fleming follows the trajectory of the Watergate Affair with
reasonable fidelity while substituting outrageous deviations. 
When 15-year-old best friends Arlene Lorenzo (Michelle
Williams) and Betsy Jobs (Kirsten Dunst) accidentally happen
upon the burglary of the Democratic Convention office in the
capital's Watergate Hotel, the presidential advisers John
Dean (Jim Breuer), Bob Haldeman (Dave Foley), and G.
Gordon Liddy (Harry Shearer) think they know too much. 
President Dick Nixon (Dan Hedaya) tries to buy them off by
giving the teenage girls jobs as youth advisers after having
appointed them walkers for his dog, Checkers (Brunswick). 
Haldeman wonders whether the girls are a threat at all, since
he describes them by saying "I've seen more going on
upstairs in a yam."  The young ladies are indeed dense,
knowing virtually nothing about government.  Thoroughly
naive about how things get done in Washington, they think
they can end the Vietnam War by telling Nixon "War is not
healthy for children and other living things."  
   For a while, though, it appears that the White House could
lend them an ear.  In the movie's most amusing scene, the
girls give Nixon and Leonid Brezhnev (Len Doncheff) cookies
they baked, unknowingly adding some pot supplied by
Betsy's spaced-out brother, Larry (Devon Gummersall).  As
the Russian party secretary and the U.S. chief executive
break into "Hello Dolly," a potential nuclear disaster is
averted.  Because Arlene seems to have no life except for
one rich in fantasies, she develops a crush on the president,
dreams of taking him away from his wife Pat, but is later
thoroughly disillusioned upon hearing tapes of the president
cursing and making anti-Semitic remarks.
   Ann Brodie's makeup job helps make all the high
government officials look strikingly like their actual
counterparts.  Saul Rubinek is a ringer for Kissinger, laying
on the heavy German accent, while Dan Hedaya could
almost pass for the dishonored chief.  But the portrayal of
Bob Woodward by Will Ferrell and particularly the depiction of
Woodward's partner on the Washington Post, Carl Bernstein
(by Bruce McCulloch) are grossly silly and unfair.  Watching
the two youthful stars travel through the political arena is at
first not without interest, but Dunst and Williams's one-joke
roles cannot carry the movie's 95 minutes.  The soundtrack,
so applicable to each scene and so dramatic, is a highlight,
especially Carly Simon's song, "You're So Vain."

Author
Noel Wood
The following review is property of MOVIE CRITICISM FOR THE RETARDED and cannot
be quoted or referenced without proper credit. For more information, go to the
homepage at http://www.homestead.com/mc4tr
Yep, That's Dick. As in President Richard M. Nixon. Or as in penis, which this
film likes to point out every chance it gets. 
Now before I continue, Let me say that behind GO and EYES WIDE SHUT, Andrew
Fleming's DICK is the film I've enjoyed most in 1999. I honestly laughed my ass
off as I watched this Clueless-cum-Gump comedy unravel. It was a brilliant
concept from the getgo, and with a few exceptions, pulled off the story
excellently. But I am here not to talk about how good the film was, I'm here to
let the director know where he went wrong.
Andrew, I've seen two other of your films, which were fatally flawed. 1996's
THE CRAFT was pure cut-and-paste MTV Generation tripe that I only watched
because of my weakness for Robin Tunney and Neve Campbell as Catholic
schoolgirls. 1994's THREESOME was a terrible romantic comedy viewed primarily
for a similair reason, this time involving Lara Flynn Boyle and the guarantee
we'd see some flesh. But Since you're not a name director at this point who's
ammassed a body of shitty work like, say. Joel Schumacher, I'll cut you a
little slack and wipe the slate clean.
Like I said, DICK had its good points. The main cast was fine. Dan Hedaya was
born to play Nixon. Why Oliver Stone even thought of casting Hanks or Hopkins
before considering Hedaya is beyond me. Michelle Williams and Kirsten Dunst did
what they were supposed to do without making me want to strangle them for their
bubbliness. David Foley was the group's most underrated performer, really
breaking all laws of typecasting to play Bob Haldeman. But from there, things
get a little shaky. 
Saturday Night Live fixtures Will Ferrell and Jim Breuer just didn't cut it.
Ferrell is not funny, and will never be funny. No matter what the role calls
for, he's always that annoying male cheerleader from those wretched new SNL
skits. For some reason, people think this guy is marginally amusing, and I
can't figure out why. So putting him in DICK as Bob Woodward can only mean
trouble. I'll cut Breuer a little more slack, since his role was ultraminimal
in the film and he didn't seen to be over or underexerting himself. But what
really saddens me is the downward spiral of Bruce McCollough. Why couldn't the
other Kids in the Hall stay as funny as Foley and Thompson (even if Thompson
has limited his repertoire to only playing the gay comic relief, but that's
another rant.)? His bumbling Carl Bernstein is truly one of the lower points in
this film. Together with the already insipid Ferrell as Woodward, they make for
some of the most unfunny moments in the film. I will, however, point out that
Harry Shearer is dead-on as "G-Man" Gordon Liddy and Saul Rubinek couldn't be
better in every aspect in his portrayal of Henry Kissinger.
But once again, I can be forgiving with the cast, seeing as to how the
supporting members are the only ones that need retooling. My main problem was
the diatribe of cheap penis jokes that just never seemed to stop. They even
manage to work their way all the way to the final scene in the film; which,
ironically, is the only time I thought a Dick pun really worked in the movie
although the buildup to the joke seemed tedious and forced.  But every
crowd-scene "I love Dick/There's more to life than Dick" was telegraphed poorly
and was utterly unnecessary. Most of the script was brilliantly creative, but
was only harmed by the incessant need for brainless phallic puns. 
A small complaint of mine is that Nixon is painted in the most unflattering of
colors in this film without any positive light shown his way. It's not
sympathetic to the controversial late President in the slightest. Granted,
that's been the media's take on Nixon for eons, so it's not that big a deal.
Besides, it's shown in such a tongue-in-cheek manner that one can't be expected
to take anything seriously as biography of any of the characters found within.
But unfortunately, it adds to the myth that Richard Nixon was a complete
failure as Commander-in-Chief, which the uninformed (and slanted youth of the
world) will probably take with them as gospel. Then again, I'm probably taking
this way too personally, which I shall now refrain from doing in order to wrap
up this review.
So, the big picture here, although you'd be suprised after reading the
criticism found within this review, is that I highly recommend DICK. The good
fortunately far outweighs the bad. The way the two girls unwittingly change the
course of history through childish antics is clever and is carried out well. We
now know who Deep Throat is, and why "he" was called such. We now know what was
contained on the 18 minutes of tape that was erased in the Watergate evidence.
Major events of Nixon's presidency are  highligted as the result of a
hypothetical situation, and for the most part, are done to perfection. Even
minor events of the day and nuances of the characters are laid out on the
table, ones that may go over the heads of viewers less knowledgeable. The
setting is flawless, the trends are accurate yet not overbearing (as it was in
THE WEDDING SINGER, among other nostalgia pieces), and the pacing is fine. So,
for the most part, Andrew Fleming did a pretty good job with DICK.
Just don't expect much from Fleming if he releases a film called PETER, ROD, or
JOHNSON.  Or worse yet, the highly anticipated Bill Clinton biopic WILLY.
"If Al Gore invented the internet, then I invented the spell-check."
-Danforth Quayle
HEY! Check out MOVIE CRITICISM FOR THE RETARDED:
http://www.homestead.com/mc4tr

Author
Michael Elliott
DIRECTED BY:       Andrew Fleming
STARRING:              Kirsten Dunst, Michelle Williams, Dan Hedaya, Dave
Foley, Will Ferrell, Bruce McCulloch, Saul Rubinek
WRITTEN BY:          Andrew Fleming, Sheryl Longin
RATED:                    PG-13 for sex-related humor, drug content, and
language.
SCRIPTURE
REFERENCES:      Proverbs 20:17, Psalms 101:7, Proverbs 19:5
I hate to admit it, but the blistering satire DICK made more sense to me
in explaining the ins and outs of the Watergate scandal than any news
reporter or political analyst of the day ever did.  Sure it's revisionist
history... but at least it tied up every loose end and answered every
question.  Besides, it was a lot more fun to sit through than the real
thing.
According to DICK, it all begins when 15 year olds Betsy Jobs (Kirsten
Dunst, DROP DEAD GORGEOUS) and Arlene Lorenzo (Michelle Williams, DAWSON'S
CREEK) leave the Watergate hotel where they are staying in order to mail a
love letter to teen idol Bobby Sherman.  Their actions, when sneaking out
of the complex, prompt a guard's call to the police who then stumble upon
the Watergate burglars.
Later, during a high school field trip tour through the White House, they
meet up with G. Gordon Liddy (Harry Shearer, SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE), Bob
Haldeman (Dave Foley, KIDS IN THE HALL), Henry Kissinger (Saul Rubinek,
BAD MANNERS), and John Dean (Jim Breuer, SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE).  Being teen
aged girls, they of course lavish all their attention upon Checkers the
dog.
While all the president's men try to decide how to handle these two
bubble-brained adolescents, President Nixon ("Call me Dick") takes matters
into his own hands because, to use his own oily words, "I have a way with
young people.  They trust me."  He christens them official "White House
dog walkers" and "secret youth advisors."
Thus begins an irreverent romp through modern history as Betsy and Arlene
are credited with being inadvertently responsible for: the end of the
Vietnam War; a new peace initiative between the US and the USSR; Nixon's
signature "V" pose; erasing eighteen and one-half minutes of presidential
tape and; giving the bickering Washington Post reporters Woodward and
Bernstein the biggest story of their careers.
Director Andrew Fleming (THE CRAFT) and newcomer Sheryl Longin
co-scripted DICK and were so faithful to their initial premise and so
inventive in carrying it out, that there is an unexpected plausibility to
the outrageous scenarios being depicted.
It helps that both Miss Dunst and Miss Williams are priceless, being
delightfully giddy and appropriately pubescent in their characterizations.
Miss Williams is especially amusing as her Arlene fantasizes about
President Nixon to the point that he replaces Bobby Sherman as her
teen-dream poster boy.
  The girls manage to play the naiveté of their on-screen roles with a
sweet genuineness and believability that serves to enhance their
crestfallen disappointment and teen-aged ire once they realize that their
Dick is "a bad man!"
The confrontation between these two teenyboppers and their President
after they hear his private tapes (before the expletives were deleted) is
not only a hoot, it is somehow oddly rewarding.  How many of us wished we
could have said these words to President Nixon's face:  "You've got a
potty-mouth!"
In a brilliant piece of casting, Dan Hedaya was tapped to play the
"Tricky Dick" caricature of Nixon and he does himself proud.   His Dick
Nixon is shifty, incapable of sincerity, and deserves to go down.
Trust is something that once lost, is almost impossible to regain.  All
comedy aside, the two female leads had no reason to distrust their
president until he gave them cause.
A lie is never excusable.  No matter how tempting it might be to offer a
lie to avoid a punishment, a lie will always lead to a worse consequence.
"Bread of deceit is sweet to a man; but afterwards his mouth shall be
filled with gravel."  Proverbs 20:17 [KJV]
We can only hope that this is a lesson that, sooner or later, our
presidents will be sure to learn.

Author
Kevin Patterson
DICK is the best kind of stupid movie: the kind that knows it's 
stupid. It is the work of filmmakers who have thrown all credibility 
to the wind in favor of going for one ridiculous gag after another. 
Most of the jokes work, and when one doesn't, you still have to 
admire them for even trying it in the first place.
The film takes as its title the moniker of former President Richard 
Nixon, who is one of many targets in this screwball satire. Its 
premise is that Deep Throat, the mysterious informant who provided 
Washington Post reporters Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein with 
crucial leads in the Watergate case, was in fact the pair of Betsy 
Jobs (Kirsten Dunst) and Arlene Lorenzo (Michelle Williams), a couple 
of dimwitted teenage girls who didn't even understand what they had 
discovered. They had been at the hotel at the night of the break-in, 
but they didn't realize what was going on, and it is only after a 
paranoid G. Gordon Liddy (is that redundant?) noticed them at the 
White House later that they began to stumble across the shady 
dealings. Convinced that they were spies, Liddy had them taken aside 
from their school field trip to a private study, where Nixon and Bob 
Haldeman cooked up the idea of making them official White House 
dog-walkers to keep them quiet. The irony, of course, is that they 
had no useful information until they were brought inside the White 
House in order to keep them from leaking information.
At this point, the history of the last two years of the Nixon 
presidency unfolds as a comedy of errors. The pullout from Vietnam, 
for example, is another concession to the girls, after one of them 
solemnly tells Nixon, "War is not healthy for children and other 
living things." Unique explanations are offered for some of the more 
peculiar details of the scandal, such as the missing 18-1/2 minutes 
on the Oval Office tape, which is caused, indirectly, by Arlene's 
schoolgirl crush on the President. Woodward and Bernstein, meanwhile, 
turn out to be childish idiots, squabbling with each other over who 
gets to be on the telephone with the girls (their initial phone call 
to the newspaper was only meant to be a prank) and what not. When 
Woodward meets with them in an empty garage, a noise is heard in the 
background and they fear they've been followed. And they have--by 
Bernstein, whose pratfall off his bicycle accounted for the noise.
All of this, of course, is absurd (though I do wonder if the details 
of the real Watergate scandal would seem believable if they hadn't 
actually happened). But everyone involved seems to know it's absurd, 
and neither director Andrew Fleming nor any of the performers take 
any of it remotely seriously. While there is, of course, an element 
of political satire present, most of it is fairly obvious, as the 
filmmakers are by and large unconcerned with maintaining any 
connection to reality, opting instead to create their own deranged 
screwball universe. All in all, this movie really has more in common 
with AIRPLANE! than it does with DR. STRANGELOVE.
Needless to say, DICK is not exactly what one would call a classic. I 
regard it in much the same light as this year's SOUTH PARK feature 
film, as an inventive, amusing, and largely inconsequential comedy 
(though far less vulgar). Profound it ain't, but at least it made me 
laugh.
Send comments to ktpattersn@aol.com.
http://members.aol.com/ReviewsKTP/reviews.html

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Andrew Fleming.
Cast: Kirsten Dunst, Michelle Williams, Dan Hedaya, Will Ferrell, Bruce 
McCulloch, Devon Gummersall, Harry Shearer, Saul Rubinek, Teri Garr, Ana 
Gasteyer, David Foley, Jim Breuer, French Stewart.
1999 - 95 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for profanity, sexual innuendo, and double entendres).
Reviewed August 5, 1999.
Perhaps the sunniest, most innocently charming comedy since 1997's "Romy and 
Michele's High School Reunion" or 1995's "Clueless," "Dick" is a sly, 
extremely potent political satire, aided by a first-rate cast that hungrily 
dig into their respective roles with a vengeance. Moving from scene to scene 
without a moment's time to spare, the film immediately pulls you into its 
surprisingly believable, if somewhat improbable story, as you follow the two 
lovably ditzy central characters that, nonetheless, are thankfully never 
turned into wild caricatures. The same cannot be said about the non-fictional 
figures, such as Henry Kissinger and Washington Post writers Bob Woodward and 
Carl Bernstein, but who really cares? The movie is just too enjoyably 
innocuous to knock it with any major criticisms.
Set during the spring of 1972 during the President Richard Nixon/Watergate 
scandal, "Dick" is, to put it bluntly, a truly ingenious idea for a comedy 
that both teenagers and adults can appreciate (for different reasons). 
15-year-olds Betsy Jobs (Kirsten Dunst) and Arlene Lorenzo (Michelle 
Williams) are the best of friends who "have less going on upstairs than 
yams." At the start of the picture, Betsy is staying over at Arlene's house 
and, late at night, they sneak out of her mother's Watergate apartment to 
mail a letter to the "Win a Date With Bobby Sherman Contest" from "Tiger 
Beat" magazine. In the midst of this, however, they inadvertently witness the 
infamous Watergate break-in but cheerfully think nothing of it. 
Coincidentally, the following day Arlene and Betsy attend a class field trip 
to the White House where, cautious that they may know something about the 
president's involvement in Watergate, President Nixon (Dan Hedaya, doing a 
fairly impressive impression) appoints the two as the "White House's Official 
Dog Walkers," as well as his "Personal Youth Advisors." This is only the 
start of the film which, in the course of its 95-minute running time, Betsy 
and Arlene often unknowingly become involved in practically every notable 
occurrence in Nixon's last few months before resigning. What was on the 
missing 18 1/2 minutes of Nixon's audio recording? Why, it was Arlene 
confessing her unrequited, devotional love for "Dick," and singing a rousing 
rendition of an Olivia Newton John song. Who was Deep Throat? Again, it was 
the code name for the two girls, who notify journalists Woodward and 
Bernstein about the CREEP document they discovered, as well as all of the 
people around the president who were associated with Watergate. Why did Nixon 
abruptly call off the Vietnam War? Because Betsy and Arlene assuredly told 
him "war is wrong." And where did Nixon get the idea to hold up two peace 
signs with his hands before boarding his plane? Well, duh! It's because the 
teenage duo had previously taught it to him!
"Dick" was directed by the unlikely Andrew Fleming, whose previous credits 
include 1994's college dramedy, "Threesome," and 1996's witch thriller, "The 
Craft." With "Dick," Fleming tests the waters of bright comedy and political 
satire, which it may not be as successful at as this spring's masterful, 
so-accurate-it's-scary, "Election," but is easily more clever with its 
one-of-a-kind, constantly innovative storyline. This film is a delightful 
treat throughout, for several reason. One, of course, is that the way the 
movie incorporates these two fictional girls into the middle of Watergate, 
and makes it fairly plausible, no less, is an example of clearly inventive 
storytelling. Two, the recreation of Washington, D.C., circa 1972, complete 
with stunningly accurate costumes and a perfectly-chosen soundtrack, evokes a 
time and place that isn't often seen this vibrantly, and reminded me 
somewhat, in strictly artificial ways, of Robert Altman's 1975 masterpiece, 
"Nashville," which is near the top of my personal list of the greatest films 
I've ever seen. And three, "Dick," in one liberating moment after the other, 
brings off a sort of pure joyousness that is not found in very many of 
today's films. For all of its knowing, at times biting, references to Nixon 
and Watergate and the rest of the time period, the movie, plain and simple, 
ties the otherwise raunchy "American Pie" as this year's most innocently 
gleeful movie. 
The casting of the two teenage girl characters was one of the most vital 
elements for the film's achievement, and they struck gold with the pairing of 
Kirsten Dunst ("Drop Dead Gorgeous") and Michelle Williams (TV's "Dawson's 
Creek"). As the giggly, slightly geeky Betsy and Arlene, inseperable best 
friends who move right through history in the making and don't look back, 
these two fine actresses work so well together, and seperately, that you fall 
in love with their characters the second you see them. With her two most 
recent films, "Dick" and "Drop Dead Gorgeous," Kirsten Dunst, appearing in 
feature films since around age 7, where she made her debut in 1990's "The 
Bonfire of the Vanities," has become incomparable with any other actress in 
her age group. Dunst has rightfully proven that she can play any sort of role 
in any type of film, and do it well; she can play comedy ("Dick," "Drop Dead 
Gorgeous," "Wag the Dog"), she can play drama ("Interview With the Vampire," 
"The Devil's Arithmetic"), she can play action ("Small Soldiers"), she can 
play intelligent ("Drop Dead Gorgeous"), and she can play dense (that's where 
"Dick" comes in). 
Complimenting her in every way is Michelle Williams, too often overlooked for 
her work in the soapy "Dawson's Creek" as the slutty, misunderstood Jen 
Lindley. I dare anyone to take a look at her in that television series, and 
then see "Dick," and not tell me that this young actress is a character 
chameleon who, if she continues to play her cards right, also has a 
definitely hopeful acting future ahead of her. As Arlene, who grows an 
infatuation for Dick, replacing all of the Bobby Sherman posters on her wall 
with ones of Nixon, until Betsy and she overhear him abusing his dog, 
Checkers, and spitting out curse words and prejudiced epithets about Jews, 
Williams is both funny and appropriately endearing. 
Together, these two girls are irresistible in both their bubbly, kind-hearted 
personalities, as well as the way they get involved in historic events and 
yet, in the first half, their greatest concern is when they will get to play 
with Checkers. If Arlene and Betsy don't come off as the smartest people ever 
to walk the Earth, they also are wisely not portrayed as completely stupid; 
in other words, they are average teenagers who still have a lot of growing up 
to do, but hopefully will never lose that amiable "glow" that they exude.
In the supporting roles as actual historical, political figures, the rest of 
the cast blends in very well. Dan Hedaya is almost uncanny in his portrayal 
of Richard Nixon, and even if Dick does turn out to be both a liar and an 
untrustworthy individual, you still can't help but feel a little sympathetic 
towards him. This has more to do, I think, with the likable Hedaya than it 
does with the late president himself. Also of note are Will Ferrell (a 
"Saturday Night Live" alum) and Bruce McCulloch (a "Kids in the Hall" alum), 
who are excellent in their decidedly comic interpretations of Bob Woodward 
and Carl Bernstein. All other actors could have been used to stronger effect, 
however, including Saul Rubinek, as Henry Kissinger; Harry Shearer, as G. 
Gordon Liddy; Ana Gasteyer (also of "SNL"), as Nixon secretary Rosemary 
Woods; and Teri Garr, as Arlene's single mother.
Being all of 17-years-old myself, I was nowhere to be found back in the days 
when Vietnam was all too close to home, Nixon was in office, and the 
Watergate scandal was the talk of the country, but as long as you know the 
basic outline of what went on in 1972, and are familiar with most of the key 
events and figures, "Dick" is an exuberant, if light and fluffy, motion 
picture that works on two levels: As a humorous account of a certain, 
controversial moment in history, and as an unforced, gentle coming-of-age 
story. The use of popular '70s pop music is also put to often marvelous 
effect, particularly Elton John's "Crocodile Rock" in a lovely scene in which 
Betsy tells Arlene what the term, "Deep Throat," means and they immediately 
go crazy in a moment of childhood giddiness, and also in the 
exceptionally-done last scene, played to the tune of Carly Simon's "You're So 
Vain." Andrew Fleming's "Dick" may not be a deep, meaningful motion picture, 
but it sure is a sweet one.
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman.
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
David Sunga
Written by: Andrew Fleming and Sheryl Longin
Starring: Kirsten Dunst, Michelle Williams, Dan Hedaya, Dave Foley
Synopsis: 
Tricky Dick Nixon (Richard M. Nixon), the 37th President of the United
States, was famous for a few things and infamous for one. Nixon ended the
Vietnam War and held successful strategic arms limitation talks with his
Cold War nemesis, Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev. But soon came the 1972
Watergate office complex break-in, an attempted burglary and wiretapping of
the Democratic National Committee headquarters by thugs hired by Nixon's
close associates. In the end, President Nixon resigned in disgrace after
erasing tapes which allegedly contained conversations in which he
obstructed justice by halting the FBI's Watergate investigation just when
big names were starting to become implicated.
The spoof DICK is a caricature of the Nixon years in which the Nixon
administration's main accomplishments are accidentally caused by two ditsy
teenage girls named Arlene and Betsy (played by Michelle Williams and
Kirsten Dunst) who are hired by the White House as dog walkers. 
In DICK, Nixon (Dan Hedaya) thoughtlessly erases the tapes which lead to
his resignation because he doesn't want the world to hear Arlene singing an
embarrassing Olivia Newton-John love song. Another running gag is that
Nixon has a dog named King Timahoe, but he keeps absent-mindedly calling
the dog Checkers, the name of a pet Nixon immortalized in a political
speech, defending himself from charges of corruption 20 years before
Watergate. Nixon era characters such as Leonid Brezhnev and Henry Kissinger
are also spoofed.
Opinion: 
DICK is great satire, a hilarious take on the Nixon years. Even folks who
weren't born in the days of Tricky Dick, Kissinger, Liddy, Dean, or
Haldeman will still laugh at bigwig politicians eating the wrong
(marijuana-laced) cookies. Or at the two oblivious teens - - Betsy and
Arlene, like Jan and Marcia from the Brady Brunch, only mentally vacuous -
- who witness surreptitious corruption time and again but fail to see
what's going on. While nefarious events swirl, Arlene and Betsy dream of
only cute 70s pop idol Bobby Sherman and the furtive man of their dreams,
Richard Nixon.  
Comedic parts concerning investigative reporters Woodward and Bernstein
fall flat, and some of the film's jokes are inside jokes, but for the most
part DICK is pretty funny. And the DICK soundtrack includes everything 70s,
from young Michael Jackson to Yes.
Copyright Š 1999 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Chuck Dowling
Cast: Kirsten Dunst, Michelle Williams, Dan Hedaya, Will Ferrell,
Bruce McCulloch, Teri Garr, Dave Foley, Jim Breuer, Ana Gasteyer,
Harry Shearer, Saul Rubinek, Devon Gummersall, Ted McGinley, Ryan
Reynolds, G.D. Spradlin, French Stewart
Written by: Andrew Fleming and Sheryl Longin
Directed by: Andrew Fleming
Running Time: 100 minutes
Date Reviewed: August 8, 1999
While staying in the Watergate Hotel in Washington DC, two dim-witted
15 year olds (Kirsten Dunst and Michelle Williams) inadvertently
expose the Watergate break in.  The next day, after wandering off from
a White House tour, they end up meeting Richard Nixon, becoming
official White House dog walkers and secret youth advisors, and
unknowingly involving themselves in almost every aspect of the
downfall of a President.
Let me first give some credit to writer/director Andrew Fleming.  His
previous two films (Threesome, The Craft) are two of my least favorite
movies ever, and I was quite harsh on Fleming in my reviews.  So going
into this film I was not expecting much at all in terms of
entertainment.  Surprisingly, Dick turns out to be really funny.
There are the obvious double meaning jokes pertaining to the film's
titular character, but not as many as you'd think... three or four at
the most, I believe.  The rest of the film's comedy is fairly
intelligent, and hardly any of it misses it's mark.  Even the drug
humor is good-natured.
Let me now give credit to the cast.  Mostly comprised of "Saturday
Night Live" and "The Kids in the Hall" alumni, everyone is dead on
target.  Dan Hedaya plays Nixon, and he's great without making the
character too much of a cartoon (on a slightly interesting side note,
Hedaya was also in the cast of Oliver Stone's Nixon).  The lead
actresses are good at conveying their character's rampant stupidity
while managing to be quite sexy as well.  Best of all though are Will
Ferrell and Bruce McCulloch as a bickering Woodward and Bernstein (the
Washington Post reporters who broke the Watergate story).  They appear
in the film's opening scene, and then reappear in the film's final act
basically dominating the rest of the film.  These scenes are a highly
amusing parody of those two journalists, especially if you've seen
movies like All the President's Men.
What makes this film work given it's subject matter is it's
presentation.  Of course saying that two teens were directly involved
in the biggest political scandal this nation has even seen is absurd,
but the movie knows this and doesn't try to be anything else BUT
absurd.  The jokes are humorous and manage to succeed to two different
levels.  Those of you who don't know anything about the Watergate
scandal will enjoy it on the comedic level of a silly movie, and those
of you with knowledge of the events will enjoy it as a sly political
satire.  For example, knowing that there was an 18 and a half minute
gap in one of Nixon's secret recordings will help you to enjoy a
certain scene even more, but the scene is also funny standing alone.
Of course you know Fleming must be delighted at the use of the film's
title in the vocabulary of moviegoers around the country.  I now have
to refer to the film as "that comedy about Nixon with the two girls in
it" to avoid making the buffoonish statements I've been making like
"Call the theater and confirm three for Dick, please".  John Waters
tried to do this with last year's Pecker... but since no one sees John
Waters' movies or even talks about them, it failed.  [PG-13]
The Jacksonville Film Journal
URL:http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Email:chuckd21@leading.net
Š 1999 of The Jacksonville Film Journal.  No reviews may be reprinted
without permission.
