Title
Review for Three Musketeers, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Kiefer Sutherland, Charlie Sheen, Chris O'Donnell,
           Oliver Platt, Tim Curry, Rebecca DeMornay.
Screenplay:  David Loughery.
Director:  Stephen Herek.
     The epithets practically write themselves.  "Young Swords."
"Teenage Mutant Ninja Musketeers."  "The Three Mouseketeers" (this one
is a Disney product).  Pejoratives all, and all suggesting something
constructed in a zealously commercial fashion.  That's exactly what the
latest incarnation of THE THREE MUSKETEERS is:  pitch meeting
filmmaking in all its overstuffed glory.  What is astonishing is that
something vaguely resembling entertainment emerged.  Thanks to a
high-energy finale and a wonderfully goofy performance by Oliver Platt,
THE THREE MUSKETEERS narrowly avoids complete disaster.
     For those unfamiliar with the basics of Alexandre Dumas' story, it
involves a brash young 17th Century Frenchman named D'Artagnan (Chris
O'Donnell) who yearns to follow in his dead father's footsteps as one
of the king's personal protectors, the Musketeers.  Unfortunately, he
sets out for Paris just as the Musketeers are being disbanded by the
villainous Cardinal Richelieu (Tim Curry).  Three Musketeers refuse to
surrender their commissions:  Athos (Kiefer Sutherland), Aramis
(Charlie Sheen) and Porthos (Oliver Platt).  Together with D'Artagnan,
they set out to foil Richelieu's plans to usurp the throne from young
King Louis XIII (Hugh O'Conor) with the aid of the mysterious Milady de
Winter (Rebecca DeMornay).
     Two huge problems, actually two parts of the same problem of
overly-commercial decision making, thwart THE THREE MUSKETEERS from the
start.  The first is that the casting has virtually nothing to do with
appropriateness for the character.  Kiefer Sutherland is atrociously
wrong as Athos, the former nobleman with a haunted past.  He appears to
believe that a frown is sufficient for showing melancholia, and he
delivers every line exactly the same, as though he were in dire need of
more fiber in his diet.  Charlie Sheen is a bit better for Aramis, but
he too is just plain under-talented.  Chris O'Donnell turns D'Artagnan
into a bland puppy dog, all youthful bluster and no charisma.  Then
there's Tim Curry, who plays Richelieu as half Dr. Frank N. Furter,
half Alan Rickman's Sheriff of Nottingham from ROBIN HOOD: PRINCE OF
THIEVES.  His lecherous grinning and campy one-liners are supposed to
be amusing, but I found them merely sad.  My first rule of
action/adventure films--that they're only as good as their
villains--once again proves true.  Fortunately, as uninteresting as the
rest of the cast is, Oliver Platt is that engaging.  His comic-relief
Porthos could have been awful, but he plays it with devilish
enthusiasm.  Every moment he's on screen is worth watching, and the
laughs he generates are as much out of the fun he is so clearly having
as they are from anything in the script.
     The other big-time mistake is a screenplay by David Loughery and
direction by Stephen Herek that cobbles together elements that worked
somewhere else, apparently under the impression that great pieces from
other films would add up to another great film.  We get Spielberg's
trademark zoom-to-closeup, and entrances and exits by Richelieu,
complete with billowing cape and ominous underscore, that have
"Cardinal Vader" written all over them.  The chase scenes and duels are
lively and fun, but never seemed to be in the flow of the story.  One
of these duels was so reminiscent of THE PRINCESS BRIDE that two
different members of the audience shouted out, "Prepare to die" at
exactly the same time.  THE THREE MUSKETEERS just doesn't hold
together, often looking like it was edited together from other much
better adventure films.
     Yet for all its calculatedness, I must admit that MUSKETEERS does
at least part of what it sets out to do: provide brainless mass-market
adventure.  After a sluggish first hour, it hits a gallop and cruises
to the finish with gusto.  The closing half hour is nearly non-stop
action, some of it surprisingly good.  Perhaps most important, the kids
seemed to love it.  While somewhat violent, it's mostly slapstick, and
appropriate for most of the family.  I didn't laugh a lot, but others
did, and there was some genuine applause.  So go figure.
     THE THREE MUSKETEERS will be compared frequently to Richard
Lester's definitive 1974 version, which is certainly a much better film
overall.  Disney's version doesn't pretend to aim for real wit or
originality, just a big-budget, big-name piece of cotton candy.  There
are worse ways to spend a matinee.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Chris O'Donnell, Charlie Sheen, Kiefer Sutherland,
           Oliver Platt, Tim Curry, Rebecca De Mornay, Gabrielle Anwar
Director:  Stephen Herek
Producers:  Joe Roth and Roger Birnbaum
Screenplay:  David Loughery based (very loosely) on the novel by 
          Alexandre Dumas
Music:  Michael Kamen
Released by Walt Disney Pictures
     Upon seeing the print ads and commercials for this movie, it might
occur to you that this story has been done before--and you would be
absolutely correct.  However, never before has David Loughery (the man
co-responsible with William Shatner for the execrable STAR TREK V:
THE FINAL FRONTIER, a film that many fans of the series disavow) gotten
his hands on the material.  And after seeing THE THREE MUSKETEERS, it
becomes clear why someone should have continued to keep him away.
Those who have seen Richard Lester's '70s tongue-in-cheek version of
the adventure should avoid this one, lest you feel compelled to hurl
popcorn and invectives at the screen.
     Young D'Artagnan (Chris O'Donnell) has decided to join the
Musketeers, the elite corps of guards charged with the French king's
safety.  Unfortunately, they have been disbanded by Cardinal Richelieu
(Tim Curry) and the best D'Artagnan can manage is helping out a trio of
outlawed Musketeers:  Aramis (Charlie Sheen), Athos (Kiefer
Sutherland), and Porthos (Oliver Platt).  Despite Richelieu's decree,
they continue to honor their vows to protect King Louis XIII (Hugh
O'Connor) and his Austrian queen, Anne (Gabrielle Anwar).  When they
discover that the Cardinal is plotting against their liege, it's up to
them to capture his spy (Rebecca De Mornay) and foil his assassination
attempt.
     The first indication of trouble with this movie is in the
casting.  It's not a stroke of brilliance to choose Sheen, Sutherland,
and Curry as the triumphant trio (although, to his credit, Sutherland
does a credible job as a moody Athos).  It's an even worse choice to
pick Chris O'Donnell as D'Artagnan, since he seems more concerned about
not messing up his perm than in giving a decent accounting of himself.
Tim Curry is entirely too feeble to make a credible villain, and Hugh
O'Connor's version of King Louis looks like something out of BILL AND
TED'S EXCELLENT ADVENTURE.
     Two performers are effective, but they're mostly smothered by all
the ineptitude around them.  Michael Wincott does a marvellous job as
the villainous ex-Musketeer Rocheford (and yes, there is a cheesy joke
about the name).  Gabrielle Anwar, who looked decidedly uncomfortable
in FOR LOVE OR MONEY, is more at home in these surroundings.  Her role
is small, but she's pretty good.
     Which is more than can be said about numerous contrived
circumstances and lines of dialogue.  Is Loughery serious when he
expects us to believe that a Musketeer would actually ask, "You got a
name, boy?"  And how is Richelieu allowed to enter the queen's boudoir
unchallenged?  Something's rotten in the country of France, and if this
script is anything to judge by, perhaps William Shatner is shouldering
entirely too much of the blame for the failure of the fifth STAR TREK
feature.
     THE THREE MUSKETEERS is supposed to be high adventure and, while
there are a few nice swordfights, most of the action isn't likely to
provoke more than a "ho-hum" reaction.  Director Stephen Herek should
go back to BILL AND TED'S EXCELLENT ADVENTURE.  He obviously doesn't
have what it takes here.  Of course, it doesn't help that his actors
are having a hard time summoning up enthusiasm for their parts.
     In much the same way that Kevin Costner's lifeless ROBIN HOOD:
PRINCE OF THIEVES butchered the legends of Sherwood Forest, so this
film singlehandedly bludgeons THE THREE MUSKETEERS.  In this case, it's
even worse, though.  There, we had Alan Rickman doing a delightful job
of chewing on the scenery.  Here, Tim Curry manages the dubious
distinction of seeming restrained when going over-the-top.
     There have been other, better versions of this story.  Likewise,
all of the principal performers have appeared in projects that put
their abilities to better use.  If there is a reason to see this movie,
it's for the five-minute extended preview of Disney's upcoming THE LION
KING (what we see is actually the opening musical number), but such
quick satisfaction is hardly value for the dollar.
     "All for one, and one for all" may be the motto of the Musketeers,
but this latest filmed version of their exploits is all for naught.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
