Title
Review for Someone to Watch Over Me (1987)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Craig Good
     I'm sorry I waited this long to see SOMEONE TO WATCH OVER ME.  It's still
in first run in some cities, so it's not too late for you.  When Ridley Scott
makes a movie you *know* that it's going to look good.  The man is simply magic
with a camera.  I could go on and on about the rich atmosphere and stunning
low-key cinematography.  After ALIEN, BLADE RUNNER, and LEGEND he was worried
about being type-cast as a fantasy film maker.  With SOMEONE TO WATCH OVER ME
he tells the story of a New York detective assigned to protect a socialite
murder witness.
     The story of the killer and his attempts to silence the rich woman is just
a foundation for the real story.  It is a story about consequences.  The cop is
happily married and in love with his wife.  He and the socialite, fatigued and
frightened, fall for each other.  The movie deals with what happens to them and
to the detective's wife and family, skillfully interwoven with the thriller
material.  The combination yields a rich film that, like BLADE RUNNER, I like
better the more I think about it.
     A few years ago I saw another movie with adultery as a central element,
UNTIL SEPTEMBER.  It's the only film I've ever seen that made me angry.  I was
furious with the story because, worse than ignoring consequences, it perverted
them.  A truth about the human condition is that our decisions and actions have
effects.  In UNTIL SEPTEMBER only the innocent were hurt, and the adulterous
couple breezed through the film making French toast and sniffing each other's
armpits.  A refreshing contrast, SOMEONE TO WATCH OVER ME not only illustrates
how it could happen, but documents the anguish and heartache of all the
participants.  It is truly what I call an adult film.  See it while you can
enjoy it on the big screen.

Author
Steve Upstill
     In Brief: Once again Ridley Scott takes a mediocre premise and by
     sheer force of technique *almost* makes you buy it.  Several
     appealing characters trapped in a movie-of-the-week.  But still,
     it's a Ridley Scott picture.
    I've developed a theory about Ridley Scott: that mediocre material has an
irresistible attraction for him.  I'm not quite sure whether it's the challenge
of transforming lead into gold, or just that dross keeps your  attention on his
work.  But you consistently hear, in reference to his  pictures (THE DUELLISTS,
ALIEN, BLADE RUNNER, LEGEND, and now SOMEONE TO WATCH OVER ME), how the movie
itself wasn't much, but IT LOOKED SOOOOO GOOD!
    He does keep getting better, though.  THE DUELLISTS was primarily eye
candy, but ALIEN had such compelling texture that it (for some) triumphed over
its hoary old bug-eyed-monster plot.  BLADE RUNNER was his only  unqualified
success as far as I'm concerned, simply because its future world was so
complete and also because, to a large extent, the creation of a compelling
world *was* the movie.  LEGEND again leaned on world-fabrication, but its other
elements were so vestigial that it didn't quite make it in spite of the
brilliance of the odd moment and the fact that it was the most complete,
satisfying fantasy world I've ever seen in a film.
    And now, SOMEONE TO WATCH OVER ME, his first "real-world" picture,
containing his first romance.  The story: cop from Queens bodyguards 
socialite from Manhattan and gets in over his head, romantically speaking.
Canonical movie-of-the-week material, right?  Indeed.  But then there's the
part that's hard to talk about.  Somehow, Ridley Scott has gone beyond look,
beyond mood, beyond texture, into some other realm entirely.  The images in the
first twenty minutes or so of this movie are so ravishing, so self-assured, so
perfectly assembled, so *right*, that they almost justify the film on their own.
Unlike the perfect compositions of, say, Stanley Kubrick, they draw you in.
They have an electric life of their own, and they say to you, "Come here.  Let
me show you something you've seen a million times in a way you've never thought
possible."
    Not that everything else in the film is wrong.  Tom Berenger is perfectly
cast as, and perfectly plays, a basically simple, hard-working, family-loving,
confused but not stupid, working class cop.  Both his wife and his love
interest (sorry, didn't catch the names) are distinct, full-blooded people.
You just wish, and wish, and wish, they these interesting, sympathetic people
would jump the track of this basic, predictable copshow and go do something 
interesting.
    Ridley Scott is a state-of-the-art filmmaker.  I just wish someone would
force a state-of-the-art script on him.  Let's start a movement to make him
direct the film of PRESUMED INNOCENT.  For this one, he only gets bbb out of
bbbb.
