Title
Review for Living Daylights, The (1987)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS (UK, 1987) ** 3/4 . Directed by John Glen. Screenplay
by Richard Maibaum and Michael G. Wilson.  Produced by Albert R. Broccoli
and M.G. Wilson. Photography, Alec Mills. Editing, John Grover &  Peter
Davies. Music, John Barry. Production design, Peter Lamont.  Costumes, Emma
Porteous.  SFX supervisor, John Richardson. Second unit director, Arthur
Wooster. Cast: Timothy Dalton, Maryam d'Abo, Jeroen Krabbe,  Joe Don Baker,
John Rhys-Davies, Art Malik, Andreas Wisniewski, Thomas Wheatley, Desmond
Llewelyn, Robert Brown, et al. An MGM/UA release. 130 minutes. PG.
Having been saturated for a year with the same "Coming next summer to a
theatre near you" clips of Bond parachuting onto the yacht of a gorgeous,
bored brunette, I knew that when the full movie did come to a theatre near
me, I would groan with the sense of deja suffered. Which I did, but then
something strange happened. By the end of the first thirty minutes of "The
Living Daylights," when beautiful but insipid Maryam d'Abo turned out to be
Bond's main femme focus, I missed the yachtwoman. By the end of the film, I
had decided that the sunning beauty had been one of the picture's main
assets.
"The Living Daylights" plays cutesy games with in-joke, allusive names:
Russian General  Leonid (after Brezhnev) Pushkin; General Anatol (after
Dobrynin) Gogol ; a professional killer called Necros ("Dead" in Greek);
Rosika Miklos (after movie music composer Miklos Rozsa?); Kamran Shah
(Vietnam transposed to Afghanistan ?);  Colonel Feyador (after filmmaker
Feyder, Fyodor Dostoievski, or what?) ; and more. Three female characters
are called Linda, Liz, and Ava. My best guess is that the one on the deck
may be Ava, whose improbable "real" name is Dulice Liecier.
The movie  did keep my interest at first, then steadily began to slide down
and away. It did not bore the living daylights out of me,nor did it live up
to expectations. Still, the initial interest is sustained by curiosity: how
will the new James Bond, Timothy Dalton, stack  up against his
predecessors? Sean Connery played Bond seven times (1962-1983); George
Lazenby, once (1969); Roger Moore seven (1973-1985).
Dalton does nicely, in a different way. Asuming that you want to socialize
with actors (not always a wise decision), Connery might be a warm, natural,
un-self-important, conciliatory companion. With his healthy,tongue-in-cheek
humor, he'd make a pleasant traveling companion. Moore would be a good
person to trade quips with during one of those marathon French meals where
taking oneself un-seriously, even using steady self-mockery, raise
superficiality to the level of an art form.
Dalton promises much as a relatively sober, even serious Bond, who
underplays his part and makes minimal concessions to smart-alecky, snobbish
remarks about  drinks, food, special needs or female  flesh. Where the
other Bonds reacted to everything with a wink or a witticism, Dalton seems
to pause regularly for a split second and look as though he were
considering the gravity and the implications of the new moment. Perhaps
this comes from his stage experience (it includes  Shakespeare).
His Bond is more work than play. Dalton's age is coyly skipped in all the
studio releases, but extrapolating from his biography I'd say that the man
is about 40. He is more physically fit than Connery or Moore in their later
Bond impersonations. Connery went  (ages approximate within one year) from
age 32 ("Dr. No") to 53 ("Never Say Never Again") doing James Bond. Moore,
from 46 to 58. Lazenby was only 30 when "On His Majesty's Secret Service"
came out, and certainly seemed fit. But the film was not a hit, unfairly,
in my opinion.
Dalton is handsome,but so were the other Bonds.Compared to aging,
post-1970s Bonds, his youthful looks contribute a more credible match
between heroes and physical exploits. But this is conventional thinking.
For many viewers, a younger Bond is an asset, but then, was there not a
special kind of satisfaction in seeing Connery and Moore, past their prime,
defeating in wiles and action hordes of younger enemies, while their mature
sex-appeal attracted, on the screen, so many younger women?
Even if we feel that Timothy Dalton, as a more businesslike, younger, and
more thoughtful Bond, rejuvenates and freshens up the series, the movie's
structure itself shows signs of age and fatigue. It  follows the basic Bond
structure: a top, action-filled pre-credit sequence on the rock of
Gibraltar,with spectacular stunts and special effects--an introduction
that's only semi-relevant to the main film, with  a message "Smiert
spionom" (Death to Spies) that doesn't connect too coherently to what
follows. Then come the  blue-chip credits by the constant Bond title-maker,
Maurice Binder. And at last the action proper gets going.
It ranges across many locations: Gibraltar, Morocco (played by Morocco),
Afghanistan (played by Morocco), Vienna (played by Vienna), Bratislava in
Czechoslovakia (played by Vienna), Czechoslovakia (played by Austria), and
England (played partly by the Pinewood studios).
The multiheaded plot sprouts subplots, like the Lernean Hydra where each of
the nine heads that was cut off was replaced by two more. It involves
spies, counter-spies, triple-crosses, scams, KGB defectors, arms dealers,
drug merchants, unholy alliances, mixed loyalties, M (Bond's "control),
phoney killings, Bond gagdetry by old Q, a new Miss Moneypenny plus many
Bondian trappings. Most of this is imaginative. Early on  it is quite
entertaining, but past the half-way mark, the mechanical succession of
chases, stunts, gimmickry and sub-sub-plots become indifferent and
confusing.
The twisty screen action and inventiveness pile up so much and so fast that
whatever conducting thread there is almost impossible to follow. An excess
of everything leads to audience stupor, with a resulting numbing and
dumbing of the public. Even within a context of fantasy, there is
incoherence in details. When, at the start, Bond attends a Bratislava
symphony concert, his tuxedo, in a socialist country like Czechoslovakia,
is as unlikely (and attention-getting) as a bikini would be in the House of
Commons. Later, in Afghanistan, the regal tent-house of the mujaheddin is
strictly out of the films of The 1001 Nights and other oriental dreams of
old Hollywood. Some of this may be camp or humor, but then it does not go
far enough.
The story itself at first seems to hesitate between a bona fide --even
serious -- international spy thriller and a typical Bond affair. This
vacillation is not unpleasant to observe as it  hints that the makers will
add to the film some of the weight lacking in recent Bonds. Yet, that's not
how things work out.
The movie eventually goes off in all sorts of flamboyant, arbitrary,
for-your-eyes-only directions. The lack of concentration is abetted by the
absence of central supervillain out to destroy the world if it doesn't
yield to his blackmail. Villainy here is not massive, but  rather like a
plot subdivision, centerless, with no unifying structure, true development,
growth or resolution. It is one long succession of dispersed--albeit well
handled and skilfully shot--special situations, with mini-climax following
micro-climax. It's like a mountain range of peaks where there's no single
height towers above the others and is the climber's ultimate conquest.
John Glen directed the last three Bond-Roger Moore pictures. He has an
overwhelmingly  "in-house" past, as editor, second-unit or action-scenes
director of earlier Bond flicks. His skill for individual  special effects
sequences, is dazzling. His ability for an overall conception of his films,
of structure and synthesis is not .To a well-plotted action film  "The
Living Daylights" is what a good stand-up comic's routine is to a classic,
sophisticated comedy or farce.
The movie floods you with a string of happenings, the way a compulsive
talker overwhelms you by talking as rapidly and loudly as possible. You
lose the point--if any--of the story, you miss the punchline, you get no
clear image of the characters, no feeling for the director as an "auteur,"
no feeling for the screen creatures as anything more than puppets.
"The Living Daylights" has been ballyhooed as the first Bond where the hero
sticks to  just one lady, whether in response to the New Continence (AIDS,
Neo-Conservatism) or for the sake of a new, more bonded Bond. This is not
precisely true, as there's  also the early,  charming presence of the
aforementioned yacht lady--but let that pass, since it is  is overall
obvious that Dalton's James is a great deal more Don Quixote than Don
Juan,with most of the typical Bond sneers, leers and horizontal innuendoes
gone.
Bully for Dalton, were it not for the choice of his paramour. Kara Milova
(Maryam d'Abo) plays a Czech cellist in a symphony orchestra. For obscure
reasons she has to double as a sharpooter. She is a clone of Nastassia
Kinski at her inexpressivest, cloyingest, and pallidest. If the new Bondian
monogamy is supposed to strike a blow for feminism too, Kara is not the
right spokeswoman: she merely plays fifth fiddle to James, and in her
passivity (during a fight she dumbly stands there for aeons before using a
frying pan on a villain) she reinforces the machoism of Bondism. There was
more feminism, for example, in  a sex-laden opus like "Never Say Never
Again" (Connery's last Bond of 1983), where gorgeous, evil ,
snake-throwing, explosive Barbara Carrera had an assertive,
initiative-taking presence that gave Connery a run for his gray cells and
his hormones.
With its lack of character development and overall structure "TLD" is less
than the sum of its parts, but it can still be fairly entertaining if you
don't expect a Bondian revolution. Some of the supporting roles are good,
notably the Dutchman Jeroen Krabbe's (he was recently the heavy in "No
Mercy") who, as the KGB defector, keeps playing roles within roles. Very
good too is the German Andreas Wisniewski (unknown to us, unless you've
seen "Gothic") as the Walkman strangler.  Both men wear their hair flat, a
sure clue that helps you spot movie villains these days.The more familiar
John Rhys-Davies (as General Pushkin) does little that stands out, but Joe
Don Baker, the corrupt yet infantile arms-and-drugs dealer, hams things up
with unbridled bliss and is like a caricature of Jonathan Winters playing a
demented General George S. Patton.

Author
Peter Reiher
     The bi-annual Bond film has appeared again, and, thankfully, it's a great
improvement on the last few.  THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS is the best Bond film since
FOR YOUR EYES ONLY, and, before that, one would have to go all the way back to
the Sean Connery films to find its equal.  Albert Broccoli and John Glen have
revitalized the Bond formula by refusing to continue the game of self-one-
upsmanship that had reduced the series to near-farce.  Instead, they have
returned to the strengths of the first few films--semi-believable plots,
reliance on Bond rather than on special effects, and a serious tone lightened
by occasional humor, rather than self-parody occasionally flirting with
reality.
     The major reason for this return to the old ways is the new James Bond,
Timothy Dalton.  Dalton is probably closer to the Bond created by Ian Fleming
than any of his predecessors.  He not only makes the action believable (which
Roger Moore rarely did), and projects the debonair attitude that is so vital to
the Bond mystique, but he also manages to show some of the tension underneath.
Roger Moore's went through some of the most hideous ordeals without ever
showing any sign that he was deeply affected by them.  Perhaps a slight
expression of concern when the going got particularly rough, and a minute
suggestion of relief when he escaped an unusually fiendish trap, but, after
that, the experience was completely behind him, and as good as forgotten.
Moore's Bond had no more history than the typical figure in a video arcade 
game, and rather less than some of those.
     Dalton, on the other hand, shows that being an undercover agent isn't all
a bed of roses.  His is the first on-screen Bond who gives any hint that the
character could flirt on the edge of a nervous breakdown.  Not to say that he
doesn't show suitable aplomb in the face of danger, but you can't help but feel
that it all *does* mean something to him, and isn't just a game that he knows
he's destined to win.
     The newly serious character is backed by a much more plausible plot than
is typically used in a Bond film.  For the first time in quite a while, one
might actually have the film spoiled by hearing too much about the plot.
Suffice it to say that it borders on the credible, and is not nearly as
cataclysmic as A VIEW TO A KILL or THE SPY WHO LOVED ME.  Richard Maibaum
(whose association with Bond films goes all the way back to DR. NO) and
Michael G. Wilson, who wrote the script, provide Bond with a nice selection of
witty lines and neat gadgets, again not as broad as in the recent films.  Bond
jokes when it's appropriate, but the jokes fit within the story.  One joke is
even thrown away, going almost unnoticed by the audience, thereby making the
point that we are watching James Bond relieving the tension with a quip, rather
than Timothy Dalton straining for a few cheap yocks.
     Director John Glen started off as a second unit director, specializing in
action sequences, before graduating to the full directing duties.  Glen has
directed all of the Bond films since FOR YOUR EYES ONLY (not counting NEVER SAY
NEVER AGAIN, of course).  He's done a particularly good job with THE LIVING
DAYLIGHTS, especially with the action sequences.  Glen seems to have been
inspired here more by the Indiana Jones school of stunt and action work than by
the previous Bond films.  He tends to have the danger and intensity build,
trying hard to give a sense of true risk, rather than merely dazzle us with the
technical brilliance of a stunt.  The opening sequence keynotes this change:
instead of something like a plane flying vertically through a closing hanger
door, or having Bond parachute off a glacier, THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS opens with a
sequence relying primarily on that oldest of action settings, a car chase.
Skillful editing and direction make it far more exciting than the earlier
stunts, which tended to provoke applause rather than tension.  Glen and company
follow through with this approach throughout.
     As has been the tendency in the last few Bond films, a fair number of well
known actors show up in supporting roles.  John Rhys-Davies appears as a
Russian general, Joe Don Baker has an unexpectedly small role as an arms
dealer, and Art Malik finally shows up as an Afghan rebel.  All do what is
expected of them, without any flashes of brilliance.  Jeroen Krabbe, as another
Russian general, does perhaps a little too much of what is expected of him.
Maryam d'Abo joins the list of unknown actresses who have played female leads
in Bond films.  She's beautiful, and responds well to menace, but doesn't seem
likely to have a brilliant future.  Several of the usual supporting players
show up, doing what they usually do.  
     The technical work on THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS is a demonstration of state-of-
the-craft, rather than state-of-the-art.  All areas demonstrate a high degree
of professionalism, without ever moving beyond into innovation.  Maurice
Binder's credits are a particularly weak effort by him, and the title song is
one of the worst ever written for a Bond film.  The rest of the John Barry 
score is a serviceable one, but breaks no new ground.
     THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS should appeal strongly to those who have spent years
yearning for the Bond of yore.  People who actually liked Roger Moore's Bond
(and there must be a lot of them, considering how much money his films made)
will probably be disappointed that THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS isn't that sort of film
at all.  It is a bit long, and would probably have played better ten minutes
shorter, and Dalton doesn't seem to have completely settled into the role.  On
the whole, though, THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS is an encouraging addition to the Bond
series.

Author
Andrew Hicks
THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS (1987) **1/2 (out of four)
        This movie, the fifteenth in the James Bond series, is one of 
two Bond movies from the 80's to star Timothy Dalton as 007. It's a 
radical departure from the carefree Roger Moore efforts. For starters, 
Dalton is young enough to be Moore's son. How old was Moore in A 
VIEW TO A KILL, about 63? The Bond regulars were all starting to 
show their age in that movie. They might as well have changed Miss 
Moneypenny's name to Miss Menopause. But here, in addition to the 
new Bond, we see a new Moneypenny, played by Caroline Bliss--a 
name worthy of a Bond girl.
        Dalton isn't my favorite Bond (or even my third-favorite), 
ranking just above George Lazenby from ON HER MAJESTY'S 
SECRET SERVICE, but we all know by this point that who played 
Bond wasn't nearly as important as the well-oiled formula itself--the 
chases, explosions, beautiful women, high-tech gadgets, etc. 
Unfortunately, the formula is more or less thrown out the window here 
in favor of the gritty 80's drug story. They might as well have called it 
M VICE.
        Bond in this movie has to find out what happened to KGB 
defector Koskov, who turns out to be a compulsive liar. His girlfriend 
(played by Maryam D'Abo, the sister of the sister from "The Wonder 
Years"), a cellist for the Russian orchestra, thinks she's helping him by 
posing as a sniper, but she ends up being shot at by Bond, who later 
reconciles with her in his usual manner.
        Throw in a naughty milkman/killer ("I'm taking you in for a 
deposit.") and an obsessive military general (played by my first 
semester college roommate) who has a giant war room in his exotic 
mansion showcasing miniature recreations of great battles through 
history and you've got the usual larger-than-life Bond villains without 
the usual Bond formula.
        THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS is more a cold war/drug runner 
80's movie than a genuine Bond movie. It almost works on that level 
except for the fact that it's the slowest-moving Bond picture ever, with 
two climactic battles that aren't that thrilling. Sure, there are a couple 
good chases in the Connery/Moore tradition, including one where 
Dalton and D'Abo are riding a bullet-proof cello sled down a snow-
covered hill, but take away the token appearances by M, Q and 
Moneypenny and it's just another sub-par 80's action movie.
        LICENCE TO KILL, the other Dalton Bond movie, didn't 
resemble the traditional Bond movie, but it at least had a compelling 
plot and some blockbuster action scenes. But when you've got an 
uneven generic movie like this, it might as well be TANGO & CASH.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Craig Good
     After the last Bond flick I thought that 007 was dead.  The plot had
become metastasized with silliness, and Roger Moore was beginning to creak.
The rumors about Pierce Brosnan confirmed that the movies were about to descend
into terminal foppishness.  The long-running series of James Bond adventures
were going out with a whimper.
     I'm happy to report that they are back with a bang.  Timothy Dalton, in
THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS, is the best Bond in years.  The proportion of intrigue to
action and gadgetry to romance has been restored to proper order.  For the
first time in ages we have a Bond who is about the right age, and who is
willing to get his hands dirty.
     The scope of this movie, and the amazing action sequences, are in the same
league as RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK.  It had to have helped that they used an Ian
Fleming short story as the foundation, because the plot has as many twists as
the mountain road in the opening gag.  And even though I never bought her for
an instant as a cellist, Maryam d'Abo, the latest Bond Girl, has to get credit
for some of the best scenery in the movie.  She makes a beautiful and innocent
foil for Dalton's patient, competent, and yet fallible Bond.
     THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS is certainly worth the $5.50 I paid to see it, and I
suspect that the capacity crowd with me opening night felt the same.  Gosh,
this has been a fun summer.

Author
Jeff Meyer
     Well, yes, I enjoyed THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS, not just parts of it, but the
entire film, straight through.  The Friday night audience I was in laughed 
uproariously several times and seemed to come out with pretty pleased
expressions on their collective faces.  However, for those of you who are 
reading the local movie reviews heralding a "new beginning" for the James Bond
series...not quite.  Below are spoilers...
     First, Bond himself.  Let's face it, the character created by Ian Fleming 
was something of a psycho--he wore Freudian hang-ups on his sleeve.  Distrust
of women, domination, the whole bit.  When Sean Connery took over the role in
the first three films, he played Bond with something of the brutal edge that
Fleming described, but this was The Movies, after all, and the suave killer
soon disappeared underneath heroics, puns and gadgets, albeit stylishly done.
Then, for reasons that still amazes me, someone decided to hire Roger Moore to
take over the role.  For LIVE AND LET DIE, he played Bond as The Saint;
afterwards, he became James Bond, Her Majesty's Comic Relief with a Poker Up
His Ass.  Except for one exception (THE SPY WHO LOVED ME), the role disappeared
underneath greater and greater stunts and special effects, and under the
increasingly wooden performances by Moore.
     Timothy Dalton could play James Bond like Bob Hoskins after Moore and 
still be refreshing.  Instead, he tries something else with Bond: a
professional, but without the hang-ups, and without his tongue anywhere near 
his cheek.  He looks earnest, and though it's Business First, he also has the
Sir Galahad urges firmly supporting everything he does--one supposes M allows
it because of his excellent track record.  Still, he gets thrown into a lot of
the situations Moore has for the last several movies (John Glen directs this
film as per usual); it just seems more suspenseful, because he's not Acting
Concerned--he actually looks like he's worried how he's going to survive.  He
even makes mistakes.  Dalton also tends to be less aloof; scenes with other
British agents (Q is back, though without the stock nagging he usually
performs) give you the feeling he actually works with them (the new Moneypenny
is quite good).  In fact, it's nice to see some competent agents other than
Bond; a battle between a safe-house guard and a Russian assassin makes you
wonder, for a while, who will get the upper hand.  It also makes the villain
seem much  more capable (and dangerous) when he confronts Bond.
     The rest of the film, though, has the trappings of recent Bond pictures: 
supposedly erotic credits (they now have "Marketing Director" near the 
beginning of the line), stunts, gadgets, humor, a new Felix Leiter (collect
them all!) and pretty fantastic luck on Bond's part.  They've even gone so
far as to try to keep a sort of continuity going: General Gogol, who has been
depicted as the head of the KGB in four or five previous films, has been moved
to the Soviet foreign office; it would appear that John Rhys-Davies will be
take up the role of head of the KGB.  Well, more power to them; if they can
keep the next few movies at this pitch (and with this quality of the dialogue
and the plot--they have paid attention to the details here), I'll continue to
watch them.  However, take it with a grain of salt; the films introducing a new
Bond have usually put a lot of extra effort into supporting factors.  Whether
they do so for the next film is a good question.
     Other comments: Joe Don Baker is listed fairly high up on the credits, 
but he can't be on screen for more than 5 minutes during the entire film.  The
villains seem a bit more stupid than sinister, though the fellow playing the
Russian defector works well.
1)  I read in one of the trash magazines they pass out free in the theater that
the Czech cellist Bond woos in this film is planned to be a steady love
interest in later films--not an unattractive alternative, as the actress who
plays Kara adds a certain Indiana Jones humor to the situations Bond finds
himself in.  Can anyone confirm or deny this?  I can't believe they'd put
anything in the films to deny Bond's "availability" in later films; but I
would like to see it, as it makes his romances each film seem pretty
superficial.
2)  The $%$!@ Aurora theater shut the projection off before they got to the
very end of the credits--did they have a "James Bond will return in XXXXXXXX"
message at the tail end?  [They did have "James Bond will return" but no film
title was given. -ecl]

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Long running series, whether on television or in the movies, have
to be careful or they'll soon be running strictly on autopilot.  So it
appears to have happened to the fifteenth episode of the James Bond
saga, THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS.
     This 1987 version has Timothy Dalton in his first of only two
attempts to play superspy James Bond.  Although he has the suave Bond
look down pat, Dalton is missing some key ingredients.  Bond always has
a sense of humor and seems, no matter how successful, to be somehow
vulnerable.  Dalton doesn't crack a smile or ever seem to be in danger.
That women want to jump in bed with him is completely convincing, but
the rest of his character has a hollowness to it that makes him rarely
credible or interesting.
     Bond films are always travelogues in disguise.  This one goes from
Old World Czechoslovakia to the beautiful and romantic Vienna.  Then
it's on to colorful Tangiers.  And finally we travel to the remote and
war-savaged Afghanistan.  Cinematographer Alec Mills makes them all
look inviting with the sand-swept desert being the most attractive.
     Jeroen Krabbe, who did such a fine job last year in LORCA, plays
General Georgi Koskov, a Russian defector and double-dealer with a
winsome smile, who is whisked away from the Russians by 007.
     We learn that Bond does have his limits.  He won't kill a gorgeous
blonde sniper and cellist, claiming it's just because she is an
amateur.  Maryam d'Abo, resembling a young Nastassja Kinski, is Kara
Milovy, the cellist and Bond's love interest in the film.
     Brad Whitaker, an arms dealer in cahoots with Koskov, is played
for broad parody by Joe Don Baker.  Since he's the only funny part in
an all too serious Bond rendition, the story would have been better
served if he had been given more screen time.
     The complicated plot involves opium, high tech weapons
trafficking, diamond smuggling, and the assassination of all British
spies.  The story is too choppy and just meanders from one locale to
another without bringing the parts together into a compelling whole.
There are a few nice chase scenes, as when Bond gets to play with the
wide array of lethal toys in his Aston Martin, while being chased by a
convoy of soldiers.
     The movie is at its most imaginative when James and Kara escape
from a falling plane, not with parachutes but in a jeep!  Director John
Glen even manages to stage this ridiculous scene in a semi-plausible
fashion.
     Arguably the high point of the film is the display of Q's latest
gadgets, the best being a ghetto blaster that lives up to its name.
     THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS runs too long at 2:10.  It is rated PG for
brief male and female nudity and violence and would be fine for kids
around 9 or 10 and up.
     My son Jeffrey, age 9, thought the movie was just "okay." He found
the blood and the live heart live in a box gross.  His overall
complaint was that the story was "all pretty much just about Bond
trying to kill just this one guy."

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Pretty close to a quarter of a century ago the first James Bond film
blazed (at times literally) across the screen.  It presented  a lithe young
Bond played, of course, by Sean Connery.  It was popular, so a second one
was made to give the audiences more.  As each successive film was a smash
the producers kept trying to give the audiences the same, only more: the
same actors, bigger, more powerful, and more fanciful villains with bigger
plans, and more bizarre henchmen.  There were, however, problems with this
approach.  The actors eventually got too old for their roles.  Lois Maxwell
as Moneypenny went from being sexy to matronly.
     Audiences did not seem to like George Lazenby, so when Connery finally
left the series they replaced him with an already-popular Roger Moore, two
years older than Connery.  Moore started out almost too old to play Bond and
the succeeding years made matters worse.  On top of that, Moore was never
right to play Bond.  Ian Flemings's superspy is a thug who, when the
occasion called for it, had nice manners.  Moore was a fop who, when the
occasion called for it could dirty his hands.  He simply did not work in the
part.  It was clear that the series was in trouble when he took the role in
LIVE AND LET DIE.  It had one of the weakest Bond plots.  Also, perhaps in
retaliation for a nasty comment Bond makes about the Beatles in GOLDFINGER,
Paul McCartney wrote one of the worst of the Bond title songs.  (It had the
dubious distinction of having duplicate redundant words in one of its lines:
"IN this ever-changing world IN which we live IN.")
     Meanwhile, the ever-escalating villains started going in for total
world destruction with henchmen that became impossible to kill.  By
MOONRAKER, the series had become a silly comic book that was turning
audiences off.  Something had to be done.  It was.  FOR YOUR EYES ONLY
started as silly as any Bond film, but after the first third it straightened
out and had a very plausible villain.  OCTOPUSSY, too, had a reasonable Cold
War plot.  The last Moore film, A VIEW TO A KILL, tried to capture some of
the spirit of the more successful Bond films, apparently reframing the plot
of GOLDFINGER>  (The number of parallels are too great to be coincidence.)
The film was not the complete mess it is usually considered to be by Bond
fans, but it was well below average for the series.
     The series has long been in need of an overhaul, and with the choice of
a new Bond we also got a new M, a new Moneypenny, and a new feel with a
younger and more vital Bond.  Through an unrecognized stroke of luck for the
producers, Pierce Brosnan, the first choice for Bond, was unavailable.
Brosnan would have been another Bond in the Moore tradition, too handsome
and insufficiently thug-like.  Dalton has a hard, flinty look rather than
being pretty.  As such, he looks the part of Bond the most of any Bond in
the series.
     Other characters of interest include John Rhys-Davies as a perenniel
friendly-foe Pushkin.  Pushkin is played with some fun by Rhys-Davies--
veteran of SHOGUN, RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK, and VICTOR/VICTORIA.  Until now
the foe has been General Gogol, who shows up for only one quick shot at the
end of this outing, but his background has been given to Pushkin and Rhys-
Davies will probably be the continuing character from this point on.  Bond's
new girl is Kara Milovy (played by Maryam d'Abo, who looks like a stretched
version of Rosanna Arquette).  She is a little less ditzy than most of the
Bond women, though well below the standard set by Carole Bouquet as Melina
in FOR YOUR EYES ONLY.  One wonders how the  public would react if there
wasn't a love interest ready to drop into bed with Bond in just one of the
films.
     The plot of THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS is more complex than previous Bond
films.  The long-dead organization that Fleming used to call SMERSH has
apparently been revived and in the midst of attempts to bring detente
between the British and the Soviets, suddenly SMERSH is murdering double-O
agents.  Why?  It has something to do with a defecting Soviet dignitary, an
American arms dealer, and obscure goings-on in Czechoslovakia, Tangiers, and
Afghanistan.
     Oh, there are some of those irritating plugs for products, including a
winery and an electronics firm to whom I will not give more publicity by
naming here.  And the producers have not entirely abandoned the silliness of
the Moore Bond films.  There are a few silly weapons, one more to use in a
car chase, and one silly ski chase using a non-standard toboggan.  but for
the most part they have been able to keep their tongues out of their cheeks.
Which is a quaint way of saying that this is the Bond film the fans have
been waiting for a very long time.  THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS may be the best
Bond film since FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE.  Rate it a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     My ranking of the Broccoli-produced films, best to worst (and subject
to some change) is:
