Title
Review for Houseguest (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Sinbad, Phil Hartman, Paul Ben-Victor, Tony Longo, Kim Greist 
Director: Randall Miller 
Producers: Joe Roth and Roger Birnbaum 
Screenplay: Michael J. Di Gaetano and Lawrence Gay 
Cinematography: Jerzy Zielinski 
Music: John Debney 
Released by Hollywood Pictures 
     And so it goes with any Disney movie.  The corporation can't
resist inserting at least one morally-uplifting theme into each of its
live action films.  While this philosophy might not be a distraction in
adventure movies like IRON WILL or THE JUNGLE BOOK, it's out-of-place
in the midst of HOUSEGUEST's juvenile humor.  People who attend movies
to see beautiful women with buck teeth and dentists operating with
anesthetized hands aren't looking for a discourse on the value of true
friendship and the need to believe in yourself.  Plain and simple,
they're in the theater to laugh.
     However, original intentions aside, it's impossible to deny one of
HOUSEGUEST's less savory agendas:  to act as a one-hundred eight minute
commercial for McDonald's.  This takes product placement to an obscene
level.  Scenes occur in front of, in, and around the fast food joint.
There's a nostalgia-laced parody of the "You Deserve a Break Today" TV
commercials, complete with the jingle.  Sinbad takes about one minute
placing a food order, checking off half the items on the menu.
Characters bond over Big Macs and fries.  On and on it goes...  It's
obvious where the audience is being manipulated to go for a meal after
the movie.  So, out of spite, I went to Burger King.
     As ACE VENTURA was meant as a vehicle for Jim Carrey, so
HOUSEGUEST is all Sinbad's.  Admittedly, the two comics have different
styles, but both share bigger-than-life personalities.  And, even
though I find Sinbad less irritating than the rubber-faced half of DUMB
AND DUMBER, nearly two hours of him is too much.  Even with likable
SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE alum Phil Hartman as the film's straight man,
HOUSEGUEST wears out its welcome more than a half hour before the
Christmas-themed final credits start rolling.
     Plot-wise, there's little here beyond a few insubstantial
strands.  Everything that happens is designed to get Sinbad's Kevin
Franklin into a situation where he masquerades as someone he's not--a
wealthy dentist with an impeccable reputation.  It takes charisma and
energy, but not much effort, to pull the wool over everyone's eyes,
which leads to a series of predictable misadventures (such as speaking
at a high school career day when he doesn't even know what his supposed
profession is).  Meanwhile, a couple of incompetent goons (Paul
Ben-Victor and Tony Longo) are on his trail, trying to recoup $50,000.
Hence, the obligatory, poorly-edited chase scenes.
     The humor is at low tide, both in terms of quality and content
(thankfully, scatological jokes are kept to a minimum--DUMB AND
DUMBER offered more than enough of those).  I chuckled my way through a
fair portion of HOUSEGUEST.  Unfortunately, most of the time, I was
laughing *at* the movie, not *with* it.  In fact, I'm not sure whether
my most hilarious moment was intentionally funny.
     Admittedly, most who share my taste in films won't be lining up
for HOUSEGUEST, so this may be a case of "preaching to the converted."
Nevertheless, every once in a while, it's possible to find a rare gem
in one of the many like-minded comedies that spring up every year.
(Remember PLANES, TRAINS, AND AUTOMOBILES?  How about CROCODILE
DUNDEE?) Alas, HOUSEGUEST is too tarnished.  About the best this film
has to offer is Sinbad doing his usual shtick beneath the Golden Arches
while Phil Hartman offers him some fries and confesses to having
fantasies about being Matlock.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
Let's get one thing straight - I *loved* this film. Yeah, it's got some prime
examples of shoddy film-making, but on the surface of all it's excessive
cheeziness, it's really funny. It's one of those movies I embarrassingly liked
so much, I would quickly recommend it, even if it's more worthy of a Razzie
than an Oscar. With that out in the open, let me tell you why HOUSEGUEST, a
hilarious film, is so bad.
HOUSEGUEST stars the one-name comedian Sinbad as Kevin Franklin, an orphan who
grew up on the poor side of town with big dreams he never let go. Even as an
adult, no matter how much people tell him to "get real", Kevin is determined
to make something of himself. He cruises around in a laughably compact car
playing out scenarios of famed acclamation like a young boy pretending to be a
superhero. He looks for answers in lottery tickets and "get rich quick"
infomercials, all the while keeping his meager lifestyle barely afloat thru
organized crime connections, but when things begin to catch up with him, a
$50,000 debt for example, Kevin finds himself needing to skip town.
At the airport on the verge of escape, two thugs (Paul Ben-Victor and Tony
Longo) determined to collect the debt begin a chase after Kevin. When it seems
he can go no further, Kevin overhears a family discussing the man they are
supposed to be picking up. The father of the group, Gary Young ("SNL" alumnus
and current co-star of "NewsRadio" Phil Hartman), explains that the man is an
old friend whom he hasn't seen in decades. He's also black, and that's all it
takes to convince Kevin to pose as someone he knows otherwise nothing about.
The Young's take Kevin into their posh suburban home, and thru overly silly
comedic events, he discovers more and more about the man he has taken the
identity of - renowned dentist Derek Bond (Ron Glass). But Kevin is quite
different from Derek, and his laid-back, party-hearty attitude is quite a jolt
to the otherwise serious-minded community he finds himself in. Seemingly
uncouth at first, Kevin becomes more and more of a mentor and therapist to the
unprioritized Gary, the confidence-lacking son Jason (Chauncey Leopardi), and
the misunderstood/misguided daughter Brooke (Kim Murphy).
Kevin's true identity is constantly at risk of being revealed, but despite his
deceitful actions, he has a heart of gold. The Young's charitable hospitality
makes it even more difficult on Kevin, who develops a genuine fondness for the
family - after all, they're the closest thing to a real family Kevin has ever
known. But as we wait for Kevin to be painfully brought into the open, we are
hit hard with cornball humor, and I must admit, I loved every minute of it.
Thru intentionally campy acting and amateurish, hyper editing, I was easily
entertained with the cinematic equivalent of cheese puffs. There wasn't a lot
of substance, but it tasted good, and I enjoyed binging on all the
brainlessness.
HOUSEGUEST suffers terribly from blatant incontinuities and cartoonish film-
making, and I'm surprised the producing credits didn't go to McDonald's after
the most obvious display of product placement movies have ever taken. But even
though the whole film could be viewed as a two-hour commercial for Mickey D's,
it would still be a funny enough commercial to make it worthwhile. The acting
was campy, but surprisingly, the one who stood out like a sore thumb was the
one who took his role the most seriously - Stan Shaw. As Kevin's best friend
Larry, Shaw seems a bit too serious about the project, which in turn makes him
hard to swallow. It doesn't demean him as an actor, but it does make him very
off-balance from the rest of the cast. Serious performances should still be
light in a film like this, and Kim Griest as Emily Young (the mom of the
family) is the one who does it right.
>From a wholly artistic viewpoint, HOUSEGUEST probably doesn't even deserve two
stars, but I laughed so much that I had to give it a recommendable grade. If
you're looking for intelligent comedy, or even a half-decent film, this isn't
really the way to go, but if you're looking for laughs, I think it's a great
choice. It's really hard to predict how you'll feel about this film. Somehow
it just rubbed me the right way, and I can't deny that even after seeing it a
few times, I laugh when I see it again. Be forewarned, it's not for everyone,
but at the same time, it resembles a good pizza: flimsy, cheap, and extra
cheezy.
