Title
Review for Powder (1995)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Christopher Null
     Once in awhile, Hollywood manages to surprise me with an
uncompromising film full of genuine emotion and enough to make you
really think.  POWDER was completely unexpected: it's easily one of the
best films I've seen all year.
     Something of an updated, hybridized E.T., POWDER is the story of
an albino teenager (Sean Patrick Flanery) with strange powers of
telekinesis, empathy, and the ability to channel and absorb raw
energy.  As Powder says, "I'm not like other people."  That's putting
it lightly.
     His mother is struck by lightning before Powder's birth, and he is
born premature, an apparent freak of nature.  His redneck father will
have nothing to do with him, and Powder ends up in his grandparent's
basement until his teens.  When Powder finally emerges from hiding, the
small Texas town has no idea what to make of him, and typical of
Southern paranoids, he is immediately ostracized as a social deviant.
     It soon becomes apparent that Powder is more than just an
extremely pale kid, as some subtle and not-so-subtle changes begin to
take effect, and we find that the outcasts among us can really be the
greatest of people.  Powder reflects the deconstruction of all that's
wrong with society, and the film manages to hammer home its messages of
peace, tolerance, and the cessation of fear without ever becoming
preachy.
     POWDER manages to take this kind of story to new and better
heights than its predecessors.  Powder is a recluse, but unlike NELL,
we can understand and sympathize with him.  Powder is the embodiment of
virtue, but unlike FORREST GUMP, he is not just a victim of
circumstance.  And Powder is imbued with supernatural ability, but
unlike E.T., we can relate to his persecution on an individual level.
     POWDER probably deserves a dozen Academy Award nominations,
especially for Flanery's jaw-dropping leading role.  The makeup, which
had to literally be painted on, is almost surreal, and writer/director
Victor Salva (who's done virtually nothing before this) deserves my
highest praise.  The special effects are groundbreaking, the camerawork
(shot in and around Houston) is excellent, and the supporting cast of
Jeff Goldblum, Mary Steenburgen, and Lance Henriksen is solid.
     This probably isn't a film for the brain-dead hordes of moviegoers
looking for mindless eye candy.  It requires a little commitment on the
viewer's part, but it's well worth it.  In the end, POWDER is a
stirring example of what to do right, not only in filmmaking, but in
living one's life as well.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (archives)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Steve Kong
The less of Powder is that less is more.  Powder is a film that is able to
work its magic on the audience in a Spielbergian way in which each and
every scene is designed to manipulate the audience's feelings.
Powder opens with a hospital scene that introduces us to the character in
which the film is named after.  Powder is a completely bald albino boy that
possesses powers that are beyond what normal humans have.  His mother dies
in labor and his father disowns him when he sees that Power is an albino.
Powder is raised and home schooled by his grandparents.  When his
grandparents perish, Powder is taken under the care of Jessie (Mary
Steenburgen).
Jessie immediately sends Powder to a reform school - which baffled me, but
I went along with it.  In the reform school Powder shows his special powers
to bullies which instead of frightening them off makes them even bigger
bullies (for the record, if I saw what Powder did in the cafeteria, I'd run
for my life).  There are other things that bothered me a little about the
way the story was told.  One was how the characters of the film faded in
and out of the film.  For instance Jeff Goldblum's character is introduced
then disappears for thirty minutes.
As for performances, the one that surprised me was Lance Henriksen.  I'm
used to seeing Henriksen in less emotionally necessary parts (Aliens, Hard
Target, Terminator) and his performance as the Sheriff was completely
different from the roles that I'm accustomed to seeing him in.  Henriksen
does very well with the part that he is given.  Steenburgen and Goldblum
are given parts that don't give them much to work with.  Goldblum does try
his best to inject some energy into the material he's given.  As for Sean
Patrick Flarney as Powder, he gives a decent performance as Powder.
Flarney gave enough of a performance to hold my attention.  This movie is
not high on character development instead this movie rests on something else.
That something is the manipulation of our emotions.  Every scene is
meticulously setup to take us in a different emotional avenue.  By the end
of the film, because of the emotional roller coaster that this film is it
has us in tears.
Worth mentioning about Powder is the wonderful score by Jerry Goldsmith.
The score by Goldsmith works with the emotional roller coaster to enhance,
and at times is, the emotional center of the scene.  Goldsmith is one of
Hollywood's hardest working composers and it is nice to see that he not
only scored this film, but he also conducted it.  Kudos to Goldsmith for a
wonderful score.
The script by director Victor Salva doesn't take any risks when it comes to
the film.  I'm sure that this film would have looked, felt, and acted
different if someone a bit quirkier had taken the reigns of the film.  The
name that immediately comes to mind is Tim Burton.  I think that in the
hands of Burton this film would have been darker and more risky in its
approach to the character of Powder.  Salva does well with Powder though,
he is a bit too "Hollywood" in his approach to the film - it feels much
like a paint-by-the-numbers film at times.
I screened Powder on laserdisc at the Bunker (the theatre formerly known as
the Higdon 1).  John Higdon informs me that the laserdisc is a hard to find
item nowadays, but you can find Powder on video.  Don't Miss Powder.

Author
J. Neil Schulman
     It's not bad enough that I tick off the liberals by 
believing in God, the U.S. Constitution, and the Right to Keep 
and Bear Arms.  
     It's not bad enough that I tick off everyone who's short on 
melanin in their skin by proclaiming my belief in O.J. Simpson's 
innocence and defend the jury that acquitted him.  
     It's not bad enough that I tick off everyone in Hollywood 
who I haven't already ticked off with my pro-gun stuff by 
proclaiming that I think SHOWGIRLS is an unsung masterpiece.  
     Uh-uh.  That's not good enough for me.  I haven't done 
enough damage yet.  I'm not far enough out on a limb.  I haven't 
yet managed to convince everyone that I should be in a padded 
room somewhere.  
     Now I have to go and declare that a convicted homosexual 
child molester has written and directed a truly great movie about 
love and transcendence ... and if that's not bad enough, the damn 
film even does its best to be anti-gun.
     Okay, Neil.  Take a deep breath and calm down.  This is a 
fair and just country, and they *always* allow the condemned man 
to have a few last words before they string him up.  Hell, if you
can't convince them that you're not out of your friggin' mind,
then you'd probably be a good sport and chip in for the rope.
     So you've got a few minutes to save your life, Neil.  See
if you can tell as good a tale as Sheherazade did.
     Today, I handed an inscribed copy of my new book SELF 
CONTROL NOT GUN CONTROL to Nathan Winters, now twenty years old, 
who at age eleven was enticed into oral sex by POWDER's writer-
director Victor Salva.  Winters was in front of the Galaxy Theater
on Hollywood Boulevard doing a protest of the movie opening, as 
well as doing some live radio with syndicated talk-show host Tom 
Leykis.  My inscription read, "No more victims!" which is
certainly a sentiment it's hard to disagree with, unless you
happen to need them for your work.
     I'd been listening to Tom Leykis for a couple of days, 
interviewing Winters, his mother, and experts on child
molestation, milking this story for all its worth.  And, why not?  
It has all the elements we've come to love so much now that the 
O.J. Simpson trial is over and we're all looking for a way to 
fill up those empty daytime hours.  Ricki Lake gives us every 
variation on "someone backstage is secretly in love with you." 
Sally Jessy Raphael, Charles Perez, Gordon Elliot, Rolonda, 
Jenny Jones, and Maury Povich each try to outcompete the others 
with every variation on young women who are cheating on their own 
husbands with their sisters' spouse.  So why shouldn't a radio
talk show get some of the action?
     Nathan Winters, despite his protests that he's forgiven 
Victor Salva, has an understandable beef against him.  The young 
director Salva drew the much younger Winters, a child actor, 
into a homosexual relationship.  Like Nixon, Salva made the 
mistake of allowing his sins to get onto tape, and it was his 
undoing: the videotapes Salva made proving his sexual 
relationship with the eleven-year-old Winters got Salva charged 
with eleven counts of sexual crimes, plea-bargained down to
five offenses and fifteen months served in a California prison
before a couple more years of parole.  Time having tolled, 
Salva is a free man, and aside from having to tell the police 
where he's living, Salva can pretty much work where he pleases so 
long as he can convince someone to pay him for it.
     Francis Ford Coppola, a Salva mentor, a producer on the 
Salva movie which Winters was starring in at the time of his 
molestation, and a consummate Hollywood insider, seems to have
taken the side of Salva the director over Winters the child star.  
According to Winters' account on Leykis, Coppola's company not
only offered Winters no aid and comfort when Salva was exposed, 
but circled the wagons and sued Winters and his mother for breach 
of contract when Winters' mom found out about the molestation and 
pulled little Nathan off the shooting set.  
     This treatment shouldn't be surprising to anyone familiar 
with how things work in Hollywood.  Read INDECENT EXPOSURE by 
David McClintock (Dell, 1982), which tells how, when actor Cliff 
Robertson blew the whistle on Columbia Pictures chief David 
Begelman for forging Robertson's signature on checks, Begelman 
was embezzling, it was Cliff Robertson who was shut out of show 
business; Begelman was just given another deal elsewhere.  If 
Hollywood has held anything sacred since the McCarthy era, it's 
that you don't tattle on someone "in the industry"--no matter 
what.  The Mafia or the LAPD has no more sacred code of silence.
     So when Nathan Winters learned that Caravan/Hollywood 
Pictures/Buena Vista Distributing--that is, Disney--had
financed and was now releasing POWDER, a fantasy film written 
and directed by none other than Victor Salva, Winters decided 
that he had a job to do.  
     Winters didn't like the idea that director Salva would be in 
charge of movie sets where children might secretly be under his 
control again.  He didn't like the idea that Disney, a company 
which is supposed to be a safe haven for children, had taken the 
man who had molested him to its corporate breast, and was going 
to make money with him and for him, as well as giving Salva a 
canvas on which to paint his homo-erotic impulses.  And, when 
you get right down to it, Winters probably wasn't thrilled that
the man who had molested him and ended his budding acting 
career was now making more movies instead of more license plates.
     So Nathan Winters called a press conference, called Tom 
Leykis, and flew to Hollywood to try to stop the release of
POWDER--to get the movie pulled from distribution.  
Supporters are urging a boycott both of POWDER and of all
Disney products.  The calls coming in to the Leykis show, if
Leykis's call screeners are being at all even-handed, are
coming in strongly supportive of Winters and against Disney.
     The film industry has battened down the hatches and is being
as quiet as they can be.  They see witch hunts from the witch's
point of view.  With Bob Dole, Janet Reno, and William Bennett
breathing down their necks, no wonder.  They remember the Hayes
Board, and rules which prevented divorce from being portrayed in
movies, or married couples sharing the same bed, for that
matter.  Of course, perhaps things have just gone too far ever
to go back and they have nothing to worry about.  On October 22, 
1995, CBS's 60 MINUTES--in the holy Sunday seven o'clock 
family prime-time hour--showed America Julie Andrews' bare tits 
in a clip from the movie S.O.B.  What other barrier is there
to cross unless Barbara Walters is planning on interviewing Linda
Lovelace after an uncensored clip from DEEP THROAT?
     So we find ourselves in an arena which we in America are 
becoming quite used to.  We have decadent, liberal, Godless, and 
gay Hollywood in one corner, and decent, conservative, God-fearing,
and puritan middle-America in the other corner.
     And, tossed into the ring for us to fight over, like Eris's
golden apple thrown "to the most beautiful of you," is a new
movie, titled POWDER, which I saw tonight.
     Sorry, my friends.  I had to see it.  I'm a fantasy writer.  I'm a
screenwriter.  I'm a journalist and opinion writer.  And even if I
wasn't, there's something ornery and contrary about me that says that
the minute someone doesn't want me to see something....
     Powder is better than you or me.  He feels your pain--literally.
He can read your memory so he knows what bad things were done to you.
He can also make *you* feel another's pain.  He makes a hunter feel,
from the inside, the death throes of the deer he just shot, and
understandably, the hunter not only doesn't want to hunt anymore, he
can't even touch a gun after that.  (Cynically, this might be Salva's
sour grapes; as a felon he can't own a gun, either.  But I'll give
Salva the benefit of the doubt, that he really does dislike guns.)
     Like all those angels, enlightened masters, E.T.'s, or other
Saviors who have come to teach us how depraved we are, Powder is only
with us a short while.  He is here to be better than us, different from
us, and to be despised for being both.  We are to revile him for
telling us truths about ourselves that we'd rather not hear.
     And, you know, in telling us about Powder, Victor Salva is telling
us about himself.  What Powder does physically by connecting the hunter
to the dying deer, Salva does with his ability as a storyteller to
connect us to his own pain.  He wants us to understand the beauty he
sees in young men --and presumably young boys, although that's not
shown in the film.  He wants us to understand the tragedy of not being
touched lovingly, and what a caress from an older man to a younger man
can mean.
     I get that.  We heterosexual men, both in the movie and in the
audience, must believe that Powder is a faggot because he sees the
beauty in the male as well as female forms.  But God is the creator of
both male and female and if you ask me, you'd have to be blind not to
admire the Lord's handiwork.  Mr. Salva, I can admire a beautiful male
body without wanting to have sex with it.
     None of this is religiously unorthodox, even to Christians.
Ironically, the sex offender Victor Salva has put no message in this
movie that should be at all discomfiting to the family values of Middle
America.  True, Victor Salva has managed to infuse Powder with those
angelic traits which are most acceptable to those Hollywood New Age
acolytes who never could get along with fire-and-brimstone
Christianity--but then, the Presbyterian and United Methodist
Churches--which favor gun control and teach us that even child
molesters are our brothers in Christ--probably wouldn't care much for
the sorts of militarized angels that Jesus told Peter He could call
down at a moment's notice.
     Victor Salva's eschatology leads us to an afterworld of love with
understanding of all and with conflict between none.  It is hardly the
heaven of Saint John the Divine's Revelation, a battlefield in our
race's future where both humans and angels fight a battle between gom
the ashes of Auschwitz or the cinders of Sarajevo?
     POWDER may, in fact, be Victor Salva's attempt at paying for his
crime against Nathan Winters.  It may be his apology.  It may be his
explanation of why he did what he did.  It may well be Victor Salva's
penance.
     Nathan Winters has already done his job.  I doubt any movie
insurance company will be willing to take the risk of allowing Victor
Salva anywhere near children on his shooting set.  And if Nathan
Winters convinces enough people to stay away from POWDER, then no
matter how good the film is, if it loses money, Victor Salva won't be
given many more chances to direct.
     But I doubt that Victor Salva will have permanent problems finding
work in the film industry again.  I mean, he's just a convicted child
molester.  It's not like he's done anything *really* scandalous ...
like joining the NRA.
This article is under submission.  Reproduction
in computer file and data bases is permitted for informational
purposes only.  Copyright (c) 1995 by J. Neil Schulman. 
All other rights reserved.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     While the film, POWDER, would have to fall into the genre of
science fiction, the film is absolutely mesmerizing.   It happens that
the genre is perfect for the story.  Equally as important is that it
tells us something about ourselves that everyone should by now know.
And that is that anyone who is "different" from us is suspect, is to be
ridiculed, and feared.
     Powder (Sean Patrick Flanery) is such a person.  His mother
dies the day he is born.  He is an Albino whose father is horrified
when he sees him.  The doctor says there may be other odd things
about the baby.   So when the father dies his grandmother puts him
in a room that is the cellar of the cottage.  Obviously, she does
not want the neighbors to know about him.   When Barnam (Lance
Henricksen) finds out about him he calls on Jessie Caldwell (Mary
Steenburgen) who runs a school for young men who have been in
trouble with the law and need to be taught how to behave.    Almost
needless to add, the "students"  begin to mock the newcomer.  This
leads to some very funny special effects.
     Powder, it is discovered, has an I.Q. that is so high it cannot
be graded.  He also has other powers and these are used to startle
those who try to take advantage of him.    He can manipulate
electricity, magnetize and do other special things that ordinary
people cannot do.
     Steenburgen is her usual kind, sweet self.  Jeff Goldblum as
the science teacher who befriends him is magnificently charming  in
the smallish role he has.  Both the sheriff and his bullying deputy
(Brandon Smith) are excellent.  In short, then, this is a film not
to be missed..

Author
Jonathan Abbey
     I left the theater thinking POWDER was one of the best movies I
had seen in a long time.  Seemingly aimed at teenagers, with a moderate
case of children's movie simplicity, the movie nonetheless resonated
strongly for me.
     POWDER was enjoyable to me for the cinematography, for several of
the characters, and for the strong sense and presence of the unknown,
both in terms of Powder's strange powers, and in terms of Jeremy's
unknown identity and place in the world.
     It is the only movie that I can think of that specifically spoke
to being a young adult growing up and feeling isolated for being very
smart and not straight enough.  The movie features an estranged adult
gay son and his father, and a frankly homoerotic scene involving a
character who had already been shown to be interested in women as
well.. that is, a character who does not yet understand his place in
the world in many ways.
     The movie gave the very clear message that it might be okay to be
different.  Really different, not just skinny and awkward around the
cheerleaders.  And the performances by Mary Steenburgen, Jeff Goldblum
and Lance Henrikson felt very earnest and caring.  They seemed to love
and truly accept Powder, different though he be.  This sounds like a
common theme, and it is.  But rarely have I seen a movie that so well
captures the feeling that one has no place or hope for place as well as
this one does.  Certainly I've not seen one that is this brave in the
situation it sets up, nor so caring in the acceptance given to the
differences inside that can keep one isolated and without connection to
community.
     Obviously, how you perceive this movie will depend a lot on the
degree to which you empathize with the main character.  If you are in
the closet or in confusion and turmoil about your sexual identity, you
may find this to be an extremely powerful movie.  I did.
     It troubles me that Victor Salva has done the things he has done,
and that he may continue to be ill.  It troubles me greatly because I
fear that his sickness may be seen as coming through in a movie that is
by it's tone aimed at teenagers and which does feature an explicit and
unapologetic (and unexplained) instance of homosexual longing on the
part of the main character.  Had Salva not had a child molestation
conviction, this movie might well have stirred up a homophobic reaction
among many, but it's loving tone and message may have come through.
With Salva's past behavior and conviction, I found myself wondering
after the fact (after reading every post on our news spool about
peoples' opinions about the movie) if any difference in sexuality
really should be considered to be wrong.  If we all agree that
pedophilia is an illness, however natural it may seem to come about,
then what logical reason is there for accepting that homosexuality is
not itself an illness?  This linkage between homosexuality and
pedophilia, already strong in many peoples' minds, seems unfortunately
likely to be strengthened by seeing this movie.

Author
Gerard Martin
     Wreathed in tragedy, POWDER begins with a first vestige of human
existence; a new life is abruptly born into our world while another,
his mother, departs.
     The new-born child is alone for the first time in his short life.
Just how alone, it seems, he will also remember for the rest of his
life.
     Nicknamed Powder for his powder-white albino skin, this newborn is
aware of everything and everyone around him.  The wired devices
measuring his brain activity completely blacken the extreme limits of
the measurement scale.
     Years later, the young man Powder, played by Sean Patrick Flanery,
remembers every detail of his life--the loss of his mother;
abandonment as a baby by his father; and the many works of literature
that he absorbed while down in the comfortably dark cellar of his
grandparent's farmhouse.  He was surrounded by shelves of books that he
will remember word for word for the rest of his life.  Interspersed
against walls are diverse toylike devices of his own construction.
     The story really begins the day that both of his grandparents are
dead; his grandfather being the last of the two to pass away.  Still a
minor, he becomes ward of the state and, for the first time in his
life, he is joined with the ranks of humanity; his grandparents having
served as living buffers during the entirety of his early life.  For
reasons of fear or ignorance, they had even stopped touching him.  It
seems that Powder holds a frighteningly unique relationship with the
adverse forces of the heavens.
     A series of far-reaching metaphors express profound notions about
life.  At the orphanage that doubles as a boy's reform school, Powder
arrests the attention of the more unfriendly of their number by
dramatically magnetizing the mealroom's entire collection of spoons
save one.  Held together into one giant clump of silverware and food,
the one spoon remaining flits across the table to join the clump only
to realize it crash apart into individual pieces again.  Not too much
longer into the story, the presence of a science lab arc lamp reveals
Powder's unearthly relationship with the electrical forces.
     Other special abilities are revealed.  Powder is close enough to
humanity to feel another's feelings--to actually listen to people from
the inside.  In an episode involving a hunter, he is even able to
transfer the fear and sickness of an animal's near death to
life-numbing effect.  A sports-hunter's life, needless to say, is
changed forever.
     Time and time again, the bits and pieces of life are challenged.
The firmest pillars of society are undermined one by one.  A sheriff
and his deputy must yield everything they believes to a higher plane of
existence.  Otherwise Powder might really be a threat to all that is
unifying about life--all things normally unanswered or unasked.
     Where does our soul go after death?  To what extent might we not
even exist except as small parts of everything else?  Are we substantial
enough to allow life to be cordially reduced to electrical impulses
only to be reconstructed into re-animated vitalizing forces of
existence?
     There is always much happening just under the surface of POWDER.
What is the pure essence of life?  High school science teacher Donald
Ripley, played smartly by Jeff Goldblum, would have life reduced to the
smallest possible elements--molecules governed by carefully controlled
and ordered impulses of electricity.  As some of these basic
assumptions are challenged, levels upon levels of meaning are revealed
in Ripley's gleaning insights, relentless further questioning and his
relooking closely at the elements that comprise the basis of life and
living.
     POWDER is a beautiful film to watch as the narrative unfolds with
every change of scenery.  There are incredible compositions that
involving pure light, meaningful colour and revealing shadow.  There is
the whiteness of powder against the drab contours of broken inner
lives.  The surface layer of order and understanding is shattered
against what lies just below, under the surface and perhaps,
ultimately, holding all of the pieces together in a discerning order of
arrangement.
     In a discourse that is very much alive in this closing of the
millennium, humanity is pitted against technology as the one is divided
from the other.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        I've never written a review for a movie I haven't watched all 
the way through, but I had to make an exception with POWDER. I 
was about forty-five minutes into this one at a friend's house when 
he and his brother got into a huge shouting match that would have 
ended in violence had we not left the house. So I never got to finish 
the movie and I'm sure as hell not going to pay three more bucks to 
watch half of a bad movie. But I can at least get a partial review out 
of it, because I saw enough to know this one wasn't worth finishing 
in the first place.
        The movie centers around a freaky teenager who's spent 
his entire life living in the cellar of his grandparents' house. When 
Grandpa dies (taking his department store down with him), social 
worker Mary Steenburgen has to take Powder (first and middle 
names? Gold Bond) to a state home, where we find out he's a 
different from the other kids. Actually, we find out he's different 
when we first see him, because he's the most pale individual 
we've ever seen and moreover he has no body hair whatsoever. 
When Powder is born in the opening minutes of the movie, the 
father takes one look at him and says "He's not my son." 
Obviously. All I want to know is where the Pillsbury Dough 
Boy was nine months ago.
        So the white-faced freak leaves his Neverland Ranch for 
the state home and faces the ridicule of other kids. That is, until 
they try to haze him during his first cafeteria lunch by making him 
"wear" his spoon ("You can either wear it on your nose or up your 
ass." Decisions, decisions...) and he uses telepathic powers to draw 
all the silverware in the room into a giant pile in the middle of the 
table. So if his father is the Pillsbury Dough Boy, his mother must 
be Sissy Spacek's Carrie character.
        And you have to factor in two more things from the 
subsequent scenes, as we find out Powder has some sort of 
super-intelligence ("Your I.Q. test went straight off the chart!") 
and attracts electrical power. This first shows up as Powder visits 
the world of high school (If he's such a genius already, why would 
he need a high school education?) and sits through a demonstration 
in Jeff Goldblum's science class. Goldblum plugs in a "Jacob's 
ladder" device that shows current running up two wires and 
immediately the current flows across the room and into Powder's 
chest. But Goldblum just stands there for about thirty seconds 
watching, instead of just unplugging the damn thing. I guess he 
was too busy contemplating why he was appearing in his third 
bad movie in a row (following HIDEAWAY and NINE MONTHS).
        That's about all I saw before the big fight began and, let 
me tell you, that was twice as interesting as the movie itself. But 
like I said, I saw enough to know this would be one of those terrible 
melodramas about the isolation of people who have superior abilities 
and how hard it is for those people to assimilate themselves into 
mainstream civilization. None of these movies ever handle the 
subject properly, instead introducing the feeble BEAUTY AND 
THE BEAST copout of having a beautiful woman fall in love with 
the guy's personality, overlooking his personal appearance. I already 
had the female character picked out (the girl who was sitting next to 
him in the back of the room during the electrocution scene), but I 
guess I'll never know for sure what happened.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
From noraruth@aol.com Mon Jun 10 15:04:03 EDT 1996
Article: 3654 of rec.arts.movies.reviews
Path: nntphub.cb.att.com!not-for-mail
From: noraruth@aol.com (Andrew Hicks)
Newsgroups: rec.arts.movies.reviews,rec.arts.sf.reviews
Subject: REVIEW: POWDER (1995)
Followup-To: rec.arts.movies.current-films,rec.arts.sf.movies
Date: 10 Jun 1996 18:16:03 GMT
Organization: University of Missouri - Columbia
Lines: 70
Sender: ecl@mtcts1.att.com (Evelyn C. Leeper)
Approved: ecl@mtcts1.att.com
Message-ID: 
Reply-To: noraruth@aol.com (Andrew Hicks)
NNTP-Posting-Host: mtcts2.mt.lucent.com
Summary: r.a.m.r. #05425
Keywords: author=Hicks
Originator: ecl@mtcts2
Xref: nntphub.cb.att.com rec.arts.movies.reviews:3654 rec.arts.sf.reviews:710
Status: RO
        I've never written a review for a movie I haven't watched all 
the way through, but I had to make an exception with POWDER. I 
was about forty-five minutes into this one at a friend's house when 
he and his brother got into a huge shouting match that would have 
ended in violence had we not left the house. So I never got to finish 
the movie and I'm sure as hell not going to pay three more bucks to 
watch half of a bad movie. But I can at least get a partial review out 
of it, because I saw enough to know this one wasn't worth finishing 
in the first place.
        The movie centers around a freaky teenager who's spent 
his entire life living in the cellar of his grandparents' house. When 
Grandpa dies (taking his department store down with him), social 
worker Mary Steenburgen has to take Powder (first and middle 
names? Gold Bond) to a state home, where we find out he's a 
different from the other kids. Actually, we find out he's different 
when we first see him, because he's the most pale individual 
we've ever seen and moreover he has no body hair whatsoever. 
When Powder is born in the opening minutes of the movie, the 
father takes one look at him and says "He's not my son." 
Obviously. All I want to know is where the Pillsbury Dough 
Boy was nine months ago.
        So the white-faced freak leaves his Neverland Ranch for 
the state home and faces the ridicule of other kids. That is, until 
they try to haze him during his first cafeteria lunch by making him 
"wear" his spoon ("You can either wear it on your nose or up your 
ass." Decisions, decisions...) and he uses telepathic powers to draw 
all the silverware in the room into a giant pile in the middle of the 
table. So if his father is the Pillsbury Dough Boy, his mother must 
be Sissy Spacek's Carrie character.
        And you have to factor in two more things from the 
subsequent scenes, as we find out Powder has some sort of 
super-intelligence ("Your I.Q. test went straight off the chart!") 
and attracts electrical power. This first shows up as Powder visits 
the world of high school (If he's such a genius already, why would 
he need a high school education?) and sits through a demonstration 
in Jeff Goldblum's science class. Goldblum plugs in a "Jacob's 
ladder" device that shows current running up two wires and 
immediately the current flows across the room and into Powder's 
chest. But Goldblum just stands there for about thirty seconds 
watching, instead of just unplugging the damn thing. I guess he 
was too busy contemplating why he was appearing in his third 
bad movie in a row (following HIDEAWAY and NINE MONTHS).
        That's about all I saw before the big fight began and, let 
me tell you, that was twice as interesting as the movie itself. But 
like I said, I saw enough to know this would be one of those terrible 
melodramas about the isolation of people who have superior abilities 
and how hard it is for those people to assimilate themselves into 
mainstream civilization. None of these movies ever handle the 
subject properly, instead introducing the feeble BEAUTY AND 
THE BEAST copout of having a beautiful woman fall in love with 
the guy's personality, overlooking his personal appearance. I already 
had the female character picked out (the girl who was sitting next to 
him in the back of the room during the electrocution scene), but I 
guess I'll never know for sure what happened.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Sometimes a film just clicks for reasons hard to determine.
POWDER should not work well as a film, but it does.  This is a story
about a self-effacing superman with a pained expression on his face who
finds himself in a world that largely does not appreciate him.  It
initially looks like a self-indulgent film searching for a cult
following from a narrow band of sentimentalists.  That may even be what
it was, but it did just enough that worked for me that I fell into that
narrow band.  In another ten years I may look at this film and wonder
what I saw in it, but for right now it had more than one scene that
paid off for me.  I would like to think I will always find the subplot
with the deputy to be powerful.
     Jeremy Reid, inexplicably called "Powder" (played by Sean Patrick
Flanery), has not had much of a life.  His mother died of a lightning
bolt before his birth.  The albino fetus salvaged from the dead woman
was rejected by the father.  The child was raised by his grandparents
and lived in a dark cellar for almost all of his life.  Powder, it
seems, was not entirely human, though what else he is is never clear.
He may be a mutation or maybe an implanted alien.  But he has an I.Q.
that goes beyond measurement, a photographic memory, telepathic and
empathic abilities, and voluntary and involuntary powers to affect
electromagnetic waves.  Due to his upbringing he is introverted and
maladjusted.  Wherever he goes he is hated and feared by most of his
Texas community.  Sent to a school for disturbed children, he finds
friends in the head of the school (Mary Steenburgen) and an energetic
science teacher (Jeff Goldblum).
     Actor Sean Patrick Flanery is hidden under an overly obvious
makeup job which looks like it was intended to justify the title of the
film.  Flanery is not a bad actor--some viewers may remember him as
TV's teenage Young Indiana Jones.  But in POWDER the white make-up
lacks contrast and seems to hide all of his facial expression but the
most pained looks, which he then uses all too often.  Also sprinkled in
are some good character actors like Lance Hendriksen as the town
sheriff.  Hendriksen is one of those familiar actors who never seem to
get the appreciation they deserve.  Mary Steenburgen is not well-used,
but Jeff Goldblum as the enthusiastic science teacher is a treat.  Two
more actors it is nice to see working are Ray Wise and camp film
actress Susan Tyrrell.
     The script has some problems.  Powder's powers seem to be revealed
only as he needs them and we are never sure what powers he has.  That
is not necessarily bad, though one might question if the writer and
director Victor Salva had a clear idea of what he wanted Powder to be.
For example, the teenager seems to be involuntarily magnetic in some
scenes and not others.  Some places the effects are not convincing.
Lightning plays a part in the story but never looks realistic.  An
animal head is also unreal-looking.  There are continuity errors witha
clock in one scene between Goldblum and Flanery.  None of these are
really bothersome.  What did need more care were the last three or four
minutes of the film, which just don't work.
     There is a great deal being said about writer/director Victor
Salva's background.  On this subject I will say just that I can respect
and enjoy Wagner's operatic cycle "The Ring of the Nibelungs" without
condoning everything that Wagner ever did in his personal life.  Salva
has had a bad chapter of his life which is now over.  His film POWDER
rises above some mediocre acting and make-up to have several touching
moments in a 1950s-style superman story.  For the people in the right
mood it gets a low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Sean Patrick Flanery, Mary Steenburgen, Lance Henriksen,
      Jeff Goldblum, Brandon Smith, Missy Crider
Director: Victor Salva
Producers: Roger Birnbaum and Daniel Grodnik
Screenplay: Victor Salva
Cinematography: Jerzy Zielinski
Music: Jerry Goldsmith
U.S. Distributor: Hollywood Pictures
     Imagine EDWARD SCISSORHANDS under the control of a mainstream
director rather than someone offbeat and eccentric like Tim Burton.  The
result would have been just another motion picture about a prototypical
misfit trying to find his niche--a movie with a lot of manipulation
and too many easy answers.  POWDER is such a film.  Unmistakably
designed with teenagers in mind, this movie presses numerous emotional
hotbuttons in a manner that is as obvious as it is skillful.
     On some levels, the film works.  It tells a modern-day fable with
enough pseudo-scientific gobbledygook to make the scenario sound almost
plausible.  POWDER is well-paced and effective at getting the audience
to care about the principal personality.  It's likely that anyone who
has ever felt like an outsider will see an element of himself or herself
in the title character, as essayed by Sean Patrick Flanery.  It's easy
to sympathize and identify with the loner.
     However, while doing all that competently, POWDER consistently
avoids taking chances.  The script, which backs away from real dramatic
conflict, lacks courage, preferring Hollywood-type scenarios to
something grittier.  The title character always does the right thing.
No matter how unjustly he's treated, he never lashes out.  The film
stays away from exploring the real ugliness of intolerance, instead
relying upon stereotypes like the spiteful bully and his ignorant
friends.  We know from the beginning how these characters are going to
react in any situation, and never feel anything for them because no
attempt is made to give them humanity.  In this entire film, Powder is
the only multi-dimensional personality.  Everyone else, good or bad, is
merely filling a stock role.
     Powder's real name is Jeremy Reed.  He was raised and educated by
his grandmother and grandfather in their small house in Texas--no
friends and no schools.  Powder is an albino, with the characteristic
white skin and pink eyes, but that's not all that's unusual about him--
his body has no hair and he possesses "the most advanced intellect in
the history of humankind."  He also has a strange affinity for
electricity.  Radios and televisions don't work around him and, during
thunderstorms, he acts like a lightning rod.
     When Powder's grandparents die, he is taken to a local institution
to live with other boys his age.  There, the strangeness of his
appearance creates an almost-universal sense of ill-will and unease.
Only a few people attempt to get to know Powder: Donald Ripley (Jeff
Goldblum), a science teacher at the local high school; Jesse Caldwell
(Mary Steenburgen), the woman who runs the institution; Sheriff Barnum
(Lance Henriksen), the chief law officer of Wheaton City; and Lindsey
(Missy Crider), the sole person of Powder's age who isn't afraid of him.
     Director Victor Salva extracts a few noteworthy moments from his
own run-of-the-mill script.  Powder's interaction with Lindsey is one
such high point.  His reaction to the shooting of a deer is another.  In
general, however, by staying within carefully predetermined bounds and
refusing to attempt anything controversial or genuinely shocking, POWDER
remains restricted to mediocrity.  There's no denying the emotional
appeal of the movie, but the opportunity for more was passed over.
POWDER wants to make its audience cry without causing them too much
discomfort.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Pedro Sena
This film, if not a power house, is really a surprise. It catches you when
you are not ready for it. And it is a heart breaking story, the kind that
one wishes had a better go at it, though we can see from the start that it
is nearly impossible.
And it takes a cast of focused actors to bring something like this to life,
and make it work.
With a terrible title, that does not do its story, or anything in the film
any kind of justice, this film really hits home at the differences between
many of us, be they just ethnocentric, or just plain, physical conditions
that are difficult to overcome.
Powder is the story of a boy that has been kept in captivity since his
birth, because he has a terrible skin condition that prevents him from
catching much sunlight. And he has been kept in a basement for most of his
early years, until one day when the caretaker grandparent dies. He has been
well taught, can read, and do many things, that otherwise, most can not do.
He also has some apparent abilities with lightning, or most forms of
electric energies, which he is capable of exchanging energies with.  And it
is the psychic abilities and powers that eventually gets him some attention.
He is placed in school, and becomes the laughing stock, but he also learns
there, that while those who are physically stronger than him may hurt him,
he can hurt them with something else. And he wastes no time putting that
energy to good use, from teaching a sheriff's deputy a large lesson in life,
about the misuse of guns, and the breaking of the law.
And, as the sad story continues, he meets a girl that comes to like him, and
vice versa, only to have her taken away from him in the end of the film,
like he is not deserving of anyone at all.  And this sends the film into its
climactic end.
POWDER is a sad film, but one that can not be ignored much, as its strengths
are beauty, of the kind that most films, can not even touch.  Some hint at
it, this film shows it. And though much of it is in the characters' minds,
sometimes, the moments are just breath taking, and totally special, to the
point of making your skin crawl.  Were this not handled deftly by a director
that can understand these things, this would have become a who cares story.
As it is handled, with so much affection, it is inspiring, something that
just isn't found in to many movies nowadays.
Mary Steenburgen is very good as a bit of the protective mother that she is
becoming. Jeff Goldblum, though always appearing fake, comes off as
interesting as a teacher  that is just surprised, as is the whole class, by
the example of electricity that they have been shown.  And he spends the
rest of the film trying to figure it all
out, at least the connection between mind, body and the electrical happening
which he witnessed.
But the spoils in this film go to the character of Powder, and the young
girl he meets, with whom he can not have a relationship on account of a
terribly protective father.
But the rest of the film is amazing, and a terribly enjoyable trip. We can
sense that this film, or character can not win, but we know that while he is
around, everyone is going to sample something that they will forever
remember. I dare say that we will, too.
