Title
Review for Bombay (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
[Administrivia: I am back; thanks to Alan Wexelblat for handling the
moderation chores while I was on vacation.  -Evelyn Leeper]
     The vast majority of Indian films are weak exploitation films
intended to entertain mass audiences, and rare is the film made for the
domestic Indian market that looks intelligently at a serious issue.
People in India usually do not go to the movie theater to be edified by
a film with serious meanings.  That is why a film like BOMBAY is so
unusual and is touring international film festivals.  It performs a
balancing act trying to please the entertainment audiences and at the
same time trying to be an indictment of the violence of the 1993
religious riots in Bombay.  Trying to do both, it is not altogether
successful at either.  There are nightmarish depictions of the riots
that presumably will bother the entertainment-oriented audience.
Still, in the examination of its real issues it betrays itself twice,
first in putting the serious themes so late in the film and then in
treating those themes overly simplistically.  To an American audience
it will seem that BOMBAY mixes 1990s violence with a simplified view of
the issues of racial intolerance much like the United States might have
had in the 1950s.  It does not look very deeply at the causes of the
religious differences for fear of appearing to take sides.  Instead, it
limits its message to saying simply that violence is wrong and whatever
the religious differences they are, rioting is not the way to resolve
them.  That is an important statement but not all that profound.
Effectively India has discovered the politically correct film.  One of
the film's reviewers called this India's SCHINDLER'S LIST.  The
comparison applies only if comparing BOMBAY to other Indian films.
     Our story starts like a classic "Romeo and Juliet" plot.  Young
Hindu boy Shekhar Misra (played by Aruind Swami) loves Muslim girl
Shaila Banu (Manisha Koirala).  He knows his family will never approve-
--his father does not like even Northern Hindus, much less Moslems--but
he goes ahead and courts her.  When his family objects too strongly he
flees to Bombay and sends for Banu.  Bombay initially represents the
anonymity and tolerance of a cosmopolitan city.  However, their love
has already caused a feud between the two families and it continues in
their absence.  While the plot takes a comic turn of the newlyweds
unable to find privacy to be together in Bombay, the reluctant
fathers-in-law escalate a feud.  This is all done with a light touch,
but soon the theme of intolerance will be handled more shockingly.  The
city of Bombay is about to be torn apart by riots, and the film will
get a good deal more serious.
     Western critics discussing BOMBAY find it odd that a light comedy
turns into an angry political indictment.  The original film was
probably an even stranger combination.  The version we are seeing is
reportedly cut down from a version in which there were also the
traditional love songs mixed in.  There are some light musical
interludes in what is being shown but not the popular songs that were
probably in the original.  It might be a mistake to attribute the
combination to the originality of writer and director Mani Ratnam.  It
is much more a convention of Indian domestic films that all films are
musicals and comedies.  As an example, KHAL-NAAIKAA, a remake of the
American horror film THE HAND THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE, was very close to
the original except for the seemingly incongruous injection of comedy
and musical sequences into the story.  But in spite of this, what does
come through is often moving, though at times not as subtle as a
Western viewer might like.  At times the action stops as a character
make speeches for tolerance.  But what other critics are finding fresh
and original is, in fact, a cultural difference and almost inevitable
in Indian domestic films.  Incidentally, I noted the credit included a
dance director in spite of the fact that there was no real dance in the
version we saw.
     The camera work for BOMBAY is a little showy.  Several simple
effects are used including slow-motion, scenes rushing past the camera,
and strobe effects as well as subjective hand-held camera shots.
     Also, the film might have been a bit better with a screen or two
at the beginning explaining the basis of the conflict and the name ofa
political group referenced in the film.  This would serve a double
purpose.  It would not only help foreign audiences understand the
conflict, it would also bind the film together by promising that there
will be serious political material coming up.  There certainly was some
question why, for example, the Moslems in the film are so opposed to a
particular temple to Ram being built.  While most of what goes on
becomes clear from context, most Western viewers could do with a few
notes.
     While the basic subject matter is contrived, this is certainly the
best Indian domestic film in years.  Rate it a low +2 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
     It's a fairly well-known fact that the Indian film industry is the 
most active in the world, producing more movies each year than any other 
(including Hollywood).  Few of those films, however, reach screens 
beyond their domestic market.  Largely because of their limited North 
American appeal and dubious quality, Indian movies are routinely ignored 
by distributors.  There are exceptions, of course -- the work of 
Satyajit Ray and last year's BANDIT QUEEN, for example.  Occasionally, 
however, a worthwhile picture causes enough people to take notice that 
it becomes a favorite on the international film festival circuit.  One 
such movie is BOMBAY, the fourteenth feature from celebrated director 
Mani Rathnam.  
     In many ways, BOMBAY is deceptive, but the manner in which it 
deceives the audience adds to its eventual impact.  For the first hour, 
it's a relatively-lighthearted romantic musical.  Arvind Swamy plays 
Shekhar, a Hindi journalism student who hails from a high-caste family.  
Manisha Koirala is Shahla Bano, a beautiful young Muslim woman.  Because 
of the extreme religious prejudice existing between the Hindu majority 
and the Muslim minority, Shekhar's father absolutely forbids a marriage.  
Shahla Bano's father goes one step further, arranging an "emergency" 
marriage for his daughter to another Muslim.  But Shekhar and Bano's 
love will not be denied.  They elope to Bombay, where, estranged from 
both of their families, they start a new life.
     Three lavish musical numbers highlight BOMBAY's first half, as 
Shekhar and Bano sing about their love for each other and their 
happiness at having children.  These songs, penned by A.R. Rehman, set 
the film's initial tone, which is one of soaring joy and passion.  And, 
while the music isn't exactly of the toe-tapping variety, it's stronger 
and more memorable than most songs in American movies over the past year 
or two.
     Just when you're starting to feel comfortable with BOMBAY, 
everything changes -- and the unexpected shift in tone hits like a punch 
to the gut.  Gone is the fun and frivolity, as death and violence 
suddenly fill up the screen.  Now we understand the full extent of 
Rothnam's purpose in the first half -- he was setting us up to like 
these characters so that when tragedy strikes, we can feel the pain and 
hopelessness of their situation.  It's melodramatic and manipulative, to 
be sure, but it works.
     On December 6, 1992, Hindus destroyed a mosque in the northern 
Indian city of Ayodha.  This led to a wave of Hindu/Muslim riots in 
Bombay that left thousands dead.  BOMBAY's second half takes place 
during this time period.  Shekhar and Bano have been living in the city 
for six years.  They have twin boys and are beginning to repair 
relations with their parents when the riots begin.  Suddenly, their 
world is turned upside down.  While the religious division in their 
family puts both Shekhar and Bano at risk from extremists on both sides, 
their children, who don't have a fixed faith, are in constant danger.  
At one point, radical Hindus douse the boys in gasoline and prepare to 
set them on fire.
     Cinematographer Rajiv Menon captures the chaos of the riots.  
Cameras move relentlessly through mobs of men hacking at each other with 
machetes, lobbing bombs at houses, and trampling helpless children 
underfoot.  It's grim and terrifying, and, at times, difficult to watch.  
The second half of BOMBAY is as dark and harrowing as the first half is 
light and gay.   
     BOMBAY is a gripping indictment of racial hatred.  The emotions 
that fueled the Bombay riots are the same ones that ripped apart the 
former Yugoslavia (the film VUKOVAR uses a similar ROMEO AND JULIET 
story to even better effect for the Serb/Croatian war).  The reasons 
given by both Hindus and Muslims for fighting sound suspiciously like 
those used by Hitler when justifying his Final Solution.  Shekhar's cry 
that "we are all Indians first of all!" isn't heeded.  The only response 
is echoed many times over:  "The divide will never heal."
     BOMBAY ends on a hopeful note, but not before etching a series of 
wrenching images in the minds of viewers.  Director Rathnam has shown 
great courage in making this picture (bombs were thrown at his house 
after it opened in India), which speaks with a voice that many will not 
wish to hear.  BOMBAY recalls how forceful a motion picture can be.  It 
also reminds us of the maxim that those who don't learn from history are 
doomed to repeat it.  Hopefully, some day, humankind will understand the 
lesson that Rathnam is teaching here.
