Title
Review for Alfie (1966)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Pedro Sena
Seeing this film some 25 years later is an interesting experience. One can
either watch Michael Caine have an interesting rave up through out the
piece, or one can get caught up in the process with which the film works.
Alfie, then, and now, is, still, a breakthrough film.  Few ever try what was
done in that film, and done it better, or attempt to recreate it.  Using the
well known English stage device, the ever glowing ASIDE, Alfie takes us
through his adventures, and misadventures, as he tries to meet the perfect
"bird", or just plain getting laid.
And each time, when he reasons things, he is always talking to us, letting
us know what he thinks, and what he might hope for.  Things rarely work out
perfectly, and never are totally satisfying to him, and we end-up hearing a
bit of the Alfie philosophy.  What's it all about, is still the theme today.
If we think that it was for sex, then even Alfie got taken for a ride.  And
if it was for an honest search for a little love and loving, then he failed
as so many of us have done as well..... and settled for second best.
There are other things that make this film a very good, and original, one.
It was photographed, for the most part with a hand held camera, and with a
small budget.  And the hand held camera, creates a very nice feeling of
intimacy, which helps in us getting to like the main character. One can't
help feel for him, when he is so close to us, and having the same problems
we are.  When he helps one woman, he ends up losing her. When he takes
advantage of one, he also ends up losing her.  And what's the point and
answer?  That's what Alfie is asking us in the end, although he does,
finally, make a friend, with no conditions... a dog.
Today, this film is a classic, and should stand out as one of the very
refreshing, and original pieces of film.  It brought us all Michael Caine,
who is excellent, and a veritable who is who from the London stage at the
time, with the exception of the American actress Shelly Winters.
The best things to look for in this film are the well designed camera
angles.  The personal stuff all gets close up angles, even for the personal
exchanges, something which Jean Luc Godard was fond of.  And then there are
the very lively angles which seem to add a rather distinctive and unusual
style to the film.
Worth seeing, and very well done, even if the color, today, appears too
bright and washed out.  But it still shows, what many films can not do
today.  Originality, and excellent acting... the English kind.

Author
Brian Koller
"Alfie" is a British production starring Michael Caine
as the title character, a selfish skirt-chaser who
only begins to question his values at film's end.
"Alfie" is an underrated film with an excellent
script by Bill Naughton, who also wrote the play.
The soundtrack is also outstanding, featuring jazz
arrangements by Sonny Rollins and the title song,
which comes at the film's *end* (as are all the credits)
and is performed by Cher.  I also liked the casting,
the cinematography, and the costumes.
While "Alfie" did not win any Academy Awards, it
was nominated for a slew of them.  Best Picture,
Best Actor (Caine), Best Supporting Actress (Vivien Merchant)
and Best Writing.  It won the 1967 Golden Globe for
Best English-Language Foreign Film.
Caine's character dominates the film.  The women come
and go in his life.  While he needs their love and
companionship, they are replaceable objects to him.
To refers to a woman in the third person, as "it" or "bird".
He prevents having an emotional attachment to a woman
by not considering her as a person.  His character is
contrasted against that of romantic rival Humphrey (Graham Stark)
whose love is permanent and unconditional.
But Alfie is not without feelings.  He can feel sorry for
himself, of course, but also shows love for his out-of-wedlock
son Malcolm, sympathy for a sickly man in a sanitarium,
and remorse towards his aborted fetus.
Caine talks to the camera incessently, often while in
the middle of conversation with others, who take no notice.
The camera becomes Caine's best friend and confidant,
and allows him to present his train of thought.
While films like "Tom Jones" have characters looking
directly at the camera, and speaking, I know of no other
film, one-man plays notwithstanding, that have used this
technique as much and as sucessfully.
Alfie has a medical examination that goes on for at least
ten minutes, talking to the camera all the while.  A doctor
keeps asking him pointed questions, and Alfie is clueless
that his health is clearly in danger.  His character seems
to completely lack introspection early in the film, and
develops only limited self-awareness as the story progresses.
Look for Shelly Winters and Denholm Elliot in small roles.
Winters is radiant and colorful, as usual.  Jane Asher,
who was famous at the time for having been Paul McCartney's
boyfriend, plays one of Alfie's girlfriends.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
