Title
Review for Only the Lonely (1991)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Frank Maloney
     ONLY THE LONELY is a film from John Hughes (co-producer) and Chris
Columbus (co-director).  The film stars John Candy, Maureen O'Hara, Ally
Sheedy, with Anthony Quinn and James Belushi.
     I recently asked in this newsgroup "Does anybody *like* John
Candy?" by which I meant does anyone find him a sympathetic screen
presence.  Some people enjoy laughing at him, some cannot abide him; but
I doubted that anyone wanted him as a personal friend.  Generally, I do
not enjoy Candy's good-hearted jerk; the last film in which I thought he
was even moderately successful was PLANES, TRAINS, AND AUTOMOBILES with
Steve Martin; the scene when the two men wake up in bed together and
have to reestablish their heterosexual manliness is both funny and
telling.
     ONLY THE LONELY offered no such insights into men or women, or even
moms.  Mom may be a bitch, but only because she loves us.  End of
insight.  And certainly none of comic manicness of THROW MOMMA FROM THE
TRAIN.
     I went to ONLY THE LONELY to see Maureen O'Hara and anticipated a
certain amount of discomfort in the presence of Candy as the price to be
paid.  As it turned out, it was neither as bad as it might have been,
nor as good as it could have been.  Even O'Hara, fiery and vicious,
suffers from a script that gives her precious little motivation and
less history.  She's a bigot, an emasculator; but you know she's
basically ok underneath.  In the Hughes-Columbus world, everyone is
basically ok underneath, even Mom.  Still, O'Hara shines through the
limitations of the script; she's alive when the rest of the movie is
dozing.
     Candy tones down the Uncle Buck klutziness and becomes the
pushover.  He decides to assert himself against the wishes of the whole
world, but exactly why will remain a mystery, as will the related
questions of why now and not before.  Candy's acting skills are
sufficiently limited that if he's not doing some SCTV fat-jerk shtick
he's talking real slow and looking like a whipped puppy to register
sensitivity.  The result here is some glacial pacing and slippery
schmaltz.
     Ally Sheedy was supposed to be this major-league introvert, afraid
of the sound of her own voice.  Not only do we not know why, but we are
given no particular reason why she finds herself attracted to Candy or
increasingly able to assert herself.  At least she's a better actor than
Candy and seems to be maturing into someone that may prove to
interesting to watch on the screen.
     In supporting roles we have James Belushi, totally wasted as
Candy's meat-wagon partner.  God, I wish the script had done more one
joke on the subject of the meat wagon.  Or a subplot hinted at of
Belushi's relationship with rather alarming wife.  And then there is
Anthony Quinn, old, totally charming, quite sexy and seductive as he
pursues the unobtainable  O'Hara, who hates all Greeks (of course, Quinn
plays a Greek).  
     A friend of mine with a taste for sentimental movies loved this
one.  I did not totally hate ONLY THE LONELY.  Instead, I would
recommend that this might be a tolerable film to rent in video, but
don't pay even matinee prices for it.  There's not enough there there.

Author
Laurie D. T. Mann
     We saw ONLY THE LONELY last night, the new John Candy movie.  It
was pretty good, and it was neat to see the return of Maureen O'Hara in
a movie, after a twenty-year retirement.
     ONLY THE LONELY is a leisurely, funny look at Danny Muldoon
(Candy), an Irish cop who lives with his mother (O'Hara) in Chicago.
His mother is the Irish version of Archie Bunker, a woman who spews
ethnic slurs at a remarkable rate.  This pair is unbelievably
co-dependent---while the advertising emphasizes the mother's hold on her
son, Danny also has remarkable trouble letting go.
     Danny meets Theresa Luna (Ally Sheedy) by accident, goes off in
search of her, and asks her for a date.  Theresa agrees, and the date
comes off as a study in awkwardness.  Both people are essentially shy,
and while Danny uses constant talking to cover his shyness, Theresa is
so withdrawn that even telling Danny she had had fun is very hard for
her.
     This film is one of John Hughes' few forays into describing the
lives of working-class people, and he did a pretty good job.  While the
movie tries to be pretty realistic, there are a few moments of unreality
in the last third of the movie.  I'd probably rate it a 7 on the Chuck
scale.
     My main problem with the movie was Danny not showing up for his
wedding.  Mom had even given her blessing, yet he just couldn't do it.
Danny believed in good appearances, and while he might have had an
incredible anxiety attack, he would have been there!

Author
Roger Snappy Rubio
ONLY THE LONELY
Starring: John Candy, Maureen O'Hara, Ally Sheedy, Anthony Quinn, and
          James Belushi
Produced by John Hughes and Hunt Lowry
Written and Directed by Chris Columbus
     This movie is the kind of movie you take a date to ... really funny
and really romantic at the same time.  It's advertised as a comedy, but
it has all the elements of a good story: love, humor, romance, conflict,
sentimentality, drama, and overall good fun.  I would definitely
recommend seeing this movie.
     ONLY THE LONELY is the story of Danny (John Hughes), a Chicago cop
who won't admit that his mother is running his life.  His mother Rose
(Maureen O'Hara) is a prejudiced, brash, and rather blunt woman who
doesn't have any qualms about saying EXACTLY what she is thinking to
anyone and everyone.  Danny meets Theresa (Ally Sheedy), a rather
introverted individual who is trying to break out of her own mold.  They
eventually fall in love, and that is something that Rose is not going to
stand for, so she makes sure to try to break them up in her own sort of
way.  I won't ruin the rest of the story, but I assure you, it is worth
seeing.
     It looks like Hollywood is responding to the call of the people for
more human stories instead of the shoot 'em up kill 'em all type of
movie with nothing to offer except violence and bloodshed.  ONLY THE
LONELY certainly delivers with good performances, a good storyline, and
for that matter, an ORIGINAL storyline.  It's not completely original,
but it does provide some refreshment amidst run-of-the-mill romances and
comedies.
     I always knew Chris Columbus was a good writer, and he didn't
disappoint me with this movie, either.  Chris Columbus is responsible
(whether in whole or in part) for some really good celluloid; for
example, he wrote the scripts for GREMLINS and YOUNG SHERLOCK HOLMES
(which, in my humble opinion, is one of his best scripts), and he helmed
the mega-hit HOME ALONE.  John Hughes almost precedes himself nowadays.
And even though his logo is on this film, it is really Columbus that
deserves the credit.
     John Candy is charismatic, funny, and a little vulnerable in this
movie, which might make him as attractive as, say, Bill Murray.  Bill
Murray is not exactly the sexiest man alive, but it is his humor that
makes him attractive to most women, and I think if John Candy keeps
going the way he is going, he just might attain Murray's status as a
comedian.  Of course, everything Murray had to say that was funny was
usually written for him, but let's stay optimistic now!  Maureen O'Hara
comes off as a slightly vicious character, compared to Ally Sheedy's
shyness.  James Belushi has a small part in this movie as Danny's
partner in the police wagon business of picking up stiffs and criminals
and hauling them away.  He is constantly talking in some way about sex,
whether advertently or inadvertently.  Anthony Quinn plays a lonely,
elderly bachelor hopelessly in love with Rose, and always attempting to
gain her heart.  All together, they make for an interesting entourage,
and one well worth seeing.
     To sum it all up: good writing, good directing, good acting, good
story.  What more could you want?  Maybe a free pass to see it like I
got, but it is worth paying your six or seven dollars or whatever you
have to pay where you are to go see it.  Take your boyfriend,
girlfriend, wife, husband, best friend, family, whoever, and treat
yourself to a good movie called ONLY THE LONELY.  I'm pretty sure you'll
like it.
