Title
Review for Brood, The (1979)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Chuck Dowling
The Brood (1979) **1/2 out of ***** - Cast: Oliver Reed, Samantha Eggar, Art
Hindle. Written and Directed by: David Cronenberg. Running Time: 92 minutes.
Very rarely does reading a bad review inspire me to watch a movie. Usually
it's the other way around. A bad review would normally convince me that I
have no desire to see the particular film. But in the case of David
Cronenberg's "The Brood", I just HAD to see it after reading Leonard
Maltin's review of it in his film guide. (Note: I am going to quote the
review now, please understand that I am quoting. This is NOT my opinion but
the opinion of Leonard Maltin which I am using to prove a point. No
scandals, please.)
     "Eggar eats her own afterbirth while midget clones beat
     grandparents and lovely young schoolteachers to death with
     mallets. It's a big, wide, wonderful world we live in!"
Now, if you sometimes enjoy watching a really bad film just to make fun of
it, this must sound like a dream come true! However, after seeing it,
Maltin's description is sadly inappropriate (what he describes is no more
than 3 minutes of the film). Luckily though, it's really not such a bad
movie, and comes dangerously close to being a GOOD one.
I can see how Maltin had a hard time reviewing the film, because it is such
a hard one to describe. But I'll give it a shot. Oliver Reed stars as a
creepy psychologist who cares for mentally ill patients in a compound
somewhere in the woods. One of his patients is a severly traumatized woman
(Eggar) who has a husband (Hindle) and a young daughter. Amazingly, she also
has the wonderful ability to produce an instant child, however a mutant one,
based on her inner rage from her childhood trauma (I know, I know... but
stay with me). These "children" then act upon the rage she feels, killing
the people whom she hates.
Luckily, we don't find this out until the film's final, gruesome scenes. So
until that point it's an intriguing little story about some murders being
committed by "creatures" and it just so happens that the victims have some
relation to Eggar. Her husband, seeking to protect their daughter, sets out
to find the truth.
The horror genre is my least favorite of all genres, and within that genre,
David Cronenberg is one of my least favorite directors. Now, having said
that, you should understand that my rating of the film is EXTREMELY high.
Reed gives an outstanding performance, and helped to make it a bearable,
almost enjoyable experience. I found "The Brood" to be very similar in look
and theme to Larry Cohen's "It's Alive" from 1974, a film that I happened to
enjoy. A major drawback is an incredibly overblown (and therefore
irritating) musical score by Howard Shore which tends to blare at you when
nothing's really going on. And most importantly why I didn't give it a good
rating: I would never want to watch it again. Still, I think I may have to
start re-evaluating some of Cronenberg's other work. There just might
actually be a little story-telling talent there. [R]
--Chuck Dowling  
--Chuck's Movie Reviews -- http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/

Author
Dennis Schwartz

BROOD, THE (director/writer: David Cronenberg; cinematographer: Mark
Irwin; editor: Alan Collins; cast: Oliver Reed (Dr. Hal Raglan),
Samantha Eggar (Nola Carveth), Art Hindle (Frank Carveth), Cindy Hinds
(Candice Carveth), Henry Beckman (Barton Kelly), Nuala Fitzgerald
(Juliana Kelly) Susan Hogan (Ruth Mayer), Nicholas Campbell (Chris),
Gary McKeehan (Michael); Runtime: 92; New World Pictures; 1979-Canada)
A horror film about what problems the human body presents to the modern
world, as one's repressed sexual desires are said to give rise to
demonic psychic forces that can attack the mind and the body. A
stunningly original film, but one that is hardly plausible. Yes. It is
entertaining to a certain degree.
Cronenberg's film has outside forces in the forms of mutant dwarves, who
are controlled by psychic forces and react in a deadly manner to the
rage of the one controlling it. They are the results of the evil
experiments allowed by a mad therapist, Dr. Hal Raglan (Oliver Reed),
the founder of the 'Institute of Psychoplasmics,' as these psychic
manifestations obey the sinister desires of a woman undergoing therapy
for her psychosis, Nola Carveth (Samantha Eggar). The terror seemed more
theatrical than real inner angst, which took away from the film's tense
scenes. The film's theme, a recurring one in filmmaker Cronenberg's
repertoire -- of an unhappy body in a palace revolt -- suggests in no
uncertain terms that dreams can kill ... and that anger if unchecked is
something that takes its toll on the individual and on others.
Frank Carveth (Art Hindle) is a head of a construction company whose
wife Nola is being treated in isolation at the institute's retreat for
her mental illness, by the sinister Dr. Raglan. Frank attends a
demonstration of how Raglan uses his therapy session to get one of his
really sick patients to express his anger to the therapist and thereby
the therapist could begin to deal with the patient's problems-which
brings about lesions on his skin (it can also bring about cancer and new
organ growths). This transference method is called "Psychoplasmics."
When Frank notices that his 5-year-old daughter Candice (Cindy Hinds)
has sores on her back after a visit to her abusive mother, he confronts
Raglan, saying he doesn't want his daughter seeing her mother anymore.
The story proceeds on an erratic course of mixing gore and shock with
cerebral challenges, never establishing which one it is more commmitted
to, as the story moves too far adrift to maintain a credible suspense.
Instead it relies on the intense performance of Oliver Reed, as the
so-called genius experimenter who lost track of right and wrong, to pull
you into the politics of what the film is saying about ethical medicine
and the implications it has for the patients and society.
Frank is the Everyman good father, only concerned about his daughter's
well-being, sure that Raglan is insane, and he is willing to do anything
possible to protect his daughter. He leaves his daughter with his
mother-in-law (Nuala Fitzgerald) to baby-sit while he goes to work and
the mother-in-law gets murdered by one of the 'Brood,' who was hiding in
the cupboard. The murders continue when her estranged husband (Beckman)
returns to the house to stay for her funeral and he is also hammered by
a midget with a mallet, who was hiding in the house. The mutant creature
gets captured by Frank and dies, and the police believe their weird
murders have been solved. But Candy's attractive young schoolteacher is
killed by two midgets with mallets bashing her head in, which takes
place in front of her class. This comes after her visit to Frank's house
and she receives an insulting telephone call from Frank's wife, accusing
her of having an affair with her husband.
The remainder of the film is about Frank protecting his child from a
further attack and eventually confronting Nola and her hatred, who it
turns out is the source of these mutant sexless creatures, controlling
them with her evil thoughts. I say...there's nothing like hatred in a
marriage to turn it into a nightmare.
It's a film that could easily be viewed as being about a bad marriage
and an even uglier separation, in other words a domestic drama with the
trappings of a horror film. While throwing out a lot of nauseating
sights and many themes, the film failed to hold together to make this a
solid effort, but if viewed for its parts rather than its sum, it had
some very strong scenes of relating one's body problems to the
constraints of the mind. In any case, it's more cerebral than the usual
special-effect horror film and is worth seeing for its uniqueness.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
