Title
Review for Bound (1996)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Michael Dequina
Bound (R) **** (out of ****)
        On paper, the noir thriller Bound did not seem like the most
promising of cinematic prospects.  Writers-directors Larry and Andy
Wachowski's only other major credit was for writing Richard Donner's
entertaining but overblown Assassins; lead Jennifer Tilly has a tendency to
be grating, to say the least; and co-star Gina Gershon was just coming off
her overwrought camp queen turn in Showgirls.  But thanks to a clever
script, strong performances, and very accomplished direction, Bound is one
of the year's biggest surprises.
        I thought my low expectations were being met during the film's first
twenty minutes, in which mafia moll Violet (Tilly) tries to seduce the
lesbian grease monkey ex-con (Gershon) next door.  With Tilly delivering her
come-hither lines in an even softer, squeakier voice than usual and
Gershon's Corky keeping one eyebrow perpetually raised, these opening scenes
play like Showgirls 2; in fact, some of the dialogue is reminiscent of the
infamous "tit" discussion scene in Joe Eszterhas's notorious script.
Needless to say, Violet and Corky finally do end up in bed, and the big sex
scene is actually done very discreetly and tastefully though it still
elicited some giggles from the audience.
        These opening moments are something of a joke.  It's as if the
Wachowskis knew expactly what the audience was expecting--cheesy lesbian
sex--so they delivered it in all its campy glory.  But in doing so, it gets
that lesbian angle out of the way quickly, so when the main plot does get
into gear, the audience is not distracted by the anticipation of the big sex
scene.  As laughable as the opening minutes are, they are key to
understanding the relationship between the two women, and they take on a
greater dimension in retrospect as the movie unfolds.
        After the sex scene, the tone quickly shifts, and the main plot is
set into motion.  Violet, fed up with the violent antics of her boyfriend,
mob launderer Ceasar (Joe Pantoliano), wants to leave him--but not without
absconding with $2,000,000 of the mob's cash.  And who does she enlist to
help her in her scheme?  Why, none other than Corky, who cooks up a
"foolproof" plan to steal the cash and frame Ceasar for the theft.  However,
you know what they say about the best laid plans of mice and men...
        This all sounds fairly formulaic, and, to a certain extent, it is.
But what makes Bound so special is the work of the Wachowski brothers.
Their script piles on twist after twist and close call after close call, and
the developments are very believable and not out of left field.  For
example, in a particularly suspenseful scene, a mob figure (John P. Ryan)
breaks out a set of lockpicks to open a locked case, much to the shock of
Ceasar; this revelation does not come off as gimmicky because, earlier, he
nonchalantly unlocked a door without a key.  The Wachowskis pay close
attention to those little details, ones that the audience does not typically
pick up on, using them to rattle the audience later on without insulting
their intelligence.
        Another refreshing aspect of the script is the presence of three
strong and intelligent characters.  At first, it appears as if Corky is the
only one with brains, but as the film progresses Violet and especially
Ceasar prove to be not nearly as dumb as they appear, giving just as good as
they get.  The casting of Tilly and Pantoliano is perfect; Tilly's squeaky
voice and Pantoliano's New Yawk accent and buffoonish demeanor would make it
easy for someone to underestimate them.
        As well-crafted as their script is, the Wachowskis energize it with
a hefty dose of style.  The film is always visually interesting, using
varieties of camera angles and movements, occasionally venturing into
slow-mo without overusing it.  One of their more interesting touches is
aping certain visual cues from other films and putting their own twisted
spin on them: Jurassic Park's famous image of quivering water is
duplicated--in a toilet bowl; and the bravura opening shot of Krzysztof
Kieslowski's Red, which travels along long-distance telephone lines, is
evoked in a clever and hilarious way.  Unlike some directors, who go for the
good-looking shot, plot credibility be damned, the Wachowskis come up with
some stunners that work well within the story, such as when a person gets
shot while standing in a pool of white paint, eventually falling in.  It's a
great-looking image, with the blood clashing against the white, but the
presence of the paint is explained by the fact that, earlier in the film,
Corky is shown painting her apartment.
        Bound has just come off of a tour of various film festivals,
becoming an audience favorite at every one of them.  As it embarks on its
run in (mainly arthouse) theatres, I am sure it will become a favorite of
everyone fortunate enough to be sitting in the auditorium.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/

Author
Randy Turgeon
Summary
    An elevator ride provides the chance meeting between Corky (Gina Gershon)
and Violet (Jennifer Tilly). There is an instant attraction between them. They
don't speak, probably because Violet is not alone. She is escorted by her
boyfriend Caesar (Joe Pantoliano), a cocky Mafia thug. Corky was recently
released from prison and managed to find work performing building maintenance
on
the apartment complex were Violet and Caesar live.
    It is not long before the two women speak, and their obvious attraction
leads to a passionate love affair. Through their conversations we learn more
about them. Violet is basically a full time escort for Caesar, even though she
doesn't let that stop her from having other clients while Caesar is away. She
has never had a lesbian love affair before. Corky is a lesbian and served time
for theft and is apparently very good with power tools. The women fall in love.
    Caesar informs Violet that another member of the Mafia is suspected of
stealing money from the Mafia boss, Gino Marzzone (Richard C. Sarafian).  The
unfortunate suspect is Shelly (Barry Kivel), a client of Violets who is dealt
with severely by Caesar and relinquishes two million dollars that he had
stolen.
Caesar has to clean the money (which was covered with Shelly's blood), count it
and turn it over to Gino.
    Violet and Corky decide to try to steal the money. They concoct a plan that
would not only allow them to get away with the cash, but set up Caesar so that
it would appear that he took it, forcing him to run for his life. Although the
plan seemed like a great idea, the execution of it becomes the women's worst
nightmare, as every possible wrong turn, bad timing and bad luck arises,
putting
their lives in extreme danger.
Commentary
    I can't recall a film where the last hour was so absolutely riveting. A
great edge-of-your seat thriller the keeps the adrenaline flowing. But this
isn't just a thriller, it has elements of black comedy, a love story, and noir.
That is not to say that the setup isn't well done - it is, but it's the
incredible final two-thirds of the film that stick in your mind.
Very compelling characters, especially Caesar, who by usual movie standards
should be the dimwitted Mafia hood bad guy, and Violet, who appears to be the
stereotypical bimbo. Both characters show a surprising intelligence and depth,
and are well played by Pantoliano and Tilly. There is such good acting in this
film that I could mention every performance, but the only other character I
will
single out is Micky (played wonderfully  by John P. Ryan), as a Mafia enforcer
who steals most of his scenes, including a great scene at the end, where he
conveys his feelings to Violet by facial expression alone, without making a
sound. It was incredible acting.
I also wanted to take a quick moment to plug the DVD format. The DVD for Bound
is top notch. Not only does the picture and sound do the format justice, but it
includes the best director commentary I have heard, as the Wachowski brothers
are joined by all three of the leading stars for the narrative. There is a
great
comment where Jennifer Tilly explains how, during a screening of the film the
violent outcome with Shelly is edited out (if you saw it, you know what I am
talking about). Because of this edit, a later scene involving Caesar
threatening
Violet in the same manner didn't have nearly the same dramatic effect. If
anything, it proves the importance of good film editing.
There are many different elements to this film that contribute to its great
style. It seems most of the scenes were shot in one extreme (dark rooms with
many shadows) to another (very bright blinding bathrooms). There are also trick
shots like Gino's slow fall to the floor, Caesar's panic-stricken stumble after
opening his briefcase (he had a camera strapped to his belly), and a slow pan
out to reveal the direct view into a gun barrel. All of these elements do the
film justice to create a mood all its' own. It is refreshing to see first time
directors taking these chances and having confidence in the script.
    An absolute must see film. One of the best films of 1996.
Directed by Larry & Andy Wachowski
Violet................Jennifer Tilly
Corky.................Gina Gershon
Caesar................Joe Pantoliano
Gino..................Richard C. Sarafian
Johnnie...............Christoper Meloni
Micky.................John P. Ryan
Shelly................Barry Kivel
Written by Randy Turgeon, March 4, 1998.

Author
Chad Polenz
Bound
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1996, R, 108 minutes [1 hour, 48 minutes]
[crime]
starring: Jennifer Tilly (Violet), Joe Pantoliano (Caeser), Gina Gershon
(Corky), John P. Ryan (Mickey), produced by Stuart Boros, Andrew Lazar,
written and directed by Andy and Larry Wachowski.
        I think all crime movies have one thing in common: things never go according
to plan. Some crime films use this to create for satire, others use it to
enhance the drama and suspense, but "Bound" is different because it does both
at the same time without contradicting itself.
        The film starts off with a real "crime movie" atmosphere - the type that
could only be created by lovers of the pulp books and cult favorites of the
genre. The setting is present day Chicago where we meet Corky (Gershon), a
lesbian ex-con who is fixing up an empty upscale apartment. When she meets
the next door neighbor Violet (Tilly) there is a clear, but unspoken
attraction between them. It's the kind you'd see in porno movies, so I'm not
sure if it really fits for such a mainstream film and its audience. We get
about 20 minutes of relatively plausible character development and flirting
between Corky and Violet, plus some very erotic sex scenes (at least to a
heterosexual male), but after a while it seems a bit gratuitous. 
        Violet's live-in partner, Caeser (Pantoliano), is your standard "Family
Man," especially the way Pantoliano depicts him - Brooklyn accent, curse
words galore, violent mood swings, etc. Caeser has just recovered $2 million
in cash that belongs to "The Business." But Violet doesn't like Caeser much,
so she and Corky hatch a plan to steal the money, frame Caeser, and screw
over the entire mob in the process.
        It's difficult to describe the scheme the women concoct without describing
it in full detail or giving away the entire film. It's not a complicated plan
really, just a clever one and it's interesting to watch how the events unfold
because just when you think everything is going to work out, something
unexpected happens and the characters must think quickly. There are scenes of
razor-sharp suspense, the kind you wouldn't expect in a film like this.
        The actual events themselves are portrayed just as seriously as Scorsese's
"GoodFellas," with lots of detail. But the offbeat dialogue and the specific
elements that move the plot make for a wholly original, yet satirical
atmosphere not unlike Tarantino's "Pulp Fiction." For example, the money
Violet and Corky try to steal from Caeser was originally covered in blood due
to something that could only happen in a crime movie like this. Nevertheless,
Caeser proceeds to wash, dry, and iron every single $100 bill as if they were
his favorite pair of pants.
        There isn't much else to say about "Bound." It's just another crime film at
the core, but it's told in an original, interesting manner and there's
nothing wrong with that.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Gramercy)
Starring:  Jennifer Tilly, Gina Gershon, Joe Pantoliano.
Screenplay:  Andy Wachowski, Larry Wachowski.
Producers:  Andrew Lazar, Stewart Boros.
Directors:  Andy Wachowski, Larry Wachowski.
Running Time:  108 minutes.
MPAA Rating:  R (violence, adult themes, nudity, sexual situations,
profanity)
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     It's always the same old story:  There's a poor sap just out of the
joint, just trying to make a buck to get by.  Then along comes a dame,
getting real friendly even though she's already mixed up with a guy, only
she says the guy is bad news and she wants the poor sap to help her get
out...and there's money as part of the bargain.  Yep, it's the same old
story...except that in BOUND, the poor sap is another woman.  You might
expect BOUND to try to cruise along on little more than its gender-bending
premise, but you would be wrong.  BOUND is a wickedly entertaining
thriller with a gloriously manic performance by Joe Pantoliano, and it
doesn't need gimmicks to succeed.
     Our resident poor sap is Corky (Gina Gershon), a woman trying to walk
the straight-and-narrow after serving five years for "re-distribution of
wealth."  She is doing maintenance work for a Chicago apartment building
when she meets Violet (Jennifer Tilly), the beautiful, breathy lady living
in the apartment next door to the one she is working on.  Violet is the
kept woman of a low-level mobster named Caesar (Joe Pantoliano), but it
seems she also has eyes for Corky, and the feeling is mutual.  Violet
confides in Corky that she wants to leave Caesar, and hopes to take with
her the $2 million Caesar is holding for his bosses while setting him up
to take the fall.  So Corky hatches a plan to steal the money and force
Caesar to run...except that Caesar doesn't react quite according to plan.
     The first act of BOUND sticks quite close to the standard film noir
formula story line outlined above, complete with femme fatale Violet
seducing Corky with drinks and double-entendre, Corky engaging in
suspicious second-guessing, and a partnership in crime which seems less
than entirely trustworthy.  Gershon (SHOWGIRLS), sporting lips so full she
seems unable to close her mouth entirely, makes an acceptable stand-in for
the usual male dumb lug, with just a touch of Bogart's world-weary
cynicism.  The sex scene between Gershon and Tilly is utterly gratuitous
after the much more effective seduction scene, however, and BOUND begins
to raise red flags of turning into pure exploitation when heads begin
smashing into toilets and severed fingers begin flying.
     I also feared I saw danger signs of BOUND becoming a case of
lesbian-chic meets plot-twist-chic once Violet and Corky get their hands
on Caesar's money, that it would play itself out with the two women
exchanging double-crosses until poetic justice was served.  The reason
that doesn't happen is that Andy and Larry Wachowski (ASSASSINS) have no
intention of letting Caesar be little more than a plot device.  As played
by Joe Pantoliano, Caesar is a giddy display of sheer survival instinct as
he thwarts the carefully-laid plans of Corky and Violet to set him up by
taking on the people Violet expected him to run from.  Pantoliano has some
hilarious moments as he becomes ever more desperate, including a
conversation with a corpse which is as comic as it is one-sided, and BOUND
begins building merrily tense scene on top of merrily tense scene.
     I suppose the thing that makes BOUND particularly satisfying is that
it is simply a very good thriller -- suspenseful, unpredictable,
well-acted and stylishly directed.  On one level, I suppose you could
argue that the lesbian angle is unnecessary, and that the Wachowskis
include it simply for titillation value, but it is precisely because it is
unnecessary that I think it is so noteworthy.  BOUND would have been just
as effective if Corky had been a man, or if Caesar had been a woman, or if
all three main characters had been men.  It was not all that long ago that
film-makers began talking about "color-blind casting," choosing actors not
because their race or ethnicity was intrinsic to the roles but because
they were the best actors available for those roles.  In BOUND, Gina
Gershon makes a sharp little suspense thriller that much more intriguing
by being perhaps the first example of "sexuality-blind casting."  Here's
to the poor saps of the world, whatever their gender.

Author
news@daily-bugle.newsops.execpc.com
Sitting in the sole film criticism course I took years ago
in college, I was suddenly puzzled as a montage of great
moments of movie romance flickered on the screen in front of
me.  While the course didn't focus on a certain era of film,
I suddenly realized that all of the powerfully romantic
movie scenes that I had witnessed were primarily in the
movies of the 30's and 40's.  I thought about the scenes in
more recent movies where characters exhibited romantic
chemistry, and couldn't think of a single one where the
chemistry between the two characters was so great that it
overpowered me like the older films.  Recently, however, I
realized that the kind of powerful romance I thought was
missing in cinema was making a comeback -- there have been
many scenes in films I've seen since 1994 that have taken my
breath away with the amount of love and passion exhibited on
the screen.  The common thread?  All of those scenes have
been between two members of the same sex.
Early in BOUND, Violet (Jennifer Tilly) spots Corky (Gina
Gershon) in an elevator she's riding with her boyfriend,
Caesar (Joe Pantoliano).  The camera hovers at the top of
the elevator, showing an aerial view of the occupants:
pinned to different points in the elevator.  Later, Violet
brings coffee over to the apartment next door that Corky is
working on, to have her turn off plumbing equipment that was
making quite a lot of noise.  Soon after, Corky receives a
call from the landlord that Violet has accidentally lost an
earring in the sink.  Corky goes over, and what follows is
one of the most erotic scenes that I've seen in any recent
movie as Violet, flush with desire, seduces Corky using her
breathy voice.  There's no nudity in that particular scene
-- it combines the kind of seduction present in the great
noir of the 40's with 90's sexuality in a mix which managed
to affect me more than any other romantic moment in any
recent film about heterosexuals.
Next, Caesar walks in the room and shouts in bewilderment.
"What the HELL is going on..." and then stops, realizes that
Corky is a woman, grins broadly and apologizes.  In BOUND
there is constant play between the noir conventions of the
40's and the modifications necessary for the 90's Chicago
the film is set in -- BOUND takes the noir genre and puts a
refreshing new spin on it, without ever succumbing to the
cartoonishness or day-glo absurdity found in PULP FICTION or
one of its multiple knockoffs.  Larry and Andy Wachowski
have the camera move in grand, smooth gestures, as if
they're trying to be parts Welles, Scorcese and Coen. They
engulf their images in such dark, noir tones that if the
film were rereleased in black and white and a few outdoor
scenes were edited out, nobody would notice the difference.
If anything, BOUND is worth the price of admission for the
production design alone.
It's hard to believe that the Wachowski brothers were
writers on the 1995 abomination ASSASSINS, a film which
seemed to showcase tremendous lapses in its characters logic
throughout the script.  In BOUND, on the other hand,
everything makes sense, nobody is stupid, and mistakes
aren't made.  Instead, you see the characters wrestling
through a situation, all trying to find the cleanest way
out... and typically becoming trapped and failing after
taking "the best possible move".  The character of Caesar
seems at first to be a stereotypically stupid mobster: but
as the film progresses, the script treats him with respect
as he tries his hardest to logically wrest himself from the
situation at hand.  Violet also, at first, seems to be the
standard bimbo, the kind who falls in with strong
personalities and can be taken advantage of (by the villain,
typically, as a plot point): but as the movie progresses,
that couldn't be further from the way she is.  There's an
economy of bullets and gunplay in BOUND, and what could have
amounted to a fairly standard standoff and shootout is
turned into a drowsy and dizzying scene by some incredibly
well-choreographed camera movements and realistic gunplay.
I typically dislike "thrillers" of this sort, as they're
typically collections of cliche arranged slightly
differently than another movie, without character
development, suspense, or genuine surprises.  Without the
intelligence, passion and artistry the Wachowski brothers
put into BOUND, the same script could easily have been
modified to make the same sort of boring so-called "erotic
thriller" or Gen-X crime drama that span the shelves at any
video rental store.  Instead, the Wachowskis take the
conventions of noir and bring them new life, creating an
erotic, suspenseful and ultimately very exciting film.
Dave Cowen (esch@fische.com)
Eschatfische. ------------------------- http://www.fische.com

Author
John Roberdeau
Writers: Andy and Larry Wachowski
Directors: Andy and Larry Wachowski
Producers: Andy and Larry Wachowski, Stuart Boros, Andrew Lazar
Bound is a movie that I think pretty much everyone should see.  For those
who enjoy a well-written, suspenseful crime drama, this movie is a good
choice.  For anybody who is more interestd in astonishing visuals that you
want to watch over and over again, this is _unquestionably_ the movie you
want.  If you have more simple tastes, there are quite a few amusing jokes,
some really good acting (Pantoliano is particularly impressive), and even
a lesbian sex scene...  The list goes on and on.  No matter what your
reason, though, it's a really good movie.
For me, the best part about it is the visuals -- the brothers Wachowski have
accompilished a great deal on what is probably not a huge budget.  The movie
has a great Noir sort of feal, and the directors went to great lengths to
make every shot in the movie interesting and very pleasing to the eye.
Great
use of slow-motion and interesting camera effects abound.
As I said, though, there is more here than a technical marvel.  The writing
(also the work of Larry and Andy Wachowski) is first rate -- the story,
though not the most original ever,  has some variations on the norm, and
there's a good blend of humor and drama.  I don't really want to give away
anything about the plot, so I'm going to keep my mouth shut.  Basically,
though, it's a mob/crime kind of a thing -- sort of.
It's worth saying that though there are good performances all around, the
Wachowskis and the cinematographer, Bill Pope (he has also worked on "Zero
Effect" which I will review sometime as well as "Clueless", "Fire in the
Sky", and "Army of Darkness"), are the clear stars of this production.
There are way too many things I love about this film for me to list them
all, and most of them would just be "this part's awesome" or somesuch, and
that wouldn't be much help to anybody.
Now, even if the movie doesn't sound that good (I didn't think so when other
people told me about it), please do yourself a favor and try it out.  Also,
don't let a dislike for one or all of the stars stop you from watching it
either -- I most definitely was not a fan of Tilly prior to this film, and I
certainly had no positive feelings about anyone else in the film.  This
movie
will change that.
Not seeing this film would have been one of the worst mistakes of my life.
It is a well-conceived and very well-exectued movie.  The directors have a
unique vision that I think make this movie one of the better ones I have
ever seen.

Author
Ben Hoffman
          Exciting? Yes.  Good story?  Yes.  Then what is my
complaint?  It is the gratuitous gore.  Do the directors really have
to show a pair of scissors, such as is used to cut twigs or small
branches, while the gangsters cut off the fingers one by one of a
suspected cheat?  His head is in the toilet and the blood is gushing
all over the place.  I could have done with that.
          Too bad because the story is a good thriller.  Two women
(Gina Gershon and Jennifer Tilly), in an attempt to outwit the male
Mobsters makes for an exciting film. The two, who happen to be
Lesbians, against the gangsters tosses in another angle in mobster
films.   But the film kept bugging me with all the shooting and blood
and the aforementioned scissors and kept me from enjoying the film's
story more.
          An odd thing was the acting of Ceasar (sic) who seemed to
be doing an imitation of Jack Nicholson right down to the whites in
his eyeballs whenever he looked upward, a distinct Nicholson
affectation.
          I don't know whether or not I liked the film well enough to
overcome the violence.  If that kind of mayhem does not bother you, you
will enjoy the rest of the film.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Jennifer Tilly, Gina Gershon, Joe Pantoliano, John Ryan, 
      Christopher Meloni, Richard Sarafian 
Directors: The Wachowski Brothers
Producers: Andrew Lazar and Stuart Boros
Screenplay: The Wachowski Brothers
Cinematography: Bill Pope
Music: Don Davis
U.S. Distributor: Gramercy Pictures 
     BOUND appears to be ripe with all the elements necessary for a top-
notch exploitation flick:  leather, guns, gangsters, blood, and a couple 
of hot-to-trot lesbians.  From the first scene, however, it's obvious 
that the writing/directing team of Andy and Larry Wachowski are aiming 
for something considerably higher than rudimentary titillation.  And, by 
taking chances and twisting conventions, they have hit paydirt.  BOUND 
is among the best film noir entries of the decade; from beginning to 
end, it's solidly entertaining.
     Ceasar (Joe Pantoliano) is a money launderer for the mob (sometimes 
in a very literal fashion -- watch how he cleans up a sack of bloody 
bills).  His live-in girlfriend, Violet (Jennifer Tilly), a closet 
lesbian, is itching to get free of him ("I want out!  I want a new 
life!").  She sees her chance when an ex-con named Corky (Gina Gershon) 
moves in next door.  Methodically, Violet seduces Corky, then, after a 
heated sexual encounter, the two plot how to liberate Violet along with 
$2 million of the mob's money that's currently in Ceasar's possession.
     Saying more than that about BOUND would be unfair, because the plot 
is loaded with the unexpected.  For most thrillers, I'm able to predict 
the so-called "surprises" far in advance, but this film's well-
orchestrated twists kept me off balance.  Until the final scenes, it's 
impossible to be sure of anyone or anything.  The biggest question, 
which is raised by the characters and stays with us, is who can be 
trusted?  We're never sure who's on the level and who's lying.  Since 
the Wachowskis don't feel bound by the conventions of the genre, they 
freely violate our expectations.  Best of all, everything that 
transpires in BOUND makes perfect sense -- the film doesn't demand 
unreasonable leaps of logic to tie everything together.  In that way, 
it's like BLOOD SIMPLE and THE LAST SEDUCTION.
     Perhaps the most intriguing departure from the norm is the use of a 
pair of lesbians as the main characters.  Ultimately, it's a great 
choice, both from a plotting and an aesthetic standpoint.  Jennifer 
Tilly and Gina Gershon steam up the screen with the kind of eroticism 
that is rarely found in same-sex or opposite-sex couplings.  From the 
closeups of Gershon's hands and Tilly's legs to the love scene (which is 
played with an undercurrent of humor), the Wachowskis understand exactly 
how to photograph these two to their best effect, using shadows and 
unusual camera angles to intensify the sensuality.  
     Tilly doesn't have great range, but she can do this kind of role in 
her sleep.  With her high-pitched, breathy voice and low-cut necklines, 
she's perfect as Violet, BOUND's femme fatale.  Unlike her Oscar-
nominated part in BULLETS OVER BROADWAY, this gangster's moll isn't a 
ditz.  In fact, she's quite intelligent, and that makes her a force to 
be reckoned with.  Meanwhile, Gina Gershon does an about face from her 
glamorous turn in SHOWGIRLS, essaying the tough, James Dean-like Corky, 
a professional thief who's interested in cleaning her life up until she 
falls for Violet and the $2 million.  Gershon, who gave one of the 
better performances in Paul Verhoeven's trashy T&A-fest, is excellent 
here, capturing our sympathy from the first reel.  And Corky, like 
Violet, is smart.  
     The intended victim of Violet and Corky's plan, Ceasar, isn't dumb, 
either, and his refusal to act predictably fuels several scenes that are 
thick with tension.  Actor Joe Pantoliano (THE FUGITIVE) plays Ceasar as 
a normally-cool man driven over the edge when he loses control of 
circumstances.  But, despite his growing panic, Ceasar still tries to 
think things through, and this makes him a dangerous adversary.  Watch 
for how he uses the re-dial button on a phone.
     From a stylistic perspective, this is a beautiful film -- a color 
motion picture with black-and-white sensibilities (as is often true of 
the best modern film noir). Shadows and light are used to good effect.  
The Wachowskis, along with cinematographer Bill Pope, have crafted a 
number of artistically superior shots.  In one instance, we see a 
droplet of crimson fall into the clear water of a toilet, then slowly 
diffuse.  In another, we see hundreds of $100 bills hanging by pins from 
a makeshift clothesline.  Then there's a scene where blood spatters a 
small pool of fresh white paint.  
     From the opening moments, ripe with sexual tension, to the closing 
shot, BOUND offers an edge-of-the-seat experience.  No noir thriller 
since last year's THE USUAL SUSPECTS has captured my attention this 
fully.  (Curiously, both SUSPECTS and BOUND were released by the same 
distributor, Gramercy Pictures.) If this film was less adeptly-made, it 
might go down as a "guilty pleasure", but, considering the amount of 
skill and intelligence invested in the production, there's nothing 
remotely shameful about this particular indulgence.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin
"We go away from our parents in youth and then we gradually come back to
them; and in that moment, we have grown up." -- Ingmar Bergman

Author
Christopher Null
     Does anyone else out there have a terrible time taking Jennifer
Tilly seriously, no matter what role she plays?  Well, I do, and her
performance in BOUND is no exception to the rule.
     Here, Tilly plays Violet, a mobster's wife with a plan to make off
with $2 million of the Mafia's money.  Enlisting the aid of Corky
(SHOWGIRLS's Gina Gershon), your everyday laborer/lesbian-next-door, the
two ladies play a game of double-cross with the mob, with Violet's
husband Caesar (RISKY BUSINESS's Joe Pantoliano) set to take the fall.
     As you might expect, it doesn't quite go according to plan, and as
the bodies stack up, the stakes get higher and higher.  If this sounds
familiar, you're probably recalling FARGO, which is structured almost
identically, but which is realized to a level of near-perfection that
BOUND is sorely lacking.
     BOUND is a stylish thriller, emphasis on style. 
Writers-directors-brothers Andy and Larry Wachowski use an avant-garde
and downright bizarre photographic motif of the extreme close-up
variety.  On the one hand this is interesting, and on the other it is
quite annoying.  The Wachowskis' style is so dynamic that it literally
feels like the viewer is being pushed around, making BOUND a
participative experience, like it or not.
     And to be perfectly honest, I'd rather not.  Placing much more
energy into "looking cool," the script ends up falling a bit flat in
areas where a little more complexity could have been used.  Most notable
in this regard is a dropped-in-your-lap ending that feels as if someone
just forgot about it until the last second.
     But there's a lot of meat between the opening credits and that --
Pantoliano is a lot of fun as his now-instantly recognizable trollish
tough guy, and the noirish feel to the picture really keeps you on the
edge of your seat.  Fans of the thriller genre will probably be
moderately pleased, as I was, but will leave hungry for more.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Steve Rhodes
     BOUND is a classic film noir.  It is made even more so with at
once both innovative and nostalgic cinematography by Bill Pope.
Although it is a color film, his color palette consists of exactly five
colors - black, white, gray, flesh tones, and red for blood.  Actually,
there is a smattering of a sixth color, green, but that is it.  If you
have to see blues, purples, or yellows in your pictures, don't bother
to see this film; they aren't there.
     If you want to know more about the process behind this, last
Sunday's (October 6, 1996) New York Times's Arts and Leisure section
had a long and fascinating article about the cinematic process behind
this film.  In it you get to learn all kinds of cinematographic lingo
and trivia, like what does the DP (Director of Photography) ask the set
designer when they first meet to do a picture?
     The answer, so that I do not get a thousand letters asking me, is
"what is white to you."  It seems there are innumerable gradations of
white, and the colors of the sets revolve that fundamental choice.
     As in FORGO, the show is done by a couple of brothers.  This time
is the Wachowski brothers, Andy and Larry, rather the Coens.  The
Wachowskis both the directed the film and wrote the script.  Although
some of the strong imagery and shock value is the same, the Wachowski
are just not in the same league as the Coens.  The only other movie
credit the Wachowskis have is that they wrote the script for the
formulaic action thriller ASSASSINS for Sylvester Stallone.
     All of this notwithstanding, BOUND is a good show with more twists
and turns that you can count.  If you can guess them all, go to the
head of the class, I certainly couldn't, and for that reason I am going
to tell you very little about the story itself.
     To make their film noir fresh and different, the Wachowskis have
the leads be a pair of lesbian lovers.  One, Corky (Gina Gershon), does
home construction.  She is tough as nails, has lots of tattoos, and is
usually very greasy from her work unclogging drains.  The other, Violet
(Jennifer Tilly), looks sweet and harmless, but isn't.  She is sort of
a permanently attached call girl to a money launderer, Caesar (Joe
Pantoliano), in the mob.
     The plot is an elaborate double cross labyrinth.  After the
obligatory scene where Corky and Violet meet and have some intense sex,
Violet tells Corky her plan to steal the two million dollars in mob
money that Caesar is holding until the big boss, Gino Marzzone (Richard
C. Sarafian), comes the next day to collect it.  Corky is an ex-con who
was in for five years for "income redistribution."  She is tough and
wise and tells Violet that she doesn't trust her.  She says that having
sex with someone is easy, but you really have to know them to commit a
crime together.
     The story is told in flashbacks and flashforwards.  Editor Zach
Staenberg cuts the scenes fast enough to maintain the high energy, but
not so quick as to confuse the audience with the time frames.  The
strong and dramatic music by Don Davis has the horns blasting to keep
up the tension.  Subtle it is not.  The sound effects editing is
equally heavy.  Listen for example to the sound of Caesar's heart about
to burst out of his chest when the cops arrive.
     The acting is all good.  Although he only got third billing, I was
particularly fond of Joe Pantoliano's realistic bumbling.
     BOUND runs 1:49.  It is rated R for sex, nudity, violence, gore,
and bad language.  This is a film for adults and quite mature teenagers
not easily sickened when someone's fingers are being cut off.  I had a
great time watching the plot's twists and turns so I recommend this
movie although granted it is not for everyone, and I award it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
