Title
Review for Carry On Up the Khyber (1968)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Graeme Huggan
   One of the best of the Carry on films. Set in India in the 1890's, the 
main story is all about the attempts by the Khasi of Kalabar (Kenneth 
Williams) to oust British rule from Kalabar forever. He pits his wits 
against the British viceroy Sir Sidney Ruff-Diamond (Sidney James) and 
the British army, otherwise known as the 'Devils in Skirts' due to them 
wearing a kilt and not wearing any underwear. 
   When Private Jimmy Widdle (Charles Hawtrey) is found wearing underwear 
while on patrole at the Khyber Pass by Bungdit Din, the Khasi's associate 
(Bernard Bresslaw), it brings the whole regiment into shame and fuels the 
Khasi's desire to kill the British who are no longer the 'Devils in 
Skirts'.
   Other story threads include Sir Sidney's wife, Lady Ruff-Diamond's 
(Joan Sims) attempt to help the Khasi and in return she will become one 
of his wives, and the romance between the Khasi's daughter Princess Jelhi 
(Angela Douglas) and Captain Keene of the Regiment (Roy Castle).
   At the end, there is a climactic battle for supremacy in Kalabar 
during which the British keep a stiff upper lip. The final scenes around 
Sir Sidney's dinner table are hilarious.
   A high-spirited and good-humoured effort, with great performances from 
Sid James as the lecherous old governor and Joan Sims as his 'dutiful' 
wife. Charles Hawtrey's characterisation reaches its zenith with his 
portrayal of Private Widdle, a bumbling and dim-witted fool. Kenneth 
Williams still plays a nasty character but adds a new voice to his 
repertoire and is exceedingly funny. Julian Holloway is perfect as Major 
Shorthouse and Roy Castle (in his only Carry on film) is well-suited to 
the part of Captain Keene.
   On the other hand, the other regulars try their best but suffer from 
some very limited parts. Peter Butterworth as Brother Belcher the 
missionary is surplus to requirements, as is Terry Scott as Sergeant 
Major MacNutt. Bernard Bresslaw plays the boring part of Bungdit Din but 
still manages to be amusing.
   Up the Khyber is a great Carry on film. The actors are praiseworthy, 
the sets and costumes are lavish, and production values are better than 
usual. The plot is very complex compared to other Carry on's and there 
are many memorable scenes, such as the final dining room scene and 
Private Widdle's scene involving the loss of his undergarments!
   This was the producer Peter Rogers' favourite film and is one of mine 
too. However, I do not think that it is the best Carry on film. 
Nevertheless, it is certainly unmissable.
