Title
Review for Planes, Trains & Automobiles (1987)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Chad Polenz
*** (out of 4 = good)
1987, R, 93 minutes [1 hour, 33 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Steve Martin (Neil Page), John Candy (Del Griffith), written,
produced, and directed by John Hughes.
"Plane, Trains, And Automobiles" is a great bonding movie about two
completely opposite strangers that, through a series of strange coincidences
that seem perfectly logical, keep bumping into each other and driving each
other crazy.
The story starts off simple enough: Neil (Martin), an ad executive from
Chicago on a business trip to New York, eagerly awaits a client's approval of
his project (immediately Hughes' world of fantastic satire makes itself
clear). Next we see Neil running around the streets of New York trying to
find a cab during rush hour. And just as it seems he has found one, someone
steals it! Later at the airport, Neil recognizes the thief, who is
surprisingly apologetic and seems kind. He introduces himself as Del
Griffith, a shower curtain ring salesman who is constantly anxious and can't
keep quiet. 
Like magnets, Neil and Del keep coming together, almost as if fate won't let
them separate. They end up sitting next to each other on the plane, and even
end up sleeping in the same bed in the same hotel room that night. I won't
explain how that happens because it would kill the point of the comedy.
Hughes' story is so charming, and the acting so convincing we never once
question the reality of any of the plot devices.
The chemistry between Martin and Candy at times upstages Hughes' script and
direction, because it's a relationship that really can't be written. Candy's
happy-go-lucky attitude is countered by Martin's cynicism and acid tongue.
Consider the situation of the two being stuck in the same hotel room: while
Del enjoys a beer, Neil showers to a faulty water system and is left with
only a washcloth to dry himself with. And to top it off, the two must sleep
in the same bed soaked with beer because it didn't occur to Del that leaving
a six pack of beer on a vibrating bed might cause contents under pressure.
Even more hilarity ensues when the two wake up the next morning in one of the
funniest and most clever situations I've ever seen.
Why is fate so cruel to these poor guys? While at the hotel they are robbed,
then travel 30 miles in the freezing cold to a train station only to have the
train break down and then take a bus full of even more characters.
The last act is the best even though it takes place mostly in a car. The two
rent a car and try to drive home, but as if the comedy had not already been
off the wall, it becomes even more zany. Even dropping hints would 
give too much away, but let's just say whatever hasn't happened to Neil and
Del probably will by the film's end.
We'll probably never go through such wacky adventures as Neil and Del, but
"Planes, Trains, And Automobiles" is so fun to watch you'll wish the same
things would happen to you. 
[Note: This film could have been rated PG had it not been for a 1-minute
scene in which Martin's character rattles off the "F" word many times. The
film would be appropriate for children 13 and up.]
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Author
David Wilcock
A comedy starring John Candy and Steve Martin
This film must feature one of the greatest comedy pairings of all
time.  Frankly, the pairing of John Candy and Steve Martin was a stroke
of genius. Candy, with his lovable 'fat guy with heart' character,
shows some real emotion, and Steve Martin, 'the cold hearted cynic' who
we gradually start to like too.  Thankfully, however, the film they
have been put in toghether has got some hillarous moments in it, and is
mostly funny all the way through.
Hughes has already shown that he has a good hand at teen comedy (see
FERRIS BUELLERS DAY OFF for an example) and now he is working with
adults. And he has now shown that he can do great films with adults
aswell. The plot goes like this. Steve Martin is on his way to see his
family for Thanksgiving, but naturally things horribly wrong. First of
all, his cab is stolen by John Candy (after Martin paid $75 to bribe
the person who called the cab to take it off him). Then, at the
airport, he discovers that he will now how to be sitting next to Candy.
Then the plane gets diverted, and Martin has to share a hotel room with
Candy (which features one of the funniest lines involving pillows) Also
in the hotel sequence, we get to see Candys first real show of emotion,
and this comes off quite well without being to soppy or mushy. I won't
go into the other events when Martin has to pair up with Candy, but
they do involve trains and automobiles, and some good jokes.
The best thing about this film, overall, is that it is consistenly
funny.  Many films now have some good jokes, but also some very 'dead'
moments when nothing happens. But any film with Martin and Candy has to
be funny. If Hughes had carried on making films like this, and not
trash like Home Alone and Beethoven, then he would be a millionare.
Overall, this is good fun, and I would recommended to anyone who's
looking for a film full of laughs, but also with a bit of character and
heart in there aswell.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
PLANES, TRAINS AND AUTOMOBILES (1987) *** 1/4  Written, produced and
directed by John Hughes. Cinematography, Don Peterman. Editing, Paul
Hirsch. Music, Ira Newborn. Cast: Steve Martin, John Candy,  Laila Robins,
Michael McKean, Kevin Bacon,  Dylan Baker, et al. A Paramount release. 93
minutes. Rated R.
Bete noire [from the  French. Literally "black beast] : a person, situation
or thing strongly detested or avoided: bugbear.
For Steve Martin, an ad executive who tries to get from New York home to
Chicago for Thanksgiving, the Odyssey of his trip is bad enough without
having to put up with the companionship of a slob, curtain-ring salesman
John Candy.  Candy is his "bete noire."  For this critic too,  Candy has
been a "bete noire" in movie after movie.  But a funny thing happened on
the way to Chicago. As the odd couple approaches the Windy City, Candy
ceases to be a "bete noire" both for Martin and for me.
John Candy  isn't about to replace Laurence Olivier -- or even Oliver Hardy
(few fat comics ever reach the top), but within his specialized persona he
finally comes into his own  in Planes, Trains And Automobiles.
Martin's troubles begin when he tries to catch, in the Manhattan jungle, a
cab to the airport . They increase exponentially during the movie's
one-and-a-half  hours. Candy, in the next seat on the plane, attaches
himself to Martin. When the plane cannot land at  O'Hare and ends up in
Wichita, willy-nilly the overage yuppie and the proletarian  have to face
together a picaresque series of detours through the Midwest. All involve
misadventures, frustrations and delays, and most means of transportation,
including a garish taxi, a missing rental car, and another one that catches
fire. Martin  cannot stand Candy, periodically abandons him, but fate
throws them back together again as they share all imaginable catastrophes,
from sleazy motel rooms to having their money stolen by burglars.
The basic comedy of the film is  that of an odd couple having to face the
many traumas of modern transportation gone haywire. Those ordeals are so
true that the less you have travelled the more you will laugh. But chances
are that  if you 're a frequent traveller the movie's  chain  of horrors
and frustrations will make you shiver rather than giggle. What
writer-director Hughes depicts is firmly embedded in reality, with minimal
exaggerations.
Hughes' view of a traveller's  America is quite jaundiced. What he does
with  New York is nasty, with people like a lawyer who gives up his cab
only after Martin has bid up to $75, or like a thoroughly bitchy
stewardess. Mid-America fares poorly too as Hughes works into his scenario
much physical ugliness of people and places.
Looking at it in this way, it doesn't really amount to comedy. But Hughes
is a canny fellow who knows which  tricks of the trade will work on mass
audiences. His movies are what Sara Lee heat-and-serve croissants are to
the real, pastry-shop product. Not the best but  reliable. So the trick in
this movie is to go beyond the ordinary and into the outlandish by adding
to  the travails of travel a mismatched duo. Otherwise, the incidents of
this trek, when taken item by item, could be too depressingly familiar to
induce any kind of mirth.
This particular notion (which is not like Neil Simon's The Odd Couple) is
not new to the movies. Its twist is to chain together (literally or
metaphorically) unlikely or antagonistic companions, who by journey's end,
will be friends or lovers. Frank Capra did it in It Happened One Night.
Alfred Hitchcock did this in The 39 Steps, with fugitive Robert Donat
handcuffed to Madeleine Carroll. Stanley Kramer shackled Tony Curtis to
Sidney Poitier in The Defiant Ones. Cop movies do it all the time these
days,  mostly with interracial partners.
I suspect that P,T & A works on the audience in different ways. For some
early-laughing viewers, past a certain point, the accumulation of
misfortunes may become mechanical. For others (including  myself) it is
precisely when the  pile of troubles becomes monstrous that  the movie
becomes really funny, because it  shifts from the realm of the almost real
to that of the almost unreal simply through the sheer weight of incidents.
This turning point is, for me, roughly when Martin, stranded on the tarmac
of the St.Louis airport  and unable to find his rented car, goes into the
familiar Steve Martinish flailings and contortions. Until about that time,
Martin has uncharacteristically been more of a straight man to Candy, more
re-actor than actor, from the opening scene of the movie.
John Candy himself may seem to be pretty consistent with (though much
better than) his previous parts, but there is in fact a major change. He
has stopped clowning and  artificially calling attention to himself. He is
not a comic any more, he is the unredeemable slob. But his good nature and
resilience slowly gain Martin's    grudging sympathy, and perhaps the
audience's. The film throws in some last-minute pathos --an old cinematic
ploy that Hughes uses to pull  the wool over the eyes of  audiences willing
to suspend logic in favor of a nice warm feeling. Does anyone  really
believe that The Slob That Came to Dinner will remain  forever Martin's
friend? But then this film is coming out during the holiday season, when we
all pretend that this is a wonderful life.
Please Note: Do not leave your seat during the end credits. There's a
clever post-scriptum right after them.
Written December 23 1987. Minimal revision  April  5 1999.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
James Berardinelli
     PLANES, TRAINS, AND AUTOMOBILES, a 1987 feature from John Hughes, 
represented something of a watershed in the career of the prolific 
writer/director/producer.  Prior to this film,  Hughes had been known 
for his contribution to the popular '80s genre of "the teen movie."  
Unlike most film makers working in that arena, Hughes eschewed the cheap 
T&A exploitation of flicks like PORKY'S in favor of surprisingly 
sensitive character interaction and relationship building.  Hughes made 
his early reputation with pictures like SIXTEEN CANDLES, THE BREAKFAST 
CLUB, and FERRIS BUELLER'S DAY OFF.  By the time PLANES, TRAINS, AND 
AUTOMOBILES arrived, Hughes had abandoned the teen genre, and was 
searching for something new.  He would find it two years later when he 
wrote and produced HOME ALONE.  PLANES, TRAINS, AND AUTOMOBILES was a 
bridge between the two phases of his career, containing elements of both 
character development and physical comedy.
     My recollection of seeing PLANES, TRAINS, AND AUTOMOBILES during 
its theatrical run was that I laughed hard and often. Re-watching it 
recently, however, I was struck that, while the comedy is undeniable, 
the dramatic underpinning of the script is stronger than I remembered.  
The "hook" that draws the viewer in is the humor, but the movie's real 
appeal is the characters.  Don't mistake what I'm saying -- there's 
nothing deep, dark, or profound lurking in the subtext.  This isn't 
Dostoevsky, nor does it want to be.  But it takes the time to round out 
the protagonists and allow us to care about what happens to them.  There 
are moments in this film that tug at the heartstrings.
     PLANES, TRAINS, AND AUTOMOBILES is a Murphy's Law story.  For 
salesman Neal Page (Steve Martin), everything that can possibly go wrong 
is about to do so.  This is like Martin Scorsese's AFTER HOURS on a 
grander, less psychotic scale.  It all starts in New York City, two days 
before Thanksgiving.  Neal is eager to get home into the bosom of his 
family so he can enjoy the holiday.  But bad weather intervenes.  His 
flight from Laguardia to O'Hare is diverted to Wichita, Kansas after a 
snowstorm hits Chicago.  What makes the trip even longer is that Neal is 
stuck next to one of those good-natured, annoying talkers who won't shut 
up.  The man's name is Del Griffith (John Candy), and he's a shower 
curtain ring salesman armed with an endless supply of dumb jokes and 
pointless anecdotes.  This isn't the first time Neal has run into him, 
either.  Earlier in the day, when Neal was trying to get to the airport, 
Del stole his cab, getting their relationship off to a rocky start.
     In the time-honored tradition of the buddy comedy, PLANES, TRAINS, 
AND AUTOMOBILES throws these two mismatched individuals together and 
allows them to suffer all sorts of bizarre misfortunes as they try to 
get home before the turkey is served.  They spend a night in a cramped 
hotel room sleeping in the same bed, endure the blatant incompetence of 
uncaring rental car clerks, suffer through transportation breakdowns, 
and watch one of their last hopes literally go up in smoke.  We know 
they're eventually going to reach the Windy City, so the fun is watching 
their slow, reluctant bonding as they take planes, trains, automobiles, 
and tractor trailers to get there.
     Steve Martin plays the anal Neal with equal parts unyielding 
rigidity and maniacal intensity.  But, although he has a few memorable 
"wild and crazy guy" outbursts, Martin's performance is largely 
restrained.  He does a good job presenting the increasingly-desperate 
facade of a normal guy who is enduring a living nightmare, and who 
really doesn't want to have anything to do with the jovial boob who is 
drawn to him like a fly to garbage.  Martin enables us to empathize with 
Neal by conveying the important fact that he isn't a nasty person -- 
he's just someone who's reacting badly to his circumstances.
     As Del, the late comedian John Candy, an SCTV alum, gives one of 
the two best-rounded performances on his resume (the other was in Only 
the Lonely).  Candy imbues Del with more depth that one initially 
expects from the big man.  Although he's a compulsive talker and an all-
around buffoon, his gregarious personality hides a deep loneliness.  
During one scene, when Neal is berating him for his unfunny stories, we 
see the hurt gradually build in Del's eyes.  One of the keys to PLANES, 
TRAINS, AND AUTOMOBILES' success is that both actors develop their 
characters into fully-formed individuals instead of caricatures.  We can 
laugh at them when they wake up horrified after inadvertently snuggling 
together during the night, then sympathize with them in their quest for 
warmth and companionship during the cold, lonely holiday season.
     PLANES, TRAINS, AND AUTOMOBILES is one of those rare movies that 
manages to mingle outrageous comedy and light drama in such a way that 
we aren't repulsed or offended by its simplicity and occasional 
mawkishness.  It's a fine cinematic treat that doesn't demand much from 
a viewer, but gives back a lot, both in terms of laughter and good 
feeling.  
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."

Author
Hal Render
     I saw PLANES, TRAINS, AND AUTOMOBILES last night and left with mixed
feelings about it.  On the surface it is one thing, in reality something else,
and the dichotomy is not handled as well as it could be.  I think
writer/director John Hughes has made another attempt at a comedy with a serious
underside, but this time the two goals do not mesh as well as in past films.  
     Basically the plot concerns marketing exec Neil Page (Steve Martin) and
his attempts to return home from a business trip just before Thanksgiving.  The
trip starts awful and gets worse, due to a combination of incredibly bad luck
and the presence of Del Griffith (John Candy).  Del is a sales rep and one of
the single most boorish people on the face of the earth.  For the purpose of
this trip he also seems to be an instrument of fate, sent to accompany Neil
through his trials and to have him examine his life and his relations with
other people.
     This is noble stuff, but the movie doesn't always reach the level Hughes
attempts.  The comedy side is quite good.  Hughes can direct a farce as well as
anybody, as he has shown in SIXTEEN CANDLES and FERRIS BUELLER'S DAY OFF.  This
time, with Martin and Candy, he has the additional benefit of two of the best
comedic actors around.  Watching Martin go through surprise, despair, anger,
and resignation is like watching a master musician play his instrument.   And
John Candy, doing a character he has done variations of for years, shows how an
overbearing lout *should* be played.  The two form a comedy team that deserve
more movies together.
     But the drama Hughes strives for sometimes seems forced.  We are made to
see the human side of Candy's cartoon character, and the shift in perception is
jarring.  Candy carries it off as well as I think that any actor could, and in
fact is the best that I have seen him.  But the script doesn't handle the
transition in a natural way, and the audience is left feeling manipulated.  
Martin's character, being less extreme, is not subject to as many shifts, but
it is not always clear from where the attitude changes he does show come.  The
whole idea of a farce is somewhat foreign to this type of introspection, so
maybe Hughes just tried something beyond him.  Still, his teen comedies did a
good job of making us laugh and think, so maybe he just didn't do as good a job
with this film.
     Despite its problems, I liked PLANES, TRAINS, and AUTOMOBILES.  I felt
empathy with the characters, and even if I didn't know where much of the
characters' emotion came from, I responded to it.  I also laughed a lot.  It's
tough to complain about a film which does that.  I'd give it a +1 on the -4/+4
scale.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Pleasant compilation of all the holiday
     travel horror stories that fit into a short 93 minutes.  Two
     very opposite travelers, played by Steve Martin and John
     Candy, are repeatedly thrown together by fate and finally by
     choice.  John Hughes can handle comedy about adults almost as
     well as comedy about teens.  Rating: +1.
     Mention John Hughes's name and most people think of films about
teenagers. Most are light comedies that hide perceptive character studies.
SIXTEEN CANDLES and THE BREAKFAST CLUB are among his better efforts.  FERRIS
BUELLER'S DAY OFF was fair and WEIRD SCIENCE...well, even Frank Capra made
occasional duds.  PLANES, TRAINS, & AUTOMOBILES is about people who are at
least technically adults.  But for that fact it bears all the hallmarks of
Hughes's earlier work.
     Neal Page (played by a somewhat subdued Steve Martin) wants to do
something very simple.  he wants to go from New York City to Chicago.  He is
leaving the Tuesday before Thanksgiving and he expects in hours to be with
his family in Chicago.  It will be hours (and hours and hours).  Page is
about to discover everything that can possibly go wrong when you travel and
a few things that probably can't.  One of the things that goes wrong is that
he gets as a traveling partner Del Griffith (played by John Candy), who may
well be the personification of every personality trait that Page does not
want in someone to whom he will be in close proximity.  Griffith is a
boisterous, obnoxious shower-curtain-ring salesman.  Page is prim,
fastidious, intolerant, and uptight.  Fate and coincidence have bound the
two of them together on a circuitous and frustrating route to Chicago.
Their trip is just one Murphy's Law incident after another, with just about
anything going wrong that Hughes's sadistic mind can arrange.  The basic
plot if fairly predictable--the two will find every possible pitfall of
traveling by air, rail, or road.
     Martin has some funny bits on his own, but he is repeatedly upstaged by
Candy, who plays his part far more broadly but at the same time winningly.
Neither seems the kind of companion anyone would really want to go across
the country with, though eventually we find ourselves inexplicably liking
each.  PLANES, TRAINS, & AUTOMOBILES is pleasant holiday fare and worth a
viewing.  Rate it a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
