Title
Review for Back to the Future Part II (1989)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jeff Meyer
[Don't worry, kids, no real spoilers lurk within]
     Actually, about the only spoiler that I will reveal about BACK TO THE
FUTURE PART II is the fact that the story is left with a cliff-hanger of an
ending, and is continued in BACK TO THE FUTURE PART III, coming to a Sequel
Auditorium near you next summer.  I remember people walking out of the LORD OF
THE RINGS in an extremely peeved mood due to the annoying surprise that the
film only covered half of Tolkien's trilogy; I wouldn't have that on my
snow-white conscience, so, Happy Holidays.  Now you can go prepared.  (I must
admit that I didn't hear too much grumbling on leaving BACK TO THE FUTURE PART
II; I assume the knowledge of it being continued is either fairly common
knowledge, or the film is more satisfying that LORD OF THE RINGS, installment
or no.  (A rather back-handed compliment...))
     So, how is it?  And, of course, the really *original* question: how does
is stand up to its predecessor?  Well, first of all, the high points of BACK TO
THE FUTURE were a) a clever use of time-travel machinations (many already
familiar to me through the wonders of science fiction and comix), b)
Christopher Lloyd's Doc Brown, c) some cute humor, and d) Alan Silvestri's
charged-up theme music.  And I liked the car.  However, the characters were
mostly pastiches, keeping it at the level of an above-average exercise in comic
plotting with an under-used plot device -- time-travel.  A satisfying movie,
but not something I was anxious to see over and over.
     Thus, I have to say that BACK TO THE FUTURE II pretty well meets up to my
expectations, because they weren't abnormally high in the first place.  The
cleverness and time-related in-jokes are pretty good, and the time-travel theme
holds together if you don't think about it *too* closely.  (See assorted heaps
of rec.arts.movies articles for examples of intense chrono-temporal
reflection.)  No real plot shocks or surprises   There's a sense of rushed
urgency in this film that was absent in the first BACK TO THE FUTURE film, and
this gives the film an edge (or at least becomes reminiscent enough of IT'S A
WONDERFUL LIFE to simulate one); however, what it adds in suspense, in takes
away from the one enjoyable friendship in the first film, the one between Doc
Brown and Marty.  Doc seems to be in the picture merely to hustle Marty from
time-period to time-period, and (except for one pleasant sequence where Brown
bumps into himself), gets to show very little personality; his main
contributions to the film are the better historical jokes.  (From the previews
of Part III at the end of the film, this may be remedied in the concluding
film.)  Michael J.  Fox seems to be trying to beat Cary Grant's record of
double-takes in ARSENIC AND OLD LACE, and while he's adequate, he's no Archie
Leech.  (The idea of Cary Grant as the protagonist in a slightly-altered
version of these films really appeals to me...)  Everyone else is a
cookie-cutout character (Biff especially); they also toil who only serve the
plot, etc.
     So, is it worth seeing?  Depends how well you liked the original BACK TO
THE FUTURE PART II is more of the same; the good news, in these sequel-riddled
days, is it's not worse than the same.

Author
Chad Polenz
***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1989, PG, 108 minutes [1 hour, 48 minutes]
[adventure/sci-fi]
starring: Michael J. Fox (Marty McFly age 17, 47, Marty McFly Jr., Marlene
McFly), Christopher Lloyd (Dr. Emmett Brown), Thomas F. Wilson (Biff Tannen
age 17, 47, 77, Griff), Lea Thompson (Lorraine Baines/McFly age 17, 47, 77),
produced by Bob Gale, Neil Canton, written by Bob Gale, directed by Robert
Zemeckis.
Us critic-type people are always shaking our heads and telling everyone that
movies aren't thrill rides, but I think that "Back To The Future II" is one
of the few exceptions. If the original film had the spirit of the 1950s, then
this has the spirit of the 80s: full of fights; chase scenes; cliff hangers;
special effects; some detective work; and of course the vision of the
high-tech future.
The film picks up exactly where the first film left off, with Doc (Lloyd),
Marty (Fox), and Jennifer (Elizabeth Shue) travelling 30 years into the
future, because something bad is going to happen to Marty and Jennifer's
kids. Doc tells Marty he must take his son's place at an incident that will
cause a chain reaction if Marty McFly Jr. says yes to Griff (Wilson - in one
of four different roles). 
Whoever said history tends to repeat itself wasn't joking, especially when
it comes to the movies. Essentially the same chase scene that Marty endured
in the 50s takes place again in the year 2015, but it's not as authentically
exciting this time because it is so obviously a parody of itself. At the end
of the situation Marty has changed the course of history for the better, and
it seems like everything's copasetic right? Wrong. Since when do things go
according to plan in the "Back To The Future" movies? 
There are so many minor conflicts and details that effect the plot and the
direction of the story I won't even bother to list them all. Basically we get
to see Marty as an old man, his house, his family, etc. We also go back to an
alternate 1985, and then back again to 1955, with everything happening so
fast the film never stops to catch a breath. 
The films' best aspect is the fact that it actually goes back to the first
movie and shows a lot of the action that occurred from another angle.
It's difficult to convey the sense of wild and zany fun without describing
every little detail. The only thing sacrificed in this film is the suspense.
Instead of a grand finale, we get lots of little victories. By the end
everything is back to normal, but something happens that leads to yet another
sequel, but it doesn't seem gratuitous.
"Back To The Future Part II" is a really great adventure movie. It certainly
has more originality than other films but it lacks a certain charm that was
dominate throughout its predecessor. 
Visit Chad'z Movie Page @http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html
