Title
Review for Trollsyn (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Jostedalen, 1349.  14th-Century Europe is ravaged by the Black Death,
but Norway is one of the hardest hit nations, losing nearly two thirds
of its population in the plague's wake.  Even given these astonishing
figures, you'd think that seven-year-old Maren (Julia Onsager Steen)
would have had at least one or two survivors to keep her company after
the pandemic strikes her family and friends.  But no, Maren is the 
only one to be spared.  If you ever wanted to view a film that depicts a young
girl wandering about a picturesque valley alone reciting rhymes to
herself, then this is that movie, and not much else.  The `Second
Sight' of the title refers only to the final scenes, in which Maren is
found by neighboring villagers and attributed with clairvoyant powers
(she wears her `birthcap' - umbilical membrane - as an amulet).  It's
a talent she's not sure she wants, or even has, although like everyone
else in her world she puts her faith in the powers of the arcane for
survival.  Almost the only time we ever hear her talk is when she is
chanting to drive away wolves, bears, or maleficent spirits.  Film
draws an interesting correlation between the talismanic manifestations
of child logic and the belief systems of the medieval era per se. 
It's fascinating to see her single-handedly and unconsciously keeping
the ritualistic sensibilities of her culture alive, even though we
know these beliefs to be doomed and misinformed.  
The lack of incident in the film might be overlooked if it was meant
to be, say, a lyric piece, or experience of awakening, but it strives
for neither.  This makes me think that its portrayal of events is
intended to be as simple as any medieval tale would aim to tell it. 
It could be that director Ola Solum wants his story to reach us at a
primal level:  we are not watching a story, we are merely watching
life.  Whatever, this leaves young Steen with the task of carrying the
bulk of the film, and she's not given a lot to do other than look
anxious and shout the occasional chant.  However, she makes a
believable peasant girl (it's amazing what a liberal application of
dirt can do) and looks right at home in her setting - I didn't realize
how taken in I was by her performance until the final freeze-frame. 
The surrounding countryside is also suitably wild and medieval:  Solum
employs a vertiginous handheld wide-angle lens to good effect. 
Director Anja Breien wrote the screenplay.  Jan Garbarek supplied the
rather eclectic score.
