Title
Review for Rosemary's Baby (1968)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Jerry Saravia
If schlocky horror director William Castle ("House on Haunted Hill") had
directed Ira Levin's bestseller "Rosemary's Baby," it would have had minor
shock effects and some scare tactics. It might even have included a hovering
demon baby and black carriage in the theatre! Such is the style of Castle (who
appears briefly in a phone booth scene) and the difference is lucidly
demonstrated in Roman Polanski's adaptation and direction of this chilling,
slow-paced horror film - a distinguished classic in a genre that has been
cheapened in the ensuing years by gore and more schlock.
"Rosemary's Baby" begins in New York City where a couple, Guy and Rosemary
Woodhouse (respectively played by the late John Cassevettes and Mia Farrow)
rent a high-rise apartment. They are introduced to their new home by the
superintendent (wonderfully played by Elisha Cook, Jr.).  Things go wrong from
the get-go.  There is a dresser obscuring a closet, voices and chants are
heard, various shadows are seen on walls, a young woman is found dead in the
street, and so on. The dead woman, a runaway, had lived with the next-door
neighbors, the Castavetts, who adopted her.  The Woodhouse couple meet the
next-door neighbors for dinner as a sign of respect, an affable old couple who
dress in loud outfits, Roman and Minnie Castavett (Sidney Blackmer and Ruth
Gordon). They are talkative, nosy people and have conflicting opinions about
Catholicism and the Pope. As they talk over dinner, the wise Roman curiously
remembers Guy's supporting role in the play "Luther": 'I was struck by a
gesture you made. It had a wonderful sense of authenticity'. Roman also seems
to have been a former businessman who has travelled all around the world.
Minnie is simply nosy, and almost every time she appears, Beethoven's "Fur
Elise" is playing in some tenant's piano.
While the film progresses, there is a growing feeling of something unnatural
about to take place. Rosemary undergoes physical and emotional changes in her
character, from cropping her hair in a "Vidal Sassoon" style to getting
pregnant. Her pregnancy is handled by two different doctors: one is Dr. Hill
(Charles Grodin), a "Charlie nobody" as Guy calls him, and there is the reknown
Dr. Saperstein (Ralph Bellamy) who prescribes herbal drinks and tanis root for
Rosemary. 
Meanwhile, Rosemary's husband Guy grows distant while successfully landing
numerous acting jobs, though he occasionally brings her flowers as a sign of
love. Her good family friend, Hutch (Maurice Evans), discovers that her
neighbors are in fact part of a coven of witches. That could explain the
scratches on Rosemary's back and some of her weird dreams where she is raped by
Satan (actually played by the late founder of the Church of Satan, Anton La
Vey)! Slowly, Rosemary begins to believe that the Castavetts are after her
unborn baby. 
Polanski places a great deal of ambiguity in "Rosemary's Baby" making us feel
as though Rosemary is simply paranoid and is imagining that there is a
conspiracy, and that her husband is one of the conspirators. There is a sense
of unease and unseen menace in the film thanks to Roman's claustrophobic
direction and cinematographer William Fraker's disorienting compositions (my
favorite being the hallway shot of Minnie making a phone call to Dr.
Saperstein, showing that she is partially obscured by the entrance door to the
bedroom so that we never see her face). Throughout the film, we are never sure
if the supposed coven of witches mean well or if they intend to do harm - could
they care a little too much about Rosemary? Is Guy's stoic demeanor a sign that
something is wrong? Could Hutch's suspicious be erroneous? Or is Rosemary going
crazy a la Catherine Deneuve's similar state of paranoia in Polanski's
"Repulsion"?
"Rosemary's Baby" was reviled by Catholic groups back in 1968, condemned for
its view of Satanism (maybe the shot of the Time magazine cover with the "God
is Dead" title did not help). Otherwise, it was critically well-received and
placed Roman on the star director map leading to many more Hollywood offers.
After more than thirty years, "Rosemary's Baby" still retains its implicit
power of genuine forces of evil unseen by Rosemary's eye, including the famous
final sequence which still rattles the nerves. For its unnerving sense of doom
and menace coupled with sharp doses of black humor, you can do no better than
this baby. This is Polanski at his devilish best. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or comments at faustus_08520@yahoo.com
or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Can you say "dated"? You can if you've seen ROSEMARY'S 
BABY which, like THE EXORCIST, was a thrilling horror film in its 
time but seems boring and laughable in the decades that have passed 
since its original release. "Mystery Science Theater 3000" has 
skewered the bad films of the past, but let me tell you, it could do a 
number on the "good" ones too. ROSEMARY'S BABY stars Mia 
Farrow (from the time she was actually good-looking) as an 
innocent housewife and her not-so-innocent husband (John 
Cassavettes), an actor who takes an easy, albeit evil, road to 
success.
        It all seems so harmless in the beginning. Mia and John 
move into an apartment where several past murders have been 
committed. (There's also a skull in the living room, but it's only for 
decoration.) Their elderly neighbors pop in for a housewarming. 
All's well for about the first hour of this slow-moving film, until Mia 
eats some of the neighbors' chocolate mousse and passes out. 
When she comes to, she finds herself in a darkened room with a 
bunch of people yelling and dancing like savages and a big, evil 
man raping her -- a foreshadowing of her future life with Woody 
Allen.
        It seems like a dream and, when she finds herself pregnant, 
she almost forgets about it. And everyone's helping with the 
pregnancy. The neighbors have some wonderful vitamin potions 
for her to drink, a good-luck charm for her to wear around her neck, 
and the name of an obstetrician who's been in the business 66.6 
years. Meanwhile, Mia begins having chronic stomach pains and 
losing a lot of weight. Before too long she looks just like the lead 
singer of The Cranberries. That's when you know your health's 
failing.
        The only person in the movie who's the least bit suspicious 
of all this is an old friend (Maurice Evans) who calls Mia up to give 
her the bad news -- and immediately falls into a coma. By about the 
two-hour mark I felt the same way. ROSEMARY'S BABY is way too 
long, and leads up to a payoff that's about as boring and laughable 
as the rest of the movie. I guess someone put a spell on this movie.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Frankie Paiva
Reading Entertainment Weekly (also known as "The Bible") I discover that I had
not seen the 10th scariest movie of all time. This caused me to rush to the
video store to rent Rosemary's Baby (Blockbuster actually had a movie over 20
years old!) which can't really be put into a catergory, unless raped mother
conspiracy thriller is a genre. 
Rosemary Woodhouse (Farrow) and her husband Guy (Cassavetes) move into an old
apartment building where several people have died of witchcraft over the years.
Guy is an out-of-work actor (Rosemary always answers "What has he been it?"
with "He's been in two plays and has done lots of TV and radio.") he's willing
to do anything to make it big, including summoning the devil.
This he does, turns out almost everyone (including Ruth Gordon who won an
Oscar) in the apartment building is a member of a Satan-loving cult. They
massacre babies and feed their blood and flesh (pleasant) to the devil himself.
Guy gets his big break after Rosemary has a dream that she is raped by the
devil (a dark and disturbing scene) she is to bear his only child.
As the plot unfolds Rosemary is led through countless twists and turns each one
of them more shocking than the next. While I can't say that I enjoyed the
ending, I do commend the director for not ever showing us the child of Satan.
For that, and for the fact that this 136 minute long movie wasn't hard to sit
through, I give it *** stars.
