Title
Review for Eve of Destruction (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     EVE OF DESTRUCTION is the sort of science fiction film that nobody
minds if you call "sci-fi."  It is an action film with a poorly thought-out
science fiction premise that happens on a few nice ideas, but generally
wastes them.  It seems that missiles are not a very subtle way to place a
nuclear bomb.  Instead, the government is going to use a robot who, short of
surgery, cannot be distinguished from an attractive blonde.  Inside the
robot's chest is a nuclear bomb about the size of a soup can.  Inside the
robot's head are many of its inventor's memories, experiences, and
attitudes.  In front of this head is the inventor's face.  The inventor is
Dr. Eve Simmons and the robot's name is Eve VIII.  So the robot really is
the Eve of Destruction (get it?).  Baghdad would know something was up if we
shot a nuclear missile at them, I guess, but would never notice anything
strange if a tall, leggy blond walked into town.  Eve VIII is being tested-
-with full nuclear capability!--in real world situations such as going to
the bank.  Suddenly she runs into the unexpected, her temporary controller
is killed, and she starts running lose in the real world like a female
Terminator.  She is following instructions programmed into her head but also
enjoying new-found toys such as Uzi machine guns.  Anti-terrorist Jim
McQuade (played by Gregory Hines) and Eve Simmons (played by Renee
Soutendijk) must team up to out-fight and out-think the robot.
     Nice things could still be done with this idea, but nothing really
interesting comes out of it.  A little if made of the idea that the woman
and the robot will have some of the same thoughts, but mostly it is a
contrivance to make the needle a little easier to find in the haystack and
at the same time to make it a little more dangerous.  Eve VIII takes
particular exception to being called "bitch" and always uses it as a trigger
to go violent.  The audience knows that via repetitions, but Dr. Simmons
shows no sign of knowing it.  And when late in the film, McQuade seems to
know the trigger, we can only conclude that he learned it reading the
script.
     The robot is made of some material that is not greatly damaged in a
seventy-mile-per-hour impact, but still feels real in a slow breast fondle.
That's the material rocket scientists have been looking for for years!
     There is occasionally a little fun here, but overall the film is mostly
for a drive-in-style audience.  I rate it a -1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
