Title
Review for Luminarias (1999)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Chuck Schwartz
Luminarias
Rated [R], 100 minutes
Starring Evelina Fernandez, Marta DuBois, Diana Ortelli, Angela Moya
Screenplay by Evelina Fernández, based on her play
Directed by Jose Luis Valenzuela
website: www.sleepinggiantweb.com
Sometimes a movie with a minority cast will do big business, even if
it's a real stinkeroo, because that minority will turn out to see their
fellows on the screen. Such is the case with Luminarias, a histrionic
stage play which has forgotten that moviemaking requires actors to turn
it down a notch. Even though its stage production came first, Luminarias
is a lowbrow Waiting to Exhale . . . and I didn't care for that poorly
made flick either. If I wanted to watch incredibly negative Latina
characters, I'd be popping a beer in front of MadTV. If I wanted to take
it on the chin for being in the majority according to skin tone, then
Luminarias  would sure teach me a thing or two. This film is so focussed
on, what I'm guessing to be, the rage of the Latina author that anyone
outside with non-Hispanic origins is dissed. And so, for that matter,
are non-Mexican Hispanics.
The film begins at the anniversary party of Andrea (Evelina Fernandez)
and Joe (Robert Beltran of Star Trek: Voyager) at which Joe is caught
swapping tongues with the blonde gringa hottie he's been doing on the
side. Apparently he's done this many times before and Andrea boots him
out of the house. Usually Joe comes back all respectful and apologetic.
This time he wants a divorce.
So we've got four single Latinas who hang out at a restaurant called
Luminarias, doing shots and talking about looking for love. Besides
Andrea, a divorce lawyer, there is Sofia (Marta Du Bois), a therapist,
who likes white guys and is in such denial of her heritage that she
barely speaks the language; Irene (Diana Ortelli) the clothing designer
who likes her studs young and Latin (but has given up sex for Lent); and
Lilly (Angela Moya), a visual artist, usually ends up with men who are
most likely undocumented, unemployed and married.
Sofia, hoping to get her friend a taste of something exotic, fixes up
Andrea on a surprise blind date with Jewish lawyer Joseph Levinson
(Scott Bakula) -- who, unknown to Sofia, is handling the opposite side
of a divorce case Andrea is working on. Andrea, as noted, doesn't like
white guys, but a couple of shots of tequila, and the sight of her ex
and his blonde, take care of that. Joseph finds himself introduced to
Andrea's family, including cousin Jesus (Cheech Marin) and a pair of
horny aunts. They're more excited about having a gringo in the family
than Andrea seems to be.
It must be noted that only Bakula, Marin and Liz Torres (in a very minor
role) know how to play to the camera. Everyone else is overacting so
badly that many of the smaller stories -- the effect of the divorce on
Andrea's son; Lilly facing the kind of discrimination the girls discuss
and/or preach, because she's fallen in love with a Korean -- are
overshadowed by weaker, lowbrow gags -- Irene's homosexual transvestite
brother. Regardless, every story turns sloppy sentimental as the play
forces one happy ending on top of another.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Luminarias, he would have paid...
Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 2000 by,
Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
"Can't trust anyone, right?" Cindy (Seidy Lopez) asks rhetorically.
"That's right," shoots back Andrea (Evelina Fernández).
And in LUMINARIAS, a film that badly wants to be a Hispanic WAITING TO
EXHALE, the list of people not to trust starts with whites and men.  If
the film had railed so against blacks, there would be pickets in the
lobby.  But not to worry, the film's vituperative dialog by Evelina
Fernández, wife of the director, Jose Luis Valenzuela, is so preachy and
stilted that it's hard to take offense.  It's equally difficult to get
interested in any of the clichéd characters.
The story concerns the love lives of 4 Chicano women (played by Marta
DuBois, Angela Moya, Dyana Ortelli and Evelina Fernández) in LA.  Living
in what looks like the lap of luxury, they have nothing better to talk
about than the size of male private parts.  The belief is that whites
have the smallest.  We also learn that whites only date Chicanos in
order to feel superior.
Another topic of conversation is whether a Jewish man qualifies for the
full racial hatred that they reserve for whites.  It's a split decision.
Andrea is particularly embarrassed for having had sex with a Jewish
lawyer (Scott Bakula).  (When she explains to him that she has never
dated a Jew, he comes up with one of the movie's few jokes.  "Jew are
now," he tells us.  Ugh.)
When Andrea is confronted with the inconsistency of her attacks on
whites, most unprintable, and her dating a Jewish male, she shows the
usual chip on her shoulder.  "It's not a chip, it's a boulder," she
boasts to her friends.  And the film, which has all of the production
values of a TV movie of the week, never moves beyond such childish
diatribes.  If you're going to fill a film with insults, at least write
them a little more convincingly.
LUMINARIAS runs a long 1:40.  It is rated R for language and sexuality
and would be acceptable, although certainly not recommended, for high
school seniors and older.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 New Latin Pictures
 Director: Jose Luis Valenzuela
 Writer:  Evelina Fernandez, play by Evelina Fernandez
 Cast: Evelina Fernandez, Scott Bakula, Marta DuBois,
Angela Moya, Dyana Ortelli, Seidy Lopez, Robert Beltran, Sal
Lopez, Cheech Marin, Sab Shimono
   There's nothing wrong with a sitcom, with its predictable,
credibility-challenging plot, provided that the characters are
vibrant and likeable and the writer's heart is in the right
place.  That's just the kind of TV-type comedy that
"Luminarias" provides.  Directed by Jose Luis Valenzuela,
"Luminarias" had its birth as a staged play by the director's
real-life wife, Evelina Fernandez, which the playwright--who
radiates a spirited performance as its lead character--has
successfully opened up for the big screen.  Despite its mere
one million-dollar budget," Luminarias" is the sort of picture
that could make a grand showing in Latino communities
throughout the U.S. and given its easy-listening format
should draw a reasonable crossover audience as well.
   Though the story bears some resemblance to Forest
Whitaker's "Waiting To Exhale," which displayed Whitney
Houston, Angela Bassett, Loretta Devine and Lela Rochon
auspiciously despite that movie's redundant plot, Valenzuela's
film deals with men who are not all jerks.  What's more
important, serious racial issues are discussed in some depth. 
While the characters in "Waiting to Exhale" are all black, this
time we're treated to a Jesse-Jackson rainbow involving
Koreans, Korean-Americans, Mexican-Americans, one
Jewish-American, and one African-American, all jumbled
together in an East Los Angeles nexus.  The focus is on four
well-to-do, professional Mexican-American women who get
together regularly in an Angeleno restaurant known as
Luminarias to discuss the men in their lives.  They drink
margueritas and tequilas, easing the way for the women to let
it all hang out.  We listen in on their jovial banter and serious
arguments alike, absorbing an image of the affinities and
antipathies of people we do not often get to see in the movie
theaters: prosperous Latinas living in spacious housing,
driving Mercedes and the like, and throwing lavish parties for
their families and friends.
   We quickly learn from their spirited restaurant banter that
these women may be of the same professional class but their
views on men and race diverge considerably.  Andrea
(Evelina Fernandez), a domestic relations lawyer in her
forties, is herself getting divorced from her wayward husband
Joe (Robert Beltran).  She is particularly incensed that Joe is
cavorting with an Anglo woman, furthering her own racist
view that the only reason whites date Latinas is to feel
superior.  Despite her wealth, she admits to having a deeply
felt rage.  Her friend Sofia (Marta DuBois), on the other hand,
is a therapist who believes in mixing in with the white society
and has forsaken her old East Los Angeles neighborhood for
the predominantly Anglo west side.  Ironically, she is the only
one of this gang of four to wind up with a Mexican man, a
waiter named Pablo (Sal Lopez) who can barely speak
English.  In smaller roles Dyana Ortelli plays Irene, a
flamboyant clothing designer who is ashamed of her
transvestite brother (Geoffrey Rivas) and who has sworn off
sex for the Lenten season, while Angela Moya performs in
the role of Lilly, an artist who is dating a Korean man, Lu
(Andrew C. Lim). 
  The one subplot that does not mesh with the buoyant tone
of the rest of the story involves Cindy (Seidy Lopez), in a
custody battle with the physically abusive ex-husband, Tony
(Richard Coca).  But as the hub of the story, Scott Bakula
turns out a credible performance as Joseph, a lawyer who
finds himself opposing Andrea in court.  Drawn to his
adversary, Joseph is at first rebuffed by Andrea not only
because he is fighting against the interests of her client but
more important because he is white and Jewish.  Struggling
with her own racist attitudes toward Anglos, Andrea is frank
and cutting as she challenges Joseph to come up with the
real reason he is interested in a woman who is not of his race
and religion.  As in most romantic comedies, their differences
keep them apart until the movie's conclusion in which
Valenzuela wraps up all the loose ends too conveniently for a
tale which seeks to elevate itself above sit-comish fare.
   The music is terrific though not intrusive and the upbeat
tempo of this good-hearted and spirited comedy makes
"Luminarias" easy to take as social commentary that deals
with themes of identity, marriage and independence. This is
one of those rare pictures that do not treat Spanish-speaking
Americans as either gangsters or servants but as people who
have prospered in a multi-cultural society that all too often
patronizes and demeans even those non-whites who have
lived in the U.S. for generations.
Rated R.  Running time: 100 minutes.  (C) 2000 by Harvey
Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
