Title
Review for Officer and a Gentleman, An (1982)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
     'An Officer and a Gentleman' did an extraordinary thing when it was
first released in 1982.  Not only did it showcase the best performance of
Richard Gere's career, but it found the perfect balance necessary in
appealing to both men and women.  Many of my friends saw the movie on their
first dates and it struck an emotional chord with many of them.  It also
made personality the main focus of its moral overtones and while it did
appear at times to play out like a soap opera, no one can accuse it of being
a false statement on life.
     Set in Seattle, Washington, the opening scene is rather unattractive as
it shows Gere in a hotel room pulling up the blind and the camera shows two
naked people embraced together in bed.  It turns out to be Gere's father
(Robert Loggia) and a prostitute.  Gere informs his father (an alcoholic and
womanizer) that he has joined the officer's candidate school of the local
Navy branch.  His father laughs and Gere walks out on him.
     The film's opening credits are displayed as Gere rides his motorcycle
to the military academy and he along with a host of others are grilled in an
opening monologue by their drill sergeant (Louis Gossett, Jr. who won the
Best Supporting Actor Oscar).  He immediately takes a disliking to Gere and
his ways.
     Gere turns out to be a hustler for profit.  Selling things like boots,
belt buckles and other accessories to the men in his bunkhouse.  The film
also shows his developing friendship with a fellow officer candidate (David
Keith) and Gere has a romantic fling with a local factory girl (Debra
Winger) who turns him into what the title suggests, 'An Officer and a
Gentleman'.  It was an Oscar nominated role for Winger which she excelled at.
     What is most enjoyable about the film are the one-on-one scenes which
involve Gere and Gossett.  Gossett certainly is a major factor in molding
and shaping Gere into becoming a better person but more importantly he is
the ideal authority figure in Gere's life and he's like one of those
teachers we hated at the time we were learning but later we realize that
their methods were for are own good and we come to admire them.
     Another bonus to the film is seeing how negative moral choices can play
a permanent part in life and while the film doesn't try and force the issue
of morals, it simply paints them as unavoidable parts of out existence.         
VISIT FILM FOLLOW-UP BY WALTER FRITH AT
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, go to http://surf.to/joblo/
Director Taylor Hackford's greatest cinematic achievement as of 1998,
this movie was able to touch people from both sexes and various sides
of the track, as the love story and the determination of the human
spirit reached out and played everyone's heartstrings succinctly.
PLOT:
Loser/loner Zach Mayo enlists in the Navy because he wants to inject a
little direction into his wayward life. During his 13-week boot camp,
he gets taught a lot of lessons of discipline, friendship and
ultimately, love, as he starts off as a son trying to escape his
father's past, and ends up as an officer and a gentleman.
CRITIQUE:
Inspirational and timeless, this romantic drama melds together a tight
script, strong performances by its lead actors, and a universally
positive message regarding the defiance of one's own demons, and the
success drawn from one's own determination, hard work and true heart.
This movie is made for the romantic in all of us, as well as the loners
that we've all experienced being at one point in our lives. How does
one get past the fact that there is no one around them willing to lend
them any love or support? How does one triumph over all adversities
despite the plethora of obstacles standing in their way? Well, besides
listening to hours of endless Tony Robbins motivational tapes, there is
only one way that we could all muster a little personal
self-confidence, and that is sheer persistence, will power and heart!
If you really want to do something, and I mean REALLY WANT TO DO
SOMETHING...you should be able to do it, no matter what obstacles lie
in your wake. This movie presents us with a great example of just that.
This film drills this philosophy right into our brains to the point
where I actually felt like going out and "doing something", just for
the sake of the thrill that the film gave me. Then I realized that it
was three in the morning, I was tired, and in my PJ's, so I left it
until the next day :). All that, and you get an interesting story about
the trials and tribulations of boot camp Navy candidates, plenty of
fully developed characters, a great performance by Louis Gossett Jr.,
and a wonderfully sugared romance which begins on notes of despair but
ends in true inspiration. Oh yeah, and I almost forgot...Richard Gere
is also quite good in the movie. This is a wonderful film that will
make you laugh and cry, smile and cringe, and give you more reason to
believe in yourself, and follow your dreams till their end. If
candidate Mayo-naisse can do it, we all can !!! 
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Louis Gossett Jr. won a Best Supporting Actor Oscar for his role in
this film.
The part of Zach Mayo was originally offered to John Travolta, who
turned it down on the advice of his agent. Richard Gere went on to play
that character in this film, and the film garnered 6 Oscar nominations.
Debra Winger spent part of her youth in Israel and served three months
in the Israeli army. She moved to California, where she decided to
pursue a serious acting career following a severe accident at a local
amusement park at which she was performing. She was married to actor
Timothy Hutton from 1980 to 1990. They had one son together.
Richard Gere was married to supermodel Cindy Crawford from 1991 to
1995.
Director Taylor Hackford lived with actress Helen Mirren from 1986 to
1997, at which point, they got married.
Look for an early film appearance by the actor who thought he was "too
good for TV", David Caruso, of TV's NYPD fame. He's the redhead recruit
with the heebie-geebies about water.
