Title
Review for Bubble Boy (2001)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Summer is the time to release the most vulgar movies, and
that's OK.  Really it is, because films are redeemed if they are
funny.  "American Pie" and even its epigonous sequel, fine. 
Making out with a pastry doesn't even take the cake in the world
of the uncouth, which received new impetus with "There's
Something About Mary."  Ditto Kevin Smith's New Jersey trilogy,
all of which make for good, unwholesome entertainment, even
the pretentious "Dogma" thanks to some crackerjack acting
especially by Jason Mewes and Chris Rock.  But when a movie
is both coarse and unfunny, that's just downright embarrassing. 
When a story makes gratuitous fun of the handicapped--of
people who are cruelly exhibited in freak shows, especially if they
legitimately have stumps where arms should be or if they are
three feet tall and act in a  repulsive manner--that's a pity.  When
a tale depends on racist barbs and paints religious groups as the
most loathsome caricatures, that's desperation.  That's not all. 
The topper in Blair Hayes disgraceful creation, "Bubble Boy," is
the cop-out conclusion which is a slap in the face--make that an
altogether knockout punch--at every unfortunate person who
must spend a life suffering with a major disability with little hope
of amelioration.
    "Bubble Boy," which is fiction but could be based broadly on
any number of hapless individuals with illnesses who must spend
their lives encased in sterile plastic, focuses on Jimmy Livingston
(Jake Gyllenhaal), born with a severe immune deficiency. 
According to his mom, even a single germ could kill him.  Cared
for by an overprotective and ferociously religious mother
(Swoosie Kurtz) and a mostly silent father (John Carroll Lynch),
Jimmy discovers love, or at least lust, when he observes his
next-door neighbor, the sexy Chloe (Marley Shelton),
provocatively washing her car.  After she visits with him a few
times, they develop an affection for each other, but when Chloe
realizes the impracticality of marriage with Jimmy and announces
impending nuptials in Niagara Falls with the idiotic rock singer
Mark (Dave Sheridan), Jimmy decides to stop playing it safe.  He
constructs a portable bubble, sneaks out of the house for the first
time in his life, and "Bubble Boy" becomes a road movie.  And,
oh, the bubble becomes (are you ready for this) a METAPHOR
for playing life too safe!!
   As the title figure hits the road, getting lifts along the way while
chased by his parents, first-time director Blair Hayes cuts loose
with Cinco Paul and Ken Daurio's racist and moronic screenplay
to introduce us to a spaced-out religious cult, a friendly biker,
Slim (Danny Trejo), an obnoxious Dr. Phreak (Verne Troyer) who
leads a circus of miserable-looking aberrations, a couple of
centenarians named Pappy and Pippy (Patrick Cranshaw) whose
taxi is followed by a buzzard, an Asian-American at a strip club
who in the most blatantly stereotyped manner shouts "500
dollars! 500 dollars!" as though he were one of those Japanese
soldiers in a 1943 B-movie shouting "bonzai! bonzai!" and an
East Indian selling ice cream and curry from his truck, who prays
over a cow he has run down and killed and who is further
humiliated when the poor creature is run over once again
splattering its remains on his forehead.  Are we laughing yet?  If
not, there's an anti-Jewish joke you haven't heard.  Mrs.
Livingston tells it.  A howler.
  I can understand Jake Gyllenhaal's presence in this movie.  He
was in "October Sky" but he hasn't yet made his mark.  And Blair
Hayes is making his debut. But Swoosie Kurtz?  One of the finest
performers on the off-Broadway stage?  For shame! This is the
first movie of the year that I've hated.  Every minute.
   The picture is said to be based on the life of David Vetter and
as such is considered an insult by David's mother, Carol Ann
Demaret.  Ms. Demaret told the Houston Chronicle in a story
posted August 15 that David, who suffered a rare genetic
deficiency and died in 1984 at the age of 12, had learned of the
film only a few weeks before its opening when she saw a report
on Entertainment Tonight and would have been OK with it if the
movie had a different name but insists that only David had the
name of Bubble Boy.  "His life was not a comedy," she states
about the lad who was the only boy who had lived in a bubble
from birth.  She believes the film mocks her son's memory.  What
do you think?
Rated PG-13.  Running time: 84 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Carol Ann Demaret, the mother of the late David Vetter, has been raising a
big stink everywhere she can about the new film Bubble Boy.  David, it turns
out, had SCID (Severe Combined Immunodeficiency) and was the only boy who
ever lived in a bubble in real life.  While Demaret, who has yet to see the
film, is probably just another loudmouth who thinks everything is funny
until it hits too close to home (you have to wonder how many times Demaret
laughed at something like Forrest Gump), she makes a pretty good point by
saying the idea of Disney making a film that trivializes people like her son
just isn't funny.
And she ain't that far off.  Bubble Boy isn't funny, but it doesn't have
much to do with the way the film pokes fun at the SCIDsters.  In fact, there
are about a half-dozen other groups of people that have more of a right to
be pissed off at this dumb coming-of-age movie than Demaret and her cronies
(who could be working for Disney and trying to get the crappy film some
publicity).  India should be pointing their brand-new nukes at us even as we
speak.  Japan is probably planning another Pearl Harbor (which means another
Disney sequel to that film).  And I don't know what circus freak show types
do to defend themselves, but keep an eye out for it.  Boy's coup de grace
is, perhaps, the worst Jews-are-cheap joke I've ever heard in a mainstream
film (one can only assume the lynching scene was left on the editing room
floor). But God forbid somebody make fun of a kid in a bubble.
The film starts with a voiceover from Jimmy Livingston (Jake Gyllenhaal,
October Sky), the titular Boy himself, explaining he was born without
immunities and can be killed by one single, solitary germ.  Jimmy was
brought into the world "gift-wrapped from heaven," meaning in a giant
plastic bubble in which he's spent his entire life.  If that wasn't bad
enough, his mother (Swoosie Kurtz, Get Over It) is the overly religious
type, crazy enough to make cookies in the shape of crosses AND have
photographs of Reagan and Nixon hanging on the wall (maybe that's why
Demaret is so pissed off).
Jimmy, who looks a lot like Jason Biggs with a perpetually bad haircut and a
Dennis the Menace shirt, falls in love with a busty neighbor girl named
Chloe (Marley Shelton, Valentine), who is referred to as "the whore
next-door" by his mother.  As the years fly by, Jimmy and Chloe grow as
close as a boy in a bubble and a girl can possibly get.  Eventually, Chloe
runs off to marry some loser (Dave Sheridan, MTV's Buzzkill) in Niagara
Falls, and Jimmy builds himself a travel-size bubble to follow her,
interrupt the wedding (a la The Graduate) and win her heart.
Then Boy becomes one big, offensive road trip.  Or is it a
fish-out-of-bubble story?  All I know is the least offensive laughs come
courtesy of a Fabio-led Up With People kind of group called Bright and Shiny
(didn't The Jesus Lizard's David Yow used to get arrested for doing
something with a similar name?).  The writing (from debut scribes Cinco Paul
and Ken Daurio) is full of non-comedic gems, like when Jimmy meets a biker
(Danny Trejo, Spy Kids), who inquires about his strange look.  "I'm some
kind of bubble boy," Jimmy replies, at which point the biker asks, "How do
you take a dump in there?"  Certainly a valid question, but it goes
unanswered.
I think my favorite part of Boy was when Jimmy was supposed to be just
outside Niagara Falls, even though the scene was clearly filmed in the
middle of a desert in Nevada (complete with giant mountains in the
background).  Director Blair Hayes, who made the funny Austin Powers 2
commercials that spoofed The Phantom Menace, carefully places a shelf full
of Niagara Spray Starch in one of the shots, like that's somehow going make
anyone think Jimmy isn't actually in the goddamn desert.
There are a few moments that could have been funny but were ruined in some
way or another - like Jimmy's first boner, which started out cute, but ended
up creepy.  Actually, "creepy" is a pretty good word to describe Boy.  It
doesn't make you laugh and it doesn't make you cry.  It just makes you feel
icky.
1:30 - PG-13 for language and crude sexual humor

Author
Michael Dequina
_Bubble_Boy_ (PG-13) no stars (out of ****)
        Tinseltown has always been guilty of questionable, for lack of a better
term, "creative" decisions.  Look no further than the last couple of weeks at
the movies for proof: Because no one asked for it, Freddie Prinze Jr. adds yet
another to his inexplicable string of starring vehicles; and an inordinate
amount of money and valuable energy continues to be expended on the wasteful
task of trying to make Penelope Cruz a household name (Memo to producers and Ms.
Cruz's publicist: it's _not_ gonna happen).  As it turns out, these annoyances
were just a warm-up of sorts for the ultimate bafflement, one that will leave
the most jaded Hollywood observer with a Prinze-like look of bug-eyed,
slack-jawed shock: _Bubble_Boy_.
        Watching the trailer or any TV spots for _Bubble_Boy_, it's easy to
stare in mouth-agape disbelief.  Now, making a comedy that involves a young man
stricken with an immune deficiency is not unheard of; after all, one of the most
memorable episodes of _Seinfeld_ involved a "bubble boy."  The difference with
this film, however, is its relentlessly mocking tone.  The plot is obviously
designed for the audience to sympathize with the innocent Jimmy (Jake
Gyllenhaal), who ventures into the outside world for the first time to make a
cross-country trek to stop the wedding of the nice girl (Marley Shelton) he
loves.  But the level of humor pitched by director Blair Hayes and writers Cinco
Paul and Ken Daurio runs counter to any such aim; that viewers are supposed to
laugh at the wide-eyed Jimmy every time he stumbles and/or bounces in his bubble
suit--and that happens a lot--says it all.
        Not content to leave worse enough alone, Hayes and the writers
apparently decided to pack in as many unfunny and potentially offensive jokes in
Jimmy's journey as possible.  Jimmy's ultra-conservative Christian mother
(Swoosie Kurtz), who is singlehandedly responsible for Jimmy's heretofore
extremely sheltered existence, is but one of the insulting caricatures that
appear in _Bubble_Boy_.  There's also a Latino biker (Danny Trejo) who teaches
Jimmy some Spanish terms that he can later butcher for "humorous" effect; a
Hindu ice cream/curry salesman (Brian George) who gets all worked up when a cow
becomes road kill; and a bar full of Chinese men whose "funny" accents are
mocked.  Are we laughing yet?  If not, there are bits involving a little person
(played by Mini Me himself, Verne Troyer) being treated like a baby because of
his size.  Ha ha ha.
        To be fair, _Bubble_Boy_ does boast one laugh.  Not so surprisingly,
though, it has nothing to do with the writing, directing, or performances.  In
the midst of a really bizarre subplot (a welcome, if still unfunny, change of
pace from the tastelessness evidenced in all the other plot threads) involving a
sing-songy cult, there is a brief glimpse of the group's leader, played by...
everyone's favorite I Can't Believe It's Not Butter pitchman, Fabio.  Perhaps
the casting director should take up screenwriting or directing, for that faint
glimmer of inspiration is the sole one in the abysmal abomination known as
_Bubble_Boy_.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
The Movie Report/Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  www.mrbrownmovies.com
www.filmthreat.com  |  www.cinemareview.com  |  www.digitalwidescreen.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23

Author
Laura Clifford
Jimmy Livingston (Jake Gyllenhaal, "October Sky") was born without an immune
system and is cared for in his California home by his bigoted, religious
overprotective mom (Swoosie Kurtz, "Citizen Ruth") and silent bullied dad
(John Carroll Lynch, "The Next Best Thing").  Beautiful teenage neighbor 
Chloe (Marley Shelton, "Valentine") becomes friendly with the guitar-playing 
oddball, but Jimmy's mom-instilled fears keep him from letting her into his 
germ free bubble environment.  When Chloe tells him she's marrying obnoxious 
rocker Mark (Dave Sheridan, "Ghost World") in Niagara Falls, Jimmy designs a 
portable bubble and sets off on a cross country journey to declare his love 
in "Bubble Boy."
Let me state one thing up front - I find political correctness to be an
overvalued virtue and I found "Bubble Boy" to be both jaw-droppingly 
outrageous and funny with some sharply observed societal and religious
subtext.  I'm amazed this button-pushing movie, sure to be reviled by many, 
came from a Disney studio (Touchstone).
Mrs. Livingston is one of those religious nuts who teaches her child that
other religions are bad, TV only gets 1 mom-approved station, and 
all fairy tales end with the hero getting out of his bubble and dying.
Jimmy grows up to be a wild eyed innocent who dines on cross shaped soy
fiber cookies and loves watching "Land of the Lost" with 'the whore next
door.'
Adorned with the spiky hair and distancing false arms of "Edward
Scissorhands,"
Gyllenhaal (a much wiser casting choice than the more obvious Brendan Fraser)
makes us feel his innocent joy at seeing grass and walking outside in his
clear spherical suit.  He first meets a churlish, regimented bus stop guy
(Zach Galifianakis) who's no help in getting him to his destination, but
a busload of 'Bright and Shinies,' an 'Up With People'-like cult all named
Todd or Lorraine, pick him up instead.  Once Jimmy innocently declares them
a cult, he's thrown out of the bus and picked up by a friendly biker (Danny 
Trejo, "Spy Kids") who brings him to Las Vegas where he becomes a human beach 
ball at a rock concert.
Meanwhile, back at home hysterical Mrs. Livingston is reading the fake
ransom note she's had her hapless husband compose.  'From the Jews?  They're 
gonna want more than $100,000!' she screams, in perhaps the flick's most 
offensive, but in character, line.  Screenwriters Cinco Paul and Ken 
Daurio are attempting to do more than shock and offend, though.  They're
illustrating how a bad environment affects our new generations.
When the Livingstons hit the road in pursuit of Jimmy, they end up hitting
the lad off his Vegas-won scooter and he bounces right into a train car
filled with Dr. Phreaks' ("Austin Powers'" mini-me, Verne Troyer)
travelling sideshow of Flipper Boy (Geoffrey Arend), Li'l Zip (Beetlejuice), 
Chicken Man (Stephen Spinella) and the Human Sasquatch (Matthew McGrory).  
Meanwhile, the leader of the Bright and Shinies (Fabio!) tells them their 
messiah will look just like the bubble boy they discarded.  The Bright and 
Shinies go off in pursuit of the messiah the freaks wish to claim as their 
savior.
After being rescued by Indian ice cream and curry van man who has
a tragic run in with a sacred cow and earning $500 in a Chinese night club 
mud-wrestling contest with two bikini-clad babes to pay a 97 year old cabbie,
Jimmy eventually lands (literally) in Niagara Falls.  The romance is just
a plot contrivance for the hero's amazing journey and "The Graduate"
parody climax is obvious, but the wrap-up does provides a few character 
revelation chuckles.
Commercial director Blair Hayes does a pretty good job keeping all the 
elements interwoven, although things get confusing once or twice along the 
way.  "Bubble Boy" is bright, frantic, innocent, occasionally gross,
wickedly observant and just plain nuts.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Annette Cardwell
It's difficult to expect much from a director whose greatest
accomplishments to date are a handful of "award-winning" TV commercials,
as is the case with Bubble Boy director Blair Hayes.  That said, Hayes's
feature film debut lives up to expectations, coming off mainly as equal
parts offensive and moronic.  But occasionally, Bubble Boy transcends
its substandard roots with glimmers of humor and scathing social
commentary.
Those moments of intelligence are delivered mostly by the film's two
stars, Jake Gyllenhall as the immuno-deficient Jimmy and Swoosie Kurtz
as his over-protective, hyper religious, Reagan-loving mother. 
Gyllenhall's sweet-natured delivery of Jimmy's hilariously naďve
narration serves as the backbone for an otherwise flimsy coming-of-age
story: Jimmy is a Bubble Boy, a kid born without immunity who could die
if he comes in contact with a single germ -- a plight explored more
seriously in the John Travolta TV movie Boy in the Plastic Bubble and
less so on Seinfeld.
His mom home-schools Jimmy, filling his head with wildly twisted
conservative propaganda and anti-sexual messages, until he's befriended
by Chloe (Marley Shelton), the beautiful girl next door.  Jimmy falls in
love with Chloe, but is afraid that his love will literally kill him, as
evidenced in a scene when she drunkenly tries to enter his bubble for a
kiss.  But when Chloe decides to marry her high school boyfriend, Jimmy
builds a bubble suit and embarks on a hijinks-addled cross-country
voyage to stop the wedding by professing his love.
The offensive bits have little to do with Jimmy's rare handicap
(regardless of what the film's protesters would have you believe), but
instead center on outrageous racial stereotypes, including a screaming
Chinese strip club owner and a devout East Indian Hindi.  But even if
you find stereotype humor funny, it's hard to muster more than a giggle
for these shallow gags.  They even manage to bungle some potentially
great moments with a group of carnival freaks.
But a few of the harsh jabs manage to work, especially in the case of
Kurtz, who very bluntly shows the dark, hypocritical side of the
religious right, and a wacky send-up of a cult called "Bright 'n Shiny,"
led by the inimitable Fabio.
Unfortunately, a few giggles can't make Bubble Boy the riotous,
off-the-wall comedy it so desperately wants to be.  Honestly, it's a
mystery how on earth this movie was ever made, and I'm not just saying
that because it's so mediocre.  How odd for Disney to take a gamble on a
film with an unknown director starring virtually unknown actors that
doesn't seem to appeal to any particular demographic and has the
potential to offend so many.
And now that the studio is suffering through a very public protest
against the film by the parents of real-life bubble boy David Philip
Vetter, maybe Disney's wondering the same thing.  Hope the opening box
office take makes it worthwhile.
http://bventertainment.go.com/movies/bubbleboy
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Robin Clifford
Jimmy Livingston (Jake Gyllenhaal) was born without immunities and, when he
was released from the hospital at age four, his mom (Swoozie Kurtz)
spirited him home in a protective, antiseptic bubble. Since then she has
been his mommy and muse and has shielded the germ-imperiled boy from the
dangers of the world - especially the "little slut" (mom's words) next
door, Chloe (Marley Shelton). Despite mom's objections Jimmy falls in love
with pretty, sweet Chloe and when she decides to marry another in Niagara
Falls, he creates a portable bubble and hits the road to find her in
"Bubble Boy."
Words that come to mind after watching "Bubble Boy" are politically
incorrect, subversive and anarchistic. Considering that this film springs
from the loins of parent company, Disney, I am amazed that it even got
released. The flick pokes fun at religion, motherhood, cults, freaks,
masturbation, immune systems (AIDS?) and more. But, my amazement is a good
thing, though, when it comes to a comedy that has the gonads to thumb its
nose in the face of convention. Because of this subversion, though, the
movie may suffer at the box office. I hope not.
For all his mother's interference and his plight of being without normal
immunities, Jimmy is a normal, well-adjusted young guy with needs, desires
and interests commensurate with almost any American teenager. He plays rock
music on his guitar and has a very normal interest in the newly moved in
girl next door, Chloe. That he lives in a sterile, habitrail-style
environment and his mom still reads him bedtime stories (although her
fairytales always end with the hero leaving his protective environment and
dying) don't deter him from ordinary emotions. He and Chloe become best
friends, but, without the ability to have physical contact, she soon starts
dating a rock star wannabe, Mark (Dave Sheridan), and, eventually, decides
to marry the sleazy guy - in Niagara Falls, thousands of miles away from
Jimmy's home in Palmdale, CA.
With the impromptu wedding only days away, Jimmy makes the life-threatening
decision to leave his safe, sterile habitat and go find Chloe to declare
his love. Being an intelligent, capable young guy, he builds himself a
portable bubble and hits the road. His adventure begins at a bus stop in
the middle of nowhere run by a less than friendly, deadpan attendant (Zach
Galifianakis). He is given a ride on a bus with the logo "Bright and Shiny"
(read "Up With People") only to be thrown out when he innocently calls his
generic looking companions (all named Todd and Lorraine) a cult. (Super
male model Fabio makes a cameo appearance as their leader.) From there he
meets and helps a surly biker named Slim (Danny Trejo) with a flat tire.
("Patches?" says Slim. "I could use some stinking patches!" in homage to
"The Treasure of the Sierra Madre.") Jimmy's adventures continue as he
slowly treks across the land and he teams up with the members of a circus
freak show led by a nasty little guy named Dr. Phreak (Vern Troyer). An
East Indian (Brian George) driving an ice cream and curry van gives B-Boy a
ride and his faith is sorely tested, to gross out effect. Meanwhile, his
overly protective mom and his dad also hit the road in search of their
wayward boy, crossing the same paths as their son.
There has been a lot of flack over the shots that "Bubble Boy" takes at the
various targets and sacred cows of our society. Religion, whether it be
Christianity, the Hindu faith or Judaism, is fired upon frequently and with
verve in the script by Cinco Paul and Ken Daurio. This alone seems to
offend troves of people. I guess some individuals have a problem with
politically incorrect satire. The use of circus freaks is being construed
as mean spirited, but these misshapen folk are good and caring (and, yes,
funny) characters, much the same way Alfred Hitchcock depicted them in
"Saboteur" (1942). Of course, no one gave Hitch any grief, but the present,
politically correct world we live in takes offense over showing others less
fortunate.
Jake Gyllenhaal ("October Sky") is dead on as the title boy and, with his
dramatic rather than comedic background, anchors the comedy with an earnest
stalwartness that, say, someone like Brendan Fraser may not have conveyed.
Jimmy is resourceful, capable and kind and so in love with Chloe (a
charming performance by pretty Marley Shelton) that he'll risk his very
life just to hold her. It's a sweet perf in a goofy, coming of age road
movie. Swoozie Kurtz is near evil as Jimmy's dominant mom, but the veteran
actress gives her character a caring personality, if only when it comes to
her son. The plethora of character actors filling out the roles of the wild
and wacky people Jimmy meets do yeoman's work and help contribute to the
subversive comedy. You might recognize a face or two with vet Danny Trejo
("Con Air") and Verne Troyer (Mini Me in "Austin Powers 2") doing their
bit.
Commercial director Blair Hayes makes his debut and keeps the pace brisk
but not hurried. Running about 90 minutes, it's the right length, to my
mind, for a screwball comedy and "Bubble Boy" exerts its right to satire
very well. Maybe I'm just thick skinned but I was not the least bit
offended by the offbeat humor, which pushes the envelope of good taste. I
think it walked the line admirably well for a lightweight summer comedy. I
guess it's all a matter of how you look at things. If you're the kind of
person offended by a film like "Bubble Boy" just say no and go see
something else. I, personally, like anarchy and give it a B-.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
