Title
Review for Siam Sunset (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Greg King
SIAM SUNSET (M).  
(Southern Star Films/UIP)
Director: John Polson
Stars: Linus Roache, Danielle Cormack, Roy Billing, Ian Bliss, Alan 
Brough, Rebecca Hobbs, Robert 
Menzies, Terry Kenwrick, Deidre Rubenstein, Peter Hosking, Victoria 
Eagger, Eliza Lowell
Running time: 92 minutes.
Despite its poetic title, Siam Sunset is far from a formulaic
romantic comedy set in Thailand.  Rather, this quirky black comedy,
featuring a bus ride through Australia's inhospitable outback,
seemingly takes us straight into Welcome To Woop Woop territory.
While the surreal, off beat sense of humour is nowhere near as
tasteless, Siam Sunset is not a winning, crowd pleasing comedy in the
vein of Priscilla, either.  This is yet another hit and miss
Australian comedy that prefers to travel an off beat path rather than
trying to secure easy laughs with a broad, mainstream sensibility.
There are a number of chuckles along the way, but genuine laughs are
far and few between.
Siam Sunset takes the idea of a deeply troubled man looking
for salvation, and marries it with the scenario of the bus tour from
hell.  Its plot eventually comes across as something of a profusion of
ideas from many other films.  Writers Max Dann and Andrew Knight
(Spotswood, etc) set up a number of wonderfully comic moments, but
often fail to deliver the killer punch line.  Ultimately, the whole
thing is a minor disappointment.
Linus Roache (Priest, etc) is cast as Perry, an industrial
chemist for a paint factory, whose mid-life crisis comes early, when
his wife is crushed by a falling refrigerator.  Perry believes that he
is a magnet for bad luck.  He also becomes obsessed with searching for
an elusive colour - Siam Sunset - which reminds him of his wife's
hair.  Perry wins a trip to Australia at a local Bingo game, and he
reluctantly decides to go, hoping to turn his life around.  But
disaster follows the cut rate tour, led by the laconic Bill (Roy
Billing), who seems to possess as much warmth and charisma as a
Rottweiler.  The tour picks up an unexpected passenger in Grace (New
Zealand actress Danielle Cormack, from Topless Women..., etc), whose
car has broken down.  Grace is fleeing from her troubled past, and her
vicious drug dealing boyfriend Martin (Ian Bliss).  Threatened with
either testifying against him or going to jail herself Grace did the
only honourable thing - lifted his secret wad of cash and headed off
for distant parts.  Martin follows and joins the bus tour, just as a
further series of improbable disasters send it off its predetermined
route.
When these hapless travellers become stranded at Eric's
Roadhouse way-stop in the middle of nowhere, the dynamic of the group
quickly breaks down.  Perry and Grace remain above all the petty
squabbling as their relationship develops, and the healing process
begins for both.
Siam Sunset marks the feature film directorial debut of AFI
award winning actor John Polson (The Boys, etc).  Polson makes an
assured debut here, directing with surprising flair and confidence,
and drawing some uncomfortably black humour from this unlikely and
increasingly bizarre scenario.  Roache delivers a nicely understated
and affable performance as the troubled and vulnerable Perry.  Cormack
brings a vitality to her performance, and makes the most of her role.
However, there is no real chemistry or charisma between Roache and
Cormack, and their relationship lacks real warmth and credibility.
Bliss' intense performance as the brutal Martin brings a nasty,
malevolent edge to proceedings that sometimes sits a little
uncomfortably with the lighter moments.
Brian Beheny's cinematography is certainly quite spectacular,
and he uses the wide screen superbly to capture the harsh but
beautiful Australian outback at its best.  However, even this
technique has become something of a cliché in itself.
Siam Sunset shows potential, but its dry humour sometimes
falls flat, and the outrageous sequence of events are not always
convincing.  This is one sunset that will not please everybody.
