Title
Review for Hear My Song (1991)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     ear My Song is the first film directed by Peter Chelsom.  It is based
on a screenplay Chelsom co-authored with Adrian Dunbar, the actor who plays
the film's main character.  It is a spectacular start for two major talents.
British Chelsom is starting out with more talent than 90% of American
directors and with a skill that it took Bill Forsyth two or three films to
attain.  I choose Forsyth because Chelsom and Forsyth are both British and
each has a loving feel for the personalities of minor characters and local
color.  HEAR MY SONG is constantly doing the unexpected.  Only in the last
ten minutes does the film get a bit sugary.
     Mickey O'Neill (played by Dunbar) is a thirty-year-old concert promoter
in an Irish neighborhood in England.  He wants little more from life than to
put on successful concerts and to woo his girlfriend Nancy.  Tara
Fitzgerald, who plays Nancy, has the sort of pristine beauty that Grace
Kelly had.  There is absolutely no need for the film to explain why Mickey
is anxious to win Nancy.  Mickey, however, is having problems, both with
Nancy and with his promotions.  He finds himself promoting sleazier and
sleazier singers to ever-shrinking audiences.  Then he manages to book a
legendary Irish singer who has been a tax exile from England since 1958.
That sparks unexpected events and a quest in Ireland.
     Chelsom's style of story-telling is brisk and usually intelligent.
Plot details are not overly explained.  Some concentration is required and
there is the feeling that the plot could take a right-angle turn at any
moment.  Unusual camera angles abound.  Chelsom and Dunbar pack the film
with comic situations and dialogue.  Some mention should be made of the
films only two recognizable stars.  Top billing goes to Ned Beatty as a
reclusive Irishman who could be the key to Mickey's success.  His singing is
one of the few negative touches as his singing voice--dubbed by Vernon
Midgley--just does not seem to go with his speaking voice.  David McCallum
is largely wasted as a police inspector and as a heavy.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
100 min., R, Drama , 1991
Director: Peter Chelsom
Cast: Ned Beatty, Adrian Dunbar, Shirley-Anne Field, Tara Fitzgerald,
      William Hootkins, David McCallum
     Adrian Dunbar is going to be evicted from the building where his
club is located.  He promises the landlords that he is going to get
Irish tenor Ned Beatty to sing at the club, and they let him stay open.
Instead of Beatty, Dunbar ends up with an impersonator.  Dunbar loses
the club, his girlfriend Tara Fitzgerald, and his friends.  He sets out
on a voyage to Ireland to try to locate Beatty so he can get Fitzgerald
back.
     HEAR MY SONG is a wonderful film, is well written and beautifully
filmed.  It is well worth going to see if it comes to a theater near
you.  Personally, this film didn't sound the most interesting to me, but
it was playing as a double feature to the other film I went to see, so I
figured I might as well watch this film too.  I was surprised at how
much I liked it.  On a scale of zero to five, I give HEAR MY SONG a
four.  It is rated R for female nudity, adult situations, and explicit
language.
     The locations used for this film were great.  The Irish country
side where Beatty was living looked beautiful.  Ned Beatty, who is
really starting to get old (53, I think) did a great job, even though he
didn't do his own singing.  Some opera singer, I think, did all of the
singing for him.  Dunbar, who I don't think I have ever seen before in
the movies, did a wonderful job and has a potential in movies, at least
in alternative cinema.  Tara Fitzgerald, although she wasn't on the
screen very much, did a memorable performance.  The rest of the
supporting cast also did a great job.
     The film was interesting.  I fully enjoyed watching it and never
got bored.  This is alternative cinema almost at its best.   I highly
suggest that if you have not yet seen this film that you attempt to.  I
don't think that you will be disappointed.  I certainly wasn't.  I feel
that this film should have gotten more exposure than it did.  At least
in my area it only played for four days, and I don't think that that was
near enough time.  I feel that this film probably would have done very
well at a mainstream theater which would have allowed more people to see
it.

Author
Frank Maloney
     HEAR MY SONG is a movie directed by Peter Chelsom.  It was written
by Peter Chelsom and Adrian Dunbar.  It stars Ned Beatty, Adrian Dunbar,
Cathleen Doyle, Tara Fitzgerald,  William Hootkins, David McCallum, and
Shirley-Anne Field.  It is rated R for brief nudity, mild profanity.
     HEAR MY SONG is an Irish (or possibly Anglo-Irish? [actually, it's
British -mod]) film that is fresh, charming, funny, sweet, and
entertaining.  The fact that the story is less than original and holds
few, if any, surprises, barely diminishes the appeal of this
light-hearted romantic comedy about friendship, loyalty, and
obligations that must be paid.
     The major character is Mickey O'Neill, played effortlessly and
energetically by co-writer Adrian Dunbar.  He is operating a slightly
bogus night club in an Irish neighborhood of an English city, which
logically ought to be Liverpool.  His schemes catch up with him and he
looses everything, especially his girl and his reputation.  To redeem
himself in the eyes of his community and especially those of his girl
(Tara Fitzgerald) and her mother (Shirley-Ann Field), the still
beautiful Miss Dairy Goodness of 1958, Mickey heads for Ireland to track
the one man who can make Mickey persona grata, a legendary Irish tenor
and tax evader, Josef Locke.  (It seems, by the way, that Locke is a real
person, who is living peacefully and legally in Ireland today.)
     In the film, Locke is played commandingly by veteran American
character actor Ned Beatty.  Beatty backs off from a full-flown Irish
accent, and what he does assay may slip a trifle from time to time.  But
the performance is fine enough to overlook an occasional lapsus linguae.
(I'd be interested in hearing from any Irish about this or any other
reaction to the film.)  The only problem I have with Beatty's
performance is in the area of dubbing the songs.  The singing is
provided by tenor Vernon Midgley, and it is really wonderful to hear it.
However, I never can believe it is coming out of Ned Beatty's all-too
familiar face.
     There is a wealth of charming character performances in HEAR MY
SONG.  And the location shots of Irish landscapes are an added
attraction.  There's a lovely friendship story concerning Mickey and his
boyhood friend Fenton (played by a singularly cute and charming actor
whose name, alas, I do not have).  Mickey says as they part, "What have
I done for you?"  To which Fenton replies, "Nothing.  But's that not the
point."  There is also a very funny performance by William Hootkins, a
man who tries to make people happy by being what they want him to be.
     The humor of the film is founded on desperation and the fear of
losing one's honor.  Mickey is desperate to get back his girl, the girl
he was never able to say "I love you" to; Locke has to redeem his
promises to the girl's mother.  And then there's a police inspector
played by David McCallum (best known for his role in THE MAN FROM
U.N.C.L.E. as Ilya Kuriakin), who's been waiting for twenty-five years
to redeem his promise to arrest the tax invader who saved his life.
There are plenty of outrageous gags, handled with style and grace, none
more so than one concerning a cow and a very deep well.
     I can recommend HEAR MY SONG to just about anyone who isn't holed
in WAYNE'S WORLD and has no intention being so (that's my minireview of
that one; please do not write to tell me what a geek I am--I happen to
be an old fart), but I digress.  If you pay full price, you will not
feel cheated.  In the U.S. it is being distributed by Miramax,
something you might want to mention to your local art house manager.
This is a charmer.

Author
J. C. Deck
     It's just too bad that a fine film like this one won't get the
exposure of, say, STOP, OR MY MOTHER WILL SHOOT so that lots of
audiences could see excellence in film production.  HEAR MY SONG
provides us with humor, romance, human interest, and some really
colorful characters.  
     The only stars familiar to United States viewers in the film are
Ned Beatty and David McCallum (of THE MAN FROM U.N.C.L.E. fame).
McCallum has a minor role but plays it to the hilt.  And Ned
Beatty--who'd have thought that Lex Luthor's assistant in SUPERMAN was
also a major league actor?  By the way, I watched the credits carefully
and that's *not* Jack Elam as one of Beatty's buddies.  Everyone else is
just superb (I liked the Ryan sisters).  The plot moves very well and is
so well photographed that Ireland's tourist authority should underwrite
the scenes set in Ireland.  The comedy is great (the cow scene provoked
the audience to laugh aloud) and the music is fine.  Try to see this
film in a theater with a better-than-average sound system: it will add
to your viewing pleasure.
     One last note, the character played by Ned Beatty is a real-life
living person--that fact is like the cherry atop a fine, soda fountain
sundae which emulates the pleasurable experience that viewing this
movie provides.  Don't wait for the video on this one, you'll lose a bit
o' the magic on the small screen.  This one deserves to be seen at full
price--you'll get your money's worth.
