Title
Review for Thelma & Louise (1991)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
James Davis Nicoll
     THELMA AND LOUISE is the most recent attempt by Hollywood to cash
in on sci-fi.  The film is set 35 years in the future and the director
chose to avoid the cliches of other B films (Giant insects, Atomic war,
Alien invasions) and try for a more 'realistic' feel by looking at the
future from the point of view of two women.  I suppose it is the same
reason UNCLE TOM'S CABIN used a coloured man as the main character; you
get a different perspective from underneath.  I'm a big fan of sci-fi,
and I had high hopes for this film, but unfortunately, what Ridley Scott
has produced is a smutty dystopia, whose technology is scarcely more
advanced than our own.
     Scott chose to set THELMA AND LOUISE in a backwater state.  While
this means he didn't have to pay for the expensive sets portraying a
futuristic city, which his accountant no doubt thanked him for, it also
means that the two characters spend most of their time driving around
scenery that seems not to have changed in any major way in the next
three and a half decades (well, once or twice, you do get to see what
seems to be the Interstate and National Defense road system, but that's
just something we're working on *now*, scarcely futuristic).  Now, while
it makes sense that the two women would want to keep to the backroads,
surely in 35 years, we'd have better backroads than dirt and the
occasional hardtop.
     THELMA AND LOUISE is at best described as pornographic.  Sex scenes
abound, and the subject of sex seems to be a major theme in the movie.
Now, there's nothing wrong with the occasional kiss or whatever, if it
is handled with taste, but this movie goes far beyond good taste.
Worse, it is inconsistent.  On one hand, Scott presents a future where
women apparently have relations with men on a fairly casual basis (One
of the women claims not to have "had" any one but her husband, but falls
into bed with a hitchhiker the women pick up and the other woman acts
pleased that this happened), but women also seem to be the target of
continual unwanted advances, and if the comments of the older woman are
correct, women who are raped can't hope to be believed (although given
the easy nature of the two women in this film, it is easy to see why).
Is sex good or bad?  Don't ask Mr. Scott, because he doesn't seem to
have made up his mind.
     To put it mildly, Ridley Scott's 1991 is not very advanced, given
the 35 years that have supposedly gone by.  The cars don't have fins.
Ovens have gotten smaller.  There are no videophones, though, and
although I looked hard, there didn't seem to be very many pieces of
technology that we couldn't built today.  They have "microwave ovens,"
which makes sense (radar can cook things *fast*!), they have
radio-controlled TV (same programs as we have, judging by the sound
track in the scene where the FBI is watching TV).  Because Scott tries
hard to look at the future from the perspective of someone living in
that future, what new technology is shown isn't explained.  Why do
people have radar dishes in their back yards?  What is that TV-like
screen one FBI man is studying?  We never find out.  It would have
worked better as a sci-fi film if Scott had figured out a way to put the
technolgy more in the spot-light.
     The police do seem to have advanced slightly.  They have flocks of
helicopters, and the police cars have megaphones on them (again, nothing
we couldn't do).  On the other hand, the cops seem to have softened in
35  years; one policeman seems to care more about the two murderers he
is chasing than he does the man they killed, and another is shown crying
as soon as he is threatened.  Are men supposed to be all soft crybabies
or drooling apes in 1991?  
     Even weapons don't seem to have changed much.  No blasters or ray
guns for Mr. Scott.  The women have a revolver and an automatic and the
police have rifles.  The rifles looked unfamiliar, but were never used,
so I couldn't tell if they were any better than the rifles the army uses
now.  Again, there didn't seem to be any radical changes, just a lot
more of what we have now.
     THELMA AND LOUISE is a sci-fi film that suffers from a terrible
lack of vision on Ridley Scott's part.  His future is not much different
from our present, except that it has more sex, funny looking cars, and a
lot of helicopters.  I had to agree with the despairing note the movie
ends on; THELMA AND LOUISE is just a bleak, pornographic version of our
present, with the slight advances in technology more than made up for by
social decay.  This is not a future I would want to live in.
What, you think people posted reviews to USENET in 1956? 

Author
Frank Maloney
     THELMA AND LOUISE is a film by Ridley Scott and stars Geena Davis
and Susan Sarandon as the title characters.
     THELMA AND LOUISE is a great film, undoubtedly one of the ten best
films that will be released in 1991, a film that may well find a place
on the 100-best list of films I have ever seen.  I kid you not.
     However, if you don't know already, the advertising campaign is
very misleading, giving many people the impression that THELMA AND
LOUISE is a light-headed road picture, a kind of Hope and Crosby with
breasts.  This is a very black comedy, and whether one finds it
ultimately depressing or uplifting is going to be a very personal
reaction.
     Myself, I was enormously cheered by this movie, especially by its
blackness, by its anger and rage, and by its absolute insistence on a
certain kind of life.
     The film looks like a Ridley Scott film, with its black wet
streets, but it feels more personal than more of his that I've seen.
     Geena Davis is absolutely marvelous as Thelma, who begins as a kind
of girl-woman running away from home on a spree and who ends up a human
being, a woman who knows herself and the world, a woman in control, a
woman willing to make a decision, a commitment.  That mobile face, that
almost prehensile mouth are exploited here to their full potential.
Davis pulls out all the stops to create her Thelma and it works.
     However, good as Davis is, Susan Sarandon may be even better.  In
some ways her character is more complex because so much about Louise
remains a mystery she won't talk about.  First she's the mother, then
the daughter, then the sister, the partner to Thelma, and through it all
is strength and knowledge that win through to acceptance.  It's a
powerful characterization and one that shines even more brightly when
one realizes that Sarandon also has to be Davis's second banana, her
straight woman.  Davis gets most of the laughs.  Sarandon got my heart.
     I think some people are going complain about a certain
one-sidedness in the men's roles.  It's true that Thelma's husband is
the one of the most astonishing pig to ever pop a brew, it's true the
foul-mouthed trucker is only technically a hominid, it's true the
trooper is a Hitler Youth with shit in his britches.  But Louise's
boyfriend, without being an Alan-Alda sensitive guy, is a real mensch,
and I suspect the cop who's heading the investigation (Harvey Keitel)
falls in love with both women even while having to catch them.
     There is some silliness in the movie.  For example, no one ever
seems to have heard of shrapnel or everyone carries a personal force
field in case of exploding tanker trailers.  And another poster has
caught a continuity error.  For some reason, I almost never catch these.
     And you may, or may not, have a problem with the conclusion THELMA
AND LOUISE comes to about women in a male-dominated society.  I think
the inevitability of what happens makes ideological concerns largely to
one side.
     Another poster also addressed the derivativeness of the ending.
This is not a problem for me.  The fact that THELMA AND LOUISE is about
*women* makes that other movie's ending beside the point, too.  In fact,
if you want to talk about antecedents, let's talk about Goldie Hawn's
wonderful SUGARLAND EXPRESS.  That is the movie that THELMA AND LOUISE
most resembles for me.
     Honestly, Davis and Sarandon are so overwhelming, any objections
pale to mere bagatelles in my humble opinion.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Thelma and Louise have had it.  Thelma (played by Geena Davis) is
something somewhere between a housewife and a household appliance.  Her
husband bullies her, cheats on her, and treats her like dirt.  Louise has it
a little better as an unmarried waitress with a foul-tempered boyfriend.
The two of them want just to get away for a weekend and do a little fishing.
Then, after an evening in a bar, Thelma is almost raped and Louise has shot
the rapist.  Suddenly the two are on the run from the law, a situation they
find both exhilarating and terrifying.  Thelma has never been allowed to
think for herself.  Now that she is free and thinking, it is not surprising
that her decisions are not very well thought-out and generally get the two
deeper into trouble.  In a sense this is a coming-of-age film about Thelma.
     At least superficially, this is a story that has been done many times
before.  The sympathetic characters start with a little fun, enrage the law,
and eventually are being chased by regiments of law enforcement officers.
Yes, the film does have car chases and hair-breadth escapes and the usual
scenes of police cars cork-screwing through the air and crashing.  Take away
the subtext and you have a very cliched film.  The subtext, however, makes
this a very strong little propaganda film.  There are a lot of men in this
film and only one man is decent and another is decent when he is not having
a temper tantrum.  Jimmy, Louise's boyfriend, does prove to have redeeming
features.  And Hal, the policeman tracking Thelma and Louise, manages to
understand every wall of the box the two of them are in.  Hall is more
interested in saving the two from harm than he is in catching them.  If this
film has a hero, it is Hal.  But every hunk Thelma tries to pick up only
makes things worse.  Truck drivers on the road are sexist pigs.  And
Thelma's husband Daryl is a real piece of work.
     Ridley Scott's direction is good in the human interaction scenes if
rather cliched in the action scenes.  The photography of the great Southwest
is certainly visually stunning.  Still, the film's message about feminism
and, in general, freedom comes on a little strong.  While the rapist
certainly has none of the audience's sympathy, killing him seems
unnecessary.  We want to see his attitudes and behavior punished, but like
Louise, we have strong second thoughts as to whether his crimes deserve the
death penalty.
     In any case, this may be one of the most intelligent cross-country
chase films.  I give it a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Laurie D. T. Mann
     THELMA & LOUISE is the latest in the new genre of "female buddy movies."
The movie is pretty strong, the acting is quite wonderful and I recommend it.
     Thelma (Geena Davis) is a repressed housewife, and Louise (Susan
Sarandon) is a more-worldly waitress who decide to go fishing one
weekend.  The chemistry between these women is terrific from the
beginning as they take a silly picture of one another as they jump in
the car, Louise's '65 Mustang convertible.
     Thelma, sick to death of her dorky husband, suggests they stop for
a drink, and they stop at a divey bar with loads of CW music and loads
of pseudo-cowboys.  One of them, Harlan, takes notice of Thelma, dances
with her as she gets drunk, then takes her out to the parking lot to
"not hurt her" as Thelma protests in drunken and fruitless ways.  But
Louise comes to the rescue, threatens Harlan with a gun, and winds up
shooting him when he mouths off to her one time too many.  (A pity
Louise was rather drunk at the time ... she could have shot him in a more
appropriate location!)
     The movie really picks up from here, as Thelma and Louise try to
stay several steps in front of the law.  The men are not all
cookie-cutter creeps, like Harlan and Daryl (Thelma's husband).
Louise's boyfriend Jimmy is alternately sweet and considerate, yet
violent at times.  Slocum, the man sent to investigate Harlan's murder,
is fascinated by the women, because everyone who has seen the women
insist they aren't the murdering kind.  Thelma blossoms in the course of
the movie, becoming someone who won't take shit from anyone.  And all
Louise can see is getting to Mexico, while avoiding Texas...
     The photography is pretty good, and there's a neat sequence of
driving through the New Mexico desert at night, the world quiet and dark
except for the car lights flashing off the rock formations.
     I have mixed feelings on the ending.  On the one hand, even trying
to talk to the cops would have been pointless.  On the other hand,
driving into the canyon rather than compromising somewhere seemed overly
strong.  I agree with an earlier poster who observed that showing some
earlier scenes from their escapades was an attempt to soften the ending,
and wasn't appropriate.

Author
Dave Gross
     I'm willing to let a lot of things I disagree with slide for the
sake of art.  For instance, I despise racism, but I won't overly
criticize a joke that depends on racial stereotypes -- as long as the
joke is funny.  Most of those sort of jokes aren't funny at all, though,
so rarely to I have this opportunity to rein in my social conscience.
     This was the attitude with which I approached THELMA AND LOUISE.  I
had heard enough about the film to know that it quite possibly would
violate quite a bit of the men's movement's version of politically
correct thought.  I was willing to let these considerations take a back
seat to the art of the movie.
     For a while, that worked out fine.  The movie wasn't too cerebral,
but sort of fell into the old suburban action fantasy Walter Mitty
thing.  You know ... the "Gee my life is boring, wouldn't it be exciting
if ..." sketch.  Not at all foreign to film.  Ad executive finds himself
in the middle of a terrorist plot; Housewife gets mistaken for daughter
of millionaire, madcap adventure erupts upon being snatched by Keystone
Kidnappers; Ordinary caring father dons super-hero garb to take
vengeance on criminal element.  We've seen this sort of thing before.
     And certainly there have been a number of movies about men who have
gone beyond the law, using violence to terrorize the countryside and
cash in on macho derring do.  ROBIN HOOD, coming out this summer, will
probably fall into this mold.  Look for enough murder and armed robbery
in this one to far outshine the criminal mayhem in THELMA AND LOUISE.
     But, unfortunately for the film's fate in this review, the quality
just isn't very good, which meant that I had time to start thinking
politics.
     It's true, I noticed right away, that the men in the film are
mostly reeking of the slime from the depths from which they have
crawled.  I didn't immediately fault the film for this, since the only
real female roles in the film were the title characters, and I didn't
think they represented wonderful examples of the species, either.
     I could talk about some of the reasons why I didn't think the film
or the story were very good.  One of the main flaws, I thought, was with
the characters.  It seemed to me that the plot wasn't something that
they did, so much as something that happened to them.  And their
epiphanal sayings every time they committed some violent act made me
wonder if these wonderful things they were discovering about themselves
or about life didn't really add up to much more than an adrenaline rush
-- explanations didn't get much deeper than that.
     But seeing as this is soc.men, not talk.movies or whatever [well, it
was soc.men before  -Moderator], I won't go into my ideas of what made
the film flawed as a film.  I will talk a little about the images of men
and women in the film.
     As I mentioned before, there are few truly heroic figures in the
film, unless you count Thelma and Louise themselves (I don't).  There is
one boyfriend who isn't entirely seedy, at least as far as we can tell
through his cold exterior.  And there is the Good Cop (tm) whose
motivations for his understanding behavior are left completely
unexplained by the film.  The incidental men in the film are all scum,
from the rapist at the bar to the leering men at the rest stops to the
repulsive cardboard-cut-out chauvinist pig truck driver to the idiot
repressive husband to the sloppy restaurant boss to the guy who was a
good lay but robbed them blind when they turned their backs -- They
drool, cackle, bully and generally act like stereotypes throughout the
film.
     This is not such a horrible crime in itself, since as I mentioned
before, the two main female characters are also not the sort of people
I'd choose to spend time with.  I can't think of any other female
characters in the film who even warranted speaking roles (other than
maybe "Some more coffee?"), so it's hard to say whether this was just
equal opportunity misanthropy.
     So for a while, the film is pretty fair-minded.  Then about
two-thirds of the way through, things start getting preachy.  If you
didn't realize that this was supposed to be a women's liberation film,
you learn fast.  The preachy stage reaches its peak when Thelma and
Louise manage to get the aforementioned truck driver to pull over.  He
expects that his frontal assault of sexual innuendo has miraculously done
the trick, but is stunned to be confronted by two women who castigate
him for his sexist behavior ("How would you like it if somebody said
that to your mother?") and then, when he refuses to apologize, blow up
his truck.
     It gets spread pretty thickly at this point, and drove the nails in
the coffin for the film, in my opinion.  But don't decide not to see the
film because it is anti-male and a poor representation of liberated
women.  Decide not to see the film because it isn't a good film.  Or I
suppose you can find out for yourself, but go on bargain night :-)
