Title
Review for Big Wednesday (1978)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
John Milius' cult favorite is awash with his usual buddy-bonding and
rites of manhood, but presents us with characters that are more
engaging and sympathetic than those in several of his other works. 
Story looks at four episodes in the lives of a trio of friends over a
period of twelve years.  Jan-Michael Vincent, William Katt, and Gary
Busey are believable as a group of L.A. surfers who grow up through
the sixties and witness the changes in each others lives.  As you
would expect from a Milius film, the men take center stage while their
lovers (Patti D'Arbanville and Lee Purcell) are merely bit players,
relegated to responding to each of the surfers' successes, failures,
and desires.  But what are wives and girlfriends compared to your
friends, who will stick with you - as surfboard craftsman Bear puts it
- through hell (Vietnam) or high water (the seasonal swells).
Milius plays off masculine iconography (beer, fistfights, cars, guns,
surfing, war, stripshows) against Bruce Surtees' subdued photography
and Basil Pouledouris' pensive musical score.  For this reason I
believe BIG WEDNESDAY imparts quintessential elements of the male
psyche more persuasively than Milius' other gung-ho action pictures. 
Also, it's a pleasant surprise to see him siding with characters who
are dedicated draft-dodgers.  Final episode of film, which should be
seen in a cinema for best effect, has a big, mythic feel to it.  Of
course Milius, a former lifeguard and surfer himself, has been aiming
for this all along: Jan-Michael Vincent's character is the archetypal
Legend in His Own Time, a latter-day Beowulf contesting the fury of
the deep; he and his friends enter their patch of the beach by a
ruined stairway that looks like the remains of an ancient temple;
Vincent's surfboard is passed on to him (in the manner of a sword or
any other powerful token) by a master craftsman who has foretold the
'Big Day' when it must be used; the three friends paddle into the
roaring ocean to brass fanfares, as if they were entering a joust. 
Was it any surprise that Milius would go on to direct CONAN THE
BARBARIAN after this?  Well-made film has the power to appeal to both
surfers and film buffs.  
