Title
Review for Uranus (1990)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jeff Meyer
[Moderator's note: I am splitting these reviews up by country, because I
have to split them up some way.  I am not trying to be provincial. -ecl]
DR. MABUSE, THE GAMBLER (Germany, 1922, silent):
A film I have long wanted to see, this is Fritz Lang's four-hour story
of a heinous criminal mastermind who manipulates the fate of post-war
Germany with his genius and his incredible mental powers.  (Yeah, it's
a hoot.)  While five hours (there's a one-hour intermission) is a bit
lengthy for most viewers, the film has a number of impressive scenes,
and the first half-hour, in which Mabuse pulls off a MISSION:
IMPOSSIBLE-like theft which allows him to exploit the chaotic German
economy to his profit, is extremely well-timed and exciting to watch.
The first half will be of enjoyment to fans of the old FANTOMAS novels
-- the European pre-pulp feel is much in evidence; the second half
tends towards melodrama (as Mabuse kidnaps the heroine and destroys
her husband), but is full of neat trick effects (for the time) and
certainly action-packed.  Robert Israel played live accompaniment
during the film, and did a splendid job -- he received an ovation
during the film when his hands matched the hands of a piano player in
a gambling den!  Certainly the most enjoyable silent film I've seen
yet at the festival.
This year's nomination for The Film From Hell.  A movie so static,
that most slide presentations look like THIS IS CINERAMA in
comparison.
TWILIGHT opens with a gray, slow moving shot over the Black Forest,
with incredibly menacing and forboding music on the soundtrack.  The
film is in black and white, and the image is impressively spooky.
Knowing that the plot concerns a serial killer of children around the
woods of Budapest, it seems to be a promising start -- one's mind goes
back to NOSFERATU and VAMPYRE and some other impressively spookily B&W
films set in these parts.  As it turns out, one's mind has a lot of
time to consider this, as the slow moving shot goes on for about five
minutes.  Without dialogue.  Foreshadowing...
The film continues in these visual spurts.  Shot of field where body
of child was discovered; camera pans at the rate of about a degree
every 5 seconds.  Finally, some people arrive; thank God, maybe we'll
get some dialog.  Well, a few words; the rest of the time, the actors
are apparently communing with nature.  It turns out they're
detectives; maybe they're trying to find the killer psychically.
They're definitely not saying much.  And after about 10 minutes of
this -- BAM!  Back to the flying-over-the-black-forest shot, with the
same ominous music, for another five minutes.
Well, the film continues to be regular as clockwork.  There are scenes
where the cameraman set up the camera to take a particular shot (the
face of a man which is *absolutely* *immobile*, or the view of rain
falling on the windshield of a car from the driver's seat), and then
leaves it running while he goes down to the sound truck for a drink,
or something.  Honestly, I would have left, but I had four people on
either side of me, and most of them appeared to be asleep.
An agonizingly boring film; the cinematography was good, but they'd
need to pay me a year's wages to sit through this mental taffy-pull
again.
LANDSCAPE WITH A WOMAN (Yugoslavia, 1976 (released 1990)):
One thing about films made in those Balkan countries during Communist
rule: most of their films seem to have a budget which was
approximately 60% of that of an average American high school film
production class.  Thus, certain technical limitations common to both
crop up, e.g., jumping between medium close-ups of the actors speaking
directly into the camera, e.g.
JAN:  Isky Pisky Palamero.  [Your cow will not mate with my bull.]
OTTO: Palamero Isky Pisky.  [Your bull will not mate with my cow.]
JAN:  Finko Chaderleech.  [This is not good.]
*sigh*  OK, OK, low blows.  However, the film isn't much to speak
about; a forest ranger (responsible mostly for keeping locals from
filching wood from the state-protected woods) creates suspicion due to
his love of painting and art, but slowly begins to win the natives
over.  The ending was rather surprising and abrupt, and not to my
liking.  There is a constant strain of folk music, like that sung by
the Bulgarian Women's Choir, throughout the film, and it makes me want
to claw the theater seats.
This is one of those films with an absolutely wonderful concept, some
of which is realized on the screen, and some of which isn't.  Peter
O'Toole plays a famous movie actor whose work is being shown in a
retrospective at a European film festival.  Colin Firth plays a young
writer who is desperate to see him, apparently due to something
O'Toole's character has done to him.  At the opening of the festival,
frustrated because he cannot talk to O'Toole, Firth shoots and kills
the actor -- and is subsequently killed himself by a falling
spotlight.
Well, they're both dead, and end up being ferried by a Charon-like
boatman to an island, surrounded by swimming, moaning souls.  On the
island is a hotel reserved for those whose fame still lives on Earth,
even after their deaths.  Of course, when your fame begins to fade...
out for a swim you go.
The vision of the afterlife has any number of attractions and neat
ideas, some of which are realized, some of which aren't.  There are
some tedious moments in the beginning, but once O'Toole and Firth
confront one another, it improves markedly.  At times, it's sort of a
reversed, relatively superficial twist on WINGS OF DESIRE; but the
film has well-timed bizarreness, a good sense of desperateness, and a
strong ending.  Firth is his usual strong character, and O'Toole
surprised me by only walking through about half of it -- he really
woke up at points.  Worth taking a look at, really.
LA GLOIRE DE MON PERE, LA CHATEAU DE MA MERE (France, 1990):
These are two separate films which tell one whole story, and they are
both two of greatest and most enjoyable surprises of this year's
festival.  Both are directed by Yves Roberts and are based on the
autobiographical books of Maurice Pagnol, which describe growing up in
his loving and eccentric family at the turn of the century.  LA GLOIRE
DE MON PERE (being released in the US of either MY FATHER'S GLORY or
THE GLORY OF MY FATHER) takes Marcel from his birth through his
unusual childhood -- he is a boy prodigy, reading at a remarkably
early age, and encouraged to be precocious by his enthusiastic,
technology-loving and religion-hating schoolteacher father (a complete
delight as portrayed by Phillipe Caubre), and his beautiful, doting
mother.
The second half of PERE, and almost all of LA CHATEAU DE MA MERE (MY
MOTHER'S CASTLE), deals with Marcel's experiences and adventures in
the hills of southern France, where his family spend their summers.
This is an old-fashioned film; characters you like in comic but
realistic situations, where half of the audience's delight is due to
their liking for the characters involved.  The topic is hardly
different than CHEAPER BY THE DOZEN, but Roberts' two films are
handled with a much finer, gentler hand; they appeal to a modern
audience without ever compromising the subject for a modern sense of
humor.  This is very much a family film; if not for the subtitles, I'd
recommend it to parents as a good film to see with their children.
Relevance?  Message?  Moral?  None is attempted, nor is any needed.
Like a good book meant for and read in adolescence, but appealing long
afterward, these two films exist on their own out of sheer affection
for their subjects.  I doubt you will learn anything from Marcel
Pagnol and his family, but I will be greatly surprised if you don't
enjoy the four hours you spend with them.  Thumbs up, smiles on.
ESCAPE FROM THE LIBERTY CINEMA (Poland, 1990 (US Premiere)):
Those of you who were discussing films within films, and particularly
THE PURPLE ROSE OF CAIRO, will *love* this film.  It's got a film
within a film within a film -- one of which is the PURPLE ROSE OF
CAIRO, to boot!  But I'm getting ahead of myself...
The film details (obliquely) the life of a Polish film censor, who
must decide which parts to excise out of films to be shown in Poland.
A former artist, he is drinking heavily and having vicious headaches
as his job gets harder and harder; he must second-guess his superiors
and the press as to what can be shown to the public -- what is
subversive, what appears to be subversive, what might be construed to
be subversive, and what can make it through the process.  And then one
evening he is called to the Liberty Cinema, where there are rumors
that the characters up on the screen are refusing to perform the
script as it was filmed...
There's a good deal of fourth wall irony (not humor) here,
particularly when the authorities accidently mix up THE PURPLE ROSE OF
CAIRO with the rebellious film; let's just say that the Jeff Daniels
character (it isn't Jeff Daniels) gets around a lot in that pith
helmet.  (Woody Allen MUST have given permission for this film to be
used this way.)  However, this film is first and foremost a political
commentary, and a rather dark and heavy one at that; I was unable to
pick up a number of the situations being shown.  The humor is a
by-product, and except for the extremely funny CAIRO scene, it's all
rather bleak.  Interesting at points, but not enough to sit through
the whole thing.
URANUS (France, 1990 (US Premiere)):
Claude Berri, the director of JEAN DE FLORETTE and MANON OF THE SPRING, has
picked a fascinating setting for his latest film: a small village in France
that was under the rule of Vichy during World War II, and is just recovering
after the conflict in Europe comes to a close.  It is chaos for many; those
in the Resistance rule the city, and an accusation of collaboration can be a
death sentence.  Various political parties, particularly the Communists (who
are just coming to power), are using such accusations to their own ends.
The center of the film revolves around the house of Archambaud (Jean-Pierre
Marielle), an engineer who went along with the now-discredited Vichy
government, and now houses a number of refugees while waiting to see what
the new government will do with him.  He shares his house with his family;
the family of a local Communist who believes in his cause but draws the line
at smearing political opponents; a collaborator, hidden in Archambaud's
childrens' bedroom; and finally Watrin (Phillippe Noiret), a schoolteacher
whose wife and house were lost in the bombings, and who has a philosophical
outlook on the situation.  One other character, Leopold (Gerard Depardieu),
the local bartender, a great bear of a man who is a drunkard, poet, bully,
and is fiercely independent of any and all political parties.
The events of the film center on the growing storm in the village after the
end of the war, the political and moral repercussions of the collaboration,
and the way it draws both the guilty and the innocent into the turmoil.
While I found the subject fascinating, it was difficult to become very
attached to URANUS; the characters are difficult to sympathize with, except
for Leopold (the scene at the opening as Leopold sits in on Watrin's school
lessons, being held in the tavern, are a treat), and even he seems rather
monochromatic, if not as low-key as the rest of the cast.  On the other
hand, the elements that would trigger intellectual interest don't seem to
flower, either; it explores the situation through the individual characters,
but the microcosm doesn't seem to shed much light on the why and how of
things in post-War France.  As a tableau of events for that period, it's a
success; but that wasn't enough to fully engage my interest.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
URANUS *** (France, 1991) Directed by Claude Berri.  Adapted 
by Berri and Arlette Langmann from the novel by Marcel Ayme. 
Cast: Gerard Depardieu, Philippe Noiret, Jean-Pierre Marielle, 
Michel Blanc, Gerard Desarthe, Michel Galabru, et al.  A 
Prestige-Miramax release. 100 min. French with subtitles. Not 
rated.(might be PG for language) 
The career of hugely talented and prolific writer Marcel Ayme 
took him from irony to mordant satire to scorn and black-humor 
sarcasm. During the German Occupation of France, Ayme wrote 
for some Vichy weeklies, including the notoriously 
anti-semitic "Je Suis Partout." 
With the liberation of France came the settling of accounts, 
as some 4,500 collaborators  (real,suspected or imagined) were 
killed by the Resistance,that is, by genuine or fictitious or 
eleventh-hour "patriots". Later, in more formal purges some 
125,000 people were tried, 38,000 received prison sentences 
and 764 death sentences, as traitors or collaborators. 
Although not found guilty of collusion with the enemy, Ayme 
was under a cloud. But he was also vehemently indignant at the 
hypocrisies and excesses of the purges which, it is a sad 
fact, only too often were a means of exacting petty personal 
revenge or settling scores. Films like HIROSHIMA MON AMOUR and 
THE SORROW AND THE PITY have illustrated those 
rush-to-judgment tendencies. The prevailing climate pre-echoed 
at times  the  American naming of names and  guilt by 
suspicion of the HUAC and McCarthy days. 
Ayme was particularly vexed by the  ascendance of the 
Communists, who became most influential as they claimed to 
have been the pure body, heart and soul of the Resistance. 
Much of that was true, as were many of the accusations flung 
at collaborators. But as it often happens in democratic times 
of retaliation, reinless injustice can also reign -- and 
that's certainly not an exclusivity in the France of the 
mid-1940s. 
Ayme published his novel URANUS in 1948 as his own settling of 
scores with the (in his view) false patriots and opportunistic 
(or misguided) Communists. His setting was a bombed-out town 
where, as elsewhere, many had guilty pasts yet all protested 
their purity, claiming to have been  Resistants, or denying 
collaboration. Ayme populated his stage with the spectrum of 
political pollution, from civilians to returning POWs to  
boot-licking officials.
Claude Berri (JEAN DE FLORETTE, MANON OF THE SPRING) and his 
sister have adapted as well as they could  Ayme's shortish but 
dense and complex book. Inevitably, cuts, condensations and 
simplifications had to be performed,  but the main characters 
are present and  played by a Who's Who of French 
stage-and-screen actors : loving, humanist professor Watrin 
,an Anatole France-like creation (Noiret); engineer Archambaud 
(Marielle) a cynical chameleon who, however, hides at great 
risk a wanted French Nazi ; the fugitive Loin (Desarthe) who 
faces death, yet has the odd "nobility" of sticking to his 
beliefs; still-thriving and still sickening black-market 
tycoon Monglat (Galabru); decent Communist Gaigneux (Blanc) 
whose family is billeted in Archambaud's apartment; bar-owner 
Leopold (Depardieu), a smalltime collaborator and  
black-marketeer, now a scapegoat for the Communists; and 
others. 
The inevitable loss in the transfer is palliated by the fact 
that Ayme --also a scenarist and playwright-- wrote striking, 
easily adaptable dialogue. Both story and dialogue have a kind 
of furious immediacy that comes from Ayme writing while events 
were still hot. A scriptwriter originating this in the 1990's 
couls never sound so authentic.  The text's humorous, 
sarcastic narration (which, oddly, sometimes reminds me of  
Dave Barry's devices) is gone however. It finds a modicum of 
equivalence in sounds and images, especially in the original 
creation of the mountainous, extroverted, alcoholic Leopold, 
whom Depardieu hams to the hilt. He wears a little Hitler 
mustache and is, heart and mind,totaly enraptured by his 
newfound love,the neo-classic,alexandrine verses of Racine's 
play ANDROMAQUE. 
The performers, even when they underplay, are mostly in the 
old French tradition of larger-than-life, rhetorical 
speakers--which  ought to  please those who miss grand screen 
dialogue. The production values are impressive in their 
precise reconstruction of a period, with its sights, sounds, 
artifacts and ruins. And the moral lesson is universal. 
