Title
Review for Gone with the Wind (1939)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Dragan Antulov
There are few films that represent such thankless task for
any reviewer like GONE WITH THE WIND. This epic melodrama,
directed in 1939 by Victor Fleming, should be viewed less as
a movie and more like an institution. Unlike any other piece
of seventh art, it actually became the essential part of
popular culture in this century. And this shouldn't surprise
anyone, since GONE WITH THE WIND looks larger than all the
other movies, almost in the same proportion in which an
average movie looks larger than real life. Its epic
222-minute length (this is the longest movie the author of
this review has watched in cinema) is only partly
responsible for such impression. The images of this film are
the most recognisable, the scenes are most memorable, the
protagonists are the most iconic and the lines are the most
quoted. Another example of its greatness is the fact that
the official "making of" documentary has more than two hours
of length. More than 60 years after its premiere, there are
still new generations of viewers ready to be enchanted by
its mythical quality. Thus the popularity of GONE WITH THE
WIND is perpetuated and it remains the most popular and most
beloved film of all times, almost destined to beat any
similar competition in near future, STAR WARS and TITANIC
included. Such enduring movie phenomenon also attracted
attention of thousands of critics and film scholars in the
last 60 years, so it is next to impossible to write anything
original about it.
The plot of the film, based on the novel by Margaret
Mitchell, begins in Georgia at the eve of American Civil
War. Scarlett O'Hara (played by Vivien Leigh) is a 16-year
old and stunningly beautiful daughter of wealthy
slave-owning aristocrat, equally unimpressed by armies of
young suitors and news about impeding crisis. Her heart
belongs to Ashley Wilkes (played by Leslie Howard), young
and handsome son of the neighbouring plantation owner.
Scarlett is devastated when she hears that Ashley intends to
marry his plain cousin Melanie Hamilton (played by Olivia de
Havilland). This news coincides with the official
declaration of war and Ashley, like all the other Southern
aristocrats of his generation, decides to join the ranks of
Confederate army. Scarlett, in the desperate attempt to stay
close to Ashley, marries Melanie's clueless brother Charles
(played by Rand Brooks) who would also join military ranks
only to succumb to pneumonia before any actual fighting.
Soon afterwards Scarlett decides to go to Atlanta and live
with Melanie who would greet her with open arms, blissfully
unaware of Scarlett's feelings towards Ashley. In the
meantime, Scarlett has caught attention of Rhett Butler
(played by Clark Gable), estranged son of Southern
aristocrats, who, unlike the rest of his generation, seems
unchained by the unwritten codes of Southern honour and
conventional morality. He is convinced that Scarlett shares
some of those traits and their relationship would be forged
in the dark days following Southern defeat, Northern
occupation and post- war Reconstruction.
GONE WITH THE WIND is often viewed as the best example of
filmmaking in the Golden Age of Old Hollywood, the period
marked by the lavish period productions, film studios
resembling ancient empires and stars having god-like powers
over the audience. There were certainly better or more
important films created in this period, but none of them
managed to perpetuate its magic through the decades. The
main reason probably lies in the fact that GONE WITH THE
WIND, unlike any other similar project of the period,
gathered the best Hollywood talents and almost anyone tried
to give at least some kind of contribution, starting with
four different directors and four different screenwriters,
all guided by the determined hands of producer David O.
Selznick. It seems that all those Hollywood people
subconsciously knew that their world is going to end in a
decade or two, and were driven by the desire to leave the
lasting mark on the motion picture. Result of their efforts
is a film that is the everlasting monument to the bygone era
of filmmaking.
The choice of talents for this film was nearly flawless. Two
main actors seem almost born for this role. Clark Gable
might have been not so enthusiastic about his role of Rhett
Butler, but the audiences and the critics through the
decades thought otherwise - his suave, cynical but charming
black sheep of Southern aristocracy seems convincing despite
not having recognisable Southern accent. British actor
Leslie Howard, cast as Ashley, was even less comfortable in
his role of Southern aristocrat, but he still delivers the
goods, successfully hiding an indecisive wimp under the
illusion of "noblesse oblige". But the greatest acting
achievement belongs to Vivien Leigh, British actress being
cast as Southern belle against all odds. Her skills in
displaying various emotions in a character that changes
through the years are evident, as well as her determination
to master the Southern accent. Vivien Leigh's zeal for this
role was awarded by "Oscar", and that zeal was again evident
in another "Oscar" calibre performance in A STREETCAR NAMED
DESIRE twelve years later. Olivia De Havilland was almost
equally impressive as less complex but almost equally strong
character of Melanie. Supporting actors were also very good,
including Hattie McDaniel in the "Oscar"-awarded role of
Mammy, Scarlett's slave nanny.
Superb acting talent was followed by superb production
values. Costumes and architecture of 1860s South are
painstakingly recreated, with William Cameron Menzies
enjoying benefits of special effects quite convincing for
that time. Suggestive photography and memorable images
(Scarlett watching the sunset, panoramic view of defeated
Southern army, destruction of Atlanta) follow the grand
scope of emotions. And the music by Max Steiner is also
excellent; its main theme is as legendary as the other
elements of film, still very recognisable, unlike any other
1930s film with the exception of musicals.
Like any other great movie, GONE WITH THE WIND left at least
some viewers unimpressed by its magic and some very eager to
point to its flaws. The most common and most obvious
objection to this film is its content, unacceptable for this
time and age. GONE WITH THE WIND, a movie responsible for
many popular misconceptions about American Civil War, gives
rather biased and, in many ways, historically inaccurate
portrayal of those crucial times of American and world
history. Margaret Mitchell's novel, influenced by the
romanticised and revisionist view of the Southern Lost
Cause, paints the Old South as a fairytale land of old,
chivalrous ideals and social harmony which fell prey to
evil, materialistic barbarians from the North. In this film
Southern blacks are quite content to have same rights as
cattle, and the phrases like "simpleminded darky" don't seem
insulting to them. Today's viewers, especially those who
adhere to the dogma of Political Correctness are easily to
tempted to look at GONE WITH THE WIND the same way they
would look at Hollywood movie about Third Reich based on the
writings of Joseph Goebbels. On the other hand, revisionist
and racist elements of the film are at least toned down with
the film's general humanism. Black character of Mammy works
as Scarlett's conscience, and the actress playing her broke
racial boundaries by being first black person to receive
Academy Award. (Ironically, the same actress was legally
forbidden to attend movie's premiere in the racially
segregated Atlanta cinema, which should gives another reason
to appreciate this film in its proper historical context.)
GONE WITH THE WIND also partially accuses Southern
aristocracy for the jingoism that contributed to the war and
future Southern misery. And the scenes of hundreds and
thousands of men being wasted in futile carnage suggest that
nothing, not even the Lost Cause of the Old South, justifies
war. This pacifist message, on the other hand, also
corresponded with the isolationist sentiments, so dominant
in late 1930s USA.
The less obvious flaw of the film is somewhat hidden by its
epic length. In the first hours of the film, characters and
their interaction is interesting because of the clear
historical context and important events in the background.
The plot doesn't simply revolve about Scarlett's romantic
dilemmas - she has some more important task to perform, like
staying alive and making sure that those around her survive
the hard times. But once the war and post-war hardships are
behind Scarlett, GONE WITH THE WIND in the last hour or so
degenerates into pure melodrama, closer to daytime soap
operas than to anything we usually associate with "larger
than life" movies. Thankfully, the ending, despite all its
sappiness, wraps it all up. Few memorable lines and the
everlasting image at the end restore the epic character of
GONE WITH THE WIND, great film so unlike its title.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Jerry Saravia
"Gone With the Wind" is the grand, majestic love story of the last 60 years that has not dated in any respect. Yes, it's an old film from 1939 that had the stature of "Titanic" in its day (though far more adult than Cameron's film), but you are not likely to see a more potent example of cinema from that period. "Gone With The Wind" celebrated its 60th anniversary celebration last year and in cinemas during the summer of 1998, and it's been restored to its original, beautiful Technicolor treatment and presented in its square box format ratio. 
"Gone With The Wind" has one of the saddest love stories ever created for the movies, namely between the passionate, shrewd Scarlett O'Hara (Vivien Leigh) and the stalwart, charming alcoholic Rhett Butler (Clark Gable). Their topsy-turvy romance takes place in the red skies of sunlit Georgia during the Civil War. There is action, romance, jealousy, betrayal, and a sweeping four hour-plus screen time that even today pushes the limits of what audiences can take while sitting in a theatre. There is even an intermission so as to give the audience a chance to collect its thoughts. 
There is one superb classic scene after another. They include Scarlett's initial appearance slowly revealed by two courtly gentlemen (one of them played by George Reeves!); the moment when Scarlett sees Rhett for the first time; the silence between Olivia de Havilland and Vivien Leigh while they are waiting for their husbands to return; an elaborate high-angle crane shot of Scarlett standing by train tracks where hundreds of wounded soldiers are being nursed only to slowly reveal the Confederate flag; and, of course, the famous "Frankly, my dear, I don't give a damn" line uttered by Rhett during the conclusion. The burning of Atlanta is also quite vivid, not to mention the exquisite landscapes showing the mansion Tara - never has a mansion been such a vivid character as well. 
"Gone With The Wind" had a limited release two years ago (along with a restored version of "The Wizard of Oz," also from 1939) but if you ever have the opportunity to see one of the great, visually elegant films of all time on the big screen, then by all means go. It blows most of the current, bloated Hollywood offerings right out of the water. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
     1939 was the apex of Hollywood's golden age.  And the winner of the
best picture that year, as well as well as seven other Oscars, was GONE
WITH THE WIND.  Easily one of the best motion pictures ever made, it has
been restored and released to the theaters.  The print is clean and
handsome, the digitally remastered sound is strong and clear and this
time they are showing all of the movie.  To make the movie look more
modern, the last few times it has been released in wide-screen by
chopping off the top and bottom.  This time it is being distributed in
the 4:3 aspect ratio of the original release.
     Based on Margaret Mitchell's record setting 1936 book, the movie is
a richly textured experience with something for everyone.  The epic
motion picture is part romance, part history, part character study and
part the world's most popular soap opera.  Our packed audience treated
the film almost reverentially.  When one person talked briefly, people
from all over the theater shushed him.
     GONE WITH THE WIND could have been called SCARLETT'S STORY, for at
its heart it is the tale of a woman, Scarlett O'Hara, who survives and
thrives through a series of disasters.  As the fickle but resilient
Scarlett, Vivien Leigh gives a tour de force performance.  Looking
deceptively like a helpless young woman, the ever-conniving Scarlett has
every man in sight wrapped around her finger.  Well, all except the one
she really wants, Ashley Wilkes, played as a wimp by Leslie Howard.
Marrying men she doesn't love, using convict labor to line her pockets
and lying through her teeth, Scarlett's guile knows no bounds.
     "If I hear one more word about war, I'll run in the house and slam
the door!" she declares to two of her would-be beaus in the beginning.
The country may be on the brink of a massive bloodletting, but she will
hear nothing about it.  Her world of fancy balls and BBQs will not
countenance any such intrusion, even if the first shots of the civil war
have already been fired.  When the "glorious" news arrives that the war
has officially begun, the men go wild whooping it up as Dixie plays in
the background.  The intense foreboding of this outwardly happy scene
makes it arguably the movie's most moving.
     Clark Gable, who unbelievably lost the best actor award that year
to Robert Donat in GOODBYE MR. CHIPS, has a ball playing Rhett Butler,
the story's loveable rapscallion.  With his hearty laugh and his sneer
of a grin, Rhett is a natural charmer without trying to be so.  He
doesn't trust Scarlett, but she is so like him that he becomes
infatuated with her.  "We're bad lots, both of us - selfish and shrewd,"
he tells her in a succinct summation of their characters.
     Olivia De Havilland was nominated for supporting actress for her
role as Ashley's long suffering Melanie Hamilton.  Melanie, who is
constantly befriending Scarlett, is her opposite.  She is as generous as
Scarlett is selfish.
     Butterfly McQueen is hilarious as the comically incompetent slave,
Prissy.  ("Miss Scarlett, I don't know nothing about birthing no
babies!")  But it is Hattie McDaniel as Mammy, Scarlett's Rock of
Gibraltar, who delivers the strongest performance as a slave and later a
servant.  Hattie's Mammy dishes out wisdom a mile a minute, but Scarlett
tries her best to ignore it.  Hattie deservedly won the best supporting
actress that year, beating out De Havilland, whose performance was
superlative.
     It was a more regimented time when girls were "ruined" by going on
unchaperoned buggy rides.  And society was scandalized by recent widows,
dressed from head to toe in black, who dared show their faces in public.
(Rhett's answer to society's condemnations was simple.  "With enough
courage," he told Scarlett.  "You can do without a reputation.")
     The artistic aspects of the film's production are as stunning as
its acting.  The sumptuous sets won Lyle R. Wheeler his first of many
Oscars.  The Oscar-winning cinematography by Ernest Haller and Ray
Rennahan added to the vastness of the picture.  Shooting outdoors with
heavy emphasis on silhouettes set against rust-colored evening skies or
orange-hued burning cities, they created a tableaux so expansive as to
make audience's mouths drop.  Max Steiner's nostalgic music, which lost
the Oscar to the even better score of THE WIZARD OF OZ, is as moving as
it is memorable.
     The only problem with the picture is that it could have used a
little judicious pruning.  The international travel sequences, for
example, add little.
     GONE WITH THE WIND is a picture deserving of a restoration every
decade.  See it, if you can, in a theater.  In fact, see all of the
classics, if you can, in a theatrical setting.  Television is fine, but
classics deserve better for their full appreciation.
     GONE WITH THE WIND runs four hours including a brief intermission.
It is rated G, but with its war violence and frightening images it is
inappropriate for most kids under around 8.  And it may not hold any
interest for kids under 10 or 11.
     My son Jeffrey, age 9, was well behaved through a long movie that
he hated.  He found it boring and frightening and gave it only * ˝.  He
complained that it was a love story with nothing about the war.
Finally, he said that it should have been rated PG.  (He turned out to
be too young to appreciate it, but as he grows up, his opinions will
undoubtedly evolve.)

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Victor Fleming
Writers: Sidney Howard (based on the novel by Margaret Mitchell)
Starring: Vivien Leigh, Clark Gable, Olivia De Havilland, Leslie Howard,
Hattie McDaniel, Butterfly McQueen, Thomas Mitchell, Barbara O'Neill,
Caroll Nye, Harry Davenport, Leona Roberts, Everett Brown, Howard C.
Hickman, Laura Hope Crews
I've been reading a lot of reviews of the most recent re-release of "Gone
With the Wind," the epic Civil War soap opera we've almost no doubt been
brought up on by our parents, and I'm actually shocked to find that the
words "Gone With the Wind" and "overrated" are used in the same sentence. 
What do I have to say to this: shame on you.  "Gone With the Wind" is not
great primarily because it's a classic, or because it merely portrays a
civlization that is gradually dying.  It's great for many of the same
reasons some people complain about: it's too long, it's story's a little
dated, and it's melodramatic.  And I personally wouldn't have it any other
way.
"Gone With the Wind" is the great sentimental view of the South during and
following the Civil War, depicting the gradual death of slavery,
plantations, and the introduction to segregation and intense capitolism,
all seen through the eyes of the film's famous (or infamous) protagonist,
Scarlett O'Hara.  Played by then-newcomer Vivien Leigh, Scarlett's the
classic Souther Belle: selfish, manipulative, egotistical, lovable.  We
first meet her when she's young, still living on her family's giant
plantation of Tara, the symbol of Southern Pride and the place that will go
through radical changes as the story progresses.
As the Civil War comes and goes, we don't see battles or carnage, but we
see everything from the perpective of Scarlett, who has fallen in love with
the suave but shallow Ashely Wilkes (Leslie Howard), a neighbor of hers who
has unfortunately fallen in love and proposed to his fragile cousin,
Melanie (Olivia De Havilland).  While Scarlett plots and plots to steal
Ashely from Melanie, mostly by befriending her and doing it that way, she
discovers someone else who has affections for her: Rhett Butler (Clark
Gable), the blunt, obnoxious, and intelligent lady killer who makes one of
the most interesting first impressions on Scarlett towards the beginning,
staring at her as she walks up the stairs at a party ("He looks as if he
knows what I look like without my shimmy," she remarks to a friend).
As the film progresses, Scarlett will loose everything, including a couple
husbands she marries not out of love but out of revenge and financial
desperation (in that order), and as the Civil War ends and the North claims
the South for its own, we see a battle between Scarlett's obsession with
Ashley and her unrequited love for Rhett, the former who loves her in that
nice way, the latter who simply adores her ("What a woman," he says once). 
Since the film runs about four hours or so (with an intermission, of
course), a lot happens, and instead of the film ending when Scarlett
realizes after she has lost everything that she "will never be hungry
again," the film keeps on going, mostly because this film is not about
Scarlett coming to the realization that she is an independent woman, but
has to come right back to the beginning of the film again.  Through four
hours of film, everything and nothing has happened.
For the fans of this film, this plot summary will probably be a refreshment
of the fun of just watching the events of the film unfold, which perhaps
may result in going to see the most recent reissue of this film, a ten
million dollar re-enhancement by Ted Turner that is currenly playing in
theaters (a weird experience, simply because the aspect ratio is that of a
TV - just one of the many older films that I wish had been filmed in
widescreen, if it had been around back then).  For those of you who've
never seen it before, this may be a good reason to actually go see it for
your first time.  Why?  Because of the two reasons many people give for
liking this film: because it's a classic and it's a masterpiece.  Two
reasons to see any film.
I don't consider every old film to be a classic or a masterpiece, mainly
because they are two completely different things and not every film made in
the past is one of them, let alone both.  "Gone With the Wind" is, though. 
It's a classic because it's not dated at all; it has effortlessly stood the
test of time.  We watch films like "Forbidden Planet," a great film that is
horrifically dated, not because the special effects have been improved, but
because of the hokey stench that it wreaks of.  "Gone With the Wind" has
none of that.  There are no unintentional jokes in this film.  Many of the
laughs in this film (and there are many, believe me) are laughs that we
could share with the audience of 1939, who saw this for the first time. 
Not to mention that Vivien Leigh and Clark Gable have lost none of their
appeal: she's still a babe, and he's still the man.  Watching them interact
is still one of the most engaging and wonderful cinematic experiences of
all time (their banter is killer).  "Gone With the Wind" is one of the few
films that has lost none of its power to entertain in its 60 or so years of
being in existence, and that's why it's a classic.
Why it's a masterpiece is a little more complicated.  But I can sum that up
in just a few words: becuase it tells a great story and it tells it well. 
There's not one chief character in this film who is not likable and who is
not seen in their full dimension.  Scarlett, even though she's a
manipulative bitch, is a lovable manipulative bitch who we root for and
againt without even thinking about it.  We all want her to get with
Ashley...and we don't because we don't want to see Melanie hurt.  And don't
tell me that you're not both saddened and satisfied by the film's final
scene, where Rhett answers her question of "What am I going to do?" with a
hilarious and sarcastically cold, "Frankly, dear, I don't give a damn." 
She got what she deserved and we're happy she did, but we also feel
something for her in that ending, some kind of pathos.  It's damn near
cathartic.
Scarlett could be seen as the sole tragic character in the story if most of
the main characters weren't tragic as well.  Rhett Butler is a man who has
everything he could possible have except the love of the woman he loves,
which ultimately destroys him and leaves him more cynical than in the
beginning.  Melanie is one of the saddest: a woman who is nice through
everything and becomes one of the main reasons for Scarlett's sadness in
the end.  And Ashely is the inept fool of the film, never realizing his
true importance and winding up losing the one woman he loves.  The sole
voice of reason in the film is Mammy (Hattie McDaniel, who won an Oscar for
her performance), the African American nanny to Scarlett, who is faithful
to her owners even after the War, and who lends pragmatic advice throughout
the film ("It ain't fittin', it ain't fittin', it ain't fittin'!").
And who can deny the scope this film places on its story?  We actually see
the passage of time contrasted in the story of the characters.  We see the
Old South die and be reborn, only differently, as we see Scarlett die and
be reborn, only differently.  We see Atlanta thriving as a busy city, then
burned down, and then rebuilt.  This film knows what happened during this
time, and it effortlessly portrays an accurate history lesson while telling
a delightfully absorbing melodramatic story about characters we like.
But none of these reasons are really why "Gone With the Wind" is such a
great film, and so worthy of being placed on the same list of great films
of all time as "Citizen Kane" and "Lawrence of Arabia."  The real reason is
because it never bullshits us about its story.  It just tells it, and never
denies us anything that we should know.  The film is about four hours long
because it has a long story to tell, and to leave out anything would result
in a lesser film.  This film is great because it has a great story to tell.
 Becuase it has amazing acting.  Because Vivien Leigh and Clark Gable are
the perfect mis-matched couple of all time.  Because it has a killer
script.  Because Victor Fleming (and all the other guest directors, like
George Cukor) knows how to set up shots perfectly (my favorite is still the
pull back to show Tara at sundown in the beginning - orgasmic).  Because
it's a bit dated.  And because for four hours you can see one of the very
few times when Hollywood just got a film right, and wasn't afraid of a
lengthy running time or cost.  I really don't want to compare "Titanic" to
this, because it's just not going to be as great as this film for at least
another 30 or 40 years, but when Hollywood really pulls out the stops and
is concerned with everything at the same time, including the story, that's
when a great film emerges.  And "Gone With the Wind," for all its 222
minutes of running time and seeping soap opera structure, is one of the
greatest films of all time.  That's inarguable.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 New Line Cinema (revival)
 Director:  Victor Fleming, George Cukor, Sam Wood, William
Cameron Menzies, Sidney Franklin (produced by David O.
Selznik)
 Writer: Sidney Howard, Jo Swerling, Charles MacArthur, Ben
Hecht, et al (novel by Margaret Mitchell)
 Cast: Clark Gable, Vivien Leigh, Leslie Howard, Olivia de
Havilland, Thomas Mitchell, Barbara O'Neil, Victor Jory, Laura
Hope Crews, Hattie McDaniel, Ona Munson, Harry Davenport,
Ann Rutherford, Evelyn Keyes, Carroll Nye, Paul Hurst, Isabel
Jewell, Clirff Edwards, Ward Bond, Butterfly McQueen
   A revitalized "Gone With the Wind" with a digitally
remastered sound track opened at about the same time as
"Argmageddon," and surprisingly enough, the two films share
common ideas.  Thematically, both are about the will to
survive in the face of disaster.  In the former story, Scarlett
O'Hara has been reduced to poverty by the devastation of the
Civil War and must use her wiles to subsist.  In the latter, the
entire world must use its cunning to endure a rendezvous with
an asteroid whose trajectory threatens the planet.  There's no
problem getting the young generation to the movies to see
"Armageddon."  But what would a demographic analysis say
about the crowd that views GWTW?  I'd guess that the curve
will be skewed greatly toward the 50+ folks who have seen
the film at least once before--either at its original 1939
opening or during the 1954 or 1961 incarnation, the 1967
widescreen version or the 1989 restoration.  More's the pity. 
GWTW is not simply the sort of story one goes to simply to
reminisce about the favorites of one's youth: it's perhaps the
best example of a classical theatrical romance which even
today does not reveal a single campy bone in its body.  For
all the grand, sentimental sweep of the Old South, the tears
and laughter of archetypal romantics, the stereotypical
portrayals of blacks and bandidos, GWTW is as believable in
today's cynical world as it was in the thirties when the crowds
packed the theaters for mushy fantasies.  And for those of us
who took our history classes in Northern schools and simply
assumed that the antebellum New Yorkers were the good
guys and the Georgians the reb terrorists, Margaret Mitchell's
account--sweepingly brought to the screen by David O.
Selznik (the Spielberg of his day)--portrays looting, "white-
trash" Yankess despoiling the gentility of the Confederates. 
Even the American Film Institute cannot be criticized for
putting this historical romance on its all-time best-100 list,
where it ranks close to "Citizen Kane" as The Great American
Movie.
   "Gone With the Wind" considers the dramatic changes
which take place in the American South between the period of
1861 and 1873.  The transfigururation is reflected in its chief
character, Scarlett O'Hara (Vivian Leigh), who mutates from a
spoiled, self-indulgent, strong-willed flirt, into a mature, giving,
and equally strong-willed woman.  In the role that any actress
would die for, Vivian Leigh portrays a bright-eyed, beautiful
southern belle residing on the lovely Tara plantation in
Georgia who is as sturdy as any woman of the 1930s (when
the film was first introduced) or even of modern times.  She
remins in love with a wishy-washy but genteel Ashley Wilkes
(Leslie Howard) even after he marries the saintly Melanie
Hamilton (Olivia de Havilland).  Ashley's flaw is that he never
convincingly rebuffs Scarlett's advances but as interpreted by
director Victor Fleming, he leads her to believe that he would
abandon his wife for Scarlett in a moment if only his honor did
not hold him back.  One of the intriguing puzzles of the film, in
fact, is Ashley's mbiguousness.  We puzzle to decipher the
man's true feelings throughout the work's entire 238 minutes,
his mild encouragement to Scarlett leading her to ultimate
comeuppance.
   Fleming received the combined help of an army of
directors, including George Cukor, Sam Wood, William
Cameron Menzies and Sidney Franklin in attempting to
overome the difficulties both on and off the set of GWTW.
Even on celluloid you'd  guess that Clark Gable (Rhett Butler),
the Robert Redford of his time, was a drinker and womanizer
in real life, and Vivian Leigh was a drug-abuser who treated
men off stage in much the manner that she dealt with them at
Tara.
   The best scenes in the movie are those involving the push
and pull of the O'Hara-Butler relationship, as Vivian Leigh
exerts her considerable talents to portray her conflict between
an unladylike attraction to a bold and impertinent blockade
runner and her need to appear as a Southern aristocratic
woman should.  GWTW's humor comes largely from the
stereotyped depiction of Mammy (Hattie McDaniel, who
captured one of the movie's eight Oscars), a slave who knew
Scarlett from the time she was born and who is looked up to
by the pretty lass as though she were her mother.  Like an
antebellum Aunt Jemima, Mc Daniel steals every scene she's
in, bossing around the household and condemning the actions
of the Yankees who somehow thought of themselves as
welcome liberators of the slaves.
   All of the drama of GWTW is successfully combined with
dazzling production values.  An immense fire is created when 
cars of ammunition explode as Scarlett and Rhett are fleeing
the advancing Northern armies.  The image could pass
muster even in the age of 1990s fx, the flames of Atlanta
providing a feverish testimony to the tragedy of this war
between brother and brother.  The most heart-rending scene
is of hundreds of broken bodies lying, bleeding, dying on the
streets as Erenst Haller's camera pulls back for a horrific
bird's eye view.
   "Gone With the Wind" is the sort of film that some have in
mind when they say "they don't make 'em like they used to." 
There is room in our movie theaters for the great classics like
this one and for the boldly original and independent works
that push back the frontiers of the cinematography.  Musically,
you might consider GWTH like a well-constructed work of J.S.
Bach while, say, a current sci-fi original like "Pi' can be
compared to a dissonant concert of Paul Hindemith.  True
cinemaphiles will always make room in their entertainment
schedules for a rich variety of works, and "Gone With the
Wind," bound to enjoy revivals for the century to come, will
rank among the finest of them all.

Author
Aaron Michaels
Directed by Victor Fleming. Written by Sidney Howard. Based on the novel
by Margaret Mitchell. Running time: 222 minutes. Rated G (although does
contain war-time violence, and sexual references).
Gone with the Wind is one of the best films ever made. I have not met a
intelligent person who hasn't liked this movie. Ted Turner has decided
to remaster this classic for it's 60th anniversary. He cleaned up the
picture and sound so that a new generation of people can enjoy this
perfect movie.
Gone with the Wind is a soap-operaish epic taking place around the time
of the Civil War with the classic character Scarlett O'Hara (Vivien
Leigh). Scarlett is the most sought after woman in all Georgia and she
teases men and makes them do what she wants. She was born into a family
that owns a large cotton plantation called Tara. Her father Gerald
O'Hara (Thomas Mitchell) expects his daughter to continue work on the
plantation after he's passed. This is not Scarlett's intent and she
would rather woo a rich beau.
Scarlett is shocked to find that a man, Ashley Wilkes (Leslie Howard),
is not completely in love with her. He is instead engaged to be married
the kind and gentle Melanie Hamilition (Olivia de Havilland). Scarlett
loves him, at least she thinks she loves him. She sets out to make
Ashley in love with her.
At a town party a rich playboy named Rhett Butler (Clark Gable) makes
his way into town for a political meeting having to do with the
possibility of war. Scarlett is interested in this poker playing
handsome man but still wants Ashley. Rhett finds out about her obsession
and lightens the movie with some humor about how she acts so whiny about
the situation.
When confronted by Scarlett, Ashley says he does love her but won't
leave Melainie for her. The Civil War breaks and Scarlett is shocked by
how Ashley wants to leave. Ashley leaves and this begins Scarlett's mad
quest for him which blocks the fact that she actually loves Rhett.
This is the poorest plot to talk about. The almost 4 hour movie is so
long and complex that it would take me about 15 paragraphs to just start
the review. I only usually write 2-4 paragraphs for plot to save room
for the review. This is the perfect movie to save room for.
This movie is one of the longest films ever made. It's beautiful, full
color images entranced audiences in 1939 and still do today. In inflated
terms, Gone with the Wind is the highest grossing film of all time by a
long shot. It makes much more than Titanic. Compare the $0.40 it would
cost to see Gone
with the $6.50 who would pay to see Titanic and you will know why it
beats the so-called largest grossing film of all time.
After 60 years the film still stays remarkable. The vast shots of war
victims and of the burning of Atlanta are some of the best ever and
don't show age. Some of the blue screened shots, such as one with
Scarlett in Rhett's carriage, do show their age but it's amazing the
special effects still look great after 60 years. Let's see how Jurassic
Park fares around 2055.
The acting in this film is the just plain perfect. Leigh is wonderfully
cast as Scarlett and plays the whiny women great. Gable is the standout
of the show though in this Oscar-snubbed performance. He shows in the
last hour some of the best acting that has ever been attempted by an
actor.
Director Victor Fleming has created one of the most perfect films ever
made. It still stands as a wonderful production of romance, action, and
self righteousness.

Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z rating: **** (out of 4 = excellent)
1939, G, 222 minutes [3 hours, 42 minutes]
starring: Viven Leigh (Katherine Scarlett O'Hara-Hamilton-Kennedy-Butler),
Clark Gable (Captain Rhett Butler), Olivia De Havilland (Melanie Wilkes),
Leslie Howard (Ashley Wilkes); written by Sidney Howard; produced by David O.
Selznik; directed by Victor Fleming; based on the novel by Margaret Mitchell.
Seen July 8, 1998 at the Crossgates Cinema 18, (Albany, NY), theater #7, at
8:15 p.m. with my mom using Hoyts Cinema Cash. [Theater rating: ***1/2: very
good sound, picture, and seats]
        It's very rare that any medium of entertainment can give one an authentic,
vivid sense of reality and life. All stories are about select moments of time
and places in the characters' lives, but only the truly great ones are able to
define their realities well enough so the audience can experience it just as
the characters do. Therefore, "Gone With The Wind" deserves accolades for its
ability to tell the epic story it does, in such a crafted, intricate, and
entertaining manner. It's a crowning achievement, not only in filmmaking, but
for storytelling itself.
        The film takes place in Georgia before, during, and after the Civil War. This
plays a major factor in the film's success. To use such a historic setting
presents many possibilities and problems since no one was alive at the time to
verify its accuracy. It might also seem cliche, boring and other such deterent
factors to potential viewers. Can a story set so long ago be relatable now?
The film confronts all these problems, paradoxically, by not cronfronting
them. It doesn't simply plug in the "right thing" at the "right time," it
creates an entire reality where everything makes sense and said concerns are
irrelevant.
        Building a strong foundation is important to all forms of media, without
which, what is there to build on? We're given some backstory here and learn a
little about our characters, especially our main character, Scarlett O'Hara
(Leigh), a beautiful Southern Belle with a will of steel, a cunning wit, and a
tremendous sense of liberty in such an oppressive time. She knows how her
society works, wherein everything she does can and will play a role in the
shaping of her life and those around her. 
        Right from the beginning we realize how determined she is to have her way no
matter what the consequences may be. Being the most sought-after woman allows
her to manipulate men (and their women) to ensure she gets her way, whether it
be obvious (i.e. who will be the one to get her food), or subtle (i.e. getting
married just to spite someone). The man she claims to love is Ashley Wilkes
(Howard), a modest gentleman who does not seem to have the same passion for
her as she does for him. He isn't so arrogant and demanding as Scarlett, in
fact, he's engaged to a woman with a personality much more like his. Her name
is Melanie (De Havilland), and she is one of the sweetest, kindest, and most
likable characters one will ever see. She and Scarlett become very dear
friends, but she never suspects the jealously Scarlett has for her, and the
love she has for her husband. Her meekness is both her strongest and weakest
characteristic - it defines who she is, but doesn't give her much emotional
self-defense.
        Acting a catalyst to the love triangle, and to the story as a whole is the
daper, stong-willed, cunning, cocky Southern business and military man Captain
Rhett Butler (Gable). He's quite a character all right - everyone listens to
what he has to say even though he's got a bad reputation. Butler makes no
apologies for his vast amount of money nor his behavior. He tells everyone the
much-needed truth in the rigid caste-like society where freewill doesn't seem
to exist, everything is done out of honor and tradition. For example, in his
first appearance Butler tells his fellow Southerners there's no way the South
could defeat the North if war were to break out. This angers them, not for his
lack of faith, but because he has the gall to say it aloud and boastfully at
that. "Do we have ammunition factories? Do we have food? Do we have a navy?
All we have is tobacco." All true statements and yet the South still insists
he's wrong.
        Butler is a shifty character to be sure, but he takes such pride in his
arrogance it's appealing. Scarlett notices this too when she first sees him,
and from the look Butler gives her, we know he's not going to stop until he
has her. But Scarlett can't get past her need for Ashley, and during a scene
which sets the stage for the grand story, Butler learns of this and continues
to throw it back at Scarlett forever.
        And so the story goes on, with Scarlett being thrown obstacle after obstacle
in her life. The conflicts she must overcome range from taking care of her
entire family to finding a proper husband, especially after she is "marked"
for life when her first husband dies. This gives the film many opportunities
to bring in more characters into the epic story. Some are vital for only a few
scenes, but their true signifcance will endure throughout the film. In most
films only a few characters exist for support in background, but this film is
more realistic and believable as it incorporates a supporting cast the size of
a small town and everyone has signficance. Even people in the background seem
more than just extras wandering the set. The costuming design is outstanding
so that the film makes for a real sense of time and place. The filmmakers
could have easily set more scenes indoors and narrowly focused to avoid having
to show the outside, real world, but these types of simple approaches are
never taken.
        The first half of the film depicts the traumatic experience the South faced
at the last days of the Civil War. Fleming is able to convey the horror of it
all by painting an image of destruction and letting the viewer decide just how
bad it is. One scene has Scarlett working as a nurse at a military hospital
while we hear a soldier in the background screaming, "No! Not my leg! Don't
cut off my leg!" Another scene shows her simplying trying to cross a street,
but as the camera pulls back, we see that her path is blocked by hundreds of
wounded soldiers, but it is their moaning that's more graphic than all the
bloody gore could ever be.
        As the second half begins, the film concentrates more on Scarlett as a
completely independent woman who single-handedly takes care of her family and
Melanie just to spite the tyrany of the North. She manages to resurrect the
family plantation, but all the willpower she has can't help her when she must
pay exuberhant taxes set by the North after the South's ultimate defeat. This
brings Rhett Butler back into the picture and thus begins their torrid love-
hate relationship.
        Most of the second half of the film is somehow related to the relationship
(or lack thereof) between Rhett and Scarlett. Each uses the other for personal
gain, but at the same time they still feel an intimate connection with each
other. Scarlett continues to use her manipulative powers over men to get what
she wants and because Rhett can't help but want her more every time she tries
to one-up him such as marrying another man and taking over his business.
        They say opposites attract, but the conflict between Rhett and Scarlett goes
way beyond opposing personalities, it borders on magnetic polarization. They
need each other and know this, yet they never seem truly happy together.
Perhaps they mistake love for passion, and the film leaves it up to us to make
this call. Both have things the other wants and vice versa, but when they
compromise, is it just to get their own way or because they actually care for
each other. Love and the perception of love are two completely separate things
and throughout the final act of the film, we're left wondering if Rhett and
Scarlett ever truly loved each other and why. Gable and Leigh do have great
chemistry, always leaving the viewer wondering which emotions were authentic
and which were manufacture. All? None? Either way is possible and it's a
mystery that cannot be solved even upon repeated viewings.
        It's safe to say most of us won't live such overly dramatic lives as those in
"Gone With The Wind," but it's still a masterpiece for its ability to give us
a sense that we've just experienced a life's worth of joy and pain.


Author
Steve Rhodes
     1939 was the apex of Hollywood's golden age.  And the winner of the
best picture that year, as well as well as seven other Oscars, was GONE
WITH THE WIND.  Easily one of the best motion pictures ever made, it has
been restored and released to the theaters.  The print is clean and
handsome, the digitally remastered sound is strong and clear and this
time they are showing all of the movie.  To make the movie look more
modern, the last few times it has been released in wide-screen by
chopping off the top and bottom.  This time it is being distributed in
the 4:3 aspect ratio of the original release.
     Based on Margaret Mitchell's record setting 1936 book, the movie is
a richly textured experience with something for everyone.  The epic
motion picture is part romance, part history, part character study and
part the world's most popular soap opera.  Our packed audience treated
the film almost reverentially.  When one person talked briefly, people
from all over the theater shushed him.
     GONE WITH THE WIND could have been called SCARLETT'S STORY, for at
its heart it is the tale of a woman, Scarlett O'Hara, who survives and
thrives through a series of disasters.  As the fickle but resilient
Scarlett, Vivien Leigh gives a tour de force performance.  Looking
deceptively like a helpless young woman, the ever-conniving Scarlett has
every man in sight wrapped around her finger.  Well, all except the one
she really wants, Ashley Wilkes, played as a wimp by Leslie Howard.
Marrying men she doesn't love, using convict labor to line her pockets
and lying through her teeth, Scarlett's guile knows no bounds.
     "If I hear one more word about war, I'll run in the house and slam
the door!" she declares to two of her would-be beaus in the beginning.
The country may be on the brink of a massive bloodletting, but she will
hear nothing about it.  Her world of fancy balls and BBQs will not
countenance any such intrusion, even if the first shots of the civil war
have already been fired.  When the "glorious" news arrives that the war
has officially begun, the men go wild whooping it up as Dixie plays in
the background.  The intense foreboding of this outwardly happy scene
makes it arguably the movie's most moving.
     Clark Gable, who unbelievably lost the best actor award that year
to Robert Donat in GOODBYE MR. CHIPS, has a ball playing Rhett Butler,
the story's loveable rapscallion.  With his hearty laugh and his sneer
of a grin, Rhett is a natural charmer without trying to be so.  He
doesn't trust Scarlett, but she is so like him that he becomes
infatuated with her.  "We're bad lots, both of us - selfish and shrewd,"
he tells her in a succinct summation of their characters.
     Olivia De Havilland was nominated for supporting actress for her
role as Ashley's long suffering Melanie Hamilton.  Melanie, who is
constantly befriending Scarlett, is her opposite.  She is as generous as
Scarlett is selfish.
     Butterfly McQueen is hilarious as the comically incompetent slave,
Prissy.  ("Miss Scarlett, I don't know nothing about birthing no
babies!")  But it is Hattie McDaniel as Mammy, Scarlett's Rock of
Gibraltar, who delivers the strongest performance as a slave and later a
servant.  Hattie's Mammy dishes out wisdom a mile a minute, but Scarlett
tries her best to ignore it.  Hattie deservedly won the best supporting
actress that year, beating out De Havilland, whose performance was
superlative.
     It was a more regimented time when girls were "ruined" by going on
unchaperoned buggy rides.  And society was scandalized by recent widows,
dressed from head to toe in black, who dared show their faces in public.
(Rhett's answer to society's condemnations was simple.  "With enough
courage," he told Scarlett.  "You can do without a reputation.")
     The artistic aspects of the film's production are as stunning as
its acting.  The sumptuous sets won Lyle R. Wheeler his first of many
Oscars.  The Oscar-winning cinematography by Ernest Haller and Ray
Rennahan added to the vastness of the picture.  Shooting outdoors with
heavy emphasis on silhouettes set against rust-colored evening skies or
orange-hued burning cities, they created a tableaux so expansive as to
make audience's mouths drop.  Max Steiner's nostalgic music, which lost
the Oscar to the even better score of THE WIZARD OF OZ, is as moving as
it is memorable.
     The only problem with the picture is that it could have used a
little judicious pruning.  The international travel sequences, for
example, add little.
     GONE WITH THE WIND is a picture deserving of a restoration every
decade.  See it, if you can, in a theater.  In fact, see all of the
classics, if you can, in a theatrical setting.  Television is fine, but
classics deserve better for their full appreciation.
     GONE WITH THE WIND runs four hours including a brief intermission.
It is rated G, but with its war violence and frightening images it is
inappropriate for most kids under around 8.  And it may not hold any
interest for kids under 10 or 11.
     My son Jeffrey, age 9, was well behaved through a long movie that
he hated.  He found it boring and frightening and gave it only * ˝.  He
complained that it was a love story with nothing about the war.
Finally, he said that it should have been rated PG.  (He turned out to
be too young to appreciate it, but as he grows up, his opinions will
undoubtedly evolve.)

Author
Brian Koller
"Gone with the Wind" is perhaps the most successful film
of all time.  It was the top grossing film until at least
"The Sound of Music", some thirty years of inflation later.
The story, and the characters, have become a part of
American cultural heritage.
The story begins in Georgia, just prior to the Civil War.
Beautiful and spoiled Scarlett O'Hara (Vivien Leigh) schemes
to win the love of the honorable Ashley Wilkes (Leslie Howard),
who is engaged to his saintly cousin Melanie (Olivia De Havilland).
Scarlett fails in this effort, but wins the admiration of
dashing scoundrel Rhett Butler (Clark Gable).
Ashley marries Melanie, then goes off to fight the Civil War.
Scarlett moves to Atlanta to be with Melanie and wait for
Ashley's return.  Eventually, Union troops siege and capture
Atlanta, forcing Scarlett, Melanie, and her newborn baby
to flee to Scarlett's home at Tara, which has been impoverished
by looting Federal troops.
After much humiliation and unethical behavior, Scarlett rebuilds
Tara and becomes a wealthy businesswoman.  She marries Rhett
and has a daughter, but her marriage is stormy.
Is "Gone with the Wind" pro-slavery?  In the pre-war scenes,
blacks seem content with their lot, and show devotion to the
white "masters" that control their lives.  Pork (Oscar Polk) is a
shuffling, slow-talking stereotype.  Prissy (Butterfly McQueen)
is described by Rhett as a "simple-minded darky".
But to its credit, "Gone with the Wind" has two very strong
and positive roles.  The characters listen with respect
to Mammy (Hattie McDaniel), whose straightforward comments
make for sage advice.  McDaniel won Best Supporting Actress,
an outstanding achievement during an era of segregation.
Big Sam (Everett Brown) shows great courage rescuing Scarlett
from grave danger.
However, my favorite supporting character is Scarlett's
exuberant first husband Charles Hamilton (Rand Brooks).
Also, Aunt Pittypat (Laura Hope Crews) gives an excellent
comic-relief performance.
"Gone with the Wind" also won major Oscars for Best Screenplay
(Sidney Howard), Best Actress (Scarlett O'Hara),
Best Color Cinematography, Best Director, and Best Picture.
Fleming was credited as director, although four directors
were used.  This was a clean sweep of all major awards
except Best Actor, which passed over Clark Gable.  (Vivien
Leigh's husband, Laurence Olivier, was also nominated, for
"Wuthering Heights."  The winner that year was Robert Donat).
"Gone with the Wind" clocks in at 222 minutes, more than twice
the length of an typical film from 1939.  The story does sag
once or twice, but only in comparison with its best parts.
The film peaks midway, during the siege of Atlanta.  The film's
best action scenes are here, and the devastation war is clearly
demonstrated by the horrific hospital scenes and acres of wounded
soldiers.
The film picks up again during a postwar sequence loaded with
suspense. Scarlett has narrowly escaped an attack on her by
lowlifes in a shantytown.  A dangerous vigilante action is then
taken by the men in Scarlett's life, while their wives wait
anxiously for their return.
Scarlett O'Hara, the central character, is shrewd, manipulating,
and selfish.  She is despised by most of the other female
characters.  Yet she is presented to the audience clearly as
a heroine.  Women identify with her determination, and she
shows positive traits helping Melanie to deliver her baby,
and saving and rebuilding Tara after the war.
Rhett Butler is a self-proclaimed scoundrel, but he keeps
performing heroic actions that contradict what he says,
just as his love for Scarlett shows despite his frequent
cruelty to her.  Although he enjoys adventures apart from
Scarlett, one of the film's recurrent themes is his
return to her, and his determination to have her love him
more than Ashley.
One wonders at first viewing why Melanie is so nice to
Scarlett, who constantly schemes to steal Ashley from her.
But Melanie does not view Scarlett as a threat, and
perhaps she loves her more than Scarlett loves Ashley.
Of course, "Gone with the Wind" is a costume epic and a
soap opera.  Because of its genre, and its strong appeal to
women (the story is told through Vivien Leigh's character),
there are naysayers (mostly men) who dislike the movie.
But there is no doubt that it an outstanding film.  If the
costumes, the cinematography, and the script aren't enough
to convince (which they certainly should be), the leading
characters are extremely interesting and well defined.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z rating: **** (out of 4 = excellent) 
1939, G, 222 minutes [3 hours, 42 minutes] 
starring: Viven Leigh (Katherine Scarlett 
O'Hara-Hamilton-Kennedy-Butler), Clark Gable (Captain Rhett Butler), 
Olivia De Havilland (Melanie Wilkes), Leslie Howard (Ashley Wilkes); 
written by Sidney Howard; produced by David O. Selznik; directed by 
Victor Fleming; based on the novel by Margaret Mitchell. 
Seen July 8, 1998 at the Crossgates Cinema 18, (Albany, NY), theater #7, 
at 8:15 p.m. with my mom using Hoyts Cinema Cash. [Theater rating: 
***1/2: very good sound, picture, and seats] 
It's very rare that any medium of entertainment can give one an 
authentic, vivid sense of reality and life. All stories are about select 
moments of time and places in the characters' lives, but only the truly 
great ones are able to define their realities well enough so the 
audience can experience it just as the characters do. Therefore, "Gone 
With The Wind" deserves accolades for its ability to tell the epic story 
it does, in such a crafted, intricate, and entertaining manner. It's a 
crowning achievement, not only in filmmaking, but for storytelling 
itself. 
The film takes place in Georgia before, during, and after the Civil War. 
This plays a major factor in the film's success. To use such a historic 
setting presents many possibilities and problems since no one was alive 
at the time to verify its accuracy. It might also seem cliche, boring 
and other such deterent factors to potential viewers. Can a story set so 
long ago be relatable now? The film confronts all these problems, 
paradoxically, by not cronfronting them. It doesn't simply plug in the 
"right thing" at the "right time," it creates an entire reality where 
everything makes sense and said concerns are irrelevant. 
Building a strong foundation is important to all forms of media, without 
which, what is there to build on? We're given some backstory here and 
learn a little about our characters, especially our main character, 
Scarlett O'Hara (Leigh), a beautiful Southern Belle with a will of 
steel, a cunning wit, and a tremendous sense of liberty in such an 
oppressive time. She knows how her society works, wherein everything she 
does can and will play a role in the shaping of her life and those 
around her. 
Right from the beginning we realize how determined she is to have her 
way no matter what the consequences may be. Being the most sought-after 
woman allows her to manipulate men (and their women) to ensure she gets 
her way, whether it be obvious (i.e. who will be the one to get her 
food), or subtle (i.e. getting married just to spite someone). The man 
she claims to love is Ashley Wilkes (Howard), a modest gentleman who 
does not seem to have the same passion for her as she does for him. He 
isn't so arrogant and demanding as Scarlett, in fact, he's engaged to a 
woman with a personality much more like his. Her name is Melanie (De 
Havilland), and she is one of the sweetest, kindest, and most likable 
characters one will ever see. She and Scarlett become very dear friends, 
but she never suspects the jealously Scarlett has for her, and the love 
she has for her husband. Her meekness is both her strongest and weakest 
characteristic - it defines who she is, but doesn't give her much 
emotional self-defense. 
Acting a catalyst to the love triangle, and to the story as a whole is 
the daper, stong-willed, cunning, cocky Southern business and military 
man Captain Rhett Butler (Gable). He's quite a character all right - 
everyone listens to what he has to say even though he's got a bad 
reputation. Butler makes no apologies for his vast amount of money nor 
his behavior. He tells everyone the much-needed truth in the rigid 
caste-like society where freewill doesn't seem to exist, everything is 
done out of honor and tradition. For example, in his first appearance 
Butler tells his fellow Southerners there's no way the South could 
defeat the North if war were to break out. This angers them, not for his 
lack of faith, but because he has the gall to say it aloud and 
boastfully at that. "Do we have ammunition factories? Do we have food? 
Do we have a navy? All we have is tobacco." All true statements and yet 
the South still insists he's wrong. 
Butler is a shifty character to be sure, but he takes such pride in his 
arrogance it's appealing. Scarlett notices this too when she first sees 
him, and from the look Butler gives her, we know he's not going to stop 
until he has her. But Scarlett can't get past her need for Ashley, and 
during a scene which sets the stage for the grand story, Butler learns 
of this and continues to throw it back at Scarlett forever. 
And so the story goes on, with Scarlett being thrown obstacle after 
obstacle in her life. The conflicts she must overcome range from taking 
care of her entire family to finding a proper husband, especially after 
she is "marked" for life when her first husband dies. This gives the 
film many opportunities to bring in more characters into the epic story. 
Some are vital for only a few scenes, but their true signifcance will 
endure throughout the film. In most films only a few characters exist 
for support in background, but this film is more realistic and 
believable as it incorporates a supporting cast the size of a small town 
and everyone has signficance. Even people in the background seem more 
than just extras wandering the set. The costuming design is outstanding
 so that the film makes for a real sense of time and place. The 
filmmakers could have easily set more scenes indoors and narrowly 
focused to avoid having to show the outside, real world, but these types 
of simple approaches are never taken. 
The first half of the film depicts the traumatic experience the South 
faced at the last days of the Civil War. Fleming is able to convey the 
horror of it all by painting an image of destruction and letting the 
viewer decide just how bad it is. One scene has Scarlett working as a 
nurse at a military hospital while we hear a soldier in the background 
screaming, "No! Not my leg! Don't cut off my leg!" Another scene shows 
her simplying trying to cross a street, but as the camera pulls back, we 
see that her path is blocked by hundreds of wounded soldiers, but it is 
their moaning that's more graphic than all the bloody gore could ever 
be. 
As the second half begins, the film concentrates more on Scarlett as a 
completely independent woman who single-handedly takes care of her 
family and Melanie just to spite the tyrany of the North. She manages to 
resurrect the family plantation, but all the willpower she has can't 
help her when she must pay exuberhant taxes set by the North after the 
South's ultimate defeat. This brings Rhett Butler back into the picture 
and thus begins their torrid love-hate relationship. 
Most of the second half of the film is somehow related to the 
relationship (or lack thereof) between Rhett and Scarlett. Each uses the 
other for personal gain, but at the same time they still feel an 
intimate connection with each other. Scarlett continues to use her 
manipulative powers over men to get what she wants and because Rhett 
can't help but want her more every time she tries to one-up him such as 
marrying another man and taking over his business. 
They say opposites attract, but the conflict between Rhett and Scarlett 
goes way beyond opposing personalities, it borders on magnetic 
polarization. They need each other and know this, yet they never seem 
truly happy together. Perhaps they mistake love for passion, and the 
film leaves it up to us to make this call. Both have things the other 
wants and vice versa, but when they compromise, is it just to get their 
own way or because they actually care for each other. Love and the 
perception of love are two completely separate things and throughout the 
final act of the film, we're left wondering if Rhett and Scarlett ever 
truly loved each other and why. Gable and Leigh do have great chemistry, 
always leaving the viewer wondering which emotions were authentic and w
hich were manufactured. All? None? Either way is possible and it's a 
mystery that cannot be solved even upon repeated viewings. 
It's safe to say most of us won't live such overly dramatic lives as 
those in "Gone With The Wind," but it's still a masterpiece for its 
ability to give us a sense that we've just experienced a life's worth of 
joy and pain. 
