Title
Review for Alien Nation (1988)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Tired and thin attempt at genre-mixing: Aliens Are Among Us meets
Crime Story. Cliches abound.
ALIEN NATION starts with one great idea and then drowns it in an ocean of
stupidity. It starts off with a none-too-thinly disguised allegory about --
literally -- legal and illegal aliens. A spaceship comes to Earth, holding
100,000 roughly humanoid aliens who have been created by some other species
for hard labor. They're intelligent and gifted, and they slowly get absorbed
into Amercan society (I'm assuming American society, but the movie focuses
on SoCal). All of this has great promise, and the first five minutes of the
movie hum with untapped possibilites. Then the plot got under way, and my
hopes died.
Why does this happen, almost without fail? I've seen countless movies that
have the germ of a good idea but not a whit of how to deploy it properly,
and I'm sad to include ALIEN NATION on that list. It's not a cheap movie; it
was financed by Gale Anne Hurd, who put her money into ALIENS and a number
of other movies of similar ilk. Just that somewhere along the line there was
a terrible failure of imagination, and the whole thing turned into a TV cop
show.
The plot features a cop -- James Caan -- and his new alien partner (Mandy
Patinkin). Caan lost his last partner to an alien grocery-store robber, so
of course he's hesitant. Eventually, he chokes back his revulsion and
decides to use the other man to get revenge, sort of. This involves getting
close to another alien, played by Terence Stamp, who simply mixes and
matches all the typical Movie Drug Lord cliches. Once we were into the usual
chases and shoot-outs, I lost all interest. There were attempts to get it
back -- like having the aliens get stoned on sour milk, or giving them goofy
names no thanks to Immigration -- but none of it elicited more than a
snicker.
All the problems can be traced to the script. There's nothing wrong with the
movie technically -- it looks convincing enough, especially in the opening
moments. But no one took a good, hard look at it and said, this isn't
enough. We've all seen enough cop shows and drug-lord revenge thrillers.
Gussying yet another one up in the guise of SF doesn't help anyone.
FOOTNOTE: The strangest thing about ALIEN NATION is the TV series that was
spun off from it, where they actually sat down and took the time to explore
the ramifications of what they'd set up. The show's well-done and worth
watching. The movie doesn't have a clue. This may be the first time the
spinoff has more going for it than the source material.
syegul@cablehouse.dyn.ml.org                 EFNet IRC: GinRei / ICQ: 934998
http://cablehouse.dyn.ml.org/serdar                another worldly device...
you can crush me as I speak/write on rocks what you feel/now feel this truth

Author
Jeff Meyer
     First of all, you should go into ALIEN NATION knowing that this really
isn't a science fiction picture per se.  It's a "partner" cop movie (my god,
we've had enough of these things to actually give it a genre) with science
fiction elements, most of which are used for either a) humor, b) social
commentary or c) the rather contrived finale.
     Anyway, if you view it as a "partners" movie, I think it works pretty
well.  50% of a such a film depends on the chemistry between the partners, and
between James Caan and Mandy Patinkin, the chemistry is there.  Both create
characters who are complex (and in Caan's case, not particularly likable), yet
who mesh very well towards the end.  Caan may be crude and bigoted (at least at
the beginning of the film) as a police detective who's partner is killed by a
criminal who is also an alien -- aliens landed sometime in 1988 (the film takes
place in 1991, and much of the humor takes place from near-future jokes),
refugees from a slave world, and were integrated into society.  Patinkin
(recognizable only by his voice -- I've been listening to music from SUNDAY IN
THE PARK WITH GEORGE) plays the first alien to make it to the grade of
detective is partnered with Caan, who wants his help in tracking down his
ex-partner's killers.  He nicknames Patinkin's character "George" (an in-joke
to Patinkin's musical role, I'd bet), since the indoctrination site gave him
the name "Sam Francisco", and you can guess what happens next: in the course of
the investigation, they gain grudging respect for one another, become friends
and eventually, partners.  Patinkin's gentle sense of humor, his immigrant's
love of America (to the aliens, America truly is a land of freedom), and his
outrage as the plot unfolds, endears him both to us and to Caan.  These guys
work so well together, I'd like to see them in a sequel with a somewhat better
plot.
     The plot is, really, cops vs. drug kingpins.  Frankly, I usually find
drug kingpins rather tired, overworked villains, but Rockne O'Bannon (the
screenwriter) makes them, and the drug they sell, repugnant through Patinkin's
reactions and his explanation of what the drug was used when his race were
slaves.  O'Bannon also does a lot of quality dialogue, and between that and the
performances by the two leads, the movie was a thumbs-up experience.  There's a
lovely line by Patinkin about the difference between America's ideals and how
they are practiced by its citizens....
     Its greatest failing is in the last fifteen minutes, where the crime plot
was dropped and another, more hackneyed one is appended.  I don't want to give
it away, but suffice it to say that this would be a fine time to head to the
restroom or stop by the concession stand -- you'll be able to predict what's
going to happen, and you'll be right.
     Conclusion: it's flawed by its ending, but as an example of its genre, I
found it satisfying and a nice twist on several conventions.  Special kudos to
Caan and Patinkin for rising above the low points of the scripts and making
the film enjoyable and (ha-ha) human.  A good matinee-price film.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     These days Hollywood science fiction films really need a high budget.
And they need imagination.  Science fiction films need a budget because the
cost of automobile parts has soared.  Car chases are not exciting unless
lots of cars get smashed up, lots of shattered windshields get sprinkled
over the street, and lots of great makeup effects of people smashed up in
the cars.  That costs money.  Then filmmakers need imagination to design new
kinds of guns that the audience has not seen before.  Gunfights with the
same old sorts of guns get boring.  Hollywood has come to see that science
fiction fans want to see new guns in science fiction film gunfights.  ALIEN
NATION is a science fiction film that has the car crashes and the new guns
that fans demand.  And I hope they are happy with what they got.  I suspect
that they will be because ALIEN NATION's basic story usually does very well
whenever it shows up in a film, four or five times a year.
     As the film starts, the "Newcomers" have been on Earth for three years.
Newcomers are aliens who arrived on Earth and were accepted much like, and
to the same degree as, many other ethnic groups.  In fact, the film glosses
almost totally over how much more different an alien species would be from
us than a new and even unfamiliar human ethnic group would be.  There are
references to a very different physiology but they sure look a lot like
humans over 95% of their bodies.  In fact, the camera lingers longingly over
the very human-like breasts of the women.  Now, nobody really knows why
human women have globular breasts that even our closest primate relatives do
not.  And compared to these Newcomers, even daffodils are close relatives,
yet the Newcomers' female breasts are similar enough that our main character
gets a thrill fondling them.  Well, it is just that kind of film.
     But I am digressing.  The aliens live in very human-like ghettos and
have very human-like sorts of problems.  Towards the end of the film we
learn a few more differences, but for most of the film you could easily
substitute "Chinese" for "alien" and could tell the same story.  And
undoubtedly someone has since it is a story that has been done so frequently
in the past.  The story is the "mismatched police partners."  You have seen
it before.  It may not have been called 48 HOURS, RED HEAT, or LETHAL
WEAPON.  There are enough of them to turn listing examples into a party
game.  Yes, there is initial friction between the partners; yes, they come
to like each other.  It is all there, complete with bugs gunfights and car
chases.
     James Caan does a reasonable job as Matthew Sykes, whose old partner is
killed by insidious aliens.  Mandy Patinkin is enjoyable to watch as Sam
Francisco--named that by an insensitive immigration official.  But then it
cannot be really hard for them to play parts that have been done so many
times before.  The film also features in cameo roles lots of products you
can buy in your local grocery store.  The alien makeup is all right if
scientifically unlikely, and all other visual effects of the film have tires
and fenders or bullets.
     What was purported to be the year's biggest science fiction film is a
huge disappointment.  Rate it a -1 in the -4 to +4 scale.
