Title
Review for Mighty Joe Young (1998)
Number of Reviews
18

Author
David Sunga
Written by Lawrence M. Konner and Mark Rosenthal
Synopsis:
An orphaned girl named Jill Young (Charlize Theron) has befriended an
orphaned baby gorilla named Joe who carries within his genes the DNA for
gigantism. Joe's parents were killed by poachers. Years later, Jill is a
young woman living in Africa, and her animal friend Joe is 4.6 meters
tall and weighs 905 kilograms, a magnificent, gentle, and intelligent
giant. For Joe's safety, Jill and her friend Gregg (Bill Paxton)
establish a place for Joe in the United States at a game reserve called
the California Animal Conservancy.
But the evil Mr. Strasser (Rade Serbedzija) and his men, the diabolical
poachers who killed Joe's parents, plot to deceive Jill and take Joe
from the Conservancy in order to sell him on the environmental black
market. When Joe escapes into the Hollywood area, the poor beast is
hunted by gung ho police snipers, evil poachers, and the good guys as
well. Who will reach him first?
Opinion:
As far as I know, there are two main big gorilla flicks: MIGHTY JOE
YOUNG of 1949, and the well known 1933 KING KONG. MIGHTY JOE YOUNG
(1998) is a modernized remake of the 1949 classic.
MIGHTY JOE YOUNG (1998) is a family movie made especially for children,
and it succeeds very well. The good guys are good (young, friendly, with
light colored clothing); the bad guys are bad (dark hat, suspicious
accent, black gloves to hide identifiable hand), and; the beloved animal
is a misunderstood friend who has run away from home. My neighbor took
with her with a troop of four young kids, and they never failed to clap
and cheer when the good guys got one over on the bad guys. The kids also
held their breath when it looked like big Joe might be hurt. It's
obvious that cast members Charlize Theron and Bill Paxton love animals
or have pets of their own. Both Theron and Paxton do such a terrific
acting job that you forget Joe is only a special effect and not an
animal actor.
The adult theme of MIGHTY JOE YOUNG concerns the protection of the
endangered Gorilla, thought to be a mythical creature until proven to be
real by a skin and skull in 1849. Although fairly intelligent and
man-like (Koko the sign language gorilla was tested to have an IQ over
80), the animal has been hunted to near extinction. Today there are less
than 400 remaining wild mountain gorillas. As for the possibility of
gigantism, modern gorillas can weigh 300 to 400 pounds (136 to 181 kg).
The largest ape, "Gigantopethecus," lived in Asia during the Pleistocene
Era. From its bones it is estimated to have been approximately 10 feet
tall and have weighed over 600 pounds (271 kg). It is almost certainly
extinct, but some suggest Gigantopethecus is responsible for tales of
the Yeti and Bigfoot.
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Bob Bloom
 Mighty Joe Young is not a good movie. It's an OK outing, that can't decide
whether it wants to be a cutsy kid's movie or a special effects outing for
adults.
 Therefore, it has a schizophrenic feel and fails to accomplish either mission.
 This updated remake of the 1949 adventure suffers in comparison.
 The original, with special effects by the legendary Willis O'Brien, always
has placed a distant second to O' Brien's other famous creation, King Kong.
Mighty Joe Young can be considered Kong's distant, gentle cousin.
 Like the original, this contemporary version begins in Africa. But times
have changed. So instead of a farmer-hunter, we have a Dian Fossey-like
anthropologist studying gorillas. When poachers attack the gorilla tribe
she is observing, she is killed as is the mother of Joe, a baby gorilla
befriended by the anthropologist's little daughter, Jill.
 Joe and Jill become inseparable, growing up in the deep jungle, where Jill
has taken her mother's place.
 Joe has grown to enormous height and weighs a ton, literally.
 Jill and Joe are lured to America by Bill Paxton's Greg O'Hara, who offers
the pair safety from the poachers out to capture or kill Joe.
 In Los Angeles, Joe becomes the star attraction at a nature preserve, but
things go awry and Joe is hunted as a menace.
 You know the rest. Joe becomes a hero, the bad guys are thwarted.
 It's all juvenile fun, by-the-numbers, you-fill-in-the-blanks filmmaking.
The actors, who also include very lovely Charlize Theron as Jill) give
adequate perfomances.
 Yet one must realize that the actors spent a lot of time emoting to thin
air, imagining where Joe would be a screen. It's not easy to perform like
that, so Theron and Paxton must be given some due for pulling it off.
 But it is Rick Baker's special effects who are the film's real stars. Joe
is a big ham, though not as corny nor as menacing as in the original.
 This big gorilla is really a teddy bear.
 Mighty Joe Young is predictable and factory-made filmmaking. It's an OK
way to while a way a couple of hours over the Christmas break.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Steve Rhodes
If you find those irritating car burglar alarms that go off for no
reason whatsoever to be the equivalent of fingernails across a
blackboard, the movie MIGHTY JOE YOUNG suggests the perfect solution.
You need to ask your spouse for a 2,000-pound gorilla for Christmas.
Being close ancestors to Homo sapiens, big apes hate those loathsome
alarms as much as we do, but they can do something dramatic about it.
And if you're an overgrown ape like Joe, the film's humongous star, all
you need to do is stomp and sit on the screeching car a few times in
order to turn it into raw recycling material.
Ron Underwood, who has given us comedies as brilliant as CITY SLICKERS
and as dreadful as SPEECHLESS, directs this remake of the 1949 movie
MIGHTY JOE YOUNG.  Besides the realistic looking gorilla, the stars of
the movie are A SIMPLE PLAN's Bill Paxton as Gregg O'Hara, a
conservationist, and CELEBRITY's Charlize Theron as Jill Young, Joe's
companion and surrogate mother.
The movie opens years earlier when Joe and Jill are both youngsters.
Poachers come into the animal preserve where Joe lives with his mother
and Jill with hers.  On a dark and misty night, the poachers kill both
mothers.  Jill hides with Joe then and for years afterwards.  The sweet
image of them nestled together, while hiding in the heavy brush, is one
of many such tender moments in the picture.
The gorgeous Charlize Theron takes care of Joe like a mother of a
super-economy-sized toddler.  Their favorite game together is
hide-and-seek, which takes on a whole new meaning when one of the
players is Joe's size.  Joe solves this with a little kid's trick of
making himself invisible by covering his eyes with his hands.  The
childlike innocence of these game scenes and the one of Jill is being
cuddled while singing Joe to sleep are the movie's best.
The formulaic plot with cartoon-cutout villains is the story at its
worst.  As Strasser, Rade Serbedzija plays the cliched leader of the bad
guys as he did previously in THE SAINT.  Little Joe chews off a finger
and a thumb from Strasser's hand in the beginning of the movie.
Throughout the movie, the camera loves to stare at the hand with the
missing digits.  This is just one of the cheap tricks that the director
falls back on when he can't think of anything else to do.  Another is
the slapstick action with Joe tossing large items like jeeps around as
if they were kitty toys.
When Charlize Theron smiles at Joe, he obeys.  The men in the audience
will have no problem believing this.  Most would be happy to follow her
commands.  The chemistry between Joe and Jill is excellent, as is the
love interest between Gregg and Jill.
The problem with the movie, most of which happens when Joe is brought
back to LA to protect him from poachers, is that the entire story can
easily be reduced to 2 parts.  The gorilla is either growling, which may
scare the daylights out of some kids, or playing, which will delight
everyone.  The story itself is so thin, involving the evil Strasser's
attempt to steal Joe for his body parts, that it keeps dragging.
The movie tries to have a surprising ending but can't quite bring itself
to do it.  In ends nicely enough but in the same formulaic spirit of the
rest of picture.  Even so, you can't help but have a soft spot in your
heart for a film with a lovable ape and two charming human leads.  The
three of them are better than the movie that they are in.
MIGHTY JOE YOUNG runs too long at 1:54.  It is rated PG for violence and
would be fine for kids around 8 and up, although some younger kids may
be able to handle it.
My son Jeffrey, age 9, thought the movie was sort of "so-so," and gave
it **.  He complained that it should have been rated PG-13 since he
found some of it scary.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
David Wilcock
Apart from the cute RKO symbol at the start of the film, there's no
surprises in this new Disney film. 'Mighty Joe' happens to be a giant ape,
who befriends Jill (Theron) who's mother was killed by poachers. Jill meets
Gregg (Paxton) who wants to move Joe out of his natural habitat and into a
wildlife preserve, where he feels Joe would be safer. Although reluctant,
Jill agrees. However, Joe soon attracts interest from a poacher (Rade
Serbedzjia) the very same poacher who killed Jill's mother. Will Joe escape
their clutches? Will Jill and Gregg fall in love. Well, would we expect
anything else from the mouse?
>From the outset, it's obvious that Mighty Joe Young is going to be nothing
but an enjoyable kids movie. Although it's incredibly predictable, it's made
well enough and is passable entertainment. Although Ron Underwood tries
nothing new when directing, the cast and the special effects are nifty
enough to make this good. The under-rated Theron, after a good performance
in The Devils Advocate (1997) delivers another good acting turn here, making
an under developed role into something quite likeable and appealing to kids.
Although she tries to be to child like during some parts of the film, her
performance certainly isn't a failure. Bill Paxton, or 'Mr. Bland' is as
bland as ever, and cursed with the worst hair seen in Hollywood for a very
long time. His performance is alright, and he's starry eyed enough to carry
the role, but someone a little more exciting would have done. Serbedzjia is
the typical Disney bad guy, yet he doesn't overplay the role, which is a
shame really, because this movie really needs an outlandish character.
Joe himself is a wonderful piece of technology from Rick Baker. Although the
CGI looks a little fake, the model is excellent and features a nice range of
actions. It's also a believable model, something missing from movies
recently. Although he's a very 2D character, he's a good enough plot device.
However, he is loveable enough for the young ones, and he's easy to root
for.
Unfortunately, the story telling suffers from Disney's obsession at bland,
straight forward scripting. The script, by Ruth Rose, is full of morals, yet
isn't quite so patronising as some of Disney's worst efforts. The family
theme is played strongly, as there's no doubt that children will learn about
friendship and family from this movie. Unfortunately, however, the pacing is
all wrong. While the scenes in the jungle are nice, in this Godzilla world
the children will be looking for something for a bit more action. Indeed,
Disney were going to make this an Godzilla competitor until pulling back the
release date. Therefore, we get 1 hour 30 minutes of sloppy morals and only
20 minutes of Joe running amok, which is a bit of a let down. It's a shame,
because the action scenes are well done, and the last 20 minutes give the
film a buzz lacking from the material beforehand. Although the action kicks
in before boredom will take over, it's still too little too late.
As a family movie, Mighty Joe Young will not hit all the targets. Although
children under eight will no doubt love the simple to understand story, the
parents in tow may get bored with the obviousness of it all, a common
problem with Disney movies. Although featuring pretty scenery, a nice
soundtrack and excellent effects, the film is lacking that spark that family
films like A Bugs Life have. Far from mighty, therefore, but still not a
complete disappointment.

Author
Matt Williams
They've remade King Kong, they've remade Godzilla, now Hollywood has set
their sights on another giant animal from years past:  Mighty Joe Young.
But this updated remake is more of an example of modern special effects
technology than of good storytelling.  If you're just going to see the
ape, Mighty Joe Young will suffice...but don't expect more than that.
The Joe of the title is a giant gorilla.  Not quite King Kong sized,
he's still large enough to ignite fear in the hearts of the
superstitious, and greed in the hearts of evil poachers.  But Joe isn't
a monster, he's just a misunderstood animal.  His protector is the
beautiful Jill Young (Charlize Theron), who was orphaned at the same
time as Joe when her mother, renknowned primatologist Dr. Ruth Young
(Linda Purl), ran afoul of the poacher Strasser (Rade Serbedzija).
But, despite her best efforts, Jill can't keep Joe a secret from the
world.  People like Gregg O'Hara (Bill Paxton) keep popping up. Gregg
works at an animal preserve outside of Los Angeles, and has come to the
wilds of Africa in search of a legend:  Joe.  Gregg offers to give the
big monkey a home in L.A..  But what is the best thing for Joe? To stay
home, and be hunted...or to live in a cage (a safe cage, but a cage
nonetheless).
But, wherever Joe goes, there will be danger.  Strasser is still around
(now running an animal preserve of his own, where he secretly butchers
endangered species), and still bears a personal grudge against the giant
ape.  He makes it his mission to find and kill Joe (and, of course, to
sell his remains for a huge profit), wherever he is.
Mighty Joe Young himself is the film's greatest achievement.  As a
special effect, he is truly a marvel.  He is so realistic, in fact, that
he's often more believable than the human actors in the film. That said,
his character is far from perfect...in fact, it is quite variable. At
times, he's merely a brute animal, little more than a monster.  But,
when the screenplay requires it, his IQ shoots up a hundredfold, and he
becomes a hairy Einstein, amused at the foolish antics of the puny
humans around him.
Bill Paxton and Charlize Theron are forced to play second banana to the
great ape, and neither of them show top form here.  They have both shown
much more skill in prior roles.  Here, their characters are flat and
uninteresting, and they don't seem to put much effort into making them
unique.  They're both aware that this is the gorilla's movie, and
they're just along for the ride.
The film, though advertised as the traditional Disney animal flick, is
slightly more violent than one might expect.  The film is, after all,
about a monstrously giant ape.  Still, though a few scenes might be a
bit intense for younger children, older kids should get a kick out of
Joe, and probably won't care that the rest of the film is threadbare.
You can't expect the world from a gorilla movie.  But, usually you can
expect more than just the gorilla.  Luckily, Mighty Joe's special
effects wizardry will be appreciated just as well on the small screen as
the big.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
Susan Granger
Director Ron Underwood's remake of RKO's adventure about an
awesome ape is the least-likely-to-succeed of the Christmas
movies. The story begins as evil poachers kill a mountain gorilla
mother and the scientist (Linda Purl) who's been photographing
her. Watching the brutal carnage of their respective mothers, a baby
gorilla and little girl cling to one another. Skip ahead 12 years and
the gorilla's grown to 15 feet in height, due to a rare, recessive
giantism gene, and the girl's become Charlize Theron. They're
playmates, living idyllic splendor until they're discovered by a
zoologist, Bill Paxton, whose greedy cohorts realize there's profit in
capturing the beast. Paxton convinces Theron that the only safe place
for "Joe" is a wildlife refuge in Los Angeles, where he's taunted into
a frenzy by the same poachers who killed his mother. Everyone is out
to kill poor, gentle Joe except the few people who care about
him. Tracing the reasoning behind this remake leads to producer Ted
Hartley, who bought RKO's film library with his wife, actress and
Post-cereal heiress Dina Merrill, who can be glimpsed briefly in a red
gown at a fund-raising gala, screaming, "Oh, my God!" Ray Harryhausen
and Terry Moore (from the '49 film) do a cameo too. The best part of
"Mighty Joe" is Rick Baker's stunning gorilla, a big, hydraulic
creation that's even better than his "Gorillas in the Mist" work. The
worst part is the dumb, cliche-driven script.  Bill Paxton looks as if
he's still watching over-his-shoulder for a "Twister," while Charlize
Theron is terminally perky, even when she's tunelessly crooning a
lullaby. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Mighty Joe Young" is
a family-oriented 4. Another "Godzilla."

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The original MIGHTY JOE YOUNG was something of a disappointment
for me.  I think that was because from about age six on one of my
favorite films was KING KONG (1933).  (Incidentally, that is one of the
rare opinions I shared with Adolph Hitler.)  MIGHTY JOE YOUNG (1949)
was a reprise of the same talent.  Its effects were created by the same
master, Willis O'Brien, assisted by a new apprentice, a special effects
technician named Ray Harryhausen.  Harryhausen would become the king of
Hollywood special effects from 1951 to 1977.  But the talent was used
to make a sort of junior King Kong for children.  Stop-motion
animation went the way of flat animation and of comic books to be
associated with children's entertainment.  Serious adults (people like
my parents) did not go to see films that featured stop-motion
animation.  As with the SON OF KONG the special effects became
associated with "cute."  In spite of my diffidence toward the original
MIGHTY JOE YOUNG, I was fairly ambivalent to hear that the classic was
being remade.  My reaction is that the remake is a big improvement in
realistic special effects and the story begins much better.  But
neither film has a whole lot of interest to say about what happens when
an eighteen-foot-tall ape is brought to America.
     As a great nostalgic touch the film opens with the RKO Pictures
logo, just as the original did.  It is an updated logo, but basically
the same radio antenna.  Apparently one of the most creative studios is
still around and in the film business sufficiently to get their name on
this remake of their film.  The new plot introduces poachers to the
story.  While their original had no reference at all to poaching, it
would have been virtually impossible to tell the same story today
without explaining why a baby gorilla would be motherless without
mentioning poaching.  The first third of this film, the part about the
discovery of the ape, is done on an almost adult level.  Linda Purl
plays Dr. Ruth Young--obviously patterned on Dian Fossey--who,
accompanied by her young daughter, Jill, studies gorillas in their
natural habitat.  Ruth and a female gorilla she is studying are both
killed by poachers the same night and young Jill adopts Joe, the
quickly growing baby of the killed gorilla.
     Flash forward twelve years and the giant gorilla is now a local
legend.  Nearly as much a legend is the white woman (played by Charlize
Theron who is actually South African), a grown-up Jill who is the
gorilla's friend.  Gregg O'Hara (Bill Paxton) is in Africa collecting
wild animal blood for a Los Angeles nature conservancy (why is never
explained).  He is temporarily detaining wild animals to collect the
blood when out of the bush comes a huge gorilla and sets one of his
captured cats free.  O'Hara wants to add some giant gorilla blood to
his collection and has his unsavory team of trackers go after the ape.
Not surprisingly, he finds the ape he was trying to catch has caught
him instead.  He is saved only at the last minute by the intervention
of a mysterious woman, Jill.  Now Gregg knows he must track down the
mysterious woman and her gorilla.  Eventually Gregg will find Jill and
convince her that for Joe's own safety against poachers he has to be
taken to a nature conservancy.  He suggests the one he is associated
with in Los Angeles.
     The plot here is not tremendously adult, but it is better fleshed
out and more intelligent than the plot in the original film.  Willis
O'Brien might well have approved of the more complex story line.
Whether he would have approved of the effect would be a different
matter.  O'Brien was bitterly disappointed when a project he started to
do a second KING KONG sequel got out of his hands and eventually
mutated into KING KONG VS. GODZILLA with its man-in-a-gorilla-suit
Kong.  Here again at least in some scenes Joe is played by a man in a
suit.  At least it is a Rick Baker-designed suit that is fairly
convincing where it is used. Deep down it is John Alexander in a much
more realistic suit.  We do not have to ask if effects technician Ray
Harryhausen would have approved.  In the party scene late in the film
the older gentleman reminiscing with his wife are really Harryhausen
and Terry Moore, the star of 1949 version.  While I am on the subject
of self-references the film poster at Graumann's Chinese Theater is
from WAGON MASTER directed by John Ford and starring Ben Johnson.  John
Ford was the executive producer of MIGHTY JOE YOUNG (1949) and Ben
Johnson was Terry Moor's co-star.  Ford and Johnson are no longer with
us so I suppose this was a way of giving them some sort of an
appearance.
     Where the new version may fall short a little of the original is
in the introduction of two nefarious villains with thick foreign
accents.  Their plan to steal the giant ape, dissect him, and sell the
pieces does not seem to make financial sense.  Somehow Charlize Theron
seems to wear a little too much makeup for her character.
     It was a little surprising that Has Zimmer who did African-
flavored score for THE LION KING, and has since been specializing in
scores for films with African themes, was not chosen to do another
African score for them.  It might have something to do with his scoring
the animated THE PRINCE OF EGYPT, a film made in direct competition
with Disney.  Whatever the reason James Horner provided the score and
did an okay job, but people will not be rushing out for the soundtrack.
Also I notice that the film walks something of a narrow path trying not
to put in a bad light the animal conservancy which is, after all, not
all that different from Disney's new Animal Kingdom Park.
     In 1949 the original film was unusual for its day.  Its remake
from almost a half century later in some ways improves on the original.
It special effects have been improved upon to the point of perfection.
But the story is unexceptional, perhaps even overly cliched, for a
modern audience.  On balance I give it a 6 on the 0 to 10 scale and a
+1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     Included with the film is a Mouseworks Cartoon.  I did not catch
the title but the subject was "extreme sports" as demonstrated by
Goofy.  It was extremely short for a Disney cartoon, being maybe two or
three minutes long.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Mighty Joe Young (1998)
Charlize Theron, Bill Paxton, Rade Sherbedgia, Peter Firth, David Paymer, 
Regina King, Robert Wisdom, Naveen Andrews, Lawrence Pressman, Linda Purl,
 Mika Boorem, John Alexander. Produced by Ted Hartley, Tom Jacobson. 
Screenplay by Mark Rosenthal, Lawrence Konner, based on a screenplay by 
Ruth Rose and a story by Merian C. Cooper. Music by James Horner. 
Directed by Ron Underwood. 114 minutes
Rated PG, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
In 1949, RKO Pictures released ''Mighty Joe Young,'' an unassuming 
adventure story about a young woman and her best friend, a 15-foot tall 
gorilla with the strength of 20 men and the heart of a child. The good-
natured film was notable for a wonderfully peculiar nightclub scene 
featuring a tug-of-war between Joe and a group of professional wrestlers, 
a stirring climax, and exceptional stop-motion animation. 49 years later, 
Disney's remake of the venerable fable hits the screen, with computer 
graphics and animatronics replacing the stop-motion animation. While too 
much of the 1998 ''Mighty Joe Young'' is merely sturdy rather than 
stirring, the film still manages to capture a measure of the original's 
charm.
The story begins in Tanzania, as Dr. Ruth Young (Linda Purl) and her 
daughter Jill (Mika Boorem) study a family of gorillas. Of special 
interest is young Joe, who is growing rapidly due to a genetic mutation. 
Unfortunately, a group of poachers, led by the evil Strasser (Rade 
Sherbedgia), is also interested in Joe, leading to an encounter that 
results in the deaths of Jill and Joe's mothers.
Twelve years later, Jill (Charlize Theron) and Joe live a secluded, 
idyllic life deep in the green forests of a distant mountain, until 
another group of outsiders disturb the peace. Scientist Gregg O'Hara 
(Bill Paxton) has only good intentions, but his discovery of Joe's 
enclave piques the interest of many, including Strasser. Convinced that 
Joe is no longer safe in their mountain hideaway, Jill reluctantly agrees 
to move the gorilla to Gregg's base of operations, a California wildlife 
preserve, where she will continue to care for Joe. Things go wrong, of 
course, because it's against cinematic law to make a giant gorilla movie 
without an extended sequence of the ape rampaging through crowded city 
streets.
''Mighty Joe Young'' works well during the jungle Shangri-La and running-
amok-in-L.A. scenes, but other parts of the film are far too subdued. The 
filmmakers reasoned that modern-day animal activists would never allow a 
giant gorilla to be carted off to do tricks in a nightclub, but their 
decision to move Joe to a New Age wildlife sanctuary was a big mistake, 
delivering about as much fun as a folk singer doing an opening set at a 
ska-punk concert. It would have been such a hoot watching Joe in a big, 
garish Las Vegas-style setting, getting down and dirty with a gaggle of 
painted-faced WWF goons experiencing 'roid rage. 
While the film's middle is soft and repetitious (Joe gets riled, Jill 
calms him down, Joe gets riled, Jill calms him down. Enough, already!), 
''Mighty Joe Young'' offers a number of rousing moments. The poachers' 
attack early in the story is unusually brutal and genuinely frightening, 
and the climax, which moves from the streets of Hollywood to the colorful 
amusement rides at Palisades Park, is well-staged and quite gripping. 
As far as the acting, no one in the cast is especially taxed by their 
roles. Sherbedgia is an effective villain, Paxton does his usual and 
Theron is appealing enough. The best actor in the cast is Joe himself, an 
emotionally expressive marvel of technical wizardry, designed and 
produced by the distinguished Rick Baker. So flawless is the blend of 
animatronics, costumes and computer graphics that after a few minutes, 
you stop thinking about the mechanical aspects and simply accept Joe as 
another actor, albeit a exceptionally large and hairy one.
Despite its lethargic scenes and formulaic storyline, ''Mighty Joe 
Young'' has enough magic to warrant a viewing. The relationship between 
Jill and the mighty ape is endearing and the film has an innocent, 
affable core that nicely counterbalances its grisly moments. If you enjoy 
the film, do yourself a favor and track down the original. It may lack 
state-of-the-art special effects, but Joe's tug-of-war with the wrestlers 
sure has pizzazz.     

Author
Greg King
MIGHTY JOE YOUNG (PG).  
(Walt Disney Pictures/RKO/Buena Vista International)
Director: Ron Underwood
Stars: Bill Paxton, Charlize Theron, Rade Serbedzija, Peter Firth, David 
Paymer, regina King, Naveen 
Andrews, Lawrence Pressman, Linda Purl.
The original Mighty Joe Young, produced in 1949, was politely
regarded as something of a distant cousin to King Kong.  This
entertaining and environmentally friendly $49 million Disney remake
softens the action to make the movie more palatable for family
audiences, while retaining something of a deliberately old fashioned
flavour.
For those interested in useless trivia, the original Mighty
Joe Young is the only movie to have been directed by a legally blind
person.  Director Ernest B Schoedsack lost his sight during W.W.II,
and could only see blurred movement.  An assistant director told him
what was happening on the set.  Taking advantage of more sophisticated
technology, director Ron Underwood (Tremors, etc) also improves upon
the original, even though it ultimately ends up being something of a
lukewarm cross between Gorillas In The Mist and King Kong.
Oscar winning effects designer Rick Baker (incidentally, the
man inside the gorilla suit in John Guillerman's 1976 remake of King
Kong) has created a life-like and realistic gorilla who interacts
beautifully with his human co-stars.  Joe, the 20 foot gorilla, is
portrayed here as quite loveable, and ensures that audience sympathy
is with him all the way.  The climax, in which Joe rescues a young boy
trapped on a blazing ferris wheel, is awash in mawkish sentimentality,
and threatens to unbalance the movie.
Jill Young (Charlize Theron, from The Devil's Advocate, etc)
has grown up as a wild child of the jungle.  She and the gorilla Joe
share a life shaped by tragedy.  Twelve years earlier they both lost
their mothers to the villainous poacher Strasser (Rade Serbedzija,
from The Saint, etc).  Ever since, Jill has protected Joe from the
dangers represented by man, hiding him away from the rapidly
encroaching modern world.
One day he is discovered by Gregg O'Hara (Bill Paxton, from
Titanic, etc), a scientist who traps animals for a nature conservatory
in Los Angeles.  O'Hara eventually convinces Jill that the safest
place for Joe is in the preserve, where he will be protected from
poachers.  Joe initially reacts badly to being displaced from his
jungle home, but soon settles down as Jill watches over him.
All goes well, and Joe becomes the conservatory's biggest
attraction.  Then Strasser returns to resolve unfinished business.
Joe escapes Strasser's clutches, and runs amok through the streets of
LA, climbing over familiar landmarks such as Mann's Chinese Theatre
and the Hollywood sign.  There is plenty of action as Joe is pursued
through the streets and sewers of LA by helicopters.  These sequences
are more genuinely exciting that the recent Godzilla, in which much of
the action was murkily shot.
The computer generated special effects are superb, although
they do not detract from the more human elements of the story.
Younger audiences may find themselves a little bored with the
developing romance between O'Hara and Jill, and the pace is a little
slow until Joe escapes into LA.  Characterisation is pretty one
dimensional, although the performances overcome many of the
limitations of the formulaic and predictable script.
An always likeable and solid actor, Paxton brings plenty of
charm and sincerity to his role here.  Special effects creator Ray
Harryhausen, who designed the Oscar winning stop motion effects for
the original, and actress Terry Moore, who starred in the 1949
version, both contribute brief cameos here.
This modern reworking of Mighty Joe Young is quite an exciting
and entertaining adventure, ideal family viewing for the holiday
season.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Disney Pictures
 Director:  Ron Underwood
 Writer:  Mark Rosenthal & Lawrence Konner
 Cast: Bill Paxton, Charlize Theron, Regina King, David
Paymer, Rade Serbedzija, Naveen Andrews
    The title character of "Mighty Joe Young," who could serve
as a model for a Rogaine commercial, is handsomer than the
Frankenstein monster and is anthropomorphically a more
sympathetic individual than Godzilla.  With his deep set,
expressive brown eyes and tendency to communicate his
feelings with them in much way a human being can, Joe is a
gorilla that the small fry can care about.  It should not be at
all surprising that the kids in the audience would scream
when poachers threaten to put down the 2,000 pound simian
or when the L.A.P.D., in the touchstone standoff with
creatures far larger than they, take careful aim with their rifles
awaiting the order from the chief to blast off.  An update of
Ernest B. Schoedsack's 1949 movie , which starred Terry
Moore, Ben Johnson and Robert Armstrong--which in turn
updated the "King Kong" theme and had comparable special
effects--"Mighty Joe Young" suffers from the same agonizing
dialogue and repetitive actions.  Each time Joe is about to
bounce off walls, crush cars, and down the Ferris wheel, he
is brought to heel by the soothing voice of the woman who
reared him from the time she was 12, after both her mom
and Joe's were killed by poachers.  Since these counseling
sessions occur quite often in the story--in a Los Angeles
amusement part, in a metal cage zooming down the
California freeways, inside a California conservatory and in
the Botswana bush--the recapitulation can become annoying. 
But since Joe's stepmom, Jill (Charlize Theron) is the most
beautiful actress that Hollywood now boasts--even better
looking than the stepmom who has eyes for Ed Harris--you
don't mind the redundancies too much.
   A thoroughly predictable fable that uses convincing
computer graphics and other special effects to portray the
title figure, "Mighty Joe Young" opens in Botswana where Dr.
Ruth Young (Linda Purl), a Dian Fossey type who is studying
gorilla protocol while caring for her 12-year-old daughter Jill
(Mika Boorem), is killed while trying to protect her hirsute
buddies from the unlawful activities of poachers.  Having
evoked a promise from her daughter to carry on the work,
she leaves Jill to tend to the clan, and, twelve years later, the
24-year-old woman (Charlize Theron) realizes that she can
no longer protect her large monkeys from the illegal activities
of the hunters.  Convinced by eccentric researcher Greg
O'Hara (Bill Paxton) to transport Joe to a California
conservatory, she allows Joe to be captured and travels with
him and Greg to the states.  While in the conservatory, Joe is
confronted by poachers Strasser (Rade Sherbedgia) and his
accomplice Garth (Peter Firth), the former seeking revenge
for losing his thumb to Joe's attack twelve years earlier. 
Provoked by his old enemy, Joe Young escapes and creates
havoc in Hollywood, alternately hiding from helicopters and
seeking out a child to save from a collapsing Ferris Wheel.
   Bill Paxton is just boyish enough to appeal to the young
ones in the audience and while he does not get a chance to
act maturely as he did so well in "A Simple Plan," he is just
right for the part of a guy who plants the first human kiss on
Jill's lips.  We even root for him win Jill's affections in the
triangular romance plot but at the same time hope that Joe
does not get overly jealous that his role is about to be taken
over by a human.  Director Ron Underwood may have
forgone the wit that allowed him to make "Tremors" more
than a silly story of worm-like predators in the desert out for
Kevin Bacon's hide.  But while there are many reasons to be
depressed during the holiday season, "Mighty Joe Young" is
not one of them.

Author
James Brundage
Written by Mark Rosenthal and Lawrence Konner
Starring Charlize Theron, Bill Paxton, David Paymer
     I'm beginning to get fed up.  Over my four years as a critic, the thing
which has kept me going is the moderate balance of films.  The good balances
the bad.  I try to see both in equal proportions.  But Disney's Mighty Joe
Young remake marks the fourth week in which I haven't seen a truly terrible
movie.
    It's a backwards machismo, I suppose, the urge to see the things which
you so loathe; but I need to see a bad film every once in a while.  And, you
know what, Mighty Joe Young doesn't qualify.
     Far from being bad, Mighty Joe Young is actually a family fun movie.
It's enjoyable, appropriate, cute, cuddly, and all of those other things
that I've been seeing in every movie since A Bug's Life.
     Mighty Joe Young tracks a 2,000 pound gorilla in the wilds of Africa
that is taken to a reserve in ... California? ... for safe-keeping.  Okay.
A little unrealistic, but who ever said a kid's movie had to have the
slightest hint of realism.  The first half of the movie is a Gorillas in the
Mist-esque hatred of poachers woman-of-the-wild motif.  The second half is a
straight up parody of King Kong, awestruck onlookers and all.
     Mark one down.  I'm feeling relaxed.  It is, as a point of fact, an
extremely un-creative movie.  But, as a vetern, I can say quite honestly
that creativity doesn't count for as much as it should.  So that saves
Mighty Joe from my wrath, although my colleagues and cohorts and surely
bashing this film at this very moment.
     This is not the film to take a girl on a date to.  It's not the film
for you.  It's the film for you and your family.  When you're right
alongside your kid, all of the normal rights and wrongs slip away.  The same
thing happens when you watch a horror movie or an action flick.  It becomes
fun.  All you have to do to enjoy Mighty Joe Young is shut up and watch.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Ron Underwood
Cast: Bill Paxton, Charlize Theron, David Paymer, Regina King, Naveen
Andrews
Screenplay: Mark Rosenthal, Lawrence Konner
Producers: Ted Hartley, Tom Jacobson
Runtime: 
US Distribution: Walt Disney Productions
Rated PG: action violence, mild language
Copyright 1998 Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Mighty Joe Young blunders about for nearly twenty minutes before we
actually get to see a great big gorilla.  His entrance, however, is a
grand one:  out from the trees he leaps, gargantuan and imposing,
sporting hands big enough to crush a Volkswagen bug, and a pair of feet
much larger than any pro basketball player will ever have.  Joe bellows
at the poachers before him, angry that they would like to kill him and
sell him for millions of dollars.  During this scene, I turned to my
friend and said, "Wow.  That's some ape."
Joe is quite a gorilla -- a big, digital gorilla.  He runs around the
fields, chasing cars and people.  He picks things up and stares at them
pensively.  He breaks things on accident, because he's just too big to
avoid clumsiness.  Joe, as a special effect, is an image that might hold
your interest for five minutes.  As a character, he doesn't quite
register.  And the story he's been put in is as limp as they come.  The
words "Family Entertainment" have never been a stamp of quality, but
Might Joe Young is just a silly special effects movie pretending to have
a heart.
The picture is a remake of the 1949 film.  It's mostly just about the
big gorilla, but, strictly as a formality, the movie also has a few
human characters.  The main one is Jill Young (poor Charlize Theron,
forced to waste her talent), a lover of gorillas.  As a child, she
witnessed a group of poachers murder her mother; now, she lives in the
jungle to protect the wildlife.  Specifically, she's out to protect Joe,
a giant gorilla who has been her friend since her childhood.  
Soon, zoologist Gregg O'Hara (Bill Paxton) discovers Joe; he quickly
realizes that poachers want to get Joe and sell him to a big game hunter
named Strasser (Rade Sherbedgia), who just happens to be the same guy
who killed Jill's mother.  So, in an effort to save Joe, Jill and Gregg
take the big gorilla to a preserve, where it is instantly clear that he
is not safe from poachers.  In addition, the space is way too small for
him (after all, he is a really big gorilla).  And, to add to the
complications, Strasser shows up under a benevolent pretext (he tells
Jill that he has a preserve big enough for Joe), and Joe recognizes
Strasser as the guy who killed Jill's mother.
Jill, of course, doesn't recognize Strasser, even though he did kill
her mother.  This is just one of the many examples of stupidity in
Mighty Joe Young, a film that fulfills every stereotype that comes with
a Special Effects Film.  The movie isn't really offensive -- it has some
competent actors, a few nifty sets, and a lot of scenes with a big,
digitized gorilla.  But the story is really dumb, there aren't any
characters, and the film isn't satisfying on any level beyond its
visuals.
The movie also has bad dialogue.  If a critic says that a film has bad
dialogue, it's only fair to quote some of it, but most of the words
spoken in this picture are phrases like "Joe isn't happy!" and "Joe
isn't safe here!"  "We need to get Joe out of here!"  "Joe is way too
big for that cage!"  I don't know if these phrases are word for word,
but they're close.  As I said, the characters here are only present as a
formality:  they do little more than state the obvious (of *course* Joe
is too big for that cage).  Paxton and Theron are talented performers
who deserve to work on a script that provides characters for them. 
Sadly, Mighty Joe Young wastes them both.
There are a few clever moments (although none of them are surfacing in
my memory at the moment), and, as I said, the digital effects held my
attention for at least five minutes.  It's certainly not a bad film for
kids; I doubt Joe will give them nightmares.  But adults in the audience
aren't likely to find much of anything interesting about the big
gorilla.  A big gorilla is only interesting for a little while; after
that, something needs to be done with the big gorilla.  Nobody ever
figures out what to do with the big gorilla.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Ron Underwood.
Cast: Charlize Theron, Bill Paxton, David Paymer, Regina King, Rade 
Sherbedgia, Mika Boorem, Linda Purl, Naveen Andrews.
1998 - 110 minutes.
Rated PG (for violence).
Reviewed December 28, 1998.
The 1949 original remained unseen by myself while walking into "Mighty 
Joe Young," the big-budget Disney remake, which was probably a good 
thing since I didn't have anything to compare or hold it up to. 
In the entertaining prologue, which owes quite a bit to the opening of 
1982's "E.T.," a primatologist (Linda Purl) in Africa is wounded and 
ultimately killed while desperately trying to save a gorilla and her 
unusually large baby, Joe, from a group of nasty poachers (are there any 
other kind?). Before she dies, however, her young daughter, Jill Young 
(Mika Boorem), promises to always take care of Joe. Twelve years later, 
Jill (the always-stunning Charlize Theron) is now a beautiful young 
woman still living in Africa and friends with Joe, who has grown to be 
considered "the largest-known ape in the world." For fear of the 
impending doom that is setting upon Joe's fate, due to inevitable 
poachers, Jill accepts the proposal of kind zoologist Gregg O'Hara (Bill 
Paxton) to ship Joe to Los Angeles where he will be kept in a peaceful 
and safe nature preserve. Before long, however, two of the hunters from 
Jill's childhood, including one poacher (Rade Sherbedgia) who got two of 
his finger's bitten off, tracks Joe down with a vendetta to settle. 
For a great deal of its running time, I was rather surprised to find 
myself captivated by "Might Joe Young," but its small charms and 
underlying love story between Joe and Jill were overpowered by the 
action-oriented and overly-violent climax, in which Joe escapes from the 
poachers and sets out into the city of L.A. Maybe the problem is that 
the story and tone of the picture are outdated from 1949 (even though I 
am personally not familiar with how close this remake follows the 
original), because even if the film had simply remained a "quiet and 
sweet little film," I doubt if I still would have liked it. If it had 
kept its deliberate pace, the film would have come off seeming ho-hum, 
but with the alternate adventure ending, my reaction was 
"been-there-done-that." Once the penultimate sequence arrived, set at a 
carnival, "Mighty Joe Young" even lost its mild level of believability, 
since it was forced to resolve itself with Joe saving a boy from a 
burning ferris wheel, thus giving the city's people a reason to stand up 
for Joe, who really was not a bad or cruel animal, but, instead, faced 
with unfortunate circumstances. 
Because of the picture's faults and overall air of uneventfulness, I am 
not giving "Mighty Joe Young" a full recommendation, but it was 
certainly not what would be considered a bad film. In fact, there is a 
lot to like, including, as previously mentioned, the charming 
relationship between Joe and Jill, whom I found myself actually 
believing to love one another. Most of the scenes leading up to the 
ending were well-done and pleasant enough (save for the throwaway 
poacher subplot), and there were even a few moments between Jill and 
Gregg that were intelligently written.
Another aspect that I would like to remark about is Charlize Theron, 
who, since making her standout debut in 1996's "2 Days in the Valley," 
has created one original and totally distinctive character after the 
other, from playing Keanu Reeves' distraught, tragic wife in last year's 
"The Devil's Advocate," to a multi-orgasmic supermodel in Woody Allen's 
"Celebrity," to playing a nice, caring pseudo-parent to an ape in this 
film. Theron, who is still only in her early 20's, has shown in only a 
handful of films that she has got a lot of range as an actress and is 
willing to physically and emotionally transform herself for every single 
role. In her scenes with Joe, and with her potential love-interest 
Gregg, the screen came alive with not only her beauty, but her wonderful 
talent and spark.
"Mighty Joe Young" is an agreeable time-waster for older kids (it's much 
too violent for the youngest viewers) and perhaps some adults, but in a 
season when children could also choose to see the marvelous "The Prince 
of Egypt," and adults could pick any number of far superior films, 
"Mighty Joe Young" simply pales in comparison. Although you could 
certainly do much worse, there is only one really distinctive quality 
about the film, and that is Charlize Theron's charismatic performance.
          - Copyright 1998 by Dustin Putman
            Dustin
Putman's Film Haven >

Author
Scott Renshaw
MIGHTY JOE YOUNG (1998)
Starring:  Charlize Theron, Bill Paxton, Rade Sherbedgia, Peter Firth,
David Paymer, Regina King.
Screenplay:  Mark Rosenthal & Lawrence Konner.
Producers:  Ted Hartley and Tom Jacobson.
Director:  Ron Underwood.
MPAA Rating:  PG (profanity, violence)
Running Time:  110 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Mighty Joe Young gives the most noteworthy performance in MIGHTY JOE
YOUNG, which is only to be expected.  After all, like the dinosaurs in
JURASSIC PARK or the tornados in TWISTER (another film in which Bill
Paxton is upstaged by a special effect), the big ape is the only reason
anyone might want to see the film.  In this big-budget remake of the 1949
ersatz KING KONG, a combination of monkey suit, computer animation and
electronics replace Ray Harryhausen stop-motion to provide a more
versatile range of emotion.  The goal was a sympathetic simian, a 15-foot
ton o' love you couldn't help but cheer for.
     All evidence suggests that making Joe a crowd-pleasing character was
all anyone involved in MIGHTY JOE YOUNG cared about -- and they couldn't
even get _that_ right.  They begin by making him an orphan, his mother
killed by poachers in Africa on the same night that anthropologist Dr.
Ruth Young (Linda Purl) leaves her own daughter an orphan trying to save
the apes.  Twelve years later, American zoologist Gregg O'Hara (Bill
Paxton) comes to Africa to investigate legends of a giant ape, and
discovers Joe to be real -- and his caretaker, Dr. Young's daughter Jill
(Charlize Theron), to be beautiful.  O'Hara offers Joe protection at a Los
Angeles nature preserve, but danger lurks in the person of Strasser (Rade
Sherbedgia), the killer of Joe and Jill's parents who has both dollar
signs and vengeance on his mind.
     MIGHTY JOE YOUNG can only work on a story level if Joe is not a
monster but a sensitive, misunderstood stranger in a strange land, like a
hirsute E. T.  Unfortunately, there is not a shred of internal logic to 
Joe's personality.  At times, he's a big playful kid; at other times, for
no apparent reason other than a cheap laugh, he's a super-intelligent
beast who shakes his head ironically and escapes from pursuers with
cleverly-executed diversionary tactics.  One minute he's looking at O'Hara
as an enemy and a rival for Jill's affection, and the next he's holding
O'Hara's hand like they're old pals.  Even Joe's situational sense of
morality makes it hard to care about him, as he dispatches villains with
the kind of ruthlessness you'd expect of James Bond, not the furry hero of
a Disney movie.  Joe's not a character -- he's a contrivance, manipulated
by technicians for whatever tone suits the needs of the moment.
     That leaves the human characters, and oh what a scary mistake that
turns out to be.  Charlize Theron is a tremendously appealing actress, but
she's instantly ridiculous traipsing around the jungle in a designer
coiffure; Bill Paxton fares little better as the earnest, bland hero you
expect at any moment will scold the villain with "he's in it for the
money, not the science."  They get to wander together in a couple of
canned romantic interludes so absurd you'll want to shoot yourself in the
thigh with a tranquilizer dart.  The rest of the cast consists of 
obligatory types (the Intransigent Authority Figure, the Henchman, etc.)
and obligatory cameos from the original (Terry Moore and Ray Harryhausen
himself), all standing around waiting for Joe to go on his action-packed
climactic rampage.
     There are plenty of viewers to whom none of this will matter in the
slightest, provided MIGHTY JOE YOUNG delivers its share of family
adventure.  In fact, it works sporadically on that level, with a couple of
lively chases and some whoop-it-up destruction on Hollywood Boulevard.
I'm just not sure what kids will make of the violence Joe inflicts on
innocent bystanders, or his streak of homicidal vigilantism.  It's telling
that the film has to put a child in jeopardy in the final ten minutes to
make Joe's noble heart evident, and have the child plead for the ape's
well-being with a wide-eyed "Is Joe gonna be all right?"  All the
film-makers needed to do for MIGHTY JOE YOUNG to work on a basic level was
make it easy to root for Joe.  Instead, the only character that matters --
in a Disney film, no less -- is an unstable, ill-defined murderer.  Say it
ain't so, Joe...say it ain't so.

Author
Bill Chambers
The most absurd remake of 1998? It's a toss up between Gus Van Sant's
Psycho and Mighty Joe Young, the new Disney picture based on the old RKO
picture. (I knew I was in trouble when a polished, computer-generated
version of that famous RKO logo appeared before the head credits.) There
is no great demand for another giant ape movie-make that ape movie,
period. (Witness the quick deaths of Buddy, Born To Be Wild and Congo.)
And while this latest entry is inoffensive and watchable, it's also an
assembly line product through and through, lacking the charm and
unpredictability of the jungle serials that partly inspired it.
Theron is Jill Young: as a young girl in the wilds of Africa, she
befriended a baby gorilla after both their mothers were slain by
poachers. That baby gorilla (nicknamed Joe) grows to immense
proportions, and adult Jill basically bides her time looking after him,
playing hide and seek with him and guarding him against poachers. Enter
conservationist Greg (Paxton), who convinces Jill to move with Joe to
California, where they can protect him better in a controlled
environment. Joe is restless at first; no sooner does he finally settle
in to the new place than those nasty poachers show up in L.A., plotting
Joe's demise. Suffice it to say, the movie could have been called "Joe:
Ape In The City."
Theron (so good in Devil's Advocate) and Paxton (so good in the recent A
Simple Plan) are fine actors, but not fine enough to transcend the
material, a paint-by-numbers script from the hack writers of Superman IV
and Mercury Rising. The plot arguably borrows more from Steven
Spielberg's The Lost World than the 1949 original, with the
computer-generated T-Rex-I mean, Joe-wreaking havoc on the busy streets
for an encore; the storytelling becomes especially lazy during this
final third, with Jill shouting, "Look, Joe's headed for the movie
theatre!" followed by a shot of Joe scaling Mann's Chinese Theater; a
moment later, Jill shouts again something like "Look, Joe's headed for
an amusement park!" And what do you know, there's Joe at the Pallisades
carnival, scaring the bejesus out of innocent thrillseekers.
The seams of last-minute edits to Mighty Joe Young show-unrelated scenes
are patched together with quick dissolves. The movie sure feels uneven,
regardless: act two is underdeveloped, while a little of Joe smashing
cars in act three goes a long, long way. Underwood (Tremors, Speechless)
was perhaps not the director for the job; even the plentiful, untamed
landscape looks dull in his hands. (Capturing the beauty of nature
requires more than his point and shoot style.)
I did enjoy certain sequences, especially the demoliton of a black-tie
dinner sequence; and the prologue, however implausible, is touching. (As
a tyke, Joe acts just like E.T.) Rick Baker's make-up effects and
puppetry are outstanding, the real star of the show-yet, for all its
technical flawlessness, the creature remains too grumpy and homicidal to
love. (His facial expressions are variations on a scowl.) To be fair, I
saw Mighty Joe Young in a cinema packed with wailing children-it's a
wonder I was able to decipher the dialogue. It's certainly not a film
for very young kids-intense fighting scenes may scare them, while any
time Joe's not on camera may bore them to tears. (Note: older boys are
more likely to be dazzled by Theron's colourful array of tank tops.) I
suspect bland Mighty Joe Young is passable entertainment for a family
outing, but they sure don't make em like they used to.

Author
David N. Butterworth
        In the finale of Disney's "Mighty Joe Young," a 15-foot tall, 
2000-pound gorilla holds a frightened young boy in its clutches as it 
topples from a crippled Ferris wheel and plummets to the ground.  Upon 
impact, rugged everyman and perennial do-gooder Bill Paxton rushes in, 
containing the emotional crowd with an earnest "move along now folks, 
there's nothing to see here."
        OK, so those aren't exactly the words he uses, but it's probably 
one of the few clichés not uttered in this unnecessary remake of an 
unnecessary remake of that mother of all monster movies, "King Kong."
        1949's "Mighty Joe Young" was an update of that classic creature 
feature, also based on Merian C. Cooper's original story (16 years after 
"'Kong" it appeared the world was ready for a new take on the beauty and 
the beast fable).  Now some 49 years later, at least according to 
Disney's way of thinking, the world is ready for one more.
        Not so.  The only--and I mean only--reason to see the 1998 
version is for the special effects.  And these, unfortunately, run hot 
and cold.
        Today's Joe Young is designed and produced by special-effects 
whiz Rick Baker, who has been wowing audiences with his state-of-the-art 
make-up effects since 1971's "Schlock" (which, incidentally, featured a 
Baker-enhanced "gorilla").  Joe is a combination of animatronic effects, 
computer graphics, and that old standard, a man in a monkey suit.  While 
there are occasional flashes of brilliance--Baker's had a lot of 
practice with simian effects, after all, including "Gorillas in the 
Mist," "Greystoke: The Legend of Tarzan, Lord of the Apes," and the 1976 
remake of "King Kong"--there's also some surprising cheesiness.
        One of the film's most embarrassing moments is when Paxton's 
band of African trackers first encounter and pursue the larger-than-life 
primate (in a scene unashamedly ripped off from "The Lost World: 
Jurassic Park").  Paxton jubilantly extols the beast's majestic gait at 
the same exact moment as Joe, and the computer effects driving him, 
stutter to a halt.
        Also, if the film's producers had wanted us to focus our 
attentions on the titular ape they shouldn't have paraded female lead 
Charlize Theron ("Trial & Error") around in a seemingly-endless wardrobe 
of spaghetti-strapped tops.  Even Joe seems distracted at times.
        The film piles on the clichés like there's no tomorrow, 
including the predictable plot (anthro-zoologists ship gigantic gorilla 
to L.A. where urban havoc is inevitably wrought), predictable villain (a 
Lithuanian I think I overheard someplace), predictable love story (Bill 
and Charlize--surprise!), and predictable denouement ("'twas box-office 
receipts that killed the beast").  Kids raised on "Men in Black" 
(non-monkey effects also by Baker) are going to find Ron ("Tremors") 
Underwood's outing a little lame by comparison.
        While certainly better than 1978's "King Kong Lives" (itself a 
lousy sequel to a not particularly good remake), "Mighty Joe Young" 
proves how the mighty keep falling.


Author
Michael Dequina
_Mighty_Joe_Young_ (PG) ** (out of ****)
Before every movie shown in Greater Los Angeles movie theatres, a
commercial for the _Los_Angeles_Times_ plays.  One such ad from a few
years back featured well-known effects creator Rick Baker and, as the
centerpiece of the spot, one of Baker's creations: a high-tech gorilla
suit about as lifelike as any you'd find in a costume shop.
Watching the update of the 1949 RKO Picture _Mighty_Joe_Young_, I was
often reminded of this spot, and it's not because the titular gorilla was
(coincidentally) designed by Baker.  Much like that ad of years ago, the
intent of _Joe_ is to make the audience marvel at the wonder of Hollywood
special effects--and instead ends up failing miserably.  Years may have
passed, but Baker's gorilla effects are only slightly more convincing,
which means that they are still laughably phony-looking (and, as such,
compulsively watchable for the wrong reasons).
This should spell complete disaster for _Joe_, which is, after all, the
tale of a gentle giant gorilla who yearns to roam free.  But the film's
nearly two-hour running time is given some substance by the
flesh-and-blood actors (who, I must say, deserve better than this film). 
Charlize Theron plays Jill Young, the surrogate mother to the big ape,
and she is able to make the audience feel and understand her affection
for Joe, even if we don't have much for him ourselves.  Bill Paxton gives
a likable, low-key performance as zoologist Gregg O'Hara, who "rescues"
Joe from his poacher-infested home in the African jungle and places him
in a Southern California-based wildlife preserve, where Joe gets antsy.
But the cast nor Ron Underwood's brisk direction can mask the clunkiness
of Mark Rosenthal and Lawrence Konner's script, which has a poacher (Rade
Serbedzija) following Joe to the States to settle a personal score with
the furry guy (Joe bit off the poacher's thumb and index finger years
ago).  As hard-to-swallow as that plot contrivance is, it's nothing
compared to the insulting climax.  I won't spoil it, but never have I
seen such a large group of generous individuals gathered in one place.
Still, the many children in the audience with whom I saw the film oohed
and aahed at all the right moments, completely enthralled by Joe's
destructive--but never overly violent--antics.  The same will probably be
the case in theatres showing _Mighty_Joe_Young_; it is sure to please its
target audience of kids.  It's just that the filmmakers forgot about the
adults who pay to bring that target audience to the multiplex.  Chances
are that they, too, will end up marvelling at how not-so-marvelous those
gorilla effects are. 
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com___________________________________________________________________
You don't need to buy Internet access to use free Internet e-mail.
Get completely free e-mail from Juno at http://www.juno.com/getjuno.html
or call Juno at (800) 654-JUNO [654-5866]

Author
James Sanford

  If you remember what a disaster the ludicrous 1977 remake of "King Kong"
turned out to be, you'll likely greet Disney's update of "Mighty Joe Young"
with at least some degree of suspicion. But there's no cause for alarm:
Thanks to splendid special effects, a few clever moments and a crackling
pace, this "Joe" is likely to please fans of the 1949 film as well as
delight younger viewers who've never heard of the simian hero before.
 The title character is a 15-foot high, 2000-pound gorilla who has grown up
in the jungles of Tanzania with his guardian Jill (Charlize Theron). When
poachers come calling, Jill hastily accepts the offer of scientist Gregg
O'Hara (Bill Paxton) to relocate Joe to a Los Angeles preserve. It's not
easy for Joe to adjust to city life, however, especially when the sinister
hunter Strasser (Rade Serbedzija), who tried to do away with Jill and Joe in
their homeland 12 years earlier, arrives in town determined to get his hands
on the prized ape.
 The story is fairly hokey, but director Ron Underwood keeps things moving
along so briskly you don't have time to question its goofiness. Though
Theron and Paxton are fine and Regina King and David Paymer provide some
laughs as the animal specialists who try to help Joe make the transition to
his new home, the real star of the movie is of course Joe himself, a
combination of Industrial Light and Magic's digital animation and Rick
Baker's ape suits; he's an astonishing creation, with an impressive range of
emotions. The technical work throughout the film is flawless, and Joe's
climactic rampage through La La Land is both funny and exciting.
 Although "Joe" has taken considerable liberties with the original material,
Underwood has also inserted a few charming references to the 1949 film in
this version, including the use of "Beautiful Dreamer," the song that kept
the first Joe under control, in a seaside sequence and cameo appearances by
Terry Moore (the original Jill) and Ray Harryhausen (the stop-motion
animation genius who worked on the original movie) as an elegant couple
attending a soiree at the conservancy.
James Sanford
