Title
Review for Leaving Las Vegas (1995)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Edwin Jahiel
"I came here to drink myself to death " says Ben (Cage) to 
Sera (Shue). This may or may not reach the status of 
quotations like "Play it, Sam. Play 'As Time Goes By'"; "Go 
ahead, make my day";  "Here's looking at you, kid"; "Goodness 
had nothing to with it, dearie".But it is bound to find a 
place on lists and in movie-trivia games. 
Ben, arguably the heaviest drinker in movie history, is a 
gigaholic. Dismissed from his Hollywood job, he heads for 
Vegas.  There he has a strange love affair with hooker Sera. 
Contrary to the old film cliches, there is no mutual 
regeneration in this odd couple.  
The film,out for months,only recently made it to my town. By 
then I was aware of its unamimously enthusiastic (so far as I 
know) critical reception, and that Oscar nominations were 
almost guaranteed -- even though its subject does not make 
Cage and Shue shoo-ins for the big acting prizes. 
By coincidence, the day after I finally saw that movie, Dick 
F., a close friend, fine academic, actor and critic -- a man 
who understands movies -- asked for my reactions to it. Here 
they are, pell-mell, with mixed praise and reservations, the 
way I e-mailed them to him.
 1) Logically, what with Ben's daily bathtubful of alcohol, he 
should have arrived in Vegas in a hearse.
2) A drunk of his caliber and a prostitute of Sera's type are 
not intrinsically interesting. 
3) We never learn what drove Ben to the hooch, except that he 
now drinks because his wife has left him... because he drank. 
A vicious circle. We know that Sera seems proud of her talent 
for adapting to men's wishes and fantasies. "I turn on, I 
become who they want..." She is also rather smug about the 
money she makes. "I get $300 just to get in his room, and it's 
$500 after that." This does no make her "simpatica." 
4) I use the phrase "not interesting" but not "unappealing" or 
"depressing."  The last two are not drawbacks.  Many top 
movies are about human monsters. But "uninteresting" is a 
liability. 
5) Gertrude Stein said that the ordinary is more interesting 
than the extraordinary. She was right. Crazies or weirdos are 
not automatically interesting without deeper layers or 
sub-texts. 
6) Other mega-drunks can be more involving. As in John Ford's 
"The Fugitive," with Henry Fonda as the "whiskey priest," from 
Graham Greene's moving "The Power and the Glory." Or, from 
another Greene book, "The Honorary Consul," with its great 
turn by Michael Caine. Or Albert Finney in John Huston's 
neglected "Under the Volcano." Or the classic "The Lost 
Weekend" with its pathetic dipso. Or "Days of Wine and Roses" 
with its terrible slides into booze. Or the weird, nihilistic 
"Barfly," with Mickey Rourke and Faye Dunaway, both irritating 
actors -- which makes them all the more convincing as lushes.
7) Nicolas Cage is on my short list of the best performers 
around today. Again, his acting certainly is up to his 
standards. He squeezes every drop of his role with minimal 
expressions, has an odd type of politeness, gentleness and 
sincerity. His pores must ooze alcohol, but behind the skin he 
is a potentially likable fellow, which makes his tragedy all 
the sadder. Even so, his character is so limited by the script 
that he did not engage my attention sufficiently.
8) Ben is no liar, yet he states that he is great in bed. It 
is widely held that alcohol may increase desire but impedes 
performance. Go figure.
9) Sera's part is rather undeveloped. That she will fall 
incongruously for the drunk is telegraphed early on. That, 
with the rates she charges and at the rate she is going, she 
may well end up terminally diseased or even killed by someone 
(her profession has that risk) is also clear. The affair 
between two dregs is an old romantic cliche, but, I admit, 
carefully camouflaged by risque realism.  
10) Photography is excellent -- with hand-held shots and quick 
transitions -- and all the more remarkable as it was shot on 
Super-16mm stock. But why are the views of Vegas so lush, 
especially the night shots?  Why romanticize a place that is 
tawdry, Mafia-ridden and coarse, a place that, metaphorically, 
reeks of sex-for-pay and greenbacks?  This might have been 
justified if shown as the perception of romantic lovers, but 
this couple is beyond esthetic fantasies. 
(After writing the above I was told that in a TV interview 
director Figgis did address someone's complaint that night 
exteriors "looked too pretty." He replied that the 
camera-people shot handheld, with available or minimal light, 
and let the backgrounds just happen, so that the result was 
unintentional beauty. I'll have to think about this).
11) The photography as well as the story can become precious, 
as in  boozing underwater in a motel pool. I allow however 
that the vacation spot has a desolate ambiance that fits the 
mood, and that there was clever staging in the  way the motel 
owner, with contained rage, throws out the couple.
12) The odd name Sera is too obvious: it points to Que Sera, 
Sera (What Will Be, Will Be), which leads to the notion of 
fatality as well as to an anti-Doris Day image.
13) Sera's pimp sordidly sells her in Vegas. We learn nothing 
about where those two are coming from. Physically they come 
from Los Angeles, but their past is a mystery.  Ben too is 
from L.A., but at least he comes from the movie world which is 
its own kind of prostitution, a parallel to Sera's profession. 
(Note the opening of the movie in a restaurant where two 
bimbos are ready to do themselves some good by joining their 
Hollywood-executive male hosts on the casting couch).  
14) Sera gives Ben a hip flask, another obvious symbol. It 
stands for her complying with Ben's request after she had 
offered him to stay in her apartment : "I'll  do it but you 
must never ask me to stop drinking." The flask, however, is so 
ludicrously tiny for someone with superhuman imbibing powers 
that it becomes comical.  
15) The film, proceeds rather than progresses, which is OK. 
But the talk remains dull, the twosome, indifferent. Their 
speech may be natural, but it paints the movie into a corner. 
How much could one take of a "prehistoric" flick with people 
who just grunt, were it not for action (a saber-tooth tiger?) 
and Raquel Welch in a bikini? 
16) On the positive side, Shue is capable and visually 
intriguing: mow she looks now like a sleazy hooker, now like a 
sexy, rather elegant one, now like a college student, then 
like the girl-next-door or the young mother across the street.  
17) On the negative side. The abuse and violence visited on 
Sera feel like a "hey, let's have some action" afterthought.  
Experienced and streetwise as she is, she should have detected 
trouble instantly, and avoided it. 
18) On the confusing side. Sera provides a commentary by 
appearing somewhere periodically and talking to someone whom 
we don't see in what seem to be different times, places and 
people. Murky. Perhaps the filmmakers had planned to use a 
narration like those often found in films noirs, then thought 
better of it.  
19) On the irrelevant side. A TV is showing bits of actors 
Alida Valli and Joseph Cotten, in not just one but two 
different movies, "Walk Softly, Stranger," then "The Third 
Man." In the first film, Cotten is a crook redeemed by 
beautiful crippled Valli. In the second, he discovers that his 
pal Orson Welles is a crook and he (Cotten)is scorned by 
Valli. I cannot find any connections to "Vegas."  
20) The sexual climax is called "la petite mort" (the small 
death) in French and perhaps in other languages. Preciously, 
it is combined here with the big death. Ho-hum.
21) The acting is, I repeat, very good, in the grand manner 
(plus the Grand Marnier manner). At least Cage dies without 
saying "Rosebud." 
Sad footnote. The author of the source novel committed suicide 
a fortnight after the movie contract had been signed.
CREDITS.  Written & directed by Mike Figgis.  Based on the 
novel by John O'Brien. Photography, Declan Quinn. Editing, 
John Smith. Production design, Waldemar Kalinowski. Music, 
Mike Figgis.  Producers , Lila Cazes and Annie Stewart.  Cast: 
Nicolas Cage (Ben), Elisabeth Shue (Sera), Julian Sands 
(Yuri), Valeria Golino (Terri), et al.  A United Artists 
release.  112 minutes. Rated R (heavy sexual content, heavy 
drinking, violence, language).

Author
Christopher Null
     The main way LEAVING LAS VEGAS has been described to me is this: 
"It's very, *very* sad."  Finally able to see for myself, I can confirm
that indeed the film is *not* the feel-good movie of the year.  And while
it's sad and spooky enough to send shivers down your spine, it is
surprisingly able to avoid melodramatics and still leave us with a
powerful message.
     LEAVING LAS VEGAS tells the tragic story of Ben Sanderson (Nicolas
Cage), a once-powerful movie executive who is fired from his job and ends
up moving to Las Vegas.  Ben is painfully and obviously an alcoholic;
drinking, quite literally, consumes his life.  We get a glimpse of the
demons in Ben's past from time to time, but by the time the film begins,
Ben is already too far gone to be remotely curable.  Alcohol has become
his reason for existence.
     In Vegas, Ben resigns to drink himself to death, burning his
severance pay to the tune of $200 to $300 a day on liquor and the
occasional prostitute, one of whom turns out to be his alter-ego, Sera
(Elisabeth Shue).  They both share a common bond of misery and loneliness,
and soon develop a rich closeness that can nearly be described as love. 
Sera is deeply committed to Ben, and vows to accept him as he is--drunk or
not.  Her devotion even leads her to buy him a flask for his poison, while
inside, she is desperate to find some way to help him sober up. 
Inevitably, the couple spirals downward to the film's tragic conclusion. 
We know all will never be well.
     Cage's masterful performance is matched by superb direction by Mike
Figgis (who also wrote the screenplay and the jazzy music for the film),
and Shue admirably sheds her ADVENTURES IN BABYSITTING goody-two-shoes
look.  While some of the plot elements are confusing (including a bit
about Sera's Russian pimp, played by Julian Sands) and the film drags at
times, the movie is very haunting without becoming overly graphic, a
delicate line that the filmmakers have successfully walked.  Like I said,
this isn't your everyday crowd pleaser, but if you're looking for a
thoughtful drama, LEAVING LAS VEGAS is one of the best bets of the year.
     The true power of this film lies in its exploration of the themes of
acceptance, resignation, and despair.  Based on John O'Brien's
autobiographical 1991 novel, the realism in the movie is simply
unparalleled, maintaining an accessibility that lets us all relate.  In an
ironic twist of events, O'Brien actually committed suicide in 1994, a mere
two weeks after the film rights were sold.  He never got to see his vision
realized on the screen, and he probably never needed to, but his legacy
leaves a lesson we could all stand to learn.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback/
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Andrew Hicks
        I don't think there's been a movie since SCHINDLER'S LIST, 
or at least DEAD MAN WALKING, that I've been so involved in that it 
was nearly impossible to get through. Adapted from the John O'Brien 
novel, LEAVING LAS VEGAS is a portrait of depression that wraps us 
up in two people, making us know, care and sympathize with them, 
then leaves us helpless in watching them destroy themselves. This 
uncompromising Mike Figgis film is an incredible emotional 
experience that leaves out all the usual Hollywood trappings, save 
its two stars.
        Nicolas Cage plays a writer who has been leaving reality 
behind, on an escalating basis, since his wife left him. It's to the point 
where, from the moment he gets up in the morning until he passes out 
at night, he's in an alcohol-induced stupor and can't allow himself to 
sober up. So, when he embarrasses himself in front of some colleagues 
(including one of his fellow DRUNKS, Richard Lewis) and is fired 
from his job, he sells or burns everything he owns and heads to Las 
Vegas. He may not have much left, but with the Vegas gamblers, 
mafiosos, drunks and hookers, at least he'll be in good company.
        Cage's plan is to just keep drinking until he dies and, indeed, 
after one painful bank scene, we never see him sober again. Most of 
the time, he's guzzling down vodka or tequila like it's Evian water. In 
Vegas, he meets Elisabeth Shue, a street hooker he takes back to his 
$29 motel room. She wants to blow him, he wants to talk and it turns 
out she's just as lonely as he is. And she has her share of problems 
with abusive pimp Julian Sands slashing her butt cheeks after she 
returns from a night of work with less cash than required, plus it 
seems people just don't respect her profession. Hey, people, she 
works hard for the money!
        They work out a beneficially mutual relationship. She has 
someone to keep her warm nights and he has someone to take care of 
him -- feed him, clean up after him, direct him to the nearest place he 
can puke -- and both accept each other without trying to change them. 
Unfortunately, this means Shue will just have to sit by and watch as 
Cage's liver gets closer and closer to that of David Crosby and that 
Cage will have to share Shue with anyone who can cough up a couple 
hundred bucks, or $175 on double coupon day. But, for each of them, 
the other is the only caring person they know.
        Cage won an Oscar for LEAVING LAS VEGAS, and a 
completely deserved one at that. He's always fun in action movies and 
light comedies, but it's almost inconceivable that this is the same guy 
who starred in AMOS AND ANDREW and CON-AIR. His performance, 
in conveying the depression and hopelessness of his character while 
still making him seem human and likeable, in various states of 
drunkenness no less, goes far beyond anything else Cage has achieved. 
Shue, as the damned-if-she-do-damned-if-she-don't hooker with a 
heart of gold, is amazing too. This is a career reviving performance for 
the woman who seemed so innocent in fluff like ADVENTURES IN 
BABYSITTING.
        The relationship Cage and Shue have with each other is a 
Catch-22 in which disappointment and loss is inevitable, and once we 
as viewers realize this, we set ourselves up for the same frustration 
Shue's character must have, in caring but being unable to stop the path 
of destruction. LEAVING LAS VEGAS is utterly absorbing because the 
acting is so incredible, the characters compelling and the writing 
superior, but it's hard to keep watching because it seems so real and so 
sad. That was probably O'Brien's goal; he wasn't a happy man himself. 
He committed suicide shortly after selling the movie rights to 
LEAVING LAS VEGAS. There's probably a really sad movie in that 
story too.
Visit the Andrew Hicks: Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving The World For Nearly 1/25th of a Century!

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     LEAVING LAS VEGAS is about people on the margins of society.  That
has been done before in films like BARFLY, but it perhaps has never
been done as well as in this film.
     Ben Sanderson (Nicholas Cage) has gone from being a film executive
who drinks too much to a drunk who cannot do anything for a living or
even to save his own life.  Alcohol has replaced his wife, his son, and
now his job.  So he has decided to treat his alcoholism as a fatal
disease, has literally burned the remnant of his previous life behind
him, and has gone to Las Vegas to die in a spree of drinking and
possibly some high living.  Almost immediately on arriving he runs into
(almost literally) prostitute Sera (Elisabeth Shue).  When he sees her
again he hires her but chooses to just talk, telling her his plan to
drink himself to death.  Seeing that he needs care and desperately
needing someone to care about she strikes up a relationship,
overlooking his indifference.  The one ground rule they set is that
neither will try to reform the other.  In a year with many films about
relationships, this is one of the most unique.  At times they relate as
lovers, friends, mother and child, prostitute and pimp, nurse and dying
patient.  Rare is the film where we see so many aspects of a
relationship, or so many different sorts of love.  Why Sera is even
interested in the heartache of falling in love with a man committing
slow-motion suicide is the enigma at the heart of this film.
     Stylistically the film is well-handled although perhaps a bit
slow-paced for some viewers, though those viewers would be unlikely to
come to this film in any case.  One false style move is to have Sera's
character developed by having her open her heart to her analyst.  It is
becoming too easy and too much a cliche to have people in disreputable
professions able to open up only to their analysts like the prostitute
in KLUTE and the hired killer in DIARY OF A HIT MAN.  One indulgence
director Mike Figgis allows himself is cameo roles with familiar
people.  It is something of a tribute to this film but also a
distraction that people like Bob Rafelson and Lou Rawls would agree to
do cameos.  Julian Sand also is present in a small role as Sera's
bizarre Latvian pimp.
     This is a film that does not pull its punches about the lives of
either prostitutes or terminal alcoholics.  The dialogue is often
raunchy and watching Cage's character deteriorate is not an uplifting
experience.  This is an adult film both in the usual sense and for the
fact it is aimed at a thinking, mature audience.  I put off seeing it
for a long time because this is just not the kind of film I generally
want to see.  In spite of that I was impressed sufficiently that it
will inevitably be on my top ten of the year list, probably high.  I
give it a low +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Mun Siong Yoong
Directed by: Mike Figgis
Written by: Mike Figgis, John O' Brien (novel)
Produced by: Initial productions / Lumiere Pictures / MGM-UA
Cast: Nicolas Cage (Ben), Elisabeth Shue (Sera), Julian Sands (Yuri).
Rating: ***1/2 out of *****
LOVE AND LIQUOR SWIRL IN A MADLY INTOXICATING CONCOCTION OF TRAGIC ROMANCE
This movie's a sure-fire hit for romantic maniac-depressives. It's
bleak, its leads do not philosophize from moralistic high stools and
its ending does not pander to the Disney crowds. Enjoying yourself
already, Bob?
Ben Sanderson (Nicolas Cage) is a previous human being who's present
existence is completely fuelled by alcohol. Alcohol to him is more
consuming than the air he breathes, more important than the family he
no longer has and more crucial than the Hollywood screenwriting job
from which he has just been fired. In a flash of insight while in one
of his rare sober moments, he recognises that there is no way out of
his longdrawn downward spiral. Hence, he burns all his belongings,
sells all his assets and then heads for the Las Vegas, capital of
self-loathing, with the specific intention of drinking himself to the
grave.
At Vegas, he almost runs down a streetwalker named Sera (Elisabeth
Shue), before promptly suggesting she keep him company for the night,
"no sex please I'm drunk", for a princely sum of $500. Henceforth, the
two social marginals hang on to each other with a poignantly warped
sense of acceptance for each other. She accepts the fact that there is
no recourse for the deathlock that alcohol has on him, while he
understands that prostitution is just a job.
After that night, she invites him to move in with her, vodka
and all, so that she might feed off whatever emotional morsels he has
to offer. In the meanwhile, she steers the both of them on the course
with as much semblence of a normal couple as she can possibly manage.
But as it is with any realtionship whose demands on both partners
increase with time, life for them is terrible difficult to steer under
the haze of alcohol on one hand and with the inconvenient working 
hours
on the other.
Much credit must go to director-screenwriter Mike Figgis (Stormy
Monday, Internal Affairs) for his screen adaptation of author John
O'Brian's (who killed himself a couple of weeks after clinching the
film deal) autobiography. Despite the melodramatic pote ntial of the
script, his cast never once wallows in the mires of self-pity but
instead, goes about trying to manage their damaged lives as best as
they can. Cage throws in much sincerity into his Oscar deserving role,
especially at the oddly endearing mom ents when his likable character
spews gems like "Looks like I'm with the right girl." when Shue
presents him with a silverflask as a gift.
Still, one suspects that the sentiments of the film are somewhat
exploited during the pervasive nights of quiet sobriety; with the
heavy cloak of nighttime jazz inspired blues courtesy of the ever cool
sounding Sting. That aside, it is also worthwhile not ing that the
gritty effects via Super 16 film stock on hand held cameras contribute
imensely to the film's sense of quiet, lean unsettledness.


Author
Jason Wallis
"Leaving Las Vegas" * * * * (out of four)
Starring Nicolas Cage, Elizabeth Shue and Julian Sands
Directed by Mike Figgis
     Some movies have such an impact that they linger in your mind long
after the credits have rolled, making you think carefully and recollect on
what you have just seen.  I finished Mike Figgis' "Leaving Las Vegas" hours
ago, and it is still as haunting as when I hit rewind on the VCR.
     Alot of people refer to this film as "that flick where Nick Cage plays
that alcoholic dude".  "Leaving Las Vegas" is not so much a movie about
alcoholism as it is a story about two people who except each other for what
they are: a drunk and a whore.
     Ben (Nicolas Cage in possibly the best male performance of the past
twenty years) is the drunk.  His family and friends have long since abandon
him, and all he has left is his liquor.  In a scene early in the film, we
see Ben staggering into a resteraunt, looking for a "friend" of his to
mooch some money off of.  He finds the guy (Richard Lewis) having dinner
with a buddy and two chicks, trying to crack witty jokes that just come out
stupid.  When Ben approaches the table, you can clearly sense that everyone
immediatly feels uncomfortable.  After Lewis gives Ben the money, he coldly
says "I think it would be best if you didn't contact me again."  Now even
though through the course of the film, some much more depressing things
happen, this is when I felt the most for Ben.  There was such a look of
sorrow and dispare on his face, (not to sound hokey or anything) it almost
brought a tear to my eye.
     It turns out that Ben was once a semi-successful Hollywood player, and
apparently a pretty popular guy.  Now he spends his time getting robbed by
hookers and trying desperatly to pick up women, not so much for the sex,
but for the company; for someone to talk to or spend time with.  
     Once he is fired from his job, Ben decides to burn all his belongings,
collect all his cash and relocate to Las Vegas to slowly drink himself to
death.
     One night he runs into a prostitute (a brilliant performance by
Elizabeth Shue - how far she has come since "Adventures in Babysitting")
named Sera.  She is involved in an abusive relationship with her pimp, a
scumbag who gets-off by cutting her.  They are both very lonely,
self-destructive people.  They immediatly hit it off, both of them
realizing that they need one another.  And it isn't even a sexual
relationship.  They don't even have sex until, like, the last ten minutes
of the film.
     "Leaving Las Vegas" is not a film about plot.  With the exception of
what I have already revealed (which all happens in the first thirty minutes
or so, by the way), there isn't too much of a story to it.  It is more a
film about people and how they react to one another.
     From what I can see, this is basically a perfect film.  The direction
is great (with Mike Figgis doing a brilliant mix between the glamor of Las
Vegas and the moody, smokey atmosphere of a film noir) and it contains two
of the best performances to come out of the 90s, or any other decade for
that matter.  But don't go rushing out to see this movie without knowing
what you're getting yourself into.  First off, if you are easily offended
by frank sexual dialouge, stay away from "Leaving Las Vegas".  It is filled
with lengthy discussions of orgasms, rape and various forms of perverted
activities involving burbon (that's right).  Secondly, if you are not in
the mood to see a very depressing film, don't see it.  
     However, if you are cool with those two things, you are in for one of
the most memorable experiences you will ever have.

Author
Pedro Sena
American films have never been known for one man films.  The "auteur", as it
is called in the media, is the type that has defined film history, with its
eccentric directors, who wrote their own material, and defined an art form
with it.
Hollywood, has defined the art of entertainment, or better explained, the
art of figuring out how to make money regardless of what it is that is being
done.  The nice thing about this is that the technical elements in this
genre are always getting better.  The bad thing is that it really hurts in
the development of the art form, beyond any kind of standard which says
"give them what they want".  Thus American arts have not been defined by
their content, but how much they earn.  Needless to say, there is another
side to this whole story, that is finally making a serious move, away from
the studio controlled delivered machines.
Today, more independent films are made and earn decent honors that it may,
yet, change the quality of the film making, from a money making thing, to a
more literary, and artistic, point of view.
And it takes one man shows, like this film, LEAVING LAS VEGAS, to bring it
about.  Watching this movie, is like going to your local theatre, and
discover that this time, they DID do a great job, and they deserve some
serious consideration.  And if the credit is not given to the two actors
that pull it off, at least quite a bit of it needs to go to the man who
directed, who pretty much wrote the whole thing himself, and created his own
music for the film.
Nothing fancy, nothing showy, just solid quality work.
And it is the two actors here, that just about cook the heck out of this
film, and its inherent sadness. It is riveting, and worth every claim and
award it is earning.  This is what it is all about, and it all means.  This
is the power that the art form can have, to create literature, rather than
entertainment.  And this is what the history of film teaches us at every
school.  Hollywood, has rarely been on the map for its artistic successes.
This is the story of a failed film writer that pretty much has turned away
from life, and decided to drink himself down the drain.  And in doing so, he
meets a prostitute, that pretty much falls in love with him in Las Vegas,
who becomes dependent on him, for learning and leaning, when things do not
go quite right for herself.  The sad part, is that,
no matter how much she tries, she is not capable of changing this man, and
save him. She has come to understand that changing what is already set and
done, is beyond the realm of her ability, and human desire for that matter.
And in the one moment, when the love between the two is finally demonstrated
in the physical way that they have wished for, but hasn't happened, he
finally gets his wish.  She is left, hung out to dry, with a therapist,
which has been a going thing through out the film, which at first is hard to
understand and figure out, but becomes clear in the end.
It is a well written story, and very well defined in its design, and how to
carry it out.  And a lot of credit goes to the two leading actors that just
shine all the way through, showing us, that there  are actors in this
country that can hold their own to the famed West End style of depth in
acting.  This film, is an amazing evening, of what acting can be, but is
rarely, in much of the arts in this country.  What a great thing this is,
and hope, for the many, who try, but get washed by a machine that rarely
cares about acting, but for the sake of making money.  Nicholas Cage had
been advised not to do this film, and he sticks to his feelings, and wishes,
and ends up proving that what he is capable of doing, at least in film, is
something that most actors would dream that they had that ONE chance in
their life to prove they could do it.  In this case, they just grabbed fate
by the throat, as the saying goes.
Superb film, even if it is a bit depressing.  And deserving, in every way,
of its awards.  Excellently directed, with its subjective points of view.

Author
Duncan Stevens
     This being 1995, misery and self-destruction are hardly unexplored
topics in the cinematic world; admittedly, the advent of what has come
to be considered Generation X cinema has lent angst a distinctly
shallow feel, but there is still room for legitimate exploration of the
themes it implies.  But it is not often that the despair depicted on
screen is quite as palpable, or as strangely compelling, as in Mike
Figgis' LEAVING LAS VEGAS, currently on limited release in theaters,
starring Nicolas Cage and Elisabeth Shue.  It isn't that the events
portrayed are particularly novel movie fare, or even that the
characters are especially real: it's that the dreariness, for this is a
profoundly dreary movie, comes within the context of more dreariness,
surrounded by, well, you get the idea.  That the events and characters,
by turns tragic and pathetic, seem absolutely normal and unremarkable,
lends LEAVING LAS VEGAS, as a cinematic and cultural statement,
considerable power.
     The plot tells only half the story.  Cage (perfectly cast,
extraordinally comvincing) depicts Ben, an alcoholic Hollywood
screenwriter who, upon being fired, heads to Las Vegas to drink himself
to death; on his first night there, he picks up a prostitute named Sera
(Shue, also entirely believable) who finds him interesting and
eventually convinces him to move in with her.  Figgis (who also wrote
the screenplay) is not particularly interested in a
redemptive-love-story theme, though: Ben's self-destruction goes on
unabated and largely unremarked upon, and the relationship at the
center of the film is among its victims.  We see extensive segments
from a perspective that mirrors his: disjointed, marked by flashbacks,
blackouts, delusions, and a heightening sense of diminishing control.
Sera, for her part, struggles with an abusive pimp and more abusive
customers, and steadily wearies of saving Ben from himself; they
eventually separate, accelerating his breakdown, and their
reconciliation comes too late to rescue him.
     But LEAVING LAS VEGAS is not a love story, in any real sense,
nor is it about alcoholism.  The sex scenes--of which there is no short
supply--are largely mechanical, joyless, whether they involve Ben and
Sera or Sera and one (or more) of her clients.  Sex, here, is simply
sex for its own sake; emotional attachment is not a related concept.
The alcohol abuse is ongoing and marks every scene, including those
where Ben is seemingly stable and self-aware: while the viewer
recognizes alcohol's effects, there are no scenes of relative happiness
or coherence due to Ben's putting down the bottle for a bit, as might
be expected if the aim were solely to dramatize alcoholism.  Drinking
simply exists--again, for its own sake.  The mood of the soundtrack
alternates between bluesy and peculiarly jaunty, making it hard to take
the story entirely as tragedy; finding pathos in self-destruction is
hard when the story is set to bouncy, even raucous, music.  The opening
shot shows Ben walking down a grocery aisle tossing bourbon and whiskey
into a shopping cart--but the hard-edged jazz beat behind the scene
undercuts any sense of that sequence as ominous or disturbing.  He
lives to drink, and he drinks to die: sadness at the concept comes only
from a removed perspective.
     The failure of the relationship of the two characters further
undermines any sense of a renewing force, a redeeming feature.  When
Ben moves in, Sera buys him gifts, prominent among them, astoundingly,
a gold hip flask.  The camera lingers on the object for a while, as if
to say, yes, she really did it: clearly, this is not a scenario where
love struggles against the effects of drink.  Rather, love (or whatever
approximates it) serves to aid and abet the process of disintegration.
No sense of future intrudes on their life--and the grimness is
reinforced by a lighting scheme where shadows are heavy, pervasive.
Discussions of their relationship are invariably tied to sex: should
they have it, what does it mean, etc., and it is over sex--his bringing
home a prostitute, in a scene redolent with irony--that they go their
separate ways.  In all the time he lives with her, she makes no
apparent effort to halt his slide: she sympathizes, when drinking leads
to uncontrollable rage or shaking helplessness, but she does nothing.
To extrapolate this attitude into a larger cultural statement about
life choices, and our willingness to see and condemn self-destructive
behavior, may seem like something of a stretch, but the tone of this
film supports that notion.
     Essentially, the movie concerns itself with certain actions,
actions that come to mark and define two lives: sex and alcohol abuse.
We are immersed in--no, barraged by images of these behaviors, to the
point where they seem distinctly unremarkable: by the end of the movie,
the viewer is hard-pressed to be shocked by the meaninglessness of the
sex scenes or the deliberateness of the alcoholic self-immolation,
because, well, the viewer has already seen two hours of similar fare.
So, it seems, goes life in this particular culture (Las Vegas, high and
low society): nothing is wrong, as such, since everything has been and
will continue to be done.  The one truly vivid scene in the movie
comes, fittingly, outside the city: Ben and Sera have gone to a motel
for a few days, and after they make a scene (in a weird fusion of
drinking and sex) and manage to break a glass table, the hotel manager,
a steel-eyed woman in her 50's, advises Sera to leave and not to "cut
her little hands" on the glass, and tells them, in a tone balancing
irritation and contempt, to clear out in the morning.  That hotel
manager's line, "We get a lot of screw-ups here," gives the viewer a
sense--a fleeting sense--of external standards, of real people without
sympathy or understanding for what Las Vegas represents.  That moment
of perspective is brief, naturally: we promptly return to the city and
all it represents.  But that one moment--when the music stops and
sunlight replaces neon, faces are out of shadow--made me think that
Figgis has something to say with this movie, something not strictly
related either to sex or to alcohol.
     To make a movie about pain and anguish, a movie with
essentially two characters, grim without turning it into tragedy or
camp is not easy, and Figgis does well to avoid that end.  But it also
says something about his perspective that the love relationship seems
so shallow: her final tearful protestation that she "loved him" seems
meaningless, artificial, given what has come before.  The effectiveness
of the message underscores the strength of the performances by both
Cage and Shue; each depiction is intensely persuasive. (Cage's best
moments are in extremis: this is real drunkenness, alternating between
the obnoxious and the self-pitying.  And Shue's weary resignation as
she goes about her work gives us a sort of pained understanding of what
she goes through.) The brilliance of the acting saves the movie, which
might easily have become unwatchable (as it is, you may often need to
look away); while I cannot recommend LEAVING LAS VEGAS to anyone
looking to enjoy an evening, it is, in its own way, compelling.

Author
Chad Polenz
***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1995, R, 111 minutes [1 hour, 51 minutes]
[drama]
Starring: Nicholas Cage (Ben), Elizabeth Shue (Sera), produced by Lila Cazes,
Annie Stewart, written and directed by Mike Figgis, based on the novel by
John O'Brien. 
"Leaving Las Vegas" plays a lot like its main character of a suicidal
alcoholic, as it is a drunken stupor through the lives of two pathetic
people. This is a grim story about two people who have hit rock bottom, but
somehow manage to fall in love with each other, once again showing how
strange and powerful love can be.
Nicholas Cage stars as Ben, a failing screen writer who is fired and
de-friended because of his alcoholism. He has depended upon alcohol so much
that when he's sober he can't function properly. He embarrasses himself at a
bank as he tries to sign a check but can't because of his nerves. He goes to
his only home, a local bar, and after a few shots is back to normal and even
witty, friendly, and almost likable. It's obvious he's given up on life and
decides to drink himself to death in Las Vegas. He figures he'd be an even
less important stiff in a town full of derelicts and immorality.
Enter Sera (Shue), a typical hooker who will do anything for money. Figgis
goes so far to define this mood and theme by indulging us with her work, so
much so it almost seems pornographic, but that's just the atmosphere of Las
Vegas. While driving one night, Ben almost hits Sera with his car. Later, he
sees her on the street and offers to solicit her. Perhaps it was fate that
they met again, and this time something between the two clicks.
It's hard to tell if Ben wanted to solicit Sera for pleasure, of if he was
just too drunk to comprehend what he was doing. They don't exactly have sex
but instead just attempt to talk to each other. Somehow the two fall for each
other, but when considering what Sera does for a living, it's obvious she
can't have a relationship and the story becomes a bit predictable from here.
The works well as a brutally honest character study, however, it doesn't
offer anything creative as far as plot goes. What it does do is paint a bleak
picture of the effects of alcohol and how two people, even as pathetic as
these two, can find shelter and happiness in each other. At times the story
starts to get a little sappy, as it's implied that they love each other
through talking, kissing, etc. Ben admits he has nothing to live for, and
Sera's kindness is the only thing besides alcohol that affects him. 
"Leaving Las Vegas" works as a good love but is a little clouded with Ben's
alcoholism. What do they see in each other and why do they care? I'm not
really sure, but it is fascinating to watch them go through the motions. 
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1995
U.S. Availability: beginning 10/95 (limited)
Running Length: 1:52
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, violence, sex, nudity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Nicolas Cage, Elisabeth Shue, Julian Sands
Director: Mike Figgis
Producers: Lila Cazes and Annie Stewart
Screenplay: Mike Figgis based on the novel by John O'Brien
Cinematography: Declan Quinn
Music: Mike Figgis
U.S. Distributor: United Artists
     Around the time that Mike Figgis began production of LEAVING LAS
VEGAS, John O'Brien, the author of the book upon which the film is
based, shot himself in the head.  This story, according to O'Brien's
father, is his son's suicide note.  And what an epitaph it is...
     By their nature, most love stories are relentlessly optimistic.  An
upbeat tone and a happy ending are almost mandatory.  So it's unusual
for a romance to delve as deeply into the dark realms of the human
psyche as LEAVING LAS VEGAS.  This motion picture is an examination of
both the power and the impotence of love.  That emotion is not, as some
would have us believe, a magical cure to wipe away life's troubles and
tribulations.  Neither is it an unqualified gateway to salvation.
     LEAVING LAS VEGAS tells the story of Ben (Nicolas Cage), an
unapologetic drunk, and Sera (Elisabeth Shue), a prostitute.  After Ben
loses his LA job, he takes his termination pay and heads to Vegas, that
American mecca of glitz and greed where souls go to die.  His intent is
not to gamble, however, but to do something more certain:  take a room
in a flea-bag motel, buy as much booze as he can afford, and drink
himself to death.  By his estimation, that should take only a few weeks.
But Ben is a lonely man and, even as his body craves alcohol, his heart
yearns for companionship.  So, when he sees Sera walking the streets, he
offers her $500 for an hour.  As it turns out, though, what he needs
more than sex is a friendly ear.  Thus begins the relationship that
forms the film's core.
     One of the reasons LEAVING LAS VEGAS is so heartbreakingly haunting
is that the unconditional love between Ben and Sera blossoms against a
backdrop of desperation, loneliness, and self-destruction.  Ben's only
plea to Sera is that she never try to stop him from drinking.  This is
not a lesson movie like WHEN A MAN LOVES A WOMAN, where the triumph over
alcoholism forms the central dynamic.  Instead, LEAVING LAS VEGAS is
about passion that flares brightly for a moment before being
extinguished.  The audience understands when Sera says, "We both
realized that we didn't have that much time.  I accepted him as he was
and didn't expect him to change.  He needed me.  I loved him--I really
loved him."
     LEAVING LAS VEGAS wouldn't be as difficult to sit through--equal
parts transcendent beauty and unbearable pain--if it weren't for a
pair of magnificent performances.  Since this is essentially a two-
character story, nearly every scene is built around Ben, Sera, or (more
frequently) both.  Actor Nicolas Cage, who has a track record of
immersing himself in parts, gives one of the year's most powerful acting
turns.  In this movie, the charisma and outward energy form a fragile
shell over a pit of despair and self-loathing.  Yet at the same time,
there's a sense of freedom--for Ben, death has lost its power to
frighten.  Cage melds all those elements into this complex, multi-
layered portrayal.  Meanwhile, Elisabeth Shue, whose filmography is far
less impressive, matches Cage scene-for-scene, emotion-for-emotion.
There's no glamour in this role, but we still see the beauty that
attracts Ben--tarnished and dulled, perhaps, but still obviously
there.
     Rarely does a motion picture create such conflicting emotions in
the viewer.  Like the French film SAVAGE NIGHTS (about living with
AIDS), but far better crafted, LEAVING LAS VEGAS has no taboos.  It
doesn't moralize about its characters.  Mike Figgis (INTERNAL AFFAIRS)
has filmed an amazing dual character study.  Like great poetry where
each verse strives for new highs and lows, LEAVING LAS VEGAS draws its
audience along a rarely-traveled path whose scope can only be fully
appreciated in the silence of the aftermath.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Bryant Frazer
     In LEAVING LAS VEGAS, Nicolas Cage plays Benjamin, an alcoholic
who's lost his family and his job, and moves to Las Vegas to quite
deliberately drink himself to death over the course of four weeks'
time.  While he's there, he meets a hooker named Sera, played by
Elizabeth Shue, who's cast adrift, so to speak, when her boyfriend and
pimp (Julian Sands) is finally murdered by the thugs he owes money to.
Since these two are just about the neediest people on the planet, they
immediately fall into a codependent relationship. Ben agrees to vacate
his room at the $29-a-night Whole Year Inn (in an unusual moment of
lucidity, Ben reads the sign as "the hole you're in") and move in with
Sera on one condition--she can never ask him to stop drinking.
     I'll say it one more time: LEAVING LAS VEGAS is about a man who
moves to Vegas and drinks himself to death. It's not a comedy, and it's
very depressing.  Still interested? The good news is that the movie is
exceedingly well acted, skillfully crafted, and even, at times, a joy.
That Benjamin's character can be so damn charming in the middle of this
deadly predicament is due to Nicolas Cage's staggering and
ever-expanding talent for playing the loser beautifully. Elizabeth Shue
is remarkable as well, even though her beauty, charisma, and demeanor
totally belie her supposed lot in life as a Vegas street hooker.
Regardless, if critics are talking Nicole Kidman up as an Oscar nominee
for the color-by-numbers TO DIE FOR, Shue ought to clinch the Nobel
Prize for what she goes through bringing this to the screen.
     Thank God director Mike Figgis knows his medium, because this
material would verge on maudlin without sure guidance. John O'Brien's
novel is deliberately harrowing, and it won't make you feel any better
to know that the writer committed suicide just a couple of weeks after
his book was optioned as a film. He would have profited, no doubt, from
the movie's release, but you sense that he and his characters were
living in the same lonely place, and sought release.
     Their sorry lots in life don't bar Ben and Sera from some
semblance of a romantic relationship, and LEAVING LAS VEGAS is indeed a
love story. As far as eroticism goes, the movie's mostly sleazy without
being sexy, and I get the feeling that's an adequate representation of
the city itself. There's certainly nothing romantic about the way Ben
drinks (indeed, he's more or less impotent), though the opening scene
is a jaunty shot of him quite literally dancing down the aisles of a
liquor store, pushing a cart filled with bottles of all shapes and
sizes. When he goes into withdrawal, he trembles and stutters until he
unstops another bottle or drains another glass, and he becomes
remarkably witty and self-assured, if not entirely pleasant. Cage digs
deep to find Benjamin's humanity, and it's brave for the film to allow
this level of dignity to such a blasted out, hopeless character while
acknowledging the fundamental disaster of his life.
     And it's no mean feat for the movie to maintain credibility.
LEAVING LAS VEGAS is about a desperate relationship that somehow
transcends traditional needs, and short circuits the sex drive (Sera
is, after all, going out and turning tricks even after Ben moves in).
One scene, which defines completely the seductive appeal of an
alcoholic haze, has Ben and Sera getting hot and bothered as Sera peels
off her swimsuit and pours liquor down the front of her body in an act
that takes the sublimated sexuality of TV beer commercials to its
erotic extreme. And of course, there's an abrupt comedown from the
sexual high that neatly negates the fetish.
     That's just one great scene in a movie that's full of them, and
with hardly a misstep.  Figgis takes an unconventional, bravura
approach to the film, and it pays off by making the experience
something more than a straightforward sad story (as movie-of-the-week
material, this tale would be deadly). The pre-credit sequence stretches
out for what seems like 10 minutes, until an obstinate, jazzy score
wells up over the credits, also composed by Figgis, which will play in
hip, sidling counterpoint to Benjamin's bleak motives for the rest of
the film. (My own pet peeve is the gaggle of Sting songs that punctuate
the soundtrack, with his vocals so high in the mix that you wind up
thinking about Sting's slightly daffy lyrics instead of the matters
onscreen.) If anything, Figgis' jumpy style is a little too much for
his material, but this is, after all, a story of excess.
     As a treatise on the savagery of alcohol addiction, LEAVING LAS
VEGAS is a winner, but I'm not sure what else Hollywood had in mind
when the story was optioned. To be sure, this is a movie that
brutalizes its characters from start to finish--and poor Sera comes
out the big loser, since Ben is the one who fulfills the mission of the
movie's title.  Curiously, we get no sense of the direction her
character is heading at the end of the film, even though we've
witnessed her desperate devotion to Ben and her abject humiliation at
the hands of lovers and strangers.  Maybe a brilliant movie about
alcoholism must by definition be unsatisfying, but this one's a tough
sell. For all its sincerity and virtue, LEAVING LAS VEGAS is a movie
that empties you out, and doesn't give much back.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     LEAVING LAS VEGAS is a romantic tragedy about a hooker and a happy
alcoholic who wants to die by drinking.  Stop right now.  You have
already formed the wrong conclusions about this show.  It is not one of
those gritty, depressing, isn't life awful movies like IRONWEED or
KIDS.  Nor is it a message movie filled with hopes of moral redemption
like WHEN A MAN LOVES A WOMAN, but it certainly has a message.  This is
a unique movie about fulfillment through love - the love of a man, a
woman, and a bottle.  It also has two of the best acting performances
of the year.
     As the movie opens, Ben (Nicolas Cage) is dancing with joy in a
liquor store as he is doing one of his favorite things - filling a
shopping cart full of hard liquor so he can drink himself silly.  He
has a life threatening problem with drinking.  His hands shake so bad
sometimes he can not sign checks until he goes to a bar for his morning
gin and tonics.  He wakes early one morning in front of the
refrigerator with the door open and his last drink still beside him.
When he speaks his speech gets slurred.  Not surprising, he soon looses
his job for drunkenness, but he views this happening fortuitously since
it means he can take his overly generous severance pay and go to Las
Vegas to drink himself to death.  He takes his bottles along and
chugalugs them as he drives.
     When he arrives he makes his cheap motel room a shrine to booze.
He has bottle after bottle in neat rows.  Although the love of his life
is drinking, he meets someone else.  She is a hooker, Sera (Elisabeth
Shue from the excellent but obscure movie ADVENTURES IN BABYSITTING),
with whom he wants to hang out.  He pays her $500 to stay with him to
talk and drink.  He tells her, "I came her to drink myself to death."
"How long will it take you" she asks.  He quickly replies, "I'd say
about 3-4 weeks."  He is not kidding, and he is very happy about it.
     She falls instantly in love with him.  He tells her, "You can
never ask me to stop drinking.  Do you understand?"  To which she
quickly retorts, "I understand."  He loves drinking and has no remorse.
He tells her, "I am a drunk, and you're a hooker.  I am a person who is
totally at ease with this."  Whenever he gets really sick, he solves
his problem by drinking even more.
     She takes care of him, but does not attempt to change him.  Rather
she helps him get all he wants to feed his addiction.  She has had no
meaning in her life before this.  Her pimp, Yuri (Julian Sands), treats
badly, but she thinks Ben needs her and after liquor, she is the only
important thing in his life.  Words do not adequately describe the
happiness they both have during this brief time they have together.
They live every second to the fullest.  Think of this as a movie of
what someone might like to do if they knew they were going to die in
less than a month.  This is not to say that Ben and Sera have it easy.
Prostitution and alcoholism are both shown to be dangerous activities
in ways you may not have considered.
     Mike Figgis does the direction, script, and (dreamy jazz) music.
All are near perfection.  The characters he creates are originals and
ones that are totally believable.  Figgis has Shue being interviewed
periodically as if she is speaking to an off camera therapist.  He uses
this as a narrative glue to hold the picture together, and it works
well.
     The chemistry between the leads is great - she with him and he
with booze although he does like being with her as well.  I had no idea
what a great actress Shue is. I have never been very fond of Cage's
acting.  Too often I have found it over the top and unrealistic.  But
here, I could not imagine any actor could have done a better job with
this role.  I hope they both get awards.  They have many great scenes
together, but I guess my favorite is the one of them by the pool in the
motel in the desert.
     The cinematography by Declan Quinn is wonderful.  Watch especially
the glitter of the neon lights of Vegas at night and of the desert
sunsets as backdrops for the hooking and the drinking.  The colors have
a rich and yet surreal feel.  The camera angles, the costumes (Laura
Goldsmith) and the make-up (Kathryn Bihr) help create Sera into a
lovely person but yet never hid the garishness of how she makes her
living.  Shue's eye's and smile is what you see no matter how short her
miniskirt.  She has an amazing presence in the film.  It would have
been easy to have her role being secondary, but her acting is right on
par with Cage's.
     This is a scary show at times.  You care deeply about these poor
souls so when Ben gets a bad case of the shakes, it makes you want to
cry.  Editor John Smith has just the right sense of when to cut between
happiness and sorrow.
     LEAVING LAS VEGAS runs a fast 1:50.  It is correctly rated R for
extreme alcohol abuse plus sex, nudity, and violence.  I would not let
teenagers go to this movie unless their parents go with them and
discuss it afterwards.  It is too easy for young minds to misconstrue
the isn't drinking fun subtext.  This is an anti-alcoholism movie, but
it takes maturity to realize it properly.  I strongly recommend this
marvelous picture and amazing acting, and I give it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
