Title
Review for Stuart Saves His Family (1995)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: general release 4/12/95
Running Length: 1:37
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Language, mature themes)
Starring: Al Franken, Laura San Giacomo, Vincent D'Onofrio,
          Shirley Knight, Harris Yulin, Lesley Boone
Director: Harold Ramis
Producers: Lorne Michaels and Trevor Albert
Screenplay: Al Franken based on his book
Cinematography: Lauro Escorel
Music: Marc Shaiman
Released by Paramount Pictures
     STUART SAVES HIS FAMILY is yet another feature spinoff of a SATURDAY
NIGHT LIVE skit.  Unfortunately, like the notable flops that preceded it
(THE CONEHEADS, IT'S PAT), this one should have remained confined to
television.  Stretched out to an agonizing ninety-seven minutes, STUART
goes from being passably amusing to tedious to virtually unwatchable.  Of
course, part of the problem is the script, which suffers from a bizarre
case of split personality--this has to be the first SNL movie that
attempts to deliver a drama-based denouement.
     Since FORREST GUMP debuted to universal popular acclaim, the movie-
going community has been awaiting the inevitable copycats.  Odd that the
first should come from the same production company that distributed GUMP
(Paramount), and that it should emerge from under the SNL umbrella.
While it wouldn't be unexpected for writer/star Al Franken to parody
Robert Zemeckis' megahit, that's not the approach he chose.  Instead,
with only the barest hint of mockery, he has tapped into the mawkishness
that made GUMP so well-loved.  Stuart isn't necessarily a Forrest clone,
but he's a socially-challenged individual who overcomes great adversity
to attain fame and prosperity.
     The film starts out with a light, satirical touch, showing us part
of an episode of a cable access show called DAILY AFFIRMATION, which is
hosted by Stuart Smalley (Al Franken).  Stuart, a member of about half-a-
dozen support groups, including Al-anon, Overeaters' Anonymous, and
Debtors' Anonymous, lisps his way through the short program, dispensing
pop psychological advice.  His "fifteen minutes of fame" are in jeopardy,
however, since the director of programming has moved DAILY AFFIRMATION
from its customary 12:00 noon slot to 2:45 am, right after a hair
replacement infomercial.
     Stuart's family is as dysfunctional as they come.  His father
(Harris Yulin) and brother (Vincent D'Onofrio) are alcoholics, his sister
(Leslie Boone) is angst-riddled and overweight, and his mother (Shirley
Knight) is indecisive and insensitive.  As Stuart puts it (in one of the
film's wittiest lines), "Seeing my mother is like a trip to the dentist's
before the advent of modern pain killer."  Fortunately, Stuart lives in
Chicago, where he has friends like the equally screwed up Julia (Laura
San Giacomo), while his family is a long bus trip away in Minnesota.
Nevertheless, a series of events, beginning with the death of an aunt,
keeps Stuart shuttling back and forth between states.
     It's difficult to say whether, given a chance, the movie could have
succeeded as a uncompromising lampoon.  The opening half-hour, which is
played almost exclusively for laughs, has its moments (several of which
are highlighted by Marc Shaiman's perfectly-toned score), but there's a
feeling that the material is already being stretched beyond its natural
limits.  The film, however, decides to get serious.  Instead of
continuing its jokey, farcical tone, it turns almost grim as the
storyline centers on the cancerous effects of alcoholism in Stuart's
family.  There's nothing humorous in the scenes where Stuart and his
siblings confront their father about how his drinking has scarred their
lives.
     While on the surface it might seem laudable that Franken has decided
to guide his film in this unexpected direction, the problem is that the
drama doesn't work.  It comes across as flat and heavy-handed.  Since
each member of Stuart's family is initially introduced as a stereotypical
caricature, it's difficult to accept any of them in a situation where
they're intended to be taken seriously.  Franken doesn't seem to realize
that his one-dimensional characters lack the depth necessary for
believable drama.  The result is a failed attempt to turn a SATURDAY
NIGHT LIVE spinoff into a social commentary.
     Like Forrest Gump, Stuart Smalley has his arsenal of pithy sayings,
including "It's easier to put on slippers than to carpet the entire
world."  Such comments seek to put a lighter spin on a bleak topic, but
they're offered up too late.  By then, a heavy dose of gravity has
already capsized the floundering ship.  In the end, it's this movie that
needs saving--but there's no life preserver.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Laurence Mixson
Starring Al Franken, Laura San Giacomo, Vincent D'Onofrio, and Harris
Yulin.
Review by Laurence Mixson(venom8@hotmail.com)
A Fully Loaded Entertainment Review - Website Coming in July!
I didn't really expect very much when I rented Stuart Saves His
Family.  The movie bombed at the box office, and I had never really
liked the Saturday Night Live sketch on which the movie was based. My
real concern, though, was the general reputation of SNL-related movies
translating to the big screen with less-than-stellar results(Half-Baked,
anyone?)
I was surprised to discover a truly entertaining, often hilarious yet
also touching little film.  It is an Al Franken production
through-and-through, who not only created the title character but also
wrote and starred in the picture. For those of you who don't know, Al
Franken plays a guy named Stuart Smalley, who has a really annoying show
on a public-access station about increasing your self-esteem, etc.
Although not a licensed therapist, Stuart Smalley is, as the program
proudly boasts, "a graduate of several 12-step programs."
Stuart is doing well enough with his tv show, but he keeps getting
distracted by family troubles. Stuart's relatives are a mess: his dad
and brother(Harris Yulin and Vincent D'Onofrio, respectively)are
alcoholics, his sister is overweight and getting over another divorce,
and his mom is in constant self-denial and solves all perceived problems
by baking. Then, disaster strikes. 
Stuart accidentally insults the manager of the station and gets his
show revoked. He is forced to move back in with his family after he can
no longer support himself, and there the comedy truly picks up.
Franken wrote all of the characters not just as cliches or stereotypes,
but as sharply-drawn, real people. Although Smalley's dad has always
imbibed too much, Stuart can still recall times when his father seemed
like an okay guy. Also, after an accident towards the end of the movie,
both Stuart and the audience learn that there is more to his mother than
previously thought.
Although filled with small, very funny scenes, Stuart Saves His Family
also has its share of dramatic moments, especially towards the
conclusion. For a lightweight comedy, it handles these scenes especially
well, often better than many so-called "serious dramas" of today. All
the more amazing is that such a movie comes from a Saturday Night Live
sketch that is essentially a one-joke bit.
If you feel like renting a comedy, and you haven't seen this film, I
definitely recommend you try this one out. You'll laugh...you'll
cry....it's all there.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Al Franken, Laura San Giacomo, Vincent D'Onofrio,
           Harris Yulin, Shirley Knight, Lesley Boone.
Screenplay:  Al Franken.
Director:  Harold Ramis.
     Lorne Michaels must die.  It is really as simple as that.  Yes,
he bought himself a temporary reprieve with the dumb-but-still-
funny TOMMY BOY, but Michaels has foisted so much horrible product
on American television and film audiences in the last five years
that such a minor success was the artistic equivalent of Charles
Manson buying a few boxes of Girl Scout cookies.  We can only find
evidence of a benevolent God in the fact that HANS & FRANZ THE MOVIE
and COFFEE TALK THE MOVIE were scrapped in development (that is not
a joke).  Unfortunately, STUART SAVES HIS FAMILY slipped out before
Paramount stopped handing Michaels blank checks.  Not only is this
latest "Saturday Night Live" character spinoff incoherent and
unfunny, its basic idea and tone are just appallingly wrong-headed.
     Al Franken stars as Stuart Smalley, caring nurturer and host of
the public access cable program "Daily Affirmation."  That is before
the program is cancelled, leading Stuart into a shame spiral which
causes concern among his cadre of 12-step sponsors led by Julia
(Laura San Giacomo).  To make matters worse, the death of a beloved
aunt forces Stuart to confront his singularly dysfunctional
immediate family:  his alcoholic father (Harris Yulin); co-dependent
enabler mother (Shirley Knight); pot-smoking unemployed brother
(Vincent D'Onofrio); over-eater and thrice-divorced sister (Lesley
Boone).  As family strife commences over trouble with the aunt's
inheritance, Stuart tries to be the peace-maker, while also trying
to revive his show on another cable network.
     To state the obvious about the recent spate of SNL-"inspired"
features, the five-minute sketches on which STUART SAVES HIS FAMILY
is based weren't all that funny to begin with.  They had their
moments, primarily because Al Franken is one of the few performers
associated with SNL in the last decade who doesn't appear to have
had all his subtlety surgically removed; indeed, his sing-song
delivery is good for the film's few laughs.  But where on earth was
he going to come up with a 90-minute concept for a movie?  The
answer is that he didn't.  Instead, he took two 45-minute concepts
and fused them together into a disastrous whole.  One plot, in which
Stuart attempts to take his Illinois public access show to the big
time (shades of WAYNE'S WORLD, anyone?), is supposed to be the funny
part.  It is not, with the exception of a cameo by Julia (IT'S PAT)
Sweeney as a timid receptionist who becomes a guest on "Daily
Affirmation."  Mostly, it's just deadly slow.
     What is _unintentionally_ funny about STUART SAVES HIS FAMILY
is the movie-of-the-week melodrama of the Smalley family segments.
Although there are a few flashbacks to Stuart's youth which are
played strictly for laughs (unsuccessfully), the majority of the
interactions are intended to be poignant or serious.  This decision
is baffling, because Franken appears to have forgotten the premise
behind the "Daily Affirmation" sketches.  They were parodies of the
touchy-feely self-help movement, deriving most of their humor from
goofy over-reliance on new age mantras like Stuart's ubiquitous "and
that's ... okay."  But STUART SAVES HIS FAMILY is practically a love
letter to self-help, and the problems within the family are treated
with a ridiculous earnestness.  The schizoid combination of
humorless comedy and misplaced sentimentality (including a score by
the ever-more-saccharine Marc Shaiman) makes for a truly
uncomfortable ride.
     It is clear that Al Franken had two basic choices when it came
to making a STUART movie:  keep Stuart a caricature in an episodic
story, or make him more real in an actual narrative.  He managed
somehow to get Harold Ramis (GROUNDHOG DAY) to direct, so he went
for the human, feel-good angle.  Big mistake.
     I said Franken had two basic choices.  Make that three:  he
could have chosen not to do the movie at all.  _That_ would have
been the smart choice.

Author
Andrew Hicks
     Just when you think the practice of turning recurring "Saturday
Night Live" characters into feature films has gotten completely out of
hand (i.e., IT'S PAT: THE MOVIE), you stumble upon a warm-hearted
comedy that turns what was previously a one-note character into a
decent movie.  I'm sure we're all familiar with Stuart Smalley
(alter-ego of "SNL" writer/performer Al Franken), the effeminate
sweater-wearing host of the public-access show "Daily Affirmation."
This movie gives us access to Stuart away from the cameras of his TV
show, into his private life (and day job as a waiter).
     Stuart's show gets cancelled and, after six days of curling up in
bed eating Fig Newton's (I like the cranberry ones myself), he gets
more bad news--his favorite aunt is dead.  So he makes a trip home to
see his dysfunctional family: alcoholic dad, codependant mom, overeater
sister and pot-addict brother.  Coming home, he realizes it's going to
take more than saying the usual 12-step cliches like "Denial ain't just
a river in Egypt" to fix the mess his family is in.  But gosh darn it,
he'll try.
     STUART SAVES HIS FAMILY is probably the only "Saturday Night Live"
movie with any heart of human quality to offset the barrage of bad
jokes.  It has some genuinely dramatic moments and also some genuinely
funny ones, most of which involve Stuart's flashbacks to the days he
was tormented for being an obese child.  I'm not sure exactly why I can
identify with that but I can...
