Title
Review for Hands on a Hardbody: The Documentary (1998)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
Exactly how much pain would you be willing to endure for a chance to win
a Nissan pickup truck worth $15,000?
The best documentaries consider offbeat subjects that seem on the
surface to have no broad appeal.  Director S.R. Bindler takes us into an
annual human endurance contest with the result being one of the funniest
and most involving films of the year as we get to know the contestants.
The best part of this life-affirming film about blue-collar workers is
that the sympathetic filmmaker avoids the cheap shots while still
producing a film that has the audience frequently in stitches.
HANDS ON A HARDBODY covers a contest of the same name run every year by
the local Nissan dealer in Longview, Texas.  Twenty-three participants
are selected at random from a fishbowl filled with applicants' names.
Those chosen spend days with their hands on a pickup truck.
The rules are simple and rigidly enforced by the judges.  There are
5-minute breaks every hour.  When not on break, the contestants must
keep one hand on the truck at all times.  They must stand up without
leaning or squatting.  Any infraction of these rules, no matter how
brief, immediately disqualifies the person.  The winner is the last one
standing with his or her hand on the truck.
The film creates a wonderful arc as the audience goes from initially
laughing at these country folks with their funny sounding, thick Texas
accents to laughing with them and then, finally, empathizing with their
quest.  (For the record, my Texas accent is still almost this heavy
although I left the state 30 years ago.)  By the end of the movie, the
viewers become glued to their seats wondering who among their newfound
friends will next succumb to the pain and have to drop out or will be
forced out through some silly blunder.  Each time someone leaves the
vehicle you can almost hear the audience sigh.
Benny, the winner from two years ago is back.  As the film's
philosopher, and clearly the man to beat, he explains that it went 87
hours the year he won.  After that long standing without sleep, your
body falls apart.  And towards the end your mind begins to go, causing
many to lose by simple slipups -- they take their hands off the truck to
scratch their head, to rub their numb legs or to wave to someone.
Although the movie works as sport, the real beauty comes from the people
we get to know.  The strain and the intense desire cause them to reveal
themselves in ways they normally wouldn't.
The group chosen at random from the people willing to submit their
bodies to the ordeal is a cross section of the local population.  There
are people of various sizes, ages, races, and sex.  The only common
denominator is that they all share the lower end of the economic strata,
ranging from a waitress to a transmission repairman.  Deadly serious,
each believes the truck will be his or hers in a few days.  Each of them
goes from an early machismo to a final, deadening exhaustion.
Benny, the cocksure cowboy type, was captured in a long interview before
the contest started, and the film cuts back frequently to this and other
pregame interviews with the rest of the highly likable group.  "It's
extremely wild," Benny describes the upcoming action.  "It is extremely
crazy.  It's a human drama thing."  Not everyone has the mettle, he
reminds us.  "If you can't run with the big dogs," he declares, "you
better stay on the porch with the pups."  A hunter, Benny uses the
exhilaration of deer hunting as a metaphor for the competition.
The other entrants include Norma, a spiritual woman with her own
50-person prayer chain.  She wiles away her time reading the bible,
listening to gospel music on her headphones, and laughing out loud with
"the joy of the Lord."  Built like a bowling bowl and just as strong,
she's certain to be a contender for this year's crown.
Janis is a large, poor woman without any front teeth.  Her husband, who
shares her paucity of teeth, stops by to tell the movie's funniest
story.  It seems he turned off their air-conditioning in the days before
the meet to get her ready for standing out in the sweltering Texas heat
-- they do have a portable awning over the truck.  He explains that most
people have a 3-ton A/C unit, but their house has a 20-ton, the size to
"cool a K-Mart store."  With it, he can cool their house to 15 degrees
below zero.  Why did he get it?  Why, because he was offered such a
great deal on it.
There is a Sandra Bullock lookalike, and a host of other individuals who
seem straight out of central casting for their variety.
Everyone has their theory on how to win.  One guy "fasts" during the
match, eating only oranges and Snickers.  He figures that if he doesn't
put too much in, not too much will want to come out.  The competitors
critique each other's food choices, break strategies, and shoe
preferences.  Along the way, they become friends as well as competitors.
After dropping out and getting some rest, they come back to cheer on
those left standing, albeit just barely.  Their collective stamina is
amazing.  After 24 hours, 16 of the 23 are still there trying hard not
to pass out.
This piece of Americana has an ending that is surprising in many ways,
not the least of which is how sudden and unexpected it is.
After it is all over with, Benny offers his thoughts once more for the
meaning of it all.  "It teaches you human values," he says of the
tortuous event.  "The very basic human values."
Co-producer and cameraman Chapin Wilson was at the screening we
attended.  He said that almost everything that Benny said ahead of time
turned out to be true.  The only thing they doubted was that he said
there was a "Lips on a Lincoln" contest in an adjoining state.  One
night in a bar, Chapin and the director looked up at the television,
which had a short story about the "Lips on a Lincoln" contest.  Every
challenger had a circle on the car in which they had to stay puckered
up.  Benny was proven right again.
HANDS ON A HARDBODY runs 1:37.  It is rated PG for a little bad language
and would be fine for all ages.
The film is playing now in extremely limited distribution.  Try to
convince your local art house to book it.  In the San Jose area, it will
be coming to one of the Camera Cinemas sometime in November.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz
HANDS ON A HARD BODY(director: S.R. Bindler; cinematographers:
Bindler/Michael Nickles/Chapin Wilson; 1997)
If you want a brand new $15,000 Hard Body blue Nissan pickup for free,
you might consider entering a contest from an auto dealership in
Longview, Texas, taking place every spring, where contestants are chosen
from a lottery. In this filmed 1995 contest, where there were 24
contestants, the winner of the pickup will be the last one standing
upright, no leaning or squatting allowed, with the winner having at
least one gloved hand (the glove is to avoid any scratches) on the
truck.
The other rules of the contest include a mandatory drug test when the
contest gets down to three people. A second prize of $250 and a third
prize of a gift certificate at a local store, to appease the contestants
who have gone so far but failed. There are 5-minute breaks every hour
and after 6- hours there is a 15-minute break.
The dealership's crude advertising gimmick, seemingly exploits the
blue-collar type of participants undergoing this lunacy, who will go
without sleep for days and will battle exhaustion, the heat, and the
mosquitoes. This makes for a different type of documentary, one with a
less serious tone than most others but one that is fun to watch, as the
varied contestants of different ages, sizes, genders, and races, each
have their idea on what it takes for them to win. The thing they have
most in common, is that they want the truck, the question is how much do
they want it.
A previous winner, the cowboy sage, Benny Perkins, who went for some 80+
hours without sleep to win his truck two- years ago, offers his view on
what it takes to win this endurance test in an interview shot before the
contest began and was shown throughout the contest, of which he was
again an entrant, and was considered the favorite because of his
previous experience. He contends that it is mental toughness that is
required and maturity, and knowing how to get comfotable and eat light
food during the breaks. He doubts if anyone under 30 will win, unless he
is a former marine with that disciplined mind-set. He calls this event a
human drama thing, rather than a contest.
Bindler's camera crew was there night and day to chronicle the event,
along with voluntary judges and family and friends cheering on the
contestants, as the documentary became about why and how the
participants entered the contest and why they are still in it. Bindler
is a native of that Texas city, though the 29-year-old went away to
study at New York University film school, but returned to film the event
he recalled as something he thought was absurd but didn't know what else
to make of it.
Some of the contestants who were singled out for interviews, were the
one's whose personalities stood out, whom we saw at different hours and
in different frames of mood and in alternating physical conditions.
Norma is an obese Hispanic woman, who is a fervant Christian. She
believes God wants her to win the truck and she has a prayer group of
some two hundred members from her church praying for her to win. To keep
alert, she listens to gospel music on her radio headphones and sometimes
goes into fits of joyous laughter to keep her spirits up. Russell Welsh
needs to get a truck to replace his other one after a tough year. Kelly
Mangrum is an attractive student, who wants braces and will sell the
truck to meet some of her other expenses. Greg is an ex-marine, who
believes he has the youth and physical stamina to win. Janis is
distinctively missing a few front teeth and says she always finishes
what she starts. Ronald is a black country boy, who says he will fast
for three days but is seen eating snickers during the breaks. He wishes
there was no tent over his head because he loves the heat and he thinks
the tent helps the others more than it does him. J.D. Drew is the oldest
contestant and is an avid deer hunter, who described how he stood
patiently for long periods to get his prey. Angie learns that she didn't
prepare properly for the contest and quits when she becomes
disorientated, saying she doesn't think she would ever do it again, but
she comes back next year and wins. Paul Prince feels he is in great
condition and thinks he can go the distance. Raul thinks he has what it
takes to win and is seen getting a foot massage from his girlfriend.
What is magnanimous about the documentary, was that even though it could
have gone for the cheap joke and made fun of these people, instead it
takes them seriously and let's them explain in their own way why they
are there. The filmmaker clearly saw that what the contestants were
doing was fantastic and out of the ordinary already, so there was no
need to embellish the story, and by keeping it simple, he succeeded in
telling their story honestly and in a very human way. These real people
happened to also be likable people, manifesting real concerns and
problems, and when people start dropping out, you can see a camaraderie
growing between some of these strangers (others remain critical of their
competitors). But, despite the competitiveness of the event, most of
them realize that they were all put through some ordeal, and they went
through it together and therefore shared the trip and learned something
about human values. The result is a quirky, non-dramatic, human interest
story about the need for Texans to drive a pickup, as if it was their
God given right to have one. And as Benny said, "It is something to see
people struggling to get what you want. But, at least, they tried.
People don't want to take a risk, anymore, they are afraid that if they
fail, they will get hurt." I'll buy that. It's worth a look, reminding
me a little bit of that Sydney Pollack film "They Shoot Horses, Don't
They," but without the cheap sentimentality Pollack threw into his film.
It played, for me, more like a sports story that ESPN 2 would air, where
the filmmaker didn't know who was going to win and many times focused on
those who unexpectedly dropped out, and part of the lure of the film was
choosing who you think will win.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
David N. Butterworth
        These may seem like mighty powerful reasons why an outspoken cowboy
called Benny would enter the annual, tortuous "Hands on a Hardbody" contest
in the sleepy Texan town of Longview, but Benny has an even better one.
Benny won the first ever contest, sponsored by Longview's Jack Long Nissan,
back in 1992.  After an incredible 87 hours, Benny was the last person to
have his hands still firmly planted on the body of a brand-new Nissan
flatbed truck as his remaining few opponents fell, walked, or were carried
away.
        In S. R. Bindler's remarkable documentary, "Hands on a Hardbody,"
the year is 1995 and Benny is back to try his luck a second time.  This
time around there are 24 competitors and, as in previous years, the rules
are simple: contestants must stand with at least one gloved (to avoid
scratching the paint) hand on the vehicle at all times; there must be no
leaning on the vehicle, and no bending of the knees to stretch the legs;
there will be five-minute breaks every hour, and 15-minute breaks every six
hours.
        The last man (or woman, since men hardly dominate this contest)
standing wins.
        In a decade of "real" TV, this might appear a less-than-riveting
study of the lengths to which people will go to win something big (in this
case a $15,000, fully-loaded pickup).  But what makes the film so
compelling is Bindler's confident technique, the poignant theme (in the
tradition of "They Shoot Horses, Don't They?"), and the memorable array of
characters who congregate under the large tent on the Jack Long parking lot.
        Characters like Norma, who listens constantly to religious music on
her walkman and is supported by a prayer chain of several hundred people.
And Angie, who claims that she doesn't think she could ever do something
like this again (only to return the following year).  And the toothless
husband who claims to have "conditioned" his equally toothless wife for the
event.
        And there's Benny himself, of course, who commands center stage
with his attempts at highbrow pontificating.  He's been here before, so he
knows what it takes.  "It's not about stamina, it's about sanity.  It's
mind over mind, it's about having the metal.  It's not a contest, or a
competition, it's a real human drama."
        Bindler's bargain-basement approach--"Hands on a Hardbody" looks
like it was shot on a Fisher Price kiddiecam and transferred to Standard 8
film--adds to Benny's so-called "human drama."  By the end of the
competition, the last two contestants hug each other long and hard, one in
congratulations, the other in commiseration.  It's at that moment you
realize that everything Benny has said, no matter how ridiculously clichéd
it first sounded, is true.  This feat of physical and mental endurance is
as much about kinship in adversity as it is about winning a truck.
        And with blood, sweat, and tears--and a lot of humor--"Hands on a
Hardbody" brings that reality home.  It might be "a work by S. R. Bindler,"
but it's an absolutely fascinating one.

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "HANDS ON A HARD BODY" (Legacy Releasing)
When Matthew McConaughey's not acting movies, he's making them through his company JK Livin. "Hands on a Hard Body" is a unique, compelling 
documentary - not a porno of some nude showgirl - about a brand new, fully-loaded $15,000 Nissan hardbody pick-up truck, the first prize in a grueling endurance contest held each spring at a Longview, Texas, auto dealership. The first part of the film sets the scene: 24 contestants are told 
to keep one hand on the truck for as long as possible. The last person standing, with at least one hand on the pick-up, gets to drive away with it. Reminiscent of "They Shoot Horses, Don't They," which revolved around marathon dance contests during the Depression, this encompasses the entire human drama of hope, devastation, triumph and defeat. As the hours and days go by, the competitors get to know each other - and we get caught up 
in their mystical quest. There's the determined young woman in her early 
30s; an ex-Marine, confident he can outlast everyone because of his military training; a farmer who had to sell his last pick-up to pay bills;  a gospel-singing Christian who's sure that God is on her side; the elderly 
man who promised his wife he'd win the truck for her; and a cocky, colorful previous winner who provides most of the commentary. By deftly intercutting pre-contest interviews with actual footage, filmmaker S.R. Bindler 
(McConaughey's best friend) captures the nervous energy, stamina, exhaustion, and determination of the various challengers, revealing their authentic quirks and humorous eccentricities. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Hands on a Hard Body" is a crazy, incredible, intense 8. This is true Americana, and you gotta see it to believe it!
