Title
Review for Manhattan (1979)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dan Chodos
Very few films can make you laugh and care about the characters at the same
time, Woody Allen's "Manhattan" has both in spades. A brilliant tale of a
contemporary neurotic in the romanticized world of Manhattan. The contrast
is as clear cut as Gordon Willis's magnificent black and white
cinematography. With Gershwin blasting in the background, we follow the life
of would be writer Isaac (Allen) Davis as he and his friends clumsily bumble
around each other trying to find the right key of happiness. The problem for
Isaac and his pseudo-sophisticated friends is that they think they earned
the answer to the secret to life because they can dissect art and drive
convertibles. A healthy relationship however, still alludes them.
Allen is in rare form as he puts on the balancing act of his questionable
career moves, underage (Hemingway) girlfriend, lesbian ex-wife (Streep), and
a rendevous with his best (only?) friends mistress (Keaton). The plot is so
seamless it almost seems unrehearsed, a tribute to Allen as he masters his
insecurity shtick but never relies on it to get him through a scene. Isaac
is dating 17 year old mature for her age Tracy, but recognizes his
insecurities and refuses to commit to what she wants -- a serious
relationship. Isaac pushes her away because subconsciously he wants to
escape this kind of life. Very soon after that, his best friend, Michael,
introduces him to his mistress Mary so he can go back and live happily ever
after with his wife. The male characters essentially use each other to clear
their collective conscious. But it doesn't work, it can't work, not in this
world with these characters. Isaac almost knows to begin with that he can't
be happy, but goes through the appearance of striving for it anyway. Mary,
played so wonderfully by Diane Keaton is so insecure that she needs men like
Isaac and Michael to justify her existence in the world of higher culture.
There's a famous scene in "Manhattan" with a still shot of the 59th street
bridge. It's beautiful and perfect, almost too perfect to be used in a movie
with characters so undeserving. As they take us through their daily routine
of savvy dinners racquetball clubs and museums we begin to discover that
there's less to admire about this kind of life and more to pity. The last
scene would be painful to watch if it were in any other movie. Isaac pleads
with Tracy to take him back as she's just about to board a plane to Europe.
Does she take the plane and escape this world? It's an important question,
and the fact that we care to know is what makes "Manhattan" one of the best
films of all time.

Author
Brian Koller
"Manhattan" is a play with good cinematography.  That is,
there's no action scenes, but there is a great deal of
dialogue, George Gerschwin music, and shots of New York
City.  The Gershwin soundtrack is actually intrusive,
but the script is excellent.
Woody Allen directed, co-wrote and starred in the film.
He is torn between two girlfriends: young and earnest
Mariel Hemingway and indecisive pseudo-intellectual
Diane Keaton.  Keaton also has an on-off affair with
Michael Murphy (who had just played another philandering
husband in "An Unmarried Woman").  To complicate things
further, Allen has quit his day job to write a novel,
and is trying to stop his ex-wife (Meryl Streep) from
publishing a tell-all expose of their marriage.
The script is terrific.  Allen has a gift for
self-deprecating humor, and can also milk commonplace
setbacks (e.g. his new, inferior apartment has brown
tap water) for laughs.  Allen's sense of humor and
romantic nature makes it almost credible that his
character would be dating Hemingway and Keaton despite
his unemployment and unromantic appearance.
Allen and his film characters seem to have much
in common.  Allen uses "Manhattan" as a platform
to promote his art preferences (Bergman and Fellini
for films, Louis Armstrong and George Gerschwin
for music, etc) clearly favoring the nostalgic
and esoteric over the present and popular.  For
most actors, this would be egotistical and distracting,
but for Allen and "Manhattan" it works.  This may
be because Allen's character is an intellectual
who would be expected to have and espouse such views.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Andrew Hicks
        On the surface, this Woody Allen follow-up to the 
masterpiece ANNIE HALL seems like the same movie all over again. 
There he is, playing a neurotic New York Jew whose career involves 
entertaining the masses with his sense of humor and whose love life 
involves a continual string of mismatches and failures. After watching 
MANHATTAN, though, it's obvious this film explores the theme on a 
much more dramatic and profound level.
        Aesthetically, MANHATTAN is worlds away from ANNIE 
HALL. Filmed in black and white and featuring a constant soundtrack 
of Gershwin music, it seems like an artsy 50's film, but then again no 
film of the 50's ever had a seventeen-year-old girl offering a 
middle-aged man a chance to have sex in a wild way no other 
woman would try with him. That brings up the third difference 
between MANHATTAN and ANNIE HALL -- we get to see the 
charming pedophile side of Woody in this film as he enters a 
relationship with high school senior Mariel Hemingway. The 
mental image of those two together is almost as disgusting 
as Mariel's lesbian kiss with Roseanne. Almost.
        Mariel is in love with Woody, but he continually tells her 
she's too young for commitment. She needs to have more casual 
sex relationships with insensitive jocks before settling down with 
one man (the same advice Madonna's parents gave her at the age 
of seven). So he takes up with emotionally unstable Diane Keaton 
(a.k.a. Annie Hall), who is on the rebound from an extra-marital affair 
with a mutual friend (Michael Murphy) but is eventually lured back 
into the affair when Murphy promises for the millionth time to leave 
his wife. Looks like someone needs to rent WAITING TO EXHALE.
        Like most Woody Allen films, MANHATTAN is a melange of 
relationships gone wrong, only here there are less rapid-fire one-liners 
and more actual drama. Emotional damage occurs right and left in 
MANHATTAN and, while it isn't as funny as ANNIE HALL , it's just 
as rewarding a viewing experience on a different level. And it does 
expose Woody's charming pedophile side so rarely seen outside of 
custody trials.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
