Title
Review for Island of Dr. Moreau, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Steve Rhodes
     From the opening credits where the type dances to Gary Chang's
music with a heavy percussion beat, director John Frankenheimer's THE
ISLAND OF DR. MOREAU boldly announces that it is a movie not to be
ignored.  Not since SEVEN have I seen such impressive opening credits.
     That the movie turned out to be as much a religious allegory as an
H. G. Wells science fiction story, I would have never guessed.  I asked
several of the other critics after the press screening if they knew if
the book had the religious aspects in it, but having not read the book
in years, none of them had any idea.  Personally, I have no problem
enjoying stories that are very loose adaptations of books, but still I
wondered.  I love Wells, and this is the first book of his to be made
into a movie in twenty years, the last being EMPIRE OF THE ANTS.
     At any rate, as soon as the credits subside, William Fraker's
cinematography makes a dramatic zoom to reveal a boat adrift in a vast
ocean.  The narrator, David Thewlis playing Edward Douglas, tells us
that his plane crashed, and he has been drifting in the South Pacific
in the lifeboat for six days.  You may remember British actor Thewlis
from his many recent roles including DRAGONHEART, RESTORATION, and
BLACK BEAUTY, which is still his best.
     Douglas, half dead, is picked up and treated by the strange
Montgomery (Val Kilmer).  When Douglas comes to, he asks Montgomery,
"Are you a doctor?"  Montgomery shrugs and tells him, "Well, I more of
a vet."  These turn out to be quite prophetic words.
     Montgomery takes Douglas to an island where Montgomery wears a
sarong and has a flower behind his ear.  He is one handsome guy in this
getup, but I still do not know why Norma Moriceau chose this costume
for Kilmer.  Even stranger, but somewhat more appropriate is the all
white outfit and gloves along with the white pancake makeup that Marlon
Brando wears as Dr. Moreau.
     When Douglas comes upon a birth operation on a beast that is part
human and part animal, he realizes that all of the "doctors" are also
human and animal hybrids.  He begins to see animals of every type on
the island that are part human and humans on the island that are part
beast, depending on your point of view.
     Douglas is confronted by Montgomery who explains to him the reason
Dr. Moreau has moved here to conduct his experiments.  It seems that
"Animal rights activists drove him out of the States.  Got so bad you
couldn't cut a rat without reading him his rights."
     Douglas finds Dr. Moreau's daughter Aissa (Fairuza Balk)
attractive.  She wants to help him escape so she takes him to an animal
conclave where the lead animal is standing on a rock serving as his
pulpit and preaching to his congregation, "We are all men, are we not
because the father has made us?"  Yes, Dr. Moreau is indeed their
father and their god.  By the end of the show the word father is
beginning to be replaced by the god reference.
     The doctor tries to reassure Douglas that, "I have seen the devil
in my microscope, and I have changed him."  He explains the ultimate
purpose of his experiments to Douglas, whose sole purpose is to ignore
the doctor and get off the island as quickly as possible.  Montgomery
scoffs at Douglas when he tries to use their radio equipment.  He
taunts Douglas with, "What are you going to say, 'Mayday.  Mayday.  I'm
being held by a pig lady.'"
     I vacillated between being absolutely fascinated by this story and
wanting the animals to eat Brando and Kilmer because their acting is so
bad.  Given all of the drugs used and give the look of the cast,
another title for the film could have been PLANET OF THE APES GETS
STONED.
     Notice too that the doctor is clearly playing the role of the
pope.  The carriage he rides in, his robes, and his staff are all
straight out of the Vatican's closet.  He has an electronic way to
control his wayward flock, however, that the popes have never had.  As
the animals put it, "if there is no pain, there is no law."
     The makeup and creature effects by Stan Winston (both TERMNATORs,
JURASSIC PARK, EDWARD SCISSORHANDS, and ALIENS among many others) will
certainly win him an Academy Award nomination.  They are unique and
imaginative.  The creatures carry the story.  The script by Walon
Green, Michael Herr, Ron Hutchinson, and Richard Stanley is quite
involving.  If you like, or at least can ignore, the heavy religious
overtones, the script is quite good.  It drags some in the middle but
it starts and ends strong.  Director Frankenheimer and editor Paul
Rubell know how to craft a high energy presentation that most of the
time keeps you on the edge of your seat.
     Without Brando THE ISLAND OF DR. MOREAU would have been much
better, but I liked it, flaws and all.   The tacked on epilogue message
is a lame attempt to justify the religious aspects of the film.  They
need no justification.  You can like them or not, but the epilogue adds
nothing and is trite.
     THE ISLAND OF DR. MOREAU runs a little over an hour and a half.
They did not have a information package available at the screening so I
am at a lost for some of the details.  The film is rated PG-13.  There
is no sex or nudity.  The language is mild and the deaths are not very
graphic.  It would be fine for most kids over say eight.  I recommend
the picture to you and give ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Jack Choo
Directed by : John Frankenheimer 
Screenplay by : Richard Stanley & Ron Hutchinson
(based on the 1896 H.G.Wells Book)
Cast : Marlon Brando (Dr. Moreau),   Val Kilmer (Montgomery),   David Thewlis 
(Douglas),  Fairuza Balk (Aissa), Daniel Rigney (Hyena-Swine),  Temuera Morrison 
(Azazello)
Produced by : New Line Cinema
Running Time : 1hr 40minutes
Rating : ** out of *****
THE CLASSIC STORY & THE PRODUCTION WHICH RUINED IT
Marking the centennial anniversary of the 1896 H.G.Wells classic, New
Line Cinema, armed with a stellar cast and expert make-up effects man
Stan Winston (Alien, Predator, Terminator etc) churns out yet another
Hollywood film based on the classic novel. Of course, the production is
no doubt much more superior compared to the earlier 2 movies, one of
which was made back in the 1933 and the other in the 1977, under the
title THE ISLAND OF LOST SOULS (sounds like a much better title..).
The story begins with Edward Douglas (Thewlis), a UN representative sent
to oversee a peace treaty somewhere in the south pacific, who is saved
from the brink of death by Montgomery (Kilmer) after his plane crashes
into the sea. Douglas soon learns that Montgomery is working for
Dr.Moreau, who incidently, owns the island and also a reputable
geneticist who has been awarded the Nobel prize. His host's reluctance
to allow him to freely move around the island becomes clear when he
stumbled into Moreau's lab, when a monstrous birth was in progress. Even
worse, the other workers in the lab are not exactly normal "people."
Douglas stumbles across yet another shocking discovery when he is led to
the beast-people community, which considers Dr.Moreau their maker. Using
shock-therapy and the Law, Dr.Moreau has long been able to keep his
beast-people civilised to some extent but there are a few animal-men who
are just too savage to be controlled.
THE ISLAND OF DR. MOREAU questions the ability of men playing god.
Dr.Moreau is a man obsessed with creating a race of beings which is free
from hate and violence...but the savage within every beast is not
something one can suppress for long. MOREAU has no doubt a very
interesting premise within its grasp. Even so, the production has failed
to make the most out of it. There are too many characters to put your
attention to and the worst thing is, the characters are not
"prioritized" so when the audience is led to believe that a particular
character is important, before they know it, he or she or it
perishes....rather ungloriously at times too.
Perhaps there is some redemption in the development of the beast people,
especially Aissa (Balk), the most human of Moreau's creations. The two
very important characters, Montgomery and Dr.Moreau himself receive no
development at all and it is in this area that the script fails
miserably.
More screen time could have been used for character interaction and
development. I really would have liked it better if, say, they delved
more into Dr.Moreau's obsession, Montgomery's purpose in the story and
justification to as why the beast-people had to rebel. Maybe the nature
of the screenplay, which incidently, does not incorporate much action
sequences in the film, forced the filmmakers to  "cut a long story
short"  and make it more of an action film than anything else (it's
still summer, and movies have to be "marketable"). The special effects
too, are really nothing for anyone to shout about. At most, I would say
the beast-men looked just a bit more realistic than those apes in PLANET
OF THE APES.
This H.G.Wells classic really has potential to be a good film.
Unfortunately, after 2 adaptations, they still could not decide on how
and what to focus their attention on to really bring out that important
message which makes up the entire essence of the story. As a third
outing, THE ISLAND OF DR.MOREAU accomplishes little and is nothing more
than an inferior version of `THE PLANET OF THE APES'. 

The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
* Wait for the TV2 broadcast.
** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha!
*** Pretty good, bring a friend.
**** Amazing, potent stuff.
***** Perfection. See it twice.
____________________________________________________________ 
This movie review was written for THE FLYING INKPOT, the 
Singaporean zine that dares to say "Bok." For a spanking 
good time, visit THE FLYING INKPOT at 

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Marlon Brando, Val Kilmer, David Thewlis, Fairuza Balk, Daniel
Rigney, Ron Perlman, Temuera Morrison.
Screenplay:  Richard Stanley, Ron Hutchinson.
Director:  John Frankenheimer.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Apparently the chaos involved in the making of THE ISLAND OF DR.
MOREAU was such that even the publicity people at New Line couldn't keep
up; the press release had Val Kilmer playing the wrong role.  About the
only constant in the production was the title, as writers (Michael Herr
and Walon Green replaced by Ron Hutchinson), directors (Richard Stanley
replaced by John Frankenheimer) and actors (Rob Morrow replaced by David
Thewlis) all played musical chairs.  And that isn't even mentioning the
production delays brought on by tropical storms and Kilmer's ego (you
decide which was bigger).  Sounds like the making of APOCALYPSE NOW, right
down to the presence of Brando.  The major difference?  The end result.
APOCALYPSE NOW was an inspired fever dream, while THE ISLAND OF DR. MOREAU
is just a nightmare.
     The story begins in a raft on the Java Sea, where U.N. representative
Edward Douglas (Thewlis) finds himself the only survivor of a plane crash.
He is found by a supply boat bringing a doctor named Montgomery (Kilmer)
back to his base of operations, a small Pacific island.  There Montgomery
works with Dr. R. G. V. Moreau (Brando), a Nobel Prize-winning biologist
who had disappeared years earlier.  Douglas wants nothing more than to
radio for help and be on his way, but once he discovers the nature of
Moreau's experiments, it becomes unlikely that he will be allowed to
leave.  Those experiments have Moreau combining human and animal DNA,
resulting in mutant creatures in an attempt to isolate the source of human
aggression.  But his island is not a paradise, especially once the animals
observe cruelty in action and decide to return the favor.
     The H. G. Wells novel on which THE ISLAND OF DR. MOREAU is based has
been committed to film twice before, in 1933 and 1977, and naturally this
version tries very hard to convince us that there is a compelling reason
to do it again, and important themes the other versions failed to uncover.
The great revelation in the script (credited to Hutchinson and erstwhile
director Stanley) is -- get this -- that humans are actually quite
animalistic themselves.  This bit of wisdom worth of the Burning Bush is
delivered scattershot -- a piece here in the split-second intro which
finds a pair of Thewlis' fellow survivors throwing themselves to a
conveniently circling shark in a fight over water, a piece there in a
montage of documentary footage you expect to be underscored by "Imagine."
     It's all spectacularly sloppy, but it's hard to know whom to blame.
Stanley might have wanted to do a cerebral observation on violence and/or
religion, but Frankenheimer seems to want a good old thriller, and the two
angles are not at all complementary.  Somebody cut this film to ribbons
trying to find a point to it all, resulting in a giddy
incomprehensibility.  Exactly what was Douglas' role in Moreau's
experiments supposed to be, anyway?  Why are the mutant rats isolated to
the boat?  What exactly did Douglas use to pick the lock in his room?  THE
ISLAND OF DR. MOREAU just keeps staggering forward and swinging wildly,
like an overweight boxer without the faintest glimmer of strategy.
     Speaking of overweight...oh, but that's far too easy.  It would be
too simple to observe that when Brando makes his first appearance, covered
in heavy white makeup and a white muu-muu the size of a circus tent, he
looks like nothing so much as the Michelin Man on safari.  It's too simple
and somewhat unfair, because even under the burden of all that weight and
a ridiculous accent, there is still something compelling about Brando on
screen.  His Moreau is what Richard Attenborough should have been trying
to go for as Hammond in JURASSIC PARK, a pleasant enough chap with a
monstrous god complex.  Val Kilmer, who is said to have quite a god
complex in real life, seems to have decided to act in a completely
different film, one which is much more fun.  His Montgomery is a casually
nasty pot-head, but at least he is entertaining to watch, particularly
when he does his dead-on Brando impression.  And poor David Thewlis, whose
character has no common sense and no particular reason for being a U.N.
peace negotiator (you'd think that might have been a useful subtext to the
war which breaks out on the island), tries to look frightened by more than
the lack of direction in the film, with little success.
     The production design for THE ISLAND OF DR. MOREAU is quite sharp,
and Stan Winston's make-up effects are worth a nod of recognition; it is
also interesting to find Ron Perlman (of TV's "Beauty and the Beast") once
more buried under mounds of makeup as the Sayer of the Law.  But this is a
badly fragmented piece of work which manages to achieve tedium in only 96
minutes.  Perhaps some day they will make a documentary about the making
of the film, like they did with APOCALYPSE NOW in HEARTS OF DARKNESS.
Then maybe it won't have been a total loss.

Author
Max Scheinin
When I was in 5th grade a teacher, speaking to the class, said "F- isn't a
grade; it's sarcasm". The Island Of Doctor Moreau is an F- movie. Watching
it is a painful excperience. It's the most over the top, campy,
ridiculously silly film I have ever seen. As a comedy it's really enjoyable
(ex: A friend and I were both rolling with laughter in the scene where you
first see Moreau's daughter ). I'm not even sure if the filmmakers wanted
you to take it seriously. It's hard to think they did. The embarrasing
camera work, the terrible closeups, the bad monster make-up makes for an
abysmal movie. Earlier that year I was sure no movie could be worse then,
say, Spy Hard.  I was wrong. Moreau does Ed Wood Proud.
 But why? It had potential. The credits are fascinating, the first scene is
terrific. It  has a wonderful cast ( Val Kilmer and Marlon Brando, both in
embarrasing performances ). When did it go over the top? They must have
lost all perspective ( it's hard to not laugth out loud at the "five finger
man" scene ). The movie is, in all seriousness, probably the worst one I
have ever seen. Counting Mortal Combat. Counting WaterWorld. Counting The
Fifth Element, and Spy Hard . Part of what makes it so awful is it's
disrespect for the audience. 
Great movies are never forgotten. I will never forget the sights of
Vertigo, Psycho, The World Of Apu, City Lights, Modern Times, Battleship
Potemkin, Singin' In The Rain, Casablanca or Citizen Kane 
( etc. ). The Island Of Doctor Moreau could have been a great movie.
Instead it settled for being  one of the worst ever. I remember that upon
it's initial release I saw a blurb in the newspaper: "Moreau is haunting!"
it bragged. I agree.

Author
Yamamoto
There I was, chillin' as usual and what do I see on the bus?  I see
this woman who wanted to get off but didn't know that she was
supposed to step down into the stairwell so she yells "back door"
to the driver.  And another girl yells "step down."  Of course the
woman gets to get off without further incidence but the girl says
"I guess people don't read the signs" while eating sunflower seeds
right under the no food sign.  Since when did we start accepting
hypocrites as a daily norm?
Speaking of counter productive behavior, ISLAND OF DR MOREAU came
out and I had to go check it out.  It's about this doctor who's
doing this genetic research in a secluded island in south Pacific
and the inhabitants he made.  Of course something goes wrong for
the plot to develop.  And yes, there is one survivor who's going to
be able to tell the tale for others.
1 mammary scene.  9 dead bodies.  2 doz bullets.  38 on the vomit
meter.  No moon shots.  What we got here are:  more counter
productive behavior on the raft-fu, attack of killer shark-fu,
search and rescue party-fu, IV-fu, a shot from hell-fu, rabbits-fu,
dancing in the rain-fu, attack of killer flower child-fu, locking
door-fu, piano concert-fu, and of course cat chase-fu.  Video hall
of fame nominations to David Thewlis for saying stuff like "I'll be
back" and to Fairuza Balk for saying stuff like "I'm reverting." 
Of course to Marlon Brando for saying stuff like "I am closer than
you can possibly imagine" and to Val Kilmer for saying stuff like
"You'll like it, well, I like it."  One and a half star.  Shaggy
Bob says wicked!
Spoiler - Stories based on Victorian era science may have a
tendency to not to follow the science practiced today but they
usually have a really good idea.  And this one is of no exception. 
The problem is, that was all they had.  Ok, the make up for the
animal people were cool but how far can make up take you?  No plot
gets in the way of the story line.  And you certainly aren't going
to sympathize with any of the characters unless you're one of those
animal rights activist who's bordering on insanity.
If you're waiting for a call from Jenny McCarthy, stand by the
phone.  You ain't gonna miss much.  And if she does call, don't
take her to this flick.
Alien Alert!  Bill signed the welfare reform bill which Bob said it
was Republican idea.  My question is, what's going to happen in 2
years?  Better yet, what's going to happen in 5 years when people
can't get more aid?  Don't get me wrong, I'm all for abolishing
welfare but it would be irrisponsible to take away people's
dependancy without replacing it with something so that they won't
revert back to the cycle of handouts.  I bet you in 5 years that
both parties are going to blame each other for the mess they
created which the librals are going to blow it out of proportion.
For wisdom according to Shaggy Bob, hit that Reply key now.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE ISLAND OF DR.MOREAU ** 1/2.  Directed by John 
Frankenheimer. Written by Richard Stanley and Ron 
Hutchinson, based on the novel by H.G.Wells. 
Photography,William A. Fraker. Editing, Paul Rubell. 
Production design, Graham "Grace" Walker. Costumes, 
Norma Moriceau. Special creature and makeup effects, 
Stan Winston. Music, Gary Chang. Produced by Edward 
R. Pressman. Cast: Marlon Brando (Dr. Moreau), Val 
Kilmer (Mr. Montgomery), David Thewlis (Edward 
Douglas), Fairuza Balk (Aissa), Ron Perlman (Sayer 
of the Law), Temuera Morrison (Azazello), et al. A 
New Line release. Cinema. 105 minutes. Rated PG-13 
but can frighten many youngsters. 
One hundred years ago the visionary writer H.G.Wells 
published "The Island of Dr. Moreau" in which a 
scientist transformed animals into something like 
humans.
In 1933, the novel was  filmed as "The Island of 
Lost Souls."  The ruler of the remote Pacific Island 
was played by Charles Laughton as a merciless, 
whip-cracking plantation owner. With talented gusto, 
he hammed up his verbal and body English. The film 
was once banned in Britain for its vivisection 
scenes, tame by today's standards. According to 
historian Carlo Clarens, "Wells openly repudiated 
the picture as a vulgarization of his novel." But 
then both book and movie were more effective as 
horror than as science.  
Its director Erle C.Kenton was a prolific, minor 
figure who tried various genres, including comedies 
with W.C. Fields or Abbott and Costello, 
Frankenstein derivatives, whodunits. Some were 
pretty good  but Kenton is only remembered for 
"Moreau", his "magnum opus."
The Don Taylor remake in1977 went back to the Wells 
title, starred Burt Lancaster, lasted 34 minutes 
longer, was more serious and eager, played pretty 
well but did not dethrone its predecessor.
Now the second remake has a director who came in on 
a "troubled" picture.  John Frankenheimer was one of 
the major new filmmakers of the 1960s, with good to 
excellent films in a variety of genres and with an 
almost unbroken  string of successes : "The Young 
Savages" (with Burt Lancaster); "Birdman of 
Alcatraz";  the legendary, paranoid political 
thriller "The Manchurian Candidate";  the military 
conspiracy thriller "Seven Days in May" (Lancaster, 
Fredric March, Kirk Douglas); the WWII adventure 
"The Train" (Lancaster); the racing story "Grand 
Prix"; the haunting, sinister sci-fi rebirth 
thriller "Seconds," one of the best pictures of the 
decade and possibly Rock Hudson's top role; "The 
Fixer"; "The Gypsy Moths."  
There was a decline in the 70s, except for "The 
Iceman Cometh," "French Connection II," and "Black 
Sunday" (1977).It continued into the 80s and early 
90s, when Frankenheimer made only about six 
features.
The fans of the director were pinning their hopes on 
"Dr. Moreau." Alas, this is not a comeback movie.  
It is not bad, but it just isn't good enough either. 
In it, David Thewlis (who triumphed in "Naked") 
plays Edward Douglas, an Englishman on a U.N. 
mission and the sole survivor of a plane crash in 
the Malay Sea. (The aquatic parts and all else are 
shot beautifully by veteran, versatile master 
cinematographer William Fraker, now 73). 
Rescued by the mysterious Val Kilmer, Thewlis is led 
to the island where he becomes a guest-prisoner. He 
discovers that Nobel prize-winner Dr.Moreau (Brando) 
had been there for 17 years, after being thrown out 
of the USA by animal righters. Kilmer, his factotum 
for 10 years, is ambiguous, takes drugs, perhaps 
aspires to become the new Moreau. He gives a 
wickedly good imitation of Brando.
Moreau works with genetic engineering, creating 
beings from "animals fused with human genes," in 
search of the perfect homo sapiens. He fabricates 
horrible-looking monsters, a gallery of mutants with 
endless combinations like parts of two animals along 
the human side. He calls them "my children."  His 
only near-total  accomplishment is beautiful Aissa, 
but even she needs regular potion fixes so as not to 
regress into savagery.  
The Law of the isle is a vegeterian version of Thou 
Shalt Not Kill. Infractions, unlike in the original 
movie in which the critters were punished by torture 
in The House of Pain, are dealt with through  
electronic implants. With a touch of a button in his 
remote-control gizmo, Moreau can send a culprit 
writhing in pain. 
Soon, the frightened, disgusted Douglas, along with 
the frightened and illogical Aissa (doesn't she know 
that without her doses she'll revert to a beast?) 
try to escape and are caught. Then the beast-people, 
do the Spartacist thing and revolt... Then Douglas 
discovers files and vials with his name on them. 
Then....
The movie is rich in visuals and effects, many of 
them splendidly computerized.  But they are 
counter-productive in their excess. Past the 
well-handled first part, you can't see the forest 
for the trees, the continuity becomes messy,  many 
incoherences enter the film. Metaphors abound--the 
expected ones like "Don't tamper with the work of 
Nature," "Don't fool with evolution," "There is a 
beast inside each human." Yet more specific 
connections to our waning century's crucial issues 
of DNA, gene-splicing and the like, are buried under 
the confused/confusing script. 
What is new and positive are the movie's funny 
aspects, whether planned or not.  Marlon Brando is a 
hoot. His first public appearance is in a 
Brandonmobile, the analog to the Popemobile. Sitting 
high, looking like a Kabuki Buddha, a Deity with a 
huge tent-hat and veils, Marlon even blesses his 
flock from above. Perhaps the filmmakers also had in 
mind a Rajah nodding to his subjects from atop an 
elephant? 
Brandon, thinking that his Moreau is allergic to 
heat and sun rays, convinced Frankenheimer that 
because of the destruction of the ozone layer, the 
doctor's  face had to be marmeladed over with a 
white, oozy sunscreen. A howl. That's not all. 
Moreau's mumbo-jumbo explanations are 
tongue-in-cheek. Outrageously and ludicrously 
delivered, they're quite comical.
We wonder where all this state-of-the-art medical 
and electronic equipment came from, and was bought 
with what money? But 
leaving logic in the Malay Sea, we can enjoy every 
single scene with Brando. He sits at a grand piano, 
with his smallest "son" (a dwarf's dwarf in size-- 
how did they do it?) at a child's piano that belongs 
to the Guinness Book of Records as the minusculest 
functioning grand ever. Together they tinkle away a 
four-hand rendition of Chopin's Polonaise No 6. They 
are very pleased with themselves. 
Later, when the now carnivorous humanoids invade the 
room and bang on the pianos, Moreau, trying to 
soothe them, tells them that the sounds are most 
interesting: "Reminds me of a man called 
Schoenberg... 12-tone music." He proceeds to attempt 
calming the savage breasts with Gershwin's "Rhapsody 
in Blue."
Watching this re-remake you seesaw between high camp 
and monstrosities, including a scene that brings to 
mind Nazi crematoria.  Animal lovers will be 
saddened at the moral and physical uglification of 
beasts. When Moreau's Law ceases to work, it's the 
law of the Jungle that prevails, but by now we all 
know that this law, once maligned, is an exquisitely 
complex, beautiful construct.
The movie could use much more simplification on one 
hand, subtlety and complexity on the other, instead 
of ending up as just a Grand Guignol spectacle. 
Still, Brando's screen time is worth the price of 
the ticket. In French, super-artists are called 
"sacred monsters." That's what Brando still is, 
especially here.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
    The third screen adaptation of H.G. Wells' century-old novel is the
worst of two warring worlds:  it's neither suspenseful enough to be
scary nor outrageous enough to qualify as a camp classic.  Marlon Brando
is well-cast as the mad scientist who lives on a remote South Pacific
island, where he can experiment on animals and play God in peace.
Brando plays the part as a continuation of his Kurtz character from
APOCALYPSE NOW, turning every scene of his into an intentional exercise
in absurdity.  His jaw-dropping late arrival-- wearing chalky white
make-up under a billowing white muumuu, among other odd accouterments--
will be long-remembered by film scholars.  And has the summer seen a
stranger sight than that of Brando behind a piano, playing excerpts from
"Rhapsody in Blue" to a roomful of mutant monsters?  As the mad
scientist's mad assistant, Val Kilmer rivals with a doped-up performance
that's almost as audacious.  (Stay awake for a dead-on impersonation of
the big guy, which Val delivers toward the end.) Alas, nothing else in
this movie even comes close to working the way it should.  The human
elements never connect, the animal actors look ridiculous, and any
affecting social commentary is saved for the last sixty seconds. 
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Marlon Brando, Val Kilmer, David Thewlis, Fairuza Balk, 
      Ron Perlman, Temuera Morrison, Marco Hofschneider, 
      William Hootkins
Director: John Frankenheimer
Producer: Edward R. Pressman
Screenplay: Walon Green, Michael Herr, Ron Hutchinson, and 
      Richard Stanley, based on the story by H.G. Wells
Cinematography: William A. Fraker
Music: Gary Chang
U.S. Distributor: New Line Cinema
     In THE STRANGE CASE OF DR. JEKYLL AND MR. HYDE, Robert Louis 
Stevenson examined the nature of good and evil by externalizing a 
normally-internal struggle.  Similarly, in THE ISLAND OF DR. MOREAU, 
H.G. Wells explored the differences between man and beast by taking a 
battle that normally occurs deep in the heart (the civilized aspect of 
one's nature versus the bestial one) and realizing it in a concrete 
manner.  There's also a none-too-subtle message about the dangers of 
letting the advancements of science outstrip corresponding ethics.  As 
originally envisioned by Wells, THE ISLAND OF DR. MOREAU is a tale of 
great substance; as re-invented by director John Frankenheimer (THE 
MANCHURIAN CANDIDATE), it's disappointingly shallow and pointless.  
    This is, in fact, the third time the H.G. Wells story has been 
brought to the screen.  The first, called THE ISLAND OF LOST SOULS, was 
made in 1933.  Filmed in black-and-white with Charles Laughton as Dr. 
Moreau, it's a chilling (if somewhat outdated) look at what happens when 
a man plays god.  44 years later, with Burt Lancaster in the title role, 
a color version of THE ISLAND OF DR. MOREAU opened in theaters.  
Arguably better than the original, this uses state-of-the-art makeup to 
augment an adventure that still has time to consider the philosophical 
implications of its subject matter.  Now, in 1996, we are saddled with 
another remake.  And, while it might have been possible to argue the 
merits of this version of THE ISLAND OF DR. MOREAU if it had offered 
something more than the others, the sad truth is that it offers much 
less.  For, while the creatures look better than in even the 1977 
version, the heart and soul of the story have been gutted, leaving 
behind a hollow, chaotic nightmare.
     Somewhere under the debris left by a script credited to four 
screenwriters lie the remnants of Wells' story, but the original tale is 
distorted and diluted not only by the need to "modernize" it, but the 
desire to emphasize visual effects and pyrotechnics over drama.  (So 
what else is new this summer?)  When the movie opens, we're introduced 
to Englishman Edward Douglas (David Thewlis), the lone survivor of a 
plane crash.  He's drifting around on the ocean in a life raft when a 
ship captained by an American named Montgomery (Val Kilmer) rescues him.  
Then, as he's being treated for dehydration, he's taken to the isolated 
island of Montgomery's mentor, the Nobel Prize-winning Doctor Moreau 
(Marlon Brando), to await transportation back to civilization.  Almost 
immediately, Edward becomes aware that some very strange things are 
taking place there.  Moreau is experimenting with splicing animal and 
human DNA.  In trying to engineer the perfect creature, an entity that 
is "pure, harmonious, and free of malice", he has created a gallery of 
grotesquely malformed "beast-men".  The prize of his collection is his 
"daughter", Aissa (Fairuza Balk), a real "pussycat."
     THE ISLAND DR. MOREAU gets off to a promising start.  Steeped in an 
atmosphere that grows more ominous and eerie with each scene, the first 
half hour promises far more than what the rest of the production 
delivers.  The film's middle portion, while watchable, makes us aware 
that the script wasn't written for thinking viewers.  It's during the 
concluding half hour, however, that the movie's house-of-cards storyline 
collapses.  Nothing much makes sense, and the climax seems to exist 
solely as an opportunity to show off a few reasonably impressive 
explosions.  
     The acting varies from bad to awful.  During the last fifteen-plus 
years, Marlon Brando has been in the habit of taking small roles for 
obscene sums of money.  His cameo performances are typically terrible, 
and his interpretation of Moreau follows the pattern.  He's only on 
screen for about fifteen minutes, and, while there, his amazing girth is 
far more likely to capture our attention than his acting.  Meanwhile, 
David Thewlis and Val Kilmer seem to be in a contest to see who can ham 
it up more.  To be fair, Fairuza Balk (GAS FOOD LODGING) does a credible 
job of mixing kittenish and human qualities, but, although she creates 
the only sympathetic character in the entire film, she is underused.  
Other members of the cast, including Ron Perlman (THE CITY OF LOST 
CHILDREN) and Temuera Morrison (ONCE WERE WARRIORS), are unrecognizable 
beneath Stan Winston's makeup.
     Insultingly, Frankenheimer concludes the movie with a short sermon 
about the fine line that separates man from beast.  If the director 
actually wanted to get this point across, he should have worked it into 
the film rather than tacking it on as an afterthought.  It is, after 
all, an integral aspect of the source material.  That it has been so 
thoroughly excised from the main plot isn't THE ISLAND OF DR. MOREAU's 
only problem, but it's symptomatic of the flawed mindset that went into 
planning this occasionally incoherent and ultimately disappointing 
motion picture.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Marlon Brando; Val Kilmer; David Thewlis & Fairuza Balk
The Island Of Dr. Moreau has gotten a lot of bad press, most of it
undeserved. It centers on a man named Douglas (David Thewlis), a survivor of
a ship lost at sea, he is rescued by a fishing boat. This particular boat is
carrying another passenger, a guy by the name of Montgomery (Val Kilmer),
who offers to help Douglas. The fishing vessel is heading to the remote
island where Montgomery works as a scientist, and he offers to let Douglas
stay there until help arrives for him. It turns out the island is a research
station run by the once famous Dr. Moreau (Marlon Brando), who had dropped
out of site years ago. It seems that Moreau has been doing genetic
experiments, namely blending human DNA with that of animals, in order to
create a more perfect being. Well, he hasn't been real successful up to this
point, and the results of his work roam the island. These half human half
whatever (depending on the individual) are wild and kept in line only by
their fear of Moreau's henchmen. To make a long story short, Moreau loses
control over these creatures, and the results are not pleasant.
Marlon Brando, after you get over the shock of is enormous size, shows just
why he is one of the world's greatest actors. His part is not huge, but when
he is on camera he can hold your attention. (I was left thinking what a
shame it is that this talent has been left largely wasted these last few
years, partly due to his living as a recluse, and of course partly due to
the fact that he appears to never leave the buffet table.) Val Kilmer's
character, Montgomery, had absolutely no redeeming qualities. You pretty
much root for this guy to get knocked off from the word go. David Thewlis
puts on a fairly good performance as the man who is basically in the wrong
place at the wrong time. Fairuza Balk, one of the most underrated actresses
in Hollywood, does a great job as Moreaus tormented daughter. Although some
of the movies best performances come from the many actors who are buried
under piles of makeup as the creatures. A real credit to both actors and
writers as they don't get a great deal of meaningful screen time. The
creature makeup and effects are amazing -- this was not a low budget
production.
As genetic experimentation becomes more and more prevalent in the scientific
community, the creatures that populate this island don't seem all that far
fetched. Which makes the fact that the novel on which this movie was based
was written many years ago by H.G. Wells
This is a good film, it's not for everyone, and a bit gorey in places, but
it makes a great alternative to a traditional horror film.

Author
Michael Redman
Remember the scene near the end of "Apocalypse Now" where the boat
finally makes it to the village? What they find is a hidden society
filled with inhabitants involved in strange rituals and run by the
bigger than life God-King Marlon Brando. This film takes that village
even further into the Twilight Zone.
Edward Douglas (David Thewlis) is rescued from a life raft after
drifting for days in the Java sea when his plane crashed on the way to
his assignment as a UN peace negotiator. He is taken to a lush island by
an increasingly crazed doctor -- or is he a vet? -- Montgomery (Val
Kilmer).  The place is run by Dr. Moreau (Marlon Brando) who is splicing
human and various animal DNA in order to create the perfect non-violent
being.
Of course things fall apart. Montgomery starts the dominos tumbling by
killing a rabbit for dinner, then dead rabbits are found around the
island. A manimal is killed because he killed and dirty dog Hyena takes
over. Trouble in paradise. Almighty Brando can't keep them under control
as they revert more and more to their animal selves.
This is the third film based on the H. G. Wells book and is visually
hypnotizing. Each scene on the island is overflowing with mood and
movement. Men, animals and everything inbetween crowd the dark and
mutable screen. Montgomery's warning to Douglas describes the entire
film, "Be careful, there are a lot of unstable phenomena out there." 
Like much of "Apocalypse Now", there's far too much going on to catch it
all and that's the way it's supposed to be. The over-stimulation crowds
your senses, leaving few details, but creating a massive impression of
foggy and breathtaking eeriness.
Brando's Moreau is beyond outlandish as he is carried on a litter,
dressed in a muumuu, coated with pancake makeup and giving forth the law
while swamped and worshipped by his creations. Kilmer is just a bit less
bizarre as the drug doctor heading into insanity. His Brando Junior
impression is a masterpiece of the grotesque and fantastic.
Yeah, the extravagant make-up, sets and dark and murky feel of the film
are grand, but occasionally the story rears its ugly head and that's the
downfall of the movie. The religious overtones are extremely heavy
handed and the add-on preachy montage at the end is just horrid. Very
little happens for a reason. Characterization is minimal and often
sacrificed for sensationalism. We have no idea who any of these people
are or what lead them to the situation they find themselves in. The
animals are easier to care about than the humans.
See this film if you're up for a disturbing visual treat, but don't
expect anything beyond that.
[This appeared in "The Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana,
8/27/96. Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com]

Author
Steve Rybin
Directed by John Frankenheimer.  Starring Marlon Brando, Val Kilmer, 
David Thewlis.  Rated PG-13.
Stan Winston's special effects and William Fraker's wonderful cinema-
tography are the main highlights in this retelling of H.G. Wells' novel.  
The movie has a terrific visceral impact, but it's hard to take it 
seriously at times: Marlon Brando and Val Kilmer both give over-the-top 
performances, and too often the film seem to be going for cheap laughs 
instead of moving the plot forward.
Brando plays Dr. Moreau, a brilliant scientist whose genetic experiments 
have gotten out of control.  Val Kilmer is his right-hand-man, but Kilmer 
doesn't get much screen time here.  David Thewlis' character, the lone 
survivor of a plane crash, becomes trapped on Moreau's island, and it 
doesn't take him long to figure out what is going on.
Frankenheimer's telling of this story is visually exciting and well-made, 
but the film is not quite sure what it wants to be.  For the first hour, 
it's straight-up science fiction with a bit of humor thrown in; the last 
forty minutes or so, it's basically an action-thriller.  It does, however,
 succeed at being consistently bizarre.
Visit "Another Shmuck on the Internet Reviewing Movies"
at http://pages.prodigy.com/oldman/shmuck.html
