Title
Review for Topsy-Turvy (1999)
Number of Reviews
20

Author
Greg King
TOPSY-TURVY (M).  
(October Films/UIP)
Director: Mike Leigh
Stars: Jim Broadbent, Allan Corduner, LesleyManville, Timothy Spall, 
Kevin McKidd, Ron Cook, Wendy Nottingham, Eleanor David, Shirley Henderson,
Dorothy Atkinson, Martin Savage, Vincent Franklin
Running time: 160 minutes.
With hits like The Pirates Of Penzance and HMS Pinafore to
their credit, lyricist William S Gilbert (Jim Broadbent) and composer
Arthur Sullivan (Allan Corduner) are the toast of London theatre in
the latter half of the 19th century.  But by the mid 1880's the pair
have hit a slump as their creativity dries up.  Their latest musical
comedy Princess Ida receives only lukewarm reviews and audiences stay
away in droves.
Gilbert's lyrics have become repetitive and his ideas stretch
credibility.  Meanwhile Sullivan wants to be taken more seriously and
turn his hand to classical compositions rather than light weight
ditties for low brow burlesque shows.  When he steadfastly refuses to
provide the music for Gilbert's latest piece of "topsy-turvydom",
despite their contractual obligations, the pair reach an impasse that
threatens to destroy their friendship and working partnership.  Then
Gilbert's long-suffering but patient wife Kitty (Lesley Manville)
takes him to an exhibition of Japanese culture.  Suddenly inspiration
strikes, and he sets to work on writing The Mikado, arguably their
most enduring and enjoyable work.
Rather than a straightforward biopic tracing the careers of
Gilbert and Sullivan, Topsy-Turvy is an exploration of the backstage
dramas and creative clashes that went into the making of The Mikado,
with plenty of insight into the world of Victorian theatre This
ambitious but beautifully conceived period piece would seem an
uncharacteristic project for award winning director Mike Leigh, whose
films are normally confronting, bleak contemporary dramas exploring
the plight of the urban working classes (Secrets And Lies, etc).
However, under his skilful direction Topsy-Turvy becomes a
surprisingly colourful, robust and vastly entertaining romp.
In typical Leigh fashion, the director also taps into the
darker side of this world, exploring the insecurities and vanities of
the talented pair, and even briefly glimpsing the lives of their
extraordinary theatrical company.  Sex and drugs also rear their
heads, even in these puritanical times.  With meticulous care, Leigh
brings this world to life.  The costumes, set design and production
values are all magnificent, and reek of authenticity.
The wonderful gallery of characters come to life through the
superb performances of a talented, but largely unknown, ensemble cast
that includes Leigh regular Timothy Spall and Kevin McKidd in key
roles.  In particular, the two leads create a wonderful contrast
between the two collaborators, suffusing the film with a mixture of
humour and pathos.  Broadbent stands out as the stiff, bombastic and
emotionally detached Gilbert, while Corduner does a superb job as the
more liberated, free-spirited but ailing Sullivan.
Although the music may not be to the tastes of today's younger
audiences, the wonderful re-enactments of several scenes from The
Mikado are splendid stuff.  Somewhat surprisingly, Topsy-Turvy's 160
minutes just seem to fly past, without many dull spots to slow the
film down.

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre)
Released in the UK by Pathe on February 18, 2000; certificate 12; 160 
minutes; country of origin UK; aspect ratio 1.85:1
Directed by Mike Leigh; produced by Simon Channing-Williams.
Written by Mike Leigh.
Photographed by Dick Pope; edited by Robin Sales.
CAST.....
Jim Broadbent..... William Schwenk Gilbert
Allan Corduner..... Arthur Sullivan
Lesley Manville..... Lucy Gilbert
Ron Cook..... Richard D'Oyly Carte
Timothy Spall..... Richard Temple
Wendy Nottingham..... Helen Lenoir
Kevin McKidd..... Durward Lely
Martin Savage..... George Grossmith
Shirley Henderson..... Leonora Braham
Alison Steadman..... Madame Leon
"Topsy-Turvy", for at least its first hour, is fragmented, unfocused and 
incredibly boring. When it finally settles down to actually following some 
semblance of a story, it gives us some wonderfully witty and perceptive 
moments about the putting on of a theatrical production -- but getting there 
is no mean feat. Watching the movie is like an endurance test to see how 
prepared we are to remain in the cinema, and only after a long while do we 
pass and get rewarded.
The film takes place in London in the late 19th Century, where the team 
behind some of the most successful stage musicals of all time, WS Gilbert 
(Jim Broadbent) and Arthur Sullivan (Allan Corduner), have just released 
"Princess Ida". The show is an international flop, due to sweltering weather 
and reviews that accuse Gilbert and Sullivan of repetitiveness. Sullivan 
agrees with the criticisms, and decides he cannot keep going on writing the 
same material. The partnership seems in jeopardy.
Much is made of this plot point in the early sections of "Topsy-Turvy", and 
yet it does not lead to anything else. Gilbert and Sullivan start to work 
together on "The Mikado" halfway through the film without Sullivan having to 
be won over. There's more: Actors, producers, musicians, friends, relatives 
and business partners are introduced, and then abandoned; some until the end 
of the film, some completely. Several of the main characters are shown to 
have grave weaknesses such as joyless marriages, problems with drugs and 
alcohol, ill health... but none of these things relate to the rest the story.
It's a confusing mishmash of irrelevance, not least because Mike Leigh, the 
writer and director, feels the need to jump in and out of hundreds of 
different locations without ever exploring them. He's never had to explore 
before, since all his previous films have been gritty dramas set in easily 
recognisable modern-day situations; but he does here, because the densely 
cluttered interiors of Victorian London are alien to most of us, and we need 
to get our bearings.
That is easy to do once rehearsals for "The Mikado" begin, because then 
"Topsy-Turvy" spends most of its time in one place -- the theatre. It is 
immensely satisfying to watch songs and dance routines develop, and see 
actors master their lines. Leigh knows this, and allows entire musical 
numbers to act as the payoffs to a lot of his scenes.
As someone who has both directed an independent film and starred in several 
school plays, I also enjoyed "Topsy-Turvy" for its entirely accurate 
depictions of the difficulties that arise when doing such things. Technical 
problems are a mere trifle when actors are making ridiculous complaints about 
their costumes, or not paying attention to directions and testing their own 
terrible ideas on how to play their roles. The picture's best moment comes 
when one of the "Mikado" players suddenly develops another accent, and 
Gilbert stops the rehearsal to say in shocked disbelief: "You've become a 
Cockney!"
It doesn't sound very funny, I know, but the humour is in Broadbent's timing. 
"Topsy-Turvy" features a lot of excellent performances; costume dramas bring 
something miraculous out of British actors -- they're put into different 
worlds, and so the only way to be convincing is to completely inhabit their 
roles. Nobody here does that better than Broadbent, whose eyes are always 
busy, whose mouth is always muttering something to itself -- he really does 
seem to be thinking Gilbert's thoughts.
Rethinking all the film's good qualities, though, leaves me even more 
perplexed at what on earth was going on during its first hour, which is a 
pointless, dreary waste of time made even worse by the fact that my watch was 
broken. Perhaps the projectionist got the reels in the wrong order. 
Topsy-turvy indeed.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Frankie Paiva
A well made period piece is often a tough sell for audiences. Most of these
films are highly dramatic and offer little in the areas of excitement or humor.
Mike Leigh's new film Topsy-Turvy which explores Gilbert and Sullivan in a
career slump breaks all of those rules. Blending a mix of colorful sets, great
music, genuinely funny scenes and dialog, and wonderful performances, this
movie keeps you interested for it's entire 160 minute length.
Famed playwright composer duo Gilbert (Broadbent) and Sullivan (Corduner) have
just opened their latest production, Princess Ida, at the Savoy theater in
England. The audience immediately proclaims it another hit, but the newspaper
theater critic says otherwise. This critic says he sees no progress in artistic
development coming from them, and says he cannot recommend the play. Sullivan
feels the same way, he's tired of using the same music again and again and
wants to write a grand opera, one so fantastic it will blow people away. 
But there are concerns as to their future. The contract with the Savoy says
that they must produce a new play when asked, and while Gilbert has one already
written, Sullivan refuses to compose for he believes it's a rehash of what's
been done before. Gilbert is hard set in a writer's block and doesn't know what
to do. All of this changes when Gilbert is dragged by his wife to a local
Japanese exhibition. He is appalled and intrigued at the same time about the
native way of life there. This inspires him to write a grand play, The Mikado,
a play sure to woo Sullivan back and draw large audiences. But at what price
will it take to get the play onstage?
Another wonderful film that shows the lives of the actor. Offering much more
behind the scenes process than All About My Mother did, it really gives us an
idea of how much work went into these plays. The script was written with these
scenes in mind, and original musical composer Carl Davis (Sullivan himself is
also credited) adds some enchanting music to go along with them. This gives the
film an upbeat pace, despite many of it's sad undertones. The star of the film
has to be the woman (who's name escapes me) who researched the time period for
the film. There are many great touches that really give us a feel for the era,
including a very humorous scene in which Gilbert uses a telephone, which were
just being introduced in their time. Leigh does a wonderful job of shifting the
focus throughout the movie. For the first hour we are drawn into Sullivan's
problems and by the 100 minute mark, we have nicely switched over to Gilbert's
troubles. Other examples of this include the plights of various Savoy players
who've been in all the plays the two created. Much of the humor is bittersweet,
and really keeps this thing chugging along. While the length is an issue for
some, so many of the scenes are carefully selected that you never get bored
with redundant information. The only scene I thought was unneeded was an early
scene where Sullivan watches two bare breasted women perform some type of
mini-musical. If this scene had been removed, it easily could have achieved a
PG-13 rating. And you haven't seen anything until you see Gilbert pretending to
be a Japanese Samurai warrior.
All of the actors (and actors playing actors) really bring their characters to
life. Towards the end, I found myself forgetting that this was a movie, that
while fact based, was not entirely true. I felt like I was there, watching the
entire thing happen. Another great film to add to Mike Leigh's filmography, and
another great film that might change the way period pieces are made. This is
fun, energetic, and at times exciting, bravo Gilbert and Sullivan, I give you a
standing ovation.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     TOPSY-TURVY is not a bio-pic in the conventional sense of the term.
It's a bio-pic in the Mike Leigh sense of the term, which may be
redundant. However, it may not even be appropriate to call it a Mike Leigh
film in the conventional sense of the term. Leigh has spent most of his
career on contemporary character studies, structuring scripts out of
character improvisations. One does not think of period pieces when one
thinks of Mike Leigh, nor would one likely think of him as the ideal
film-maker to look behind the scenes at the creation of Gilbert &
Sullivan's "The Mikado." How would this fashioner of human drama approach
the fashioning of light opera?
     As it turns out, he does so with detail, detail and more detail --
occasionally to nerve-wracking excess. The story opens in 1884, where
"Princess Aida" -- the latest creation of the immensely popular team of
lyricist William S. Gilbert (Jim Broadbent) and composer Arthur Sullivan
(Allan Corduner) -- is receiving tepid notices for the excessive
familiarity of its themes. Gilbert responds defensively, retiring to write
his latest fanciful libretto, while the ailing Sullivan resolves never to
write light opera again. He is persuaded to reconsider when Gilbert
attends a Japanese exposition and comes up with one of his most original
ideas in years. But the concept for "The Mikado" is only the beginning of
the arduous process of staging it.
     When TOPSY-TURVY finally hits its stride, with Gilbert's visit to the
exposition, it's an extraordinarily entertaining piece of work. Leigh
dives into the pre-production process with gusto, exploring every possible
element of a theater company's work. The rehearsal scene, in which Gilbert
attends to the details of pacing and the inconvenient absence of two
actors, is hilarious even in its attention to the mundane; a scene of
Gilbert using Japanese women as advisors for cultural authenticity has a
similarly unexpected charm. Leigh even finds drama in the finances of
theater, creating a nice scene in which the theater's manager (Ron
Cook) negotiates salary with featured performer George Grossmith (Martin
Savage). You know a film-maker is doing something write when he can wring
comedy out of a wardrobe session, and drama out of whether or not a song
will be cut from the production.
     It would be easy to embrace TOPSY-TURVY unreservedly if Leigh seemed
to know what to cut from his own production. Even at 160 minutes, the film
never seems tedious; it does, however, seem unnecessarily meandering.
There are detours into Sullivan's European trip to recharge his batteries,
brief explorations of Gilbert's contentious relationship with his mother
and a late surge of sympathy for Gilbert's perpetually abandoned wife
(Lesley Manville). Leigh also goes overboard in the inclusion of musical
numbers, giving us full-scale recreations of at least a half-dozen songs
from three different productions. While the inclusion of some Gilbert and
Sullivan work would seem necessary as context, Leigh takes too much
liberty with the length and breadth of his musical interludes. By the end
of TOPSY-TURVY, you may feel you've sat through "Princess Aida" and "The
Mikado" in their entirety.
     In most films, the extra weight would probably have sunk the whole
endeavor. Blessedly, TOPSY-TURVY is that rare film that gets better with
every passing minute, building to that enchanting final hour of
preparation for production. Still more blessedly, Leigh has put together
another superb cast to give the scenes as much bite as possible, including
Leigh veterans like Alison Steadman (LIFE IS SWEET) and Timothy Spall
(SECRETS & LIES). Most blessedly of all, he has Allan Corduner and Jim
Broadbent in his lead roles giving two of the best performances of the
year. Broadbent's Gilbert has a bit more to work with -- and hence the
showier part -- but Corduner's more amiable, artistic integrity-bound
Sullivan is a delight as well. Leigh covers a lot of ground in TOPSY-TURVY
-- perhaps, ultimately, too much -- but he has the good sense to come back
around to the good stuff. The result is a biography as singular as Leigh
himself: messy, insightful and, of course, very human.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The Savoy Theatre, London, March 14, 1885, saw the world premiere
performance of the Gilbert and Sullivan operetta THE MIKADO, quite
possibly the most popular operetta ever written.  Mike Leigh whose
films of late have dealt with the slice of life problems of the lower
classes instead this time tells us the story of the birth of this
operetta, one that almost did not make it to the stage after a
production beset with problems.
     As the film opens Sir Arthur Sullivan (Allan Corduner) is ailing.
As he sees the end of his life coming, he wants to get on to writing
serious music.  Sullivan would like to write a major serious opera.  He
had written the scores for several William Gilbert (Jim Broadbent)
comic librettos, but he has decided that he should get on with his
serious writing while he still could.  Gilbert had come to the end of
creative streak and his new plays were sounding a lot like his old
plays.  Sullivan wished to remain friends with Gilbert, but wanted no
more to do with their partnership.  Gilbert, whom Broadbent plays as
witty without being really intelligent, is bewildered at the loss of
his partner.  In a nick of time a traveling fair from Japan gives
Gilbert the inspiration to set a story in Japan.
     For once it may be good for the viewer to know ahead of time that
the story is leading to the production of THE MIKADO.  Otherwise the
first half-hour or so would seem aimless and pointless.  Watching the
elements collect in the early stages of the formation of a classic is
much like watching the dust collect in the early stages of the
formation of a star.  There is not much to see.
     Speaking of stars, this film has been cast with very few.  Leigh
has chosen mostly lessor luminaries but nonetheless quality actors for
nearly every role.  He intends the draw to be curiosity about the
subject matter rather than to see any well-known actor's next film.  On
seeing the film I had to say that the only face familiar to me was that
of Jim Broadbent, and him I knew from BBC imports.  This is an
intelligent policy with so many good but unknown actors to choose from
in Britain.
     By the second half of the film it is clear what we are seeing.  We
see some extended shots of the preparation, much as we would see in a
current documentary.  In very realistic style we will see three or four
actors on a stage going over the minutiae of how to pronounce the words
of the script and where to put emphasis in the lines.  Acting seems to
have changed very little in 115 years.  Elsewhere we see negotiations
over what will and will not be worn for costumes.  Through it all
Gilbert is demanding to tyrannical.  In one incident he cuts a well-
liked song a day before production making very clear that the cast has
performed it excellently, but that his own song is at fault.  The cast
is willing to take Gilbert's treatment, but rebels because they think
the song should be performed.
     One stylistic problem is the detailed inclusion of a scene in a
bordello.  It seems out of place with the rest of the film and
certainly it would seem that the nudity could be implied rather than
graphic.  The scene seems to be calculated to give the film a more
profitable rating, as there is little else in the film worthy of more
than a PG-rating.  Arthur Sullivan's dilemma of having to choose
between creating popular crowd-pleasing entertainment or high art
revisits an argument carried on in such films as SULLIVAN'S TRAVELS and
THE WHOLE WIDE WORLD.  Leigh who wrote and directed is clearly a fan of
Gilbert and Sullivan as a duo and would clearly vote for Sullivan's
staying with popular art.  Most of the film takes place in rooms, but
the film creates a very credible version of England in the 1880s.
     Mike Leigh gives us a very credible view of what it must have been
like to be present at the production of THE MIKADO.  It gives more than
a little insight into similarities and differences in the creative
process 115 years ago and today.  I give it an 8 on the 0 to 10 scale
and a high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Jim Broadbent, Allan Corduner, Lesley Manville, Eleanor David,
Ron Cook. Directed by Mike Leigh. Rated R.
I think I missed something here. I have seen cream-of-the-crop critics,
whom I greatly respect, name Mike Leigh's Topsy-Turvy the absolute best
film of 1999. I'm not trying to sling mud on their decision -- maybe
their choice was a valid one. But I just don't see where they are
coming from. The movie is rock-solid: I enjoyed it tremendously and
thought it was a 3 hours well spent. But best movie of the year?
Goodness, no. But if ever there was a movie that's actually easy to
overpraise, this would have to be it right here.
At first glance, this elaborate costume drama seems like a bizarre
choice for Mike Leigh, acclaimed British director of more human dramas
like Naked and Secrets and Lies but after closer examination you
realize that Topsy-Turvy has quite a bit in common with those films. It
is the story of notorious playwrights Gilbert and Sullivan --
fictionalized, I'm sure -- and their struggles with success, the idea
of being the "kings of Topsy-Turvydom," as well as their personal mini-
rivalries.
Allan Corduner plays composer Sullivan as a pretentious man,
dissatisfied with the pair's 10 hits in a row. He doesn't like the
fluffiness of their work, the relative insignificance of it. He wants
to do something more significant, like a real opera, something to show
for himself. He has kidney problems and goes on a "recovery trip" to
Europe. When he gets back to Britain, he meets again with his artistic
partner Gilbert (Jim Broadbent) and, for the first time, refuses to
work with his latest scenario, dismissing it as sheer folly at a time
when he wants to do something that will be remembered.
Gilbert is faced with a dilemma: Sullivan refuses to set his piece and
the theater owner who puts on their plays is pressuring them for
another (they're currently reviving one of their classics). He searches
for inspiration and gets it when his wife takes him to a Japanese
culture festival. He has a good time and when he gets back home, he
realizes that he has his next play at his fingertips: "The Mikado."
Leigh's production is distinguished by obsessively meticulous attention
to detail. He takes the time to actually put on good chunks of Gilbert
& Sullivan's plays and it seems he has spent at least half of Topsy-
Turvy's budget just setting them up. Though I sometimes wonder about
the purpose of having so much play footage, which stretches the movie's
running time to nearly three hours, I have to admit that it does look
good, as well as authentic (Leigh spent a lot of time working in
theater as well as film).
The more interesting of the two playwrights is definitely Gilbert, who
is portrayed as a man afraid of his own success. At one point, he
almost sabotages his own show by cutting out a crucial song. When The
Mikado is first put on, he wanders the street for most of the
performance and when he gets back, the first thing he asks is "How bad
was it?" Sullivan doesn't come off as quite that complicated; he's an
adulterer and an operetta composer with delusions of grandeur. Still,
this is a human story: the characters' inner conflicts (as shown here)
are actually vastly more interesting than the body of their work.
Both Corduner and Broadbent are relative unknowns in Hollywood and
since this is the polar opposite of what we would call a "Star
Vehicle," casting them was probably a good idea. This goes double
considering that they turn out to be top-notch actors as well. Leigh
could not have asked for more from their performances. Broadbent is
especially effective, funny when he needs to be but also human and
affecting.
The movie is chock full of great acting, great sets, great costumes,
great lines and even some (sketchy) character complexity. For that I am
most greatful. But when people say that this is the best movie of the
year, I say there needs to be more. I certainly don't mean to belittle
this effort, though. Indeed, a job well done.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Have you ever wondered about the self-destructiveness of
showbiz groups? No matter how successful their association,
they tend to break up, the individuals rarely doing as well
thereafter as when they were part of a flourishing team. 
Even when the entertainers stay together, personality
clashes cause uncomfortable friction.  Everyone knows that
long-term collaborators Andrew Lloyd Webber and Tim Rice
are not two peas in a pod.  We have less information about
the compatibility of Betty Comden with Adolph Green or Ira
Gershwin with his brother George, Alan Jay Lerner with
Frederick Loewe or George S. Kaufman with Moss Hart. 
Better known is the discord between William Schwenck
Gilbert and Sir Arthur Sullivan, librettist and composer
respectively of some of the world's most celebrated, joyous,
and satiric operettas.  Mike Leigh, known for his imaginative
"Secrets and Lies" and for his less accessible "Naked," has
just come out with a ravishing biopic about the two great
composers of English operetta focusing (in the first half) on
their discord while opening the movie up to a gorgeous
second half featuring scenes from "The Mikado."  This is the
not the first time that G&S have had their lives translated to
the screen.  In 1953 Sidney Gilliat directed "The Great Gilbert
and Sullivan" (known in Britain as "The Story of Gilbert and
Sullivan"), which critic Leonard Maltin cited as "a flavorful
biography of operetta composers with many highlights from
their works."
    Viewers who have mixed feelings about the film are
likely to say that the first part drags while the second picks up
in spectacle and entertainment value, but this is to disparage
the subtle ways that Mike Leigh signifies the musical duo's
conflict.  They don't come out with fists flying in the style of
David Fincher's "Fight Club" nor do they shout like  Al Pacino
in "The Insider."  These folks are British, after all, and they
sublimate their anger into their works, fourteen musical
compositions which lightly and effectively satirize the British
government and society of their Victorian times.  As director
Leigh graphically but delicately shows us, on the surface the
incident which almost caused their falling out occurred after
the critical and box-office flop in 1884 of the operetta
"Princess Ida" whose libretto was written by William
Schwenck Gilbert (Jim Broadbent) and composed and
directed by his colleague, Sir Arthur Sullivan (Allan
Corduner).  At that point, Sullivan is ready to break the
contract that the creative people had with producer Richard
D'oyly Carte (Ron Cook) to come up with a new work every
year because, Sullivan insists, the topsy-turvy (not believable)
plots turned out by the librettist, all loose ends neatly tied
together with contrived finales, were banal.  After carefully
taking in the many details woven into this stunning tapestry of
a musical biopic, however, you might conclude that below the
surface, what matters most are the personality differences. 
Gilbert is married, a cranky and uptight fellow who is shown
to be uncomfortable with success and who has disappointed
his wife--whom he has not let into his world.  Sullivan, by
contrast, is more of a free-living, easy-to-get-along with sort,
of mild disposition, living with a mistress--a decidedly
un-Victorian arrangement.  One suspects that another cause
of friction is the envy that Gilbert might have felt that he,
unlike his partner, had not yet been given a title by the
Queen.  They are so estranged, in fact, that quite a bit of
time passes in the film before we see the two men in the
same frame.
   Happily for the partnership, success comes when Lucy
Gilbert (Lesley Manville), who is the librettist's wife, takes him
kicking and screaming to a Japanese exhibition in London
where Gilbert gets the idea for a new production of grander
design and more resonance than anything done before. 
Thus, "The Mikado" is born.
   Like Artisan Entertainment's "Illuminata," directed by John
Turturro, this USA/October release takes us behind the stage
to see what goes on during rehearsals--the personal
problems and anxieties faced by the performers, the conflicts
that at least two of the company have with the costume
designer, the heartbreak caused when the cantankerous
Gilbert decides just one day before the opening night of "The
Mikado" to cut a major song delivered by its star, Richard
Temple (Timothy Spall).  These being Victorian times, the
backstage scenarios highlight the priggishness of one
performer who insists that wearing a Japanese outfit that runs
down only to his knees would be undignified--to which the
costume designer indignantly responds that he had carefully
researched the outfits worn by the Japanese of medieval
times.  
   While "Topsy-Turvy" is a departure from Mike Leigh's usual
slice-of-life bent, the director makes clever use of fast-
forwards to advance from the rehearsal of a single scene to
its execution, then returns to the preparation period only to
advance once again to the final, costumed delivery of the
scene.  The music is glorious and, in fact, the polished
performances of this talented ensemble makes me lose some
of the regard I've had for productions seen years ago which,
by contrast, seem like amateur hour.  The principal
reservation I have is that those in the audience who may not
be aficionados of G&S works will leave the theater in the dark
about the themes of the compositions.  Just what is "The
Mikado"--a piece which lampoons British society but which
distances the satire by situating the action in Japan?  Leigh's
dialogue is as witty as his direction is fluid and surely, come
awards time, costume designer Lindy Hemming and
production designer Eve Stuart should garner nominations. 
Sir Arthur Sullivan's music has been adapted for this picture
by Carl Davis, all photographed by Dick Pope on location in
Hertfordshire, Surrey and London as well as in a studio.
Rated R.  Running Time: 160 minutes.  (C) 1999
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Jerry Saravia
To be perfectly honest (as I usually am), I was not exactly looking forward to
a film about the musical operetta kings Gilbert and Sullivan. Why you might
ask? Because I am not a big fan of musicals in general, and musicals by any
composer, even Stephen Sondheim, are not exactly my cup of tea. On the other
hand, excluding my naivete for a moment, I was deeply enthralled by Mike
Leigh's new film "Topsy-Turvy." This is a wonderfully illuminating look at the
theatre and the backstage lives of the actors involved in making a musical -
the pains, the tears, the heartbreak, the confusion, the need to express
oneself creatively and personally, etc. 
The film wisely spends more than an hour detailing the lives of Gilbert and
Sullivan, and the status of their new musical, "Princess Ida," which received
mixed reviews and proclaimed Gilbert as the "king of Topsy-Turvydom." The
highly repressed and laconic librettist William Schwenck Gilbert (Jim
Broadbent) seems to have no idea how to react to such news except that the show
must go on. While writing his music, Gilbert mostly ignores his faithful wife,
his seemingly senile father, and his crotchety bedridden mother.
The sickly, charming, luxurious Arthur Sullivan (Allan Corduner) has no
intention of continuing his collaboration with Gilbert if they persist
producing such lightly frolicking musicals dealing with magic potions. He wants
to do more personal work. This almost sounds like the story of those 70's
Hollywood film directors trying to survive in the soulless 90's of commerce and
box-office. One day, however, Gilbert is inspired to write "The Mikado," and
thus the collaboration with Sullivan is renewed. The musical looks like it
might be a disaster considering that it consists of white British actors
playing Japanese denizens wearing silk robes - one of the actors complains
about the indecency of removing their corsets. How would an audience respond to
such a musical? And is disaster imminent when Gilbert consults real Japanese
women to see how they really behave and act?
The unerring delight in "Topsy-Turvy" is in witnessing how the production of
such a comical musical takes shape, and in seeing how the people involved are
affected by it with their own little vignettes taking place. We have the
comical actor (Martin Savage) with a need for morphine; the lead soprano
(Shirley Henderson) who has fits of drinking and is a single mother; and most
importantly, the portly-shaped actor playing the lead role, Richard Temple as
the Mikado (Timothy Spall, a Leigh regular), who is saddened that Gilbert cut
his leading musical number. And of course, we get a view of Gilbert and
Sullivan's complicated lives, including Gilbert's wife's awareness that her
husband is inattentive to her needs in a heartrending scene. 
"Topsy-Turvy" explores every single aspect of theatre you can imagine. There is
the costuming, appropriate line readings at rehearsals, accounting practices,
box-office revenues, heartaches and headaches over casting, makeup sessions
where actors talk about one another, jealousies, etc. Next to Kenneth Branagh's
delectable "A Midwinter's Tale," this is as good as it gets when it comes to
the world of theatre. 
My favorite scenes involve rehearsal and actual musical numbers. I love the
extended scene where Gilbert enunciates every single syllable that is erred
during rehearsal down to the most minute detail - the scene is long but
essential in capturing the nightmare of minutiae and detail in rehearsals. I
also love the musical numbers from "The Mikado" which reverberate with momentum
and high energy - it gives you the feeling that you are near the stage at the
Savoy Theatre watching a live performance. 
"Topsy-Turvy" ranks with Mike Leigh's best work, including the near-brilliant
"Secrets and Lies." This film is one to admire for many generations, showing
the pains and excesses one must endure to create theatre and the rich rewards
one reaps from all the hard work. When the lights go down, the magic begins as
the audience is transported into another world. The process by which this
happens is at the heart of "Topsy-Turvy."                                      
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, complaints or general comments at
Faust667@aol.com or at faustus_08520@yahoo.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

TOPSY-TURVY (director/writer: Mike Leigh; cinematographer: Dick Pope;
editor: Robin Sales; cast: Dorothy Atkinson (Jessie Bond), Jim Broadbent
(W. S. Gilbert), Ron Cook (Richard D'Oyly Carte), Allan Corduner (Arthur
Sullivan), Eleanor David (Fanny Ronalds), Shirley Henderson (Leonora
Braham), Lesley Manville (Lucy "Kitty" Gilbert), Kevin McKidd (Durward
Lely), Wendy Nottingham (Helen Lenoir), Martin Savage (George
Grossmith), Timothy Spall (Richard Temple), Alison Steadman (Madame
Leon), Jonathan Aris (Wilhelm), Dorothy Atkinson (Jessie Bond), Charles
Simon (Gilbert's ailing father), 1999-UK)
A wonderful film. Mike Leigh's valentine to the theater. It is a
stunning period film on Gilbert and Sullivan, the remarkably successful
and unique British musical duo during the Victorian era, whose
partnership ran from 1871 until 1896.
This 160-minute musical epic (just right in length--the film was never
dull for a second), moves at its own very satisfying speed, enhanced by
the magnificent musical arrangements of Carl Davis and replete with many
hilarious episodes (it's a very funny film). It also has an opulent
cinematography by Dick Pope, the eye-pleasing stagework of Gary Yershon,
the just right costumes by Lindy Hemming and the impeccable performances
by all concerned, with special kudos to Jim Broadbent as the constantly
sulking and cranky librettist William Schwenk Gilbert. Allan Corduner,
as the bon vivant, genius musical arranger Sir Arthur Sullivan, and
Timothy Spall as the lead baritone Dickie Temple, are outstanding in
their supporting roles.
Gilbert being the more business-minded partner, is therefore relegated
to being the watcher of the box-office receipts. He is also the
demanding stage director and the one with the self-effacing humor;
while, the newly knighted Sullivan, is noted for his artistical
integrity and of exuding pleasure in his work while performing, always
smiling when conducting, even when coming off a sick bed to make the
opening of a show. His mannerisms encourage a sense of gaiety for
everybody around him.
The rest of the troupe, made up of many Leigh regulars, were all superb,
including Shirley Henderson (a singer with problems offstage), Dorothy
Atkinson (a soubrette), Wendy Nottingham (as the wizened business
manager), Eleanor David (Sullivan's lover with the know-how to take care
of her pregnancy problem independently) and Martin Savage (the troupe's
star, highest paid performer and drug user).
The film opens in 1884, with the D'Oyly Carte (Cook) production of the
flop Princess Ida and will end with the much regaled The Mikado, a
virtual goldmine for the two artists, that was first produced at the
Savoy Theatre in 1885. After Ida, Gilbert was dubbed by the critics "the
king of topsy-turvydom" (Topsy-Turvy was a successful play that Gilbert
wrote, one that his critics and Sullivan are accusing him of repeating
its staid formula in his newer works). Sullivan, at the same time,
decided to stop writing music for light comic operettas and tried to
reinvent himself, taking time off, due to an illness, for a vacation to
France, which included a visit to a bordello. But he was determined when
he returned to London, to do only serious musical compositions. It isn't
until D'Oyly Carte forces together the meeting of the two enormously
rich and famous personalities he has under contract for the Savoy, who
are coming off 10 straight hits, does Gilbert realize how serious the
rupture in the relationship is.
Leigh makes this into a story about what happens backstage: capturing
the arduous
process of creating a Gilbert and Sullivan show from scratch, accurately
depicting the petulance of the actors, the reality of the business side
of show business, those dreaded rehearsals, and all the delicate
balancing of egos that come into play, as the director pushes for the
performances he wants. It couldn't be more real or more tempered with
total affection for what the actor and writer must go through to get
what they want out of their work. It is as good a story about the
backstage happenings as any in films, and is so much superior than
Shakespeare in Love, which basically did the same thing last year and
was rewarded with an Oscar.
The Gilbert and Sullivan reversal of misfortune begins when the prim
Gilbert's somewhat frustrated wife (Lesley Manville) coaxes him to see a
London exhibition on Japanese culture, where he watches a sword fight,
drinks green tea, views kimonos and the Kabuki. Returning home inspired,
he has his servant hang a Japanese sword over his doorway and in a
moment of great significance, when the sword falls to the floor, and
after feeling blue by being dumped on by critics and Sullivan, he
regains his lifeforce; it is like a moment of 'satori', as he glides
confidently through the air with the sword and thusly The Mikado is
born. It was amazingly well done to watch his facial and bodily
transformation from one of a grouch to unmitigated joy in an instant, as
his love for his work is written all over him.
As "The Mikado" goes into rehearsal, Gilbert forcefully directs the play
and the actors are just as brilliantly daunting whether rehearsing or
cavorting backstage, or performing for an audience. One of Leigh's pet
themes over the years, is for actors to do improvisations. The actor
works with the director to help enact the work, and this teamwork is
exemplified, as Gilbert listens to the cast when they tell him to put
back the Mikado song he removed from Dickie.
Gilbert intimidates them in his own inimical way to pronounce words like
"persiflage", to walk like the Japanese do, and to stop wearing corsets.
His meaty part couldn't be played to greater perfection, in a
performance that is memorable, making it difficult not to think of
Broadbent whenever the name Gilbert will now be mentioned. He won Best
Actor at the 1999 Venice Film Festival. Topsy-Turvy captured Best
Director and Best Film honors in the New York Film Critic Awards.
But with the success of The Mikado, Gilbert tells his wife that he can't
handle such happiness, "There's something inherently disappointing about
success." This is the same Gilbert who calls his mother "the vicious
woman who bore me into this ridiculous
world."
Musicals don't get any better than this offbeat one. Leigh directs like
the master he is, someone who is at the pinnacle of his career. He is so
sure of what he is doing, the film is so well researched for
authenticity without having to put the film in a period straight jacket,
that it retains a refreshingly modern attitude despite being properly
set in Victorian times. Leigh has so definitively caught the orneriness
of the two huge personalities, arguably the very best writer-composer
team ever, that he doesn't even have to mention their famous courtroom
dispute over a carpet in the Savoy Theater that fractured their delicate
relationship for three years until they reunited thereafter, but were
never successful again. The beauty of the film, making it so much more
than the typical musical, is that the director caught the environment of
Victorian society, allowing it to add a socio-historical perspective to
the backstage dramatics of the theater people and to the travails of the
G & S partnership. This historical perspective was depicted, by flashing
the newspaper headline of the death of General Gordon and his men in the
Khartoum massacre on the screen and then the film zeroes in on some
actors stuffing themselves on oysters, basking in the bourgeois society
the Empire has made possible for them and so many others in England.
But the director's main point wasn't political as it usually is, he
merely wishes to show what a colossal effort it is to put on a stage
show and that G & S individually would have undoubtedly found great
success alone, but it is only with their collaboration that their
success is so magnificent, and that we should be grateful for what their
partnership gave the world. I'm also grateful that Leigh made this film.
I felt just wonderful leaving the theater. I knew that I saw something
special.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
Perform without benefit of a corset?  Scandalous!
For the latest Gilbert and Sullivan opera, the actors and actresses have
been firmly instructed not to wear their corsets.  None of them have
ever gone on stage without a corset before, so pandemonium has set in.
TOPSY-TURVY, an homage to the business of show business and to Gilbert
and Sullivan operas, is a surprising work by writer/director Mike Leigh,
an intense filmmaker best known for edgy dramas like NAKED and SECRETS
AND LIES.  Set in London in 1884, TOPSY-TURVY takes us backstage as
Gilbert and Sullivan work on perhaps their best known operetta, "The
Mikado."
As William Schwenk Gilbert, Jim Broadbent gives an endearing performance
as a successful and driven man who resented the critics and his being
the lesser talent of the Gilbert and Sullivan team.  Critics would
predict great success for their works and then go on to ridicule their
artistic abilities.  Gilbert was referred to in one review as "the King
of Topsy-Turvydom," which wounded his pride deeply.
In a lesser performance, Allan Corduner plays Arthur Sullivan as
somewhat of an enigma.  "You're a genius," Gilbert says to Sullivan.  "I
merely bask in your reflecting glory."  But Corduner gives us little
appreciation of Sullivan's actual gifts.  That he had higher aspirations
than Gilbert is made apparent but little more.
The film's momentum suffers greatly from Leigh's proclivity to include
such extraneous material as dentist visits and to let some scenes run on
for what seems an eternity.  If you don't like Gilbert and Sullivan
operas, imagine how painful having long passages read aloud will be.
All the picture's production sins, and they are many, are eventually
redeemed as you become part of the show.  By the end you'll feel like
you've signed on to sing in the chorus.  And when there's a revolt on
stage to come to the aid of a member of the company, you'll want to join
the protest.
Filmed by Dick Pope in garish colors, the movie makes Gilbert and
Sullivan's style of comedic opera look attractive and funny.  The opera
as kitsch was something that Gilbert himself was unclear about.  He
describes "The Mikado" as "not grand opera but low burlesque."  But soon
afterwards, he says, "This is not low burlesque.  This is an entirely
new Japanese opera."  Whatever it was, he certainly poured his heart and
soul into it.  Yet, he wasn't happy.  In depression after the opera's
triumph, he laments to his wife, "there's something inherently
disappointing about success."
Among the film's small delights are Leigh's fascination with the
scientific instruments of the time and their effect on the operation of
an opera company.  From the telephone to the "reservoir pen" to the
special effects, each contributes in it's own way to the opera's
production.  Even cryptography has its place when competing companies
need to keep their box office revenues secret from snooping telephone
operators.
Nothing, however, can make up for the fact that the movie is a full hour
too long.  Films like this almost make you wish for a dastardly studio
executive to seize the print and cut it down to the proper size.  Movie
after movie this holiday season feels as bloated as a diner after a big
Christmas dinner.  Even with its excesses, however, TOPSY-TURVY is a
good-spirited and intriguing behind-the-scenes look at a stage
production and is worth seeing.
TOPSY-TURVY runs 2:40.  It is rated R for a scene of risqué nudity and
would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Gary Jones
Lars von Trier makes a science-fiction epic. Tim Burton makes a romantic
comedy. Hardly less shocking is the idea of Mike Leigh, the master of
bitter-sweet contemporary kitchen-sink dramas such as Life is Sweet and
Secrets and Lies, making a period piece with musical numbers and
involving historical characters. But he has, and has done it
wonderfully. Leigh's admirers can rest easy that despite the beautifully
realised Victorian costumes and interiors, the usual Leigh elements are
there - the wry sad humour, the pain of disappointments profound and
mundane, and the delight in people and their idiosyncrasies.
In Topsy-Turvy, Leigh uses the first production of Gilbert and
Sullivan's The Mikado to explore his familiar themes. After the
lacklustre reception of their Princess Ida, composer Sullivan (Allan
Corduner) states his intention to abandon the musical theatre for his
more serious symphonic work. Librettist Gilbert (Jim Broadbent) seeks to
persuade him to change his mind and produce yet another opera at the
Savoy theatre for Richard D'Oyly Carte (Ron Cook), but Sullivan is
unimpressed by Gilbert's stale ideas for the new opera and it looks like
the legendary partnership is over. Gilbert then visits a Japanese
cultural exhibition, and the seed of the idea for The Mikado is sown in
his mind.
Despite his ambitions as a serious composer, Sullivan is a bit of a
party animal, while Gilbert, in contrast to his delightfully funny
lyrics and dry wit, is a fairly joyless soul whose only moments of
spontaneity occur in private. Leigh manages to explore the complexities
of his characters in ways that few other film-makers can match. Leigh's
films are scripted, but the script is the result of lengthy rehearsal
sessions which are largely improvised. This gives his films a
distinctive combination of spontaneity and discipline. Both lead
performances in Topsy-Turvy are a joy, as are the supporting turns,
particularly that from Leigh regular Timothy Spall. During the
preparation for The Mikado's first performance, we are treated to
several musical numbers from the show. You do not have to be a Gilbert
and Sullivan buff to enjoy the songs' hilarious, and utterly British,
interplay of stoicism and eccentricity. 
There is a moment in Topsy-Turvy which is even more of a departure for
Mike Leigh than the historical setting and the music: the camera moves
in under Gilbert's face and tilts up to look at him from below as he
beams with joy at the moment his is struck by the inspiration for The
Mikado. For Mike Leigh to actually draw attention to the camera in this
way is astonishing. Maybe he'd just watched The Matrix and came over all
funny. Steady on, there Mike. 
Topsy-Turvy is a long film, and could perhaps have benefited from a bit
of tightening-up here and there, but it is nevertheless delightful and
confirms Mike Leigh as one our national cultural treasures. (8/10)
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Mike Leigh (Career Girls) has left an unmistakable stamp on the 90s,
writing and directing four films that broke the conventional feature
film mold and, in turn, netted the Brit accolades from peers, critics,
festivals, and even two Academy Award nominations (for Secrets & Lies).
What makes Leigh's work so invigorating is the fact that he rarely
follows a proper script, letting his actors improvise dialogue from a
basic outline of the film's story.
Which is why Topsy-Turvy, Leigh's fifth and latest film of the decade,
is such a surprise.  His biopic of Gilbert and Sullivan runs nearly
three hours, most of which is spent on well-choreographed numbers from
their plays.  Well-choreographed numbers?  Mike Leigh?  What gives?
While the film is still flawlessly executed, it's so much of a departure
from Leigh's previous films that Turvy is almost disappointing.  Simply
put, if you're a fan of Gilbert and Sullivan, you will love this film.
If you don't particularly care for their garish musicals, you may admire
Turvy's acting and grandeur, but don't expect much else.
Focusing on the fourteen months leading up to the premiere of `The
Mikado,' Turvy introduces its main characters in a rather unique way.
The two don't share a scene together until about forty minutes into the
picture, which leaves plenty of time to establish them as completely
separate artists, rather than two hit-makers connected at the hip.
Turvy begins in 1884 with the debut of `Princess Ida' at the legendary
Savoy Theatre.  The play was a critical and commercial flop, which sent
both Gilbert and Sullivan reeling in different directions career-wise.
William Schwenk Gilbert (Jim Broadbent) is haunted by a newspaper review
that referred to the playwright as `the King of Topsy-Turvy-dom.'
Meanwhile, Arthur Sullivan (Allan Corduner, The Impostors) is shown as a
physically ailing composer at a bit of a career crossroads.  He hates
the repetitious music that he has been composing for Gilbert's equally
repetitious themes of magic that propel each of their plays.  Sullivan
wants to write an opera, while Gilbert wants to plod along using more of
the same supernatural subjects.
Courtesy of a well-timed museum exhibit of Japanese culture, Gilbert
gets the idea that eventually becomes `The Mikado,' the production that
jumpstarted the duo's creative juices.  They went on to do The
Gondoliers and The Yeoman of the Guard and blah blah blah.  There isn't
much in the way of surprises, but there rarely ever is in a biopic.  The
only revelation here is that G & S's actors were used to wearing corsets
in each play, but couldn't in `The Mikado' because the Japanese attire
wouldn't hang right on their frames.
To Leigh's credit, he can elicit amazing performances from his actors,
and Turvy is certainly no exception.  Broadbent is fantastic, in a
stick-up-your-ass sort of way (a big surprise if you remember his sleazy
nightclub owner in last year's Little Voice).  Corduner is great in an
altogether different way, looking a bit like a smirking Inspector
Clouseau.  It seems like he's in on some private joke (maybe he saw what
the running time was).  Also worth noting is the performance of portly
Leigh regular Timothy Spall, who plays one of the Savoy regulars, as
well as the technical work, which is fantastic from the costumes to the
art and production design.
Since I am not a fan of Gilbert and Sullivan (I just found out that
they're responsible for the songs that Sideshow Bob sang on the Cape
Fear episode of The Simpsons), I found Turvy to contain too many
song-and-dance numbers.  There is an Oscar-quality film somewhere in
there, but unfortunately, it's buried amidst the musical numbers.  But,
like I said, G & S enthusiasts will probably wish there were even more.
2:40  R for nudity and adult situations

Author
Homer Yen
Long before Andrew Lloyd Webber and the days of Rogers
and Hammerstein, there was the era of William Schwenck
Gilbert and Arthur Sullivan.  These two comprised one
of the most prolific show business teams of their
time.  Gilbert and Sullivan were responsible for a
string of memorable (and some not-so-memorable) comic
operas put upon the London stage during the late 19th
century.  
However, their creative juices would begin to run dry.
 Praised for such dandy showpieces as "The Pirates of
Penzance" and "H.M.S. Pinafore," the duo's next
offering, "Princess Ida," is labeled as formulaic and
predictable by an influential London Times critic. 
This infuriates librettist Gilbert (John Broadbent),
who believes that "Ida" is a great play.  However,
composer Sullivan (Allan Corduner) ruefully agrees
that "Ida" does feel a bit recycled.  Worse yet,
Sullivan's health is failing.  He declares that he
needs some time to rest before being able to continue
composing new songs.  In the meantime, the sweltering
summer heat is keeping audiences away from the
theatres, so box office receipts are steadily
declining.  And, there seems to be a variety of
personal problems that are brewing among the cast
members.  This all amounts to a serious setback and
does not bode well at all.
"Topsy-Turvy" is a sweet film that focuses on this
particular period of this partnership's lives when it
seemed that the two were ready to split up over
creative differences.  In a meeting that the two have
to discuss their future and current impasse, Sullivan
explains that he has always understated his music to
Gilbert's words.  Surprised to hear this, Gilbert
interjects that he has always subordinated his words
to the grandness of the music.  Yet, despite their
mutual respect for one another, they can not move
forward.  Gilbert's latest idea is an opera about a
couple who finds a magic potion.  Sullivan fires back
that his idea is none too different from a recent
production about a couple that finds a magic lozenge
and none too different from another recent production
about a couple that finds a magic coin.
It is not until Gilbert visits a Japanese exhibition
that his creativity becomes reinvigorated.  Gilbert is
entranced by a Kendo sword fighting demonstration, the
raw emotions brought forth through a kabuki play, and
a dainty tea ceremony where the waitress can only say
"six pence, please."  This experience steers him
towards a new and better work, eventually turning out
to be "The Mikado."  Sullivan, now feeling better,
loves the idea and begins to set his words to music.
Like many British films, the strength of this one is
its charm.  I credit most of it to the wonderful sense
of frivolity that exists during this time period where
music and laughter, good manners and wonderful dress
seemed like the guiding principles of the day.  I
especially enjoyed Broadbent's portrayal of Gilbert
who seemed to always suffer in deadpan silence in his
struggle to create his next great work.  In one
passage, he talks about his estranged mother.  "No one
respects her more than I do," he says.  "And I can't
stand the woman!"  I also appreciated the sacrifice
that the cast, chorus and orchestra members went
through as they prepared for the show (having once
been myself an orchestra member for my high school
plays).  "Topsy-Turvy" is not the typical film that
presents a problem, dramatic arc, and then a solution.
 Writer Mike Leigh does not write for Hollywood. 
Thus, Gilbert and Sullivan's dilemma is not a race
towards some glorious resolution.  Rather, it is more
like a leisurely walk through a Victorian park that
unveils delicate beauty in every direction you look.

Author
Ross Anthony
I tried, but I couldn't make it all the way through this film. Fifty-five
minutes isn't a respectable enough length of time to do a legitimate review.
Therefore, feel free to call this review illegitimate.
Regrettably, I found this cold clammy presentation nearly as frigid as the
theater in which it was screened. Five layers of clothing, and a scarf
couldn't protect me from either. While the elaborately costumed characters
were cursing the oppressively hot weather in Europe, it seemed to me that if
I were to reach up and touch them, I'd find the temperature of their pale
cheeks similar to that of bathroom tile.
Set in Paris and London, the story opens as an "artistic-type" emotional
Sullivan scored his last composition for the trivial topsy-turvy stories of
the sternly British scrooge-like Gilbert. Sullivan wants to write operas!
Amidst this drama, long excerpts from productions are included, but play
heavily, contributing nothing to the behind-the-scenes story at hand.
Admittedly, I am a lover of the silver screen, not the stage. Visa-versian's
may beg to disagree with this review. To them I say, "No need to beg ... I'm
glad you enjoy stage. In fact, this article may very well be meaningless to
those of you that adore Gilbert and Sullivan productions."
I am a lover of music, mind you. A pianist myself, still, the musical
interludes and interjections fall like concrete (in all fairness, the
theater's sound system was sorely outdated). Nothing inspires, nor warms my
cold heart, though several attempts are made. In one bid at humor, two
topless dancers laughingly touch each other's toplessness; in another
attempt, one fellow in top hat and coat declares, "I played golf this
morning!" The lady gasps, "In this heat?" The gentleman, "Yes, but not in
this attire." (A few people snicker in the audience. Could I be missing
something?)
The vulnerability displayed by a vain Gilbert when the loss of Sullivan's
musical partnership seems imminent caught my attention. I do hope the
writers capitalize on this interesting character trait. Other than that, the
acting itself is fine, the costuming grand, but the over all appeal ...well,
not enough to keep me in my seat.
Topsy-Turvy. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Allan Corduner and Jim Broadbent
Written and Directed by Mike Leigh
Produced by Simon Channing-Williams at USA/October Films.
Grade..........................C
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Edwin Jahiel
TOPSY-TURVY (U.K., 1999) ****  Written and directed by Mike Leigh.
Photography, Dick Pope. Editing,  Robin Sales. Music,Carl Davis (from 
Arthur Sullivan's). Production design , Eve Stewart. Produced by 
Simon Channing-Williams.  Cast: Dorothy Atkinson (Jessie Bond),  Jim 
Broadbent (W. S. Gilbert), Ron Cook (Richard D'Oyly Carte), Allan 
Corduner (Arthur Sullivan), Eleanor David (Fanny Ronalds), Shirley 
Henderson (Leonora Braham), Lesley Manville (Lucy Gilbert), Kevin 
McKidd (Durward Lely), Wendy Nottingham (Helen Lenoir), Martin Savage 
(George Grossmith), Timothy Spall (Richard Temple), Alison Steadman 
(Madame Leon) and many others. A USA Films release. 160 minutes. PG
Delicious is the word for this labor of love and love for the 
theater. Delicious like a long,  leisurely gourmet meal of "haute 
cuisine" which lasts for hours, has an unhurried pace, makes time 
pass most pleasurably, brings in course after course, and progresses 
with interesting conversations.
Writer-director Mike Leigh has carved a special film-niche for 
himself with very British movies that reveal extraordinary things 
about ordinary working-class people: High Hopes, Life Is Sweet, 
Naked, Secrets and Lies, et al. He (and his actors) have been awarded 
a host of major prizes. And that's not counting Leigh's activities in 
the theater, and with TV films which also get theatrical releases.
In Topsy-Turvy Leigh deals with the team of  librettist W.S. Gilbert 
(1836-1911) and composer Arthur Sullivan (1842-1900) or Sir Arthur 
after he was knighted in 1883. There's also a third man, 
impresario-manager D'Oyly Carte (1844-1901).
Even though one my cats is called Yum-Yum, I  am no G & S aficionado. 
Yet I appreciate how distinctive and novel their works were and how 
they brought out another side of staid Victorianism.
Compared to the familiar hoi polloi characters in the other Leigh 
movies, the "showbiz" people of Topsy-Turvy are downright patrician. 
They appear not in the old genre of artists' biopic but within a 
limited time-frame which allows depth and details.
It begins in 1884, when the latest G & S production, Princess Ida, 
was not well received. By G & S standards, it's a flop. The team's 
first collaboration, Trial by Jury, had been followed by several 
hits: The Sorcerer, H.M.S. Pinafore,  The Pirates of Penzance, 
Patience , and  Iolanthe. Princess Ida may have not deserved its 
unsuccess, but certainly Ida is no Aida. Not that one can compare 
hefty Grand Operas and their Bel Canto to the comic operettas that G 
& S invented.
Sir Arthur, bedridden with painful kidney trouble, still finds the 
strength to get to the Savoy Theater and conduct the orchestra. (His 
expressive face as he mouths the score is a marvel). But he also 
suffers from the musical ambition to compose, as he had in his early 
career, serious music. Princess Ida is the last straw. " I can't 
waste any more time on these trivial soufflés" he tells Carte.
Sir Arthur takes a break by going to the Continent. He is a bon 
vivant whose appreciation of French food and, in a Paris bordello, of 
a topless singing duo of ladies, bring out his "joie de vivre" and 
wit. It's charming.. But by the time Gilbert reads him his latest 
libretto, Sullivan has had it with topsy-turvy, formulaic plots.
The film's 160 minutes never drag or fatigue. And I say this as the 
founder of the BBNMM movement -- Bring Back the Ninety Minute Movie. 
We are treated  (and it is a treat) to wonderfully calibrated 
Victoriana:  interiors, artifacts, people; character and 
personality-revealing talk;  thoughts on creativity and art; the 
business side of productions; insights into private lives. Every 
minute brings something of interest, and many skillfully brief 
moments stand for full situations.
Topsy-Turvy revels in contrasts especially between lively 
man-about-town Sullivan and. serious, often dour Gilbert. The choice 
of words and images has the effortless feeling that comes from 
intelligent preparations. "Echt" British humor and educated wit are 
both a contrast to and a supplement of the funny singing patter of 
the G & S productions.
The partners are on the verge of breaking up permanently when smart 
Mrs. Gilbert (who like all the supporting  characters is painted with 
forceful economy) drags her husband to a novelty, an Exposition of 
Japanese culture. Kabuki, dances, music and other Japanese exotica 
suddenly set Gilbert on his operetta road to Damascus. Thus is The 
Mikado born in 1885.
All this is dealt with a succession of cleverly edited scenes. 
Gilbert, who has bought a Japanese sword, plays with it.  Cut to G & 
S together again,  reading a new script. Cut to February 12, 1885, 
when dire, Empire-shaking news reaches England: General "Chinese" 
Gordon and his men in besieged Khartoum were massacred on January 26 
by the Mahdi's rebel Sudanese. Cut to performers-to-be in The Mikado 
gorging themselves with oysters --and soon becoming sick. Life does 
go on.
The acting, from tiny to main roles, is flawless. Smart, telling, 
enjoyable moments, scenes or sequences abound. The funniest have 
Gilbert rehearsing his cast and thus becoming like a modern stage 
director. He has Japanese ladies show his performers how to stand, 
walk, and deploy fans. He instructs others on delivering lines. (Was 
Leigh  partly inspired by Truffaut's film-within-film mishaps in Day 
for Night?). It is high comedy, doubly impressive when one thinks of 
the movie's cast rehearsing how to handle The Mikado's rehearsals. 
Especially since Mike Leigh and his people,  in plays and movies, do 
not work in kosher ways. There are no standard scripts; everything 
derives  from interaction, invention and improvisation. Assuming that 
process was also used in Topsy-Turvy, the approach results in 
wonderful smoothness and dovetailing.
There is even suspense .Gilbert cuts out the song of a performer (who 
recalls Robert Morley). Will he reinstate it?  Will the  key actor 
who shoots  drugs, the actress wih a bad leg, or the actress who 
drinks, affect the performance?
One gets here many films for the price of one. G & S's life and 
works; how "An Operetta Is Born"; authentic shoptalk; backstage life 
of total verisimilitude --the best I know of-- and more. Technical 
aspects are brilliant. But the press seems to neglect the 
contribution of a major collaborator. Composer Carl Davis, born in 
Brooklyn but a longtime resident in England, though well-known in 
inner circles is not a name familiar to the public. Yet his output is 
huge and magnificent. Davis's scores include theatrical films (he won 
the British music award for The French Lieutenant's Woman);  many TV 
films (Channel 4, BBC, etc.) that have often been released as 
"regular" movies or appeared on PBS; TV series from the UK; 
documentary series such as The World at War, The Unknown Chaplin, 
Cinema Europe: The Other Hollywood. His new scores for silent 
classics (Intolerance, Ben-Hur, The Eagle, Greed, etc.) are the best 
ever. Prodigious Davis is the top film composer of our day, yet no 
one of my acquaintance knows him, except for maestro-pianist Ian 
Hobson who has recorded with him in England and admires him.
A final thought. Other operettas, e.g. by Vienna's Johann Strauss, by 
the Hungarian-born Franz Lehar, or by France's Offenbach, have 
traveled very well. But the untranslatable texts of W.S. Gilbert have 
limited the G & S repertory to English-speaking countries. 
Topsy-Turvy, in spite of getting two New York Film Critics Award 
(Best Film, Best Director) may also meet with this fate.
"Le mauvais gout mene au crime"(Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's film reviews are at: http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel/

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
When the New York Film Critics voted it as Best Film of 1999,
this unconventional, music-laden biopic of Gilbert & Sullivan by Mike
Leigh took on a surprising, new status. By definition, the term
"topsy-turvy" means inverted or confused, both of which apply to the
life and times of Britain's operetta maestros William Schwenk Gilbert
and Arthur Sullivan, who worked together from 1871 to 1896, concocting
delights like H.M.S. Pinafore, The Gondoliers and The Pirates of
Penzance. The story, covering 14 months in the mid-1880s, finds the
ailing, aristocratic composer Sullivan (Allan Corduner) deeply
discontented with his collaboration with the somewhat boorish
librettist Gilbert (Jim Broadbent) after the tepid reception of their
Princess Ida. Depressed and despondent, Sullivan decides to turn his
attention from "light" to "serious" opera, much to Gilbert's dismay,
not to mention the chagrin of the manager (Ron Cook) of the Savoy
Theater. That is - until Gilbert's wife (Lesley Manville) takes him to
a Japanese exhibition in London which sparks a fanciful idea - namely
The Mikado, which became one of Gilbert & Sullivan's greatest
hits. Then the rest of the film concentrates on the meticulous
preparation of this witty, new operetta - focusing on the rehearsals,
primarily on the prickly, temperamental actors (Timothy Spall, Martin
Savage, Kevin McKidd, Shirley Henderson). Leigh's pacing,
unfortunately, is uneven. There's a middle section with tepid musical
numbers from The Sorcerer that gets quite tedious. And the including
of some risque nudity seems gratuitous, earning an R-rating when the
content should have been suitable for teenagers. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, Topsy-Turvy is a deftly performed, frothy,
delightful 8, particularly for Gilbert & Sullivan fans.

Author
David N. Butterworth
        About two-thirds of the way into "Topsy-Turvy," the ambitious but
ultimately disappointing new film from Mike Leigh ("Secrets & Lies"),
there's a scene which hints at what might have been.  William Gilbert, the
librettist who formed a highly successful collaboration with composer
Arthur Sullivan, is rehearsing three of his cast members in a scene from
the latest comic opera by Gilbert and Sullivan.
        That's right: these are *the* Gilbert and Sullivan of Victorian
England, and Leigh's film is a bold departure from his grittily-realistic
social dramas that featured working class stiffs, not the toast of London's
West End.  What's notable about the scene in question, however, is that
Leigh is once again at the top of his game as a writer and director,
infusing the sequence with humor, awkwardness, repetition, silly accents,
sarcasm, disrespect, and much more besides.  Had the entire film been this
delightful, then moviegoers would be in for a treat with "Topsy-Turvy."
        Unfortunately, everything prior to this point, some two hours of
admittedly grand-looking screen time, has been dull as plainsong, tra la la
on one note.  There's a lot of talk, none of it particularly interesting,
and several colorful musical numbers shot unimaginatively from the Savoy
Theatre stalls.  But there's no real inspiration here, let alone drama.
Leigh himself appears to realize this, and crams enough sordid details of
his characters' private lives into the film's final 40 (of a cramp-inducing
160) minutes to pad out an entire season of "Melrose Place": Gilbert's
long-suffering wife Kitty longing for a child she can't have; Sullivan and
his mistress discussing her next abortion; the operetta's leading lady
hitting the sherry after performances, and another prominent member of the
company shooting up before.
        Bang bang bang bang--all four of these come at us right out of the
blue, eliciting what one Gilbert and Sullivan critic refers to as
"topsy-turvydom."
        Advance notices might lead you to believe that "Topsy-Turvy" is a
period piece about the making of "The Mikado" but it's not until, again,
well into the film that Lucy "Kitty" Gilbert (played by longtime Leigh
regular Leslie Manville) drags her husband along to a Japanese exhibition
where the inspiration for Gilbert and Sullivan's most popular work is
sparked.
        Leigh has spared no expense on the look and feel of the production
but what's missing is his trademark ability to get inside his characters.
Jim Broadbent and Allan Corduner play the musical pair with authority, but
we get little insight into what made their association so successful given
that most of the film is spent with them stalemated at a creative impasse.
        Leigh's last three films--"Career Girls," "Secrets & Lies," and
"Naked"--were all "best film of the year" selections for me.  "Topsy-Turvy"
represents a change of direction for the director and in so doing takes us
away from what Mike Leigh does best: kitchen sink-styled slices of life
highlighted by true depth of character.  This is a "Mikado" that is sadly
missing its Yum-Yum.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Louis Proyect
Best known for his semi-improvised cinematic representations of
dysfunctional families and personal relationships trapped in the
oppressive web of British class society, director and screenwriter
Mike Leigh seemed like an unlikely candidate for a film based on the
career of Gilbert and Sullivan. The surprise is that he not only has
produced one of the greatest entertainment biographies of all time,
one that is faithful to the effervescent quality of Gilbert and
Sullivan's light operas, he has also managed to tell the story of the
frustration and suffering that went on behind the scenes. In doing so,
he remains faithful to the humanitarian spirit that defined his
earlier work.
"Topsy-Turvy" proceeds from the time in G&S's career when critics have
begun to detect a loss of creativity. Opening with the debut of
"Princess Ida", we see librettist Sir William Gilbert (Jim Broadbent)
in a rage over a review stating that the new work merely repeats
well-worn themes that have already appeared in their work over the
past 25 years. However, composer Sir Arthur Sullivan (Allan Corduner)
agrees completely with the negative review and announces his refusal
to collaborate with Gilbert until he has had the chance to compose a
serious opera based on a lofty theme rather than another
entertainment.
This coincidentally is the aspiration of film-maker John L. Sullivan
in Preston Sturges's screwball comedy "Sullivan's Travels", who is
tired of making comedies. This Sullivan wants to break free of
contractual ties to a Hollywood film studio in order to make a film
about the plight of the common man during the depths of the
depression, while the other Sullivan wants to be more like Verdi or
Wagner. (Sullivan did manage to create one serious
opera--Ivanhoe--which remains justly neglected.) D'Oyly Carte  (Ron
Cook), under whom Gilbert and Sullivan are obliged to contractually,
has the same attitude toward Arthur Sullivan that the film moguls have
in "Sullivan's Travels": why rock the boat. Not only does the tried
and true please the people, it also generates revenue. In essence,
this is the primary source of dramatic tension in "Topsy-Turvy",
namely the conflict between art and commerce.
Ever the hard-headed realist, Gilbert is depicted phoning the theater
box-office each morning after a performance in order to record the
receipts into a ledger book in his library. (One of the film's merits
is its attention to period detail. The phone is an unwieldy
contraption which forces people on either end to begin and end each
exchange with, "I am speaking now. Can you hear me." It has been
argued, by the way, that the period of the most rapid technological
change in human history is exactly the period depicted in
"Topsy-Turvy", when telephones, telegraphs, steamships and electrical
lights were first being introduced.)
This cash nexus is reflected not only between the clash between
Gilbert and Sullivan, but also in the manner in which the repertory
company in the Savoy Theater struggled for a sense of dignity and
accomplishment when management regarded them merely as wage labor.
In one of the most powerful scenes of the film, the principal male
actor-singers meet with impresario D'Oyly Carte for a salary review.
James Grossmith (Martin Savage) is told that he is to receive a 7.5
percent review, which is not only less than he expected, but
undermines his sense of self-worth as an artist. Anybody who has ever
been subject to a performance review in a corporation, upon which
salary increases are based, will appreciate how demeaning this
experience can be. Performing for Grossmith is as daunting a task as
it is for modern-day performers and he resorts to the same crutch
favored by many a rock star, the heroin needle. On the evening of the
first performance of "The Mikado," Grossmith is shown  in his
dressing-room plunging a needle into a scarred arm just five minutes
before the opening curtain.
The females also have it tough. Leonora Braham (Shirley Henderson),
the Savoy's ingénue, is not only an alcoholic, she can't seem to find
a unmarried man who will take an interest in her. As soon as she
mentions that she has a young son from a previous marriage, they shun
her. When co-star Jessie Bond (Dorothy Atkinson) suggests that she
sing at recitals in the home of London's wealthy, so as to meet
eligible bachelors, Braham complains about the class prejudices that
she finds there. Meanwhile, Bond performs on and offstage
flirtatiously night after night, despite a festering leg wound which
she gamely has fresh bandages applied to each day.
Despite the pain and frustrations of people from top to bottom of the
chain involved in producing these light-hearted operettas, when they
mount the stage we and the audience are left with sheer pleasure. This
is one of the great accomplishments of Leigh's film. It ranks with
Ingmar Bergman's filming of an onstage performance of Mozart's "The
Magic Flute." What gives Leigh's filming of G&S's classic ensemble
pieces even more power is its unstinting but compassionate portrayal
of the cast's vulnerabilities.

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Mike Leigh. Screenplay by Leigh. Starring Jim Broadbent,
Allan Corduner, Ron Cook. Running time: 160 minutes. Rated AA for nude 
scenes. Reviewed on March 22nd, 2000.
Is there a historical era with which the movie screen seems more in love 
than the Victorian? I tend to doubt it; no other time in history is 
portrayed with more style, more panache than the late nineteenth century, 
and "Topsy-Turvy" is no exception. Indeed, with its concentration on the 
colorful world of theatre, writer/director Mike Leigh's latest movie is 
even more visually sumptuous than many other Victorian-era films. 
Combined with the wit and music of Gilbert and Sullivan, "Topsy-Turvy" is 
a real treat for the eyes and ears.
As the movie opens, William Gilbert (Jim Broadbent) and Arthur Sullivan 
(Allan Corduner) have enjoyed a successful and profitable partnership for 
more than two decades. Gilbert writes the stories, Sullivan composes the 
music, and to this point they have enjoyed nothing but popular acclaim. 
However, their latest opera, "Princess Ida", has been received lukewarmly 
at best by critics and audience alike. To make matters worse, Sullivan 
has grown weary of what he calls Gilbert's "world of Topsy-Turvy-dom": he 
wants to write a grand opera with a more human, more emotional scope than 
the likes of "The Pirates of Penzance" or "HMS Pinafore". He feels 
Gilbert's ideas have grown repetitive and refuses to score his new plot, 
a blatant rip-off of a previous collaboration, "The Sorcerer".
With no end to the impasse in sight and the fate of the Savoy Theatre, 
run by Richard D'Oyly Carte (Ron Cook), at stake, Gilbert's wife Kitty 
(Lesley Manville) drags him to an exhibition of Japanese culture. 
Impressed by the vastly foreign culture, he purchases a samurai sword to 
hang on his wall as a souvenir. When it nearly falls on his head one night,
Gilbert is inspired to write "The Mikado". The team of Gilbert and 
Sullivan appears to have another success on its hands -- but only if the 
opera actually makes it to the stage!
"Topsy-Turvy" can be more or less evenly divided into two acts. The first 
deals with the imminent dissolution of Gilbert and Sullivan's partnership 
and the struggles of their confreres to persuade one or both of the 
stubborn pair to give in. It is interesting enough, but feels somewhat 
meandering. These sequences do a good job of establishing the principal 
characters and the tribulations of Victorian theatre, but are rather 
lacking in incident and the whole thing basically just goes on too long. 
"Topsy-Turvy" clocks in at more than two and a half hours, and I think it 
would have been better served by shaving some time off this first half.
Far better is the second act, in which "The Mikado" goes into production. 
We are privy to all the details of the theatre business -- line readings, 
costume fittings, orchestra rehearsals, and so on, but done in such an 
entertaining manner as to avoid tedium. Of particular interest, we are
witness to the clashes of ego and the hints of scandal which envelop the 
play's cast and crew. It is here that Leigh's already fine script really 
shines -- a scene where the actresses from the "Three Little Maids" 
segment practise in front of real Japanese women is a highlight. The 
dialogue and pacing in this act is excellent. Unlike the first half of 
the movie, nothing is dwelt on for too long and as a result there is a 
real energy to these latter scenes. There is also a great deal of humor in 
"Topsy-Turvy", and fortunately it arises naturally from the circumstances 
rather than being grafted onto the script. The theatre is a funny and 
bizarre enough environment without being exaggerated, and Leigh is well 
aware of this fact.
Performances from the cast are uniformly excellent, with Broadbent a 
standout as Gilbert. He does a particularly good job portraying the 
playwright's moody disposition, sometimes appearing both jolly and dour
at the same time. Scenes like one in which he leads a read-through of "The 
Mikado" with a bemused, shorthanded cast really show off the depth of 
Broadbent's performance. He is funny without descending into caricature. 
Corduner is very good as Sullivan, but isn't given quite the same breadth 
of material to work with. Much is made of his desire to branch out into 
more serious opera, but his characterization doesn't extend far beyond 
that. For example, whereas Gilbert has some great scenes with his wife 
filled with both humor and emotion, Sullivan's scenes with his paramour are 
more sedate. I never felt we got to know Sullivan the way we did Gilbert. 
Ultimately, Corduner's performance is simply less passionate and more 
functional, and ends up being overshadowed by Broadbent.
The rest of the cast is solid in their supporting roles. While these may 
seem incidental to the movie as a whole, characters such as a leading 
lady with a sordid past and a sickly actor with a drug problem really 
make "Topsy-Turvy" feel complete. This is not just a movie about William 
Gilbert and Arthur Sullivan, but about a Gilbert and Sullivan production, 
cast and crew included. It is in presenting these details that Leigh 
really sparkles. He does not focus on them, but rather serves them up 
for the consumption of the viewer, to be digested or ignored at will. 
They are not so much subplots in of themselves, but just further 
complications along the road to opening night.
Of course, the real star of any movie about Gilbert and Sullivan is the 
music, and "Topsy-Turvy" does not disappoint. In addition to a number of 
pieces from "The Mikado", the movie also includes selections from "The 
Sorcerer" and "Princess Ida", all lavishly presented on a 
beautifully-designed stage setting.
"Topsy-Turvy" is a lot of fun, especially for those with something of an 
appreciation for the works of Gilbert and Sullivan. Even if you're not 
well-acquainted with their operas, the movie serves as an excellent 
introduction to them, and provides an enthralling glimpse into 
the hectic and complicated world of theatre. The movie's lengthy running 
time does work against it, but it is otherwise extremely well crafted. Here 
is a film that ably demonstrates that, even after a century, Gilbert and 
Sullivan's world of Topsy-Turvy-dom has never lost its appeal.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/TopsyTurvy.html

Author
Robert Marley
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Robert Marley.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/5603531ee51544df8825685f00747334?OpenDocument
Gilbert and Sullivan and so much more.
A film review by Robert Marley - Copyright Š 2000 filmcritic.com
One of my earliest childhood remembrances was watching a performance of
H.M.S. Pinafore. I thought it was really neat. The costumes and music
were amazing and even though I couldn't understand all of what was going
on, I was fascinated by how all of these people worked together.
Now 20 years later, while watching another Gilbert and Sullivan
performance (of sorts) I am still thinking the same things.
`Topsy Turvy' is the story about the two collaborators who during the
late 19th century created such musical masterpieces as H.M.S. Pinafore,
the Pirates of Penzance, The Mikado and many others.
William Schwenck Gilbert (Played by Jim Broadbent) is the librettist,
writing the words. Arthur Sullivan (played by Allan Corduner) is the
composer, writing the music. Gilbert is the very model of a 19th-Century
British gentleman, an overly proper married man certain that he knows
best  which he often does. Sullivan lives a freer life, almost
libertine by comparison; but there is a seriousness of purpose in him.
For nearly a decade, Gilbert and Sullivan's collaborations have
delighted the English people. Their popular comic operas have recouped
handsomely for the successful Savoy Theatre; impresario Richard D'Oyly
Carte (played by Ron Cook) himself is a stabilizing influence, gently
but firmly overseeing the two men.
But, in 1884, as a London heat wave cuts into the theater trade, their
latest work, `Princess Ida' receives only lukewarm press. Sullivan
wants to quit and compose more serious music, but the two are
contractually obligated to create a new work for Carte. Sullivan rejects
Gilbert's next idea as `topsy-turvy' and unbelievable, and although
Gilbert tries to accommodate him, they cannot agree. Mired at a creative
impasse, Gilbert and Sullivan can barely converse.
Then, Gilbert's wife, Lucy `Kitty': Gilbert (Lesley Manville), drags him
along to a Japanese exhibition. Exposure to the very different culture
sparks inspiration in Gilbert. He rebounds, conceiving `The Mikado.' The
concept encourages Sullivan, and the production comes together, which is
when the TRULY hard work begins.
Written and Directed by Mike Leigh (Secrets and Lies, Life is Sweet) the
film is visually impressive and amazingly well performed. However, the
pace of the movie is leisurely at best, which unfortunately makes for an
ass-numbing collection of costumes, characters and sub-plots. There are
so many characters and background stories introduced through the film
that you almost need a playbill just to keep up with everything. What's
worse, is that after spending so much time working through all of the
developing plots, all the stories seems to get wrapped up at a blinding
pace towards the last 30 minutes of the film.
Fans of Gilbert and Sullivan's work will no-doubt delight in the
fantastic musical numbers (some performed in their operatic entirety),
but will they want to see all of the this combined with the backstage
bickering and headaches that it took to accomplish such memorable
pieces?
Overall the movie looks good, the costumes are beautiful and its
fascinating to watch all the people working together, but when spread
out over the 160 minutes of running length, it just makes for a long,
drawn-out film appealing primarily to most viewers' mothers.
My opinion: a good rental for a rainy day.
Director: Mike Leigh
Producer:  Simon Channing-Williams
Screenwriter: Mike Leigh
Stars:  Jim Broadbent, Allan Corduner, Lesley Manville, Eleanor David,
Ron Cook, Timothy Spall, Kevin McKidd,  Martin Savage, Shirley
Henderson, Dorthy Atkinson, Wendy Nottingham, Jonathan Aris
MPAA Rating: R
Year of Release: 1999
