Title
Review for Shine (1996)
Number of Reviews
18

Author
Edwin Jahiel
SHINE (Australia, 1995) *** 1/2  Directed by Scott Hicks. Written by Jan
Sardi. hotography, Geoffrey Simpson. Editing,Pip Karmel. Production design,
Vicki Niehus. Music, David Hirschfelder. Produced by Jane Scott. Cast:
Geoffrey Rush (David Helfgott as an adult), Noah Taylor (David as a young
man), Alex Rafalowicz (David as a child), Armin Mueller-Stahl (Peter
Helfgott), Lynn Redgrave (Gillian), John Gielgud (Cecil Parkes), Googie
Withers (Katharine Prichard) et al. A Fine Line release. 105 min. PG-13
"Shine" was the sensation at last year's Sundance Festival. You can see
(and hear) why. It is not a film-by-the-numbers concoction of special
effects or robotic characters, made for everybody's major target audience
of teens to 25-year olds, plus a few old geezers in their thirties. It is
about real people, doubly so as this is a true, un-fancied up story. While
the facts are special, they are not as as unusual as some may think.
Artists can and do crack  under severe pressures, the way Australian
pianist David Helfgott did.
The movie is excellent, although it leaves some questions unanswered about
certain  times, places and people's backgrounds. The Helfgotts live in
Perth, I believem but various press items say Adelaide, Melbourne or "a
city." There are other unclarities.
Peter Helfgott, the head (most emphatically) of the family, is a Polish Jew
who had emigrated to Australia before World War II. (I have seen mentions
of "a German Jews," perhaps because he speaks the language). His late
father seems to have been very authoritarian. Peter's passion was music but
this was opposed. A violin he had bought when young was smashed by his
father.
Peter is a gravely traumatized individual. All or most of his relatives
were killed in the Holocaust. The man is a pauper, not merely a low-income
earner.  He dwells in a miserable house, almost a shack, with his wife and
kids.
The apple of his eye is young David who, as a child, is something of a
piano prodigy. His teacher is his father. Peter is imperious,bullying,
tyrannical, intolerant yet at the same time terribly possessive. "No one
will love you as I" is his leitmotiv to David at all stages of  his son's
life. It is clear that Monster Dad is not quite all there.Which gene went
wrong in him is unknown. So is  information of how and when Peter acquired
the musical training that allows him to teach his son so ably.
When  a professional teacher wants to instruct  the so-promising David,
Peter's "I can't afford to pay for lessons" is true statement but also an
alibi. He just won't let go of his son.Eventually he relents. Later he
grudgingly accepts having the local Jewish community lend a hand to the
boy. Visiting Jewish-American super-star violinist Isaac Stern offers to
get David to America, a wonderful scholarship and invitation are extended
Peter, perhaps  the Holcaust destroyed so many families, wants the boy to
stay with him. He refuses to let him go to the U.S.A.
In spite of his horrid, mad background, when David places second in an
all-Australia competition he  becomes a young star nationally. Finally
breaking away from Dad, he ignores his maledictions and opposition and
accepts a scholarship at London's Royal Academy of Music.
His first public concert in England is a triumph. But it is immediately
followed by a mental collapse, then a long maladythat lasts for several
years. Eventually comes a cure, incomplete but sufficient to return David
to the world of performing brilliantly in public. He will tour North
America in March 1997.
Except for some lack of fact-giving "Shine" shines in every way.  The
performances could not be better.  In small parts, beautifully done, are:
the great, amazing, versatile Sir John Gielgud ( David's teacher in London)
who will be 93 in April 1997 (Aries); Lynn Redgrave (the astrologer who
marries David and helps his recovery), a youngster of 54 (in March 1997),
sweet and lovely ; the charmingly named Googie Withers (David's good,
understanding friend) who, though not a major star, enhanced more than a
dozen, mostly British films from the late1930s to the mid-1950s. She
resurfaced in two fine features in 1985 and 1994.
The youngsters who play David as a child and as an adolescent are perfectly
cast. Geoffrey Rush (David as an adult), an admired stage actor who has
also been in films, is  extraordinary. His constant, endlessly repeated,
jabbered comments to himself and to others, uttered with a happy, friendly
face, are a unique tour-de-force which copies the real David. The only
approximate comparisons I can make are to the manic David Thewlis in
"Naked" and to several agitated characters by James Woods.
Peter is played by the former East German actor Armin Mueller-Stahl. He has
been in American films since 1989's "The Music Box." You may remember him
in "Avalon,"  "Kafka,"  "Night on Earth" (the New York cabbie) and "The
Last Good Time." While David is the center of the movie, Peter's portrayal
is the most cryptic and perhaps complex.
Eloquent  bits of business are numerous. Like Peter, a non-believer,
visiting a rabbi to make arrangements for David and donning a skullcap
--perhaps for the first time everr. Or else he once had faith but the
Holocaust may have caused him to lose it. As he starts on the corridor
leading to the exit, he removes the cap.  Like Peter again,in his pitiful
yard,  simply glances at a barbed wire.The reference to death camps is
instantaneous.
"Shine" gives a new meaning to "family movie," as do the current "Mother"
and especially the French "Thieves."
This review and others  can be found at : http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel/

Author
Christopher Null
     In Hollywood, you just can't make a movie like SHINE.  Put simply,
it is just not allowed.
     This is our loss and Australia's gain, because SHINE comes off as
one of the upper-echelon films of the year, an ambitious and unflinching
look at that country's David Helfgott, a prodigy of a pianist driven
insane by his father, only to emerge again after 20 years of
institutionalization.
     The film tracks David's tumultuous life from young boy (Alex
Rafalowicz) to young man (FLIRTING's Noah Taylor) to adulthood
(Australian stage actor Geoffrey Rush).  David's father Peter (Armin
Mueller-Stahl) pushes young David so hard (his motto: "Win!  Win! 
Win!") that his mind slowly crumbles before our very eyes.  And while
Peter wants David to be The Best, he doesn't want him away from home,
and his overprotectionism, combined with Peter's insistence that David
master Rachmaninoff's 3rd Piano Concerto (the "Rach 3," considered one
of the most difficult piano pieces ever written), eventually drives
David over the edge.
     Extremely compelling for a film that is essentially a character
study of one man, SHINE succeeds by leaving out no detail and by
masterfully using the camera to capture an inner turmoil that would be
impossible for us to feel otherwise.  Exquisite is the string of
five-star performances by Rush, Taylor (a favorite of mine),
Mueller-Stahl, and supporting players John Gielgud and Lynn Redgrave. 
Rush's frantic jabbering as the insane adult Helfgott so perfectly
captures the mood that he deserves (and is receiving) serious notice. 
And let me not forget the music, which is awe-inspiring (especially the
unbelievable Rach 3), and which makes you want to applaud after each
piece is performed.
     SHINE isn't flawless, though -- the biggest problem is a *serious*
defect in the sound quality, normally no big deal, but inexcusable in a
film about music.  The roundabout plot structure will not appeal to
every filmgoer, and when the movie was over, I felt a bit cheated by the
lack of a real ending.  (Helfgott has returned to sanity and is
allegedly going to play at the Oscars if SHINE is nominated -- an event
that the film, as it stands, would never portend.)
     I guess you can't have everything.  But maybe leaving the audience
hungry for more was the whole idea.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Scott Renshaw
     It has been a long time since a film inspired as profound a case of
"What am I missing?" in me as SHINE.  This Australian drama has been a
fixture on year-end top ten lists, won a Best Picture nod from the
National Board of Review, and picked up a New York Film Critics
Association Best Actor for star Geoffrey Rush.  So I sat myself down to
watch SHINE, and I waited to be transported.  And I waited.  And I waited.
And it never happened.  SHINE is an extremely well-crafted film, but it
doesn't pay off at a gut level.  Director Scott Hicks' restrained approach
to an uplifting story ends up choking much of the life out of it.
     SHINE is based on the true story of David Helfgott, who is an
emotionally troubled 40-year-old (Geoffrey Rush) when first we see him.
The film then flashes back to David's youth in Perth, Australia, where he
is a piano prodigy under the strict supervision of his domineering father
Peter (Armin Mueller-Stahl).  David's raw talent is apparent to all who
see him, but Peter refuses to allow David to leave home for an opportunity
to study music in the United States.  The teenage David (Noah Taylor)
accedes to his father's wishes once, but a scholarship to the Royal
College of Music in London is too much to pass by.  Disowned by his father
for his disobedience, David leaves for London and studies with Professor
Cecil Parkes (John Gielgud), but his latent eccentricities become a
full-fledged collapse which institutionalizes him for nearly twenty years.
     There is a lot to like about the first half of SHINE, which focuses
on the relationship between David and his father.  Peter Helfgott is a
great character, a Holocaust survivor whose obsessive control over his
family masks a deep fear of losing them.  Armin Mueller-Stahl brings out
both sides of the complex Peter -- the loving father who embraces David in
the middle of the night and the tyrant who beats him and forces him to
repeat "I am a very lucky boy" -- making him a sympathetic figure in spite
of his cruelty.  Noah Taylor carries his half of the relationship as well,
making his desire to master the incredibly challenging 3rd Piano Concerto
by Rachmaninoff an effort both to make his father proud and to prove his
own talent without Peter's guidance.  Perhaps the film's best sequence
involves David's performance of the "Rach 3" at the Albert Hall, wild hair
and sweat flying in slow motion as his ultimate artistic triumph becomes a
mute pounding of keys.
     The screenplay by Jan Sardi explores several other relationships of
David's, but it soon becomes clear that none of them are as compelling as
the relationship between David and Peter.  There is a briefly-explored
friendship between David and Socialist author Katharine Prichard (Googie
Withers), the teacher-student interaction with Professor Parkes, and
eventually a romance involving an astrologer named Gillian (Lynn
Redgrave), yet there is little passion to any of them.  Even the death
of one character cannot evoke much emotional response, and David's match
with Gillian is apparently the result of complementary astrological charts
instead of a genuine connection between them.  SHINE may be about David
Helfgott, but Peter Helfgott is the real soul of the film, and when he
disappears from the narrative there is nothing to drive it forward.
Geoffrey Rush's performance as the adult David is superb, a portrait of
mental illness which is vivid and lacking the obtrusive kookiness of many
screen depictions of such conditions; his mile-a-minute monologues full of
puns and streams of consciousness display a brilliant mind imploding upon
itself.  There simply isn't much to the second half of SHINE which leads
us to a conclusion.  David begins to re-enter society and to play music
again, but the process of his healing is taken almost for granted.
     The real fault for SHINE's failings lies with director Scott Hicks,
who discovered David Helfgott's story and decided to turn it into a film.
Hicks' background is in documentary film-making, and it seems that his
instinct is to let David's story tell itself.  Most films about characters
struggling to triumph over adversity play to the broadest possible
emotional canvas, and it is admirable that Hicks has chosen not to
bludgeon his audience insensible with feel-good signifiers.  However, he
takes SHINE several miles too far in the opposite direction, and finds
himself with a film which drifts when it should be building to an
emotional resolution.  SHINE is a good-looking, good-sounding and
thoroughly professional production with a pair of excellent performances
by Armin Mueller-Stahl and Geoffrey Rush.  It is also too sedate by half,
a story of shattered genius which opts for a dim glow when it needs a
dazzling shine.

Author
Ben Hoffman
Briefly, SHINE is among the best, the most entertaining, the most
involving film of the year.  The film is, more or less loosely, based
on the life of David Helfgott, an eccentric, fascinating Australian
classical pianist and covers his life from 1950 to 1980.  A great cast
coupled with spellbinding music as well as the direction by Scott
Hicks combine  to make this a most memorable film.  The film's title
is from a press clipping his father saves which says that at the
concert, "David Shines."
Using flashbacks, director Hicks shows  David as an exceptional talent
at a very early age, (Alex Rafalowicz), becoming a young man (Noah
Taylor) and finally as a 40-year-old adult.   The casting is superb so
that not for a moment will you doubt that the three are really the
same person at different ages. . . right down to their mannerisms.
David is a young Jewish boy whose father Peter (Armin Mueller-Stahl,
who has been in some very fine films, most notably, THE MUSIC BOX) was
deprived by the holocaust and other circumstances of being able to
pursue a musical career and who now pushes his son so Peter can
vicariously live the life  which he never had, very similar to what
Mozart's father did to him.   He is constantly reminding young David
of how lucky he is, making him repeat the phrase over and over: "I am
lucky,".
When David gets a scholarship in America, his father turns it down.
When David, now a young man, is able to go to a music school in
London, his father, no longer able to impose his wishes on David tells
him that   if he leaves the house he will never be allowed to return.
This is the biggest factor in David's suffering a nervous breakdown,
receiving shock treatments and ending up in a psychiatric hospital.
One of the moments in the film that had me gulping back tears was when
a woman who was a volunteer pianist at the hospital is playing.the
piano.  When David turns the page for her, she asks, "So you can read
music?" and the disheveled, nervous David replies "Yes."  The woman
asks his name and when he tells her it is David Helfgott, she nods and
suddenly it dawns on her who he is and what has become of him. . . a
high point for me in this wonderful film.
Stage actor Geoffrey Rush is simply magnificent in his portrayal of
David.  Others in this exceptional cast are Lynn Redgrave, John
Gielgud, Googie Withers, Sonia Todd and Nicholas Bell.   What more can
we say except to urge you not to miss seeing this great film.

Author
James Brundage
The Scott Hicks film "Shine" is a stunning blend of music and cinema. He has
directed one of the best films of the year (and has a Best Picture and Best
Director nominee to prove for it).
This interesting and engaging film opens with Geoffrey Rush (Young Einstein)
talking in an all-too fast voice and then cascades to reveal more and more
of his abusive childhood through flashbacks. Each time Rush appears on
screen, he captures your attention with his eccentric performance, and is
now running neck-to-neck in my guess for the Best Actor Academy Award (with
Ralph Finnes of "The English Patient" as his only major competitor). It a
probability that he will get the award, if only because of the fact that he
plays with such passion that he can easily portray the wild lifestyle of
pianist David Helfgott.
The film's style allows the audience to get a good taste of the spirit of
Helfgott, showing them him playing his own, darker interpretation of the
monstrous "Ragmaninnov's Concherto #3" and then allowing everyone to see
just how abusive his father was, hanging up the phone every time David tries
to call him.
The real David was the pianist for most of the film, and the performance
shows through in one particular scene in which he sits down at a piano in
the middle of an Australian piano bar and proceeds to play all of "Flight of
the Bumblebee" with a cigarette hanging out of his mouth.
Although it takes a degree of musical appreciation to enjoy, the film is
good enough quality wise to make an entertaining two hours. This one is
worth seeing if you enjoy quality pictures, but is neither funny nor
suspenseful. It is a story with power, not a story with thrills.

Author
Shane Burridge
True story of David Helfgott, a teenage pianist who won a scholarship
to The London Royal College of Music, had a nervous breakdown, and
returned home to Australia a forgotten recluse (although after the
Australian release of this film, the public showed a renewed interest
in him and he responded with a successful nationwide tour).  Three
actors play Helfgott - as a boy, a teenager, and an adult - but it's
the latter performance by Geoffrey Rush that's most absorbing.  How
much time did Rush and scriptwriter Jan Sardi spend with the real-life
Helfgott to capture his flustered, stream-of-consciousness speech so
naturally?  Rush's performance is such a powerhouse one (he doesn't
use a hand double for the piano-playing sequences) that it's easy to
overlook the similarly fine turns by his younger incarnations.  And
don't forget Scott Hicks' seamless directing job - it would be
tempting for any director to use the tormented-genius premise as an
excuse to go over the top, but Hicks keeps a tight rein on his story.
Emotional core of the film is harder to pin down - clearly it must be
Helfgott himself, but since he has been repressed by his father (Armin
Mueller-Stahl), a Polish Jew whose own father denied him access to a
musical instrument, he's not given to emotion easily (until his
wordless, memorable final scene on stage).  Also it's kind of
difficult to empathize with (a) mental instability, and (b) musical
genius.  The emotional focus of the story is instead directed toward
Helfgott.  Everyone he comes in contact with responds to him
positively; everybody loves him -  writer Katharine Prichard (Googie
Withers), his mentor Cecil Parkes (John Gielgud, still going strong),
his wife-to-be Gillian (Lynn Redgrave), and his family.  Despite all
the feel-good overtones, story never gets sappy, sentimental, or
manipulative.  Only point to consider after viewing is why no
explanation is offered for the cause of Helfgott's dysfunction.  Was
it simply too much strain that led to a mental collapse?  Were his
problems impressed on him from the start by his obssessive father? 
Was it purely medical in cause?  Or are we to be left with the
assumption that genius goes hand-in-glove with it's own special
madness?  As the film doesn't say one thing or another about any of
these possibilities it is the last one that might leave you with the
strongest impression, and since the expression `shine' is never
equated with Helfgott during the course of the film it's natural to
assume that it refers to the light of his talent which burned too
bright and too fast.  Or perhaps he `shone' because his father was
part Polish.  I know, I know.  I'm sorry... it was too hard to resist.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     SHINE is a true story, a biography of a sort of local celebrity in
Australia.  The man is eccentric to the point of being nearly autistic
but is also a brilliant pianist.  David Helfgott is a man with many
personal demons, some real and some imagined, who was a musical prodigy
but could not face the pressures that a musical career placed on him.
The greatest of all the pressures came from his father, a man of huge
rages who wanted to control David like he would control a puppet.
     As SHINE opens, we see David as just another schizoid wandering a
city street like you might see in any big city.  He is seen staring in
at a small wine bar after closing time.  The staff at first sees him as
trouble, but find his quick staccato conversation endearing.  They
decide to give him a ride home.  From there film flashes back to
David's youth to show us the forces that created this apparent human
wreckage.  David is the son of Peter Helfgott, a Polish Jew whose
entire family was murdered in the Holocaust.  Peter survived, but
hardly intact.  Emotionally blasted by his loses he irrationally holds
his new family in an iron grip.  Out of an irrational fear of losing
these new loved ones he refuses them the freedom of making any
decisions for themselves, least of all decisions that may take them
away from him.  Peter Helfgott treats the members of his family as
something between objects and pets.  Criticism and even blows are
administered on a daily basis while praise is reserved only for the
most special of occasions.  David, who has never known any other
treatment accepts it and considers it natural.  And through this
treatment he is able to become an exceptional talent as a pianist,
perhaps even brilliant.  In spite of his family's low income and the
crude facilities available locally, David is able to prove his talent
in competition and even comes to the attention of the great Isaac
Stern.  But any attempt that David makes to go someplace to develop his
talent is vetoed by his father.  The film follows David as eventually
he does get away and makes an effort to develop his great talent, but
the struggle to escape his father has already too far weakened him and
taken too much of a toll.
     What is interesting in the film is the affect that music has on
David.  As a boy music is a negative influence on him, dragging him
down into the strange psychological state he eventually reaches.  He is
eventually even forbidden to play the piano for fear of the effect it
will have on him.  Yet the same music is also what pulls him out of
that slump, returning some semblance of a life and even a career to
him.  Also remarkable is how people seem to keep finding David
endearing.  In spite of his many problems and the infinite patience
that is required for dealing with him, the adult David seems to have
the charm somehow to attract admirers and people who are willing to
care for him.  The adult David strikes one as having an intelligent,
but uncontrolled mind.  He talks as fast as his fingers move playing
the Rachmaninoff Third Piano Concerto, but he jumps from idea to idea
and drops each for the next.
     Top billing ironically goes to Armin Mueller-Stahl who plays Peter
Helfgott.  Mueller-Stahl is a good actor with a single
characterization, but he rarely varies from that characterization and
shows any breadth in his acting ability.  The reason that the actor
playing David does not get top billing is because it is shared among
three actors: Alex Rafalowicz playing David as a boy, Noah Taylor plays
him as a teenager, and Geoffrey Rush plays the adult version.  Rush
seems to be getting the most attention for the role, but all three are
interesting actors.  Other recognizable actors include John Gielgud,
Lynn Redgrave, and Googie Withers.  (Gielgud this year alone has been
in GULLIVER'S TRAVELS, LOOKING FOR RICHARD, SHINE, THE PORTRAIT OF A
LADY, and HAMLET, in addition to doing voices in DRAGONHEART and THE
LEOPARD SON.  It is nice to see that he can find work!)
     While it is possible to see this as a story of triumph over great
odds, it seems like a weak triumph.  It will be hard for most viewers
to see much to admire in the adult David who must seems so incredibly
hard to control.  It seems like a small victory, and may leave the
viewer a little dissatisfied with this as a story of redemption.  I
rate SHINE a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     Just an afterthought: In part where SHINE falls down is in its
allusion to what much of its audience will see as a mystery about great
musical performances.  It does not make clear to the audience just what
makes one musical performance great.  Any good record store will have
two or three recordings of the "Rach 3."  Presumably each of these will
have every note that Rachmaninoff wrote, played exactly as the composer
specified.  And presumably the same is true of Helfgott's performance.
The filmmaker knows that there is great variation in these performances
but besides showing some (silent) sweat on David's brow and showing his
emotional agony as he plays, the film leaves as a total mystery why
David's is a performance more to be prized than any one of the many
others.  I am not sure I know the answer to this question and it
certainly is something very germane to the film.  The script dangles
this very central issue in front of the viewer but makes little attempt
to answer it.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Another overrated underachiever from last year, SHINE is the true
story of David Helfgott, a classical pianist from Australia who spent a
double decade in a mental institution before returning to the ivory
fold.  Three actors play the prodigy, with Geoffrey Rush's adult
arguably the most memorable of the lot.  (He doesn't even use a hand
double!) His stammering, seen-RAIN-MAN-one-too-many-times shtick,
however, is far less affecting than it should be.  Blame better movies
like MY LEFT FOOT, whose tortured heroes were a world more-accessible
than this one.  (Helfgott's story is incomplete and, at times, incompre-
hensible.  More than once I wondered if I was watching a dream
sequence.)  Of the other actors, Armin Mueller-Stahl displays subtle
sadism as Helfgott's demanding, narcissistic father.  Even better is
John Gielgud's London mentor, the one character who comes the closest to
showing us the soul of a performing musician. 
--
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
I'm also on the Web!  http://www.pagesz.net/~legeros/

Author
Chad Polenz
Shine
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1996, PG-13, 105 minutes [1 hour, 45 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Geoffrey Rush (adult David Helfgott), Noah Taylor (teenage David
Helfgott), Armin Mueller-Stahl (Mr. Peter Helfgott), Lynn Redgrave (Gillian),
written by Scott Hicks, Jan Sardi, produced by Jane Scott, directed by Scott
Hicks.
You don't have to be a musician to understand the power music can have. It's
something so forceful it rivals love. "Shine" proves this to be true as it is
a story of a gifted pianist torn between his loyalty and honor to his father
and his love for his music. The film's most moving element is not the drama,
but the music itself.
As the film opens we meet an eccentric man wandering in the rain, he is the
main character, David Helfgott as an adult (Rush). Through a series of
flashbacks we are told the story of how he came to be where he is now. As a
small child he displayed a great ability for playing the piano. He enters a
talent competition and although he amazes everyone, he does not win first
prize. Later, one of the judges stops by his house to give him a "special"
prize, but this insults his Orthodox Jewish father, Mr. Peter Helfgott
(Mueller-Stahl) because he is essentially given a prize for losing. Mr
Helfgott is a Holocaust survivor, he refuses handouts, and teaches his
children, "Only the strong survive."
Most of the first half is plotless, however, many events occur to create for
detailed characterization and atmosphere. Some of these things are short and
subtle, but really add up, such as a scene in which David (played by Noah
Taylor from age 14 - 20) flirts with a girl but his father purposely calls
him away. Other examples include: when David's sister crawls through a hole
in the fence to talk to a boy, Mr. Helfgott seals up the hole; and when David
tries to get back at his father by ruining his bath, he is beaten. I find
family conflict and domestic violence to be some of the most powerful,
dramatic elements in cinema, and this film makes perfect use of them. 
The love/hate relationship between David and his father reaches a boiling
point when he is offered a full scholarship to a musical college in London.
David decides to go even after his father threatens to completely disown him.
I never thought I'd see a parallel to "Star Wars" in a film such as this,
but a Luke Skywalker/Obi-Wan Kenobi type of relationship seems to form
between David and his new teacher at college. The teacher describes the power
of music in such a way it seems supernatural - music becomes to David what
The Force is to Luke Skywalker. 
There are many wonderful scenes in which David's musical ability speaks
volumes on its own, but could it be too much for him to handle? His entire
life has revolved around the piano, and it finally catches up with him as he
suffers a mental breakdown after performing his best concert ever.
The second half of the film is quite strange and jumbled. Geoffrey Rush
delivers an outstanding performance as a mentally challenged adult David, but
the film doesn't give much explanation to his condition. Then again, an
explanation nor a plot is really necessary from this point on, as it becomes
a simpler story about David's day-to-day struggle for happiness.
David starts playing the piano again and many things start to happen in his
life. He meets a woman named Gillian (Redgrave) and they get married. David's
father also makes an appearance in a typical coming of terms scene - but has
he finally forgiven him? It's difficult to tell, but I think that's the
point. In fact, most everything that happens during his adult life is open to
interpretation. The scenes themselves are easy to follow (and quite funny at
times), and it seems something monumental is going to happen.
The only thing I didn't like about "Shine" was the sudden ending and the
choppy storytelling throughout the second half. But despite these minor
flaws, the film works as a good and original drama that combines the power of
music with the human spirit. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com
(C)1997 Chad Polenz

Author
Brian Koller
If 'Rain Man' became a concert pianist, he would
be David Helfgott.  "Shine" is the true-life
story of David, taking him from repressed childhood
to demented adulthood.  "Shine" is always interesting
and never drags, but sometimes misses the mark.
David is the only male son of tough-love father
Armin Mueller-Stahl, a Jewish concentration camp
survivor now living in Australia.  Father succeeds
in making David a child protege, but is reluctant
to give up control over him.  As David matures,
he develops greater psychological problems, with
the blame blatantly placed on his father.  David's
growing success as a pianist is wrecked by a
nervous breakdown, and he ends up institutionalized.
But he gradually recovers, and there is a happy
if unlikely ending.
Three actors play David.  Alex Rafalowicz is
child protege David, timid and polite.  Noah
Taylor is adolescent David, awkward and self-effacing.
Geoffrey Rush is middle-aged David, jabbering,
joyous and oblivious.  The Taylor and Rush versions
of David appear to have nothing in common except
their skill with a piano.
"Shine" is a good movie, but it has been over-rated.
I have several explanations for this.  The addition
of John Gielgud and Lynn Redgrave in minor roles
adds class to the cast, as does the extensive
use of (and references to) classical music.  Also,
the notion of an 'idiot savant' is appealing, a man
who can't tie his shoes or carry a conversation, but
who has some redeeming, extraordinary talent.  Give
David a piano and he's the life of the party.  Take
it away, and it's back to the funny farm.
Rush won the Academy Award for Best Actor, while
Mueller-Stahl was nominated for Best Supporting Actor.
Both give excellent performances, but I can't say
the same for their characters.  Demented David
always charms and never alienates, while his father
has psychological problems that rival his son's.
It just seems too easy to put all the blame for
David's dementia on his abusive father.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
John Schuurman
This movie is about fathers and sons and the pain we pass along as the
generations go by. The film is based on the true story of Australian
pianist David Helfgott (Geoffrey Rush). In it we never actually meet
Helfgott's father's father. All we see is his severe portrait on the
wall (a portrait that is virtually a character in the film judging by
the furtive way the camera and the characters give it worried glances).
And all we hear is the one story about him -- told several times. The
story is told as a ritual exchange between David and his father, Peter
Helfgott. Peter (Armin Mueller-Stahl) tells the story. It seems that he
loved music as a boy. He saved and saved his money and bought a
wonderful violin. He asks his son: "But what happened to my violin?" 
David's ritual answer, "The father smashed it."  
"You are a very lucky boy, David. A very lucky boy. Say it."
Presumably, this exchange is to impress David with how much different
(and better) his father is than his grandfather was. But we don't
believe it. This is the sins of the father visited upon the children to
the next generations. This is just smashing of another sort. 
The defining moment in this exquisitely painful and hopeful movie is
when this story ritual is broken by David. He refuses to furnish the
expected answer -- instead he turns away, the father slumps off -- and
the cruel cycle is stopped. 
This is how it happens: David (played beautifully by Alex Rafalowicz as
the boy and by  Noah Taylor as the teenager), the son of Peter
Helfgott, the son of his father Helfgott, possesses a prodigious gift
for playing the piano. But he is also possessed by his father and is as
smashed by the father's monstrous love as was the storied violin. 
Peter is a Polish-Jew who survived but lost all of his family in the
concentration camps of the Holocaust. Both a child of that dark night
and of his father, Peter is now driven by the demons of fear and pride
and sorrow.
The universal cry of survivors of the Holocaust is "Never Again!" Peter
Helfgott lives out that wail in an oppressive and feverish attempt to
never again lose his family. And yet, pride and anger drive him to try
to conquer the very world to which he fears losing them. He rants, he
bellows, he loves far too deeply. He hugs and he beats his son with the
same sad but ferocious ineptitude. He at once drives the young David to
"Win, you must always win, David," and at the same time when
opportunities come for the boy to study abroad in the great music
schools, he denies his permission and blessing. Finally, when David
determines to go despite Peter's threats of eternal punishment, he
disowns David and bans him from any further contact with the family.
And all the while David is going quite mad. He goes to the Royal
College of Music on scholarship where his genius further emerges under
the care of his tutor, played joyously by the ninety-two year old Lord
John Gielgud. While at the Royal College he takes on the riotous "Rach
3", Rachmaninoff's Third Concerto for Piano in D minor. That massive
piece proves his glory and his undoing. He collapses and breaks down
while in performance of it. 
When we see him as an adult. He is back in Australia, his speech is
full of chattering non-sequiturs, his behavior is bizarre but disarming
(if you don't have to clean house after him), and though quite
harmless, he has been institutionalized for years (no family). 
It is only after twenty or more years of estrangement that his father
Peter enters his life one last time. He again tries to exert the old
control, again the suffocating embrace, and again the story of the
violin. "You are a very lucky boy, David. Do you know what happened to
my violin?"
Averted eyes. Silence. And a turn away. And only then David can begin
anew. Still crazy, but with some understanding women, able to put
together a life. 
David chatters throughout the film about his "ridiculous tragedy." 
I guess it is both ridiculous and a tragedy. But it is a very old one
-- and dug in very deep. It is one that makes me tremble. The sins of
the fathers handed down. Fathers to sons. Fathers to sons. How to stop
the cycle? What can arrest the methodical twists of this history? Can
we really change? 
David's surname "Helfgott" means, "With the help of God." David calls
it a ridiculous name. It seems to me it is our only hope.
For more reviews by John Schuurman see
http://www.mcs.com/~wcrc/movies.html 

Author
Walter Frith
I admire the way foreign films manage to tell a story without standard
Hollywood trappings.  This is a good thing most of the time but in the case
of 'Shine' the emotional impact needed to sustain a film of family, genius,
insanity and redemption is missing.  Based on a true story, the Australian
made 'Shine' is the story of a musical pianist/genius (Geoffrey Rush) driven
to the brink of insanity through the pressure of obtaining success and the
break-up he has with his family after turning against his father's wishes to
leave home in Perth, Australia to pursue his studies in London, England.
 Given the fact that most psychological studies have concluded that genius is
often associated with insanity is a factor as well.  His father (Armin
Mueller-Stahl) disowns him but the emotional bond between them remains.  The
film opens on a rainy evening in the present day and Rush's character is
approaching 50 and the movie is then told in flashback from his days as a boy
growing up in Australia and becoming a legend at 14 with his gift of tickling
the ivories.  I wasn't moved by this picture the way I thought I would be and
'Shine' doesn't have a lot to offer the average movie goer as it is a film
better suited to film buffs rather than for general audiences.  It's art must
be appreciated and I suppose the film's admirable qualities depend on your
point of view and for a look at the life of a musician with emotion and
Hollywood running rampant you can look at 1995's 'Mr. Holland's Opus,' a film
many considered overly sentimental but a balance is not struck with 'Shine'
as it is just the opposite and my preference is the former.  Judge for
yourself.  Other notable members of the cast are Noah Taylor, Lynn Redgrave
and Sir John Gielgud.
Coming Soon: Reviews of 'Secrets and Lies,' 'The People vs. Larry Flynt,'
'Michael' and 'Evening Star.'  "SEE YOU AT THE MOVIES."

Author
Steve Rhodes
     It widely acknowledged that there is a fine line between genius
and madness.  Less well recognized is the narrow separation between a
father's obsessive love and an abusive domination.  SHINE is a true
story of an Australian piano prodigy that examines this border between
brilliance and insanity and between protection and suffocation.  With
some incredible performances, expect to see this movie on many best of
the year lists.
     As the story opens, we see an apparently homeless person, David
Helfgott (Geoffrey Rush), babbling nonsense in the rain.  His manic
speech pattern has the cadence of an auctioneer, and his sentences
sound like gibberish.  As he does throughout his adult life, he smokes
a cigarette rain or shine, even while jogging to get fresh air.
     The story is told in a long series of flashbacks.  The first is to
David (Alex Rafalowicz) at about age seven playing in a piano contest.
He loses, but one of the judges, Ben Rosen (Nicholas Bell), offers to
tutor him.
     You see David has never had a lesson other than from his
autocratic and stubborn father, Peter (Armin Mueller-Stahl from THE
MUSIC BOX).  His father is self taught and proud of it.  His children
can learn music and become stars without help from the outside.   He
can teach them everything they need to know.
     The sets by Vicki Niehus capture well the poverty of the Helfgott
(means Help God) family.  They live in a house with a corrugated
aluminum exterior and a peeling paint interior.  Rosen, in contrast,
has a huge white house with verandas on every side and every floor.
     When David (Noah Taylor from FLIRTING) becomes an adolescent, he
is offered a place at a great music school in the US by Isaac Stern
(Randall Berger).  As Stern puts it, "America.  You know, land of the
free, home of the brave.  You know, Mickey Mouse."  But, it is not to
be.
     David's father runs the household with an iron glove.  He does it
as a protective mechanism since he is a Polish Jew who survived the
Holocaust.  Peter's violin had been smashed by his father.  Peter
abuses David, and one can assume that his father probably abused him.
Most of Peter's abuse of his family is mental, but he does hit David
some.  He alternates behind hugging and telling him how much he loves
him, and trying to toughen him up.  Peter cautions his son, "In this
world only the strong survive.  The weak get crushed like insects."
     The film has three great performances.  Rush will probably draw
the most praise, but I was just as impressed by Mueller-Stahl and
Taylor.  The effect that Peter has on David is devastating and almost
terminal, but you will find yourself feeling sorry for Peter as well.
He can barely cope with the world, and life has not been kind to him.
In most films, when the father terrorizes the son this much, the
audience instantly hates the villain father.  Here it is much more
complex.  The script by Jan Sardi and the directing by Scott Hicks
never go for the cheap thrills or easy put-downs.  This is not a
documentary, but it has a documentary's inherent authenticity.
     Eventually, David gets a scholarship and goes to the Royal College
in England.  There he is trained by Cecil Parkes (John Gielgud), and
there he finally plays the almost impossible Rachmaninoff Piano
Concerto No. 3, known as Rack 3 to pianists.  His father tried to force
it on him at age seven.
     The concert at the Royal College, where he plays the Rack 3, is
the centerpiece of the film.  The cinematography by Geoffrey Simpson
(LITTLE WOMEN) is at its best here.  Watch how David's hair is backlit
so that you can see the sweat pouring off of every hair follicle.
Simpson uses a blend of speeds which the editor (Philippa Karmel) then
combines into a montage that leaves the viewer as exhausted as David.
     At a certain point, David's brain snaps.  It is easy to understand
some of the possible reasons.  After electroshock therapy he becomes
little more that a curiosity back in Australia.  Like an animal at a
circus side show, he plays to amuse the crowds at restaurants.  They
get a kick out of seeing a guy who appears crazy being able to play
such lovely and difficult classical music.
     As could only happen in a true life story, there is an astrologer
named Gillian (Lynn Redgrave) who shows up.  Although engaged, she
ditches her fiance to marry David.  If it weren't real, this part would
have been ludicrous.
     There is much to admire in SHINE, but its beauty has to be seen
and heard.  The piano music in the film is played by the real life
David Helfgott, and it is sublime.  Words can not adequately convey
this moving tale.  Scott Hicks could have approached this story as a
morose tragedy.  Instead he has us look David in the eye and see his
humanity and his gift.  An uplifting story of a person who learns how
to cope with the brutalities of his existence, and if not thrive, at
least survive.  He goes from being a sane but unhappy child to being an
insane but finally happy adult.
     SHINE runs 1:45.  It is rated PG-13.  There is some rear male
nudity, very brief sex, and the violence of hitting.  There is no bad
language.  Given its frank treatment of child abuse, I would suggest
the film is for kids only say eleven and up.  I recommend the picture
strongly and give it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
David Sidwell
Starring: Geoffrey Rush, Noah Taylor, Lynn Redgrave, John Gielgud
We share the descent into darkness of a talented boy pianist. Years later we
see his subsequent resurfacing; in the mid 80's a damaged man walks out of a
rainstorm and back into the world. 
The movie charts the causes of his mental breakdown. 
Based on the life story of David Helfgott, this Australian film is a rich
exploration of the pressures drilling in upon a child-genius, compounded by
the looming shadow of a domineering father.
In the 1950's Helfgott emerged as a child prodigy. The film traces his
relationship with his father, whose encouragement comes at the cost of
demanding David have no life beyond that of the black and white keys.  
David is offered places in the USA, but his father refuses to let him leave
Australia. The effect this has upon Helfgott is cleverly told via a single
reverse tracked shot; David is sobbing on the front doorway of his music
teacher's house. He is well lit via the external house lights. His teacher
isn't home. We pull back and see that the dark front room's window has it's
curtains open. There, in a pool of blackness, is a Grand Piano. David's fall
over the dark cliff has begun.
Instead of being told in a linear mode, SHINE jumps around in time, ala
"Pulp Fiction". This narrative device works well; we see David as a boy,
teenager in London and mental-patient in various snippets. The film then
neatly loops back for its uplifting conclusion. Adult-Helfgott's return to
the light is told in linear fashion.  
The lead role is played by 3 different actors, with the teenage-David
(Taylor) and adult-David (Rush) standing out. Whilst Rush is known for his
TV work in Australia, I think this is his first major cinema work. His
David, whilst clearly damaged - he keeps quoting his "daddy" in a babbling
word torrent, cuddles strangers and grabs women on the breasts - is both
touching and funny. 
Taylor's teenage-David is the more sympathy producing role. We 
are mute witness to his gradual breakdown as the pressures just keep on
building. His father wants him to play the very demanding Rachmaninov's 3rd,
whilst his teacher wants to start him with a simple Mozart.
Technically this is a beautiful film and a lot of thought has gone in to the
production. I particularly like the use of slow motion and sound effects.
One scene has adult-Helfgott happily babbling in a car in the rain. The
sound of the windshield wipers fades up over his voice. With a clever
subtlety, the wiper sound appears to morph into a rhythmic thumping, but of
the same beat. The image dissolves and we realise the thumping is the slow
motion applause of a crowd. But it's US being clapped. WE are young-David
walking up to the stage for our first public show. 
The music, as you would expect from a film of this subject matter, is
critical. And it works very well. The 'miming' of the actors piano playing
is faultless (apparently Rush didn't mime; he really did play)
Helfgott's life is certainly not without it's sympathetic people. Indeed his
return to the 'normal' world is accelerated by his chance meetings with two
very special women. 
His ultimately uplifting story is a magic piece of theatre craft. It shows
that with the 'help of God' we can all find our way back home.
Footnote: the real David Helfgott is still playing. He has just started a
series of recitals here in Australia.  
David Sidwell
   (Melbourne, Australia)    
    e-mail:        dsidwell@connexus.apana.org.au
    WWW:          http://connexus.apana.org.au/~dsidwell

Author
Michael Redman
An Australian child prodigy, bullied by his father to succeed, is on his
way to world fame by virtue of his remarkable skill at the piano. He
wins contests, impresses the right people and teachers stand in line to
work with him. Then it all falls apart amidst sweat, insanity and
Rachmaninoff's "Piano Concerto No. 3".
Based on the true story of David Helfgott life, the film has earned
numerous awards (Best Actor from New York Film Critics Association, Best
Picture from others). It is a powerful portrayal of madness but there is
also a certain "emptiness" to it that prevents the film from reaching
inside the audience with the intensity that the tale begs for.
Helfgott's journey from childhood through his breakdown to a comeback in
his forties is one of triumph over mental illness, however the viewer's
emotional involvement often remains detached. And that's too bad.
Whatever it is that just doesn't "click" stands in the way of this fine
movie being a magnificent one.
Geoffrey Rush who portrays the musician as an adult is wild and right on
target as the rambling fast-talking genius-in-left-field. His inspired
take on the deranged rivals Dustin Hoffman's Rainman. You'll be unable
to take your eyes off him while he is eating up the screen.
One of the problems is that Helfgott condition is never very clear. We
see him as a beaten child dominated by his monster father but driven to
excel at the keyboard. We watch as he gains more and more skill,
learning to use the piano as a means of self-expression. All along, his
eye is on his father's Holy Grail: performing the seemingly un-playable
"Rach 3".
After masterfully performing the piece, he collapses on stage. The next
thing we know, he's institutionalized: a shattered man. Slowly coming
back to life, during the next few years the pianist begins to regain his
sanity. What happened? It's never very clear and that missing piece of
the jigsaw puzzle leaves the picture incomplete.
There are some wonderful scenes between Rush and Helfgott
savior/lover/astrologer (Lynn Redgrave) and some truly frightening ones
featuring the boy and his father. Based on the reviews and awards,
perhaps others see something that I don't, but I couldn't help wanting
more.
[This appeared in The "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana,
2/27/97. Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
berardin@buttercup.cybernex.net
Cast: Geoffrey Rush, Armin Mueller-Stahl, Noah Taylor, Lynn Redgrave, 
      Googie Withers, John Gielgud, Sonia Todd, Alex Rafalowicz, 
      Nicholas Bell
Director: Scott Hicks
Producer: Jane Scott
Screenplay: Jan Sardi based on a story by Scott Hicks
Cinematography: Geoffrey Simpson
Music: David Hirschfelder; piano played by David Helfgott
U.S. Distributor: Fine Line Features
     SHINE is a deceptively simple title for an amazingly powerful 
motion picture.  Based on the life story of Australian pianist David 
Helfgott, director Scott Hicks' (SEBASTIAN AND THE SPARROW) film touches 
on themes as diverse as the nature of genius, the triumph over 
adversity, and the destructive power of love.  And, while there are few 
obvious similarities between this film and MY LEFT FOOT, there is an 
undeniable kinship, if only in the way both portray the extreme courage 
of an individual.
     Long before its American theatrical debut, SHINE had already 
attained the status as one of 1996's few "must see" films.  At Sundance, 
where it was among the hottest properties, the war for distribution 
rights exploded into a public confrontation between Harvey Weinstein of 
Miramax and Bob Shaye of New Line (Weinstein accused Shaye of "stealing" 
the picture from him).  The movie has also earned 12 Australian Film 
Institute (AFI) Award nominations, including one for Best Film.  
     SHINE has its roots in 1986, when director Scott Hicks read a 
newspaper story about David Helfgott, a pianist who performed a flawless 
classical repertoire at a Perth restaurant.  Hicks' interest was piqued, 
and he arranged to see Helfgott in concert.  For the better part of the 
next year, he worked to earn the man's trust with the goal of presenting 
his story in a motion picture.  That tale, which is admittedly 
fictionalized to some degree (Hicks is emphatic that this is not a 
straight biography, although it does include real people and events), 
became SHINE, one of 1996's most stirring and inspirational tales.
     To fully comprehend David Helfgott's story, it is necessary to 
understand his father, Peter Helfgott (powerfully portrayed by Armin 
Mueller-Stahl), a Polish Jew who settled in Australia after surviving 
Hitler's purge.  He's a soul-sick man whose ongoing battle with private 
demons makes his personality erratic and his actions unpredictable.  He 
lost his parents and sisters-in-law to the Holocaust, and the anguish of 
those losses impels him to keep his family together at all costs.  When 
we first encounter him during the 1950s, he is still rebelling against 
his long-dead father's influence.  Peter's drive to teach his children 
to play instruments is a direct reaction to his own father's dislike of 
music (he once smashed a violin that Peter bought).
     SHINE follows David's life from childhood (where he's played by 
Alex Rafalowicz), through adolescence (FLIRTING's Noah Taylor), to 
adulthood (respected Australian stage actor Geoffrey Rush).  When we 
first meet him, he's performing at a school recital.  There, a music 
teacher, Ben Rosen (Nicholas Bell), notices his obvious talent, and 
offers to teach him.  Eventually, after winning several competitions, 
David is invited to study music in the United States.  His father, 
determined not to "let anyone destroy this family", refuses to let him 
go.  Soon after, David's talent begins to languish as his musical 
progress stagnates.  When he receives a scholarship to the Royal College 
of Music in London, an elderly writer friend (Googie Withers) encourages 
him to take the offer, whether his father objects or not.  In following 
that advice, David sunders his relationship with Peter.
     In London, he studies under the guidance of Cecil Parkes (John 
Gielgud, in what's easily his best feature performance in five years), 
attempting to reach his potential.  But, on the night of his crowning 
glory, when he plays a perfect rendition of Rachmaninoff's Third Piano 
Concerto (accepted as one of the most difficult pieces for even a master 
pianist), the cumulative pressure overwhelms David, and he suffers a 
nervous breakdown.  The next time we see him, more than ten years older, 
he's a pathetic, jittery individual given to incoherent, babbling 
monologues.  Public piano performances are long behind him... until he 
enters a small restaurant. 
     Love can have many faces, and SHINE shows two of the most extreme.  
The first is Peter's obsessive, domineering love.  Mueller-Stahl's 
performance defies us to label Peter as just another abusive father 
trying to live vicariously through a son.  At times, Peter can be 
comforting and gentle, and there's no denying that his feelings for 
David are genuine.  But there are instances when the violence of his 
outbreaks has cruel results.  The other face of love is the healing, 
undemanding one, as embodied by a middle-aged astrologer named Gillian 
(Lynn Redgrave).  She offers her strength and understanding to David, 
helping him to rebuild his life.  The film's final scene directly 
contrasts Peter and Gillian's approaches, as David attempts to bring 
closure to one of the great, unresolved issues of his life.
     SHINE would not be as powerful or affecting without the tremendous 
performances of Noah Taylor and Geoffrey Rush, both of whom were 
nominated for AFI Awards.  Although the two actors worked together to 
perfect certain shared mannerisms, each brought a unique interpretation 
to the role.  Taylor's version is young, energetic, and highly-strung.  
Rush gives us a mending David, who, while still hyperkinetic, is 
gradually learning to face the world rather than hide from it.
     Hicks elected to tell the story in a non-chronological fashion.  
While the structure isn't as irregular as that of PULP FICTION, the 
choice to loop through flashbacks then move linearly into the future 
gives the movie a unique dynamic.  Thankfully, there is no voice-over 
narrative -- events are allowed to speak for themselves without the 
crutch of a disembodied voice adding "helpful" comments.  Hicks has made 
few, if any, mistakes with SHINE, and the manner of presentation is just 
one example of a perfect choice.
     SHINE is about building strength from weakness.  Early in the film, 
Peter gives a "tough love" pep talk to David in which he declares, "Only 
the fit survive.  The weak get squished like insects."  This, along with 
the belief that "everything will let you down except music", forms the 
creed by which Peter lives.  When David attempts to follow his father's 
advice, he is nearly destroyed.  The inspirational aspect of SHINE is 
that David fights his way back.  He never gives up, and, ultimately, his 
triumph becomes ours.  
     The film also presents its own inimitable impression of genius, 
arguing that even the greatest talent needs to be nurtured, not turned 
loose like a weed.  Through the power of Helfgott's virtuoso musical 
performances, SHINE illustrates that there are other, more effective 
ways of self-expression than mere speech.  
     In fact, there are more themes and sub-themes here than any 
reasonable-length review or essay could possibly cover.  This is 
unbelievably rich material, and I can say without reservation that Scott 
Hicks' work deserves the highest recognition.  SHINE truly does what its 
name says.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
"We go away from our parents in youth and then we gradually come back to
them; and in that moment, we have grown up." -- Ingmar Bergman

Author
dsassoc@neponset.com (D&S Associates)
(This review is an excerpt from Reeling, a movie review show running
on Boston Cable TV, hosted by Laura and Robin Clifford. Note that the
film descriptions vary in completeness due to the fact that they're
actually intros for running film clips.)
"Shine" is the incredible story of Australian pianist David Helfgott,
a man pushed by his father and his love of music to excel, then held
back by that same man when his success results in scholarships to
study in America, then London's Royal Academy of Music.  Armin
Mueller-Stahl is the Holocaust-scarred Peter Helfgott whose pain at
having seen his family destroyed causes him to react with abusive
behavior when his own son wishes to leave the family nest.  David is
played from his teen years until his breakdown in his twenties by Noah
Taylor ("Flirting") and in his forties, when he's saved by the love
of Gillian (Lynn Redgrave) by Geoffrey Rush.
"Shine" is the best feature film I've seen so far this year (although
I'm still totally enamored of the documentary "Paradise Lost" in my
number 1 slot).  Scott Hicks, an Australian director more known for
his documenaries, has done a masterful job presenting the life of a
tortured pianist to the screen.  He's assembled his film as a three
movement concerto, first taking his time to establish the very young
David Helfgott and David's family background, then going into
overdrive as David Helfgott as a young man suffers through the
conflict of how his success and the pursuit of his dreams tears him
away from his family and finally slowing the pace again as the older
David is brought back into real life from an institution by the love
of several women.
Armin Mueller-Stahl is Peter Helfgott, the sterm family patriarch who
urges his son to excellence, only to become abusive when his son
yearns to take advantage of a scholarship to London's Royal Academy of
Music leaving his family behind.  Mueller-Stahl manages to walk a fine
line and remains sympathetic as a Holocaust survivor who's seen his
family destroyed and will go to all lengths to keep his own family
intact even as he destroys his own son's sanity in the process.  Hicks
underscores Peter's character strongly visually - when David does
leave, Peter burns his scrapbooks chronicalling David's success and we
see the flames in Peter's glasses echo the Holocaust.  Peter's wife is
first presented silent and in shadow, where she remains for the most
part due to the power of his conviction.
Geoffrey Rush is astounding as the eldest of the three David Helfgott
portrayers.  The strange rhythms of his language (both verbal and
body) are right on target - he's still communicating at a very
intellectual level - one just has to adjust to where he's coming from.
He works well with Lynn Redgrave to adjust the hyper quality down a
knotch at a time.  Rush also learned how to key the piano (although
it's the real Helfgott we're hearing on the soundtrack) correctly so
that a double wouldn't have to be used!  That's applying oneself for a
role.
Noah Taylor is also fine as the troubled younger man whose attempt at
independence results in an emotional breakdown because of guilt.  His
intensity and nerdiness gradually drop away as he becomes accustomed
to college life under the tutilage of John Geilgud.
Lynn Redgraves comes into the film very late but still manages to make
a strong impression as the woman whose curiousity and concern allow
her to see beyond David's strangeness.  Her Gillian is a strong woman
who delights in life's pleasures.
British actress Goggie Withers adds a nice grace note as the younger
David's friend who supports his decision to break away from his
father.
"Shine" has a masterfully complementary score that accentuates the
story and the classical highlights of the film.  The scene where David
plays Rachmaninoff's "Piano Concerto No. 3" is simply one of the most
powerfully editted sequences I've seen in a film this year.
Laura and I saw "Shine" a few weeks ago, so I have had the opportunity
to ponder this film and the rest of the movies we've seen this year.
We still have a number of films to see before the year's end, but,
even so, I declare "Shine" to be the best film of the year!
Start with a fascinating true story of the live of pianist David
Helfgott. Add an intelligent screenplay by director Scott Hicks and
terrific performances by Geoffrey Rush as the elder David, Noah Taylor
as David the younger, and especially Armin Mueller-Stahl as David's
father - my hands down choice for best supporting actor for 1996; a
bevy of strong supporting characters, the likes of Lynn Redgrave and
Sir John Gielgud; and the best classical music I have seen/heard in a
film, ever.
What you get is a powerful character study of a musical genius nearly
destroyed by the good intentions and misguided love of his father.
Following the life of Helfgott as a young piano prodigy up through the
emotional break with his beloved father, his fall into madness from 
guilt over the break, to his recovery and subsequent return to music,
"Shine" is an extraordinary example of top notch filmmaking.
Praising the three who played Helfgott at various stages is easy.  The
threes, Alex Rafalowcz, Taylor and Rush are beautifully cast as the 
genius at the various life stagess.  The transition from one to the 
next is seamless because it feels like the same person.  Geoffrey
Rush, especially, stands out as the elder Helfgot.  He is on screen
for only 20-30 minutes of the film, but makes such a strong
impression, his performance feels like a starring role.
Armin Mueller-Stahl is, in a film steeped in brilliance, the best
thing in this movie, and that's saying something.  As Peter Helfgott,
David's father, he displays such a range of emotion - love, jealousy,
pettiness, selfishness and confusion - so effectively, that I can't
think of a better performance this year.  You, the viewer, end up both
feeling sorry for and loathing the man at the same time.  This is no
small feat for an actor.  Mueller-Stahl pulls it off brilliantly.
The musical selections, especially Rachmaninoff's Piano Concerto No. 3
as the film's focal point, are magnificent.  The Rach piece, played as
David falls into madness, is the singularly most stunning visual and
audio music experience that I have had watching a film.  The music is
played by Helfgott himself, but the actors are the ones who appear to
be playing.  It is as beautiful a crafting of movie magic as I have
ever seen.
For award purposes, "Shine" deserves, right now, best picture,
direction, screesnplay, supporting actor and, maybe, best actor for
Geoffrey Rush. High praise for a film, but deservedly so.
After much thinking, I have to agree with Laura and give "Shine" an
A+, my first for 1996!  Would I say it's worth it?  Yeah.


Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Geoffrey Rush, Armin Mueller-Stahl, Noah Taylor, Lynn Redgrave,
Googie Withers, John Gielgud, Sonia Todd, Alex Rafalowicz, Nicholas Bell
Director: Scott Hicks Screenplay: Jan Sardi based on a story by Scott
Hicks
"Practice makes perfect", my mother always told me, but did I listen to
her? Stubborn to the very end, I remember defying her at age ten,
standing in front of the piano and refusing to play my scales. Boy did I
get a hiding that day, not so much for refusing to play the piano, but
for calling the piano numerous degenerate names, and in the midst of the
abuse including the much revered composers Chopin, Mozart and Bach. You
will be relieved to hear that my appreciation for classical music has
improved with time.
I was never a truly talented musician to begin with. My idea of piano
playing was 'slam the keys, make some noise, forget about timing, and
use those foot pedals for muscle toning'. So when faced with a talent
like David Helfgott, one cannot help but be amazed at how a human soul
can transform that hated instrument into the harp of the gods. Play,
David, play.
My mother took piano playing pretty seriously, but I can say without a
doubt David's father was obsessive. My one qualm with the movie is with
him: 'I love you David (shove). I really do (hit). You know I love you
David (whack). If you go David, I won't love you any more (punch). Did I
hurt you David? (kick). Remember David, you will survive, life goes on.'
It isn't clearly explained in the movie whether David Helfgott's main
psychiatric illness was schizophrenia, or a major depressive disorder.
The viewers are left with a picture of a young David receiving
electro-convulsive therapy to the brain, post playing 'Rachmaninov'. No
particular event or reason is given, but one can only conclude that it
was a combination of loneliness, the manipulative and emotional
wranglings of his father, and that unusual spirit which is David
Heffgot.
This is undoubtedly a moving tale of love of music, and survival of
parent guilt. Painful to watch because of the destructive paternal
instincts of David's father, who wished the best for his son, but also
needed to bathe in his prodigy child's glory. So when the fledgling
talent decides to spread his own wings, the control freak parent panics
that he will lose his one claim to fame. Thus reacting in an un-fatherly
manner which forever scars his child's life. A sensitive portrayal of
David Helfgott by Geoffrey Rush and a well deserved Oscar.
So my tale ends with my brother and sister, who were not so disobedient
as I, 'shining' at every local piano competition, winning every
'glittered' prize. Though I didn't quite get my opportunity to 'shine'
as a child, at least I knew what I didn't want to do. So the child which
was Tim Voon, enjoyed the rest of his youthful days, without that
peculiar instrument in his life; and as for the beating my mother did
give me, thank God it hasn't left me with rapid speech; and as David's
father would say 'you will survive, life goes on' - without that damned
finger-twitching, precise metronoming, endless scaling, piano.
Talent Feel Scale: 0% Clyderman / *HEFGOTT* / Amadeus 100%
