Title
Review for Raising Arizona (1987)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The Coen brothers have made another movie.  Two years ago the then 29-
year-old director Joel and the then 26-year-old producer Ethan made a superb
story of murder and misunderstanding.  BLOOD SIMPLE was a great first film
and all the more amazing for having come from two unknowns.  Joel had been
editor on some low-budget horror films, the best known of which was THE EVIL
DEAD; Ethan had no film experience.  BLOOD SIMPLE was a great film and an
outstanding critical success.  More recently the Coens had to prove that
they had more than just one film in them.  Well, RAISING ARIZONA proves that
and while it seems less ambitious to make one more comedy in a market full
of comedies, RAISING ARIZONA is as unique in its own way as BLOOD SIMPLE
was.
     Nicholas Cage plays H.I., an ex-con who went through jail terms as
often as you go through tubes of toothpaste.  Then he married Edwina, an
ex-cop who wants to settle down with him and raise a family.  One problem.
No kids.  And as a cigar-chomping doctor gaily explains, there aren't gonna
be none, neither.  Things look pretty bad until Edwina hears about a
furniture chain (Trey Wilson who played in FX and as the base commander in A
SOLDIER'S STORY).  owner whose wife just had quintuplets.  Now, if some
folks don't got enough kids and others got too many, the answer is obvious.
If H.I.'s so used to stealing....  Well, you get the idea.  And what the
Coens give us a bringing-up-baby sort of comedy done in a manic Joe-Bob-
Briggs style.
     I think while he was making this film, the cameraman must have lived on
black coffee and motion-sickness pills.  In fact, the same might be true of
most of the major actors.  The Coens have a way of telling a story that is
fast and staccato.  The camera moves in fast, jerky motions, making the
viewer feel as manic as the characters.
     The film grinds up biker movies, the prison system, other people's
kids, the parents of other people's kids, and just about anything else that
gets in its path.  The film is fast and it's funny.  And it's not like most
of the other comedies out there.  Rate this one a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
RAISING ARIZONA (director/writer: Joel Coen; screenwriter: Ethan Coen;
cinematographer: Barry Sonnenfeld; cast: Nicolas Cage (H. I.
McDonnough),  Holly Hunter (Ed), Trey Wilson (Nathan Arizona, Sr.), John
Goodman (Gale), William Forsythe (Evelle ), Sam McMurray (Glen), Frances
McDormand (Dot), Lynne Kitei (Florence Arizona), T.J. Kuhn (Nathan
Arizona, Jr.), Randall "Tex" Cobb (Leonard Smalls), 1987)
A very funny spoof about a colorful couple who must have a child and
will try to get one by any means possible. The Coen brothers know how to
push the right comedy buttons as they stereotype a low-class couple and
move them over the edge.
H.I. (Cage) is an habitual, incompetent criminal, specializing in
convenience store robberies, where he gets caught but receives light
sentences because his gun is never loaded. Ed (Holly) is the prison
officer who takes his picture every time he enters the prison, and after
his third stay in the same prison she decides to accept his proposal and
marry him. Through the use of a voiceover, emanating from H.I. as the
narrator, the logical sequence of the story is followed.
Distraught when she is told by her doctor that she is barren and can
never have children, Ed is even further upset that she can't adopt
because of her husband's extensive prison record.
H.I., since his release, has gone straight, working at an industrial job
and living in a trailer on the outskirts of Tempe, Arizona, as the Coen
brothers raise the question of how long this habitual criminal can go on
being a normal family man before he reverts to his old habits.
With news of quints born to a wealthy owner of the largest chain of
unpainted furniture stores in Arizona, Nathan Arizona Sr. (Trey), the
couple reasons that it is unfair that some have so much while others
have so little. So to balance things out, they kidnap one of the quints,
the photogenic Nathan Arizona Jr. (Kuhn), and bring him home.
Armed with Dr. Spock's book on how to raise the child, they are the very
perfect picture of doting parents and a nuclear family. But their bliss
is short-lived, as two of H.I.'s prison mates escape and come knocking
on his door at 2am. Gale (Goodman) and Evelle (Forsythe) want to stay
but Ed insists they are a bad influence on H.I. and for their baby and
wants them to leave at once, but is talked into letting them stay for a
few days.
H.I. is visited by a so-called normal family, his foreman and friend,
Glen (McMurray) and his fast-talking wife Dot (McDormand), who have a
household filled with adopted children. They unleash their herd of
uncontrollable adopted children onto the McDonnough house and it results
in slapstick-like comedy, as it ridicules these families for wanting
children but thinking of them as ideals, not aware that they are real
people.
The film has its moments of serious pauses, as H.I. is filled with
dreams of what should be right and wrong in life. He also has fatalistic
nightmares. One of his nightmares materializes, in the person of a
heavily armed biker from what seems like hell, Leonard Smalls (Cobb). He
is a man tracker who wants more than the $25,000 reward Nathan Arizona
offered to get his baby back, as he fails to make a deal with the
magnate, but not before threateningly telling him that he will get the
baby.
There are a few more complications along the way, as H.I. goes berserk
at Glen's suggestion that they do a wife swapping thing, and then
punches his dim boss in the nose, which gets him fired. When Glen
figures out who the baby is, he tells H.I. he won't turn him over to the
police and collect the reward only because his wife wants the baby. The
other complication is that the fugitives realize who the baby is and how
valuable he is, and they take him from the couple.
There is a flat scene, where the fugitives are robbing a bank and not
knowing what to do with baby Nathan, take him into the bank they are
robbing. Here the comedy was predictable Chevy Chase sort of material.
The Coen brothers know how to make a quirky film and they sure know how
to write side-splitting dialogue. And if you are looking for something
heavier, like a lesson to be gotten from all this or a searing comment
on society, maybe you could even find that here also. Though sometimes
the comic situations and the way all the characters talk funny, seem
forced, it still recovers from these lapses and bounces back with more
off-the-wall situations once reserved for "keystone cop" comedies, like
ferocious dogs chasing the hero, improbable victories for our improbable
hero while fighting Goliaths, and store clerks who have hidden vengeance
inside them. If it is absurd comedy that makes you do cartwheels,
something that is unique and dark enough to have some bite in it, then
this film is funny enough to overcome some of its failing moments.
Dennis Schwartz: " Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Brian Koller
There is a world out there where everyone is equally
stupid, weird and funny.  And they don't even know it.
That world can be found in "Raising Arizona", an inspired
comedy with a feel that has never been successfully
imitated.
Nicholas Cage and Holly Hunter are a husband and wife,
ex-con and ex-cop team that have one thing missing from
their lives: she cannot have children.  With Cage's
criminal record, adoption is impossible.  Reading about
a furniture magnate's wife delivering quintuplets,
the young couple kidnaps one of the kids.
The plot becomes ever more complex and crazy as Cage
loses his job, and returns to robbing convenience stores.
John Goodman and William Forsythe show up as stupid
prison escapees who learn the secret behind the baby's
sudden arrival.
Much of the humor comes from Cage's deadpan expressions.
Hunter is adorable as Cage's excitable wife, while
Goodman gets more good lines than he did on the final
two seasons of "Roseanne".
Bratty kids alert!  Cage's boss pays him a visit,
bringing his pre-adolescent kids, who are among the
biggest brats in celluloid history.  It doesn't help
that father actually encourages them.  Are they too
young for military school?
You know that "Raising Arizona" must be a great comedy if
it can find a good role for Randall 'Tex' Cobb, former
Larry Holmes punching bag.  Cobb was born to play the Lone
Motorcyclist of the Apocalypse, who wears a tattoo that
states "Mama Didn't Love Me".
Web surfing reveals that Roger Ebert only gave this film
one-and-a-half stars.  Well, I'm sure that some people laugh
at my grades too!
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Jeff Meyer
     Alright, new approach:  I liked RAISING ARIZONA.  Laughed throughout it.
Wanted to write down quotes from it (this film has enough for three movie
quizzes in it).  Absolutely the best "zany" film to come along in two years,
and the finest slapstick I've seen since THE GODS MUST BE CRAZY.  But I came
out realizing that I knew a lot of people who weren't going to like this.  So,
rather than review the film listing the aspects that make the film appealing,
I'm running through points which might dissuade a viewer from enjoying this
film:
WARM HUMAN COMEDY:  This isn't the Huxtables here, folks.  This isn't even
Woody Allen's family in HANNAH AND HER SISTERS.  The Coens (writer/directors of
RAISING ARIZONA) are not trying to have you leave the theater imagining how
pleasant it would be to have dinner with the protagonists; having dinner
with H.I. and his wife and their house-guests would probably be the most
dangerous social visit of your entire lifetime.  However, these characters have
a movie screen between them and us, and this certainly allows the viewer a
certain emotional distance, i.e. you can laugh your ass off about what happens
to them.  We're going for yoks here -- rude yoks, satirical yoks, farcical
yoks, and just plain gut-busting Friday night yoks.  If your diet requires some
emotional attachment to the main characters (say more than 30%), then perhaps
you should skip it.  However, if you're a comedy mercenary, giving no quarter
and taking none, this is meat & potatoes.
UNDERSTATED COMEDY:  Really like subtlety in your humor, eh?  Prefer the
understated, symbolic approach to comedy?  Have an oil portrait of Noel Coward
hanging in your library?  Better avoid RAISING ARIZONA like the plague.  Not
that the humor is crude -- it's not.  As a person who believes that the world
would be a far better place if every print of PORKY'S and its sequels were
buried in a Hanford nuclear waste site, I am in opposition of stupid humor as
much as the next mutant.  The jokes here are not stupid, but their not wearing
much in the way of formal wear, either.  They're not going to politely knock on
your door and ask if they can borrow your expensive brown mustard; they're
going to trudge in through the back door, grab a beer out of the fridge and
sprawl out over the couch.  And you're going to be happy they did, unless
you're picky about these sort of things.
JET PLANES WITH ACCOMPANYING ROCK MUSIC:  No, sorry, no jet planes in this
film.  Some of the characters do talk like Goose, though.
DON'T FIND BABIES OR PEOPLE WITH THICK SW ACCENTS AMUSING: Gosh, I'm not one of
those people you see in the Magic Mushrooms commercials, but I have to admit
that the lil' tykes in this flick are just Gosh-Darned cute.  And I do find
those accents amusing.  I'm from Iowa, and no one ever saw fit to give ME an
accent.  Well, nobody ever said life was going to be fair.
HATE SLAPSTICK:  Well, considering how much bad slapstick there are in movies
today, I can understand your reservation.  However, this is really good
slapstick.  There is a 10-minute chase scene in the middle of this film which
should be used to teach both chase scene dynamics and visual joke-telling.
Absolutely wonderful.
CAN'T STAND TO HEAR BACH PLAYED ON A BANJO:  Look, if Bach hasn't complained
about it, what are you bitching about?

Author
Peter Reiher
     I was a big fan of Joel and Ethan Coen's first film, "Blood Simple."  I'm
not sure if it's accurate to say that their new film, "Raising Arizona," is
precisely a disappointment, but it certainly isn't at all what I expected, and
I didn't really like it.  "Raising Arizona" is such a peculiar movie that I
find it difficult to analyze my own feelings about it.  In some sense, that
itself is a sort of recommendation, since I'm a believer in trying to have
unusual film experiences, but I can't help but come back to the fact that I
didn't really like it.
     The story is moderately peculiar, to begin with.  A lower class Arizona
couple discover that they can't have a baby.  Adoption is out, as the husband
is a five or six time loser, specializing in robbing convenience stores with an
unloaded gun.  When they hear of the birth of a set of quintuplets, they set
out to steal one of them for their own.  "Raising Arizona" just starts from
here, throwing in vast numbers of complicating factors and extraneous
vignettes.  It's safe to say that the screenplay is rather different from the
run-of-the-mill Hollywood script, or any other type of script that actually
gets made.
     The Coen brothers (who wrote the script, and then split directing and
producing chores, Joel doing the former, Ethan the latter) have taken this odd
substrate and layered on further levels of weirdness.  The characters are
strange, the direction is unusual, the cinematography gratuitously inventive,
and the overall effect more stupefying than anything else.  I'm not really sure
if "Raising Arizona" came out the way the Coen brothers intended, but it
certainly doesn't work.  Perhaps the plan was to create an overall atmosphere
so bizarre as to carry the film on that basis alone.  Unfortunately, the
different elements tend to work against each other, rather than demonstrating
the internal consistency necessary to carry such a plan off.
     Not to say that "Raising Arizona" is without its merits.  There are
several funny moments, a nicely choreographed chase scene, and Nicholas Cage,
playing the husband (known as H.I., pronounced just as you would expect), gives
an excellent performance.  His character is a dimwitted rube who's not very
strong on honesty, but Cage makes him lovable, rather like a large, stupid dog
whose misdeeds are so inept as to make you feel sorry for him.  Cage's greatest
achievement is that he makes H.I.  seem like a real person, a feat beyond the
rest of the cast.  Everyone else is a caricature, and somehow "Raising Arizona"
needed more of a foot in the real world.  More realistic portrayals might have
overcome the sense that the Coens view not just these characters, but the whole
level of society they represent, with condescension and contempt.
     Particularly unfortunate is Holly Hunter's shrill and shallow performance
as the wife.  If both of the leading characters had been real people, then
supporting them with a cast of stick figures might have worked out.  But Hunter
brings very little to her part, other than a few good line readings.  In
particular, she doesn't show a strong enough maternal instinct to convince us
of the necessity of all the random mayhem that follows.  Randall "Tex" Cobb
stands out among the supporting cast, as an extremely nasty bounty hunter.  And
the babies (of course) are very cute.
     The cinematography, by Barry Sonnenfield, is breathtaking, yet
inappropriate.  In "Blood Simple," every flashy camera move reinforced the
scene.  Here, the wild antics of the camera seem beside the point, as if they
were created almost without regard for what is going on in the film.  They are
worth seeing simply because they're so audacious, but they add little to the
film.  Carter Burwell's music, on the other hand, does seem to capture some of
the tone that the film strives for.
     If there's one thing wrong with "Raising Arizona," it's a lack of
sympathy.  The Coens don't seem to care about any of their characters, except
as the butts of jokes.  Really effective slapstick depends on the audience
caring about the disaster befalling the characters, but if the filmmakers don't
care about them, the audience won't , either.  The Coens made "Raising Arizona"
with too much brains, and too little heart.  "Blood Simple" was all thought and
no emotion, too, but the thriller genre is inherently more cerebral than
comedy.  Good comedy comes from the gut and the heart, only secondarily from
the brain.
     Given its immense uncertainty of tone, I'd have to rate "Raising Arizona"
as a failure, overall.  But it is a very different type of failure than the
typical film.  "Raising Arizona" is an imaginative failure, a failure caused by
an attempt to do more than the filmmakers were able to do.  That may not be the
same thing as success, but it's more interesting than some films that achieve
everything they set out to do.  For those looking for something different than
the average film, "Raising Arizona" is worth seeing.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews, screensavers, trailers & more, visit http://www.joblo.com/
The Coen brothers have been known to do many different types of movies.
BLOOD SIMPLE was their ode to the noir murder mysteries. MILLER'S CROSSING
tipped a cap at the stylized gangster flicks. BARTON FINK left much to
interpretation and played on the old Hollywood system. THE HUDSUCKER PROXY
was their take on the 1950s screwball comedy and FARGO was praised by
everyone in the world as the perfect small-town murder fable. Add THE BIG
LEBOWSKI to the list, with a combination of all the elements from above, and
you've got an awesome career for two extremely private filmmakers. And oh
yeah, then there's this movie...
PLOT:
A simple-minded small-time crook and cute policewoman fall in love and
marry. The loving couple cannot have children of their own so they decide to
steal one from a local rich family who recently had quintuplets.
Unfortunately for them, it isn't long before everyone else, including two
ex-cons, a wife swapping foreman and a nasty bounty hunter, find out about
their shenanigans, and try to cash in on their own.
CRITIQUE:
A perfect film which improves with age, this movie takes all the various
elements needed to create an ideal motion picture and nails them right on
the head! Let's start from the top. Delivering a story like nobody's
business. This is a wonderfully rich and clever tale filled with many cool
characters, classic moments and interpretative showdowns. How I never saw
the obvious undertone connection between the "bad ass" Leonard Smalls
representing Cage's character's dark side is beyond me, but the more I see
the film, the more I realize that much of it is a struggle of Cage's own
psyche. But don't mind all that serious interpretation shtuff. This film is
just plain out hilariously funny! It roars with originality, features
dialogue that should be bronzed and saved for generations to come and
marinates it all with a charming score that'll have you humming it for
weeks. But that's not even the half of it. Let's talk about the
performances. All rock solid! Nicolas Cage showing us what he was all about
before he became a "big action star". Quirky, goofy, downtrodden hero with a
loving heart and a poetic mind. How could you not love this guy?
Holly Hunter playing the ultimate white trash wifey with a precious soul,
while others like John Goodman and Frances McDormand sweeten the pie,
stuffing the entire film with memorable performances all around. But there's
more. One of the most distinctive features of this film is its impeccably
stylized direction. I mean, foggedabouttit! Hand-held cameras running
around, crane shots, unbelievable stunt tricks (can anyone explain the knife
being thrown in the plank shot?), a classic car chase featuring a pack of
Huggies at its end and various wide-lensed sequences used only to accentuate
the film's over-the-top fantastical comedy feel. Amazing, just amazing. But
the Coen masterpiece wouldn't be complete without a touch of the
heartstrings as well. One of the last scenes featuring the husband and wife
team overlooking a child's crib gets me every time! Wow. A hilarious romp
that manages to poke a hole in our tender side, too? Whatta flick. Add all
that to the film's infectious prologue and ambiguous epilogue, and you've
got a movie that delivers on all counts and more.
A cool story, classic dialogue, excellent performances, a catchy soundtrack,
a unique visual flair, humor, drama, thrills, chases, love, hate and a
fantastical element soaking the entire film in a blanket of surrealism. So
if you love originality in film, if you love the stylized ventures a la Coen
and appreciate well-written words intermixed with slap-stick comedy, check
this flick out asap! "There's right and there's right and never the t'wain
shall meet." Okay, then.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars: (Courtesy of the IMDb)
The part of Edwinna was written especially for Holly Hunter. The Coen
brothers lived with Holly, Sam Raimi and Frances McDormand when they were
all first starting out in Hollywood. Of course, Frances and Joel Coen went
on to marry in 1984 and recently adopted a baby named Pedro.
Joel is the brother who usually gets the "credit" for directing their films,
but it is well known that both he and his brother Ethan direct their films
together. They also write and produce their films together, and edit most of
them under the pseudonym, Roderick Jaynes.
The shot in which the camera moves in on the mother discovering that Nathan
Jr. is gone is a direct homage to Sam Raimi's EVIL DEAD, a film on which
Joel Coen was an editor.
The alarm button the clerk presses in the convenience store reads
"Odegard-Trend Security." This is the name of the security company in Sam
Raimi's CRIMEWAVE, a film the brothers Coen co-wrote with Raimi himself.
The character Leonard Smalls (Randall "Tex" Cobb) is a reference to Lenny
Small from OF MICE AND MEN.
The acronyms "P.O.E" and  "O.P.E." spray-painted in the washroom and shown
in reverse in the mirror are references to the Stanley Kubrick films DR.
STRANGELOVE OR: HOW I LEARNED TO STOP WORRYING AND LOVE THE BOMB and THE
SHINING.
H.I. can be seen wearing a uniform with the name "Hudsucker Industries"
written on it during one of the film's earlier scenes. This is also the name
of the company in THE HUDSUCKER PROXY, also by the Coen brothers.
When Nathan Arizona is being interviewed one of the microphones has "KOEN"
written on it. This is a reference to the filmmakers, the Coen brothers.

Author
Kevin Patterson
"My name is H.I. McDonough. You can call me Hi," drawls Nicolas Cage, and with
that, Joel and Ethan Coen's "Raising Arizona" is off and running with the
deranged inspiration of a tall tale. Hi, a dimwitted but surprisingly eloquent
convenience store thief, is the perfect narrator for this tale of love and
kidnapping, rural Arizona-style, delivering his "observations" with all the
weight of a Shakespearean monologue. After several rounds in the slammer, Hi
finally marries his true love, a police officer and prison photographer named
Ed (Holly Hunter) for whom he has been carryinga torch ever since she first
took his mug shots - "the day I'll never forget," as he fondly remembers it. 
Unfortunately, they soon discover that Ed is infertile, and their inability to
have children puts the strains on their marriage ("I even found myself driving
past convenience stores . . . that weren't on the way home," Hi reflects
somberly). The adoption agencies aren't too impressed with Hi's criminal past,
so the two come up with a unique solution. A wealthy family has recently had
quintuplets, so they'll just steal one of theirs - after all, four ought to be
enough for them, right? After Hi somehow manages to make away with one of them
despite starting what is probably the best approximation of a riot that
two-week-olds can manage, the movie follows Hi and Ed as they try to care for
their new addition to the family. 
More grins ensue, mostly deriving from the banter between Cage and Hunter and
from the performances of John Goodman and William Forsythe as two hilariously
inept escaped criminals. And the Coens' talent for visual comedy makes for
some of the movie's best moments; an extended romp through the desert towards
the end of the movie is good for quite a few laughs as Goodman and Forsythe
manage to pull one ridiculously dumb stunt after another. There is also a
chase scene in the middle which seems to come straight out of a Road Runner
cartoon and has to be one of the funniest pieces of slapstick in movie
history. It's nearly impossible to describe verbally, but let me just say that
it starts with what seems like a typical convenience store robbery, but by the
end, a trigger-happy policeman is running through a drugstore trying to dodge
carts steered by screaming women who are being pursued by a pack of house
dogs. 
The only thing that seems a little uneven about "Raising Arizona" is its
handling of the bizarre "Lone Rider of the Apocalypse" character. This hefty,
gun-slinging biker, who seems to have wandered in from a Mad Max  movie,
appears at first mostly in Hi's dreams or in his imagination, but towards the
end he seems to be a real person. While some of the other goings-on are pretty
outlandish, it is not until the biker is revealed to be a physical reality
that "Raising Arizona" clearly crosses the line into fantasy, and at an hour
and fifteen minutes into the film, it's a little late. The biker's scenes are
certainly amusing - it wasn't until after the movie was over, when I had
finally stopped laughing, that I got to thinking about this in the first place
- but it also didn't take me too long to figure out that the character was
handled rather strangely. 
Psychotic bikers and metaphysical distortions aside, however, "Raising
Arizona" is definitely one of the funnier and better-written comedies that I
have come across, and I would definitely recommend it to anyone who enjoys
clever, tongue-in-cheek verbal humor and off-the-wall slapstick.

Author
Gary Benson
CAPSULE: Terrific fun, probably destined to become a cult classic.
     This is the most fun I've had at a movie since BRAZIL.  (Before BRAZIL, it
was SILVER STREAK).  That should tell you something about my orientation, so if
you *hated* BRAZIL, you can probably stop reading now and assume you're going
to loathe RAISING ARIZONA, too.
     Comedy movies usually leave me cold.  AIRPLANE wasn't funny except when
Beaver's mom translated Jive, GHOSTBUSTERS was stupid, and what can be said of
REVENGE OF THE NERDS?   Ugh.  THE HOLY GRAIL was a wasted afternoon, and after
seeing all his movies except THREE AMIGOS I've decided that Steve Martin can't
do a decent movie.  Yes, including DEAD MEN DON'T WEAR PLAID.  SILENT MOVIE had
its moments, but they were pretty far apart.  I've never seen BLAZING SADDLES,
although I understand that there are two funny parts: one where a guy slugs a
horse, and one where they fart.  (I've never found farting to be particularly
funny, see.)
     So, in RAISING ARIZONA, there is no farting.  What there is, is incredible
--some of the silliest anti-heroes you would ever hope not to meet, much less
see your sister date, in an imbroglio complete with a high speed chase scene
(and a detour to pick up a lost package of Huggies), the fragging (!)  of a
surrealistic bad-ass biker, total morons tunneling out of prison via the main
sewer system, and tons of great baby's-eye views of adults.
     To me, that's part of the charm of this minor classic.  It has an
innocence that's believable, a fresh outlook that left me at least wishing it
were twice as long.  Once the action starts, it never lets go, kind of an
Indiana Jones turned inside-out.  Yes, but is it ART?  Well, I think so.  There
are some very intelligent comments scattered throughout, accounting in part for
my going back for a second look.
     For me, this movie represents an accomplishment centered on an internal
consistency and logic all its own while taking the stance that *nothing* is
sacred.  These two qualities are the life-blood of good comedy for me.  (Did
anyone on the net ever see Madison, Wisconsin's Kentucky Fried Theater do their
live rendition of MARJORIE MORNINGSTAR?  That had those qualities, as my other
favorites mentioned above do.)
     In one scene, the hero, H.I., has decided that for the good of his wife,
he must leave her.  His letter contains archaic words and phrases (like "tarry"
and "yon") giving the scene a bathos that is very difficult to describe--we
KNOW H.I. doesn't talk like that, so we assume he doesn't have that sort of
vocabulary.  Or does he?
     In another beauty, a Business Man and his Wife share a scene that looks
just like a theater set.  The perspective is foreshortened, and the furniture
placement and even their gestures and "speeches" seem like something Noel
Coward (or perhaps Pinter) would have dreamed up while wasted on pig tranqs.
     Timing, pacing, camera work, everything is so well done that I got really
caught up in the characters, who are a perfect match to the crazy, but still
believable, world the movie creates.
     If your tastes in humor are a bit offbeat, if you don't mind satire aimed
at bewilderingly stupid criminal types, and if you basically like to laugh
yourself to tears, you're in for a treat with this one.  On the Mark Leeper
Network Standard Scale, I give it a +3.7.  It would be a +4 except I thought
the ending scene was just a bit too drawn-out.  But I guess the denouement was
worth waiting for, so Hey!  Go see it!  You'll like it!

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
The Coen brothers have been known to do many different types of movies.
BLOOD SIMPLE was their ode to the noir murder mysteries. MILLER'S CROSSING
tipped a cap at the stylized gangster flicks. BARTON FINK left much to
interpretation and played on the old Hollywood system. THE HUDSUCKER PROXY
was their take on the 1950s screwball comedy and FARGO was praised by
everyone in the world as the perfect small-town murder fable. Add THE BIG
LEBOWSKI to the list, with a combination of all the elements from above, and
you've got an awesome career for two extremely private filmmakers. And oh
yeah, then there's this movie...
PLOT:
A simple-minded small-time crook and cute policewoman fall in love and
marry. The loving couple cannot have children of their own so they decide to
steal one from a local rich family who recently had quintuplets.
Unfortunately for them, it isn't long before everyone else, including two
ex-cons, a wife swapping foreman and a nasty bounty hunter, find out about
their shenanigans, and try to cash in on their own.
CRITIQUE:
A perfect film which improves with age, this movie takes all the various
elements needed to create an ideal motion picture and nails them right on
the head! Let's start from the top. Delivering a story like nobody's
business. This is a wonderfully rich and clever tale filled with many cool
characters, classic moments and interpretative showdowns. How I never saw
the obvious undertone connection between the "bad ass" Leonard Smalls
representing Cage's character's dark side is beyond me, but the more I see
the film, the more I realize that much of it is a struggle of Cage's own
psyche. But don't mind all that serious interpretation shtuff. This film is
just plain out hilariously funny! It roars with originality, features
dialogue that should be bronzed and saved for generations to come and
marinates it all with a charming score that'll have you humming it for
weeks. But that's not even the half of it. Let's talk about the
performances. All rock solid! Nicolas Cage showing us what he was all about
before he became a "big action star". Quirky, goofy, downtrodden hero with a
loving heart and a poetic mind. How could you not love this guy?
Holly Hunter playing the ultimate white trash wifey with a precious soul,
while others like John Goodman and Frances McDormand sweeten the pie,
stuffing the entire film with memorable performances all around. But there's
more. One of the most distinctive features of this film is its impeccably
stylized direction. I mean, foggedabouttit! Hand-held cameras running
around, crane shots, unbelievable stunt tricks (can anyone explain the knife
being thrown in the plank shot?), a classic car chase featuring a pack of
Huggies at its end and various wide-lensed sequences used only to accentuate
the film's over-the-top fantastical comedy feel. Amazing, just amazing. But
the Coen masterpiece wouldn't be complete without a touch of the
heartstrings as well. One of the last scenes featuring the husband and wife
team overlooking a child's crib gets me every time! Wow. A hilarious romp
that manages to poke a hole in our tender side, too? Whatta flick. Add all
that to the film's infectious prologue and ambiguous epilogue, and you've
got a movie that delivers on all counts and more.
A cool story, classic dialogue, excellent performances, a catchy soundtrack,
a unique visual flair, humor, drama, thrills, chases, love, hate and a
fantastical element soaking the entire film in a blanket of surrealism. So
if you love originality in film, if you love the stylized ventures a la Coen
and appreciate well-written words intermixed with slap-stick comedy, check
this flick out asap! "There's right and there's right and never the t'wain
shall meet." Okay, then.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars: (Courtesy of the IMDb)
The part of Edwinna was written especially for Holly Hunter. The Coen
brothers lived with Holly, Sam Raimi and Frances McDormand when they were
all first starting out in Hollywood. Of course, Frances and Joel Coen went
on to marry in 1984 and recently adopted a baby named Pedro.
Joel is the brother who usually gets the "credit" for directing their films,
but it is well known that both he and his brother Ethan direct their films
together. They also write and produce their films together, and edit most of
them under the pseudonym, Roderick Jaynes.
The shot in which the camera moves in on the mother discovering that Nathan
Jr. is gone is a direct homage to Sam Raimi's EVIL DEAD, a film on which
Joel Coen was an editor.
The alarm button the clerk presses in the convenience store reads
"Odegard-Trend Security." This is the name of the security company in Sam
Raimi's CRIMEWAVE, a film the brothers Coen co-wrote with Raimi himself.
The character Leonard Smalls (Randall "Tex" Cobb) is a reference to Lenny
Small from OF MICE AND MEN.
The acronyms "P.O.E" and  "O.P.E." spray-painted in the washroom and shown
in reverse in the mirror are references to the Stanley Kubrick films DR.
STRANGELOVE OR: HOW I LEARNED TO STOP WORRYING AND LOVE THE BOMB and THE
SHINING.
H.I. can be seen wearing a uniform with the name "Hudsucker Industries"
written on it during one of the film's earlier scenes. This is also the name
of the company in THE HUDSUCKER PROXY, also by the Coen brothers.
When Nathan Arizona is being interviewed one of the microphones has "KOEN"
written on it. This is a reference to the filmmakers, the Coen brothers.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Joel Coen
Writers: Joel and Ethan Coen
Starring: Nicolas Cage, Holly Hunter, Trey Wilson, John Goodman, William
Forsythe, Randall "Tex" Cobb, Sam MacMurray, Frances McDormand
While we watch "Fargo" for the fun masterpice of it all, we watch
"Raising Arizona" for the pure fun and off-beatness of it all.  "Raising
Arizona" is one of the most original and clever little comedies I've
really ever seen, and it's all due to the greatness that is the Coen
Brothers.
"Raising Arizona" deals with a group of hick arizonians (duh): H.I.
(Nicolas Cage), pronounced "Hi;" and Edwina (Holly Hunter), who goes by
"Ed."  Both are pretty much either side of a pole - he a small-time and
incompetent crook, she an officer of the law twice decorated - but after
a couple run-ins during the mug shot photograph, they seem to have some
kind of bizarre chemistry.  After a couple years, and about three jail
terms, H.I. and Ed are married, and decide to settle down into suburban
Arizona, which means trailer homes.
After a while of what they refer to as "the Salad Days," they decide
that the only thing missing is "a little critter," but it turns out Ed
is barren ("a rocky place where my sea could find no purchase," H.I.,
the narrator of the film, says).  But it turns out that the wife of the
owner of a wide chain on unpainted home furnishings in the southwestern
area, Nathan Arizona (Trey Wilson), has come into quintuplets, and the
hapless couple decide to steal one, since it's not fair for some to have
so less while others to have so much.  This is only the opening 15
minutes, before the opening credits.
The Coens run aboslutely wild with this wacky premise, introducing
bizarre characters who seem to conflict with the lives of H.I. and Ed,
as well as their newly-stolen gipper.  For one, two of H.I.'s prison
buddies (John Goodman and William Forsythe) break out of prison, trying
to steal H.I. back into his old life, while growing a little attached to
the baby.  And an incident with the stupid, moronic owner of H.I.'s
blue-collar job (Sam MacMurray) comes to his house with his wife
(Frances McDormand, very pre-"Fargo") as well as his wide variety of
mal-raised children, creating a lot of doubt in their minds, as well as
creating a bigger problem.
Of course, the biggest and most surreal problem in their lives becomes
that of a biker straight from Hell (Randal "Tex" Cobb), who seems to
show up once they steal the child.  He's never fully explained, but
gives the film a mythical and surreal quality, not usually shown in
child-kidnapping comedies (it's like a sub-sub-genre).
The film's big set-piece is a classic chase sequence, promted by the
waning of H.I.'s assimilation into family life, meaning he tries to rob
a convenience store again.  With Ed driving off with the baby, leaving
her husband for the cops, a trigger-happy and obsessive cop following on
the window of a car, a brace-faced clerk with a Dirty Harry-brand gun, a
hick with a car, and a bunch of ferocious dogs, the scene is one of the
greatest suspended laughs I've had, including that one episode of "The
Simpsons" where Homer falls down the Springfield Gorge twice.
The acting is hilarious too.  Nicolas Cage, in his first good
performance, is hilarious, especially in his silent comic scenes.  This
was back in the days when people hated his acting style, but looking
back on it, he really hasn't changed that much.  That says a lot for
critical analysis.  And Holly Hunter shows that she can really do
comedy, and do it spectacularly.  She's a riot in this film, especially
when she begins crying hysterically "I LOVE HIM SO MUCH!!!"  In smaller
roles, Goodman and Forsythe are a hilarious pair of stupid, absentminded
crooks; and Trey Wilson steals every scene he's in as the irate father. 
And, of course, Frances McDormand and Sam MacMurray are awesome as the
stupid hick "decent folks."
This was the Coen brothers second film, the first being "Blood Simple,"
which was a great film, but didn't have that great style the Coens are
known for.  They combine depth with off-beat and wacky humor, and are
always interesting.  This is most evident in "Fargo," but "Raising
Arizona" is probably one of their best accomplishments.  Their writing
is excellent, featuring some truly classic one-liners (a giant,
deep-voiced black prison inmate saying he feels "trapped" in a woman's
body because "sometimes I get the menstrual cramps real hard"), and some
classic scenes of wild comedy (the chasing the baby scene towards the
beginning).
The film is a screwball comedy of errors, combining a little bit of
satire with the Coen-brand humor, which is often copied, but never as
well as the original.  They combine funny dialogue, interesting
characters, and outrageous situations into this film, creating one of
the funniest films I've really ever seen.  It's strangely touching,
somewhat deep, but always hysterical.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
