Title
Review for West Side Story (1961)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
WEST SIDE STORY (1961)
Not Rated; running time 151 minutes
Genre: Musical
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0055614
Written by: Ernest Lehman (based on the play by Arthur Laurents
      and "Romeo and Juliet" by Shakespeare)
Directed by: Robert Wise, Jerome Robbins
Music by: Leonard Bernstein, Stephen Sondheim
Choreography by: Jerome Robbins
Cast: Natalie Wood, Richard Beymer, Russ Tamblyn, Rita Moreno,
George Chakiris, Tucker Smith, Tony Mordente, David Winters,
Eliot Feld, Susan Oakes, Simon Oakland, Jose De Vega,
Tony Mordente, Ned Glass
DVD standard features (region 1): widescreen; theatrical trailer;
dual layer; Dolby Digital 5.1 soundtrack; 8-page booklet; scene
access.  Languages & Subtitles: English, French
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2001
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamswestside.html
It's no secret that I love musicals.  But that love has been tempered by
the fact that musicals, by their very nature, were basically idealized
flights of fancy; worlds in which Beautiful People would break out in
song and dance at the drop of a hat.  Not that there was anything wrong
with that, necessarily; in fact, I think my love for musicals developed
because I needed to escape to the fantasy life they portrayed.
That is, until I watched WEST SIDE STORY, and saw, for the first time, a
musical that addressed the realities of life in the ghetto.  Uh, to the
extent that dancing and singing 'bangers can be said to be real.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
The place: New York.  The time: the 1950s.  Whites hung out on one side
of the 'hood, Puerto Ricans, on the other; and never the twain should
meet.  But someone forgot to tell that to Tony (Richard Beymer) and
Maria (Natalie Wood).
Tony, a good White boy, and Maria, a good Puerto Rican girl, defy
tradition by falling in love, much to the chagrin of their families,
their friends - and their respective homies in the rival White Jets and
Puerto Rican Sharks gangs.  The Jets, led by Riff (Russ Tamblyn), and
the Sharks, led by Maria's brother Bernardo (George Chakiris), try to
talk "sense" to Tony and Maria, to no avail.  All hell breaks loose when
Bernardo's girlfriend Anita (Rita Moreno, as good as it gets) tries to
deliver a message from Maria to Tony via the hard-headed and
hard-hearted Sharks; and dire consequences follow.
The Upshot:
Forget that the late Natalie Wood was no more Puerto Rican than I am,
that she wouldn't know a Puerto Rican accent if it bit her on the butt,
and that Wood, Rita Moreno, and Richard Beymer actually had singing
doubles (Marni Nixon, Betty Wand, and Jimmy Bryant, respectively).
Forget that of all the males cast for WSS, Richard Beymer seemed the
most out-of-place [who might've been better as Tony, at the time?
Dunno...maybe John Derek, the cutie from THE TEN COMMANDMENTS?]; if
anyone had the potential to drag WEST SIDE STORY down a notch or two,
Beymer would've certainly been its weakest link.  And forget that one
doesn't usually perceive singing and dancing gangbangers as a menace
[not in these days of drive-by shooting, anyway.  I prefer the cop
rock-types myself...but I digress].
Forget about all that, because it simply does not matter.  The strength
of the movie WEST SIDE STORY lies in its earnestness and in the way it
conveyed the immediacy of its tale without compromising on its obvious
roots as a stage play.  In spite of their shortcomings, I believed in
Wood's Maria, and in Beymer's Tony.  And because of the powerful
performances of the supporting cast (chief among them the firey Moreno,
George Chakiris and Russ Tamblin as fated gangleaders, Simon Oakland as
the soul-dead Lieutenant Schrank, and my favorite Chick of 'em all,
Susan Oakes as the ruffneck Anybodys), WEST SIDE STORY will always be
much more than Just Another Musical for me.
Not to discount the musical portion of the program; not in the least.
Even without its Message, WSS could still stand on its musical merits
alone.  Composers Leonard Bernstein and Stephen Sondheim whipped up a
masterful score; choreographer Jerome Robbins created memorable dance
sequences (who could ever forget "America"? or "Cool"? or...); and
though Ernest Lehman's script seems a bit dated by today's standards,
director Robert Wise beautifully put it all together in a film that
truly deserves to be hailed by a term that's so often abused these days:
a classic.
And did I mention it had singing and dancing 'bangers?
  "Overture" and "Jet Ballet"
   WEST SIDE STORY kicks off with five minutes of little on-screen
   to entertain the viewer except an unidentifiable (at first)
   illustration that changes colors; so just close your eyes and
   enjoy the swelling score until the illustration segues to an
   overhead view of Manhattan and leads to..."Jet Ballet", which
   begins with WSS's trademark signaling whistle, and what appears
   at first to be a bunch of Misunderstood Yooth havin' fun - at
   first.  I can't think of better way to get the feel for the rest
   of the movie, than these first few minutes.
  "Jet Song" and "Something's Coming"
   It's clear: Tony's trying to climb out of the barrel - and the
   Jets are the crabs.
  "The Dance At The Gym" and "Promenade/Mambo"
   Everytime I watch the Jiggaboo/Wannabe dance scene in Spike Lee's
   SCHOOL DAZE, I see Lee's influence in WSS's "Mambo" (though WSS
   of course has SD beat by a country mile).  And besides the
   amazing dancing, the Gym scene is notable for a grin-invoking
   bit with John Astin as Glad Hand.
  "Maria"
   I prefer the "Tony and Maria are hit with a bolt of lightning"
   instrumental/dancing version of "Maria" to the version that Tony
   sings.
  "America"
   By far my favorite number in a movie full of great song/dance
   numbers.  An interesting contrast of old country/new country
   viewpoints, there is so much depth included here, both
   stylistically (Rita Moreno and George Chakiris burned the roof off)
   and in substance (the lyric "Life is alright in America/If you're
   all White in America!"...man oh man).
  "Officer Krupke"
   The Problem With Juvenile Delinquents, in a nutshell.  All they'd
   need to add for 90s/00s sensibilities are references to video games
   and violent movies.
  "One Hand, One Heart"
   If I had been thinking, I would've looked for a recording of this
   song when I got married.
  "The Rumble/Tonight"
   Great intermix of sweetness (Tony & Maria), sexiness (Anita) and
   tragedy (the gangs).
  "Somewhere"
   Forget Streisand; this song has never been done better than in WSS.
   Here, it conveys a poignant mix of despair and desire.
Don't tell anybody, but the time the (very cleverly done) closing
credits roll around, I'm always a soggy mess.
DVD Thingies:
Nothing outstanding here, as far as DVD-specific features go.  I am
happy, though, for the updated soundtrack (for which I turned the knob
up to 11) and for the 8-page booklet; these alone make purchasing this
DVD a steal at any cost.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
I could note, I reckon, that WEST SIDE STORY tore up the Academy Awards
in 1961, with 10 total Oscars including Best Picture, Best Supporting
actor (George Chakiris), and Best Supporting actress (Rita Moreno).  But
it hardly matters.  Y'all already know that WSS was tha bomb, right?  If
ya don't know, now ya know.
WEST SIDE STORY: (rating: greenlight):
They just don't make classics like this anymore.  More's the pity.

Author
Brian Koller
"West Side Story" won ten Academy Awards, making it
one of the most honored of Hollywood films.  But
it also one of the most over-rated.
The plot is an update of Shakespeare's Romeo and
Juliet.  It involves two rival gangs co-existing in a
slummy New York neighborhood.  The Jets are Italian
Americans, the Sharks are Puerto Rican.  The gangs
meet at a dance to discuss terms of a rumble.
At the dance, former Jet leader Tony (Richard Beymer)
falls mutually in love with Maria (Natalia Wood),
who is the sister of Shark leader Bernardo
(George Chakiris).  Maria pleads with Tony to
prevent the rumble, and Maria's relatives plead
with her to avoid Tony, who is "one of them."
There are good things to say about "West Side Story."
Some of the songs have good melodies, the sets are
good, and I like the bigoted cop character (Bill Bramley).
Natalie Wood is lovely, although, like most of
the cast, she is too grown-up to be a convincing
teen-ager.
The problems begin with the much-acclaimed dance
numbers.  I have this notion that gangs are a
primitive form of organized crime, but the gangs
in "West Side Story" are only guilty of showy,
synchronized dancing.  The rival gangs should forget
about the rumble and hold a dance contest instead.
The songs are also over-rated.  While I like
"I'm So Pretty", many numbers feature Tony and/or
Maria mooning softly (and artificially) at length.
The film's basic message is that bigotry is wrong.
This moral, while unarguable, is nothing new, and
"West Side Story" makes its point far too many
times.
Except for Chakiris, all of the cast was dubbed, even
Rita Moreno.  Choreographer Jerome Robbins was the
original director, but was replaced with Robert Wise
when the production fell behind.  The film's Academy
Awards include Best Picture, Best Director,
Best Color Cinematography (Daniel Fapp), Best Supporting
Actor (Chakiris) and Actress (Rita Moreno).
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
