Title
Review for Zire darakhatan zeyton (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Brundage
Zire Darakhatan Zeyton (Under the Olive Trees)
Written and Directed by Abbas Kiarostami
     Let me say that, after I have written this review, I will never be
allowed within the borders of Iran. It will be the basic disrespect I intend
to show towards my first (and probably last) contact with the Iranian Film
Industry that keeps me out.  It will also be my high criticism of the
extraordinarily strict censorship standards that the country holds close to
its very story heart.  For either reason, after this review, Iran is a
country that is out of the question.
     Basically, Under the Olive Trees is the worst kind of dissapointment:
an unconventional film with a very conventional story.  To say it simply, it
is boy-meets-girl, boy-loves-girl, boy-stalks-girl-until-she-marries-him.
The boy is Hossein (played by Hossein Rezai, the low-budget filmmakers
couldn't afford actors that would respond to a name other than their own).
The girl is Tarereh.  Both of them are working on a low-budget film about a
love story that takes place after the 1992 earthquake.
     While watching it, having discovered that it was about the Iranian film
industry, I jokingly stated that it was a Iranian The Player.  Another
person shook his head and said it was more like Irma Vep.  We were both
joking.  It was a terrible movie.
     The cinematography, the sound, the direction: all hold up under the
incredible stress that a terrible script puts them under.  In fact, the
cinematography is the very best part of the movie.  Iran, as displayed in
the film, is a beautiful and somewhat mystic place where a simpler form of
life dominates.  If only that were true
     The cinematography leads me to believe that Jim Jarmush is part of the
standard film school curriculum, because the camera only pans once during
the film, and does the rest in probably less than one hundred shots.  Shots,
folks, not slugs.  I'm not stating that this is a bad thing, I'm just
stating that, after a while, it gets boring.  It takes away the steam.
     On the subject of steam, the simple fact is that Under the Olive Trees
doesn't have it.  It doesn't have steam.  It doesn't have gas.  This damn
film doesn't even have fumes.  It moves along with the pace of a caterpillar
and tempts you to sleep through it constantly.
 As far as plot goes, it basically has none.  I have already outlined it for
you, but, for those hoping to see a violent `Stalker' film, hope again.  The
stalking you witness is rather a constant badgering and following around of
Tahereh.  In America, we have two words for that `Restraining Order.'
     The influence of the theocratic Iranian censors seems alive and well in
the fact that every other word out of any characters mouth is `Praise' or
`God', both of which, theocracy or no, are bad dialouge when used profusely.
The same is true of films on the opposite end of the spectrum, ones that don
't know how or when not to curse.
     It's always a great pity to have your first experience with another
country's film industry be spurned by a completely terrible film.  Let's
face it, we all prejudge, and I've obviously prejudged Iran as have a great
difficulty at turning out films.  I saw, as my first Czech film, Kolya.  An
excellent movie.  As my first Italian film Cinema Paradiso.  Another
excellent film.  My first experience with Japanese movies, Godzilla, which,
let's admit it, is fun as hell to watch.  Hong-Kong: Hard-Boiled.  The odd
apple in my bunch of very pleasing foreign films would have to be this one.
It's bad, and it's bad by American standards

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: limited release Spring 1995 
Running Length: 1:43 
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Nothing offensive) 
Starring: Mohamad Ali Keshavarz, Hossein Rezai, Tahereh Ladanian, 
          Zarifeh Shiva 
Written, Produced, and Directed by Abbas Kiarostami
Cinematography: Hossein Djafarian 
Released by Miramax Films 
Subtitled 
     THROUGH THE OLIVE TREES, the latest movie from Iranian director 
Abbas Kiarostami (and the third in an unofficial trilogy of which the 
first two chapters were WHERE IS THE FRIEND'S HOME? and AND LIFE GOES 
ON...), is an art-film lover's art film.  Slow almost to the point of 
stagnation, the movie serves the dual function of a 
character/relationship study and a firsthand look at the difficulties of 
making a motion picture in the rural regions of Iran.  If you've never 
had the unique experience of simultaneously being bored and fascinated 
by a movie, THROUGH THE OLIVE TREES is a likely candidate for the first 
opportunity. 
     I didn't fall asleep during the film, but many patrons in the 
theater understandably did.  Nothing much happens during the one-hundred 
minute running time.  There are long periods of inactivity, including a 
climactic ten-minute shot of one person chasing after another.  There's 
no dialogue during this scene, and the only sound (other than the music) 
is the wind rustling through the olive trees.  Those without a tolerance 
for slow, deliberate movies will find this a trial beyond belief.  It's 
not much of stretch to call this the cinematic equivalent of a Sominex. 
     The seemingly-turgid pace is necessary, however.  Had things moved 
faster, numerous subtle and intricate touches would have been lost.  The 
characters are all marvelously realized, and their interaction is so 
unforced that it draws the viewer in.  Kiarostami has used carefully-
framed point-of-view camera shots to emphasize the intimacy of his 
picture.  This movie puts the audience right next to the actors. 
     The story is simple.  A film director is making a movie in the 
Iranian countryside.  He recruits local actors, but when shooting 
begins, a problem comes to light.  His male lead, a young man named 
Hossein (playing himself), is madly in love with his fifteen-year old 
female co-star, Tahereh (playing herself).  Because of Hossein's 
illiteracy and homelessness, a marriage is impossible, at least from the 
perspective of Tahereh's grandmother (who is also her guardian).  
Undaunted, the young man continues to pledge his undying love.  For her 
part, Tahereh is busy studying for her exams and the last thing she 
wants is to engage in a conversation -- any conversation -- with the 
ardent suitor she wishes would go away.  A finer cinematic portrait of 
unrequited love has not been seen since MANON OF THE SPRING.   
     Not only is the courtship (such as it is) of Tahereh and Hossein 
presented with a rare and unflinching honesty, but we are *not* given an 
opportunity to find out how things are resolved.  The film's ending is 
open to interpretation and reminds us that movies are only windows into 
another reality, and it's possible for them to close at the most 
inopportune times. 
     Moments of comedy are sprinkled throughout, often relating to the 
difficulties experienced by the director of the film-within-the-film as 
he attempts to get uncooperative performers to complete a take.  This 
device of having actors playing the actors who filmed one of 
Kiarostami's previous films (the on-screen director is actually actor 
Mohamad Ali Keshavarz playing Kiarostami) creates opportunities for 
confusion, but mostly it lends an air of verisimilitude to the 
proceedings that results in a documentary-like style.  Kiarostami, a 
master of camera angles, uses a preponderance of deceptively simple 
shots to give his production a perspective that's very different from 
that of most current feature releases.   
     THROUGH THE OLIVE TREES is an exceptionally well-crafted and 
thoughtful motion picture.  There is no melodrama here -- this is 
straightforward drama without frills or flourishes.  Nevertheless, there 
are many -- even among the art-film crowd -- who will find this to be a 
colossal waste of time.  American/Iranian cultural differences are an 
issue, but the real obstacle is the pacing.  Those who fall under 
Kiarostami's spell will find themselves mesmerized.  Everyone else will 
get a nice nap. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 
