Title
Review for Striking Distance (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  9/17/93
Running Length:  1:46
Rated:  R (Violence, language, mature themes, sexual situations)
Starring:  Bruce Willis, Sarah Jessica Parker, Dennis Farina, 
           Tom Sizemore, Robert Pastorelli
Director:  Rowdy Herrington
Producers:  Arnon Milchan, Hunt Lowry, and Tony Thomopoulos
Screenplay:  Rowdy Herrington and Martin Kaplan
Music:  Brad Fiedel
Released by Columbia Pictures
     A guy with a name like Rowdy Herrington had better make a more
impressive film than this if he doesn't want his name to get confused
with that of a professional wrestler.
     Tom Hardy (Bruce Willis) is a cop on Pittsburgh's water rescue
squad whose discovery of bodies floating down the river causes him to
revisit an ugly and tragic past.  Two years ago, he lost his
detective's shield when he claimed that the murder of his father,
Police Chief Hardy (John Mahoney), was committed by a cop.  No one
believed him, and the force as a whole labelled him a turncoat.  Now
Tom has a new partner, Jo Christman (Sarah Jessica Parker), who accepts
that Hardy's story may be more than a fantasy, and together the two
begin an illegal investigation of a new series of murders, which Tom
believes are inextricably linked to the chain of events which resulted
in his father's death and his own disgrace.
     Disappointment abounds for anyone expecting DIE HARD on water.
The only similarity is actor Bruce Willis, but this film is sadly
lacking both the slick direction of the DIE HARD movies and the
entertaining script.  For STRIKING DISTANCE, we get a routine cop
story, complete with far too many chases, moments that stretch the
viewer's credulity past the breaking point, and few legitimate
surprises.  The action is depressingly routine, and Bruce Willis has
only one or two opportunities for wise-cracking, which is clearly one
of his fortes.
     Actually, for the first half of the movie, the plot doesn't seem
all that bad.  It's full of cliches, but that's to be expected, and it
contains far too many stock situations, but that shouldn't surprise
anyone either.  However, any shred of competence shown by the early
script unravels as the movie zips along to its ridiculous conclusion.
The revelation of the killer is an absolute joke (and I don't mean a
funny one).  I didn't figure out the identity early, but I would have
had I not given the writing more credit than it deserves.  You see, I
was hoping things might turn out to make (gasp!) sense.
     Perhaps someone could tell me why Sarah Jessica Parker, who really
isn't a bad actress, would take this thankless role (the standard
answer to this question is "money").  This is a prototypical "token
female."  Not only is Jo totally uninteresting, but she's stupid.
It's sad to see anyone in a part this poor, but even more distressing
when the performer isn't some no-name actress in her first major motion
picture.  Did Ms. Parker actually think STRIKING DISTANCE would
advance her career?
     Bruce Willis, who has shown moments of undeniable ability (IN
COUNTRY, while not a great film, was a tour de force for the actor),
manages to be little better than annoying in STRIKING DISTANCE.  Some
of it surely has to do with his character:  a morose, self-centered man
with a drinking problem. (Why do these movies always have to have
alcoholic heroes?) There are a couple of solid scenes where Willis
stays within himself, but those are few and far between.
     Now, as for the relationship between Jo and Tom, I didn't buy it
for a moment.  Not only does it start far too quickly, and with too
flimsy of a premise given the circumstances, but it generates neither
heat nor romantic tension.  It's not that the two don't have
chemistry--given an opportunity, they might have--but the movie doesn't
allow anything to develop.  A couple of bed scenes is about the extent
of things as far as we're concerned.
     The opening car chase is enjoyable, even if parts of it are close
to self-parody (I was reminded of LAST ACTION HERO).  After that,
however, everything settles into the usual action film routine.  There
are about two more chases than necessary--on land and in water.  My
philosophy about chases is that they should be avoided unless the
director has something new to show off.  Needless to say, STRIKING
DISTANCE breaks that rule.  No one could accuse Herrington of anything
close to originality.  He goes strictly by-the-book, churning out a
picture that is pure formula, with a generous does of idiocy thrown
in.
     There are a lot of other bad things I could talk about--the
overblown score, the silly portrayal of the police, the bad dialogue,
the poor lighting in almost every scene--but I think it's pretty clear
how few are the virtues of STRIKING DISTANCE.  In fact, one of the
positive points is that the movie is too loud and noisy to fall asleep
during, which is surely what most people would do if their attention
was based on story and character.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Dragan Antulov
Those people who didn't like Hitchcock used to say that he
made entire movies around single, most effective scene. In
case of STRIKING DISTANCE, 1993 thriller directed by Rowdy
Harrington, the most original and effective scene is
actually wasted in the beginning. What follows is rather
formulaic plot about Tom Hardy (played by Bruce Willis),
Pittsburgh homicide detective and one of the many members of
his family who chose police profession. Loyalty towards his
colleagues and kinsmen is seriously challenged when he
starts investigating the case of a serial killer and finds
out that the perpetrator might be policeman. But this is not
the end of his problems - first, his own father (John
Mahoney) becomes one of the killer's victims, and later on,
his coleague and cousin Jimmy (Robert Pastorelli) commits
suicide after being accused for brutality because of Hardy's
testimony. The ratting on colleague is unforgivable crime
and Hardy is transferred to the River Rescue service. Two
years later, he is embittered alcoholic, but the new wave of
killings would make him re-start investigation, this time
with the help of partner Jo Christman (Sarah Jessica
Parker).
STRIKING DISTANCE is rather forgettable film, which
shouldn't surprise anyone, because the script, written by
Rowdy Harrington and Martin Kaplan, is so full of cliches
and predictable plot twists, that the film itself is hardly
distinguishable from hundreds of similar products produced
by Hollywood in that era. The only difference, perhaps is
the setting - city of Pittsburgh is something like a
refreshment for all those viewers who are tired of seeing
all crime thrillers set in Los Angeles, New York or, in case
they got lucky, New Orleans or Chicago. However, city in
question was probably chosen because of being situated on
three rivers, which allowed Herrington to direct many and
endless chases including speedboats. Some of those action
scenes work, and some don't - in any case, they hardly
justify a whole bunch of formulaic subplots and wooden
characters. The acting is mostly fine - whole bunch of
capable character actors like John Mahoney, Dennis Farina,
Andre Braugher or Brion James do their best to rise above
mediocre script. The lead actor, Bruce Willis, was probably
in one of the worst periods of his career - post-HUDSON HAWK
and before PULP FICTION - so his character, although still
being wise-cracking self, is hardly memorable. Another
disservice to him is done with pairing his character to the
token female in the form of Sarah Jessica Parker, good actor
totally unsuitable for the role and romantic pairing with
zero chemistry. All in all, STRIKING DISTANCE is movie
unworthy of attention, made watchable only by rather sad
collection of great acting talents who had deserved much
better film.

Author
Jon A Webb
     This is the film whose working title was THREE RIVERS when it was
made in Pittsburgh some months ago.  I remember that the city offered
extremely good cooperation during the making of this film; they
willingly shut down streets, closed tunnels and bridges, at the
convenience of the filmmakers.
     All the cooperation paid off.  The film is like an advertisement
for Pittsburgh; it conveys a wholly different image from the
conventional one of a worn-out steel town.  Pittsburgh is clean, a city
of rivers.  We should be able to use this film to recruit new faculty
and students.
     The orientation of the film, toward's Pittsburgh's rivers, is
strong enough to make one think of Pittsburgh differently.  It seems
like we all should have boats, to give the impressive Pittsburgh Rescue
Force something to do.
     The plot is the obvious cop-movie plot.  A policeman has suffered
damage in the past as a result of his encounter with evil.  He has been
weakened to his very soul.  He must confront the evil again; will he
triumph.
     There's very little surprise in the film, though I suppose the
ending qualifies.  A few scenes were oddly filmed, and for that reason
striking:  for example, the shot of the three people tied to chairs,
and the drowning scene at the end.  It's something of a fresh view.
     But basically, this is a Bruce Willis film, with Bruce using
brutality softened by sarcastic quips to get his way, which is always
right.
