Title
Review for L.A. Story (1991)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     In STARDUST MEMORIES, the aliens tell Woody Allen, "We like your films,
especially the 'earlier, funnier' ones."  It is a running gag.  Everybody in
STARDUST MEMORIES likes Allen's "earlier, funnier" films.  Actually, even
outside of STARDUST MEMORIES, people seem to prefer Allen's earlier style,
but Allen does not want to go back to it.  That makes it fair game for other
filmmakers.  With L. A. STORY, Steve Martin is filling that void, picking up
the earl Allen style.  We have a film with a slight plot which is really
mostly an excuse to tie together small skits, jokes, and sight gags about
life in Los Angeles.  Martin, who scripted, is every bit as loving of his
Los Angeles, in spite of its faults, as Woody Allen is of New York City (and
speaking as someone living in the New York area, with just as much reason).
     Martin plays Harris Telemacher who in spite of his Ph.D. is a sort of
television clown weather man.  He breaks up with his mistress who is selfish
and uninteresting and begins dating a 23-year-old nymphette, but he really
wants to win a British journalist (played by Victoria Tennant) who is in
town to write an elitist, snobby, put-down article about Los Angeles.
Unfortunately, she finds both the town and its goofy weather man entirely
charming, each in spite of its little quirks.  But Harris has problems
deciding what he really wants romantically and going for it.  Then from the
most unexpected source, a mystical force takes control of Harris's life and
pushes it in the right direction.  While the style is archeo-Allen, the plot
is really neo-Allen and there is more than a little similarity between the
plot of L. A. STORY and a film like PLAY IT AGAIN, SAM or even the current
ALICE.
     But L. A. STORY's attraction is not so much plot as sidebar humor.
Martin takes affectionate swipes at traffic congestion, earthquakes, the
superficiality of the people, crime, and a lot more.  Here and there Martin
swipes a scene from some well-known source.  Knowing some very basic French
and Spanish will be of some assistance too.
     Steve Martin deserves additional credit for letting someone else, Mick
Johnson, direct L. A. STORY.  All too often when the star of a film writes
the screenplay, he feels he should direct also.  Many good actors have a
very hard time directing themselves, though they do not realize how hard a
time they had until the film is released.  Gene Wilder is one actor who
cannot direct himself, for example.  By letting someone else direct, Martin
can concentrate on his performance.  And his performance is fine in this
slight but funny comedy.  I rate it a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     L.A. STORY (1991), a beautiful parody and homage written by and
starring Steve Martin, opens to a carefully choreographed water ballet
of lawn sprinklers.
     As L.A. wakes for another morning of glorious California sun, the
image is subtitled "Los Angeles, California, Temperature 72 degrees."
We see Los Angelenos going about their morning routines, switching from
one sleepy guy in shorts busily dragging his Christmas tree to the curb
to a suit who chats away on his cell phone as the stretched limo he is
riding in is being towed.
     "I live in Los Angeles, and I've had 7 heart attacks -- all
imagined," explains meteorologist Harris K. Telemacher (Steve Martin).
"That is to say, I was deeply unhappy, but I didn't know it because I
was happy all the time."
     "When the weather dropped to 58 degrees this weekend, how did you
cope?" asks Harris in a man-on-the-street interview.  As a wacky
television weatherman, he fits right in with the area's "culture."
Even so, he is almost fired by the show's producer, played devilishly
by a candy sucking and Hawaiian shirt wearing Woody Harrelson, when the
producer claims Harris was doing some intellectual thing during another
of his slapstickish weather reports.
     In a film so rich that it would take at least three viewings to
sift through all of the humor and subtleties, the show's subtext is
highly romantic and poignant.  The humor is presented with such
delicious seriousness that it becomes almost an anthropological
exploration of West Coast tribes.  ("Hi, my name is Bob," chirps Dennis
Dragon as a saccharinely polite thief.  "I'll be your robber.")  The
resulting film by director Mick Jackson is so funny that I could not
control myself at times -- one belly laugh would not subside before
another began.
     In a completely plastic city, where Harris drives a hundred yards
to his next door neighbor's house, he meets his would-be wife, Sara
McDowel (Victoria Tennant), who has just arrived from her home in
London.  She shocks the locals by saying exactly what is on her mind.
     When not attempting to date someone his own age, Harris goes out
with Sandy, who, after all, is just "4 years shy of 27."  Although the
credits list her as "Sandy," she carefully writes her name for Harris
as "SanDeE" with a star at the end and a heart encasing the name.
Sarah Jessica Parker, who has been too often miscast as she was in THE
SUBSTANCE OF FIRE, plays free spirit SanDeE with perfection.  The woman
is incapable of standing still and constantly dances and twirls, while
throwing her long, curly hair about.  Having not a care in the world
and not burdened with excessive brain power, she lives an experiential
lifestyle.
     An electronic highway sign plays perhaps the sweetest, and
certainly the most unusual character in the story.  The sign gives
Harris prescient advice and even speaks in riddles -- unscramble "How
Daddy is Doing," commands the sign.
     The show is full of well chosen cameos by known actors playing
against type.  Rick Moranis, in a Hamlet take-off, appears as a
gravedigger with a thick English accent.  Best is Patrick Stewart as
the maitre d' of a restaurant so exclusive that Harris has to accompany
him to the maitre d's bank (Fourth Reich of Hamburg) to review Harris's
financial statement before he can get a reservation.  And since his is
deemed deficient in several areas, he can order only a limited number
of items on the menu, and certainly not the duck.
     Thanks to the sparkling and romantic cinematography by Andrew
Dunn, the picture has a magical sense of wonderment about life.  Amidst
all the humor is a sensitive story about a man in search of meaning for
his life.  And in a quest for love.  ("Forget for this moment the smog
and the cars and the restaurant and the skating and remember only this.
A kiss may not be the truth, but it is what we wish were true.")
     "Wow, that was something!" says Harris as the show draws to its
delightful conclusion.  "That was really something!"  As my newfound
friends faded away, I thought, "My sentiments exactly!"
     L.A. STORY runs a fast 1:35.  It is rated PG-13 for very brief
nudity and a little profanity.  The show has so much mature humor that
I think kids would need to be nine or ten to appreciate it.  I strongly
recommend this gem to you and give it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Jim Pellmann
     This one took me by surprise: none of the ads, clips, or reviews I
saw prepared me for this good a movie.  It's an intelligent, funny
romantic comedy, using Los Angeles as a surreal backdrop.
     Written by and starring Steve Martin, it's the story of a "wiggy,
wacky TV weatherman" who gets dumped by his status-conscious girlfriend
(Marilu Henner),  has a brief affair with a frenetic valley girl named
SanDeE* (no, that's not my terminal acting up), and ultimately pursues a
British journalist (played by Martin's real life wife, Victoria
Tennant).
     But this is L.A. and the city is as much a character in this story
as anyone else.  Indeed, a central "character" is a freeway road
conditions sign that magically communicates with Martin and helps him in
his romantic quests.  One reviewer compared this movie's fairy tale
aspects to those of ALICE, but with a lighter touch.
     As is expected from Martin, L.A. is the butt of a continual string
of jokes and the film is filled with jabs at the people and lifestyles
of southern California.  Some are mildly amusing: Martin driving over
sidewalks and neighbors' lawns, and down steep staircases to avoid
traffic jams; power lunchers' blase ignorance of an earthquake.  Others
are wickedly hilarious: the TV station's ever-changing news show format;
Martin's attempts to obtain a reservation at the city's hottest new
restaurant, L'Idiot, where potential customers must submit complete
financial records, and diners are offered designer dental floss between
courses.  Two days later, I'm still finding myself chuckling over some
scenes.
     This is the type of California bashing the rest of the country
loves to see.  But in this case it is all tempered by gorgeous scenes of
the tropical, the bright, the successful side of L.A. life.  Martin may
complain of living in an "intellectual-free zone", but everybody is
enjoying it, and we do too.  There are many visually stunning scenes and
liberal use of time-lapse photography.  The mood is capped by lush
musical interludes from new-age artist Enya.
     With so much going on, you have to look fast.  You'll easily miss
some of the visual humor if you don't pay close attention.  There are
also literally dozens of uncredited cameo appearances by well-known
movie and TV personalities.  Rick Moranis shows up as a
Shakespeare-quoting gravedigger, Chevy Chase as a restaurant patron
whose financial failings relegate him to a table in the back, and
Patrick Stewart (Capt. Picard on the new "Star Trek") as the owner of
L'Idiot.
     While all the performances are on target, it's Steve Martin's
writing that impressed me the most.  All in all, thoroughly enjoyable
and highly recommended.
