Title
Review for Hsing hsing wang (1977)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Michael Dequina
_Mighty_Peking_Man_ no stars; **** for camp value (out of ****)
On many occasion, Quentin Tarantino has gone on record to say that he
loves _Showgirls_ (in a serious way), so it comes as no shock that the
latest rescue effort by his Rolling Thunder revival label would be a
landmark in grade-A cinematic cheese.  This 1977 Hong Kong knockoff of
_King_Kong_ stars Danny Lee (who would go on to co-star in John Woo's 1989
masterwork _The_Killer_) and blonde Swiss bombshell Evelyne Kraft--or,
rather, Kraft's left nipple, which plays peek-a-boo from behind her
barely-there animal hide top.  For all the ample physical gifts with which
she was blessed (which are heavily displayed throughout the film for
maximum ogling value), Kraft might as well just have been that single
nipple, for she displays just about as much acting range as one.  Take the
scene where she thrashes about after getting bitten by a snake; it's hard
to tell if she's in excruciating pain or in the throes of orgasmic ecstasy.
But, of course, acting ability is of little importance in a brainless
no-brainer such as this, in which a gentle oversize gorilla (make that "guy
in a gorilla suit") who raised an orphaned lass (Kraft's monosyllabic
Samantha) in the Himalayan wild goes on a destructive rampage when brought
to the urban jungle of Hong Kong.  But before the big third act
smash-o-rama, director treats the audience to some of the most
unintentionally hilarious footage ever committed to film.  The biggest
whopper is a doozy of a love montage (involving jungle cats being spun
around in amorous delight) that is made even more of a howler by its
overwhelming earnestness.  When the gears are shifted to the city and the
demolition skills of the big ape, the laugh percentage takes a dive, but
the cheese quotient skyrockets, in the form of some awfully unconvincing
miniature and rear-projection effects.  Though Tarantino may argue
otherwise, _Mighty_Peking_Man_ is one terrible movie, but rarely are bad
movies quite this giddily laughable--making it ideal midnight movie fodder.
 (opens April 23 in exclusive midnight movie engagements)
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com


Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: A wild jungle woman and an 11-story gorilla are
discovered in Tibet and taken to Hong Kong where the gorilla escapes
and causes havoc.  This is a laughable 1977 rip off of KING KONG
(1976), itself a rip-off.  Production values are low and audiences seem
to like the film mostly for derisive laughter.  Rating: 2 (0 to 10),
high -2 (-4 to +4)
   - Directed by Ho Meng-Hua.
   - This film is provided to be a sort of laughing stock to finish the
     festival.
   - An earthquake uncovers an 11-story tall gorilla in the Himalayas.
     A hunter, chosen because he just broke up with his girl and is at
     loose ends, gets sent to find the ape and finds a sort of female
     Tarzan who controls the ape.
   - Evelyne Kraft is the jungle girl in a leather bikini that she is
     pasted into so she always looks on the verge of bouncing out of.
   - Gorilla actor has no idea how gorillas move and suit is terrible.
     Nice miniature effects, however.
   - Has almost a music video inside it of jungle girl playing with
     animals like Chi-chi the leopard.
   - Several places there is narrative that is nearly incoherent as if
     there are missing scenes and the viewer has to guess what happened
     in the interim.
   - Actual location shooting in Mysore.  Ape shown badly matted behind
     temple.
   - Combining of images usually pretty bad.  Incompetent matching of
     film stocks.
   - Stock footage frequently used.
   - Gorilla brought to Hong Kong by greedy entrepreneur who really
     abuses the ape before it escapes and tears things up real good.

Author
Steve Rhodes
So what does it take to make a movie so bad that it's good?  How far
over the top does a picture have to go to become hilariously horrible?
What does a B movie have to do to make sure that audiences realize that
the filmmaker is winking at them from behind the camera?
Meng-Hwa Ho's unabashedly hokey MIGHTY PEKING MAN knows all of these
answers.  The 1977 film is about to be re-released by Quentin
Tarantino's ROLLING THUNDER PICTURES in "hopes of jump-starting the
recently dormant but still vital Midnight Movie tradition."  Not only is
it a perfect midnight movie, it's also one of the few foreign films that
work well dubbed.  Dubbing usually makes actors look silly, but here it
just makes already outlandish performances seem even more so.
The story, a Chinese parody of KING KONG, has a not-so-fearless group of
explorers going into the jungle to find the ape that is rumored to be
"over 10 feet tall."  At various times, he appears to be anywhere from
30 to 300 feet tall.  Among the picture's delights are its crude special
effects.  The man in the ape suit gets to crush small villages that are
made of such simple materials that you can create the same effects in
the comfort of your own home.
The joys of the movie, however, come more from the actors than the
gorilla.  Johnny Feng (Danny Lee) leads the expedition.  He's distraught
because his girl is sleeping her way to the top by dating his successful
brother, a television director.
The safari travels in covered wagons pulled by water buffalo.  One of
their first encounters with danger is a herd of marauding elephants who
crush an entire native village -- buildings, livestock and humans.  Does
this make any sense and does it have anything to do with the story?  No
and no, but it's stupidly funny.
Even better is the tiger attack.  One of the frightened men jumps
straight into quicksand and disappears with only his hat left on top.  A
less fortunate one has his leg bitten off by the tiger after an
unsuccessful wrestling match.  Johnny goes for medicine, but the person
bankrolling the mission shoots the wounded worker first.  No sense
wasting valuable medicine, he reasons.
The funniest character is played by Baywatch babe lookalike Evelyne
Kraft as Samantha, the ape's companion.  Dressed in cheesy, skimpy
animal skins, she looks terrific.  Her bikini outfit has only one
shoulder strap, which makes her running scenes sensually humorous since
her top is unable to fully serve its intended purpose.  She speaks
little intelligible language since she and her parents crashed there
when she was a little girl.  Taking Johnny to the wreckage, she says
"mama" and "papa" as she points to the two skulls in the cockpit.
The jungle turns out not to be as harsh an environment as one might
suspect.  One look at Samantha, and you realize that there must be a
nearby makeup counter and a hair salon.
And did I mention the python that bites Samantha's thigh just south of
her private parts?  Well, Johnny gets to come to the rescue and happily
treat her wound in the traditional manner.  But it is the ape's
ingenuity that saves her.  Turns out that the Mighty Peking Man knows
herbal medicine.
The ending scene which is, of course, set on the top of a tall building
has the military pounding away mercilessly at our lovable beast.  This
long sequence is choreographed to the dramatic ending of Shostakovich's
fifth symphony, a piece of classical music as over-the-top as the story
itself.  As the French horns blare, the cymbals crash and the violins
make loud discordant sounds, the ape fights his last battle.  You should
count yourself lucky if your life ends with such a climactic flourish.
MIGHTY PEKING MAN runs a bit long, even at just 1:30.  It was rated
PG when released in 1977 before the introduction of the PG-13 rating,
which it would undoubtedly get today.  The film contains sexuality,
brief nudity and comic violence and would be fine for kids 11 or 12 and
up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
R.L. Strong
ROLLING THUNDER PICTURES & COWBOY BOOKING INTERNATIONAL PRESENTS A SHAW BROTHERS
PRODUCTION   A HO MENG-HUA FILM   "MIGHTY PEKING MAN"
EVELYNE KRAFT  DANNY LEE
EDITED BY CHIANG SING-LUNG  
ORIGINAL MUSIC BY CHEN YUNG-YU & DeWOLFE 
EXECUTIVE PRODUCER  CHENG PANG 
DIRECTOR OF PHOTOGRAPHY  TSAO HUI-CHI, WU CHO-HUA
DIRECTOR OF VISUAL EFFECTS  TEISHO ARIKAWA    
PRODUCED BY  CHUA LAM, RUNME SHAW, VEE KING SHAW  
SCREENPLAY BY I. KUENG  
DIRECTED BY HO MENG-HUA
The ground rumbles and quakes. But only in the background, as the
natives of an Indian jungle scatter before the set in front of the
front projection screen starts to puff forth clouds of smoke and dust
and break apart. Suddenly, the camera starts to shake violently.
Welcome to the wonderfully trite world of "THE MIGHTY PEKING MAN"
being re-released by Quentin Tarantino's Rolling Thunder Pictures
outfit onto the midnight circuit. Originally released by a small New
York outfit, World Northal Films in 1978 as "Goliathon" was anything
but a hit both here and in it's native Hong Kong back in 1977. So why
bring the film back? Well, for the obvious reason being that any film
this adorably bad has to be seen.
Our story opens with the earthquake releasing a 100-foot tall missing
link. He terrorizes the natives and becomes a local myth. In 1977, a
local promoter, Lu Tiem (Ku Feng ) decides to investigate the legend,
in an attempt to capture the big beast and put him on display.  He is
told that the best explorer for the job is Johnny Feng (Danny Lee,
best known for his role in John Woo's 'The Killer'). Danny is drunk
and despondent, having discovered his wife having an affair with his
brother, so Danny has no qualms about packing up for the jungles of
India.
Once in the jungle, the team is besieged by an assortment of
dangers. A stampede of elephants, an attack of a very drugged tiger,
and assorted other misfortunes.  Finally, Lu Tiem turns his back on
Johnny, leaving him for dead. Johnny is rescued by Samantha (Evelyne
Kraft), a vivacious female Tarzan. Samantha has survived in the jungle
after the crash of her parent's plane when she was a child. Now
fully-grown and wearing a leather bikini (which threatens to fall off
throughout the film), Samantha nurses Johnny back to good health, with
the help of her protector, The Mighty Peking.
Johnny and Samantha soon start to become attracted to one another, and
their life in the jungle is idyllic. Samantha has not only grown into
a beautiful woman, but has developed a nurturing relationship with the
animals of the jungle. She wrestles with snakes, plays with large
beaked birds, and carries a leopard on her shoulders.
But Johnny grows tired of paradise and convinces Samantha to come with
him back to Hong Kong. She agrees, and the two of them set off for the
big city.  Unfortunately, Peking Man follows.  When the three of them
arrive in Hong Kong, Mighty Peking Man is captured and put on display,
showing off his strength to the amusement of the local populace.
Back in Hong Kong, Johnny is confronted by his estranged wife.  She
confesses her indiscretion, pleading with him to take her back. As
Johnny makes love to his wife, Samantha bursts into the
room. Heartbroken, Samantha runs to the stadium where the promoters
are tormenting The Peking Man. Pleadings with the promoters to release
the giant, Lu Tiem hits her. Peking Man summarily breaks out of his
cage and goes on a rampage throughout Tokyo (?) , sorry Hong Kong
until he is killed by the military. Johnny returns to Samantha's side
proclaiming his love for her and asking for her forgiveness. The two
lovers return to the jungle to live happily ever after.
There I've spoiled the whole thing for you. Don't believe that for a
minute. The plot of "Mighty Peking Man" is only one of its cheesy
pleasures. It's not that this film is unremittingly bad, it's just
that the earnestness involved does not always translate to the
screen. But the effort is so profoundly goofy that one can't help but
be drawn into the film. This is the perfect group night out feature. A
movie that cries out to be talked back to and laughed with.
There are some scenes that caused me some reservation, even
despair. The noticeably drugged leopard and tiger in the film are
painfully used as props. No concern for their well being is evidenced,
as the animals visibly labor to breathe. But, when one has to carry a
200 pound leopard on one's shoulder's and spin it around like your
little brother, I guess narcotics would be a necessity.  Still, those
scenes brought the film to a dead stop for me.
Some of the scenes with Evelyne Kraft as Samantha are just hilarious
to watch.  Not because of her performance, but due to the attention
she and her bikini cause. During the sequence where She and Johnny
leave the jungle for the city, the terrified villagers are to busy
staring at Evelyne to react properly to the attack of Mighty Peking
Man on their village. The sight of grown men in black face (yes, this
film is dreadfully not politically correct), screaming in fear at a
giant ape man while their eyes are fixed on Samantha's posterior, is
riotously amusing.
Director HO MENG-HUA has had a long career in Hong Kong films but
nothing could top this triumph of silliness and ineptitude. The
performances are nothing to write home about. But Evelyne Kraft exudes
a charm and innocents that is keeping with tone of the film. It's her
presents that makes the film work. And that bikini isn't a bad
attraction either. The special effects by TEISHO ARIKAWA are on a
level with the Godzilla films of the early 1970's and have a charm
that is hard to resist. While Peking Man is nothing more than a
stuntman in a hirsute with a mask on, there is something refreshing
about the presentation. A hand made quality, lacking from today's CGI
heavy films. No, there's not a once of believability here. But charm,
it has. The charms of a cheap plastic toy that we remember from our
childhood, but charm just the same.
On a scale of 1 to 5, "MIGHTY PEKING MAN" rates a 3. This is an
audience participation film, along the lines of 'Rocky Horror" (which
I dislike), or any other midnight movie. A party movie, but not one to
watch on your own. That, I cannot recommend.
Copyright 1999 R. L Strong
All rights reserved Nothing in this article may be quoted or re-printed without
the express written permission of the author.
