Title
Review for Daddy's Girl (1996)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Richard Scheib
Canada. 1996. Director - Martin Kitrosser, Screenplay - Steve Pesce, 
Producers - Richard Brandes & Pierre David, Photography - M. David 
Mullen, Music - Parmer Fuller, Production Design - Brian McCabe. 
Production Company - Image Organization/Ventana Productions.
Gabrielle Boni (Jody Mitchell), William Katt (Don Mitchell), Michele 
Greene (Barbara Mitchell), Roxana Zal (Karen Connors), Peggy McCay 
(Grandmother Jacqueline Jones), Mimi Craven (Rachel Landers), Ruth 
Manning (Victoria Hemp), Whip Hubley (Mark Springer), Lindsay Ridgeway 
(Claire Landers), Madison Mason (William Tucker)
Plot: Young Jody Mitchell clings to the life of happiness offered by her 
adopted parents. She kills her school principal who threatens to send 
Jody away to another school. And when her step-parents start arguing 
over her mother Barbara's having to financially support her father Don 
as he tries to fulfil his dream of designing toys and people start 
advising her to leave him, Jody kills again to protect her perfect 
family.
This is one of a series of psycho-thrillers produced by Canada's Pierre 
David. David made his name with a series of thoroughly dreary sequels to 
David Cronenberg's `Scanners' and has since put out such (usually 
direct-to-video) releases as `Stalked' (1994), `The Paperboy' (1994), 
`The Secretary' (1994), `The Nurse' (1995), `The Dentist' (1996), `Man 
of Her Dreams' (1996) and `Cupid' (1997). All of these shuffle around 
the themes and basic formulas patented by much more successful thrillers 
like `Fatal Attraction', `The Stepfather' and `The Good Son'. 
Unfortunately David's films are all made to a plodding predictability of 
script and direction, seemingly irrespective of who is behind the 
camera. Each set-up is telegraphed well in advance in a way that 
effectively robs them of any suspense. `Daddy's Girl' is as 
formulaically routine as the rest of David's films. Young Gabrielle Boni 
in striking fire-red hair does manage to conjure up an effective 
nastiness on screen.

