Title
Review for Angels with Dirty Faces (1938)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
The great success of "Dead End", the 1937 film that
starred Joel McCrae, Humphrey Bogart, and the 'Dead End'
kids, inevitably led to a sequel.  "Angels with Dirty
Faces" reunited Bogart and six of the 'Dead End' gang.
Because the producing studio had been changed from
United Artists to Warner Brothers, the character names
were also changed.  McCrae was both romantic lead and
good guy in "Dead End".  In the sequel, James Cagney
takes over as leading man, while the good guy is the
priest played by Pat O'Brien.
The plot tells the familiar story of childhood pals
going separate ways, become rivals as adults.
Rocky Sullivan (Cagney) grows up to be a career
criminal and racketeer, while Jerry Connelly (O'Brien)
becomes a priest.  They both vie for the souls of
the 'Dead End' kids, who seem destined to become
the next generation of Rocky Sullivans.  Other story
lines have Sullivan double-crossed by his lawyer/partner
Frazier (Bogart), and Sullivan romancing a reluctant
Ann Sheridan.
Cagney is excellent.  He is perfectly cast as a gangster,
the little tough guy with a deeply hidden heart of gold.
During shootouts with the police or rival gangsters, one
can't help but root for him, all the while aware that the
1930s code requires him to come to a bad end.  Bogart's
character is cowardly and two-faced when compared to his
aggressive character from "Dead End", while the hoodlum
kids have been softened and placed in more secondary roles.
"Angels with Dirty Faces" is Cagney's film, and he dominates
every scene he is in.  This was the film that made him
famous, and rescued him from the bit roles he had been
playing.
"Angels with Dirty Faces" received three Oscar nominations;
Best Actor (Cagney), Best Director (Michael Curtz, who would
go on to direct 'Casablanca') and Best Original Story
(Rowland Brown).
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
