Title
Review for Maurice (1987)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Thuan N. P. Nguyen
     SUMMARY:  MAURICE tells the story of a platonic love affair between
Maurice Hall and his Cambridge classmate Clive Durham which took place when
homosexuality was still a criminal offense in England.  Under societal
pressures to conform, Clive tries to suppress his love for Maurice and marries
a [dull] upper-class woman.  Maurice also tries to suppress his attraction for
men but eventually  comes to term with his feelings and casts aside the
homophobic and  class-divisive values of his society.  
     MAURICE is quite a bit more exciting than the above summary suggests.
It's a fantasy romance with elements of a grim reality, the cruel persecution
of gay love.  Maurice Hall is outwardly an ordinary man, an upstanding member
of wealthy English society, as is Clive Durham.  But they share a secret.  
Each loves the other.  Maurice has been attracted to men as long as he can
remember, but he was never able to discuss these feelings with anyone because
the teachers & clergymen constantly tell their wards about the  "unspeakable
sin of the Greeks" and watched them constantly.  It is by  accident that
Maurice meets Clive at Cambridge.  Their friendship blossoms and the two fall
in love but for a long time, neither is capable of acknowledging his emotion
for the other.  
     The movie succeeds beautifully in capturing the moods of romantic love,
the wistful longing glances, the words almost-but-not-quite spoken.  The 
interior settings are rich with period details and everything radiates warmth.
The outdoor settings are equally romantic.  The fields and woods always appear
green, lush and misty.  Clive's country estate possessed a dignified, timeless 
charm as filmed by director James Ivory.  The costuming was equally flawless,
as with A ROOM WITH A VIEW, the previous film by the Merchant-Ivory producer-
director team.
     The most interesting part of the movie's storyline, for me, involves the
two paths taken by Clive and Maurice in response to the trial of their mutual 
friend, Lord Risley.  Entrapped by a policeman, Risley was sent to hard labor
for committing a homosexual "offense."  Clive becomes ill with worry and fear
and eventually breaks off his affair with Maurice to marry a woman and enter a 
career in politics.  These changes, however, are nothing more than monumental
acts of self-deception for Clive.  Maurice also tries to conform.  He goes to 
a hypnotist who tries to "cure" him of his "sickness."  Maurice eventually
comes to accept his gay sexual identity and ends up the happier for it.
     James Wilby turns in a convincing performance as the torn Maurice.   This
role was originally to be played by Julian Sands, who played George in A ROOM
WITH A VIEW.  I think James Wilby's appearance is more suited for the role of
the "ordinary" man which Maurice is.  Julian Sands would have been too
"pretty."  Hugh Grant plays dashing Clive Durham and manages to effectively
communicate the pathetic changes that occur in Clive (keep track of who has the
mustache :-) ).  The supporting cast is generally amusing.  Ben Kingsley puts
in a appearance as the American hypnotist.
     MAURICE presents a positive, idealized view of gay love in comparison to
the grim depiction of a gay marriage in PRICK UP YOUR EARS.  The author,
E. M. Forster, wrote it with a happy ending in mind, with the idea that "two men
should fall in love and remain in it for the ever and ever that fiction allows"
and said that he "shouldn't have bothered to write otherwise."  The story's
main weakness is the contrivedness of some of the meetings.  (re: Maurice &
Alec)   I enjoyed the movie a great deal and found these faults to  be minor.
As a matter of fact, I'll probably go back to see it *again* soon, which is my
way of saying "this is one of the best movies I've seen this year."
MAURICE
Starring: James Wilby, Hugh Grant, Rupert Holmes
Also starring: Denholm Elliott, Ben Kingsley, (and many others)
Director: James Ivory
Producer: Ismail Merchant
Adapted from the novel MAURICE, by E. M. Forster.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Disappointing E. M. Forster entry by
     much of the same team that made A ROOM WITH A VIEW.  A plea
     for acceptance of homosexuality flounders in melodrama,
     florid production values, and even a mild dash of sexism.
     There is enough quality present to make the film worth
     seeing, but not as much as you'd think.  Rating: +1.  (The
     following review contains spoilers and opinions that are
     going to draw flak.)
     Over the last few years there has been a discovery of the works of E.
M. Forster by filmmakers.  Until A PASSAGE TO INDIA, I don't think anyone
had ever filmed a Forster novel.  Since then, we have seen A ROOM WITH A
VIEW and now MAURICE.  The new entry is the story of a homosexual, Maurice
(pronounced "Morris") Hall, who discovered his own homosexuality at
Cambridge and a bunch of other people's as he went along.  MAURICE tells the
story of his discomfort in a country that is "disinclined to accept human
nature."
     Maurice becomes aware of his homosexuality at Cambridge, where we are
shown that he runs into no women who are attractive or interesting.  There
are darn few women in the whole film who are not portrayed as superficial
and vacuous.  But there are lots of pretty men running around.  In class,
they read classics with references to homosexuality (the professors tell the
boys just to skip over the explicit parts and interpret the rest as platonic
love).  One thing sort of leads to another and Maurice meets Clive Durham,
who is close and pretty and soon they are pretty close.  The film follows
their affair for a few years until Clive decides to buckle under to public
pressure and marry someone of the opposite sex instead.  It isn't long
before he is telling Maurice how he was surprised to find that women are
nice too.  (It is the only scene in the film that has much nice to say about
women.)  Maurice tries to have an American hypnotist (played by Ben Kingsley
doing his best to sound like a Texan) cure him, but it doesn't work and soon
Maurice decides that if he cannot have Clive, he will have Clive's assistant
gamekeeper.
     There are always two parts to an E. M. Forster story.  There is the
story itself and there is the social comment.  A PASSAGE TO INDIA, in
addition to having a good story, argued cogently for home rule for India.  I
became firmly convinced that Britain did the right thing almost forty years
ago.  A ROOM WITH A VIEW argued that Edwardian social custom really screwed
up people's lives and I left the theater shouting "Down with Edwardian
social custom!"  It too told a good story.  MAURICE is perhaps the most
relevant to our society and even in that it is more than seventy years out
of date, but the story itself is not very good this time around.  It is
overly long in the telling--about 140 minutes--and is much more melodramatic
than director Ivory's previous ROOM WITH A VIEW.  I think Ivory wanted to
repeat that film's success, so he put in many of the same faces, forced Ben
Kingsley into the wrong role, chose a not-very-good novel, and then gave it
a long and florid treatment.  With the talents involved, the film could not
go wrong, but one would expect a much better rating than a low +1 on the -4
to +4 scale.

Author
Manavendra K. Thakur
Cast: James Wilby, Hugh Grant, Rupert Graves, Denholm Elliott, Simon Callow,
      Billie Whitelaw, Ben Kingsley, Judy Parfitt, Phoebe Nicholls, Mark Tandy,
      Helena Mitchell, Kitty Aldridge, Patrick Godfrey, Michael Jenn, and
      Barry Foster.
     There has been much discussion about the film MAURICE and reviews of it.
May I take this opportunity to give my opinions about MAURICE?  I would like to
address both aspects of the quality of the film: as a film itself and secondly
as a film dealing with the very sensitive and important issue of homosexuality.
     As a film, MAURICE is a notable accomplishment, especially as a followup
to the major commercial and artistic success of A ROOM WITH A VIEW.  The
producer/director team of Ismail Merchant and James Ivory did not let their
previous success go to their head.  They set out to adapt Forster's novel to
the screen, and that is what they have done, no more and no less.  Although
their achievement in MAURICE does not equal their success in A ROOM WITH A
VIEW, the film is most certainly worth seeing.
     There are many themes common to both MAURICE and A ROOM WITH A VIEW.  In
both films, the denial of physical and sensual pleasures that characterizes
Edwardian society is portrayed as a major flaw in that society.  Marriage is
depicted as a social contract, an inhibiting force against the true expression
of feelings and happiness.  Societal pressures to conform are intense.
     Both films resolve the conflict with a gentle yet firm repudiation of the
negative pressures society can impose on its members.  The fact that the lovers
in MAURICE are of the same sex does not lessen the strength of their endearing
and true love for each other.  Both films end with a reaffirmation of the
common human bonding that transcends nationality, class, and societal
expectations.  Instead of presenting their views as a polemic, the films
entertain and present thoughts for further contemplation.
     There are differences, too.  In A ROOM WITH A VIEW, Lucy and George only
risk their virtue, whereas in MAURICE, the lovers must risk being disgraced as
well as being imprisoned.  In the first film, the two lovers are re-united
while society and family give their blessing: there is no doubt that the two
will marry and live together happily.  In MAURICE there is a great deal of
uncertainty as to the future (although the joy of the present is clear when
Maurice and Alec meet in the boathouse).  The two men clearly cannot marry
legally, and their relationship will in all probability be forced to continue
hidden from public view.  While A ROOM WITH A VIEW is a humorous comedy of
manners, MAURICE is somewhat darker both in cinematic style and narrative tone.
     My complaint with MAURICE is that in 135 minutes of screen time, we only
get to know the two of the three main characters with any significant depth.
The two are, of course, Maurice and Clive.  These two are portrayed very well,
and we learn a great deal about them and their motivations.  It is Alec that we
don't know as much about.  We learn very little about who he is, what his
background is, and why he loves Maurice as much as he does.  Just exactly why
Alec climbs a ladder up to Maurice's bedroom, apparently on a hunch, is not
immediately clear.  Alec and Maurice had exchanged nothing more than a few
glances.  It's this sort of ambiguity that stops us from fully understanding
Alec, despite however hard we try.
     The other characters (the mothers, Clive's wife, sisters, and the man who
goes to jail for his homosexual activity--sorry, I don't remember his name)
are just there.  We don't know much about them, and therefore we don't care as
much about them.  They just take up screen time.  Most of the time, they are
incidental to the real narrative which is about the relationship of Clive with
Maurice and Maurice with Alec.  Of course, these relationships do not exist in
a vacuum, and therefore Merchant-Ivory, like any other film makers, are forced
to incorporate the supporting characters into the narrative.  Whereas this task
of incorporation was accomplished with great success in A ROOM WITH A VIEW,
MAURICE fails to achieve the same results.  Maurice and Clive are convincing in
their own depth, but the other characters are not nearly as compelling.  This
is the main flaw that prevents me from ranking MAURICE with A ROOM WITH A VIEW.
     However, I should note that my complaint has nothing to do with the fact
that many and perhaps most of the dullest characters are women.  I do not have
any compulsive need to have charming and intelligent women on the screen in
order to make the film's depiction of male homosexuality palatable and
acceptable.  To its inestimable credit, the film does not take that easy escape
route.  (In fact, it may be possible that Merchant-Ivory deliberately
de-emphasized the supporting characters so that viewers would be forced to
concentrate on the relationship between the main characters.  But that purpose
could have been far better accomplished in many other ways.)  My complaint is
based on the rather unsuccessful portrayal and integration of Alec and the
supporting characters, period.  Whether those characters are male or female is
irrelevant to my complaint.
     So that's how I feel about MAURICE as a film, per se.  But the very fact
that the film has been made and distributed so widely is important in of
itself.  The film does not exist solely as a film in a bubble of its own.  I
can judge the film as a film, but I would be negating the tremendous social
value and importance of the film if I were to do only that.  While I can debate
its merits as a film critic, it is impossible to deny that I am a also member
of the human race and a product of Western society.  MAURICE forces me to make
that acknowledgement and to act on it rather than focus exclusively on my
skills as a film reviewer.
     I cannot forget the muted squeals of excitement and joy an elderly man
sitting in front of me uttered whenever a love scene occurred between Maurice
and Alec.  I don't know if that man was gay or not as I consider it rude and
completely inappropriate to ask a total stranger about his sexual orientation.
But that man's emotions were just as genuine as Maurice's love for Clive and
later Alec.  It was clear that he was overjoyed at seeing two men engaging in
sensual acts in a major film released in the United States.  The power of
MAURICE in that regard simply cannot be denied or denigrated.
     As Mario Prats on the net so movingly wrote, the film evokes the classic
dilemma of being forced to subvert one's innermost desires for societal gain
and acceptance.  The societal and religious pressures that Clive succumbs to
are tremendously strong and still in existence today.  The simple act of seeing
a positive depiction in a mainstream film of love and joy in a homosexual
relationship is a powerful negation of incessant reminders and warnings from
religious fundamentalists and society at large that homosexuality is considered
immoral and wrong.  MAURICE succeeds in negating that pernicious societal view,
and it is that success which delighted that kindly old man.
     MAURICE is not a great film, but it is a good one.  If Alec's motivations
had been more fully explored, perhaps the full potential of the film's power to
touch viewers with its humanity and sensitivity would have been realized.  And
perhaps that would have helped even more to increase the number of individuals
sympathetic to the lesbian and gay community.  Some members of that community
may not want the help and/or sympathy of the larger (and therefore dominant)
heterosexual group.  But I would submit that we do have only one world to live
in, and I for one feel that a world based on mutual love, understanding, and
tolerance is far more preferable than one based on fearful isolation and bitter
divisions.
     MAURICE is not a belated or reluctant attempt to welcome unobtrusive and
docile gays and lesbians to society's living room of guarded acceptance.
Rather, it is an affirmation, a celebration, an intelligent presentation of the
strengths, hopes, fears, desires, and problems of homosexuals in Edwardian
society and (by extension) our own society of today.  MAURICE has done its part
to give the homosexual community the attention it deserves.  That great
achievement, coupled with its cinematic excellence, makes it a very significant
film and one well worth seeing.
     Director James Ivory and producer Ismail Merchant created Merchant-Ivory
Productions way back in 1963, and the two have been making films together
since.  James Ivory studied under and was influenced by the great Indian
director Satyjit Ray.  Frequently, they have collaborated with Ruth Prawer
Jhabvala in the preparation of their scripts.  Merchant-Ivory's films are known
for viewing English society in a particularly picturesque manner.  Their most
successful film so far has been last year's A ROOM WITH A VIEW, which won
Oscars for Best Art Direction, Costume Design, and Best Adapted Screenplay.
