Title
Review for Patton (1970)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
     I don't usually do reviews of older movies, but PATTON happened to
be playing in a local "revival" theater and, although I've seen the
film many times on TV and video, I'd never before viewed it on a large
screen.  As a result, I took this opportunity to see it and
subsequently write a review.
     By the way, for years now, I have considered PATTON to be my
favorite all-time motion picture.  What that says about my character,
you can guess for yourself....
Starring: George C. Scott, Karl Malden, Michael Bates,
          Karl Michael Vogler, Edward Binns, Paul Stevens 
Director: Franklin J. Schaffner  
Producer: Frank McCarthy 
Screenplay: Edmund H. North and Francis Ford Coppola based on 
         factual material from PATTON: ORDEAL AND TRIUMPH by 
         Ladislas Farago and A SOLDIER'S STORY by Omar N. Bradley 
Cinematography:  Fred J. Koenkamp 
Music: Jerry Goldsmith  
Released by Twentieth-Century Fox 
     In early 1971, the Academy Awards saluted PATTON.  Capturing eight
Oscars--including best picture, best director, best actor, best
screenplay, best editing, and best production design--the movie won
every major battle of the evening.  Such acclaim was richly deserved,
for PATTON remains to this day one of Hollywood's most compelling
biographical war pictures.
     With its larger-than-life, yet at the same time singularly human,
portrayal of Gen. George S. Patton, Jr., Franklin Schaffner's picture
is an example of filmmaking at its finest.  From production design and
battle choreography to simple one-on-one dramatic acting, PATTON has it
all.  There is no scene in all one-hundred seventy minutes that doesn't
work on some level.
     Patton was not a friendly, easygoing person.  A war hero and a
keen strategist, he was also harsh, stubborn to the point of
intransigence, and undiplomatic.  Aside from the campaigns he waged in
North Africa, Sicily, and across Europe, the general is perhaps best
remembered for an incident when he slapped an enlisted man.  The news
media of the time vilified him for this, and the history books have
been little more kind.  That single act, more than anything, typified
the national perception of him.
     That side of the man is shown in PATTON, but there are more facets
to the general's personality than what he presented in public.  There
was also the deeply thoughtful philosopher, who believed in God and
destiny, and accepted reincarnation (he believed that he had been on
the battlefield when the Carthaginians fought the Romans, and had later
served with Napoleon).  Patton was neither cold nor insensitive--he
cared deeply about those under his command who stood in the face of
enemy fire and refused to yield.  In its evenhanded presentation,
PATTON does justice to those aspects of the general's character, in
addition to the more obvious ones.  What we see is not a legend, but a
man, with all the flaws and triumphs that made him who he was.
     Into the role stepped George C. Scott, giving the performance of a
long and impressive career.  Indeed, Scott became so identified with
the character, and played the general so perfectly, that the Patton of
documentaries has since occasionally been referred to as "an imposter."
In a part that requires a skillful scaling of the emotional ladder,
Scott finds the perfect balance between bombast and subtlety.  From the
opening scene (the famous speech to the Third Army in front of the
giant American Flag), the viewer's attention is riveted to the screen,
and only when the final credits roll do external distractions reassert
themselves.  It is no exaggeration to say that, in the decade of the
seventies, only men like Brando, Pacino, Nicholson and De Niro equalled
what Scott accomplished in PATTON.
     The film opens in 1943 North Africa, with a brutal look at
American casualties at the battle of Kasserine.  Patton arrives from
Morocco to take command the U.S. army in Tunisia in preparation for
fighting Rommel (Karl Michael Vogler) at el Gitar.  From North Africa,
Patton's forces move to Sicily, where they sweep north across the
island, taking Palermo, then racing Montgomery (Michael Bates) to
Messina.  Along the way, Patton's verbal and physical abuse of a
soldier suffering from "battle fatigue"--which the general brands as
cowardice--becomes ammunition for his critics.  He later offers a
public apology, but this incident keeps him from the action for a
while, and he must stand by as a decoy during the Normandy invasion.
Later in the year, however, General Omar Bradley (Karl Malden) gives
Patton command of the Allied Third Army, with which he pushes across
Western Europe to stop the Germans at the Battle of the Bulge, the last
major Nazi offensive of the war.
     With the exception of Patton, the only character given more than
cursory attention is Omar Bradley, who is shown to be a conservative,
level-headed antithesis to Patton's impulsive, ill-tempered bluster.
Bradley begins the film serving under Patton, and ends it as his
superior.  The two are friends, but each finds fault with the other's
methods.  As Bradley says, "I do this job because I've been trained to
do it.  You do it because you love it."
     The statement that Patton "is [his] own worst enemy" is proven
repeatedly.  After the slapping incident, while the general is
essentially on probation, he makes some comments that he believes to be
off-the-record.  The press prints them, and Patton is seen as having
insulted the "Russian Allies" by claiming that the United States and
England would jointly rule occupied Europe following the war.  In order
to get back into favor with his superiors, Patton must promise to keep
his "big mouth shut."
     PATTON manages the intricate task of presenting personal details
in the larger context of their historical backdrop.  We observe
detailed recreations of the battles of el Gitar, Sicily, and the Bulge,
even as Patton's own desires, needs, and hopes are exposed through his
actions and conversations.  The most defining moments for the general
as a person often come when he's alone with his aide, or facing his own
mortality as he gazes across battlefields that are millennia old.
     Fred Koenkamp's photography does justice to the picture's
material.  Not only does he have a good sense of how to capture a
battle on film, but he is equally adept at framing the quieter, more
personal moments.  The last shot of the film, with Patton walking his
dog across a snow- spotted field in Bavaria, blends the best of both
these intimate and panoramic views.  Jerry Goldsmith's fine--and
immediately recognizable--score compliments Koenkamp's
cinematography.
     Those who have not seen PATTON, or who have not watched the film
carefully, might assume that this movie is about World War Two and one
of its most celebrated generals.  In fact, they would be only partially
correct.  What PATTON sets out to do is to demythicize its subject and
show the forces that drove this man.
     Brilliant tactician, merciless disciplinarian, tireless fighter,
prima donna, and staunch patriot--Patton was all of these things and
more.  Life for him was the battlefield, and without war, his spirit
was sapped.  The German military recognized this when they noted that
Berlin's fall would finish him.  Patton was an anachronism--a man who
belonged in another time.  He was a warrior living in a time when
victory in battle no longer meant the triumph it once had, a Roman
conqueror who understood the meaning of the words that "all glory is
fleeting."  Above all, however, he was an icon whom millions cheered,
millions hated, and few understood.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Franklin J. Schaffner
Writers: Francis Ford Coppola and Edmund H. North (based on the book "A
Soldier's Story" by Omar M. Bradley and "Patton: Ordeal and Triumph" by
Ladislas Farago)
Starring: George C. Scott, Karl Malden, Michael Bates, Edward Binns,
Stephen Young, Lawrence Dobkin, John Doucette, James Edwards, Frank
Latimore, Tim Considine
The film "Patton" is a film filled of many contradictions, just as the man
it's portraying was.  General George S. Patton Jr. was the flamboyant
military commander who was at the same time brilliant and clueless, and
came off as being everything that someone like me would say is wrong with
war, and also everything that is right about it.  Watching the film is
seeing an exercise in a film that takes both sides of the story, sits on
the fence, and still gets away with it, mainly because it just knows how to
show both sides equally and doesn't try to make any pro or con statements
against war.
On the surface, "Patton" is at once an epic war film and an intelligent
biopic of a very controversial and notable figure in history.  On one
level, we see a wildly entertaining cinemetic war picture that probably
could have starred almost anybody (probably John Wayne), following one
man's need to conquer in battle and to come out the winner of each and
every battle, primarily because he's such a brilliant strategist.  And we
also see an intelligently and brilliantly layered biopic on a man who's
need to bring the best out of his troops by following a series of codes
ultimately leaves him without anything else to do one he's completed it, as
well as a three-dimensional depiction of a man who most people thought was
such an asswhole because he just wanted to do things right.
The film opens with Patton (played with a fiery intensity by George C.
Scott) addressing several troops (and the audience) about the many codes
one must follow in order to be succesful in war as well as why war is such
a great thing, all while standing in front of a giant American flag (a
stunning and textured shot).  He mentions how individuality is a terrible
thing, how much of war is getting revenge, and other things that many
people will easily take offense at since it's so honest about what war
really is, and what the many costs of war are.  It's easy to pick out all
the problems with war from his speech, but then one must realize that if
you're going to fight a war, this is the only way you're going to win.
The film takes off from there to depict many of his World War II
ups-and-downs, starting out as he takes over a base in North Africa, and
follows right up to his conquest in Germany.  We see Patton as he tries to
shape his new troops up into the right kinds of troops, prohibiting pin-ups
from the barracks, and forcing everyone to wear helmets at all times.  His
strategies are so brilliant because he knows so much about war history, and
is able to manneuver as to what worked before and what didn't, and also
because he's so consumed with the business of war strategies that it's hard
seeing him doing anything else in life.
But with this, there's his many negative traits.  He's almost totally made
of stone, and becomes one of the biggest nuiscances to the American army
because of this and his lack of public bravauda.  When giving a speech
about what will happen at the end of the war, he accidentally forgets to
mention their ally, Russia, and says that America and England will be
ruling the world afterwards, prompting a ton of negative feedback from
everyone, especially Russia.  But Patton has worse problems: he's so
consumed with war and how everyone must be part of a group that he worries
only about those who are physically wounded by the war and not those who
are psychologically so.  His treatment of a soldier who has "bad nerves"
becomes an indictment of his character and the entire American military by
the media, and wounds Patton's career from that point on.
As this goes on, we get a couple asides to pull us away from Patton.  We
not only follow his career, but also that of a colleague and later friend,
General Omar M. Bradley (Karl Malden), who's the exact opposite of Patton:
patient, just, and only following orders.  We see how Bradley's career
actually gets better than Patton's, and by the end, the man who was once
under his command is giving him orders.  We are also privileged to see how
the German soldiers react to him, as they are constantly trying to study
him and understand him, but never do.
Patton was a complex and mysterious man, and the script by Francis Ford
Coppola and Edmund H. North is a brilliant one that understand this notion,
and instead tries to show him as he most likely was.  Seen in history as a
one-dimensional crazy man, the script actually deepens his character, and
by the end, elicits actualy sympathy for him.  This film is not a criticism
of him or war, but really an almost documentary on him, not taking any real
side on him, but showing him as a three-dimensional person.  Scott's
performance is like this: at his most tempermental, you can see why so many
people impersonate his performance; but many times Scott goes down about
100 notches to show him as a man tortured by his own fear of a lack of war.
The film sees Patton not as what is good or bad about war, but really as a
giant contradiction of both of these.  He's a man who basically embodies
everything about war, and when a war is around, he's the best at training
his men to fight a war, and at coming up with strategies that help his side
win battles.  He's so good because he understands that war needs
dehumanization, that people with a high amount of emotion over the idea of
war need to have their spirits broken, and need to learn to be an animal. 
But again, this is exactly what is wrong with war, how it turns humans into
psychotic, unfeeling monsters, and the film shows this as the main
contradiction in Patton's life: he was heroic, but at the same time he was
tragic.
"Patton" is an amazing film, one that is able to stir up emotions for
someone who could easily be reduced to just a simple monster.  It
understands that without war, there was little else of Patton left, and it
is able to touch on a part of all of us that fears becoming obsessed with
accomplishing something, and the fear of what to do next after it has been
accomplished.  The best biopics, "Amadeus," "Raging Bull," were all able to
find something about their subjects that can easily be conveyed to all of
us, and did so in an entertaining manner.  And since "Patton" is as deeply
entertaining and fascinating as it is introspective and brilliant, it ranks
as one of the best films to ever be made.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
'Patton' is the film the elevated many careers.  It also caused controversy,
inspired bravery and honour, and made a false prophecy in its opening
monologue that is now legendary.  Combine it with its intellectual look at
war (there isn't that much action) and you have the makings for one of the
20th century's top five films about war.  Many say that 'Patton' is a great
biography.  If you want to talk about two to three years of a man's life, I
suppose you could make that argument but it's a weak one.  A character study
would be a more appropriate description of this great motion picture set in
World War II.
Although he is known for the 'Godfather' films and 'Apocalypse Now', people
should be constantly reminded that one of the authors of the film's
screenplay is none other than Francis Ford Coppola who shared an Oscar with
Edmund H. North for this film.  A winner of six other Oscars ----- Best
Picture, Best Director (Franklin J. Schaffner), Best Actor (George C.
Scott - who refused the award), Sound, Film Editing and Art Direction/Set
Decoration, 'Patton' has the dubious distinction of producing a leading
actor in his most famous role and wondering if at times you're being fooled
into thinking the real Patton is on screen.  George C. Scott is absolutely
riveting as the no-nonsense, outspoken and mean tempered general with a
compassionate side and knows when to use these two main sides of his
personality.
The film begins in a glorious manner with a platoon of soldiers being
brought to attention as General Patton makes his way to the platform and
discusses all that is American about war with a huge American flag hanging
in the background.  When he's done, you're ready to sign up!  He says at one
point that "Americans have never lost and will never lose a war.  Because
the very thought of losing is hateful to Americans."  Upon the film's
release in 1970, right in the middle of the Vietnam War, the general would
turn out to be wrong about this.
The film then opens after its credit roll to a massacre of American troops
under British command in North Africa during the middle of the war.  A new
commanding general is assigned and it is none other that Patton himself.
Working with Patton is General Omar Bradley (Karl Malden) in a top
performance that should have netted Malden a Best Supporting Actor
nomination but didn't.
The two sides of Patton's moody personality come into full view in a tent in
Sicily when he comforts the men wounded seriously in battle and kneels at
the bedside of one soldier who is incapacitated with his eyes bandaged and
oxygen being fed into him.  Patton whispers something in his ear which the
audience doesn't hear and he then lays a medal on the soldier's pillow and
gives him a gentle touch on the head.  Patton then turns around and sees a
soldier crying and after repeated attempts at getting him to stop, Patton
slaps the helmet right off his head and curses at him.  He orders the man
out of the tent and threatens to shoot him before two men forcibly remove
him from the tent.
After this incident, Patton must apologize to the soldier he slapped on
direct orders from his superiors and the scene where he apologizes is
probably Scott's best scene in the film.  A real life performance by Scott
shook up the motion picture academy when he refused to accept his Best Actor
award by saying that he felt the acting community was a group effort and
that actors shouldn't be in competition with each other.  Scott received two
other Oscar nominations previously for 1959's 'Anatomy of a Murder' and 'The
Hustler' in 1961 and had asked that his name be removed from the list in
both cases.  He would receive one more nomination to date after 'Patton' for
his 1971 performance in 'The Hospital' and how his performance in 'Dr.
Strangelove' in 1964 wasn't nominated is only one of many Oscar mysteries.
The climax of 'Patton' is memorable from a scene involving Patton's request
to an army chaplain where he wants a weather prayer to relieve blizzard like
conditions and he gets both the prayer and relief.  Director Franklin J.
Schaffner cross cuts Patton reading the prayer with intense battle scenes
which is haunting, moving and unforgettable.  A testament to how serious
Patton was about winning the war with the enemy comes in a scene in the last
third of the film where he shouts "If we are not victorious, let no one come
back alive!"  This film is alive and well today and is one of the most
victorious films of all time with its peers, historians (both film and war)
and with audiences.  As long as there is war in the world, it will stand the
test of time.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Brian Koller
"Patton" is an intelligently written and well-plotted movie
that deserved its Academy Awards for "Best Picture" and
"Best Actor."  It is an outstanding war movie that has its
focus not on the soldiers in the trenches, but the generals
who control their destinies.
The film follows the career of George Patton (George C. Scott)
from early battles against the Germans in North Africa, and
later in Italy and in Europe.  Patton's biggest battles are
not always against the Germans, however.  He must compete
against generals Montgomery and Bradley for resources and
key assignments, and never comprehends that a four-star 
general must also be a success as a politician.
Movies are inherently fictional, even when based on actual
events or personalities.  I don't know and don't care how 
historically accurate this movie is.  When discussing Patton,
I am referring to his film character.  From the little I
know about Patton or WWII, the film is authentic enough for me.
One minor quibble: Omar Bradley's autobiography was used
as a source, and he served as a technical advisor, leading
to the Bradley character (Karl Malden) being perhaps
too saintly.
Patton is as broad a character a film could hope to have,
and a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity for an actor.  Scott
have a supporting role in "Dr. Strangelove", but he will be
forever typecast as Patton, as Patton will be forever identified
with the actor Scott.  Patton is obsessed with military history
and achieving battlefield glory.  He believes he is reincarnated,
with each life participating in the era's greatest battles.
He stubbornly refuses to see the growing international 
obsolescence of the military relative to political and 
economic alliances.
Perhaps too much is made of Patton's abilities as a general.
The audience is led to believe that Patton could have won the
European war in a few months if it wasn't for pesky Montgomery
trying to steal his glory and supplies.  A rare comic relief
moment involving Patton's cowardly pedigreed hound doesn't
quite work either.
But it is rare that a film character can have so much depth
that it can be explored for over two hours with such 
effectiveness.  Also, the tank battles, ancient ruins, and
general's housings (they lived well, with a full staff of 
toadies) have excellent cinematography.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
