Title
Review for Immediate Family (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Randy Parker
        IMMEDIATE FAMILY contains one of the strangest sights of any movie
this year.  Yes, even stranger than the hair pieces in STAR TREK V.  Brace
yourselves for a shock: for the first time in his film career, James Woods
plays a sensitive, all-around nice guy.  I'm not kidding.  I had to
constantly remind myself I was watching Woods and not Alan Alda.  With his
warm performance, Woods has broken the mold and virtually reinvented his
on-screen persona.
        Woods stars opposite Glenn Close; together, they play a loving
husband and wife who can't conceive.  After years of fertility drugs, they
finally decide to give up on mother nature and pursue an open adoption,
which means they meet the natural mother before the baby is born.  Mary
Stuart Masterson plays the pregnant teenager who agrees to give up her
baby.  The movie examines the culture clash between the lower class
teenager from Cleveland and the Yuppie couple who live in post-card pretty
Seattle.
        IMMEDIATE FAMILY captures your heart, but only after fighting off
several flaws.  For one thing, just when the movie seems ready to end, the
real conflict finally kicks in.  Better late than never, I guess.  Second,
the lovey-dovey relationships are too much to take: it's like being trapped
in an elevator with someone who reeks of perfume.  The sweet aroma is
suffocating.  Third, the movie is utterly predictable; the "big surprises"
are anything but surprising.
        The good news is that director Jonathan Kaplan has elicited
memorable performances from his leads.  It comes as a shock to see Woods
expressing compassion rather than his usual hostility.  I never buy Close
in her glamorous DANGEROUS LIAISONS-type roles, but her character in
IMMEDIATE FAMILY suits her well.  I believed every minute of her
performance as a woman who desperately yearns to have children.  Close will
probably earn her umpteen millionth Oscar nomination, but it's Mary Stuart
Masterson who really deserves the honor.  Masterson is so down to earth and
so compelling that it's impossible not to feel for her.  Her performance
rings true at every juncture as the movie depicts the pain and confusion of
teen pregnancy.
