Title
Review for 6th Day, The (2000)
Number of Reviews
14

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The 6th Day (2000)
Arnold Schwarzenegger, Tony Goldwyn, Michael Rapaport, Michael Rooker,
Sarah Wynter, Wendy Crewson, Rod Rowland, Terry Crews, Ken Pogue, Colin
Cunningham, Robert Duvall, Wanda Cannon, Taylor Anne Reid, Jennifer
Gareis, Don McManus, Steve Bacic, Christopher Lawford. Screenplay by
Cormac Wibberley, Marianne Wibberley. Directed by Roger Spottiswoode.
124 minutes.
Rated PG-13, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
A funny thing happened this Thanksgiving. A new slam-bang action movie
starring Arnold Schwarzenegger opened and nobody seemed to notice. How
could such an oversight occur? Perhaps the barrage of hype for "How the
Grinch Stole Christmas" was so intense that it hypnotized filmgoers.
Perhaps some fumes from the 1999 stink bomb, "End of Days," lingered
around the big man's name. Or could it be that Arnold has simply entered
the twilight of his film career?
I hope not. Oh sure, he can't act and he's a Republican, but how can you
not love the big lug? Arnold Schwarzenegger is the embodiment of the
American dream. A scrawny kid from a tiny European village achieves fame
and fortune as a bodybuilder, then announces his intent to become a
movie star. Everyone snickers at his ambitions, his cartoonish bulk, his
gap-toothed grin and, of course, that accent. But Ah-nuld ignores the
naysayers, becomes the most popular actor on the entire planet and
marries into the Kennedy family. My God, you couldn't make up a story
like that!
Of course, time spares no living creature, and the years are beginning
to show on this Sequoia of a man. Schwarzenegger still does his action
hero shtick in "The 6th Day," but his movements are more deliberate,
betraying a certain creakiness. Even the bravado is muted. This time
around, his most famous catch phrase gets amended as his character
states "I might be back."
The aging of Schwarzenegger fits perfectly into "The 6th Day." Beneath
its sci-fi trappings, the film addresses mortality and is far more
thought provoking than one might expect.
Set in the near future, the story revolves around cloning. Arnold plays
husband and father Adam Gibson, who runs a charter helicopter business
with his partner Hank (Michael Rapaport). Shortly after consenting to a
high-tech fingerprinting and eyesight testing procedure for a new
client, Adam swaps a piloting gig with Hank without informing the
passengers. Later, Adam returns home, only to spot his exact duplicate
inside the house with his wife and daughter.
Adam learns that he was mistakenly cloned by cronies of genetic
engineering tycoon Michael Drucker (Tony Goldwyn). While cloning of
lower animals is allowed, the practice is strictly prohibited for
humans. Since Adam is walking evidence of Drucker's lawbreaking, the
pilot must be eliminated, leading to the sort of action expected in a
Schwarzenegger movie.
As entertainment, "The 6th Day" falls in the middle of the Ah-nuld
oeuvre, not as good as the "Terminator" films and "Total Recall," but
better than a lot of his outings. Although the cloning particulars are
extremely far fetched, most of the other near-future trappings seem
refreshingly credible, not to mention fun. Hank has a holographic
girlfriend so accommodating ("I've recorded all your favorite sporting
programs," she coos, while straddling him and his sensory-stimulating
love chair) that he has no desire for a real woman. Drivers can turn
over the vehicle commands to programs that drive a pre-planned route.
One of the Adams gleefully sneaks a stogie in the garage, defying a
national ban on smoking. A police station allows suspects access to
virtual-reality court-appointed attorneys and psychiatrists.
The futuristic stuff is a kick, but the notions raised by the cloning
theme are much more interesting. In the story, an individual's memories
and personality can be transferred to their fully-grown cloned body,
which presents Adam with an ethical quandary. Initially, he wants to
kill his clone, but then reconsiders. Even if Adam 2 is a duplicate,
does that make him deserving of death? Dr. Griffin Weir (Robert Duvall),
the scientist behind the process, faces his own dilemma when his gravely
ill wife, Katherine (Wanda Cannon) begs him to stop cloning her and just
let nature take its course.
I left with a number of questions. What if this procedure was possible
in our world? Would I participate? Would downloading the contents of my
brain into a new container let me attain a practical immortality, or
would my soul get lost in the transfer, leaving a separate lifeform that
only thinks it is I? Even if I could be sure that my soul would survive
the transfer, should I do it? Yes, the procedure would allow my
continued earthly survival, but what about the possibility of life after
death? I would never be able to find out if our souls reunite with loved
ones on a different plane of existence.
Pretty heady stuff for an Ah-nuld movie, eh? Here's a final (and
frightening) thought. What if cloning is like photocopying and, each
time you make a copy of a copy, the quality level goes down? And what
if, at the upper echelons of our society, cloning has been going on for
decades, with inferior fourth or fifth generation clones walking the
streets right now? This, my friends, would finally explain George W.
Bush, who recently claimed, in the type of phrasing that you would
expect from a fifth generation clone, that people were
"misunderestimating him." Think about it.

Author
Susan Granger
      Beginning with a quote from Genesis - "and God created
man on the sixth day" - this sci-fi fantasy revolves around a
billionaire entrepreneur (Tony Goldwyn) who is determined to conquer
death: "I'm just taking overwhere God left off."  To this end, he's
funded Replacement Technology where genetic research is done by a
highly respected, if conflicted scientist (Robert Duvall). In this
world of the near future, animal cloning is accepted but human cloning
is strictly forbidden. So when an assassination attempt goes wrong and
a charter helicopter pilot (that's Arnold) is unwillingly cloned,
indomitable Arnold teams up with his duplicate to reveal a sinister
corporate conspiracy.  "I'm going to take my life back," he vows. So
much for the plot concocted by Cormac and Marianne Wibberley. What's
likely to catch your interest is the sexy holographic girlfriend that
Arnold's buddy, Michael Rapaport, has created; she's compliant with
his desires and disappears when she's no longer needed. Or perhaps
you'll like director Roger Spottiswoode's ("Tomorrow Never Dies")
mega-budget array of high-decibel explosions, gunfire and car
crashes. Amusing moments occur when the relentless, virtually
indestructible assassins (Michael Rooker, Sarah Wynter) keep
reappearing - "Doesn't anyone stay dead anymore?" - and when Arnold,
the family man, quips, "I don't want to expose (my daughter) to any
excessive violence. She gets enough of that from the media." But the
real humor, or drama, inherent in having someone meet his clone is
never explored. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The 6th Day"
is an action-packed 5. It's ironic that a movie that puts a spin on
the dangers of cloning looks like a clone of other, better Arnold
Schwarzenegger movies like "Total Recall."

Author
Laura Clifford
The latest Schwarzenegger sci-fi actioner is a derivative middle-of-the-road
effort that's entertaining enough while you're watching it, but dissolves
from the memory as you exit the theater.
Arnie is Adam Gibson (a tribute to "Neuromancer" author William Gibson?), 
a family guy with a sexy marriage (Wendy Crewson, "Bicentennial Man" is
wife Natalie), preteen daughter and dog Oliver.  He owns a helicopter charter
business with his younger partner Hank (Michael Rapaport, thoroughly wasted
here).  After Hank poses as Adam to take the wealthy owner of Replacement
Technologies (Tony Goldwyn as Drucker), Adam returns home to find a clone
celebrating his birthday and two thugs (who seem right out of "The Matrix")
intent on killing him.
Adam is established as an old fashioned kind of guy when he refuses to go
to RePet, a pet cloning business, when Oliver dies.  (He also owns a
vintage Cadillac.)  The script, by husband and wife team Marianne and Cormac 
Wibberley, explains that in this futuristic society, there are laws against 
cloning humans because of the complexity of the human brain (and the one known 
experiment which went tragically wrong).  Replacement Technologies, which
owns RePet, is publically in the human part replacement business, but
privately of course they're cloning people, via the research of Dr. Weir
(Robert Duvall), who's trying to keep his dying wife alive.  The film's title
refers to the Genesis passage about the creation of man.  Unfortunately, the
script botches its main mystery when attempting to explain why Adam Gibson
was cloned.
Arnold is no great actor, but gets by here on his likeability.  Goldwyn's an
interesting bad guy, Australian actress Sarah Wynter ("Species 2") does a
good Linda Fiorentino standin and Crewson injects some personality into
the wife role.  The rest of the cast, which includes Duvall, Rapaport, and
Michael Rooker, is unexceptional.
Technically, the film provides a lot of razzle dazzle eye candy, like
remote controlled helicopter races, dolls that simulate children and the
'blanks' waiting to be cloned.  However, the film's visuals constantly
remind us of other films like "Blade Runner," "Demolition Man" and Arnie's
own "True Lies."  The film's script even borrows the main premise of "The
Sixth Sense."  Director Roger Spottiswoode ("Tomorrow Never Dies") allows
his film to run for an excessive 124 minutes.
"The 6th Day" may be better than Arnold's last effort ("End of Days"), 
but I doubt it will last many days during the crowded holiday movie season.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Kong
Let me first say that The 6th Day is better than Arnie's last film End of 
Days.  But, that's not saying too much since End of Days was so 
terrible.  We are entering in to the era of neo-Arnie  a softer and gentler 
Arnie who makes movies that are no longer rated R, but are rated 
PG-13.  The 6th Day has one huge failing and is rescued by one great 
idea.  More on this later.
In The 6th Day we follow the life of ordinary guy Adam Gibson (Arnold 
Schwarzenegger).  He's a helicopter pilot with a pretty ordinary life with 
a wife, daughter, and even a cute dog.  On his birthday he decides to 
switch off a job with his work partner Hank.  Hank is killed during the job 
and Adam comes home to find someone who looks interestingly just like 
him  this person is living in his house, acting like him, playing with his 
child, and even having sex with his wife.  Well, in any other movie a 
mind-over-anger approach would have taken place.  But, come on!  This is an 
Arnie film and all hell breaks loose, as there are two Arnies on screen.
In the near future  and we're told the not so far away future by the 
opening titles  cloning of pets has been perfected and though humans have 
been cloned, it is outlawed.  The master-cloning doctor is a brilliant man 
named Dr. Weir (Robert Duvall) and he has a scheming business partner named 
Drucker (Tony Goldwyn).  Well, like in real life, laws are made to be 
broken and Adam has been cloned and now that there are two of them in the 
world, one of them has to be eliminated to eliminate the evidence of 
illegal cloning.
The story for The 6th Day is not deep, this is an action film, but the 
issues brought up in the film are great!  The cloning process basically 
reproduces an exact clone of a person within two hours.  What does this 
mean really?  It means that a person can live forever.  A snapshot of a 
person's mind at a moment of time (called a "syncording") and a sample of 
the person's DNA is all that is needed to create a perfect clone.  This 
clone doesn't even know that he is a clone.  The issue of cloning is quite 
real in today's world and the film does bring up some of these interesting 
issues.  It is because of this that the film survives, it is able to infuse 
enough action to please the audience and also put in something for the 
audience to think about after the film.
Where the film fails, but not failing hard enough for me to not like the 
film, is in its tone and setting.  See, the opening titles try to scare us 
by saying that what we are going to see is the near future.  But, it goes 
on specifically to let us know that this is not too far away from now.  And 
if the film had stuck to this then it would have been a brilliant 
film  what I mean is if the film had put the characters in a world that is 
not far different than our world right now, it would have helped put the 
audience closer to what is happening on screen and what is at the core of 
the film, the question of cloning.  What director Roger Spottiswoode 
("Tomorrow Never Dies") does though is tell us one thing and then show us 
another  he puts us in a world where helicopters can transform into jet 
planes, where instead of ammo firing guns there are laser guns, and 
holographic displays for football games.  With these things he's just put 
us not in the near future, but way "out there".  And but doing that the 
points and issues brought up by the film do not him home well enough.  Also 
the suspension of disbelief is now greater since we now have to believe 
that cloning technology is perfected to the point where a human can be 
cloned in two hours plus that there are helicopters that can turn into jet 
planes and that there are laser guns.  I think Spottiswoode seriously 
dropped the ball here.  He should have said that it was in the not so 
distant future then set it up just like that, it would have made the film's 
depiction of the cloning much more frightening.
Lets not forget though that this is an action film and there is action in 
the film.  Like Spottiswoode previous action film Tomorrow Never Dies, the 
action is pretty flat in this film.  Spottiswoode does not know how to do 
action well.  The action is flat and at times yawn inducing.  A car chase 
is shot early on in the film and that was a dud.  The laser gun fights 
were, well, laser gun fights that looked as exciting as some cutting room 
floor stuff from the original Star Wars film.  It's enough action to carry 
the film along, but it sure isn't exciting enough to carry the film by 
itself  thank goodness for the good core ideas about cloning.
The actors seem to do what they can with the film.  Arnie is Arnie.  This 
isn't one of his best performances.  It also isn't one of his worst.  He is 
serviceable and likeable on screen.  I wish Arnie would return to the 
classic style Arnie and make movies like T2, Total Recall, or even 
something like Predator.  Neo-Arnie is a little too soft for my 
tastes.  Worth mentioning is actress Sara Wynter as Talia.  Talia is one of 
the agents working for Drucker's corporation trying to eliminate 
Adam.  Wynter is does pretty well with her part and it was always 
entertaining to see her on screen.
The 6th Day is an average movie that eludes my recommendation for a big 
screen showing at full price.  But, if you see it at a cheap matinee or on 
video it will be a decent flick to see.  The ideas brought up about cloning 
are good conversation items and it is nice to see Arnie back on the screen 
doing something better than that hellacious (pun intended) End of Days.

Author
Ross Anthony
If your loved one fell ill with a fatal disease at a young age would you
have him/her cloned? Letting the real McCoy die only to live with the clone?
"Sixth Day" does a good job of raising ethical dilemmas in the potentially
near future. But, if you weren't happy with the clone, would it be all right
to just kill it off? Would you have the guts to kill your own clone?
This is a film to prompt a lively conversation on the subject of genetics
and morality, but as an action film it's rather uninspired. Aside from an
exciting car chase early on, the action sequences play rote, as if everyone
involved had done them so many times that they were able to accomplish their
tasks with their minds on something else. Autopilot.
Supposedly a mild-mannered family man and chopper pilot, when the poop hits
the fan, Arnold switches into super-hero mode without the slightest
hesitation. Killing people and dodging the bad guys as if he'd been doing it
on a daily basis (or had an action-packed film career).
It's the not-so-distant future, computers have automated many of our normal
tasks and genetics have made it possible to change lives in ways that are
worth protesting over. Did your favorite puppy kick the bucket? Just bring
the remains to REPET and they'll clone you a new one. "He'll remember all
the tricks you taught him and even where the bones are buried." But the
kingpins of REPET also own NU-ORGAN and, though it's been outlawed, they
dabble in human cloning as well.
Hired as a charter pilot for the principal cloner and then presumed killed
in a mishap; Arnold gets cloned illegally by the bad guys. So when the real
Arnold sees another himself living his real life, the real and unreal bad
guys decide to really kill the real him. This conflict brings rise for
chases, capture and escape, and gunfights.
Stereotypical mod-squady thugs try time and again to nab the elusive Arnold.
Cloned back to life after being run-over by a car, one bad guy complains of
chest pains. "Your chest was crushed, completely crushed. This is a new one.
It's perfect! The pain is all in your head!" Since clones have the memory of
their sources ... do they remember the pain of death? Another mind toy.
The acting, aside from Robert Duvall as the head clone doc, is average. An
imperfect pace, mundane direction, and rather blotchy dialogue (a few
thought-provoking chunks mixed into rote action-film spewage) irritate the
picture's effect, but the main problem is the action. It's just not a
terribly exciting movie.
Quipped from the Bible, "On the Sixth Day ... God created Man." Anti-Cloner
protesters make the point that the good book doesn't say "Man created man,"
hence the apropos title and the film's best question, "Do clones have
souls?"
The 6th Day. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Arnold Schwarzenegger, Tony Goldwyn, Robert Duvall, Michael
Rapaport, Michael Rooker, Sarah Wynter, Wendy Crewson, Rod Rowland, Terry
Crews, Ken Pogue, Colin Cunningham.
Directed by Roger Spottiswoode.
Written by Cormac Wibberley, Marianne Wibberey.
Produced by Mike Medavoy, Arnold Schwarzenegger, Jon Davison at
Columbia/Phoenix.
Grade.......................... B-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Columbia Pictures/Phoenix Pictures
 Director: Roger Spottiswoode
 Writer: Marianne Wibberly, Cormac Wibberly
 Cast: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Tony Goldwyn, Robert Duvall,
Michael Rapaport, Michael Rooker, Sarah Wynter, Wendy
Crewson
   Identity crises are the stuff of comedy, as Shakespeare
knew, and while Roger Spottiswoode's "The 6th Day" is not
quite Shakespearean, the identity of its principal figure is
often in question--thereby inspiring both comedic touches and
some dramatic flavor.  Columbia Pictures' logo asks, "Are you
who you think you are?" which is quite a favorable concept
for a story line, but Spottiswoode--who is responsible for the
superior James Bond rouser "Tomorrow Never Dies"--settles
for the most insipid use of the notion with his high-budget
"The 6th Day".  
   Featuring some breathtaking airborne shots of snow-
capped mountains and the downtown skyline of Canada's
most picturesque big city, Vancouver, "The 6th Day" takes us
behind today's headlines into the technology of cloning.  The
picture starts with a reasonably high credibility factor.  We
already know that a sheep named Dolly was actually cloned
by science; that is (correct me if I'm wrong) some DNA
samples from its woolly body were captured, placed in a
Petrie dish, and given the opportunity to duplicate with all the
creature's thoughts, feelings and personality.  Because of
rapid, Dolly-inspired strides now being made in the field,
Spottiswoode situates "The 6th Day" in the year 2005 rather
than in the previously considered 2020, giving us the
conviction that people, too, may actually be duplicated within
a short period of time.  Instead of using the slow process of
allowing a cloned creature to be born and grow naturally,
Cormac and Marianne Wibberley's sceenplay has billionaire
industrialist Drucker (Tony Goldwyn) knocking out human
clones from pre-sculptured models so that his
Frankensteinian doctor, Graham Weir (Robert Duvall), can
simply implant the DNA into the models, allowing them to
spring quickly to mature life.
   The trouble begins when Drucker, believing the owner of a
charter aircraft company, Adam Gibson (Arnold
Schwarzenegger) to be dead, clones the man into an exact
duplicate, so that when Adam returns to his farmhouse he
finds his double kissing his wife and partaking of the birthday
cake which formed the centerpiece of a surprise party.  When
Drucker discovers that Adam is alive and thereby able to
smash his illegal operation, he sends his chief bouncer
Marshall (Michael Rooker) and Marshall's sidekick Talia
(Sarah Wynter) into action to remove the authentic Adam
from the scene.
  In a picture that is full of the sound and fury of seemingly
endless car crashes, the emission of laser guns, and some
predictably generic explosions, the part that offers a modicum
of interest is the comedy.  Adam's comrade-in-flight, Hank
(played by the ubiquitous Michael Rapaport), demonstrates
his affection for women who make no demands by keeping a
state-of-the-art holographic, Stepford-wife bimbo in his
residence, a consort who meets all his needs at her master's
command and disappears instantly when he becomes tired of
her.  Schwarzenegger himself is given some lines that are
humorous by their very clunkiness.  When he breaks the neck
of a villain who has already been killed and cloned several
times, he remarks to himself, "In my day people who were
dead stayed dead."  
   But look at the missed opportunity--what could have been
done when the two Adams finally meet fairly late into the film! 
Each could have affirmed that he was the true Adam (like
George W. Bush's and Al Gore's insistence that "I am the
real president-elect") and could have spent the balance of the
time sorting out their identities.  What's more, we do not get a
sense that Drucker is an entirely evil person whose laboratory
should be destroyed, nor do we see a reason for the
existence of an absolute 6th-day law forbidding human
cloning (the movie's title comes from the Biblical phrase, "On
the Sixth Day God created Man").  Why not simply tweak the
corporation?  Stop its people from killing people and put the
whole operation to use saving the lives of the terminally ill. 
That would be just one suggestion superior to the Luddite
mentality that informs this story.  The film, which suffers from
an endless barrage of noise and effects that have been
cloned over and over from previous movies, could have better
utilized A-1 performers like Robert Duvall and Tony Goldwyn
to be a mind-bending instead of ear-splitting drama.  
Rated PG-13.  Running Time: 90 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie news, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Es tu, Arny? What the heck happened to these guys after the late 80s, early
90s? Remember when Sly, Arny and Bruce ruled the box-office? Well, Bruce is
actually still kickin' some mighty tail, but Arny has gone "soft" and
doesn't want to be seen blowing away a zillion guys with one machine gun
anymore. Of course, his newfound morality is commendable, but it doesn't
appear as though he has completely made up his mind just yet. Both END OF
DAYS and this film seem to be hinting at this so-called "new" Arnold, but in
the end, they just give us the same "old" Arnold, but with much less
fire-power and oomph. The result? Well, in the case of both of these
films...pretty lackluster.
PLOT:
Set sometime in the near future, this film features a world in which cloning
your dead pets minutes after they pass on is considered normal. Human
cloning, on the other hand, is forbidden, but do you think that will stop
the rich evil guy and the unethical doctor from having some fun of their
own? Not a chance! Unfortunately for them, one of the dudes on whom they
decide to test their brand of fun is named Arnold Schwarzenegger (in real
life, that is). And yup, you guessed it...Arny is not happy about having
another "man" take over his life.
CRITIQUE:
A really great premise, some cool futuristic doodads in the first half hour
and a surprisingly strong humor element don't make up for this film's cheesy
production value, stereotypical bad guys, weak score and lack of energy in
the second half. Not exactly sure what went wrong here but I was really
enjoying this movie during its first thirty minutes or so. There were plenty
of cool technological gadgeteries presented, a nice setup for the whole
cloning scenario and one of the creepiest "dolls" to ever see the day of
light (her name is Sim-Pal Suzie and trust me...you won't ever forget her).
Even Arnold seemed to be back to his old self. Delivering goofy lines, being
that burly nice guy husband we all love so much and setting us up for some
good ol' fashioned cloning fun. But the bottom seemed to drop out of this
film at around the halfway point. It's as if they didn't have enough budget
and decided to place everyone in one building and have them run around
playing laser tag. And how annoying were those laser guns and repetitive
scene transitions? Plenty, but not as bad at the obvious blue screen used in
some of the later helicopter stunts. I mean, c'mon people, is this a
Hollywood movie or a phony baloney TV production set to the big screen? Not
enough gloss, not enough punch, not enough of much.
And I'm really kinda pissed about it all because the film did actually seem
to have quite a bit of potential. It's a great subject for a movie, one that
actually manages to spark several cool moments throughout, but too much
talking and not enough interesting developments in the story ultimately
stunt the film's growth. Arny was pretty good as his character(s) but the
film never really seemed to emit any sense of impending doom. Maybe it was
because the characters weren't that well developed. Maybe it was because the
bad guys were so cheesy (red and blue hair, people...c'mon...get with the
program!), or maybe it was because the film didn't look that believable
after its gratifying start. Whatever it was, it certainly didn't prevent me
from enjoying enough of the film to recommend it just slightly, especially
to Arny fans. But there is no revolutionary sci-fi flick in here, folks.
Just another dud to add to the long list of sub-mediocre sci-fi movies
plaguing the industry this year. But I did enjoy this film's many funny
lines (and yes, Arny even says "I might be back" at some point), its cool
techno fun stuff early on and its intriguing proposition. Sadly, it is in
its execution that this film ultimately fails. Video fodder for sure, but
nothing more than that. I do however look forward to a real good cloning
movie in the future. In the meantime, I'm gonna go out and rent TOTAL RECALL
again. Now there's a great sci-fi flick!
Oh yeah, and if you're looking for an "action" movie, this one doesn't fit
that bill either. Unless of course, you consider laser tag gun games
"action". And where was this clone fight between Arnold and himself that I
had heard so much about? Hmmmm...wasn't in our copy.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Director Roger Spottiswoode is probably best known for directing James Bond
in TOMORROW NEVER DIES. Which made people forget about him directing STOP OR
MY MOM WILL SHOOT! and TURNER AND HOOCH. He used to be married to actor Jack
Palance's daughter, but they divorced in 1997.
Screenwriters Cormac Wibberley and Marianne Wibberley are man and wife.
This film was originally titled ON THE SIXTH DAY.

Author
Robin Clifford
What does the future hold for us? Genetic engineering could eliminate world
hunger, cure disease, and remove the threat of extinction and stock the
medical labs with cloned organs for transplant. It could also open the
Pandora's box of mankind's most elusive desire - immortality.
Adam Gibson (Arnold Schwarzenegger) is and old-fashioned family man with a
happy and loving little clan of wife, Natalie (Wendy Crewson), and
daughter, Clara (Taylor Anne Reid). He comes home one night brandishing a
surprise gift for Clara, only to find his place taken by an exact duplicate
of himself. His perfect life wrenched away, Adam is plunged into a sinister
world of murder, corruption and high tech skullduggery in a tale about the
dangers of cloning, "The 6th Day."
Deriving its title from the bible - "and God created man on the sixth day"
- this latest Arnold flick utilizes a very hip and controversial subject,
cloning, as its high-tech draw. And a rather cool one it is. "The 6th Day"
begins with true and fictional reports of the progress of cloning from the
first success, Dolly the sheep, through the failed attempts at human
cloning and the eventual banning of the process if it involves people. This
future world does accept the simpler aspects of the technology, though,
with such specialized companies like RePet, Nu Salmon and Real Grain. These
new companies can recreate your beloved, but dead, pet, or fresh food for
your table. A lucrative industry in creating spare body parts has sprung
up, too. But, because of the ban, whole body cloning is definitely a no-no.
Enter our hero, Adam Gibson. Adam is an adoring husband and father who
leaves the house on his birthday not suspecting that a sinister plot is
about to change his life. He and his partner, Hank (Michael Rapaport), have
a lucrative helicopter business, Double X Charters, which ferries
snowboarders up into the mountains to ski. Hank convinces Adam to take his
special day off and the younger man takes the charter of a wealthy genetics
tycoon, Michael Drucker (Tony Goldwyn). The impact of this fateful decision
is made vivid to Adam only hours later.
Arriving at home with a new life-size talking doll, SimPal Cindy, for his
daughter, Adam is confronted by an unbelievable site. Hearing everyone
singing "Happy Birthday," he looks in the window to see himself and his
family celebrating his birthday. Two thugs arrive on the scene to take Adam
away, telling him that there has been a "sixth day violation," that he was
erroneously cloned and that, should his family find out, they will all be
killed. Adam must face the powerful, greedy corporation, led by Drucker,
which stole his life and fight to get it back.
"The 6th Day" moves, despite the high-tech, sci-fi premise, along a
well-traveled road about one innocent man pitted against a corrupt, evil
system. Here, the cloning technology has advanced to the point where
immortality is within the grasp of man, but society has deemed such an
advance as too dangerous. Arnold, as the muscular everyman Adam Gibson, is
thrust into a world of duality as our hero is brought to question his own
existence, his own reality in this world. Is the Adam who is fighting so
hard for his life and family truly being persecuted or is he merely a clone
remembering a life not his? And, if he does remember another's life as his
own, isn't, then, truly his?
All of this is a really good premise for a movie and, if it weren't
burdened with a former action megastar who wants to return to his former
glory, there may have been a good movie here. Instead, we see Arnold in
transition. The former Mr. Universe has been through some major heart
surgery and you can see that he just can't do what he used to in his films
like "Predator" and the "Terminator" franchise. Now, Arnie has to do more
thesping and less butt kicking and he is simply not up to the task. When he
is playing the loving husband and father opposite Crewson and Reid, it made
me want to cry - but, not from emotion for the scenes! With all the
millions Arnold has made from his flicks over all these years, he couldn't
have invested in a few acting lessons, maybe.
Given an actor in the lead role, I think that, with everything else
associated with "The 6th Day," there could have been a good sci-fi actioner
here. As it is, the supporting cast - with Tony Goldwyn as the greedy
high-tech entrepreneur, Michael Rooker as his chief henchman, and Robert
Duval as the well meaning mad scientist - is left to hang in the breeze
with nothing to anchor on to. The F/X showing the brain drain process that
makes cloning possible reminded me of the 1980 Ken Russell film, "Altered
States," and doesn't cover any new ground.
At a little over two hours long I thought that "The 6th Day" could have
easily lost 30 minutes and have been a better movie. Losing Arnold would
have been another good move. I give it a C-.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Homer Yen
Imagine the following fascinating but profoundly
challenging ethical issues surrounding the topic of
cloning.
* World population explodes to such an extent that
food levels decrease to dangerously low levels. By
cloning fish and livestock, however, new food supplies
could be easily reintroduced into the food system to
eradicate any future shortages.  
* Your precious 10-year old daughter would be
heartbroken if she found out that her adorable pet
pooch has gone to Heaven.  To save her from the pain
and yourself from the excruciating task of explaining
to her what happened, you visit a business at the
local mall that specializes in cloning pets.  Within
two hours, Rover is 'resurrected'.  Your daughter
never knows the difference and life goes on.
* Deion Sanders, a talented football player acquired
by our Washington Redskins for an ungodly sum of money
to help ensure a championship season, suffers what
seems to be a career-ending injury. With that, the
hopes of winning the Super Bowl and the $50+ million
investment die.  Miraculously, Deion appears in the
next game looking as if nothing had happened.  The
pursuit of the coveted Super Bowl championship
continues and all seems normal.  
These are all compelling quandaries regarding the
future of Man and would certainly make for an
interesting sci-fi yarn.  However, despite the fact
that "The 6th Day" is layered with philosophical
undertones, the moral issues are much more compelling
than the film itself.
Starring a somewhat subdued Arnold Schwarzenegger,
this moderately entertaining science fiction/action
adventure film takes place in the "not too distant
future and sooner than we think."  Science and
technology has advanced to a point that the lines
between reality and artificiality are becoming
increasingly blurred.  Virtual girlfriends are
becoming as acceptable as the real thing. SimPals
(lifelike but eerily ugly dolls) are the hottest
holiday toy.  Meanwhile, there is heated debate that
rages over the legitimacy of human cloning.  Although
it is currently banned under law, a greedy
businessman, Michael Drucker (Tony Goldwyn), wants to
have the laws overturned.
Our hero, Adam (Schwarzenegger) gets caught up in a
bizarre and dangerous situation when he learns that
he's been cloned.  Waitperhaps he's the clone and the
other guy is real.  It's another absorbing question. 
But no matter how interesting this film could've been,
the basic DNA of any Schwarzenegger film sacrifices
ingenuity for eye candy and a bit of action.  You can
expect several gunfights that make it look like a sort
of revved up commercial for Laser Tag.  There are some
cool sci-fi effects that will surely please the
men-who-love-cool-gadgets population.  And, there are
some pretty good performances.  Of note is Michael
Rappaport as one of Drucker's henchman, and there is a
tender turn from Wanda Cannon who plays the dying wife
of a key scientist within Drucker's firm.
But where "The 6th Day" goes awry is that it is
basically a toned down version of the typical
Schwarzenegger movie.  It doesn't have over-the-top
action sequences, the violence level is somewhat
subdued (although there is one graphic scene), and our
hero even displays an uneasy gushiness.  It's even
rated PG-13.  Perhaps seeing so many of his other
cartoonish but action-packed films have caused me to
consider this project a step in the wrong direction. 
While it tries to be more than just a mindless action
flick, the movie doesn't really have anything to get
excited about.  You'll walk out of the theatre
thinking that you saw a preview for Playstation 3.


Author
Steve Rhodes
Two Arnolds for the price of one.  How could you go wrong with a recipe 
like that?  Well, in THE 6TH DAY, director Roger Spottiswoode (TOMORROW 
NEVER DIES) doesn't, coming up with an intelligent and high energy 
science fiction tale that is a lot of good old fashioned fun.
Set in a time -- "In the near future.  Sooner than you think." -- in 
which cloning has become possible, the cautionary movie opens with an 
XFL football game.  (Just think of the product placement fees that the 
XFL had to come up with for that plug.  The NFL, the story explains, is 
in the midst of a 4-year player strike.)  The first $300,000,000 
quarterback is severely injured in the game.   The solution, of course, 
is cloning.  Although cloning of human organs and of entire animals is 
legal, complete cloning of humans is against the law, so the replacement 
strategy for the quarterback is kept strictly secret.
As Drucker, the head of a cloning conglomerate and of the XFL, Tony 
Goldwyn (GHOST) is a villain who is a bit too cold for the part.  His 
chief scientist, Dr. Graham Weir, is significantly underplayed by Robert 
Duvall.  The rest of the supporting casting, however, including Michael 
Rapaport as Arnold's sidekick and Michael Rooker, Rodney Rowland and 
Sarah Wynter, as Drucker's thugs, works quite well.
Arnold Schwarzenegger, as helicopter pilot Adam Gibson, is at the top of 
his form.  He is lovable, humorous, vulnerable and strong.  A man who 
has been known for some robotic acting at times, Arnold is remarkably 
human this time, even when he is a clone.  Early in the story, he is 
cloned and the bad guys under Drucker's orders try to find the real Adam 
and eliminate him with the use of some cool guns.  If people find out 
that there are two Adams, Drucker will go to jail, and his operation 
will be shut down.
The gadgetry becomes an engrossing and hilarious subplot in its own 
right.  Carefully mixing the future with the present, all of the 
technological toys seem quite realistic.  Car's navigational systems 
have become capable of autopiloting.  Holographic images have become the 
billboards of the future.  Kid's dolls become a creepy cross between a 
real girl and something from THE BRIDE OF CHUCKY.  Get arrested and you 
are instantly given a virtual court appointed attorney.  And if you have 
been worried about sex on the Internet, wait until you see what is 
possible with a full-sized virtual sex toy.  The latter is one of many 
reasons why the film's PG-13 rating is a bit questionable.
You back up your data regularly, or you should, but do you back up your 
brain?  Drucker does.  Memory dumping becomes part of this intriguing 
and complex story, whose twists come quickly and often.  Even if part of 
it is familiar ground for an Arnold actioner, it is none the less 
entertaining.  It may not be the sort of movie that you'll be discussing 
a week later, but while you're there, you'll have a high old time.
THE 6TH DAY runs 2:04.  It is rated PG-13 for strong action violence, 
brief strong language and some sensuality and would be acceptable for 
teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE 6TH DAY
(Columbia)
Starring:  Arnold Schwarzenegger, Tony Goldwyn, Michael Rapaport, Robert
Duvall, Michael Rooker, Sarah Wynter, Wendy Crewson, Todd Rowland.
Screenplay:  Cormac Wibberley & Marianne Wibberley.
Producers:  Mike Medavoy, Arnold Schwarzenegger and Jon Davison.
Director:  Roger Spottiswoode.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (violence, profanity, adult themes, brief nudity)
Running Time:  124 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     It's been more than a little bit sad watching Arnold Schwarzenegger
turn into an object of fond nostalgic reminiscence. Nobody's kidding
anybody here -- the big guy has always been an iconic presence first, last
and always. Back in the '80s and early '90s, however, that presence was
put to effective use in guilty action pleasures (COMMANDO, PREDATOR) and
genuine action pleasures (the TERMINATOR films, TOTAL RECALL). What does
he have to show for most of the last decade? THE LAST ACTION HERO, BATMAN
& ROBIN, JINGLE ALL THE WAY and END OF DAYS. Going to an "Ah-nuld" movie
became a desperate grab at what he used to be: American cinema's one true
super-hero.
     There's no point going overboard with praise for THE 6TH DAY, a solid
action thriller and little more. It is, however, a pleasure to watch
Schwarzenegger in action without cringing in embarrassment. He plays Adam
Gibson, a charter pilot in a near-future America where genetic
manipulation is rampant but human cloning is illegal. Gibson heads home
from work one day to find himself already with his family -- presumed dead
after his business partner (Michael Rappaport) takes his assignment one
day, he has been replaced by a clone. When those responsible, including
billionaire Michael Drucker (Tony Goldwyn) discover the overlapping
Gibsons, it becomes necessary to erase one of them. That leaves Gibson
running for his life from apparently immortal assassins and trying to
figure out how he can get his life and family back.
     The title of THE 6TH DAY refers to the Genesis verse about the
creation of man, and the film as a whole fiddles around with questions of
bio-ethics and playing God. Surprisingly, it does so in a manner that's
both moderately intelligent and fairly clever. The script by Cormac and
Marianne Wibberley has fun with near-future developments like life-size
genetically-engineered dolls (with creepy, Chuckie-like features), cloned
versions of deceased pets (the wonderfully named RePet) and virtual
girlfriends, while still addressing the legitimate issues involved in
human cloning. The pseudo-science that advances the plot is far from
consistent -- the cloned assassins somehow remember their deaths even
though their memories hadn't been "backed up" to that point -- but it
rarely proves intrusive enough to sabotage the whole package.
     One of the reasons it's easier to enjoy that package is that it's so
simple to unwrap. Too many action films ignore the genre's basic rules for
success: create a likeable enough protagonist; give him worth adversaries;
pump up the energy for the set pieces; and don't over-think things.
There's nothing spectacular about any of the action sequences in THE 6TH
DAY, but spectacle isn't the real selling point here. Roger Spottiswoode
is a competent enough action director who finds just the right pacing for
his key moments. He does tend to over-direct the expository segments,
reducing even the most basic domestic moments to snippets of film, and
proves overly fond of jittery, distorted point-of-view shots for
characters' memories. Fortunately, he finds the right pace when it counts,
and avoids action overkill. The result is a film that keeps moving without
feeling as though it's dragging you along or assaulting your senses.
     It's also simply enjoyable seeing Schwarzenegger return to form. He
has always shown a great sense of humor about his screen image (beyond the
trademark quips, even), and he gets a few opportunities here to indulge
his lighter side. He also avoids over-indulging that lighter side, so that
decidedly un-whimsical pillow fights between Gibson and his wife (Wendy
Crewson) don't inspire a gag reflex. THE 6TH DAY finds Arnold armed with a
few one-liners, but he's not over-indulged there either. In fact, there's
a refreshing quality of "just enough" to most of the film. There's a
pointless explosion here or a bit too much exposition there, but from
start to finish it's generally concerned with delivering the goods. It's
faint praise, but praise nonetheless. And after nearly a decade, it's
worth a nod of encouragement that Arnold Schwarzenegger finally doesn't
look like a lost action hero.

Author
Michael Redman
Human cloning appears inevitable. We've cloned sheep. We're mapping the
human genome. Can a clone of a former President who, himself, runs for that
office be far away?
"The Sixth Day" examines the moral implications of copying people. Sorta. It
also tosses in an Arnold Schwarzenegger action film and does neither with
much thought...or action.
Adam Gibson (Schwarzenegger) returns home one day to discover that he's
already there. His duplicate is enjoying his birthday party. Even worse,
he's enjoying his wife in the back seat of their suburban assault vehicle.
In the not-too distant future, cloning is commonplace. "Repet" is a
commercial success assuring your family they never have to suffer the death
of a beloved pet. Rover is back with you, just a clone away. Human copying
has been outlawed but a rogue company is secretly Xeroxing away.
The bad guys have to kill Gibson before they are discovered. Arnold has to
survive, destroy their operation and make everything safe for law-abiding
folk. It's a typical Schwarzenegger movie, but not quite as exciting.
The action scenes lack the punch of earlier Schwarzenegger pictures.
Accustomed to the more highly stylized "Matrix", the audience for
old-fashioned shoot-em-up science fiction films might be disappearing. This
one isn't exactly a box office sensation.
The story feels reminiscent of "Bladerunner" but without the soul. The minor
plot element of which Gibson is "real" (which could be interesting had it
been explored for more than 30 seconds) is handled clumsily compared to the
underlying question of whether Deckard is a replicant. Gibson's mission is
to destroy clones which happen to have a built-in limited life span. Sound
familiar? Compare the final scene with one of the Bladerunner endings.
In this season of Christmas releases, Santa won't be laughing "Ho! Ho! Ho!"
at this film. It'll be more like "Ho! Hum!"
(Michael Redman has written this column for long enough that he can remember
both versions of "Bladerunner". Email redman@bluemarble.net with your
cinematic memories.)
[This appeared in the 12/7/2000 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bluemarble.net.]

Author
Christopher Null
     You've seen the ads.  You know the story.  So is The 6th Day the
same movie as Total Recall, just without the blonde?  Not really, but
don't feel bad if you have a little déjŕ vu along the way.
     Rest assured, you're watching an Arnold Schwarzenegger vehicle. 
This time he's not a spy or a commando, he's Adam Gibson, an extreme
snowboarding tour guide in the not-so-distant future, an era that
includes a company called RePet can clone your dog, cat, or snake.  Or
you can pick up a Sim-Pal, a child-size doll (with real hair that grows)
that makes for one of the creepiest props I've seen since that
miniature, squirting chicken in Eraserhead.
     One day in this utopia, our lovable hero returns home from work to
discover that, a la RePet, he's been cloned and a doppelganger has taken
over his life.  Say what!?  Everyone knows human cloning is illegal. 
Before you can say "I'll be back," Arnie finds himself on the run from
goons intent on killing him -- if only he could figure out who -- and
why -- they wanted him dead!
     Of course, that reason just might have a little something to do
with Tony Goldwyn's multi-billionaire bad guy Drucker, who turns out to
be building some kind of illicit clone empire that is near-unstoppable. 
Clone hitman gets killed?  Just re-clone him and send him back out into
the field to bust some heads!
     For the first time on film, it's Arnie vs. Arnie as the real Adam
comes to terms with his alter ego, only he understandably finds he has
trouble kicking his own ass.  Why?  Because this is the era of a kinder,
gentler Arnold.  A PG-13 Arnold.  A pacifist Arnold that only kills four
thugs instead of the usual two dozen during a shooting spree.
     Much of The 6th Day serves as little more than an excuse to show
off a bunch of gee-whiz effects, a lot of which is reminiscent of
Schwarzenegger's Eraser.  And while some of the FX really are gee-whiz,
some -- like the extremely annoying "high-tech" wipes that work as scene
transitions -- are tedious and look more like music video sequences.
     A lot of this unevenness can be chalked up to director Roger
Spottiswoode, the man probably best known for helming the limp James
Bond vehicle Tomorrow Never Dies but also responsible for movies like
Stop! Or My Mom Will Shoot and Turner & Hooch.  Then again, I suppose
Spottiswoode is no more out of his element that Arnold Schwarzenegger is
as producer.
     So is all this talk of cloning possible -- namely that you can copy
a person's personality and all their memories by flashing a light in
their eyes, or that you can clone a whole person in two short hours? 
Well... what The 6th Day lacks in scientific feasibility it makes up for
with some much-needed humor.  Now, a little phony science I can forgive,
but what's less forgivable is that The 6th Day is so damn boring!  Where
are the thrills?  Sure Arnie hangs out of a helicopter once, but much of
the film takes place behind corporate doors discussing the right and
wrongs of the clone debate.  Hardly a True Lies with, you know, a nuke
or two going off.
     Ultimately, The 6th Day turns out to be a curious modern morality
fable, one that comes out distinctly on the anti-cloning side.  But I'm
not sure if Spottiswoode isn't sending mixed messages here.  After all,
two Arnolds!?  What could be wrong with that?
Director: Roger Spottiswoode
Producer: Jon Davison, Mike Medavoy, Arnold Schwarzenegger
Writer: Cormac Wibberley, Marianne Wibberley
Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Tony Goldwyn, Robert Duvall, Michael
Rapaport, Michael Rooker, Sarah Wynter, Wendy Crewdon
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Dennis Schwartz

SIXTH DAY, THE (director: Roger Spottiswoode; screenwriter: Cormac
Wibberley/Marianne Wibberley; cinematographer: Pierre Mignot; editors:
Mark Conte/ Dominique Fortin/ Michel Arcand; cast: Arnold Schwarzenegger
(Adam Gibson), Tony Goldwyn (Drucker), Robert Duvall (Dr. Weir), Michael
Rapaport (Hank), Michael Rooker (Robert Marshall, Drucker's main
henchman), Sarah Wynter (Talia), Wendy Crewson (Natalie, Mrs. Gibson),
Taylor Anne Reid (Clara, Adam's daughter), Rodney Rowland (Wile), Colin
Cunningham (Tripp), Steve Bacic (Johnny Phoenix), Wanda Cannon
(Katherine Weir); Runtime: 124; Columbia; 2000)
A rehashed formula action/sci-fi film about the near future that looks
old hat and plays like low-brow entertainment even as it advances the
sophisticated problems cloning might eventually hold. Maybe it's because
the film tried to be both preachy about its social conscience message
and at the same time your typical Arnold Schwarzenegger action film,
that it looked so confused, seeming as fuzzy and as unbelievable as the
instant cloning process it featured in the film. But, as for the film's
entertainment value, it passes the test for mild escapist fare, and to
the bargain you have two Arnold's saying lame one-liners for the price
of one. Arnold's comeback from health problems can be declared over but
it cannot hide the fact that he has aged and seems more weary and unsure
of himself now, not quite the super-hero he once was. But, even if this
film is not as good as his "Total Recall" or "True Lies"  or  even
"Terminator 2," it should be good enough to be accepted by his loyal
following. How it will do in the box office and with the general public,
is hard to say, as the film seems gloomily cluttered with nocturnal
shots and the action is less than spectacular, and it is not as stylish
as some other recent popular action films (eg. The Matrix). Arnold still
likes to do things the old-fashioned way, by knocking heads in times of
difficulty. And, how the public will respond to the aging Arnold saving
the world from an evil clone manufacturer who is merely a greedy
businessman and not a super-villain, in a PG-13 film without an edge, is
anyone's guess, especially since Arnold's popularity is slipping. In
this film he is asked to carry the load, though helped somewhat that the
film is well executed, has good enough special effects and a
semi-plausible cloning theme. But, he still cannot overcome the overall
mediocrity of the film.
Cloning is evil in this film mainly because it is used by a shady
biotech corporation head Mr. Drucker (Goldwyn), a slimy, reptilean
character, who by means of  illegal clonings has become the richest man
in the world. He is consumed with accumulating more wealth and with
getting politicians to change their vote to make cloning legal for
humans. It is now only legal to clone pets and to clone animals to
restock the food supply. It is banned for humans by a so-called
"6th-day" law.
For its thought provoking moments, the film wants to draw its
battlelines over good science vs. bad science, showing how Drucker's
corporation greedily makes money off science and profits greatly from
its illegal operation. Drucker states, he is only going forward to
territory where God left off. God, as a superior belief to science, is
thrown into the argument by Arnold, who plays the ordinary Joe,
suspicious of science and the new trends in the world. Philosophy is not
one of the film's strong points, as there is a muddled argument for each
position presented.
Dr. Graham Weir (Duvall) is a mad genius scientist that Drucker's
corporation financially backs to do its secret illegal clones. Weir is
someone who is in it for the knowledge and the love of his wife. She
died five years ago but is now cloned thanks to him, but is now dying of
cancer and refuses another clone. For him, there is nothing higher than
human love. He's the most interesting one in the film, so it behooves me
that he has a truncated part, which fails to give him the depth needed
to draw out his character and go further than the drab figure he is
portrayed as, being a good scientist used by an evil businessman.
The first example of cloning, comes in the film's opening scene, where a
star football player, on a team owned by Drucker, with a lifetime
contract of $300 million a season, is brain-dead after a football
injury. "We have a lifetime contract with a vegetable. Johnny--you're
gonna have to take one for the team." Marshall (Michael Rooker), one of
Drucker's henchmen says, before pulling the plug on Johnny's
life-support system. A cloned Johnny then reappears as a star
quarterback again. The joke being, that you don't have to die, the
corporation can clone you in no time at all (hardly believable), if they
have your genetic code, and the cost is a only mere one and a half
million bucks.
In the next scene, we see that Adam Gibson (Schwarzenegger) is a nice,
peaceful family man, living a normal suburban life with his doting wife
Natalie (Wendy Crewson) and his playful daughter. He's a charter
helicopter pilot who is partners with the free-wheeling, comical,
bachelor Hank (Michael Rapaport). Hank is, also, someone who has the
perfect girl via 'virtual reality.' They have been hired to airlift
Drucker to a skiing slope, and the only catch, and it turns out to be a
big catch, is that Hank and him have to undergo a special blood,
fingerprinting and eye test on Drucker's special machines. Drucker will
use this info gathered here later on for cloning purposes.
Adam's big problem at home comes when he learns that their daughter's
pet dog Oliver, a pet his daughter can't live without dies. The wife
wants the dog cloned at RePet? But this is against his religious
principles. He thinks there's something wrong about messing with the
natural order of life and death, because he's just an old-fashioned guy,
liking his 1950s Caddy over the modern automatic car that drives
itself.  He also endears himself to those old-fashioned family values of
how to raise a child and blames the media for showing too much graphic
violence. But, he seems to have a selective opinion on when to use
high-tech, because on his job, he seems to be all for high-tech, using a
remote control to fly one of his other helicopters.
Adam switches places with Hank and pilots Drucker by posing as Adam, so
he can go to a RePet store and see if he wants a cloned dog and to then
attend a surprise birthday party his wife is throwing for him. But a
fanatical anti-cloning fundamentalist (Colin Cunningham) executes the
pilot and Drucker. Thinking that Adam and Drucker died and nobody will
be the wiser, Weir clones them. When Adam peeks into his house at his
birthday party, there is another Adam in there blowing out the candles
on his birthday cake - one who looks just like him. He is then met by
the most persistent villains on Drucker's goon squad trying to eliminate
him (Sarah Wynter and Rodney Rowland). Their claim to fame is that they
keep getting killed by Arnold but keep coming back, unfortunately this
lengthens the film to over two hours with no apparent discernible
plusses in keeping the film going.
After seeing that his family has accepted the clone as him, the dazed
Adam is on the run from Drucker's goons and in search of the truth as to
what's going on, and has to put up with the knowledge that there are a
lot of clones around and that the one who looks like him is sleeping
with his wife. He also finds out, to his amazement, that even Drucker is
a clone.
The film lets go of its pseudo-science pretenses and turns back to
Arnold in the action-hero mode, of him getting revenge on those who dare
to mess with him and his family. It's all been seen before, but the film
seems easy to take or leave, and is only mildly offensive to both those
who like their films with a bit more intelligence and those who prefer a
lot more rough action. This film will live and die not by its story, but
by what you think of its action scenes. I thought they were good enough
in a functional sense, but there were just too many dead spots in the
story for me to find this big-budget film anything more than a minor
work.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
