Title
Review for Child's Play (1988)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Matt Prigge
Director: Tom Holland
Writers: Don Mancini, John Lafia, and Tom Holland
Starring: Catherine Hicks, Alex Vincent, Chris Surrandon, Brad Douriff,
Dinah Manoff, Tommy Swerdlow, Jack Colvin, Neil Guintoli
We all know the fate of "Child's Play," which is the same for almost any
film these days that does marginally well financially: Sequel Hell.
With the newest installment in the quasi-popular series currently out
(that would be "Bride of Chucky" - and it grossed 11 million in its
opening weekend, which I think is the sign of the apocalypse number
five), it's kinda fun to go back and see how it all began rougly ten
years ago with the original, a task which is a retread for some, and for
others (namely myself) a chance to see what all the fuss was about.
Alas, the original "Child's Play" actually isn't that bad.  Even seeing
it in the tiny, claustrophobic, and mechanically-challenged theatre at
my college wasn't the horribly dull experience I thought it would be,
not just because of the nicely rowdy crowd (which you almost need to
watch a film like this - and if you don't believe me, try and watch this
flick by yourself one day), but because as a whole, this isn't a bad
movie.  It's not great, but it does have two things that many horror
films like this one don't have: 1) a rather nifty premise, and 2) a
sense of humor, both which save this from Horror Hell, which is
precisely where, say, "I Know What You Did Last Summer" has recently
gone.
The premise of "Child's Play" is that a serial killer named Charles Lee
Ray (Brad Douriff) is shot and almost killed by a Chicago hard-boiled
detective (Chris Surrandon - see what happens to some Oscar nominees?),
and before he dies, utters a voodoo chant that sends his soul directly
into a kid's doll called Chucky, a doll which has got to be the
scariest-looking kid's doll I've ever seen.  The next day, a bum who's
stolen it sells it to single-mother Karen Barclay (Catherine Hicks), who
then gives it to her young son Andy (Alex Vincent) for his birthday.
Of course Chucky begins talking to the kid and trying to find a way to
get out of the doll, but certain twists come up.  Like the guy he
learned voodoo from reveals to him that the only way to break the curse
is to take over the body of the first person he told he was inside the
doll, that being Andy.  And soon enough, Chucky is killing people either
for revenge or for what seems like fun, and people are discovering that
Chucky isn't just a kiddie doll one by one.
The idea is a neat one, ripe for lots of comic terror, and luckily it
utlizes a lot of that.  It plays with an idea stolen from a classic
Looney Toons short that when someone knows that Chucky is alive, they
tell people about it, but when he tries to prove themselves, Chucky does
nothing, and everyone thinks they're crazy.  It plays with this, as well
as the whole child-like thought that dolls and toys come to life, and
even manages to cram in a couple really frightening moments.  Even if
there's an entire sequence devoted to cliches (a woman alone in a house
hears a noise, goes to investigate it, and finds nothing, but wait for
the kicker a second later!), there's also a harrowing car ride with
Chucky trying to knife the detective from the back seat, and then trying
to attack him when the car finally crashes, leaving the viewer with at
least rather visceral exprience.
The ending is rather fun, as well, albeit a tad too drawn-out (about
four different endings, maybe five), and the characters are more
intelligent than the average horror film line-up, making them easier to
sympathize with.  If there's one horrible thing about many horror films,
it's that the protagonists are morons who you can't help but shout
obscenities at, and for the most part, "Child's Play" steers away from
that.  And most of all, the Chucky character is a good one, not just
because he provides instant comic relief (LOOK!  That doll's moving on
its own!), but because he's a generally scary character.
If there's anything really wrong with "Child's Play," it's that it's too
trite and has too less self esteem.  At almost 90 minutes, "Child's
Play" features way too less to be a real classic of horror.  It throws
itself into a simple three act set-up that renders it quick and almost
forgettable if it weren't for the fact that the film deals with a
psychotic doll.  If the film had more confidence in what it was
presenting, it would really push the envelope and become even more than
just a short bit of horror escapism, which is precisely why this kind of
film is only memorable as a cheap little horor film...which isn't
necessarily a bad thing.  As such, "Child's Play" is content to be just
the short, typical horror film, but saves itself via a sense of humor
and a nice quasi-campy feel that makes it much more enjoyable than the
average short, typical horror film.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Jerry Saravia
Let's begin by saying that I am heartily sick and tired of post-modern,
cleverly designed horror/slasher flicks which try to comment on the whole
slasher genre, only to end up becoming what it is that they are pretending to
satirize. The year 1998 had the following in store: "Urban Legend," "I Still
Know What You Did Last Summer," "Halloween H20," and "Bride of Chucky." The
latter has the same degree of self-awareness, considering there's one shot of
someone watching a clip from "The Bride of Frankenstein." 
"Child's Play" is one of the better horror films at around the time of
"Halloween 4" and "Monkey Shines." It unfolds at a quick pace with some tense,
scary scenes. The best scene is when the mother picks up the package that the
doll came in, and the batteries fall on the floor! Oops! How can the doll speak
without batteries? When she threatens to throw the doll into the fireplace, the
doll's face contorts into the angry, evil Charles and emits some Exorcist-like
obscenities: "You filthy slut!", and so on, and so forth. 
"Child's Play," however, has some unbelievable moments that hinder the tension
towards the end. For example, the suave cop who shot Charles Lee Ray
disbelieves the kids stories about the doll speaking and giving orders, and he
disbelieves the mother after she's obviously been attacked (she's bitten on the
arm). Then the cop is attacked by Chucky, and curiously, when he sees the kids
mother afterwards, he doesn't even tell her that he was attacked! Why not?
That's hard to swallow, and it is unlikely that such a doll would travel
through the cold city of Chicago unnoticed, but that's a trivial complaint. The
ending, as effective as it is, is a cross between "Terminator" and "Halloween,"
where the killer just keeps rising back from supposed death. They could have
easily blown the doll to kingdom come, so you can see why it was stupid to make
two inferior sequels about the same damn Chucky doll. 
"Child's Play" is done the old-fashioned way (even for an 80's horror movie) by
not including a high body count or any needless gore- the movie builds its
suspense with thrills and chills. The performances are decent and most
importantly, we care about the characters' plight. Although it doesn't come
close to the unrelenting terror of the voodoo doll episode in "Trilogy of
Terror," "Child's Play" is still better than most recent horror flicks. Oh
yeah, and there are no clever post-modernist jokes. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com

Author
Randy Parker
        Every little kid dreams of having a doll that can walk, talk, and
play with him.  For Andy, the 6-year-old protagonist of the thriller
CHILD'S PLAY, this dream becomes a horrifying reality when his doll,
Chucky, not only comes to life, but also goes on a grisly murder spree.
        CHILD'S PLAY opens in a toy store with a dying serial killer
transferring his soul, via voodoo, into an innocent-looking doll.  A
struggling single mother, played by Catherine Hicks (who was the marine
biologist in STAR TREK IV), buys the possessed doll as a birthday present
for her son, Andy.  Much to his delight, Andy discovers that his new doll,
which he names Chucky, is alive; he can walk, talk, play, and much much
more.
        Trouble starts to brew when Chucky (possessed by the serial
killer's spirit) starts to murder people, and the police suspect that Andy
is responsible for the crimes.  No one will believe Andy, who claims that
his doll Chucky is the real culprit--that is, until Andy's mother discovers
that the doll has been operating without any batteries in it.  But before
she can dispose of Chucky he escapes, and in the remainder of the film,
Hicks and a detective, played by Chris Sarandon, team up to find and
destroy the doll.
        CHILD'S PLAY is fun, campy, not too gory, and at times genuinely
suspenseful.  Several tense sequences in the movie raised the hair on my
back, including the one in which Sarandon, trapped in his overturned car,
must fend off Chucky's attempts to kill him.  Thanks to convincing special
effects, the movie passes its most important test: the mobile and murderous
doll is believable and quite frightening.  Chucky's demented gaze and
sinister smile are haunting and will make you think twice the next time you
see a cabbage patch kid.  I was also impressed by Alex Vincent's
performance as Andy, the cute and gutsy little boy who must overcome his
mother's and the police's skepticism about Chucky's true nature.
        Although I enjoyed the humor, suspense, and premise of CHILD'S
PLAY, the film's lack of originality bothered me.  The gimmick of a doll
coming to life is reminiscent of 1978's MAGIC, which was about a
ventriloquist's homicidal dummy.  Furthermore, Chucky's knife-wielding
antics really aren't all that different from those of Jason in the FRIDAY
THE 13TH series.  My biggest problem with CHILD'S PLAY is its ending which,
although effective, seems lifted directly from THE TERMINATOR.
        Despite these problems, CHILD'S PLAY is certainly above average as
far as horror movies go, and if you're looking for some campy humor and
good suspense, then the movie is worth checking out.
