Title
Review for Brother (2000)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Laura Clifford
In the world of the Japanese Yakuza, 'brother' signifies both a bond 
stronger than blood and the immediate underlings of a clan Yakuza's oyabun,
or father.  Writer/director/star Beat Takeshi is Yamamoto, saved from 
execution by the rival gang who've killed their boss by Harada (Ren Ohsugi, 
Hana-bi"), who's switched loyalties to save his skin.  Instead, Yamamoto
is banished and travels to L.A. in search of his younger, half brother Ken
(Claude Maki), a small time drug dealer.  Yamamoto quickly recreates the
Yakuza lifestyle in L.A., slaughtering Ken's suppliers and building his own
empire in "Brother."
Known as Aniki (brother), Yamamoto forms a particular attachment to Ken's
friend Denny (Omar Epps, "Love and Basketball"), ironic seeing as when
he first ran into him anonymously on the street, he shoved a broken bottle into
Denny's eye.  Aniki's ability to outfox Denny in the bets Denny constantly
proffers builds a humorous rivalry between the two.
Not much else is too funny in the violent world Yamamoto forms around himself.
Once the Latino drug connection's been wiped out, they form an alliance with 
young Japanese hotshot Shirase (Masaya Kato), respectful of Yamamoto after the
loyal Kato (Susumu Terajima, "Afterlife") stakes his life to prove Yamamoto's
worth.  Shirase proves too headstrong, though, eventually embroiling Yamamoto's
clan in a war with the Mafia which Yamamoto realizes will prove their undoing.
Fans of Takeshi's stylish violence will delight in the gunplay, Yubitsumes 
(the removal of a finger joint as apology), hari kiri and death-by-chopstick
scenes peppered throughout his film, although newcomers may be left scratching
their heads.  Takeshi's characters are always men of few words, but his Aniki
is too inscrutable, his motivation mystifying.  His script is like a mosaic -
it gives an impression, but leaves us to fill in the connective tissue.
Yet Takeshi's exploration of the meaning of family has a resonance which
helps us overlook his film's flaws.
Takeshi's Tokyo backstory is confusing to follow, only gradually making
sense as the film progresses.  The violence ingrained in Aniki's being
could explain why he allows his clan into an unwinnable war, yet it doesn't
explain Denny's loyalty, which costs him everything.  (It doesn't help that
Epps, after facing a shattering revelation, plays a revenge scene too
lightly.)  Kitano introduces a flighty mistress (Joy Nakagawa) for Aniki out 
of nowhere, then dispatches her just as abruptly.  Still Kitano's Aniki 
is a striking figure with his elaborate Yakuza back tattoo, black suits and
dark sunglasses and his final, prophetic gesture is that of a larger than
life iconic figure.
While Director of Photography Katsumi Yanagijima's ("Sonatine") Tokyo
scenes look like claustrophobic stage sets, he captures an outsider's
look at L.A. emphasizing horizontal lines in the architecture and landscapes.
Joe Hisaishi provides the typical, retro-orchestral Kitano score.
"Brother" is not likely to win new fans for Takeshi Kitano, but it's an
intriguing, if not wholly satisfying, addition to his oeuvre.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Robin Clifford
Yakuza tough guy Yamamoto (Beat Takeshi) is forced to leave Tokyo and heads
to  LA  to find his younger half-brother Ken (Claude Maki.) Soon, the older
gangster realizes he is thrust back into the old violence he left behind in
Japan  and,  before  long,  he commands a sizable gang of his own. When his
Yakuza  brethren refuse to bow down to Mafia pressures, it's all-out war in
director/writer Takeshi Kitano's "Brother."
Steeped in the long tradition of the Yakuza - a gangster society that is an
integral  part  of  the  overall  Japanese  culture - "Brother" begins with
Yamamoto  (Beat Takeshi, the director's on-screen moniker) arriving, alone,
in  Los  Angeles. He's looking for his relocated half-brother and, finally,
finds  out  where  he  lives.  Flash  back  to  Tokyo and we see the end of
Yamamoto's  Yakuza  clan as a rival gang absorbs it. The deal requires that
Yamamoto be eliminated to save the clan, but, the crime boss is secreted to
the US.
Once  in  the  good  old USA, Yamamoto picks up where he left off in Japan,
taking charge of Ken's homeboys. He joins forces with a rival Japanese gang
led  by  Shirase (Masaya Kato) and they being to take on the Chicano street
gangs,  eliminate  them, then move into their territory. Soon, the usurpers
come  to  the  attention  of the local Mafia and war breaks out between the
enemy factions on the streets of LA.
There  is  one thing you can say about Takeshi Kitano's films. They are the
vision  of  the filmmaker and, whether light comedy or gangland drama, have
his  firm  imprint  on every one. His use of over-bearing, schmarmy, cheesy
60's   orchestral   movie  music,  often  utilized  inappropriately,  is  a
trademark.  He frequently has the actors look directly into the camera, not
at  the  audience  but  at  the  actors  they  are  playing off of. He also
maintains  the  image  of  the  strong,  silent  type (or, as in the comedy
"Kikujiro",  the  weak,  silent type) who uses violence instead of words to
make his point.
Kitano's  films  are  interesting  -  maybe  not  always  good,  but always
interesting.  In  "Brother,"  there  are  a number of bits that don't quite
work.  Kitano  uses  frequent  non  sequitur  scenes  of  gangsters playing
basketball  or  throwing  a football that have nothing to do with the story
and  actually  take  attention  from the gangland drama. He also, at times,
injects  humor  into violent scenes, taking the edge off of such sequences.
I'll also mention the saccharine score, again, as an annoyance.
On  the  plus  side,  Kitano  gives  full  shrift  to  examining the Yakuza
sub-culture  with its codes of chivalry, obligation, loyalty, obedience and
brotherhood. Members of a Yakuza clan maintain a fanatical loyalty to their
anikis  (brothers)  within the gang with a willingness to put one's life on
the  line.  This loyalty, obedience and obligation are depicted vividly and
violently  throughout  the  story  and  lend  the  viewer  a look into this
culture, little known to American audiences.
Emotion,  or lack thereof, takes the lead over the acting in "Brother." The
Japanese characters, led by Yamamoto, are symbolic in the dedication to the
Yakuza  clan.  The  gang  leader's  right hand man, Kato (Susumu Terajima),
shows his complete commitment to Yamamoto as he declares to "stake my life"
on  protecting  his  boss  and brother. For Kato, the stakes are high. Omar
Epps,  as  one  of Ken's homies, Denny, has a violent initial confrontation
with  Yamamoto,  but  overcomes  his  suspicion and dislike for the man and
embraces  the  Yakuza  philosophy and loyalty to his boss.  The rest of the
cast,  with  some  exceptions,  is there to be the fodder that the gang war
uses up in copious quantities.
During  a  summer  season  that  suffers  from  a dearth of good mainstream
flicks,  the  independent  film  market  is  called  upon  to  provide  the
intelligence  in this season's film-going experience. Considering the utter
mediocrity  of  blockbuster  fare,  the  discerning  movie  maven  has some
alternatives.  There  hasn't  been,  over  the  years, a plethora of Yakuza
gangster  flicks  - Sidney Pollack's "The Yakuza" (1975) and Ridley Scott's
"Black  Rain" (1989) are two - and none from Japanese makers in our market,
with  the  exception  of  "Brother" and some vintage Akira Kurosawa flicks.
Kitano's  is a flawed work, but a breath of fresh air despite the problems.
I give it a B-.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
The first American film by writer, director, editor and star Takeshi Kitano, an
enormously popular Japanese version of Clint Eastwood, BROTHER could be referred
to as THE LONELINESS OF THE LONG DISTANCE GUNNER.  Like Eastwood's spaghetti
Westerns, the stylistic violence is the movie, and the plot is close to
non-existent.  The difference is that BROTHER is more violent, much classier and
absolutely fascinating.  As a director, Kitano has a gift for framing and
staying with a scene, and his editing choices are impeccable.
As the story opens, Yamamoto (Kitano, who goes by the acting name of Beat
Takeshi) is about to be a man without a country.  After a war breaks out between
two Japanese Mafia families, Yamamoto ends up with a Mafia death sentence
hanging over him.  He solves the problem by fleeing the country and going to
live with his kid brother, Ken (Claude Maki), in L.A.  Ken and his buddies,
including Denny (Omar Epps), are a bunch of two-bit drug dealers.  This is
completely unacceptable to Yamamoto, who almost single-handedly gets his brother
and his buddies to the top of the gangster chart.  With his pensive stare, his
slight facial twitch and his droll, macabre humor, Yamamoto is a walking time
bomb that explodes at random intervals.  In no time at all, he initiates two
major drug wars.
Rather like an opera, the dramatic and melancholy score sweeps us into the
frame.  Kitano loves to have the camera linger over facial close-ups.  Not a fan
of dialog, he likes to let the setting tell the tale.  But when words are
necessary, he prefers to keep them to a minimum.  Yamamoto, for example, in his
most emotive moment, says calmly, "We'll all die."  He does this with his
biggest smile of the movie, which is little more than a grin.  
BROTHER is a breathtakingly beautiful but graphically violent film that isn't
for everyone.  But, if you're a Kitano fan, you'll be very satisfied.
BROTHER runs 1:54.  The film is in English and in Japanese with English
subtitles.  It is rated R for pervasive strong violence, language and brief
nudity and would be acceptable for older teenagers.  
My son Jeffrey, age 12, gave it just one *, saying that it was a bloodbath
without a plot.
The film is playing in limited release now in the United States.  In the Silicon
Valley, it is showing at the AMC and the Century theaters.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Rachel Gordon
Violence is bad.  Violence is ugly.  Violence breeds yet more violence. 
Kids, don't try this at home.  This weighty message isn't the only
barrier to enjoying Brother, but it's certainly one of the largest.
Written, directed by, and starring the infamous Takeshi Kitano
(Kikujiro, Sonatine) Brother is his first film made outside his familial
Japan, bringing the yakuza tradition to Los Angeles.  (Yakuza translated
for the average American is the Japanese mafia.)
If you piss a "family" member off, or dishonor yourself in any way, the
usual punishment is public display of self-mutilation, usually resulting
in the loss of limbs.  A definition of dishonor can be anything from
making a stupid decision to leaving one family for another.
It would be interesting to know more about where these and other customs
come from.  Unfortunately the film doesn't give too much of an
explanation, assuming its audience is aware of Kitano's earlier work. 
There are several shots that focus specifically on detailed tattoos that
spread across the entire back of the yakuza members, leading one to
assume they would be symbolic of something, but you never know what. 
Then there's a scene in which a man kills himself in front of a rival in
exchange for that rival joining the family.  Granted, this is one of the
best scenes in the movie, but it doesn't make a lot of sense.
Instead, the two hours are basically spent watching the following: 
people go out and shoot each other, talk about it for ten-plus minutes,
then go out and do it again.  The consistently repetitive discussion of
territory during these moments involuntarily provokes yawning.
There are also plot details thrown in for no identifiable purpose.  All
of the sudden Yamamoto (Kitano) has a girlfriend.  He barely speaks to
her, treats her like crap, and then sends her away.  Another missed
opportunity, considering it is such a big deal for Kitano to bring his
magic to the United States, is the combination of cultures, which rely
too heavily on overused stereotypes.
Though slow moving, Brother does have good elements.  The action scenes
are well directed, clearly defined, and interesting to watch.  Some of
the violence is more hinted at than shown, which produces the luscious
squirm that one goes to see such films for.
The actors would be more enticing if they had more to do.  Shirase's
(Masaya Kato) loud, sarcastic coolness set against Yamamoto's quietly
threatening attitude is truly an entertaining combination.  Their
moments together or apart steal the rest of the show.
Also to its credit, Brother tackles the cause and effect of crime with
realism.  A life of crime is easy to get sucked into with the first
reward of quick cash.  Sure people get rich, but they can also lose just
as easily.  It's a great moral, with a great cast, just not much
substance to back it up.
Director: Takeshi Kitano
Producer: Masayuki Mori, Jeremy Thomas
Writer: Takeshi Kitano
Starring: Takeshi Kitano, Omar Epps, Claude Maki, Masaya Kato, Susumu
Terajima, Royale Watkins
http://what.bacfilms.com/brother/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
