Title
Review for Temp, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Timothy Hutton, Lara Flynn Boyle, Dwight Schultz,
           Oliver Platt, Maura Tierney, Faye Dunaway
Director:  Tom Holland
Producers:  David Permut and Tom Engelman
Screenplay:  Kevin Falls
Music:  Frederic Talgorn
Released by Paramount Pictures
     Peter Derns (Timothy Hutton) is an executive at a cookie producing
company.  When his usual assistant becomes indisposed, Kris Bolin (Lara
Flynn Boyle), a temp, arrives to help Peter get his office in order and
prepare his reports on time.  However, Kris isn't satisfied with just
being an assistant, and is soon setting her heights on one of a number
of executive jobs that suddenly become available as a result of the
deaths of the people who previously held them.
     I actually liked the ending of this movie.  Compared to what
usually comes at the end of the majority of today's thrillers, the final
scene in THE TEMP is cleverly-written and nicely surprising.
Unfortunately, it's about the only thing in this film that the word
"clever" could be used to describe.  Put simply, most of this motion
picture is puerile rubbish.
     The plot is a colossal mess.  It heaps implausibility upon
implausibility until the viewer is left scratching his or her head and
saying, "They can't be serious about that."  It's the movie's job to
present its events, no matter how outlandish in a convincing manner so
that the audience can suspend disbelief.  THE TEMP either has no idea
how to do this, or doesn't care enough to make the attempt.  There are a
number of subplots that are started, given some background, then
inexplicably dropped, never to be heard from again.  One or two of them
seemed to have some promise.  The relationships between certain
characters are also left tangled or dangling without resolution.
     Of course, this film is in the grand tradition of second-rate
garbage like THE HAND THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE, UNLAWFUL ENTRY, SINGLE
WHITE FEMALE, etc.  I keep going into these films hoping that they're
going to have some new twist to apply to the genre.  None of them,
including this latest entry, do.  If you've seen one, you've seen them
all.  In this case, THE TEMP doesn't even have a catchy title.
     Timothy Hutton is decidedly unconvincing in his portrayal of the
sometimes-paranoid Peter Derns.  Hutton goes from wooden to
over-the-top at fairly regular intervals.  With a little more effort on
his part, we might have gotten the feeling that there was something in
Derns worth caring about.  As it is, we get a dull, one-dimensional man
in a business suit who has psychological, financial, and marital
problems.
     Two performers do reasonable jobs.  One is Lara Flynn Boyle in the
title role.  Not known for solid acting in the past, she's the best
thing about this film.  It's too bad that her most convincing
performance to date (excluding a few memorable scenes in the TV series
TWIN PEAKS) comes in a picture that has so little to recommend it.  Also
doing an impressive job in a smaller role is Maura Tierney (as Derns'
estranged wife Sharon), who may play the only genuinely likable
character in the whole movie.
     THE TEMP is a poor thriller.  What's worse, it's unimaginative,
with a plot filled with holes that even the easiest-to-please movie-goer
will have a hard time explaining away.  There's also the expected blood
and gore, and the familiar "did she or didn't she do it" questions.  But
you didn't expect anything better, did you?  Not from a movie with a tag
line of "Don't get mad.  Get promoted."
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Chris Holland & Scott Hamilton
For the html version of this review with screen captures, please point
your browser to http://members.aol.com/stomptokyo
Awful femme fatale movies had something of a mini-renaissance in the early
90's, including such noxious titles as Basic Instinct, The Crush, The
Babysitter, Poison Ivy... oh, the list goes on and on. They all feature,
in one form or another, a conniving woman who is initially attractive on
many fronts but eventually reveals her true colors and is nearly
responsible for the downfall of all who put their trust in her. We wish we
could say that The Temp is the worst example of this sub-genre, but the
truth is, most of them are easily as painful as this movie. However, don't
let that deceive you: The Temp is very, very bad indeed.
Peter Derns (Timothy Hutton) works as a marketing executive for the Mrs.
Appleby cookie company. The environment is highly competitive, especially
since Appleby was recently acquired by another company, constantly
referred to as "the boys in New York." When Peter's regular assistant
takes leave to be with his wife during childbirth, Kris Bolin (Twin Peaks
alum Lara Flynn Boyle) arrives to save the day. Not only does she finish
the all-important report due by noon, but she also reorganizes Peter's
entire life in the space of a week.
Kris decides she likes working for Peter so much that when the regular
assistant returns to work, she arranges an "accident" involving a paper
shredder. Personally, we're the types to check the power eight times
before sticking our hands into something with that much destructive
potential, but there it is. A whirring sound, a spray of blood, an
agonized cry, and Kris is sitting pretty in Peter's office again. She even
sends the poor cad a sympathy card.
Unfortunately for Peter, Kris doesn't stop there. She has found that she
likes being upwardly mobile, and so the company undergoes a colossal
series of accidents and firings as Kris works her way to the top, trying
to seduce Peter along the way. Peter, who is just exiting therapy for
acute paranoia, doesn't know whether he imagines that Kris is engineering
these events, or if she's really responsible. What he does know is that
she's not making it any easier for him to reach a reconciliation with his
estranged wife.
>From here, The Temp spirals downward into absurdity. Not only are we led
to believe that Kris can get away with murder (repeatedly), but she can
also engineer a batch of cookies that cause test market volunteers to
cough up blood, hack the company e-mail system, and perform a number of
other highly unlikely activities. We began to think that Kris might
actually be innocent, because her tally of crimes became too massive to
believe.
The script is not completely to blame for The Temp's hemorrhage-inducing
awfulness; the cast does its part to lower the film's quality even
further. Boyle should have gotten some sort of shame award for her
overacting as Bolin. Faye Dunaway (as Derns' boss, Charlene) did get a
shame award for hers -- the Golden Raspberry for Worst Supporting Actress
that year. Hutton chose to go the other route, becoming the most
relentlessly boring screen personality we've seen since Jeff Muldovan in
Trancers 4. Rounding out this roll call of shame is Dwight Schultz, who
should really stick to those oddball characters on TV. His dull executive
role in this movie made us pine for the wacky adventures of "Howling Mad"
Murdoch on The A-Team.
When we see films like this, we often wonder what could have inspired a
movie studio to make a film this wretched. Was the script re-written on
the set? Were all the people involved suffering some mass hallucination
that they were making a good movie? Perhaps the flick itself offers a
clue: maybe somewhere, in an office in Hollywood, a vengeful temp is
secretly greenlighting projects just like this one. Now that's scary.
This review copyright 1998 by Chris Holland and Scott Hamilton of Stomp
Tokyo Video Reviews.
