Title
Review for Downdraft (1996) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Richard Scheib
Canada/Czechoslovakia. 1996. Director - Michael Mazo, Screenplay - 
Christopher Hyde, Producers - Mazo, Lloyd A. Simandi & Deborah Thompson, 
Photography - Danny Nowak, Music - Peter Allen, Special Effects - North 
American Pictures S.R.O., Special Effects Supervisors - Jiri Berger & 
Vladimir Jehlicha, Production Design/Visual Effects Design - Charles 
Wood. Production Company - North American Pictures/Minotaur Films.
Vincent Spano (Colonel Jack Brenner), Kate Vernon (Alexa Belekenyev), 
John Novak (Miles Standish), Paul Koslo (General George Washington 
Devlin), Sandra P. Grant (Babe), John Pyper-Ferguson (Spike), William S. 
Taylor (Rudy), Sean Fuller (Hawkins), Michael Spelchta (Mikey Brenner)
Plot: Jack Brenner, a US colonel falsely incarcerated in order to cover 
up the death of an out-of-control general, is granted his freedom if he 
will assemble his old team of nonconformist experts and break into a 
military bunker where a scientist has taken over and is threatening to 
fire nuclear missiles on China and the former Soviet Union. But once 
inside the bunker the mission is fraught by a killer cyborg hunting 
them, while above ground a general determines to do everything he can to 
ensure the secrets the bunker holds are not discovered.
For a B-budget action film that one enters with little expectation, 
`Downdraft' proves surprisingly worthwhile. What does takes one aback 
about it is the extraordinary busyness of its plot which manages to 
juggle enough subplots sufficient to serve as single plots for 
half-a-dozen films. Not only does it feature a missile bunker with a 
rogue scientist threatening to fire nuclear warheads, but it also throws 
in an about-to-explode hydrogen bomb boobytrap and an about-to-meltdown 
nuclear reactor. Also thrown in for the count are a killer android; an 
out-of-control AI which has melded with the scientist's mind; and an 
out-of-control general determined to sabotage efforts on the surface. 
That the film manages to keep so many subplots up in the air without 
losing the thread or confusing the viewer, is all credit to it. 
Naturally not all of these get entirely satisfying airings but the film 
manages to work them better than one might think. It all functions quite 
well within its modest budget - there is the feel it wants to open up 
with some more extravagant action sequences but still conducts itself 
quite respectably nevertheless with at least one sequence with the 
android shooting at the team in a descending elevator that is 
dramatically intense. A good degree of care and attention has also been 
given to making the hero and the film's `Dirty Dozen' team of characters 
seem believable and well-rounded.
Despite being set in the US and made by a company that call themselves 
North American Pictures, the film is actually a Canadian production that 
was shot in Czechoslovakia.  

