Title
Review for Angels and Insects (1995)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Steve Rhodes
     I think ANGELS AND INSECTS is supposed to be a morality tale, but
it is so outlandish, it is comes off more as parody.  If it were not so
slow and somber, one might be tempted to laugh at it.
     ANGELS AND INSECTS tells about the lives of naturalists and is set
in England in 1864.  The movie's purpose is to show the strong linkage
between humans and insects.  In one of the more pedantic editing jobs
(Belinda Haas) in recent memory, we have frequent cuts between the
horrors of the insect world and that of the human.  Although there are
several memorable insects scenes, perhaps the most dramatic is the
immolation scene of the moths in the ubiquitous candles that lit the
rooms of that era.  A close second is a scene straight out of THE BIRDS
but with moths instead of birds attaching the helpless female.
     As the movie starts, the camera (Bernard Zitzermann) is drawn into
swirl of unfocused images which on closer inspection turn out to be
"savages" dancing.  As soon as the viewer realizes that the film is
meant to be out of focus and that he does not need to run and complain
to the manager, the film switches to a swirl of upper-class dancers in
England and here the colors are rich and the picture is sharp.  Watch
the costumes (Paul Brown) in this and every scene of the show for they
are as ridiculous and pedantic as the editing.  Some gowns are
overgrown with fruit favored by insects while others are made to look
like insects, e.g., bold and broad, yellow and black bee stripes.
     It seems that Mr. William Adamson (Mark Rylance) has just returned
from the Amazon without his specimens, having lost them all in a
shipwreck.  This means he has no way of earning a living.  This
predicament is quickly solved when Sir Harold Alabaster (Jeremy Kemp)
and Lady Alabaster (Annette Badland) invite him to stay in their home
since they all share an interest in entomology.  Well it turns out that
the Alabaster's home is a highly dysfunctional one, and we have long
since learned from the movies that almost all Victorian homes were.
Since I am sure movies would not lie to us, it is nice to be safely
ensconced in the late twentieth century.
     Mr. Adamson soon falls under the spell of the lovely Eugenia
Alabaster (Patsy Kensit).  She has a slight problem in that her
previous fiance killed himself rather than marry her for mysterious
reasons which left her a bit mixed up.  Nevertheless, Mr. Adamson soon
marries her.  Eugenia has a brother Edger (Douglas Henshall) who is the
canonical rich wastrel.  He does not approve of Mr. Adamson and tells
him, "you are underbreed and not a good match for my sister."
      The servants all turn their heads and face the wall whenever Mr.
Adamson goes by, and he does not know what to make of this.  As
Eugenia's relative Matty Crompton (Kristin Scott Thomas) says, "There
are people in houses who can know a great deal if they choose."  I
guess the servants are not supposed to know the dark secrets of the
Alabaster household.  The shocking ending of this movie is telegraphed
about a million times, but I will not reveal it here, although the
trailers for the movie do.  In one of the better pieces of dialog, the
husband says of the mystery, "Whom can I tell that I should not destroy
in the telling."
     This is a show where I developed an admiration for all of the fine
details of my watch.  At the one hour point, I began to wonder what, if
anything, was ever going to happen.  As it turns out, in the last
quarter of the film the actors and actress come alive as if they had
come through a metamorphosis.  Why director Philip Haas did not breath
live into the show before then astonishes me.  There is a genuine,
albeit mainly unrealized, potential in this picture.
     Actually, the worst part of the movie is not the plodding
direction, it is the stilted script by Belinda and Philip Haas.  Most
of the lines fall like stones and are laden with gibberish.  A typical
one forces the excellent actress Kristin Scott Thomas to have to say
verbatim, "I wish humankind would create such altruistic virtues, but
sometimes I think socialism may never be realized."
     ANGELS AND INSECTS runs too long at 1:57.  It is rated R for lots
of sex including certain perversions and full male and female frontal
nudity, but if you are looking for an erotic show, I think you have the
wrong film.  I would not let teenagers see the show unless they were
mature.  Although I am glad the characters finally came alive toward
the end, I can not recommend ANGELS AND INSECTS to anyone, and I give
it a single * for a good conclusion to a poor film.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Pedro Sena
If someone wants to make a point, they will take you the length of
something, anything, and then spring it on you. This film, is such an
adventure.
However, this film just has one of those understated feelings, none of the
acting stands out, probably because it might give the film away, and for the
majority of the film, it has moments that are just trying to "break out"
this rather monotonous film, into something else.
To his credit, and the actors, the director does not allow any of the film
to fall into anything except his complete story. The insect is friendly,
until the tide changes, and then it attacks. This film does the same. The
story centers around a man that has just come back from the Amazon, in what
has been found out to be a disastrous mission for a group of scientists.
This one managed to survive, and has found his way back home to England. He
ends up taking up a stay with a rather generous rich man, who has similar
interests, and who decides to sponsor this scientist of insects.
All is fine, until the younger brother gets upset because this outsider, a
commoner at that, has found his way into the family. As time continues, we
find that the scientist has an interest in one of the family's daughters,
one who apparently has suffered a rather unfortunate fate. She was married
and her husband promptly dies, in what may be considered odd circumstances,
which we never learn about. It's the upper class.... they get away with a
lot of things. What these might be is another question. But a hint does show
itself one time when the younger brother challenges the scientist to a duel,
which is refused.
Eventually, this marriage takes place. The scientist continues his studies,
and his helper is none other than his wife's sister, whose interest in his
profession is uncannily similar to his. She is an astute observer. And with
her help, a book gets published, and a successful working agreement starts.
The marriage lasts. And after a few hints, and moments here and there, and
an inordinate amount of children, the damn finally breaks. In the form of a
child that may have been some sort of revenge on the younger brother, by a
previous maid.
And the film takes on the vicious attitude that ant colonies can take with
each other. All of a sudden, the civilized are the real insects, and the
film comes to a quick resolution and ending.
This is an acting showcase. The people in it have to maintain their space as
well as they can, and never hint at anything. Of course, this was the way in
the Victorian age anyway, where everything happened behind closed doors and
the maids and everyone else in the house was not exactly not a part of it.
A very well directed film, although slow, the lines are delivered with the
same deliberateness that the ant colonies work. It seems to be its main
theme. And as such, the film ends up developing a statement about who is the
real savage and the angel. The innocent whose live it is anyway, or those
who ought to know better, and do nothing about it. Very few films will do
this correctly without giving it away. There are hints, yes... looking back
on it. But they are so subtle that we really make nothing of it... the film
really makes no reason for us to pay attention to those moments. They seem
so natural, a part of the
natural evolution of things... until we find out what was really behind it
all.
Excellent film, very well directed and beautifully thought out. But the
ending may really shake one up. It is brutal in ways more than one.
Reviewed by Pedro Sena. Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1997. All Rights Reserved.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     In the 1860s naturalist William Adamson (played by Mark Rylance)
has come back ten years in the Amazon jungle but on the way lost all
his notes and specimens in a ship disaster.  His patron, the
Rev. Harald Alabaster (Jeremy Kemp), has invited Adamson to visit the
Alabaster country estate.  The Reverend Alabaster has embraced the
teachings of Charles Darwin, albeit reluctantly, and is looking to
Adamson to help him sort out his crisis of faith in the face of
changing ideas.  Adamson is struck by the beauty of Alabaster's
daughter Eugenia (Patsy Kensit), but having lost everything he cannot
hope to win her, particularly with Eugenia's snob brother Edgar
(Douglas Henshall) reminding Adamson at every turn that while he is a
guest at the Alabaster estate, he is of quite a lower station in life
and must never think of himself as being anywhere near an equal.
However, Eugenia's fiance committed suicide before Adamson knew her and
with Eugenia's younger sister marrying Eugenia feels the need to be
married.  Knowing that she is considered out of his caste, Adamson
offers what help he can give to Eugenia, even marriage, and is
astounded when his unobtainable love readily accepts his offer.  The
marriage is an odd one and not wholly satisfying, but Adamson is able
to channel his time into the study of ants on the Alabaster property.
It is a study in which he is ably assisted by Matty Crompton (Kristin
Scott Thomas), a quiet, spinsterish relation to the Alabasters also
living at the estate.  Adamson finds to his amazement that Crompton is
at least his equal in intellect.
     If all this sounds a little bit like a Jane Austen plot, the
answer is yes, it is a little bit like that, but it is also very
different in theme.  There is also some Charlotte Bronte thrown in.
And something more.  The story, the photography, and even details like
the costume design are intended constantly to compare and contrast the
upper class society with the society of insects, particularly ants and
butterflies.  It does so as the odd behavior of the Alabaster family is
developed.  The problem is that the we note the odd behavior for so
long that we start to wonder why we are being shown so much upper-class
weirdness we no longer really want to understand the family.
Eventually the viewer gets tired of waiting for some concrete
development.  It is not that there is not some interest to the study of
the ant world and its comparison to the Alabaster family social
structure.  But the film seems aimless for too long before things tie
together.  The screenplay is by Belinda Haas who edited the film Philip
Haas who directed.  The same team did the same tasks on 1993's THE
MUSIC OF CHANCE, which was a better film.  While it was perhaps even
more enigmatic than this film, it seemed like an enigma to better
purpose.
     ANGELS AND INSECTS is a bit of a disappointment and rates a low +1
on the -4 to +4 scale.  Incidentally, don't look too hard for angels.
The book ANGELS AND INSECTS had two novellas, one having to do with
angels, one with insects.  This is an adaptation of "Morpho Eugenia,"
the novella about insects.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     About 150 years ago there was the Victorian age, known for decorum
and modesty, even prudery.  When we think of that period, the very
word, "Victorian" brings that certain image to mind. Still, people are
unpredictable and, regardless of the age in which they live, there are
secrets about which most of us know nothing.  One such secret was
discovered by a naturalist, William @Adamson (Mark Rylance) who lost
all his specimens he had studied and collected in South America when on
his return to England he was shipwrecked.
     Many educated and wealthy men of the time engaged in studying
nature.  When one such, the Reverend Alabaster, (Jeremy Kemp) heard of
the disaster that had befallen Adamson, he took him into his home where
Adamson met and fell in love with the beautiful daughter of the
Reverend, Eugenia (Patsy Kensit).
     Adamson seemed to have indeed fallen into great luck but nothing
ever runs smoothly.  Adamson wondered why his wife was a tiger in bed
at night but a cool cucumber during the day.  He could find no
explanation.  The other bothersome part of being in the household was
that his brother-in-law, Edgar, (Douglas Henshall)  who despite being
of the aristocracy was in fact a disgruntled boor and seemed to have an
intense dislike of Adamson.  It seems that he wanted the Alabaster
family kept pure; Adamson does not fill the mold of a blond, beautiful
family.  When the secret of the Alabasters is out, it is an exploding
bombshell.
     The film is ably helped by Mary (Kristin Scott Thomas), a poor
relation who lives with the family but who has more in common
intellectually with William than he does with his wife.
     While on the surface this may appear to be a costume film of the
Victorian Age, with the evolutionary theory of Darwin making its
presence known, the movie is much, much more.  Highly recommended.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

ANGELS AND INSECTS (director: Philip Haas; screenplay: from novella
Morpho Eugenia by A.S. Byatt; cinematographer: Bernard Zitzermann; cast:
Mark Rylance (William Adamson), Kristin Scott Thomas (Matty Crompton),
Patsy Kensit (Eugenia Alabaster), Jeremy Kemp (Sir Harald Alabaster),
Douglas Henshall (Edgar Alabaster), Saskia Wickham (Rowena Alabaster),
Lady Alabaster (Annette Badland), 1995-UK)
A sophisticated mid-Victorian drama, told in the form of an allegory,
about upper class society, playing more like a PBS special or a
high-brow Merchant-Ivory film but with a darker secret to tell. It
comments on the environment influencing one's behavior more than
anything else, as the female protagonist is studying a colony of red
ants attacking black ones. This model is compared with the behavior of
civilized society in England.
William Adamson (Mark Rylance), the son of a Scottish butcher, who is a
naturalist, returning from 10 years away exploring in the Amazon jungle,
surviving a shipwreck where he lost all his collected specimens except
for the rare butterflies he brings back to his patron. His patron is the
enlightened Sir Harald Alabaster (Kemp), who believes in the Creator but
accepts Adamson's beliefs in Darwin's theories, just published at the
time. He encourages him to stay and live on the estate and help him
organize his own naturalist collection according to scientific rules. He
offers no resistance when the destitute scientist asks his permission to
marry his beautiful daughter, Eugenia (Kensit). She is like the
butterfly, so delicate and beautiful to behold.
William is surprised that she accepts his sudden proposal. He first
meets her on the dance floor, but she abruptly leaves him, filled with
tears. When he tries to comfort her, at a later date, she tells him she
was engaged to a Captain Hunt, but he killed himself rather than marry
her. She agrees to marry him in a double wedding with her younger sister
Rowena (Saskia).
The Alabaster family is put under the microscope and the kindly but
obsequious William observes first-hand how different each member of the
family is. Eugenia's brother Edgar (Henshall) behaves boorishly toward
him, telling him he despises him for marrying his sister, that he could
never be one of "them" because he has poor bloodlines. The mother
(Badland) is an obese woman, always collapsing from exhaustion, who is
used to being pampered, surrounded by servants who feed her strawberries
in cream and other elegant treats. She might be compared to the queen
bee in the insect family, always being cared for.
Insects were easy to find as comparisons to family members, angels is a
different story. Matty Crompton (Kristin Scott Thomas), who befriends
William, having similar interests to him, mentions that "There are
people in houses who know everything, yet remain invisible.'' Which
refers to the servants, but might be the closest we come to anything
resembling angels in this film.
Meanwhile, Matty, who is reminiscent of an ant-like creature, taking up
a study of an ant colony on her own so she can publish a book, is also
becoming closer to William, as he realizes he has more in common with
her than with his beautiful but cold wife. Matty is the household tutor
to the family's younger children, the poor cousin of theirs. She has
been attracted to William for some time, but he hardly notices her. She
chastises him one day by saying to him, "you do not know if I am aged 30
or 50''. He does notice her wrists when she draws the insects so
perfectly, and feels very close to her intellectually. If one can read
his mind, he is saying to himself I shouldn't have married for looks.
The film enters a period where the years pass wantingly by with William
living a comfortable but not fulfilling life. He also has a few
children, whom he does not feel strongly about. He is like some insect
who is trapped in a spider's web and can't get out, until he learns
about a dark secret that he can't bear to live with. And the very
cautious and measured man must choose between going back to the
uncivilized Amazon jungle or remaining in luxury in the most civilized
of all nations.
The film was visually pleasing; the costumes were beautiful; the script
was acceptably literate, and the film ably took the viewer into an
antiquated world and its peculiar customs, where the many maids who
worked at the estate turned their back to the wall in the presence of
their betters, giving one some rough idea about life there. The problem
with the film, was that it was tedious and had no emotional oomph to it.
The acting was stiff. The pace of the film was lethargic. The most
interesting sights were the insects themselves, which if that's your
thing, it would be better to view on one of those nature shows public
television has. Overall, this film showed the dramatic events in too
clinical a manner for it to be viewed as anything more than a competent
production.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Mark Rylance, Patsy Kensit, Kristin Scott Thomas, 
      Douglas Henshall, Jeremy Kemp, Annette Badland, Saskia Wickham
Director: Philip Haas
Producers: Belinda Haas, Lindsey Law, Kerry Orent, and Joyce Herlihy
Screenplay: Philip Haas and Belinda Haas based on the novella 
      MORPHO EUGENIA by A.S. Byatt
Cinematography: Bernard Zitzermann
Music: Alexander Balanescu
U.S. Distributor: The Samuel Goldwyn Company
     In the words of actor Douglas Henshall, ANGELS AND INSECTS, the 
latest film from MUSIC OF CHANCE writer/director Philip Haas, is 
"Merchant Ivory meets Tennessee Williams."  It's a fair comparison.  The 
movie is a period piece, taking place in the late 1850s and early 1860s, 
but the air of Victorian restraint is frequently disturbed by aggressive 
displays of sexuality.  However, unlike the work of either Merchant & 
Ivory or Tennessee Williams, ANGELS AND INSECTS is a presentation of 
ideas over characters.  And, although competently acted, it lacks the 
one standout performance which could have transformed it from a 
fascinating motion picture to a great one.
     ANGELS AND INSECTS, based on A.S. Byatt's novella MORPHO EUGENIA, 
opens in Victorian England with the arrival of naturalist William 
Adamson (Mark Rylance) at the demesne of the Alabaster family.  William 
was recently shipwrecked on his return journey from South America, and, 
in that disaster, lost all of his worldly possessions.  Reverend 
Alabaster (Jerermy Kemp), keen to have an educated scientist help with a 
book he is writing, invites William to live in his house.  Once there, 
he becomes infatuated with the serenely beautiful-but-cold Eugenia 
(Patsy Kensit), the eldest daughter of the Alabasters.  Although not 
hopeful that a match is likely, William nevertheless courts Eugenia, and 
is greatly surprised when she accepts his marriage proposal.  But a dark 
secret in her past cannot stay buried forever.
     In many ways, this film is a study in contrasts:  the passionate 
abandon of the South American natives to the structured restraint of 
England's Victorian aristocrats, Darwin's evolution to the Bible's 
creation, butterflies to ants, and beauty to intelligence.  Haas wants 
us not only to understand the rigidity of life on the Alabaster estate, 
but to see the decadence that bubbles just beneath the surface.  
Eugenia's apparent physical perfection, which enthralls William, hides a 
dead, ravaged soul.
     Haas has elected not to reveal the horror of Eugenia's situation in 
one melodramatic moment of discovery.  Instead, he gradually unfolds the 
truth, feeding it to the audience bit-by-bit, clue-by-clue, so that when 
the generally-oblivious William finally learns his wife's secret, we are 
already cognizant of it.  The entire narrative of ANGELS AND INSECTS is 
fashioned like this, with slow, steady revelations.
     If Eugenia is the butterfly -- beautiful, fragile, and as vapid as 
"colored air", then Matty Crompton (Kristin Scott Thomas), an educated 
woman living with the Alabasters, is the ant -- plain, resourceful, and 
intelligent.  It doesn't take William long to learn that he has married 
the wrong woman.  Matty is his perfect companion, but he recognizes too 
late how little value should be placed on physical appearance.  
     ANGELS AND INSECTS compares human life to that of an ant colony.  
The similarities and differences are striking.  Like men and women, ants 
are organized, social creatures whose primary purpose is reproduction.  
However, in the kingdom of the insects, there is no decadence, no 
hatred, and no duplicity.  Ants serve their queen selflessly rather than 
always seeking their own ends.  Humans think of themselves as civilized 
-- the product of generations of sexual selection -- but the true 
barbarism of their nature often surfaces.
     The drawback of ANGELS AND INSECTS is a combination of lackluster 
characterization and mediocre acting.  None of the men or women 
populating this film grab our sympathy.  In the case of someone as 
shallow as Eugenia, this is entirely appropriate, but William remains 
strangely distant, in part because of a bland performance by Mark 
Rylance.  As Anthony Hopkins has shown, it's possible to present a 
passionate portrait of restraint.  Unfortunately, Rylance's William is 
too often without soul or heart.  This leads us to watch him with 
interest, but never become emotionally engaged in his travails.
     Ultimately, the reason to see ANGELS AND INSECTS is for its keen 
and intricate explorations of human sexual and social interaction.   In 
the world of insects, there is only one layer, but men and women hide 
truth beneath many facades.  Yet perhaps the most striking similarity is 
how members of both species are capable of stinging without remorse, 
unconcerned about the consequences.  That's an uncomfortable message 
that everyone can relate to.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net, jberardinell@delphi.com
web: http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Bryant Frazer
        Near the beginning of ANGELS & INSECTS, our romantic protagonist
courts the object of his very sexual affections in odd fashion. That
scene, which involves a veritable swarm of butterflies and moths crawling
across the woman's clothing and skin, is a good indicator of the film's
ambitions. Putting a Victorian estate under the microscope, ANGELS &
INSECTS postulates that this family unit, with sons, daughters and
servants all tending slavishly to the needs of a bloated matriarch, is
something less sophisticated and more distasteful than your average
backyard ant farm. 
        William Adamson (Mark Rylance) is an outsider among the
blueblooded Alabasters, the family whose patriarch, Sir Harald (Jeremy
Kemp), rescued the young naturalist from a disastrous shipwreck. He is
allowed to live with the Alabasters as Harald's assistant, and swiftly
falls under the spell of the oldest daughter, Eugenia (Patsy Kensit). 
This courtship among the insects is the film's most direct metaphor, and
its most satisfying conceit. As William confesses his love to Eugenia, he
looses upon her what first seem to be the world's loveliest butterflies.
But soon, Eugenia is beset by the unsightly male counterparts to the
beautiful females, which crawl across her body, drawn by female
pheromones. 
        The trauma of that experience isn't enough to derail the romance,
which unfolds to the chagrin of Eugenia's brother, Edgar (Douglas
Henshall), who considers William an unfit suitor.  Edgar's sneering
insults grow more and more provocative, but William resists his verbal
exhortations to physical battle and marries Eugenia. His assimilation into
the family is thus made literal, and Harald seems rather fond of the young
man -- but Edgar won't let up, spouting continually about how little
William knows of the world, and the significance of his improper breeding. 
        This socio-scientific Darwinism is as much a key to ANGELS &
INSECTS as are the butterfly and ant-farm metaphors (when Eugenia proves
herself to be less than an ideal lover, William bides his time with a
detailed study of an ant colony on the estate). For the first hour or so,
I was sitting on the edge of my seat, gamely tracking all of the asides,
double entendres, and allegorical declamations. Philip Haas's screenplay
tries to cram all the thematic concerns of its source material (the
novella MORPHO EUGENIA, by retroVictorian scribe A.S. Byatt) into the
two-hour space of a feature film, but it's a little much. 
        Those concerns spill over from the story and dialogue into the
film's visual grammar, as well. While the overall production design is
sumptuous and striking, the movie's infatuation with its own color sceme
grows tiring. For instance, when Kensit turns up in one of her
show-stopping gowns, an unlikely peacock blue fringed in blood red, the
effect is an imperfect distillation of the Peter Greenaway Effect-decidely
garish in appearance, but relatively graceless in execution.  More
effective for my money is the less specific sense of dread that infuses
the proceedings, especially in the scenes leading up to the marriage of
the unlikely lovers. 
        So maybe it's because the film wore me out in its first section
that I found the second half fairly tedious. It's mostly a waiting game.
We know that Kristin Scott Thomas (she plays Matty Crampton, the family
tutor) gets billing above Kensit, so her role will soon become prominent.
The ad campaign has assured us that there's a "startling"  revelation in
the final reels, but the punch is telegraphed across most of the movie.
And, of course, we know that something's got to give -- and it does. 
        That having been said, the movie does have its tremendous
pleasures. The performances are decidedly less mannered than we've come to
expect from costume drama, and Rylance and Henshall make deliciously
credible intellectual adversaries. I'll even go out on a limb for Kensit,
whose vaguely unsettling concupiscent charms have never before been put to
such perfect use. The cinematography is lush and surprising, and the
atmosphere is boldly creepy. 
        The opening credits sequence, which flash back to Adamson and a
troupe of Amazonian dancers frolicking in the firelight, is more honestly
sexual than anything that follows, and we get the sense that he was never
happier than he was among the natives (as if to underscore the point, the
titular letters spelling out "Angels" cross the screen in front of the
dancers). This sequence, beautifully edited by the director's wife,
Belinda Haas, helps us understand the libidinous freedom that Adamson
craves, even as he takes a luscious wife in an ostensible paradise. While
the inhabitants of a less seething Victorian tableaux might negotiate
apparently charmed paths to a satisfying but unlikely happy ending, we are
made to grow more and more certain that the only resolution to the
Victorian dilemma postulated by ANGELS & INSECTS is escape. 
