Title
Review for Death of a Salesman (1985) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Death of a Salesman" may be the Great American
Tragedy.  No matter how many other successful plays
Arthur Miller may have had, he will always be
remembered for bringing Willy Loman to life.
In 1984, Dustin Hoffman was cast as Willy in a
Broadway revival.  Most of the cast was retained
for a broadcast television production.  Volker
Schlondorff, whose entire previous career was
spent in Germany and France, became the director.
The story is depressing and even disturbing, as
it has the effect of challenging the viewer to
consider the value of his or her own life.  Willy
has spent his adult life as a struggling salesman,
and has lived under the delusion that he and his
family were destined for success, even greatness.
His wife Linda (Kate Reid) knows the truth, but
participates in his husband's delusions since
dreams are all that he has left.
But now Willy's dreams are shattered.  Prematurely
senile, he is fired from his longtime job and lives
on handouts from his old friend Charley (Charles
Durning).  Son Biff (John Malkovich) is jobless
and a kleptomaniac.  Son Happy (Stephen Lang) is
a cynical womanizer.  A broken man, Willy is
considering suicide.  As the story unfolds, it is
finally made clear why Biff has been such a failure,
with the blame seeping into Willy's life as well.
The play also ironically contrasts the parenting
skills of Willy and Charley.  Willy lives for his
two sons, and showers attention on them.  Charley
takes little interest in his nerdy son Bernard
(David S. Chandler), who nonetheless becomes an
important lawyer.
"Death of a Salesman" is not an enjoyable film
to watch.  The title gives away the ending, and
casts a gloomy pall over an already depressing
storyline.  If most folks live a life of quiet
desperation, Willy has graduated to the next
level.  While downbeat films have made great
cinema before (e.g. "The Lost Weekend"), it
doesn't happen here.
"Death of a Salesman" did well at the Golden Globes
(in the television movie category).  Hoffman won
Best Actor, while Malkovich and Reid were nominated
for their Supporting roles.  The film was also
nominated for Best Picture.  Hoffman and Malkovich
also won Emmy awards.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
