Title
Review for Cop Land (1997)
Number of Reviews
27

Author
Michael J. Legeros
A movie review by Michael J. Legeros
Copyright 1997 by Michael J. Legeros
     COP LAND is surprisingly underwhelming.  Neither a meaty cast nor a
meaty plot can do much for writer-director James Mangold (HEAVY).  His
epic-flavored movie-- about big-city police corruption that spills over
into the small town where most of the cops live-- is missing *some-
thing*.  Maybe it's the pacing, which is as sluggish and slow-moving as
Sylvester Stallone's dimmer-witted hero.  Maybe it's the abundance of
characters, which renders the first hour more than a little difficult to
follow.  (I still don't know who the victim of the fire was.) Maybe it's
the plot, which veers toward implausibility when the bad guys throw a
party for someone who is supposed to be dead.  (The party as a symbol
for the cop's ever-increasing arrogance?  Maybe.) Whatever the reasons,
COP LAND amuses but never entirely entertains.  Even the big finale,
admittedly a kicker with its nifty use of sound and silence, lacks
enough emotional punch.  With Robert De Niro, Ray Liotta, Harvey Keitel,
Michael Rapaport, Janeane Garofalo, Robert Patrick, Cathy Moriarty,
Annabella Sciorra, and Peter Berg.

Author
Nick Schaden
                Sylvester Stallone can't act.   Sylvester Stallone can't act.   I've
had that phrase drilled into my head in every Stallone movie I've ever
watched for the notable exception of "Rocky".   Finally, I'm pleased to
announce that after watching "Cop Land" Stallone CAN act, and act
wonderfully.   Furthermore, "Cop Land" plays out well in almost every
aspect, making for a very fine movie.
        "Cop Land"'s plot involves a corrupt set of NYPD cops who live across
the river in a fictional small town.   Stuck in the middle is Freedy
Heflin (Sylvester Stallone), an overweight sheriff who finds himself
torn between his dirty cop friends (Harvey Keitel, Ray Liota) and
revealing the truth to Internal Affairs' Mo Tilden (Robert De Niro).  
As much as the trailers may suggest it, "Cop Land" is by no means any
action/adventure/thriller movie.   Instead, it's more of a methodical &
dramatic psychological movie.   We don't see shoot-out after shoot-out,
as most of the action is centered around Freddy and the struggles he
goes through.   In a way I enjoyed this change of pace, it makes the
movie original and more thought provoking.
        However, to make a true "drama" succeed in the movies, you need good
acting.   Luckily the talent just flies in, De Niro, Keitel and Liota
all do (as always) superb acting jobs.   The big question I'm sure
you're asking is: How is STALLONE?   Stallone is great, and has possibly
the best performance of the movie.   His body movements, speech and eyes
all work together to paint the near perfect picture of a sheriff in
sorrow and doubt.   Hopefully, with any luck Stallone will continue to
take acting roles like this, he's much better here then playing Rambo.
        In conclusion, while flicks like "Face/Off" were fun summer
entertainment, the movies just "skim the surface". I walk out of the
movie theater enjoying the ride but I don't really give the movie much
thought afterwards.   "Cop Land" is a much deeper picture - you can't
walk in and expect guns blazing.   However, you can expect just as, if
not more bang for your movie buck.   To see Stallone light up the screen
is almost worth the price of admission alone.   

Author
Michael Dequina

Cop Land (R) ** 1/2 (out of ****)
        James Mangold's Cop Land is one of those films that looks better on
paper than on screen, a picture that is more fun to anticipate than actually
watch.  Despite the presence of a vast array of impressive acting talent, a
provocative premise, and a great deal of pre-release hype, this star-studded
morality tale is a letdown, overblown and undercooked.
        Sylvester Stallone makes his much-ballyhooed return to "serious"
acting as Freddy Heflin, sheriff of Garrison, New Jersey, whose population
mainly consists of New York police officers.  Serving as law enforcement for
a town inhabited by law enforcement does not come with much true authority,
but it gives Freddy some satisfaction--deaf in one ear and a little slow in
the head, he can never serve as an officer of his much-revered NYPD, but at
the very least he is the closest thing to being a real cop.
        Freddy's admiration for the big-city cops is put to the test with
the arrival of Internal Affairs officer Moe Tilden (Robert DeNiro), who
comes to Garrison investigating the secret affairs of the town's
badge-wielding residents after a hotshot young cop (Michael Rapaport) takes
a mysterious dive off of the Brooklyn Bridge.  Figuring prominently in his
investigation is Ray Donlan (Harvey Keitel), a well-connected cop who
spearheaded the police migration into Garrison through some suspect deals.
But there's only so much Moe can do on his own, so it's mainly up to Freddy
to restore some order to the town and the NYPD.
        That right there is enough fodder for an interesting film, but
Mangold does not seem to know where to stop, including a number of
additional characters and plotlines.  Freddy impaired his hearing years ago
rescuing Liz (Annabella Sciorra), whom he still pines for although she's
married and has a child with blowhard cop Joey Randone (Peter Berg), who, in
turn, is warming the bed of Ray's wife 
Rose (Cathy Moriarty).  Also on the canvas is Gary Figgis (Ray Liotta), an
undercover officer with a weakness for coke, whose partner's mysterious
death could have something to do with a grander scheme.  Then there's
Janeane Garofalo as Cindy Bretts, one of Freddy's two deputies, an
idealistic newcomer to Garrison who doesn't like what she sees.  And so on.
        The glut of characters and stories would be richness if everything
were explored in some semblance of depth.   However, in their existing,
crudely developed form, they just serve as distractions from the main
plot--which in itself, as written, does not equal the sum of its promising
parts.  With so many characters and plot threads dangling, let alone its
main story not jelling in the most satisfying of manners, Cop Land would
appear to be better served with a longer running time.  Yet I don't think
even that would have helped too much, especially without anyone for the
audience to latch onto emotionally.  Freddy is too low-key and distant to
sympathize with or root for.  When Freddy gets his day, it's supposed to be
exhilarating, but it's hard to get excited when one does not really care for
him.
        Stallone fares well enough in this dramatic role, his star presence
disappearing into the character behind 40 extra pounds of fat, but perhaps
he disappears a bit too much.   He does not embarrass himself alongside the
likes of DeNiro and Keitel, but I can't exactly say he holds his own,
either.   While it's a relief to see the typically overwrought Sly trade in
histrionics for subtlety, he's so subdued that he cannot help but appear
bland when sharing the screen with the more accomplished actors, who add
color to their roles without overdoing it.  Keitel and DeNiro shine in what
are fairly limited roles (Ray is shady; Moe is determined), and Liotta gives
his best performance in a long time as the most interesting character,
straddling the line between right and wrong.
        With Cop Land, Stallone proves the point he set out to make--that he
can play a serious role, and fairly well at that.  However, I don't know
exactly what writer-director Mangold's point was.  Is it that cops can be as
bad as the crooks?  If so, I got that message within the first fifteen
minutes, and even then, it's a rather obvious premise (I do, after all, live
in L.A.).  Or is it just to turn out an entertaining yarn?  If that was the
case, he could have fooled me--with its  Oscar-ready cast and pretentions
toward a novel-deep tapestry of rich characters and intricate, interlocking
plotlines, I could have sworn he was striving for something more profound.
Yet even if the latter were so, this overstuffed and shallow film does not
come close to meeting any epic aspirations.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown23@juno.com  |  mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
mj-23@geocities.com  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
Michael Jordan Sites:
http://members.tripod.com/~mj23/mj.html  &
http://www.geocities.com/Colosseum/Field/2302/

Author
David Wilcock
Stallone attempts to 'act' in this cop drama. The film is set
in a neighbourhood pratically built by Kietal, who's
nephew (played by Michael Rappaport) is involved in a car
crash and killing of two black youths. Keital dosen't really
want to get involved in anything, gets rid of Rappaport,
and Stallone and De Niro try to work out what the hell is going on. 
This film should be brilliant. It sounds like a great plot, the
actors are first grade, and the supporting cast is good
aswell, and Stallone is attempting to deliver a good
performance. However, it can't hold up. Although the
acting is fantastic (even Stallone isn't bad) the directing and
story is dull and long winded 
Some scenes go on for too long, with nothing really
happening in them. In fact, the only scenes that do work
are action scenes, which I suspect Stallone was trying to
avoid. In this film, serious means dull. The dialogue is
warbling, and basically just repeats the same points over
and over, no matter who is delivering them. The plot,
which has potential, is wasted, again just being cliched
after a while. In fact, the only thing that does keep the film
going is Kietal and De Niro, both delivering their usual
good performances. However, Stallone, although not given
much to say, gives a good performance. 
However, it's not all that bad. As said above, the action
scenes are well done. Theres also a very good ending,
which uses the cinemas sound system well. In fact, the last
10 minutes of this 2 hour film are one of the best endings
of 1997. If only the rest of the film was as good as the
ending. 
Cop Land, then, turns out not to be a power house film,
but a rather dull, and not every exciting film. Hugely
disappointing, and I can't really recommend it. 

Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) I've seen rave reviews for Cop Land and I've seen
reviews that say to avoid it. Ah, if only I could feel that strongly
about it. 
It was good. You won't hear me telling you why you should skip it. It's
just that I never got interested in it; it never pulled me in. Once you
get past the hook, the details are conventional cop-movie material. 
The movie is set in the aptly named town of Garrison, NJ, right across
the bridge from New York City. About thirty NYC cops and their families
live in Garrison, away from the crime and the slime of the big city.
Most of the cops are crooked, and living in Garrison is just the tip of
the iceberg (to be in the NYPD, cops are required to live in New York
City; these cops found a loophole). 
A deaf ear kept Freddy Heflin (Sylvester Stallone) from joining New
York's Finest, so he became the sheriff of "Cop Land." In contrast to
the cops across the bridge, Freddy's days are spent retrieving stuffed
animals and resolving tiffs between neighbors. For all the policing he
does, he could be the sheriff of Bedford Falls. 
When the New York cops cover up a case of brutality and murder by
bringing their comrade to Garrison, Freddy is faced with a moral
dilemma. On the one hand, there is no need to make his own life worse by
turning in his neighbors on the force. Besides, these people are his
link to his dreams. Hanging out with them is as close as he'll get to
being an NYPD officer. On the other hand, the corruption runs deep, and
the leaks in the coverup are being plugged with the bodies of innocent
people. 
The movie is intellectually engaging, but the "cop" aspect offers
nothing that you can't get on prime time TV. When Robert de Niro as the
archetypal "police chief" explodes in frustration, it is so much like
every other cop movie that you wonder if director Mangold is poking fun
at the genre or just being lazy. 
The movie takes itself seriously, and it is never lighthearted. Howard
Shore's music sets this tone very well (Shore also composed the haunting
score to CRASH.) The weighty, ponderous music is at times reminiscent of
Bernard Herrmann's CAPE FEAR, and at times it calls to mind the pure
dark tones of Philip Glass' KOYAANISQATSI. The music was very good, but
on the other hand, it may have promised more emotion than the rest of
the movie actually delivered. It seems wrong to fault a movie for having
TOO GOOD a score, but maybe a better match could have been made. 
Much has been said about Sylvester Stallone. He is trying to shed his
action-movie persona and get into meatier roles, starting with this one.
He isn't outstanding, but he is better than usual and better than most
people are giving him credit for. The most obvious difference in
Stallone is not the 20 pounds he gained, but the expression he wears on
his face. Instead of a hostile, indifferent scowl, he has a naďve,
insecure grin. 
Stallone is flat, but the role is not exactly dynamic. The character's
dream is to work as a New York City cop, and that dream can never be
fulfilled. But instead of setting new goals, Freddy plants himself as
close to New York as possible, on the outside looking in, trying to fit
in with those whose careers he admires. The character doesn't know how
to give up his youthful dreams, and so is living a self-doubting,
came-in-second life. A low-key approach to the character was called for,
and Stallone did fine. (Perhaps he found the story to be a parallel to
his own career. Maybe some defect kept him OUT OF the New York City,
andINthe New Jersey, of acting careers.) 
It's possible that Mangold didn't entirely trust Stallone with the
character of Freddy. The dialogue tells us how Freddy went deaf in one
ear, but we also see how it happened through flashback. The flashbacks
add to Freddy's character, but they have little to do with the story and
they seemed out of place. Maybe Mangold thought Stallone's Freddy needed
some extra depth (no pun intended). 
Still, a couple of scenes were very good and deserve to be mentioned.
Early on, a young NYPD cop who's drunk and off-duty, runs two men off
the road, killing them. The scene is intercut with Freddy, drunk and
off-duty, running into a deer, killing it. Each has accidentally taken
an innocent life, and they are equally branded by the same gash across
the nose. Another scene that showed some directorial ingenuity is told
from Freddy's aural point of view; we hear what Freddy hears. 
I could say a lot of nice things about Cop Land, but I can't recommend
it. The vital spark that pulls you in and makes you care about the movie
is missing. Many people really liked this movie, and a few despised it.
I just wish I had been that moved, either way.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
George Papadopoulos
Director: James Mangold
Cast:        Sylvester Stallone, Harvey Keitel, Robert De Niro, Ray Liotta,
Anabella Sciorra
The first thing you notice about this movie is the excessive weight being
lugged around by the actors. There has been considerable publicity about
the twenty kilos that Stallone piled on but nothing has been mentioned
about the appearance of flubber on the other actors in the film. I fear it
is because, while Stallone deliberately put the weight on himself, the
other actors have let themselves go in the past year or so. Harvey Keitel
is no longer the tight, taut body he was in MEAN STREETS and Ray Liotta is
obviously been gorging on ring-dings due, no doubt, to the fact that he
hasn't been in a Scorsese movie since GOODFELLAS. On the other hand, Robert
De Niro, while he isn't exactly resembling RAGING BULL days, seems to be
enjoying his meals at his Tribeca restaurant a bit too much, whereas Cathy
Moriarty thought it may be a good career move to do the De Niro thing and
look like Jake La Motta. All in all, the stellar cast of this film carries
some excessive baggage in more ways than one.
Weight issues aside, COPLAND is a well-structured, well-cast, well-acted,
well-photographed and well-directed film. While it is no GOODFELLAS, it has
all the ingredients of a better than average cop/corruption movie. The cast
is mind-boggling. It was great to see Keitel with De Niro again, Liotta
with De Niro, Keitel with Liotta, Sciorra with a white guy and Stallone
with someone else other than Talia Shire and Burt Young. 
The film centres on an attempted police cover-up over a cop shooting a
couple of crack-addicted black folk (for a change). The young cop, being so
distressed, jumps off the George Washington Bridge. But did he jump? We
find out later that his uncle (Keitel) set it up so that he could get away
with the killing but things don't go to plan. Things become messy and now
the uncle has no choice but to save his own ass by actually killing his
adopted nephew. Stuck in the middle of all this is Freddie (Stallone), the
sherrif of the town where these policeman reside. The police town "where
everyone feels safe to cross the street" is Garrison in New Jersey (I
didn't think anyone was safe in Jersey), just over the Washington Bridge
from where the cop allegedly jumped from. Freddy knows that the kid is
alive and now has the dilemma of either doing nothing and keeping his
police friends and quiet job or he could do something for himself, his
career and justice, Amen. Guess which option Stallone chooses?
This film could have been a turkey. Stallone could have flexed his muscle
and turned his character from a repressed loner to a Rambo-like law
enforcer. But no, instead we have Stallone giving a terrific performance
and his best one sinceum,well...Rocky 1. His usual droopy eyes and
incoherent mumbling are perfect for a character who lacks the confidence
and self-esteem to take any decisive action (talk about a stretch) until he
is forced too. While the film is not short of action, opting to delve a bit
more into the characters than the usual Hollywood fare, the predictable
final shoot-out is a knockout. It is shot with a muffled sound to reflect
Stallone's impaired hearing and the silence is deafening.
The heavyweights put in their usual strong performances, especially Keitel
who, thank God, isn't playing another sweet-natured middle-aged man and
plays what he was born to play: a baddie. The surprise packet is Stallone.
His performance is a revelation. There is a beautiful scene with Anabella
Sciorra where she asks him why he hasn't married and he gives her this
dopey, alcohol-induced stare and says "Because the good ones are taken" and
his head falls on her shoulder. It is such a touching and restrained
performance that leaves you wanting more. I want more of Stallone like
this. More sensitive, caring and lovey-dovey. More acting and less high
testoserone, macho, American flag-waving bullshit. Give me a character I
can work with. Despite my wishes, I hear Stallone is planning another Rambo
film and his next film is a mindless action flick. Oh well, it was good
while it lasted.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Cop Land (1997)
Sylvester Stallone, Ray Liotta, Robert De Niro, Harvey Keitel, Michael 
Rappaport, Janeane Garafalo
Rated R, Three and one half out of five atars
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
For more reviews, go to www.nuvo-online.com and click on "film."
"Cop Land" is a film about weight. The weight of defeat, of broken dreams,
 of corruption, conscience and culpability. As Sheriff Freddy Heflin, 
Sylvester Stallone trudges through life. A heroic act as a young man cost 
him his hearing in one ear. The partial hearing loss cost him his dream 
of becoming a New York City Police officer.  And the loss of his dream 
cost him everything. So Freddy trudges through life, 40 pounds overweight,
 with a sad smile, a lazy gait and a don't make waves attitude. Heflin is 
Sheriff of Garrison, New Jersey, a small town just across the river from 
NYC. Garrison's population is comprised largely of New York cops who have 
made the town their refuge, an oasis from the madness of the big city. 
They treat Heflin with benign condescension, as nothing more than a slow-
witted figurehead. And Heflin accepts the role; if he can't be a "real" 
cop, at least he can hang out with them. 
So life goes on, with Heflin deferring to the lawbreaking and casual 
bullying of his "superiors", until an incident in NYC changes it all. 
Late one night, Murray Babitch (Michael Rappaport) is side-swiped on the 
George Washington bridge by a pair of joy-riders. When he pursues them, 
one of the men leans out the window and taunts Babitch while aiming 
something at him. Babitch panics and fires on them, resulting in a car 
wreck and two dead young men. Within minutes, the bridge is swarming with 
people, and the only object found near the men's bodies is "The Club". 
Police cronies plant a gun, but an alert paramedic notices the scam and 
raises loud objections. Amidst the chaos, Babitch's uncle, Senior officer 
Ray Donlan (Harvey Keitel) spirits his nephew away, claiming that the 
young cop committed suicide by jumping from the bridge.
Babitch is given a lavish police funeral, while Uncle Ray keeps the youth 
tucked away in his Garrison home, so convinced of the sanctity of the 
town that he holds a barbecue at the house, with the youth wandering 
about freely drinking and socializing. Sheriff Heflin knows about the 
brazen farce. Internal Affairs investigator Moe Tilden (Robert De Niro) 
suspects. But the cops in Garrison have many powerful friends.
The investigation of the incident allows "Cop Land" to spin off into a 
wide variety of sub-plots and character studies. The film meanders, the 
multiple stories become confusing, and the inevitable show-down is overly 
simplistic and more than a bit illogical, but Cop Land works anyway, 
because of writer/director James Mangold's steady, assured pacing, 
excellent cinematography and the strong performances of the powerhouse 
cast. 
Stallone sheds his Nautilus image for the film, reminding us that he 
began his career as an actor, not an icon. His Sheriff Heflin is a 
fascinating character, an utterly defeated man with a spark of his former 
self still burning somewhere inside. Stallone's nuanced performance is 
good,  hopefully a harbinger of a new direction for his career. Keitel is 
excellent as the leader of the Garrison cops, a viper of a man whose 
smile is nearly as threatening as his scowl. De Niro does his usual fine 
work, as do Robert Patrick, Cathy Moriarty, Annabella Sciorra and Peter 
Berg in supporting roles. The wonderful Janeane Garofalo, who seems 
incapable of making a bad career move, has a nice turn in a cameo as one 
of Sheriff Heflin's deputies. 
The actor who makes the biggest splash in "Cop Land", however, is Ray 
Liotta. After a long series of simplistic bad guy roles, Liotta finally 
has a part with some meat to it, and he is outstanding. His Officer Gary 
Figgis was once a member of the Garrison cop's inner circle, but became 
estranged from the group following the murder of his partner, who had 
planned to testify against the officers. Figgis is a bloated mess of a 
man, a cokehead drowning in anger and self-pity, but his conscience has 
survived and he becomes an uneasy ally of Sheriff Heflin. 
Beyond the dynamic acting, "Cop Land" offers several impressive set 
pieces. One of the best involves a violent confrontation, viewed through 
Stallone's hearing-impaired character. The combination of near-silence 
and high-voltage action is disconcerting and mesmerizing, adding a 
surreal element to the film at just the right moment.
The structural and logical flaws of "Cop Land" are easy to forgive, given 
the strong acting, pacing and framing of the film. Writer/director 
Mangold has constructed a worthy tale of despair and redemption that 
overflows with memorable images. "Cop Land" isn't a great film, but it is 
a very good one. 

Author
Walter Frith
Police corruption has been a powerful subject for examination and perhaps the
most famous and well remembered story is 1973's 'Serpico' in which Al Pacino
played the title character and the film was based on a true story involving a
lone New York City police officer who blew the whistle on several of his
peers and then was forced to leave his career behind.  
'Copland' looks at the same subject of corrupt cops but puts a twist on an
old story you wouldn't expect to see.  It seems that for many years it was a
rule set in motion by the governing body in New York City that officers who
worked for the NYPD had to live in the city so their actions could be kept
under observation by Internal Affairs (these are the people who police the
police) but on a technicality many officers were later allowed to be declared
eligible to live in surrounding areas such as New Jersey and Connecticut and
it seems in this movie that across the Hudson River by way of the George
Washington Bridge is a little town named Garrison, New Jersey (pop. 1280) in
which a handful of cops have set up shop to perform many clandestine
activities of a corrupt nature and the town's honest but rather timid sheriff
(Sylvester Stallone) becomes embroiled in a conflict not usually seen in this
small town where he boasts that they have (quote) "one of the lowest crime
rates in Northern New Jersey" (unquote).
As the story picks up steam the corrupt cops in question (Harvey Keitel is
their leader) fake the death of one of their own so he can't be prosecuted
for a seemingly wrongful death of two motorists he had a run in with one
night while driving home from a night of drinking and the story then focuses
on an Internal Affairs agent (Robert De Niro) who begins investigating the
situation and finds something not quite right.  Because his jurisdiction ends
at the George Washington Bridge he tries to convince Stallone that something
has to be done by way of an investigation to resolve this unusual situation
 One of the crooked cops in question (Ray Liotta) has a redeemable side to
his sinful persona and has some of the best work of his career in this movie.
The film's writer and director (James Mangold) has approached the subject
matter in this movie with total credibility and has nailed down the attitudes
and personalities of police officers (both corrupt and honest) in a very
convincing fashion and while the film's climax is straight forward and
contains little surprises it is still powerful and intelligent filmmaking
done with characters both compelling and believable.  No actor has a leading
performance in this film and while each has a supporting role, Sylvester
Stallone shines bright with some of his best work in more than a decade and
proves he CAN act given the right set of circumstances and his portrayal of a
small town sheriff dealing with big city corruption is one of the most
sympathetic and interesting characters he's ever played.  Stallone dumps the
macho act entirely after gaining 40 pounds to play this role.  In fact there
are no slackers in this cast which also includes Robert Patrick, Michael
Rapaport and Annabella Sciorra   
'Copland' is a smashing success so far as movie making is concerned and is
one of the best films of 1997 and is certainly one of the most convincing
police stories of all time.

Author
Steve Kong
Sylvester Stallone acts? Ha! At least that's what I thought walking into
the showing of Cop Land. Did I walk out thinking different?
Across the bridge in New Jersey there is a town named Garrison. It's a
small town, mostly populated by cops from New York. The sheriff of Garrison
is Freddy Heflin (Sylvester Stallone). He has a desperate want to be in the
NYPD, but can't get in because of one deaf ear. The town of Garrison is
populated mostly by cops, most of them dirty.
Writer/Director James Mangold tries to write a multileveled story, spinning
up many plot threads. He includes the main plot of a super-boy cop who
shoots two death two black men on the bridge. Then there are the
miscellaneous personal stories that link different cops. One cop is
sleeping with another's wife. Another is doing drugs and does something
horrible to his girlfriend. One bigger thread is about a dirty cop who sets
up the town with the help of the mob. Moe Tilden (Robert De Niro) heads up
an Internal Affair's investigation of that dirty cop. There is also a love
interest for Stallone. There are a few other threads, but they are mostly
extraneous ones. Most of these threads get cut short and end up being
shallow. Many of the threads are unneeded.
The film seems to become bloated after a while. Many big name stars step
into the film, including Harvey Keitel, Robert De Niro, and Ray Lolita.
(Off subject, De Niro's character seemed to have been stuck in the late 70s
or early 80s, his hair is awful, and he's dressed badly). I was happy to
see Janeane Garofalo again. Her screen time is little and her part was
completely unnecessary, but it was nice to see her again on the big screen.
Cop Land tries really hard to be a high drama film and though it comes
close, it fails. Cop Land is a wait for video movie, and even then, I
cannot recommend it. And for those of you wondering, yes, Stallone can act,
and he does well in Cop Land. Stallone just needs to find a project with a
better script next time. 

Author
Justin K. Siegel
COP LAND -- a movie review by Justin K. Siegel
Over the past 20 years, we have seen Sylvester Stallone rise... and
fall. And rise. And fall again. Now, 21 years after his underdog-hero
in ROCKY made him a blue-collar hero, Stallone has decided that he's
ready to try a little "serious" acting. All that at the tender age of
50. In COP LAND, an ultra-low-budget crime-drama from indie darling
James Mangold (who directed HEAVY, one of 96's better films), Stallone
gives the best performance of his chronically spotted career (yes,
even better than in STOP! OR MY MOM WILL SHOOT).
Mangold is on his way to being a _serious_ player in Hollywood. HEAVY
flirted with brilliance on more than one occasion, and COP LAND is the
flat-out best film I've seen since 1995's THE USUAL
SUSPECTS. Mangold's direction plays a part in it, but what brings COP
LAND over that mountain are the performances. Keitel? De Niro? Liotta?
Michael Rapaport? One interviewer called it the "Method All-star
Team." And then, in what I was sure would be the film's downfall,
Stallone puts his heart and soul into into his portrayal of a
painfully shy man who, like the leading man in HEAVY, just stares at
life.
Harvey Keitel plays Ray Donlan an New Yourk City police-officer, who,
sick of living _and_ working in NYC, has cut a deal with the mob: the
mob buys some NYPD guys a bunch of land in Jersey, and the NYPD turns
a blind eye to the mob.
Stallone plays Freddy Heflin, a Garrison, New Jersey sherrif, who,
because of a hearing-problem occured while rescuing a girl from
drowning as a youth, could never become NYPD. The girl he saved as
grown up (Annabella Sciorra) and has married a _real_ cop; a New York
cop. A dirty cop. He is played rather dully by Peter Berg.
After a young cop, fresh off saving a bunch of children (Michael
Rapaport), shoots two black youths, Donlan says he saw him jump off
the George Washington Brigde, but actually is hiding him out. After
Internal affairs officer Moe Tilden (De Niro) comes sniffing around
looking for the body, Donaln knows he messed up, and tries to kill
Rapaport.
COP LAND is a wonderful, fresh, and naturally exciting thriller,
which, as I said before, is a worthy companion piece to THE USUAL
SUSPECTS. After all, they're both about thwarting crooked cops.
I'm sure this review seems scattered and poorly written, but that's
because I'm still under the power of this magnificant film. I'm sure
glad I found those "COP LAND ADVANCE SCREENING INVITATION" tickets on
a park bench last week. You have to wait till Friday to see it.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "I look at this town, and I don't like what I see," remarks the
sheriff of the backwater town of Garrison, New Jersey.  Although his
town nominally has a low crime rate, the reality is much grimmer.  The
city, a bedroom community of New York City cops, is a cesspool.  The
corrupt cops from across the river live in Garrison thanks to the
payoffs from their mob connections.
     Sylvester Stallone in a partially successful attempt to
demonstrate his acting range plays Freddy Heflin, the town's
good-old-boy sheriff.  Much has been written about how the ever-buff
Stallone bloated out in order to nab the part.  Stallone creates a
lethargic sheriff who sleepwalks through the first three quarters of
the film.  Although it can be argued that this shows his talents as a
serious actor, any other actor giving such a remote performance would
more likely have been criticized than praised.  Nevertheless, the
critics have heaped accolades on Stallone's work in COP LAND, since it
shows he can do more than action flicks.  Granted, but his range in COP
LAND is even more limited than in his usual superhero roles.
     Freddy is a sad guy with a hang-dog look who spends his time
looking wistfully at The Big Apple where he wants to be a cop.  Because
as a teenager he saved his would-be sweetheart from drowning in her
car, he lost his hearing in one ear and hence his chance of passing the
NYPD entrance exam.
     Why Stallone wants to wear New York City blues is never adequately
explained.  The confusing narrative rarely takes the time to delve into
any motivation or character development, and it is easy to see why.
The script by the director, James Mangold, has as many characters as a
Balzac novel, so there is little time to devote to any of them, which
is a shame since the story has promise.  A sheriff who ignores all the
major lawbreaking around him so he can concentrate on domestic
disputes, kid's arguments, and improperly placed garbage could have
become a compelling character study about a person with misplaced
values.  The movie needs a more tightly focused story that concentrates
on just a few characters and gives them some meaningful dialog.
     Perhaps the saddest aspect of the making of this film is all of
the wasted talent.  Like a sports team owner awash in cash, producers
Cary Woods, Cathy Konrad, and Ezra Swerdlow signed up so many excellent
actors that even the most minor parts are filled with highly capable
people.  Besides Stallone, the cast includes, among others: Harvey
Keitel, Ray Liotta, Robert De Niro, Peter Berg,  Janeane Garofalo,
Robert Patrick, Michael Rapaport, Annabella Sciorra, and Cathy
Moriarty.  The screenplay, however, gives the actors little to work
with.  All the characters suffer from being too one-dimensional.
Still, with a cast this strong, the show does have its moments and
could never be called a bad show even if the director's pacing is
glacial.
     With a more lively production, the holes in the story could have
been ignored, but the cost of the director's slow gate is that the
audience has more time to dwell on the film's improbabilities.  Take
just one.  If you were on the lam from a bunch of killer cops, would
you hide in the town where they lived or would you get out of there as
fast as you could?
     If you like to see homages to classic old films, then COP LAND
will not disappoint.  Stallone, taking on the Gary Cooper role from
HIGH NOON, ends the show with a fast drawn gun and a hail of bullets.
HIGH NOON, on the other hand, did not have the advantage of color or
white carpet to accentuate the blood.  It made up for these
deficiencies by creating flesh-and-blood characters rather than
unfilled-in sketches.
     "How do you think this makes me look," complains Freddy to an NYPD
cop flaunting his lawbreaking for the world to see.  "Go home and don't
think so much," admonishes the cop played by Harvey Keitel.  The
director seems to be saying that to the audience.  You're to ignore the
movie's flaws.  Afterall, you've got a morosely serious Stallone
surrounded by a galaxy of stars.  What more could you want?
     COP LAND runs 1:44.  It is rated R for violence, profanity, and
brief nudity and would be fine for most teenagers.  I liked parts of
the picture but not enough to recommend it.  I give it **.
REVIEW WRITTEN ON: September 12, 1997
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: James Mangold
Starring: Sylvester Stallone, Harvey Keitel, Ray Liotta, Robert DeNiro, 
Annabella Sciorra, Robert Patrick, Peter Berg, Michael Rapaport, 
Jeaneane Garafolo, Cathy Moriarty, Noah Emmerich, Deborah Harry, Frank 
Vincent
"Stallone.  There's the quintessential thespian.  This guy's got as much 
range as a daisy air-rifle," said Dennis Miller numerous times.  Well, 
Stallone may have drudged through countless Rambo-esque roles, 
occasionally taking a "break" from them to do horrible comedy (but I am 
still going to say that I enjoyed "Oscar."  Sorry.), always emerging 
rich but constantly ostricized by his peers (i.e. Mr. Miller).
When his follow-up film to "Daylight" (*snicker*) was announced as a 
drama and the sophomoric film by writer/director James Mangold (of 
"Heavy," a film I didn't see), who actually cast Sly in the lead, 
surrounding him with actors like DeNiro, Keitel, Liotta, and Sciorra, I 
know I'm not the only one who got a good laugh.  But as the months wore 
on after the announcement, I began to sit on the fence on the topic and 
wait till it actually comes out before I either crucify him or build 
some kind of monument to the guy that's not in front of the Philadelphia 
Art Museum.  And now that I've seen it...
Well, lemme sadistically hold you in suspense for a second here.  The 
story revolves around the slow-moving, kinda-deaf sheriff of Garrison, 
NJ, Freddy Heflin (Sly), and his kafkaesque problem he has to deal with. 
 Now Garrison is a town where almost the entire population is an NYPD 
cop - where the cops come for some form of safety out of the boundaries 
of the nasty city.  The unquestionable and unnofficial leader of them is 
Ray (Keitel), who arranged everything and runs it like some kind of Don 
Corleone who hangs out in bars with his men.
Freddy watches them with envy but with some distance.  See, he went and 
saved a girl when he was young (who would grow up to be Sciorra, who 
kinda resembles Talia Shire a bit in this flick), and, on account of his 
bum ear, was not allowed to be a cop.  And since 99% of the population 
is either cop or wife/kin-of-cop, there's really not much to do.  There 
are only two other officers (Jeneane Garafolo and Noah Emmerich) and 
there duties include dealing with garbage disputes and uselessy doing 
speed checks on a bunch of cops who just tell them "Just say 'Oops, we 
nabbed some good guys.  I think I'll go look for some bad guys.'"
But an Internal Affairs man, Moe Tilden (DeNiro), shows up in town and 
talks to Freddy about the corruption that he already knows about.  
Earlier in the picture, they stumbled up a bit in relation to a kinda 
stupid Garrison cop (Michael Rapaport) who shot a pair of guys who 
sideswiped him since he thought they had a gun.  The guy then jumped off 
the bridge...or did he?  Since Freddy knows all about it and is kind of 
scared to go take on all his friends, he has a giant moral delimna on 
his shoulders.  One angel is scared, the other is speaking the element 
of justice, truth, and good to him.  Also on the scared angel is a bunch 
of people telling him to not screw with the Garrison community which has 
been expertly financed by Ray to ensure a kind of hypocritical peace, 
ruled by a mafia of New York's finest.
The cast is utterly huge, drawing a bunch of scene-chewing actors 
together (i.e. DeNiro and Keitel, who have one lone scene together), 
serving them with an risky topping.  The actual film's exciting and 
riveting enough - but the topping is exciting and riveting no matter how 
good or bad it is.  So this whole "Can Sly do it?" topping is just 
right.
Well, here it is - Sly rocks.  Period.  They guy creates an emmotional 
character who you care about, identify with, and sometimes even almost 
cry with.  Freddy's much like any of us: alone in our principles and 
scared to be alone to do anything about them.  He's such a well-written 
character for the sole reason that he's human.  And Sly, who is almost 
the character anyway, does a fantastically moving job with the role.  No 
more grunting and saying cheesy one-liners.  No more pushing some guy up 
into a staligmate (or is it the other one that points downwards?).  Just 
Sly in his buff - 40 pounds heavier and 1000 times better than he's ever 
been.  This is not only his best performance in years, but simply his 
best performance.
Will Stallone get an Oscar nomination?  I dunno.  If the Oscars were 
nominated right now, he'd definitely be up there.  But I have a feeling 
this film will actually revitalize his sagging career and he might just 
nab a nomination since, well, it's Sly and he actually rocked for a 
change.
The supporting cast is amazing and all, but nothing can stand up to 
Stallone's, probably because most of them are not real humans.  The two 
closest things to human are Freddy's best friend, a coke-addicted 
corrupt cop (Liotta - who else for that kind of character?) who begins 
douting his choice in life, and Freddy's distant love interest, Sciorra, 
who was saved by Freddy and married a jerk cop (Peter Berg).
All the elements create an interesting character study whic borrows 
elements from "High Noon," "Rio Bravo," and "Straw Dogs."  But the plot 
and everything just affects Freddy's character, who finds himself in the 
parallel sitution to his saving-the-girl situation earlier in his life. 
 There, he acted quickly and lost his hearing.  Decades later, he's 
afraid to bust the move and is pretty content to just lay home on his 
couch and listen to Springsteen (yuck).  The Freddy character is what 
will make this film endure.
But even if the Freddy character were not as interesting as he is, the 
film would still kick some great ass.  It's intense, interesting, and 
always entertaining.  And the thought of these cops doing some of the 
stuff they do is just plain creepy.  So, as I said, the Freddy character 
and Stallone's performance is what just adds to this amazing film, which 
is one of the better films I've seen all year.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Boyd Petrie
Respect's Reviews can be found at
http://www.aros.net/~respect/movies.html
I'm not exactly sure that I can review this fairly.  I am pretty
biased towards Stallone films, but then I figured that critics are
supposed to be biased.  I admit it... I love Stallone movies.  Even if
they are brainless action flicks (with the exception of The Specialist
which was just plain awful) I usually have a good time watching them.
However, upon hearing Stallone's reduction of salary in order to play
a kind-hearted sheriff in Cop Land, I was hoping and praying that the
role would turn out to be a good one for Stallone.  After films like
Assassins, Judge Dredd, Daylight, and The Specialist, one can get
tired of his usual antics on screen.  Watching Rocky, I knew Stallone
had the talent to become a big star, but he was launched into a career
of action films which bombed here in the USA, but did quite well
overseas.
But that isn't saying some of his action films weren't good.
Demolition Man was highly entertaining and pretty good for what it
was.  Cliffhanger was just plain terrific with good performances from
the entire cast and some incredible action sequences.  But Stallone
was always known as Sly Stallone, not as serious actor Sylvester
Stallone.  Until now.  It has taken over 20 years for him to get
another role just as good as his Rocky persona.  Was it worth the
wait?  Some of us loyal and faithful ones pushed through the cliched
action films in hope for a better film.  Well, it is here.  Cop Land
is not only one of Stallone's best films, but one of the best films of
the year.  Considering that it is already August, I can truthfully say
that.  My only hope is that this film is remembered when those Oscar
nominations are made.  
Cop Land begins with a monologue from a narrator telling us about the
hero of the movie.  Freddy Heflin (Stallone) is the sheriff of
Garrison, New Jersey, which is known by the locals as Cop Land.
Freddy dreams about being one of the NYPD cops that he sees everyday
in his jurisdiction.  Unfortunately, Freddy went deaf in one ear
during a heroic rescue when he was younger, and this keeps him from
getting any kind of job on the NYPD.  So he settles for being the
sheriff of this small town.  Cop Land was created when some of the
police officers of New York didn't want to have to live in the city
and put their families at risk.  But the only problem was that no cop
could live on the other side of the river without being a transit cop,
at least part time.  So a group of New York's finest, led by Ray
Donlan (Harvey Keitel), become part-time transit policemen and live in
Cop Land.
As Freddy begins to suspect, New York's finest may not be so fine at
all.  He witnesses things that make them look less and less heroic,
and more and more corrupt.  But by nature, Freddy isn't one to speak
out or stand on his own.  He remains quiet, and with his overweight
but kind physique, he never really is taken seriously.  His only real
friends are the girl he saved from drowning and the other officers
working with him.  Naturally, he is in love with Liz Randone
(Annabella Sciorra), who remains friends with him because she owes him
her life.  But she is married to Joey Randone (Peter Berg), a sleazy
cop who treats her with as little respect as possible.  Soon, however,
an incident involving a drunk cop (Michael Rapaport) who accidentally
shoots two African Americans because he thinks they had a gun, sparks
an investigation of the Cop Land cops.  Murray "Superboy" Babitch, the
drunk policeman, doesn't want to be caught in a slew of
investigations, so he jumps off the bridge connecting New York to New
Jersey.  Or does he? 
Freddy is the only witness to the truth and he knows exactly what is
happening.  The investigation of the suicide brings in internal
affairs Moe Tilden (Robert De Niro), who believes that because Freddy
lives around all the cops, he probably sees and hears more than anyone
else.  Unfortunately, the Cop Land cops have a lot of power behind
them, and the internal affairs investigation is quickly cancelled.  It
is up to Freddy to deal with what he should and shouldn't do.  But he
does have help from Gary Figgis (Ray Liotta), a corrupt cop who wants
revenge after his partner is killed.  Together, these two uncover the
conspiracy behind the suicide of Superboy, and the corruption of the
Cop Land cops.
What makes Cop Land so much better than most other films of this same
genre is the way it is done.  While the film does have action
sequences, this is more or less a drama with colorful characters to
drive it forward.  The pace is kept slow, and this allows the
emotional effect to come out of the woodwork, which makes the film
more entertaining than almost any other film out this year (the
exception may be Contact).  Freddy is such a great character because
he is much different from every character Stallone has ever played.
But that isn't the only reason.  Freddy, the sheriff with an
unrealized dream, is so much like the average person that most people
could probably relate to him.  He doesn't speak his opinion, he
doesn't pull over speeders unless they are going about 50 over the
speed limit, and his weight is a result of his dream shattering
hearing loss.  His emotions are stored up inside him, and they are
released in a final battle between good and evil at the end of the
film which is very disturbing and shocking.
But let's face it: the entire cast is terrific, with Stallone and
Liotta giving the two best performances of the film.  Liotta almost
steals the film from under Stallone, but considering that he isn't a
very likeable character, he doesn't quite succeed.  Liotta is a very
underrated actor, and hopefully he will get some more roles like this
one in the future.  Keitel is amazing as the leader of Cop Land's
cops.  It was almost a role destined for him.  De Niro is terrific as
usual, and I don't really need to say more.  Sciorra gives a nice,
low-key performance which compares to Stallone's.  Janeane Garofalo
gives a very god performance, although she isn't in the film all that
much.  When she is, she handles herself quite well.  Rapaport is good
with some nice moments of his own.  But, as the hype has been
suggesting, this film is Stallone's, and it is rightfully his.
Perhaps I am just overexaggerating his performance because it is so
different from his action roles.  But I don't think so.  Hopefully,
Oscar won't forget this film.
Cop Land is rated R for language, violence and some gore, brief
nudity, as well as some drug use.  Director/writer James Mangold
(Heavy) has created a wonderfully fresh and emotionally involving film
about corrupt cops.  Nothing is really surprising, except for the
shocking showdown at the end.   But none of that matters, as this is a
vehicle for strong performances and a great story.  It's nice to see a
film that doesn't rely on special effects to move the story along.  I
just hope that Cop Land doesn't get lost in the shuffle of big-budget
films with no story.

Author
Scott Renshaw
COP LAND
(Miramax)
Starring:  Sylvester Stallone, Harvey Keitel, Ray Liotta, Robert DeNiro,
Michael Rapaport, Annabella Sciorra, Robert Patrick, Peter Berg.
Screenplay:  James Mangold.
Producers:  Cary Woods, Cathy Konrad and Ezra Swerdlow.
Director:  James Mangold.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, violence, brief nudity)
Running Time:  103 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     At the age of 50, Sylvester Stallone made a bold career move.  After
spending more than a decade making mega-millions for carrying flimsy films
on his broad shoulders, Stallone realized that he wasn't getting any
younger.  So he lobbied writer/director James Mangold for the lead role in
COP LAND, Mangold's gritty drama about a small New Jersey town populated
almost entirely by corrupt New York City cops.  He gained almost thirty
pounds for his role as affable Sheriff Freddy Heflin, and worked for
bargain basement wages.  He joined a cast of heavyweights like Robert
DeNiro and Harvey Keitel which would push him to his creative limits.  At
the age of 50, Sylvester Stallone decided to take up acting.
     In one sense, it was a brilliant decision.  Freddy Heflin is easily
Stallone's best role since the one Stallone wrote for himself 20 years ago
-- one Rocky Balboa -- and Stallone does some wonderful work with it.  His
heavy-lidded gaze and crooked half-smile are ideal for Heflin, a
good-natured figurehead sheriff whose job is to wear a badge and stay out
of the way of the locals.  It's the only law enforcement job Freddy can
get thanks to a hearing loss suffered as a teenager while rescuing a
drowning girl, and he feels resigned to accepting it for what it is.  That
is before Internal Affairs officer Moe Tilden (DeNiro), investigating the
mysterious "death" of a young cop (Michael Rapaport) involved in a
suspicious shooting, pricks Freddy's pride by pointing out all the graft
going on under his nose.  With minimal theatrics, Stallone shows us a man
who never wanted anything more than to be a cop finally deciding to be one
of the good guys.
     With such solid potential in that story -- and such a talented cast
of co-stars -- I'm sure the last thing Stallone expected was that he would
have to carry COP LAND the same way he carried his formula action films.
Yet that is exactly what he has to do, because Mangold has written only
one real character in COP LAND, and provided only one real conflict.  He
introduces no complexity into the issue of cops on the take, reducing the
characters played by Keitel and Robert Patrick to one-dimensional
villains.  Crucial relationships are woefully underdeveloped, notably that
between Stallone and Annabella Sciorra (as the girl Freddy once saved, now
grown and married to one of the dirty cops).  Even DeNiro gets little to
work with and does even less with it, playing the short-fused I.A. man
like every short-fused movie cop cliche rolled into one.  Only Ray Liotta,
as a coke-addicted cop trying to go straight, offers any genuine support
to Stallone.  Every event not directly related to Freddy feels trite and
perfunctory; every scene is given the most obvious spin.
     Actors make choices like the one Stallone made with COP LAND because
they believe that the film is going to get noticed, that it could do for
them what PULP FICTION did for John Travolta and Bruce Willis.  Stallone
deserves to get noticed for his work in COP LAND, work which reminds us
that Stallone became a star because he brought humanity to a sympathetic
underdog.  Whether COP LAND will get noticed is another matter.  James
Mangold went searching for an urban epic in COP LAND, but he didn't find
one.  He just found one great character.  It's the kind of character
people revise their career plans for, the kind of role which can make a
movie star want to be an actor.

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Sylvester Stallone, Harvey Keitel, Ray Liotta, Robert De Niro,
Peter Berg, Janeane Garofalo
Synopsis: A small town sheriff who feels obligated to a popular but
dirty cop must decide whether or not to betray him when a victim of
attempted murder asks for protection.
This is a drama, not an action flick. This time, nstead of playing
Rambo, or Rocky or any other superheroic type of guy,  Sylvester
Stallone plays a sweet, slow-witted, pot-bellied, likeable sheriff of a
small town who wanders sadly an gently through a town that doesnt have
much excitement. The film is called "Cop Land" because the New Jersey
town that Sylvester patrols is mostly inhabited by cops who work across
the bridge in New York. Theres an atmosphere of conpsiracy since
throughout the film, it is made known that the mob has connections with
dirty cops who have connections with dirty politicians, but all of these
clues or not followed up on or explained. I loved the film and thought
it was a great bit of normal-guy type heroism and drama. 
Opinion: Whether or not you enjoy the film hinges entirely on one key
point - - it depends on how you interpret Sylvester Stallones
character. If you interpret Stallones character as a smart guy, then
youre going to wonder why he didnt investigate all those
conspiratorial threads and why things are left "hanging" unexplained. If
you interpret him as a slow-witted guy, then youll be happy with this
film, because the film is essentially a morality play, with the moral
that even a gentle, confused guy can make a moral decision to do the
right thing.

Author
Jeff Pidgeon
        "Cop Land" is the sophomore effort of writer/director James Mangold,
and doubtless many will say that it's not as good as his first film, "Heavy".
Since I haven't seen "Heavy", I'm not as subject to the seemingly inevitable
disappointment that seems to follow an impressive debut.  I found "Cop Land"
an affecting film that has many strong moments, if a bit lacking in the unity
department.
        "Cop Land"'s script doesn't want to do very many things in a literal
way, so it winds up being a little too oblique with one too many things.  The
consequence is that the set-up for this film is large and long, not bad in and
of itself, but this forces writer Mangold to reveal many plot points through
expository dialogue rather than having things unfold more naturally through 
events in the film.  One of the strong things about the film is that there are
very few characters who ever tell the truth, but this happens so often that
the script has little time left for revelations.  
        The basic story is that of a group of New York cops who have set up
residence in a small town in New Jersey.  It's rife with corruption, a hope-
lessly tangled net of influence and political connections, most of them invol-
ving Ray Donlan (Harvey Keitel) and his cronies.  He runs things far more than
the town's local sheriff, Freddy Heflin (Sylvester Stallone, in an agreeable
role), and when any of the club shows signs of rebelling, the consequences are
cold, brutal betrayals -- there's plenty of opportunities to let your fellow 
officer slip below the tide as you swim away, telling whatever story you like 
later.  The atmosphere of this film reminded me of the soldiers of "Platoon",
where your life could depend on the loyalty of your companions.
        Freddy starts the film well aware that things aren't on the up and up,
but things come to a boil when an intoxicated officer shoots two people, and the
local system starts a cover-up.  The cost of the lies mounts quickly, and 
Freddy is edged ever closer to confronting those whom he would be (Freddy is
partially deaf due to an accident, and is thus ineligible for the force).  As he
becomes more and more certain of what he should do, the support of his friends 
falls away little by little, until he is seemingly lost in the maze of payola
and power.
        None of the performers in the film are on unfamiliar ground, which
doesn't adversely affect the acting, but does affect the verisimilitude some-
what.  I was a bit detached from things, half aware that was *Robert DeNiro* up
there.  A cast of talented unknowns might have gone a long way here, but aside
from DeNiro, everyone played thier roles with an appropriate level of inten-
sity.  Stallone's performance is a bit underplayed for my taste, but to a de-
gree that was refreshing, and appropriate -- his character is reticent, looking
for compromise and mutually agreeable solutions -- but it was difficult not to
(at least partially) interpret the performance as a very conscious Departure 
>From The Rambo Stuff.  Playing it down is fine, but I found the performance 
bordering on colorless at times.  The underdog role still suits him far better 
than the superhero, and Freddy's back story of an unrequited love illustrates
this nicely.  Freddy's life of quiet desperation is touching, and his bid for
justice engaging.  The climax, with a further deafened Freddy confronting his
'superiors', is a nice turn on the typical shootout sequence.
        The cinematography by Eric Alan Edwards is effective without showing 
off (an attempted murder near a swimming pool is nicely lit with menace), while
Howard Shore's score is derivative of past efforts (particularly "Seven") and
only sporadically effective.  Mangold is definately a director to watch, and
while "Cop Land" isn't "High Noon" (a film it bears some resemblance to), it's
an ambitious, textured, intelligent effort.  Moderately Recommended.

Author
Chris Webb
        Here is a film that is wrapped in a 95 minute package that should 
be about three hours long, and still would be enjoyable.  Director/writer 
James Mangold probes into the lives of 5 different personalities that only 
touched the surfaces of their lives.  He could have and should 
have gone deeper.  Despite this lapse, though, Cop Land is a great film 
with great acting across the board.
        Sylvester Stallone is an intelligent guy.  After all, he wrote 
the Academy Award winning Rocky (1976), and was nominated for the 
screenplay.  It was also the last time we saw him truly act.  Maybe urban 
dramas are a place he could inhabit and reap benefits from for movies to 
come.  After failing to impress in comedy (Stop, Or My Mom Will 
Shoot, Oscar) and in his specialty, action (the last few Rockys and 
Rambos, Judge Dredd), Stallone has delivered an understated performance 
that rightfully has Oscar buzz flying around him.  
        As the lonesome loser, Freddy Heflin, Stallone has to portray a 
half-deaf, overweight (he added 40 pounds and watched muscle 
deteriorate), and joke of a cop, who never became a Cop.  He is the 
sheriff of Garrison, New Jersey, a haven for New York's most 
corrupt police officers.  He keeps a peaceful town, but no one takes him 
seriously.  He watches the cityscape pass him by, a place his hearing 
kept him from working.  However, he wasn't always this buffoonish.
        He lost his hearing while saving the woman (Annabella Sciorra) he has 
come to love, and protect, after she plunged off a bridge in her car 
years before.  This kept him from becoming the decorated city officer he 
yearns to be, but in Cop Land he is presented the chance to achieve hero 
status.
        Ray Liotta could have won me over years ago, had I seen 
GoodFellas before witnessing his performances in Unlawful Entry, the 
ironically titled Unforgettable and the atrocious Turbulence.  I can 
finally say, he has won me over.
        In fact, he puts in the most impressive performance in this well-
stocked film.  As an ambiguously moral cop, Liotta dives into his 
own personal dilemma of doing what's right and doing what's fashionable.  
He has some questionable dealings as a result of using his police 
privileges which extend to a drug habit and insurance fraud.  But, on the 
good side, he serves as Freddy's mentor.  
        Perhaps to show HIS seriousness, Liotta has beefed up as well.  
In one chase scene, its enjoyable to watch Stallone and he become 
out-of-breath as a result of their weight gain.  With his usual 
intensity, Liotta puts in a performance for all-time, that should be 
recognized come Oscar time.  He's the one to watch.
        Harvey Keitel is the bad cop.  Robert De Niro is the good 
internal affairs cop.  Michael Rapaport is the fallen-hero cop.  Noah 
Emmerich and Janeane Garofalo are the small-town Heflin-wannabes.  All 
are terrific.
        Keitel is unforgiving as ever as .  He is the one who created 
Garrison for his profit and to run his shady dealings.  His nephew, 
Michael Babitch, played by Rapaport, made a mistake.  He had saved six 
black children's lives, recently, but became trigger-happy after being 
side-swiped by two black teens, and kills them.  His uncle, Keitel's 
Ray Donlan hides him as others plant a gun in the deads' car.  A 
bogus funeral is held after Babitch and Donlan fake a suicide. 
        Everyone around knows this is false, including Mo Tilden (De Niro).  
Yes, even De Niro has put on the pounds to capture the essence of an 
overeating desk cop, who must chase down some of his own.  This meets 
with the bad cops' disfavor, but also compromises Freddy's position 
between his friends who got him the sheriff's job and doing the right 
thing.  The deal is, Freddy has spotted Babitch, and Tilden 
has gone after Heflin to get him to become the cop he's wanted to be:  An 
heroic one.
        Garofalo and Emmerich play the bumpkin deputies smartly, and 
don't want to become involved in breaking up a mob-run dictatorship in 
Garrison.  Its Freddy's turn to become the law.  The question is, will 
he?  
        Stallone and De Niro together make sparkling confrontations over 
right versus loyalty.  And we are finally shown that Stallone knows how 
to act and can stand his own.  De Niro has returned to acting since 
seeing a ridiculous bit in Marvin's Room and his patented psycho in The Fan.
        Keitel and Liotta hold well, with Liotta putting in his best 
performance yet.  The only lagging part comes from director James 
Mangold.  
        This was a great script which could have gone on forever, and 
been just as riveting.  We hardly got to know some of these fascinating 
guys, but his direction was impeccable.  Watch for the deafened shoot-out 
which takes place.  It is the second great shooting sequence of the 
summer taking the lead of Face/Off's Over the Rainbow.  Still, when the 
only flaw is that it was too short, it says something for the movie.
        Come Oscar time, I ask that the Academy look favorably on 
Stallone, recognize Liotta, and give Cop Land a much-deserved 
nomination.  Its not one of the immortals, but its one to see again and 
again.  

Author
Tim Voon
I like a man who isn't afraid to show his weight, look scruffy and worn
down by the ills of society. He walks about with a dogged look on his
face, at first blindly obeying his master's dodgy whims, turning a deaf
ear to the suspicious cries of organised crime. It would appear that
this sheriff who would be a cop, has been beaten into submission by the
forces above him, until that something timely snaps within. This is a
man who isn't macho' or even an action hero', but an ordinary man
trying to find meaning in his upside down world where nothing is as it
seems. I like this new Sylvester Stallone in his apparently first
non-egotistical role.
Following in the same vein as LA CONFIDENTIAL, COP LAND discusses all
the wonderful issues about corrupt police officers - the people who
society despises most. Headed by Harvey Keitel, this Mob/Cop syndicate
has made a safe haven for itself in a small town outside NY. In this
white washed community cops live peacefully side by side, but beneath
the calm exterior fury boils as they sleep with each others wives,
quibble amongst themselves and even kill their own when their community
is threatened. So the joy of the story arises from good eventually
prevailing over evil, and the once beaten Sheriff (Stallone) awakening
to his better self. Where like a faithful wounded dog, he'll keep coming
at you right till the very end.
The star studded cast is almost too numerous to mention, but there are
fine performances from Robert De Niro, Ray Liotta, Annabella Sciorra,
Janeane Garofalo who play the other major leads. It almost seems like a
family reunion for American Italian actors come to make a spaghetti
meatball picture. Not as good or heartfelt as LA CONFIDENTIAL, but still
a movie which is worth an honourable mention. Worthwhile viewing
overall.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Sylvester Stallone has not had a beguiling career since the heyday of "Rocky"
nearly ten years ago. Since then he's tried and failed with comedy ("Oscar"),
musicals ("Rhinestone"), and drama ("Rocky V"). Stallone is usually best in his
action roles such as "Rambo" or "Cliffhanger," but his range as an actor is
fairly limited. "Cop Land" is supposed to be Stallone's first very dramatic
role but there's no energy and no enthusiasm, much like the movie itself. 
Stallone plays Fred Heflin, a simple-minded, stolid sheriff of Garrison, a
fictional New Jersey town. His chain of command in this town is nil, and he
only has two other people in his staff. His basic duties are relegated to
traffic duty. The New York cops who run this Jersey town are controlling
everything but there's corruption boiling everywhere. Michael Rapaport plays a
cop nicknamed Superboy who inadvertently kills two black teenagers during a car
chase. The police want to cover it up, and Superboy supposedly commits suicide
by jumping off a bridge. Fred is oblivious to these surroundings and decides to
take no action against the corrupt cops because they put him where he is now. A
colorful Internal Affairs officer (Robert De Niro) tries to get information
from the unwilling Fred but fails. It turns out Fred is more interested in a
cop's wife (Annabella Sciorra) but when people start getting knocked off, he
decides he has to do what is morally correct. He gets some guidance from a
former cop (Ray Liotta) who is also a cokehead. 
"Cop Land" could have worked with some imaginative direction, a stronger plot
and a better performance by the lead actor but it is no different from any TV
movie on the same subject. There have been countless movies on police
corruption - the best of these was the decadent "Bad Lieutenant" - and so
there's nothing here we haven't seen before and better. For example, there's a
gun planted at a crime scene; a typical Internal Affairs interrogation scene;
badges flashed by several cops; nonessential bar fights; and a final, cliched
shootout staged in slow-motion a'la Peckinpah. None of this is handled with any
energy, flash, or vigor - it has a TV movie staleness that discomfits rather
than enthralls. 
Stallone is inarticulate as an actor and, although that might help the role, he
sleepwalks through the film with no trace of humor or passion. Harvey Keitel is
naturally more animated as an actor but his corrupt cop character is something
he can play in his sleep. Ray Liotta is convincingly frantic as the druggy cop
but his role is too similar to his Henry Hill character in "GoodFellas." Peter
Berg, Frank Vincent, Michael Rapaport, Cathy Moriarty, Janeane Garofalo and
Annabella Sciorra play trivial, forgettable roles with no inner life or central
meaning to the story. A chance meeting between De Niro and Keitel is wonderful
to behold but the scene is never followed up on. Ditto the Garofalo character,
a new cop in Heflin's staff, who helps Heflin at the beginning but then decides
to leave town. Why? Where's the transition? 
"Cop Land" is directed by James Mangold who helmed the brilliant character
study Heavy. This film, though, has the same snail pace and static energy, and
it deadens rather than enliven the proceedings. Robert De Niro and Ray Liotta
breathe life into the film whenever they appear on screen. Stallone and "Cop
Land," however, are too ordinary and listless to keep anyone interested. Watch
the invigorating TV show "NYPD Blue" instead.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at
jerry@movieluver.com

Author
Ben Hoffman
It is nice to see Stallone in something other than his macho,
daredevil, machine gun-firing roles.  And he is much more likable
playing Freddy Heflin, a wannabe policeman who is rejected because one
ear has been damaged when, as a teenager, he dove into the water to
rescue the drowning Liz (Annabella Sciorra).  He is an acknowledged
hero and is given the job of sheriff in the town of Garrison, NJ, just
across the river from NYC.  There is not much happening in Garrison
except possibly for a jackknifed big rig.
Garrison is called "Copland" because so many of New York's finest are
fed up with NYC's crime rate of one every eight seconds.  In Garrison,
no one commits a crime because there are too many cops living there.
Sheriff or no, the cops really control the town.  For instance, when
Cindy (Janeane Garofalo), a new deputy, wants to cite Ray Donlan,
(Harvey Keitel) a top ranking cop for speeding, Freddy has to tell her
that is a "no-no."  We do not give tickets to cops.  Nice and peaceful
town.
Nice and peaceful until Officer Murray Babitch (Michael Rappaport) who
is on his way home after a fun evening in NYC gets sideswiped by a
couple of black men who are having their own joy ride.  Infuriated, he
gives chase.  When one of the men leans out the window with a gun
pointed at Babitch, he fires his own revolver and causes the car he is
chasing to crash and explode, killing both occupants.
That is not good . . . but worse is that when the detectives
investigate, they find that there was no gun involved, just a steering
wheel lock.  That is bad.  He can easily lose his status as a hero for
having rescued people in a fire and suddenly find himself the subject
of a police brutality investigation.  But what are friends for?  A
fellow officer plants a gun in the crashed vehicle.  To insure there
will be no further inquiries they pretend that Babitch must have
jumped to his death from the George Washington Bridge into the Hudson
River.  End of story?  Hardly.
Two things then happen.  As Donlan drives away after the ticket
incident, Freddy sees the "drowned" Babitch looking out the back
window.  Further, there is the NYC police Internal Affairs
investigator, Moe Tilden (played with great humor and flair by Robert
De Niro) who smells there may be a cover up.  Tilden tries to talk
Freddie into helping him by reporting anything suspicious but Freddie
is uncertain about what he should do; go against his cop friends
. . . or uphold the law?  The combined efforts of Tilden and Freddy
could forever change how Garrison is perceived and run.
For the most part, the film is exciting. Much of that is due to a
superb cast.  Aside from those already mentioned, there are Ray
Liotta, Peter Berg, Robert Patrick in supporting roles.

Author
Anders Fagerholt
COP LAND
"The greates trick the devil ever pulled?"
This isn't going to be a review in the normal meaning of the word.
What I would like to do is to tell the story of James Mangold and the
greatest trick he ever pulled, and no he didn't convince the world
that he didn't exist.
The following is what I believe happened those dramatic days a year or
two ago.
James Mangold was sitting there and had just finished writing what he
believed to be a brilliant screenplay, and yes it kind of was. A nice
old-fashioned story about cops and corruption. And he was pretty sure
he could make a fine low-budget movie out of it. But then he realised
like many others before him that that simply wasn't enough. There are
made fine low budget movies every day. How the hell should he manage
to get this movie noticed around the world. That's where the trick
comes in. Use magic. Get an actor who everyone thinks is shit and make
him do the performance of his lifetime. After all if you can make
Stallone act you are bound to have gold come pouring out your ass.
Well that sounds like a neat fairy tale, doesn't it. Well like it is
with all magic tricks they may not be so hard as they seem. First of
all you don't pick the truly hopeless type, stay away from the likes
of Van Damme, Dolph Lundgren, Segal and Schwarzenegger. You pick
someone like Stallone. Now all of a sudden you have brought a great
risk into the game. Stallone could be like nitro if he isn't watched
the whole thing could blow up in your face. If Stallone does a bad job
it makes a mess of the whole thing then it's no longer a fine
low-budget movie, then it's "just another lousy Stallone movie". So
you better watch out. To prevent this you cast him alongside
first-class actors like Keitel, DeNiro and Liotta. With people like
this around it makes him look a lot better and it gives the audience a
signal, that this i far more serious shit than Rambo. However you must
make sure to put these people in the background, 'cause the point is
to make Stallone look good. If the others get to much attention we
could end up with a situation where Stallone makes them look bad, and
that would really ruin the trick.
Then it's a lot up to the role he's given. You give him a reasonably
simple role. Don't give him Shakespeare. Though the role of Freddy
Heflin isn't a one dimensional bad role, it's a great role, butit's a
role that's easy to control through the directing. After all there is
a lot of acting in directing. And you have to be very busy couching
the guy for his role. I bet Mangold spent a lot of times going through
the scenes over and over again until Stallone got it right. When it
comes to the role it's also an essential part of the trick that the
role was strictly the opposite of what Stallone has become typecast
as.
Perhaps the greatest part is that he forced the guy to gain weight. It
worked for Travolta didn't it, well it worked here as well. Mangold
managed to  pull his trick off and newspapers all over the world
reported in a shocked state, that WOW Stallone can act. Now isn't that
the greatest promotional trick you've ever heard of. It may not be a
part of the creative process of film-making, but don't tell me it's
not an essential part. This trick is what got your asses into the
theatre in the first place.
Cop Land is a great movie, and an ingenious promotional trick

Author
Alex Fung
COP LAND (Miramax - 1997)
Starring Sylvester Stallone, Harvey Keitel, Ray Liotta, Robert De Niro,
  Peter Berg, Janeane Garafalo, Robert Patrick, Michael Rapaport,
  Annabella Sciorra, Noah Emmerich, Cathy Moriarty
Screenplay by James Mangold
Produced by Cary Woods, Cathy Konrad, Ezra Swerdlow
Directed by James Mangold
Running time: 105 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
I have always believed that Sylvester Stallone had the ability to turn
in a good acting performance -- after all, one doesn't turn in such a
subtle, nuanced performance as he did in his film ROCKY simply by
chance.  He has not, however, given a performance of note in recent
years, nor has he faced any sort of role which would test his acting
chops; save for the odd foray into comedy (such as OSCAR and STOP! OR
MY MOM WILL SHOOT), Mr. Stallone has been restricted to the role of
Action Star, where characterization typically surrenders to stunts and
effects sequences.
Mr. Stallone makes his much-heralded return to "serious" acting in James
Mangold's police drama COP LAND, where he plays his first recognizably
humanized character in well over a decade.  Gone are the
larger-than-life, testosterone-soaked superheroics -- Mr. Stallone's
Freddy Heflin character is an agreeable, half-deaf, overweight sheriff
of the town of Garrison, New Jersey.  Supporting Mr. Stallone in COP LAND
is an impressive ensemble cast of remarkable talent -- iconic actors such
as Harvey Keitel and Robert De Niro, surrounded by capable actors like
Ray Liotta, Peter Berg, Michael Rappaport and Janeane Garafolo.
James Mangold's first film was a character drama called HEAVY, which I
have not seen as of this writing.  I have, however, read Mr. Mangold's
corresponding screenplay, which was superb -- rich with characterization
and incisive dialogue, with a series of compelling plots rife with an
undercurrent of sadness.  The same can be said for Mr. Mangold's
COP LAND, and it quickly becomes apparent how his second project has
managed to gain the interest and attention of such an astonshingly
varied group of talented actors -- COP LAND juggles several subplots
simultaneously, and is filled with numerous meaty roles which all figure
prominently into the film's storyline; there are very few throwaway
supporting characters of little consequence to COP LAND, and it would
seem that the prospect of portraying one of the many integral characters
in a complex drama must have been enticing to the acting talent.
Unfortunately, it is this very selling point of COP LAND which proves to
be its undoing; the film is simply too unfocused, veering back and forth
from one subplot to the next.  Mr. Mangold has written a involving epic
covering much terrain, and then tried to cram it all into a movie which
runs less than two hours.  There is too much going on in each subplot to
be adequately covered in a one-hundred minute film -- COP LAND is a film
which could stand to improve with a longer running time, where the
relationships between the characters could be developed and examined in
greater depth, and the various story angles could be covered in a more
complete and satisfactory fashion.  As it stands, the stories in COP LAND
seem hurried as they compete with each other for screentime, and leap
forward in sporadic bursts rather than unfolding in a natural
progression.
COP LAND has its strengths: its premise of a small town populated almost
exclusively of corrupt New York police officers is intriguing, and the
film's action sequences, including a nighttime car chase and a rooftop
fight scene are dynamic and well-shot by cinematographer Eric Edwards.
Prolific composer Howard Shore provides COP LAND with a striking, moody
score, and while she has a smallish role in the current context of the
film, Janeane Garafolo once again steals scenes as Deputy Cindy Betts, a
newcomer to the Garrison police force -- what a remarkable talent she is.
While it is somewhat disappointing that the climactic sequence in
COP LAND is a directly confrontational one, Mr. Mangold's inspired use of
sound in conjunction with this battle is effective, original and
striking.  However, COP LAND is ultimately hampered by its insufficient
rendering of each subplot.  It is of course possible to juggle several
subplots and a myriad of characters simultaneously -- Robert Altman's
films are proof enough of that -- but Mr. Mangold's characters are so
well drawn out and the subplots are of sufficient complexity that they
virtually cry out for a more detailed depiction than what is eventually
shown in this cut of the film; watching COP LAND feels somewhat like
watching a random one-hundred minutes of what should be a 140-minute
film.
As for Mr. Stallone, his performance is somewhat of a disappointment.
His 38-pound weight-gain to portray Sheriff Freddy Heflin has been
well-publicized in the media, and his performance is more understated
and self-contained than any of his other recent performances, yet Mr.
Stallone is not particularly successful in depicting his character's
mental and emotional anguish -- Freddy has been transfixed with Liz
(Annabella Sciorra), the wife of tempermental cop Joey Randone (Peter
Berg) ever since he rescued her in an automobile accident which caused
his partial deafness, yet Mr. Stallone's method of portrayal this
onscreen consists mostly of staring vacantly into space, a glimmer of
wistfulness peeking out from behind his eyes, while his character's
increasing unease with the shady goings-on with the corrupt New York
police officers, led by Ray Donlan (Harvey Keitel), which run the town
is also ineffectively depicted.  Mr. Stallone is not great, or even
particularly good, in COP LAND, but he takes a solid step forward in
terms of regaining his credibility with the general public as a bonafide
actor.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"Let's hurt somebody." - Aaron Eckhart, IN THE COMPANY OF MEN

Author
Patrick McCarty
I walked out of "Copland" with a very excited feeling above filmmaking that
I haven't felt since seeing "Fargo"...Not that Copland is on par with
Fargo, but nonetheless, I have been so routinely dissapointed lately (see
my reviews for Faceoff, Michael, and Shine, for example at
http://w3.one.net/~mcpilot/movies.htm) that I am sometimes squeamish about
spending the $7.50. 
Not so Copland. It was a thoroughly enjoyable film which should, in my
opinion, earn Stallone a Best Actor Nomination. Yes, I will be the first to
say it. 
THe film is set in Garrisson, NJ, a small extention of New York City in
which numerous NYPD Cops have come to settle to get away from the crime and
noise of the Big Apple. Garrisson was created, ostensibly, BY the cops, FOR
the cops. It acts as a haven for the most crooked of New York's finest, the
leader of which is Ray Donlan (Harvey Keitel)
The plot emerges slowly, as does the film, but frankly, that was a nice
change of pace from the usual summer fare that tries to top every last
scene with one which is louder and more violent. A young cop, Murray
"Superboy" Babich (So named because he singlehandedly saved a family of
children) gets himself into a troubling situation when he impulsively kills
two young joyriders. Donlan, Murray's uncle and a fellow police officer,
immediately covers up the mistake by planting weapons in the victims' car,
and by making it appear as though "Superboy" took his own life by diving
off the George Washinton Bridge. 
In reality, Ray is hiding his nephew out in Garrisson, until the Internal
Affairs Investigation cools off. The IA Investigator, Moe Tilden (Robert
Dinero) knows instinctively that something is amiss with the killing of the
two suspects. He has evidence that there were not armed, that the evidence
was planted, and that Murray is alive somewhere. If he can find Murray, he
can prove a cover up, and he can finally nail Donlan and is on-the-take
cronies. 
That's anough about the plot. It's invoved enough that it would take a
significant investment in bandwidth to explain it fully.  
Sylvester Stallone plays Freddie Heflin, the local sherriff of Garrisson.
His was essentially an appointed post, handed to him by Donlan, because a)
Freddy could not get the job he truly longed for, that of an NYPD officer,
due to deafness in one ear caused by a childhood accident and b) knowing
that he wanted more than anything than to be a cop, Donlan knows that
Freddy will stay out of the way of the crooked business being conducted in
the city, around the round table at the cop's 4-Aces bar. 
Stallone is EXCELLENT. His portrayl of the unassertive, pushover Freddy is
instantly convincing.  You do not see a single trace of the teeth gritting,
groaning Rambo that Stallone made famous, in fact, you forget you watching
Stallone at all. He brings Freddy to life in the very first scene, an
overweight, bumbling cop wannabe, who hangs out at the 4-aces but is
neither welcomed nor shunned. He's Donlan's sycophant, standing idly by, as
the corruption goes on under his nose, relegated to solving discarded
garbage problems and jacknifed trucks. 
Stallone draws a very convincing picture of Freddy. His life is full of
regrets, his movements those of a beaten man, laying around in his spare
time listening to wistful Springstine. The movie is basically the story of
how Freddy slowly awakens to his conscience and ultimately, tired of being
dressed down by the crooked cops, decides to BE a cop and do the right
thing. 
Now, don't get me wrong, this is not the moment where the music swells and
Stallone ties the red bandana on and proceeds to blow the whole Police
Dept. away without missing a shot. The Director (James Mangold, who also
wrote) resists this temptation and suceeds.  That is where this movie, in
fact, succeeds, in that the Freddy's character is true, from start to
finish. You will see what I mean in the very last scene. This scene is
critical in keeping the movie true to itself. Freddy does not go on to
marry the girl, to become chief detective of the NYPD's 37th precinct. 
All of the actors do a great job, especially Ray Liotta, who, in my humble
opinion, could have won the OverActor's Anonymous Award for his bizzare
turn in "Turbulence", and here, finds the right blend of manic corruption
and a conscience trying to get out. Keitel is perfect, and Dinero is his
usual excellent. And, while I am a fan of Janeane Garofalo, she took a
rather small part here, although I suspect because she was interested in
being a part of this film for no other reason.
A word of caution--this film is involved. There are subplots and
backstories aplenty, that will all come together at the end. It's not like
"Face Off" where the set up took 1 minute and you got bullets for the
remaining 120. This film requires some work on your part, to keep up and
resolve. Oddly, some of the same critics who are complaining about the
numerous side stories (Which are, in my opinion, all relevant) are the same
folks who loved "Get Shorty".  It took a slide rule and a plumb-bob to keep
all of the weaves in THAT film straight!
"Copland" is a very very good film. Stallone has shown that he can act.
Take it in for no other reason than for that performance. 

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Sylvester Stallone, Harvey Keitel, Ray Liotta, Robert DeNiro, 
      Janeane Garofalo, Michael Rapaport, Robert Patrick, Peter Berg, 
      Anabella Sciorra, Cathy Moriarty
Director: James Mangold
Producers: Cary Woods, Cathy Konrad, and Ezra Swerdlow
Screenplay: James Mangold
Cinematography: Eric Edwards
Music: Howard Shore
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
     Much has been written about Sylvester Stallone's return to serious 
acting in COPLAND.  It's an entirely different matter, however, to watch 
the action superstar in this new role than it is to read and hear about 
it.  In COPLAND, Stallone plays Freddy Heflin, the shy, overweight, 
rather dumb sheriff of the tiny town of Garrison, New Jersey.  The most 
noticeable thing about Freddy isn't the caliber of his gun, it's the 
size of his paunch.  And, every time Freddy confronts COPLAND's villain, 
Ray Donlan (Harvey Keitel), something extraordinary happens:  he meekly 
backs down.  It's a strange thing to see Stallone playing someone whose 
primary characteristic is impotence.
     While this is probably the actor's best turn since ROCKY, and he 
does a credible job that may earn him the opportunity to do more 
"serious" work in the future, Stallone's performance is outshone on all 
sides.  That's not a knock against him; it's an acknowledgment that the 
supporting cast is about the best that it can be.  Although Keitel's 
one-dimensional, over-the-top portrayal isn't all that impressive, both 
Ray Liotta and Robert DeNiro manage to craft well-developed, interesting 
characters.  In smaller roles, Janeane Garofalo, Robert Patrick, and 
Anabella Sciorra are equally impressive.
     Writer/director James Mangold, who earned the chance to make 
COPLAND on the strength of his debut feature, HEAVY, uses the same kind 
of main character here as in the previous film.  Freddy is a lonely 
loner -- insecure about himself and his place in the world, and always 
dreaming of a woman and a life he cannot have.  In HEAVY, Pruitt Taylor 
Vince longed for Liv Tyler.  Here, the woman who represents Freddy's 
perfect female is Liz Randone (Anabella Sciorra).  The relationship 
between these two is one of COPLAND's most fascinating elements, but it 
lacks any kind of resolution, and that represents one of several 
frustrating aspects of the film's ending.
     Ultimately, COPLAND is just another story of police corruption in 
New York City -- a Western transposed into modern times.  The film takes 
place in Garrison, a tiny northern New Jersey town (population 1280) 
that has been dubbed "Copland" because of the number of NYPD officers 
who live there with their families.  Ray and his cronies basically own 
Garrison, due in large part to Freddy's passivity.  He's "a wannabe who 
couldn't get on the force because of his bad ear," and who isn't willing 
to do anything to rock the boat.  But Ray is a bad cop -- he has his 
fingers in a number of illegal pies, and he has connections so high up 
that not even an internal affairs officer, Moe Tilden (DeNiro), can 
touch him without concrete evidence.  
     COPLAND opens with a dynamic sequence that includes a wildly 
unpredictable car chase that ends with a young cop (Michael Rapaport) 
killing two men, then apparently jumping to his death from the George 
Washington Bridge.  Only he's not really dead; he's being hidden by his 
uncle, Ray, who doesn't want his own illegal undertakings exposed as a 
result of an internal affairs investigation.  When Freddy notices that 
the rookie is still alive, despite a police funeral and full news 
coverage of his death, the sheriff unwittingly becomes a player in a 
high stakes game that involves warring factions of a the NYPD, the mayor 
of New York, and a high-ranking organized crime figure.
     COPLAND is an energetic movie, but the plot is a little too 
ambitious.  The interaction between individual characters is often 
highly enjoyable, but, when you try to take in the entire story, 
implausibilites leap to the surface (not the least of which is how 
easily a high-profile individual can be presumed dead with the media 
swarming around and everyone in one town knowing that he's still alive).  
The film's logic is more than a little suspect, and quite a few plot 
threads are left dangling by the time that the final reel is over.  Late 
reshoots may have given COPLAND a better sense of closure, but they 
don't address all the unanswered questions.  With that in mind, it 
should be recognized that this is a movie to be appreciated for 
individual scenes, some of which are dynamic and powerful.  And there is 
a certain visceral satisfaction in the resolution, as is often the case 
in a cop movie.
     In addition to the high caliber of acting, another thing that sets 
COPLAND apart from an average entry into the genre is Mangold's 
dialogue, which sparkles with intelligence.  The director may not have 
Tarantino's gift for words, but his characters speak reasonably, not 
like they're reading from a sheet of paper.  Even the supporting 
players, like Janeane Garofalo's officer Cindy Betts, say and do things 
in a believable manner.  As I indicated, the overall story has problems, 
but Mangold is a master of the moment, and he gets us to care about the 
characters enough that we don't spend one-hundred minutes obsessing over 
flaws.  As a result, COPLAND is a compelling, if imperfect, motion 
picture.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@mail.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Brian Takeshita
The local sheriff of a small town has turned a blind eye to its criminal
inhabitants for years.  The bad guys are bad, all right, but they've also
kept a certain kind of order.  The sheriff figures that as long as worse
criminal elements are kept at bay, and peace is the rule, there's no use
making waves.  Then one day, the sheriff's conscience begins to bother him,
and he remembers why he became sheriff in the first place.  Inspired by the
appearance of another law enforcement officer who has continued the fight
for justice in the midst of corruption, the sheriff resolves to persevere in
the face of overwhelming odds and fight for right once again, culminating in
a showdown at dawn.
Sound like a classic western?  Something with Gary Cooper?  John Wayne?
Actually, it's Sylvester Stallone, and the small town is in modern day New
Jersey.
Yes, you heard me right, and no, I'm not off my rocker.  The movie is James
Mangold's COP LAND, which plays itself out like a western for our time.  The
town is called Garrison, aptly named because it is populated by New York
City transit cops who have gotten out of the perilous Big Apple and built
themselves a suburban community across the river in New Jersey (so maybe the
movie is an "eastern").  Stallone plays Sheriff Freddy Heflin, a
slow-witted, overweight man with one bad ear that has prevented him from
becoming NYPD himself.  With cops all around, Heflin's biggest job is
finding out who's been dumping trash in front of other people's yards.  The
guy doesn't even give out parking tickets, since most of the cars belong to
cops.  "Real" cops.
It seems most of the NYPD living in Garrison has their hand in something,
and the cop who controls it all is Ray Donlan (Harvey Keitel).  Donlan is
something of a celebrity and power broker within the NYPD - everybody knows
him, and he gets what he wants.  Donlan's nephew Murray Babitch (Michael
Rappaport), also a cop, gets into trouble for shooting a couple of unarmed
black youths on the George Washington Bridge, and Donlan covers it up by
faking Babitch's suicide and hiding him out.  Internal affairs investigator
Moe Tilden (Robert De Niro) suspects Donlan's activities and asks Heflin for
help, but Donlan gets the investigation called off by one phone call to the
New York City mayor.  With Tilden's hands tied, Heflin alone must uncover
the plot and bring Babitch in.
As I'm sure other reviewers will note, this is easily Stallone's best
performance since ROCKY.  He plays a character who is understated because
the script calls for it, but is even more so because we don't expect it.
This is Sylvester Stallone, after all, and here he is backing down even
before a confrontation develops.  To watch him play this character is
somewhat shocking at first, but due to the merit of his performance, we
quickly accept him in the role and move on.  Even better, Stallone takes the
shy Heflin and gradually increases his assertiveness and alters his meek
complacency over the course of the film.  You want character development?
This is it.
Stallone is surrounded by a wealth of acting talent.  I mean, come on -
Keitel and De Niro (hey, I just realized that they were both in TAXI DRIVER)
should be enough said, but Ray Liotta, Annabella Sciorra, and even Robert
Patrick (that's right, the T-1000 from TERMINATOR 2:  JUDGMENT DAY) are no
slouches, either.  Liotta plays Gary Figgis, Heflin's friend and a cop who
happens to be fed up with Donlan and his flunkies.  Sciorra is Liz Randone,
whom Heflin saved from drowning years ago as a teenager.  His act of heroics
is the reason why he's partially deaf and can't live the life he's always
wanted to.  Patrick plays Jack Duffy, another cop and Donlan's right-hand
man.  All actors portray their characters well and contribute to the
advancement of the plot.
Unfortunately, with all this talent, you're left wanting more than what
you're given.  You want to see more screen time for some of the
actors/characters.  Most characters in the film are interesting, and at a
slightly clipped running time of 104 minutes, there could have been enough
leeway to give them the extra scenes.  It's too bad, since a couple of the
plot threads, like Heflin's relationship with Liz, and Tilden's
investigation into Donlan's mob connections, could have easily been explored
further.
Another problem is the film's closeness to a western.  Because we know what
happens in most westerns, once we recognize the pattern in COP LAND, we know
what the outcome will be.  At that point, almost all of the tension and
anticipation drops out the bottom, leaving only a curiosity regarding the
technicalities of how the inevitable conclusion will be played.
COP LAND may not be a masterpiece, but it does showcase some solid acting
that's worth seeing.  I just hope Stallone hangs on to the dramatic bug
again after such a long hiatus.  Given the right circumstances, he'll
surprise you with how good he is.
Note:  Stallone reportedly gained between 20 and 40 pounds for this role,
and he's been lauded for this.  How come when I gain a couple of pounds,
people just tell me I'm starting to look a little thick?  Oh, the injustices
of the world....

Author
Brian Finkelstein
[My understanding is that this film is still unfinished, so keep that in
mind.  -Moderator]
OK, here's the deal guys.  I normally would not review a movie for the
masses, but in this case I felt that I needed too because I saw the
movie several months before any of the normal NET critics will so I
must share my insights but I'll keep it short.
Copland is a movie starring DeNiro and Stallone along with several other
big names.   Basically it's about a bunch of city cops who spend their
free time in Garrison New Jersey and are all thoroughly corrupt.  They
keep the town safe, but their bring their warped sense of fairness and
justice with them across the symbolic bridge.
This flick has many, many problems.  First is the acting of Sheriff
Freddie, played by Stallone, who allows the big city cops to do
whatever they want.  He spends the entire movie with a decidedly
retarded expression on his face.  The character was supposed to be deaf
in one ear, and it is possible to image Stallone reading the script and
thinking to himself, "He's so stupid that he can't hear!  I'll play
this role as if he were retarded."  Stallone stands with his jaw agar
for at least 1 hour of this 1-1/2 hour movie.
Aside from Stallone's acting, the rest of the problems are entirely
script related.  There are seemingly dozens of sideplots relating to the
Mafia and love interests that are never explained or resolved.  They are
brought up, explained quickly, thought about for a second, and then
forgotten never to be brought up again.  Also, the fact that there are
dozens of characters that are constantly in motion and are never truly
memorable was less then helpful.  Several times during the movie I found
myself turning to my friends and asking-- who's that?  who's that?
All in all, this movie had little merit except for a slightly
entertaining sequence in the beginning showing the parallels between
city and suburban police life.  I have intentionally given away very
little of the plot as the movie has yet to be released so changes can
easily be made, but this movie was too far gone... I urge each and every
one of you reading this, don't see the movie-- it's not worth the seven
dollars.
This is the first review i've done, i'd love to hear how i'm doing...

Author
Seth Bookey
  Seen on 20 September 1997 at the Cineplex Baronet Coronet for free.
   What has an ensemble cast, pointless flashbacks, a love of policemen,
   90 minutes to bore an audience to death, has only two funny moments,
   one overblown dramatic moment, and stinks? No, it's not Mayor
   Giuliani's campaign. It's Cop Land. A lot of people were leaving the
   theatre within the first half hour. Of course, it was free to anyone
   who was there for the preview. I would have left, but I rarely leave a
   theatre, and besides, I had to see if this would be the worst movie I
   have seen since Excess Baggage.
   Cop Land would probably read better than it films. The high-concept
   premise here is that Garrison, NJ (not it's real name) is a town of
   1280 people, mostly police (all of whom are white) and their families
   and embroiled in a deep cover up. Already, the prospect of watching
   corrupt straight white men is unappealing; I could just watch the news
   every night and review that.
   Sheriff Freddy Heflin (Sylvester Stallone) is the "law" in
   Garrison, and he has a childlike trust in those who have empowered him
   to guard the American Dream. The worst thing that happens to him is
   bumping his nose on the steering wheel while swerving to miss a deer
   caught in his headlights. But the American Dream, in this case, is
   built an a lie. Oooooo. How shocking. Corrupt cops (Harvey Keitel, Ray
   Liotta, Peter Berg, etc.) work in New York City, which they hate, and
   come home to be above the law to a town across the George Washington
   Bridge, which, oh so ironically, overlooks New York.
   The plot thickens when hero cop "Superboy" (Michael Rappoport) screws
   up and is forced fake his own death after killing two delinquent,
   reckless, but ultimately harmless black youth. Lots of subplots and
   "buddy boy" nonsense ensues. The film takes its sweet time and when
   Freddy finally figures out he is living in a gangster movie, it is too
   late to care. That he is deaf in one ear, the result of saving the
   love of his teen years, who married some other putz, keeps him off the
   NYPD he reveres, and out of our sympathies.
   Ultimately, Cop Land is something that would have been a great book,
   but is in fact, a dreadful movie. There are simply too many characters
   and subplots to keep track of or care about. I watch soap operas and
   read 19th Century Russian novels, but this was too much of a
   challenge. There are so many other ways to watch stories like these,
   and one springs to mind. NYPD Blue. Tuesday nights on ABC, 10 Eastern,
   9 Central. Slow and steady builds audience interest. Throwing dressed
   up pigs (no pun intended) in the form of an All-Star cast into this
   mishmash was a real waste. The only actor missing from this mix was
   Steve Buscemi.
   One of Three Woman Shown in the Cast: Cathy Moriarity, who is often
   seen holding a drink or looking like she ought to be.
   Most Annoyed Actor with a Bad Haircut: Robert De Niro as the very
   exasperated Internal Affairs officer with a very very very bad
   haircut.
   Smartest Actor: Janeane Garofolo, as the Sheriff's Deputy who does the
   only logical thing in the movie; she leaves town.
   Best Ironic Line: Ray Liotta tells Stallone that there are two kinds
   of people in this world: Video game players and pinball players. I
   guess those were the intended audience members.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html
