Title
Review for Beetlejuice (1988)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
David Wilcock
BEETLEJUICE (1988)
STARRING MICHAEL KEATON, GEENA DAVIS AND ALEC BALDWIN
DIRECTED BY TIM BURTON
RATED (15) IN THE UK, (PG) IN USA
A WARNER BROTHERS (THE GEFFEN COMPANY) RELEASE
Tim Burtons comedy-horror classic. A happy couple (Davis and Baldwin) while
shopping in a country town, happen to die, from their car falling off a
bridge. They comes back to haunt their house, yet no one can see them,  Now
that there house is empty, there estate agent (who's been trying to get
them to sell) uses this oppurtunity to sell the house off. However, the new
family have different ideas. While the husband (Jeffery Jones) and the
daughter (Winona Ryder, who was 15!) like it as it is, the wife (Catherine
O'Hara) and her designer want it changed. Davis and Baldwin aren't pleased
about this, so they try to scare them out. They're not good enough,
however, so they hire a 'Beetlegeuse', (Michael Keaton,) to scare them out.
What follows is a mad rollarcoaster ride.
The secret to this film enjoyment is it's outrageous speacial effects. It's
more like watching some whacked out cartoon than an movie. Although blandly
directed by Burton, some of his scenes are near classic (the Harry
Belafonte round the table, for example) But the effects really do add
something. Watch Davis rip off her face! Gasp as Baldwin runs around with
no head! They really are quite special.
But of course, the best thing about this film is Keaton. He is brilliant.
Not in this film for nearly long enough, when he IS onscreen, the film sky
rockets. He has this beautifully perverted voice which he uses so well.
Davis and Baldwin also do a good job as the dead couple, and they case
worker is also very funny. Jones and O'Hara do an excellent job as the
living couple, and Ryder is suitably weird enough as the cooky daughter.
Another element that adds to this film is Danny Elfmans fantastic score.
Very gothic, and very effective. Of course, Harry Belafonte also helps to
make the score an sucess.
Overall, this film mainly depends on the performances and effects, and
thankfully these are both good. The film runs at a resonable length aswell,
90 mins, so you won't get bored. Recommended.

Author
Max Scheinin
Over and over again he takes bizzare premises and makes blockbusters. 
Beetlejuice isn't a perfect movie--but it's an entertaining one. It's
uneven and poorly maintained and badly edited and the main character (
Beetlejuice played by Michael Keaton ) should have been completely rooted
out. I love this movie. It's offbeat, but so is all his work. And it has a
genuine sense of wit. 
Here's the movie's outline: Two young lovers who have just been married
move into a house. In these first moments there's a lovely little sense of
whimsy and magic. One day they go to town to pick up some groceries. As
they're riding back they ram into the side of a bridge. Their car is
balanced over the side of a river courtesy of a plank of wood. There's a
dog on the other side, holding them up. Then he hops off and - boom!  -
down they go. Yep, they're dead in an instant and they don't know it.
I don't want to go into detail but this is a marvelous comedy about the
afterlife--a good rental for when you're feeling bizzare.

Author
Jim Freund
     BEETLEJUICE is a surprisingly enjoyable flick.  The story (somewhat
reminiscent of Thorne Smith's writing) follows a recently deceased young
married couple (Alec Baldwin and Geena Davis) who haven't been dead long enough
to properly follow their "Manual for the Recently Deceased."  They may not
leave their house for fear of the netherworld they find outside, complete with
Arrakis-like sandworms.  Ere long, an obnoxious (living) couple (well-played by
Jeffrey Jones and Catherine O'Hara) move in, and immediately begin to wreak
havoc with the afterlives of our protagonists.  They also have a teenage
daughter (Winona Ryder) who is straight out of Charles Addams' cartoons.  Due
to her morbidity, she may communicate with the ghosts, who otherwise have
trouble making themselves seen or heard.  Consulting their manual, the couple
seek help on their situation by going to a case worker at Spirit Central for
advice.  All suicides become bureaucrats (love it!), and they find little
relief after waiting in line for two months.  However, they have seen ads for a
"bio-exorcist" (he exorcises the living) named Betelgeuse (Michael Keaton),
whom the case worker has warned them about.  He is a ne'er-do-well, and only
adds to their problems.  Now they must rid themselves of him as well as resolve
their situation with the living family and their spiritualist friends.
     The film is fast-paced and genuinely funny.  Much better than I'd
expected.  It does slow down near the end, and it is also evident that some
important plot-telling moments were edited out of the finale in an attempt to
pick it up.  I have also heard that there were other post-production changes,
including the original premise that every time the couple leaves their house,
the Netherworld is different.  Apparently some found this too confusing, and
the producers dumbed it up.  I'd have preferred it left alone.
     The performances overall work, but are not extraordinary.  Robert Goulet
(who has a minor part) must have an aging portrait hidden away--he looks
younger here than he did in Atlantic City.  Michael Keaton carries himself
adequately (a la original Saturday Night Live) in his only good role since
MR. MOM.
     BEETLEJUICE was credibly directed by Tim Burton (Pee-Wee's Big Adventure).
The score is by Danny Elfman, and is a cross between Danse Macabre and his work
with Oingo Boingo.  I enjoy his work more and each each time I come across it.
Four classics by Harry Belafonte are featured, including a *funny* sequence in
which some dinner guests (Dick Cavett among them) become possessed, and find
themselves singing and dancing to "Day-O".  The art direction makes this film
worth seeing on a large screen, (the sound is noteworthy as well,) and the
upscale special effects are very good (though there are minor flaws).
     The film is rated PG which indicates that there is no on-screen splatter
or blood, but I would not advise taking a young child.  There are a few scary
moments, and a lot of disembodied and mutilated characters.  (Such as the case
worker who puffs on a cigarette--and the smoke comes out her throat.)  While
they are not gross, a youngster would be likely to get genuinely frightened.  
This should have gotten a PG-13.  Nevertheless, I definitely recommend this
one.

Author
Craig Good
     Did you know that people who commit suicide become civil servants in the
afterlife?  Do you know how to pronounce "Betelgeuse"?  You would if You had
seen BEETLEJUICE, the latest from Tim Burton.  If you saw PEE WEE'S BIG
ADVENTURE just try to picture a feature full of Large Marge characters and
you'll be close.  But this is in many ways more like Burton's wonderful short
"Vincent" than PEE WEE was.
     In fact, this is more like Tim Burton than his last feature.  PEE WEE'S
BIG ADVENTURE was Tim Burton at the service of Paul Reubens, while BEETLEJUICE
is Tim Burton at the service of Tim Burton.  For that reason I can recommend
this movie to people who liked PEE WEE, and also to those who hated it.  It's
the same in the right ways and different in the right ways.  Confused?  I'll
make it simple: BEETLEJUICE is a much better film.
     John Lasseter, one of Burton's classmates at Cal Arts, once said that
being a film director could be a waste of Tim's talents as a designer.  I'm
happy to say that his inventive, playful, slightly dark sense of design is a
major asset of the movie.  Another asset is the premise:  A newlydead couple
haunting their New England home want to frighten off the neurotic New Yorkers
who move in down stairs.  The trouble is they aren't very good at it.  How they
get help is the crux of the movie, and I won't spoil any of it for you.
     BEETLEJUICE is funny, well-crafted and features a wonderful cast.  Even
without Michael Keaton's manic-oppressive performance you'd have your money's
worth, so when he does appear it's a real bonus.  All but the most
nightmare-prone tots should get a kick out of the movie.  If they weren't
scared by Large Marge they'll be fine.  A big part of the fun is that Burton
delivers plenty of adult humor while still delivering enough good physical
comedy to keep the kiddies in giggles.  Now we just need to get the Academy to
create a special award for Best Use of a Harry Belafonte Album in a Motion
Picture Soundtrack...

Author
Jeff Meyer
     Well, I'd give BEETLEJUICE a rather high rating, but I have to point out
something first.  I've seen the director, Tim Burton's, other work, namely the
Disney shorts "Vincent" and "Frankenweenie" (I exclude PEE WEE'S BIG ADVENTURE
only because I think that film conformed to Paul Reuben's concept more than
Burton's), and I have loved his sense of style and humor.  It's silliness, but
silliness that draws upon an almost cartoon- like attitude and a bright
lampooning of certain cinematic fashions.  "Vincent" had send-ups of the
Corman/Price Edgar Allen Poe works, and "Frankenweenie" contained howlers from
the James Whales FRANKENSTEIN films -- an impressive achievement, considering
how well Mel Brooks mined this subject in YOUNG FRANKENSTEIN.
     BEETLEJUICE is no exception; it's got more imagination and cleverness (in
both visually and in the script) than anything else I've seen this year.  I
wouldn't highlight anything for you here, because it's too much fun to discover
what Burton has done with ghost story conventions.  For the most part, he tends
to provide a pretty logical hierarchy for the land of the undead, though he
leaves a few things (like the Sandworms and the fates of several characters) up
in the air (ha-ha).  Most of all, though, the film is a whirling dervish of
visual gags; while the special effects are primitive at points, the imagination
with which they are used makes up for any lack of technical shine.  If you like
Warner Bros. cartoons, I really think you'll like this; it contains a lot of
features which are personally appealing but not universally appealing.  Let us
just say that if you liked his earlier short films, you'll like this one.
     The last scene (Belafonte was never so good!) will last me for a long,
long time -- what a bizarre, beautifully goofy fantasy!  A big thumbs-up for
me -- worth $6, or twice at $3.50.
-----
Footnote:  Saw BEETLEJUICE for the second time last night, and whatever
reservations I had about the film in my previous film, scratch them.  The sound
was much better during this showing, and being able to comprehend more of the
lines (especially Keaton's), I think the show was firing on all eight
cylinders.  A $5.00 film, easily, and my favorite movie so far this year.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Excuse me if this review is not very well constructed.  I have to write
it very, very quickly.  I just saw BEETLEJUICE, an extremely forgettable
fantasy film.  So much so that even as I walked out of the theater, large
pieces of the film were being forgotten forever.  Why is BEETLEJUICE so
forgettable?  I guess because the producers had so much budget and so little
story.  It is not that it was a bad story.  It was co-authored by Michael
McDowell, one of the leading modern horror writers, but it was about four
pages worth of story and the rest was just lathered-on special effects.
Remembering the film entails remembering the list of special effects, mostly
totally gratuitous, that were laid on at at various points in the minimal
story.
     The story of BEETLEJUICE involves...(oh, rats.  What was it about?  oh,
yes!) a young couple who live in a rustic little town and love their old
house.  They are in a car accident and are killed.  Now is this where they
see the ghost with the shrunken head and the smoker who was charred to a
cinder?  No, I think that's later in the plot.  Oh, well, it doesn't really
matter.  Anyway, they go back to their house and can get in but can't get
out again.  Yeah, I'm pretty sure this is where they had the alien landscape
special effect and the giant sandworm.  That's what they face if they leave
the house.  Wait, that doesn't make sense--they were just outside the house.
Well, I guess making sense doesn't matter.  And then, yes, that's it, some
not very nice people buy the house and start to remodel it.  The ghosts
don't like that, so try to scare the new owners.  Now is this where they rip
their faces off altogether or is this where they just stretch their faces
into funny shapes?  Doesn't matter, I guess.  So where does Beetlejuice fit
into this?  Well, first off there is nobody named "Beetlejuice."  There is
someone named Betelgeuse, like the star, and that's pronounced "Beetle
juice," but then why isn't the film called BETELGEUSE?  Darned if I know!
Anyway, Betelgeuse fits in later in the plot.  But don't worry about the
plot.  The filmmakers didn't.
     The star of the film is Geena Davis who is attractive enough to
occasionally upstage the special effects.  She may be familiar from
television work or from her role in the remake of THE FLY.  Alec Baldwin is
forgettable as her husband.  Jeffrey Jones as the new owner is used to being
upstaged by special effects as in HOWARD THE DUCK.  And Michael Keaton was
on hand as (uh, give me a second), oh yes, in the title role.  No, wait,
there was nobody in the title role.  Well, anyway, give this tournee of
mediocre special effects a -1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
