Title
Review for Falling Down (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Life is a sort of social contract.  You put in your work at school and
then in your career.  You pay your dues and you expect to be paid back with
a reasonable level of happiness.  You expect to reap the rewards of your
work.  You expect to live in a society where the rules seem to make sense
and where justice prevails.  And, of course, all those expectations are in
varying degrees wrong.  If you walk places where you have a right to walk,
you are very liable to be beaten and robbed.  If you go into a convenience
store, you very often find prices are just too darn high.  The hamburger may
look good and juicy in the picture, but when you actually get it, it is
flat, dried out, and unsavory.
     Michael Douglas plays "D-Fens," a 30-something nerd with a crewcut who
by his accounting is just not getting his fair share out of life.  His
marriage has gone sour, his career has gone sour, and life just seems to
have picked him to dump on.  On a  hot day in Los Angeles with traffic at a
total standstill, he abandons his car and sets off on foot to get to his
daughter's birthday party and at the same time just let everybody know that
he is fed up.  Today he is going to make sure he gets satisfaction.
Overcharge him, and be prepared to have him take your store apart.  Push him
and he is going to push back.  Cheat him only in peril of your life.  Then
there is Prendergast (played by Robert Duvall).  On Prendergast's last day
of police work, he becomes fascinated by a string of incidents that he can
plot in a line on a map.  Somebody is fighting back against all the
indignities of life, the same ones that frustrate Prendergast, and
Prendergast has to stop him before he gets in serious trouble.
     FALLING DOWN is an angry howl against the deterioration in the quality
of life we all face.  Joel Schumacher directing from Ebbe Roe Smith's script
has created a villain cut from the same cloth as Bernard Goetz.  It is hard
not to sympathize with Douglas's angry man.  It would be easy to identify
Douglas's character with one political wing or the other, but as he goes
from venting his anger on a Korean grocer, to Latino gang members, to a
neo-Nazi, and finally to rich, selfish, over-paid whites, we see Douglas as
surprisingly center-of-the-road.  He is a Moderate who has run fresh out of
moderation.  This is a protest film that could have been made in the 1960s.
(My wife, I, and Vincent Canby independently thought to compare it to THE
SWIMMER.) Only toward the end does FALLING DOWN lose its power and become
somewhat prosaic.  But the film is angry and takes chances few Hollywood
films are anxious to take anymore.  I rate it a high +1 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Bill (Michael Douglas) is having a bad morning.  He's stuck in his
car in a traffic jam, his air conditioner isn't putting out any cold
air, his windows won't work, and there's a fly buzzing around his head.
All this is enough to make him snap.  Just like that, he gets out of
his car, leaving it behind in the middle of the road, and sets off for
home on foot.  His cross-town trek quickly turns violent when he feels
his rights as a consumer and citizen are violated, and a number of
potentially-lethal weapons fall into his hands.  Meanwhile, police
officer Martin Prendergast (Robert Duvall) is going through a
life-crisis of his own.  How he deals with it not only puts him squarely
on the side of the law, but on a collision course with Bill.
     Some of the appeal of FALLING DOWN is doubtless the idea that an
average, middle-aged, white collar man can be empowered against the
numerous annoyances that the world throws at him.  Hopefully there
aren't many people out there who will resort to the lengths that Bill
goes to, but it gives a measure of vicarious enjoyment to watch him
dole out punishment to the people that insult, snub, and otherwise
aggravate him.  These are things that, at one time or another, we've
longed to say and do (a whole psychological treatise could be written
on this subject).  Until things get too violent, that is ....  While
it's easy to sympathize with punching a loud-mouthed, profane man in
the mouth, shooting someone to death, no matter how despicable they
might be, is another matter.
     The premise and early execution of FALLING DOWN are tremendous.
The idea is original and the filming of the scene where Bill snaps is
imaginative and evocative.  We can feel the heat, the tension, and the
building rage.  When he gets out of the car, it's as much a relief to us
as it is to him.  The movie's pacing, especially during the first half,
is on-target.
     Also, some of the early scenes with Bill are cathartic, but as the
violence of his attacks builds and the "righteousness" of his purpose
becomes fuzzy, the audience's sympathy for him erodes--even though he
never directly harms anyone who could be described as "good" or
"innocent."  Another thing that dissociates us from the character is
that we learn that he isn't as normal as we first thought.  Bill has
some deep problems that make it apparent that his snapping isn't a
spur-of-the-moment thing.  While we never lose our emotional attachment
to Bill, it isn't the same toward the end as in the beginning.
     As a counterpoint to Bill, we're given Robert Duvall's Prendergast,
who is in many ways a similar character.  He too feels the weight of
life pressing down on him and yearns to let out a shout.  But his
rebellion takes a more normal, natural course.  We understand
Prendergast more than we feel for him, but that's the nature of his
personality.  Bill has all the emotional volatility; Prendergast has
stability and sanity.
     As a thriller, FALLING DOWN works most of the time because of the
depth of its characters.  The plot is not especially remarkable.  In
fact, on some occasions, it comes dangerously close to a descent into
action/thriller cliches and formulas.  Fortunately, the performances of
Duvall and Douglas give this film greater strength than most movies of
the genre.
     The gallows humor also functions as a device to keep FALLING DOWN
rolling along.  The movie has such a slick sense of humor that it could
almost be considered a black comedy.  I think such a label would be a
misnomer, however, because of the film's breadth.  As FALLING DOWN
unfolds, numerous social statements are made.  Some are overt (such as
an incident with the neo-Nazi), but others are more subtle.  One of the
most disturbing scenes occurs when a young child teaches Bill how to use
a grenade launcher, claiming to have learned the lesson from television.
FALLING DOWN is replete with moments such as this, many of which are
uncomfortable because they strike a nerve.
     Indeed, the depth of issues dealt with by FALLING DOWN elevates it
above the normal shoot-'em-up film.  In many cases, the violence isn't
just for the sake of violence (although I'm sure the studio made no
attempt to dilute it).  There's more to this film than initially meets
the eye.  Sure, the viewer who wants to see a tightly-paced thriller
with a lot of gun-play and emotionally-satisfying moments won't be
disappointed, but the discerning, thinking movie-goer will find more
here than simple escapism.  FALLING DOWN has the power to disturb, and
if it takes a few wrong turns along the way, it should still be
applauded for the things it does--and tries to do--right.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     In the opening of 1993's FALLING DOWN, a man known mainly by his
vanity license plate name, D-FENS, has reached his breaking point.
Stuck in a traffic jam that goes on forever, his air-conditioning has
gone on the fritz, the kids in the school bus nearby are hanging out
their windows screaming and a pesky fly is driving him crazy.  Doing
what we all fantasize about, he walks out of his vehicle and declares
he's had it.  As his figure disappears on the horizon, his fellow
drivers are left dumbstruck as to what to make of this act of courage
or insanity.
     Dressed in a white shirt with a narrow tie and a plastic pocket
protector, D-FENS, played with a blend of grace and irascibility by
Michael Douglas, has a crew cut head that is drenched in sweat.  When
he walks into a convenience store owned by a Korean, he goes completely
berserk over the owner's inability to give him change.  Using the
owner's bat, he trashes the place for no reason other than deep seated
resentment of minorities as he suspects them of having stolen some of
his opportunities.
     When two Hispanic gang members pick him out to hold up, they find
they have chosen the wrong guy.  Although no Steven Seagal, Douglas's
fury imbues D-FENS with extraordinary strength.  In no time, D-FENS
becomes an efficient and unemotional killing machine attacking the
people he resents, which covers the vast majority of the residents of
Southern California where he lives.  With his pasty white skin and
bright white shirt, D-FENS stands out in the crowd of minorities that
populate most of the picture.
     D-FENS has no safe haven.  Lost, he wants to return to his
ex-wife's house for his daughter's birthday.  With the natural fear of
a deranged ex-husband, Barbara Hershey plays his jumpy ex-wife.
     His gripe is not confined to minorities.  When, one minute too
late, he enters a fast food restaurant, he finds that he can no longer
order breakfast from its excessively smiling personnel.  Grinning from
ear to ear, the clerk and her manager explain that they are not serving
breakfast anymore.  It is arguably in this scene when he most touches a
nerve in all of us.  Who among us has not been in a similar situation?
When he pulls out his machine gun, all of a sudden he can have the very
thing that was deemed impossible only seconds earlier.
     The beauty of Douglas's everyman performance is how polite he
remains to those shocked by his bizarre behavior.  His stiff, awkward
walk and his sad story leave the viewer with somewhat ambiguous
feelings about him.  One moment you hate him, but the next he begins to
generate some hidden sympathy, most notably in the fast food scene, but
also in others.
     In the cliched role of the cop on his last day on the job, Robert
Duvall plays a perpetually mild-mannered detective named Prendergast.
In contrast to D-FENS's seething anger, Prendergast has the relaxed
look of someone about to retire.  Unfazed, he enjoys his last day in
his war against criminals.  "I don't like you," his boss admits.  "You
know why?  You don't curse.  I don't trust a man who doesn't curse."
(The once beautiful and slender Tuesday Weld, now with rolls of fat,
plays Prendergast's clingy wife.)
     "I'm the bad guy?" asks a disbelieving D-FENS when finally trapped
by Prendergast.  "How did that happen?"  Swept up in a tide of events
that has engulfed his life, he has no idea what has happened to him.
He was just an average Joe Engineer only a month ago before he was laid
off.
     Part Orwellian morality tale and part bizarre little movie,
FALLING DOWN both fascinates and repulses the viewer.  It is an uneven
and frequently pretentious story that is never as important or dramatic
as it thinks it is.  Still, there is a hint of truth in every scene
even if overblown.  When the film ends, you realize that it has touched
hidden nerves in strange and unsettling ways.
     FALLING DOWN runs 1:48.  It is rated R for profanity and violence.
The film would be acceptable for teenagers.
