Title
Review for Wrongfully Accused (1998)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
James Brundage
    Leslie Neilson is the missing ingredient (and perhaps link) that makes
these things funny.  There's just something, the X-Factor, about him on
celluloid that we have all grown to love, that lets us accept parodies that
wouldn't fly with anyone else.  They let the inner child go free, let us
have fun, and let us laugh.  It's him, that's all.  Leslie Neilson, like a
brand name, making us laugh since 1980 (Airplane!).  Through the parody trio
of the Naked Gun films, to the bomb Spy Hard, to his series Police Squad,
the Airplane! Films, and a very little known nature special he did that
somehow ended up not making me flip the channel, he just does it perfectly.
He has a funny face; he has a funny pathos.  He's just a funny guy.
    This movie is the standard Neilson film, this time with him as Ryan
Harrison, who was wrongfully accused of murder.  You're thinking The
Fugitive, right?  Kind of.  Thrown into the mix are Mission: Impossible,
Patriot Games, The Usual Suspects, Lone Star, Clear and Present Danger, The
Day of the Jackal, 2001, The House of Yes, The Saint and Baywatch.  It
proves it, I guess, that the people who do these things actually have brains
to know the little touches in movies we've never heard of (or, at least most
of us).  There really is no plot to it, but, hell, it's fun.

Author
Joe Barlow
        You may find it hard to believe, but Leslie Nielsen was once a
highly-respected dramatic actor.  From 1949 to 1980, he appeared in
over 50 movies and countless television shows, including "M*A*S*H,"
"Forbidden Planet" and "The Big Valley."  The talented actor had a
well-deserved reputation for delivering solid, dramatic performances in
any role he played.
        But in 1980, Nielsen took a small part in the Zucker Brothers
comedy "Airplane," and his life and career changed virtually overnight.
In that film, Nielsen played a deadpan doctor whose services are
desperately needed when an entire airline crew comes down with food
poisoning in mid-flight.  Nielsen's performance was so clever and droll
that Hollywood immediately began offering him other comedic parts,
including the lead role in the short-lived TV series "Police Squad" and
its subsequent big-screen offspring, the "Naked Gun" films.  So
successful were these movies that Nielsen's "serious" work, which spans
five decades, has been all but forgotten.  It's a shame, too.  Although
I like "The Naked Gun" as much as anybody else, it would be wonderful to
see him do another film in which he plays something more substantial than
a loveable goofball.
        Nielsen's latest offering, "Wrongfully Accused," is a parody of
"The Fugitive," the popular Harrison Ford extravaganza.  Ryan Harrison
(Nielsen) is a famous concert violinist who is falsely accused of
murder.  After being arrested, he makes a daring escape while his...
        Oh, it doesn't matter.  You don't go see a film like this because
it contains a riveting plot; you go because you want to see how Nielsen's
character will screw up every situation he finds himself in THIS time.
Along the way, we know we'll see some of Nielsen's famous slapstick, and
catch a bunch of pop-culture injokes (I spotted parodies of "Casablanca,"
"Fatal Attraction," "Charlie's Angels," "Baywatch," "Fargo," "Braveheart,"
"Mission: Impossible," a none-too-subtle lampoon of "Titanic," and
perhaps a dozen others).  Oh, and we'll also get dialogue like:
        Since we can agree that the plot is pretty much irrelevant,
let's focus instead on the humor factor.  The good news: this is
probably Nielsen's funniest movie since "The Naked Gun" trilogy.  The
bad news: that doesn't say much.  His most recent outings, which
include "Spy Hard" and "Dracula: Dead and Loving It," have been nothing
more than painfully unfunny attempts to cash in on the Leslie Nielsen
name-brand.  Unfortunately, even an actor of Nielsen's considerable
ability cannot rescue a movie that's only pretending to go through the
motions; as such, these flicks fared dismally at the box office, and
were soundly shredded by fans and critics alike.
        Writer/director Pat Proft helms this latest offering, and he's
obviously done his homework: this movie feels a lot like "Police Squad,"
with gags flying fast and furious.  Unfortunately, it has the same problem
that most Nielsen comedies have: a lack of restraint.  Every gag that
Proft can think of is included, regardless of whether it's actually
funny or not; as such, the comedic effect is seriously compromised.
The rare witty line or clever joke is a sure sign that the next gag will
involve a man getting hit in the genitals or banged in the head with a
frying pan.  News flash: that's not funny, and never was.  Can someone
please explain to me why these kind of scenes are considered so
brilliantly hysterical that they deserve to appear in EVERY comedy film
that comes out?
        The good news is, the jokes that DO work actually work pretty
well.  Particularly noteworthy is the entire opening sequence (which
depicts Nielsen's character performing a violin concerto before an
appreciative audience), as well as a later gag involving a runaway
locomotive.  An additional scene demonstrates the wrong way to use
suntan lotion, a moment which for me was the movie's biggest laugh.
        All in all, though, the film is nothing new, and Nielsen stays
comfortably within the territory he's staked out since "Airplane."
Apparently he's happy there; I just heard that he's signed on to do two
more comedies: "Titanic Too: It Missed the Iceberg," and "2001: A Space
Travesty."  Zounds.  Here's hoping that they're edited a little more
liberally than their predecesers were.  As it is, even though it runs a
mere 90 minutes, "Wrongfully Accused" seems to drag on a bit too
long.
        Oh, by the way, don't believe the theater lobby poster, which
lists Sandra Bernhardt as one of the film's stars: she appears for only
a single fifteen-second scene.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Leslie Nielsen, Richard Crenna, Kelly LeBrock, Melinda McGraw
Ingredients: Parody about fugitive searching for the real killer
Synopsis:
In this farcical spoof of THE FUGITIVE a concert violinist named Ryan
Harrison (Leslie Nielsen) is seduced by someone else's wife (Kelly Le
Brock), and invited for a late night rendezvous. Reaching the mansion,
Harrison gets attacked by a mysterious one-armed, one-legged, one-eyed
terrorist, and framed for the husband's murder. Thanks to a lucky
accident, Harrison escapes from the prison bus, becomes a fugitive, and
attempts to find out who framed him. Meanwhile a crack team of lawmen
led by Fergus Falls (Richard Crenna) is hot on the trail.
WRONGFULLY ACCUSED is not an action movie, but a Leslie Nielsen comedy
similar to the  NAKED GUN series. The main idea is to poke fun at movies
such as ANACONDA, TITANIC, MISSION IMPOSSIBLE, BRAVEHEART and THE
FUGITIVE through the use of unlikely comedic situations and rambling
dialogue containing movie theme cliches and catchphrases. 
Opinion:
The main character's name (Ryan Harrison) is obviously an amalgam of
Harrison Ford and Jack Ryan (Ford played the Jack Ryan character in the
movies PATRIOT GAMES and CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER), so most of the
parody revolves around Harrison Ford movies. In fact, there's even a
sendup of the scene where space hero Han Solo gets encased in a block of
carbonite. 
The comedy, however, is hit or miss. The farce is good (typically he
escapes one danger only to get bonked on the head by another), but the
parts of dialogue where Harrison goes on rambling discourses concerning
the Beatles and other topics are more boring than funny. On a scale of
one to ten on the comedy scale, I'd give it a six. 
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Joy Wyse
Written, Produced and Directed by Pat Proft
Thinking about this movie brings to mind the phrase "Jack of All Trades,
Master of None".  They have tried to make a movie that will appeal to
everyone and ends up appealing to no one, except maybe a few 13-14 year
olds who go to a lot of movies.  The majority of the script depends on
satirizing other films.  If you haven't seen them, you probably won't
catch the jokes.  Obviously, there's The Fugitive, but there's also
Titanic, Braveheart, Mission Impossible, and many, many others.  Trying to
figure out which movie is being portrayed is most of the fun.  And, it is
fun to study the wonderful props that are used.
Too much sexual innuendo prevents this from being a children's film,
although some of it is subtle enough to go right over their heads.  There
is a scene, for example, when Lauren Goodhue [LeBrock] "prepares" a cigar
by licking it, and Ryan Harrison [Nielsen] causes the drawer to open. 
It's too childish to appeal to many adults, because many of the jokes are
aimed at those viewers who are just discovering puberty.  Sadly, some of
the funniest bits are missed by many.  They are in the closing credits. 
They list everyone including: party guest out of focus [Ingrid
Henningsen], fainting pedestrian [Barbaree Earl Nielsen], and Wanted
poster boy [Jason Payn].  They list winning lottery numbers.  Credit is
given to: Director's favorite lunch on a cold, rainy day_.grilled cheese
sandwich and tomato soup.
There is a credit for Interns We allegedly all had sex with_.list upon
request.  I liked "Best Boy on Batteries: Mike Sweeney" and Groped: Patty
Sachs.  Then, they proceed to list "Today's Menu", complete with prices. 
They also include   "no one cares about the following people" and names
twenty.  They include things that were stolen, and people in the crew who
smuggled Cuban Cigars out of Canada.  The way closing credits go on and on
these days, it's difficult to figure out which are the jokes.  At one
point it's stated "This movie costs less than Michael Jordan makes in a
year".  It shows!

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Pat Proft
Cast:  Leslie Nielsen, Kelly LeBrock, Melinda McGraw, Richard Crenna,
Michael York
Screenplay:  Pat Proft
Producers:  Bernd Eichiger, Pat Proft, James G. Robinson
Runtime:  90 min.
US Distribution:  Warner Bros.
Rated PG-13:  sex related humor, language
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
It's hard to motivate myself to write a review for a film when I know I
will have spent more time on it than the makers spent assembling the
film.  The film in question is, of course, Wrongfully Accused, which has
been written and directed by Pat Proft and stars Leslie Nielsen.  See,
it just isn't funny.  I laughed approximately five times, and each time
it was a weak and uninspired display of hilarity.  There are so many
jokes in this film -- I would lose count if I tried to keep track.  It
spoofs just about every popular film, from Casablanca all the way up to
Titanic, and it botches every single gag.  
In fact, I can't recall a single film reference that I found funny. 
Oh, wait!  I laughed when the usher pointed to the seat with a
lightsaber.  Other than that, we're talking dust-in-the-mouth dry.  I
think I smiled a few times, but there is so much room for uproarious
entertainment in a film like this, and Wrongfully Accused simply fails. 
I know it's bad when a film makes me realize the good things about a
comedy like BASEketball, which actually had some pretty funny moments. 
And this one pales in comparison to Mafia!, which had me laughing from
start to finish.  
If you've seen the unfunny trailer, then you know what to expect.  It's
a parody of The Fugitive, with about thirty other film references piled
in for good measure.  Nielsen plays Ryan Harrison (it's probably
supposed to be a joke that Harrison is also the first name of that actor
who played the main character in The Fugitive...oh, what's his
name...).  Harrison is Lord of the Violin; the first scene is arguably
the "best," for it is mildly amusing to see Nielsen fake violin playing
and then instigate a mosh pit in front of the stage.  
>From there, however, it's a drop-off into a limp and lame graveyard of
meaningless jokes and unfunny plot developments.  See, Harrison's
adversary is the one-armed, one-legged, one-eyed man.  Harrison needs to
prove his innocence, because he's been framed for the murder of the
husband of a woman he really likes (Kelly LeBrock).  He's also being
chased by a U.S. Marshall; Richard Crenna has this role, and fails
miserably in mocking Tommy Lee Jones to any degree of funniness.
It's not the material that flops, but Proft's approach.  The one-armed,
one-legged, one-eyed man, for instance, isn't very funny, though it
seems like it should be.  I think it would have been funny to see an
armless man, though, who walks around without prosthetic limbs.  Other
references are equally flat:  the Titanic scene (which is in the
preview) just isn't interesting at all.  It's not funny to see the
heroes kissing, and then get hit in the face by a big steel girder.  
What makes a spoof funny is exaggeration:  if the girder had hit them,
and they went flying off the screen, while screaming loudly and
violently, then I might have laughed.  
The performances don't really help out.  Nielsen plays it straight, as
he always does, but the problem is that he's the same character as he's
been for the last ten years.  LeBrock is okay, but looks disinterested. 
The only other character worth mentioning is Crenna's, and, as I said,
he misses the mark by miles.  
It's not worth my time, or anyone else's, to sit through a dumb
90-minute comedy that will have you laughing for twenty-five seconds.  I
don't even know how a film like this got produced and released:  humor
is, for the most part, universal, and I can't imagine anyone finding an
acceptable percentage of Wrongfully Accused bearable.  It's a comedy
that won't make you laugh, and a spoof that barely spoofs its targets. 
Nobody put any thought into this production.  Learn from my mistake and
don't waste your time with it.

Author
Jamie Peck
WRONGFULLY ACCUSED
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
"Wrongfully Accused" meshes together the premises of "The Fugitive" and 
"Patriot Games," casting its always game star as Ryan Harrison (get 
it?), a master violinist who is drawn into an affair with a married 
temptress (Kelly Le Brock). She, however, sets Harrison up to take the 
rap for the murder of her husband (Michael York) - a crime actually 
committed by a one-armed, one-legged, one-eyed man (Aaron Pearl). 
Harrison is arrested, found guilty and sentenced to death, but escapes 
from a prison bus, of course, and then is pursued by a determined U.S. 
marshal named Fergus Falls (Richard Crenna, unnecessarily riffing off of 
Tommy Lee Jones' already smirky Oscar-winning role). There's also a 
mystery brunette (Melinda McGraw) and an assassination subplot involving 
the U.N. Secretary General, but like any of it matters. 
"Wrongfully Accused" gets off to an assured start, with an in-concert 
Nielsen, touted "Lord of the Violin" by bare-chested posters, pulling a 
Jimi Hendrix on his musical instrument as hundreds of tuxedo-clad mosh 
in front of the stage. Nice touch. Most of the scenes that follow, 
however, never top the opener. (Hysterical exceptions: the Mentos and 
"Baywatch" goofs.) Movie parodies are crammed in at an almost-subliminal 
rate, but most are empty. When a giant snake lunges onto the screen and 
snatches a cast member a la "Anaconda" or baseball players disappear 
into a "Field of Dreams"-esque cornfield, there's really nothing to 
laugh at. Other moments, like an interlude in a fishing shop, are so 
unfocused that you're not sure what you're supposed to be laughing at. 
There seem to be more cheap references than frenzied send-ups here, so 
it's possible that director/writer Pat Proft, by bombarding the viewer 
with a careless mixture of the two, guarantees something is sure to 
stick. And what does stick sticks well, particularly the jabs at genre 
conventions like stylized flashbacks and hard-boiled dialogue, what 
those "Naked Gun"s (which Proft collaborated on) did great; these bits 
are so on-target that they allow you to remember "Wrongfully Accused" as 
an almost-halfway-there spoof instead of a lame-brained failure. The 
movie might have been cursed to begin with, opening fast on the heels of 
"Mafia!", from Proft colleague Jim Abrahams, and "BASEketball," from 
Proft colleague David Zucker, but it's a strong possibility that nobody 
is going to be accusing "Wrongfully Accused" of being Nielsen's 
funniest.

Author
Scott Renshaw
WRONGFULLY ACCUSED
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Leslie Nielsen, Richard Crenna, Melinda McGraw, Kelly LeBrock,
Aaron Pearl, Michael York.
Screenplay:  Pat Proft.
Producers:  Pat Proft, James G. Robinson and Bernd Eichinger.
Director:  Pat Proft.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (sexual innuendo, profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  85 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     "Leslie Nielsen _is_ Leslie Nielsen" reads a tongue-in-cheek opening
credit that opens WRONGFULLY ACCUSED, and no irony could be more bitter.
Once upon a time Nielsen was a B-movie dramatic actor who re-invented
himself as a deadpan comedian thanks to the Zucker-Abrahams-Zucker team,
who cast him in AIRPLANE! and their television series "Police Squad!"
Those successes led to three NAKED GUN films based on "Police Squad!",
which in turn led to SPY HARD and MR. MAGOO.  The one-time serious actor
who used to play straight man so successfully against absurdist parody
turned into a self-parody, mugging ever more shamelessly as he became
typecast as the prat-falling dope.
     You can expect more of the same -- Leslie Nielsen once again _as_
Leslie Nielsen -- in WRONGFULLY ACCUSED, the latest in a seemingly endless
string of films this summer from ZAZ alumni.  This one, written and
directed by HOT SHOTS! and NAKED GUN co-scribe Pat Proft, casts Nielsen as
Ryan Harrison, internationally renowned "Lord of the Violin."  Seduced by
a slinky temptress (Kelly LeBrock), Harrison ends up accused of the murder
of millionaire Hibbing Goodhue (Michael York, looking like a Madame
Tussaud figure of himself).  He escapes, he runs, he's pursued by a
single-minded law-enforcement agent (Richard Crenna), he searches for a
one-armed, one-legged, one-eyed man (Aaron Pearl), yada yada yada.
     I don't know whether the strained comedy of WRONGFULLY ACCUSED would
have seemed any fresher if it hadn't come hard on the heels of MAFIA! and
BASEKETBALL, but it certainly doesn't help.  Proft tries to keep the gags
coming fast enough to obscure the tedium -- perhaps believing he can
convince an audience that a hundred lame jokes add up to one decent one --
but the gags are worse than uninspired.  They're uninspired and redundant,
the kind of stuff that makes you suspect Proft and Jim Abrahams were
sitting in a room together as they were hashing out this film and MAFIA!,
respectively.  How else to explain the fact that both films include a shot
of a man leaving a lipstick print from a kiss, and a computer generated
tongue emerging from someone's ear, and shots at Michael Flatley?
     Those re-cycled gags are enough to make WRONGFULLY ACCUSED feel
ridiculously tired.  Nielsen's performance merely compounds the misery.
He has become such a flashing red light for self-defeating satire that he
simply can't play the role he once played:  the slack-faced observer of
anarchy. Directors have decided it's easier to get the audience to laugh
at Nielsen than it is to write anything funny to which he can react...or,
more appropriately, _not_ react.  WRONGFULLY ACCUSED features Nielsen at
his least appealing, throwing out rolled eyes, grimaces and misguided
reaction takes by the truckload.  Instead of providing an incongruous
presence that contributes to the humor, he becomes a vaguely pathetic
aging class clown.
     I realize that subtlety has never been the forte of genre parody, but
there are scattered moments when WRONGFULLY ACCUSED appears to have a
decent idea that's not head-smackingly obvious.  The best laugh, one I'm
sure was unintentional, comes from the 30-second cameo by Sandra Bernhard
which belies her prominent featuring in the credits.  It seems like a
clever jab at Julianne Moore's cutting-room-floor performance in THE
FUGITIVE, especially when Nielsen refers to getting information from
Bernhard's character in a scene we never see.  It's probably too much to
expect that level of insider satire to be sustained, especially when it's
so much easier to have Nielsen bang his head on a low bridge while
standing on the bow of the Titanic.  That's about the level of humor you
can expect when a film's number one comedic weapon is Leslie Nielsen _as_
Leslie Nielsen.

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "Wrongfully Accused" (Warner Bros.)
 Writer/director Pat Proft is an advocate of the "non-stop
jokes" school of comedic film-making. Problem is: they're not very
funny. Amusing, perhaps, but really funny? No. Straight-faced Leslie
Nielsen's game, though. In this parody, he's the stripped-to-the-waist
acrobat from "Lord of the Dance" and an aging wannabe Leonardo Di
Caprio from "Titanic," whose high-on-the deck love scene in the mist
and the rain culminates in a slapstick twist. The story begins like
"The Fugitive," as Ryan Harrison, a superstar classical violinist
(Nielsen) - "Lord of the Violin" - becomes romantically involved with
the sexy, socialite wife (Kelly LeBrock) of his pretentious benefactor
(Michael York). When the tycoon is fatally shot, he's found holding
the gun and wrongfully accused. But, on his way to death row, the
prison transport bus crashes into a train and Nielsen runs for his
life, spewing likes like, "My head is spinning like a dreidel in a
sandstorm." He knows he must track down the one-armed, one-legged, one
-eyed real murderer in order to clear his name. And he's doggedly
pursued by a United States Marshal, Richard Crenna, whose Tommy Lee
Jones imitation is relentlessly dead on. There are giggles - like the
"Baywatch" life guards who spring into action when he's in danger of
being water-logged, the "Braveheart" battle make-up, the "Field of
Dreams" baseball players disappearing into the mist, the "Mission
Impossible" high-wire suspension, and the "ER" public address system
bleating out messages for Drs. Ross, Green, Benton, et all to pick up
their checks, plus evocations of "North by Northwest," "Casablanca"
and other classics. But what Pat Proft really misses are his previous
"Naked Gun" collaborators, Jim Abrahams and David Zucker, who could
put some punch into his scenes and sight-gags. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Wrongfully Accused" is a silly, flimsy 4,
consisting of loosely strung-together movie allusions, cliches, and
quotes.

Author
Matt Williams
Talk about beating a dead horse.  Leslie Nielsen is still trying to
squeeze the last drop of humor out of the spoof comedy.  Give up!  It's
bone-dry, as his latest comedic train wreck, Wrongfully Accused, can
attest.
The film roughly follows the plot of The Fugitive, but spoofs a variety
of films in-between, from The Empire Strikes Back to Titanic. Leslie
Nielsen's bumbling fool this time around is Ryan Harrison, master
violinist.  He's falsely accused of murder and must escape to find the
real killer:  a one armed, one legged, one eyed man (Aaron Pearl).
In the Tommy Lee Jones role here is Richard Crenna as Fergus Falls, the
U.S. Marshal assigned to track Harrison down.  You'd think that the
filmmakers would be able to get some mileage out of Tommy Lee Jones'
Oscar-winning role.  No such luck.  Crenna barks out orders in
Jones-style, but his character is so uninteresting that he goes missing
for most of the film's last third, and you never notice the difference.
And of course the film has to have some sort of love interest.  That job
is dually provided by Kelly LeBrock and Melinda McGraw.  One of these
women has Ryan's best interests at heart...the other wants to kill him.
But he doesn't know which is which, and the audience couldn't care less.
The film is packed with wall-to-wall non sequitur gags, but the film's
escape sequence is the only one which even mildly works, and it is
mostly successful only in comparison to the rest of the film.
One of the big problems with the humor here is the source material.
Rather than spoofing a genre, Wrongfully Accused decided to spoof one
specific film, The Fugitive. As all the comedic potential is tapped
early, the film grasps out for other sources of inspiration.  However,
the amalgamated hodgepodge of scenes are so desperately humorless that
it seems the filmmakers are simply playing a game of "Guess Which Film
We're Spoofing Now!"
There have been worse spoof comedys...but not many.  For the crime of
being unfunny, Wrongfully Accused is guilty, guilty, guilty.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases
