Title
Review for Pitch Black (2000)
Number of Reviews
20

Author
Sean Molloy
Pitch Black, a new entry in the sci-fi action category of "people vs.
space bugs", manages to avoid the pitfalls that lots of other films in
this genre inevitably stumble into.  Far too often I've witnessed
these things spiral headlong into a black hole of stupidity, where
scenes that are supposed to be cool and shocking instead wind up
inducing groans and laughter.  Recent victims of this phenomenon
include Event Horizon and Alien Resurrection - both are films that had
promising buildups, and both wound up building towards events that
were just plain ridiculous.  So I'll say this much for Pitch Black -
it never crosses the fine line into the well-traveled territory of
sci-fi cheesiness, and for that I am grateful.  Unfortunately, it
tends to tread firmly on the safe side of that fine line, rarely
managing to create those moments of uber-cool that would put it on a
level with Aliens, the reigning champ of the people vs.  space bugs
film.
When people set out to battle space bugs, I'm more than willing to
suspend logic and accept plot contrivances - Pitch Black is guilty on
both counts - if it makes for a promising set-up.  Sure, have a crew
of space travelers crash land on a tri-sunned planet just as it has
it's only night in 22 years, that doesn't bother me.  And give this
crew of advanced space explorers two blowtorches and a couple
glow-sticks as their sole sources of light, I have no problem with
that.  Have a convict who can coincidentally see in the dark and has
mysterious motives, why not?  And sure, have this planet populated by
an inexplicable species that is hurt by light on a planet that doesn't
ever have a night except for this one convenient moment...  Never mind
that such a species in such a habitat doesn't make a lick of
sense... why would they have evolved on the planet in the first place?
What the hell do they eat?  There's an implication that they're
cannibals, but anyone who's taken a single science class knows that a
population can't sustain itself like that.  You can certainly come up
with some far-fetched answers and explanations on your own, but in the
end, it just plain doesn't matter.  Just go with it, cuz the
contrivances here are outweighed by the potentially cool situations.
And that's really what you're here for, now isn't it?
Alas, potential is really all we get.  Pitch Black has its share of
moments, mostly occurring in the first half, but when I walked away in
the end, it felt as if a lot of good ideas had been greatly wasted.
The film opens with a spectacular crash sequence, akin to the horrific
plane crash that that opens Alive.  A later scene that occurs when the
suns are still shining finds the reluctant Captain Fry (Radha
Mitchell) underground, tethered to a rope trailing behind her in a
series of caverns, protected from the things lurking in the dark only
by spotty shafts of sunlight.  Moments like these are exquisite, but
unfortunately they do not come often enough.
Love it or hate it, if there's one thing The Blair Witch Project
accomplished, it was to make us remember how powerful simple
suggestion can be in a suspenseful situation.  Pitch Black,
thankfully, adheres to this forgotten school of thought.  These
creatures lurk in the darkness; when we see them, we see just enough
to assemble their forms in our heads.  A frightening moment can be
easily ruined by a bad computer graphic, and Pitch Black never
succumbs to overplaying its hand in this department.  The special
effects never overstep their bounds, and we're treated to that rarity
in the modern age of blockbuster filmmaking - restraint.  The
flip-side to this coin is that a select few of the action sequences
were too dark and confusing to make out what was happening.
The planet these folks land on looks beautiful, the film has been
overexposed and saturated with different colors to effectively
simulate what light from three suns would look like.  The moment of
the eclipse is absolutely beautiful, and stands as one of the most
striking visuals I've ever seen in a film like this.  The whole film
somehow feels refreshingly like a British, independent art- house take
on the sci-fi monster movie.
But eventually it all just kind of fizzles out.  By the third act,
frankly, I was more than a bit bored.  Not too long after the sun
sets, the action starts to plod generically along, and the thrills are
too few and far between.  The focus seems to dwell too much on the
only fairly interesting crew, and there are simply too many of them
around for us to care about their problems.  When a supposedly key
'revelation' is made about the kid traveling with the group, you kinda
shrug and wonder why it was even mentioned.  The deep-voiced and aptly
named Vin Diesel, who voiced the Iron Giant and here plays the shady
convict Riddick, is admittedly extra cool.  His psychological
interplay with Captain Fry almost got to the point of being
interesting, but couldn't quite make it over the hump.
The film also missteps by providing us with an ending that is, well,
just sorta there.  When I walk into a movie like Pitch Black, I expect
something epic to close things out.  But I suppose, at the same time,
I'd rather have it just kind of stop than see things ruined with
something ridiculous and laughable (see, once again, Event Horizon and
Alien Resurrection for examples of how not to handle an ending).  For
a couple of minutes, Pitch Black seems like it's on its way to exactly
ripping off the conclusion to Aliens - and I do mean exactly.  But at
least it has the wisdom to stop itself from going in that direction.
In the end, I was thankful to have seen an example of a sci-fi action
thriller that never once seemed overtly stupid or absurd... they are a
rare breed indeed.  There's enough unique and good stuff here that
Pitch Black certainly isn't a waste of time.  Sadly, it's just a very
well-crafted waste of potential.

Author
Steve Rhodes
"Is this whole planet dead?" asks one of the stranded space travelers in
David N. Twohy's PITCH BLACK.  The planet is far from dead in this
ALIENS MEETS THE BIRDS tale, but the movie itself is close to terminal.
A spaceship with settlers, mainly Muslims, and one criminal in chains,
crash lands on an unknown planet with three suns.  "We take this as a
good sign," the Muslim leader says of the three suns.  It isn't.
When one of the crew goes near a small hole in the ground, he
disappears, leaving evidence that he may have been eaten alive by
something that lives down there.  So what does the ship's replacement
captain, Fry (Radha Mitchell), do?  Why, she climbs down into the
darkness with only a rope to tie her to the people on the surface.  The
script by Jim and Ken Wheat is full of such illogical moments, which
fail any reasonable sanity test.  I suppose I should have mentioned that
the captain died in the crash, but in generic sci-fi movies like this
one, the captain always dies in the crash, so I figured that you didn't
need to be told.
The aliens can function only in a pitch black environment, so guess what
astronomical event is on the way in this land of perpetual sunshine?
Talk about unlucky!  But don't worry, Riddick, the criminal, played with
sleek charisma and rippling muscles by Vin Diesel (BOILER ROOM), has had
an eye job.  With his glazed eyes, he can see in the dark.  What a lucky
coincidence!
Most of the movie has the characters wandering around as they are
attacked from the sky by flying aliens.  As they are pecked at by
noshing monsters with messy table manners, the actors mumble their
dialog.  This is a blessing in disguise.
The movie has one redeeming feature -- its stunning cinematography.
Reasoning that the three suns would make for strange coloration, the
cinematographer denudes the color and oversaturates the shots.  With an
effect similar to that in BOUND, the movie is told in shades of gray
with only one or two other colors coming through.  Only the indoor
scenes, lit by artificial light, have a more normal color palette.
Riddick, even if he is a cold-blooded killer, frequently occupies the
high moral ground and is the bravest of all.  In contrast, Johns (Cole
Hauser), Fry's second in command, is an unreliable dope addict.  He
shoots up with a needle in his eye -- yes, the movie loves to gross us
out as well as scare us with loud noises.
As Macbeth said about the film, or would have, if he'd been born a
little later, "it is a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
signifying nothing."  Oh well, at least the picture's artistic look
places it a notch above other such generic science fiction films as WING
COMMANDER.
PITCH BLACK runs 1:49.  It is rated R for language and sci-fi violence
and gore and would be acceptable for most teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Vin Diesel rocks! Harumph...well, now that I got that out of my system, I
feel it my duty to pre-announce how I enjoy different kinds of films
depending on my mood at times, and how I am generally prone to thumb up the
higher quality entertainment flicks, but also more than open to appreciate
an all-out, turn-your-brain-off-at-the-door cheezefest presentation of film.
And guess what...this film is just that!
PLOT:
A bunch of good folks, along with one bad mutha, fall upon a desolate planet
infested by crazy, alien monsters who hunt their prey exclusively in the
dark. Unfortunately, these folks apparently picked the worst time to have an
accident on this planet, since a solar eclipse is just about to take place,
and the chompin' critters are ready to take a bite out of any human left
unprotected by light.
CRITIQUE:
Vin Diesel rocks! Or did I mention that already? Fact one about this film is
that it doesn't truly stray into any original ground. Fact two about this
film is that most of its characters, mostly no-names, do little to allow
themselves to be given a shit about, except for the "bad guy", Vin Diesel,
who kicks major ass! And fact three about this film is that it includes one
of the coolest opening crash scenes that I have ever seen, is charmed with
an intriguing look of filters, yellows, blues and reds clogging the screen
one at a time, and simply pumps the last 30 minutes with enough tension,
cool alien freakazoids and dark undercurrents to register a "fun time" stamp
on my face. Is this the next sci-fi classic? Certainly not, but it also
doesn't pretend to be, with just enough one-liners from Diesel to vie for a
nomination into the cult movie favorite category of the year. This movie is
pure cheese with a touch of arty pretension, all draped under the banner of
a simple good time at the movie theatre. I thought that it started with a
bang, slowed considerably once they all settled onto the planet, but then
took off again when Diesel and crew took to shelter after the eclipse.
I mention Vin Diesel so often in my review because his character truly made
this film memorable for me. Where else could you see a buff dude with silver
eyes and slick sunglasses run around and knife-fight alien bat-thingies? Not
sure but this film delivers on the Diesel meter full-force! Unfortunately
the rest of the two-bit characters are one-dimensional at best, with a
contingency of Muslims and the proverbial Obi-Wanesque guy simply getting on
my nerves. However, on the whole the film did provide me with enough
thrills, money shots and cool moments with Diesel to warrant a full
membership to the club of enjoyment. The two elements which could have been
improved upon in my opinion, include the soundtrack, which was almost
non-existent and the quality of the rest of the characters in the crew. I
assume that this flick was on a low budget, but that doesn't really justify
the exclusion of any other interesting characters from the mix. But don't
cry for me Argentina, cause all in all the movie delivers its punches on the
targets of its choice, which include the fun special effect-laden aliens,
the slick stylings of director Twohy and the charismatic performance by Vin.
So if this "type" of film is your schtick, then wait no longer to catch this
dark son-of-a-gun in the theatres right now. But if you're looking for
something a little different and more intellectual, I suggest that you wait
a little longer and check into the two Mars movies still to come later on
this year. Either way, Vin Diesel rocks!
And if not for anything else, just see this movie in order to witness a
character go mano-a-mano with a friggin' alien! Very cool!
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
This film was originally titled NIGHTFALL.
So who the heck is Vin Diesel, you might be asking yourself? Well, you might
remember him from a small role that he had during the first 30 minutes of
SAVING PRIVATE RYAN (8/10) as Private Adrian Caparzo, his deep voice, which
was used as that of THE IRON GIANT (5/10) and his more recent role in BOILER
ROOM (7.5/10), a film which ironically opened on the same day as this film.
He's also written and directed two films of his own, MULTI-FACIAL and
STRAYS, which were screened at the 1995 Cannes Film Festival and 1997
Sundance Film Festival respectively. Not too shabby for a 32-year old.
No surprise is the fact that the "lead" lady in this film, played by Radha
Mitchell, hails from Australia. My buddy and I noticed an accent come and go
during the movie, which made us suspicious to this little known fact.
If any of you are wondering where the heck David Twohy, the director of this
film, comes from, well it's actually a pretty short resume. This is only his
second directing gig, his first being the under-achieving THE ARRIVAL
(7.5/10) with Charlie Sheen, and he is mainly known as a screenwriter to
such films as G.I. JANE (6.5/10), WATERWORLD, THE FUGITIVE and CRITTERS 2?
Yup.
The Wheat brothers, who are two of the writers of this film, also have a
sorted background writing unmemorable sci-fi and horror flicks including
SILENT SCREAM, AFTER MIDNIGHT, FLY II and IT CAME FROM OUTER SPACE II.

Author
Homer Yen
In the opening scene of "Pitch Black," an interstellar
transport ship with dozens of passengers that are in
cryo-sleep pods, runs into a devastating meteor
shower.  The ship is skewered and casualties are
heavy.  Fry (Radha Mitchell), the only surviving
crewmember, tries to attempt a crash landing on a
desolate planet.  She frantically works the controls
as the ship careens out-of-control towards the
planet's surface.  The opening scene is frenetic and
successfully establishes its pace.  And I'm enjoying
the ride.
Ten people are lucky enough to survive the spectacular
crash landing.  But they may regret their seemingly
good fortune when they discover that the planet is an
arid ball of sand.  Worse, they learn that
subterranean Pterydactol-resembling aliens inhabit it.
 With raptor-sized teeth and claws that can easily rip
apart flesh, it's a good thing that these aliens don't
come to the surface because they can't stand sunlight.
  Even luckier for these marooned travelers, this
planet's system has three suns, which provides
perpetual daylight.  Well, at least that's what they
think.  Soon, their situation gets increasingly dark,
and they'll need to work quickly to get off the
planet.  Otherwise, they'll all become alien bird
feed.
Sci-fi movies in the style of "Alien" (and that's
exactly what this is) follows a familiar formula.  And
"Pitch Black" stays true to the blueprint.  You can
expect several of the survivors to be killed off (and
it's usually the characters that either panic and run,
wander off into the night by themselves, or the
inconsequential characters that we don't really care
about).   You can expect a modicum of tense moments as
the aliens close in.  And, you can expect a mad dash
at the end as the survivors grittily make their way to
the final destination in a final attempt to escape. 
Indeed, the last twenty minutes offer a satisfying
finish.
But what makes this a little meatier than other films
of this type are the human-interest stories.  One
involves Riddick (Vin Diesel), a vicious murderer that
was being transported to a prison.  As a result of the
crash, he has now awakened from his cryogenic slumber.
 He feels nothing for the other survivors or their
perilous situation and only wants to escape.  He is
incredibly cunning and possesses an acute sense of
smell and the ability to see at night.  He may be even
more dangerous than the predators that live beneath
the planet's surface.  The other features the feisty
Fry who is referred to as "Captain" by the survivors,
but is unable to cope with her responsibility and the
burden of saving everyone.
"Pitch Black" also manages to satisfy on the visual
level.  Bleached hues accentuate their desolation and
camera views are frequently seen through the infrared
eyesight of Riddick, which adds color and beauty to
the events happening on screen.  The component about
this film that was most underwhelming, however, was
the aliens themselves.  In a genre where there is no
limit to creativity, these aliens looked inexplicably
ordinary.  
Although I enjoyed this offering (and probably much
more than I had originally anticipated), this film's
life span may be as short as some of the victims of
the film.  I say that because there are no big stars
to attract anyone's attention, and if you've seen
other sci-fi films about people-as-alien-fodder, then
you'll probably think that you're experiencing a
2-hour case of deja vu.  But "Pitch Black" does offer
interesting story lines, a varied spectrum of likable
personalities, and the enjoyable sensation of seeing
who will survive and who won't.  With a sustained
atmosphere of suspense and just the right amount of
pace, this film is a good choice for the weekend
moviegoer in search of some entertainment.

Author
Alex Ioshpe
DIRECTED BY: David N. Twohy
WRITTEN BY: Jim and Ken Wheat
CAST: Radha Mitchell, Vin Diesel, Cole Hauser, Keith David (I)
MPAA: Rated R for sci-fi violence and gore, and for language
Runtime: USA:112 (unrated version)
Weirdly cool, coolly weird, beautifully stupid, Pitch Black opens with
a bang. A slam, actually, as a damaged spaceship under the direction
of a brisk pilot named Fry (Radha Mitchell - the Ripley of this story)
makes a crash landing onto an unknown planet. On it is a killer (Vin
Diesel), a bounty hunter, a stockbroker, a brat boy and a couple of
Muslim pilgrims -- all on the same ship. And they were all going
somewhere (where exactly the screenwriters do not know). The rest of
the crew is killed; the passengers are all shook up and emerge ahead
of schedule from their transport comas, blinking and bleeding in a
seemingly lifeless planet with three suns, which seems completely
abandoned. But once in 22 years darkness falls and strange creatures
emerge from the ground. Now they all have to trust a killer who can
see in the dark. What happens next you can guess.
The film is shaped in the image of Ridley Scott's "Alien", but has a
couple of inventions of its own. These are of course not associated
with story or character development, but instead concern the visual
aspect. "The Arrivial"-director David Twohy creates a chillingly
effective atmosphere with light, shade and color combinations,
bringing to ''Pitch Black'' the disorienting thrill of a world turned
upside down. The film works best at the very beginning, when every
character and scene is a mystery, and we, along side with the
characters, experience a creepy notion of paranoia -- a fear of the
unknown and a sense of something (or someone) lurking beneath. But
then Twohy decides to turn off the originality and everything becomes
pitch black. It is sad that films like this are regarded as science
fiction, where the special effects are the heart of the movie, around
witch the rest is built. With a script being on the same intellectual
level as "Lost in Space" , it's hard to make a decent movie. Even the
story itself doesn't stand any criticism (and I am not talking about
the lucky landing or the perfect timing either). The planet doesn't
give any impression of being alien. Somehow resembling the planet
Tatooine from George Lucas' "Star Wars", it has the perfect
environment for human beings -- temperature, surface and air. Is this
convenient or what? There are other disturbing problems. Since it's
dark only once in 22 years wouldn't it be more likely that the
creatures would fear darkness and not sunlight? And considering that
the planet is completely dead on the surface, do these creatures eat
at all? Or are they completely dependant on human visitors?
Considering these (and many more!) irrationalities, it's impossible to
watch this film as a science fiction. However, this movie is an
excellent choice for horror and action lovers. The acting is decent,
the effects are cool, the action is well coordinated - what more do
can you want from a popcorn-film? Vin Diesel ("Saving Private Ryan")
is very spooky as the feared murderer, being some sort of Hannibal
Lecter-meets-Rambo kind of guy, with his eyes glaring in the darkness
like a hyena. Midchell is likewise very effective with a couple of
strong scenes and emotional outbursts. The rampaging aliens,
meanwhile, look something like flying hammerhead sharks and behave
like a flock of vampire bats and they squawk ''reeee-reee-reee!'' as
they pounce and devour. True, we haven't seen that before. But does it
really matter? The concept is known and that's enough. And though I
did enjoy some of what was presented in "Pitch Black", I have seen it
all before.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
A disabled spacecraft crash-lands on a harsh desert planet at the
beginning of this tedious sci-fi disaster. Among the grungy survivors
are the female pilot (Radha Mitchell), a Muslim priest (Keith David),
a prissy antiquities dealer (Lewis Fitzgerald), a convicted killer
with huge muscles and surgically-enhanced laser vision (Vin Diesel)
and the bounty hunter (Cole Hauser) who is bringing him to justice.
Squabbling, they're all vying for leadership power - until they're
terrorized by armies of voracious, carnivorous, nocturnal creatures
who are fiendishly determined to devour them. Australian
writer/director David Twohy (The Arrival), working with writers Jim
and Ken Wheat, lifts elements from the Alien films, among others, and
treacherous, pterodactyl-like creatures from Godzilla.  The formulaic
dialogue is all their own and there's little tension in the episodic
plot which involves a solar eclipse. The only commendable originality
is in the stylish lighting, utilizing various filters, and
cinematography, drawing on several types of film stock which
complement the strange, ominous planet with its intense heat from
three different suns and bizarre desert landscape. However, on a
parched, cloudless planet supposedly devoid of all water, a sudden
downpour which drenches the hapless survivors is one of the most
obvious discordant occurrences which is never explained. And if Vin
Diesel's voice sounds familiar, you might recall that he did the title
character in The Iron Giant. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
Pitch Black is a dismal 1 - a noisy, nightmarish waste of time and
money, the producers' and yours.

Author
Scott Hunt
Review by Scott Hunt         Movie Hunt:
http://netdirect.net/~hunt/index.html
Cast: Vin Diesel, Radha Mitchell, Keith David, Cole Hauser, Rhiana
Griffith, Claudia Black, Lewis Fitz-Gerald
Writers: David Twohy, Ken and Jim Wheat
Director: David Twohy
Pitch Black is a sheep in wolf's clothing. It is full of darkness,
danger and violence and if you buy into the marketing hype, an
unsettling and scary film going experience.
Don't be fooled.  Pitch Black is a morality play masquerading as a
scare-fest. 
It starts off with blistering intensity. A cargo spaceship crash lands
on a planet apparently leeched of life by the scorching heat of three
suns.  Among the survivors is Fry (Mitchell), the ship's pilot, who
spends the film wrestling with the fact that she tried to jettison the
other passengers in her effort to land the craft safely. There is Imam
(David), an Islamic leader whose faith in his god is tested repeatedly
throughout the film. There is a law enforcement officer in the form of
Johns (Hauser), who attacks every situation with square jawed
authoritarian zeal. And there is Riddick (Diesel), a menacing,
muscle-bound convicted murderer who's being brought back to justice by
Johns. 
The group quickly sizes up the situation and each other. Confident in
their assessment of matters, a plan is set in motion to escape their
hellish environment. Those plans are shredded by the appearance of one
of the planet's wildlife, a predatory,  sometimes winged, species that
enjoys the taste of blood and flesh. Fortunately, the creatures are
light sensitive and are forced to live in networks of catacombs under
the planet's surface. Unfortunately, the group has managed to land on
the planet moments before an eclipse is about to occur, taking away
their one protection from the monsters. The group's savior comes in the
form of Johns, whose decisive leadership looks to deliver them from
purgatory. Or does it?
Pitch Black deviates from the standard sci-fi fare by avoiding some of
the stock "escape the boogieman" conflicts  the genre typically serves
up. Just as the planet gave a false facade of lifelessness, first
appearances given by the survivors proves to be just as false. The
excitement of the film comes not from the danger posed by the creatures,
but rather from watching the shifting allegiances and emotional growth
of the characters as the planet serves as a deus ex machina of sorts to
catalyze emotional growth. 
A recurrent theme runs throughout the movie of faith, whether it be
religious or in a person, and how that powers their  motivations. I
found it telling that an accidental death occurs early on due to the
misperception of a self professed atheist. Conversely, Imam constantly
contributes any good fortune to Allah. One by one, his perceived heaven
sent blessings are taken away and crushed. Imam is forced to reassess
his faith. Another character expresses belief in god, along with a life
long hate. Yet another character makes a decision that echoes the
sentiments of Christ about selflessness and has lasting repercussions
for several of group. It is a fascinating character study hiding under
the guise of a scare flick.
Special mention should be made of Vin Diesel, who intriguingly conveys
feral menace combined with a truly mesmerizing presence. His character
could have easily slipped into a parody of the baddass killing machine,
but Twohy and Diesel add surprising depth to Riddick. They can be
excused for the two or three Shwarzenegger-like catch phrases that growl
their way out of Diesel's mouth.
The movie has its flaws that can be nitpicked. The creatures do look
derivative of the ones in Alien. The dialogue isn't the freshest at
times, reminiscent of a bad comic book. Yes, the appearance of Riddick's
vision skills are more than a little timely considering the situation.
These trappings are on the periphery of the story Twohy is really trying
to tell. Twohy may have lured you in under the pretense of scaring you
with film fabricated boogieman, but he shows the real boogieman to be
the prejudices and beliefs we use to direct decisions in our lives.

Author
Max Messier
filmcritic.com presents a features story from staff member Max Messier.
You can find the story also at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/95a45e26914c25ff862562bb006a85f2/2289acc767a96663882569770017ab83?OpenDocument
Cole Hauser is one of those low profile actors that's been surfing
around Hollywood for the past ten years, working with high profile
directors like John Singleton, Richard Linklater, Gus Van Sant, and
Stephen Fears.  Hauser has been seen in small parts in such films as
Dazed and Confused, School Ties, Good Will Hunting, Higher Learning, and
The Hi-Lo Country.  But in his newest role as 'Johns' in the film Pitch
Black, just released on DVD, Hauser shows that he can be a leading man
just as well as a supporting player.
We recently spoke with Hauser about his involvement in the Pitch Black
project, his relationship with his father (Wings Hauser, whom he did not
meet until age 11), the purpose of his film career, and if Joel
Schumacher still has the gumption to shoot a successful feature film. 
(Hauser also appears in Schumacher's Tigerland, in theaters now.)
How did you get involved with the Pitch Black project?  What type of
things interested you in the role of Johns?
Initially when I got involved with the project it was pretty early.  I
talked to David Twohy about the role and then he screen tested me.  So,
I went in and screen tested for the role over a couple days.  It wasn't
an easy process but I read with a bunch of different actresses and
actors.
What really interested me most about the project was the hero-to-villain
metamorphosis - the different colors the character plays.  I think in
the DVD you will see more of those colors than in the theatrical release
because it wasn't explained completely -- regarding the relationship
with Vin Diesel's character Riddick.  The DVD version better displayd
the evolution of my character Johns from hero to villain.  The character
gave me the chance to play the heroic role by getting all of the people
off of the planet... and then he turns evil by wanting to save his own
self by killing a child.
What was the experience like working with David Twohy?
It was good.  He's a great director to work with.  He supported pretty
much everything I did and he gave me a lot of freedom to make the
character the way I envisioned.  He was a good supporter of the actors
and their own personal intentions for their roles.
So he is more of an actor's director than a technical director?
Definitely.  He's kind of a quiet guy when you first meet him and he's
kind of shy, though he gets his points across where he wants them to get
across for the most part.  He hired us and saw that talent within us
actors and gave us the freedom to do our own thing.  We (the actors)
rehearsed a lot before we actually filmed so there was pretty much
nothing to talk about during the actual shooting day.
He does fall under the role of an actor's director but he's also a
technical director.  He's got a vision because he wrote the movie as
well, and you could pick his mind to find out what his idea for a
certain scene would be.  It was a benefit to have the writer and
director there during the filming.
What was the best experience you had making the film?
Learning to use all of those weapons and looking like a professional
mercenary.  It's always fun to play someone like an action hero that you
always wanted to play as a child.  I think every young boy loves that as
a kid.  An additional positive experience I had was visiting Australia
and exposing myself to that part of the world.
Did Vin Diesel and you partake in training exercises for all of your
combat scenes?
Vin and I worked hard on all of our action scenes because we didn't want
them to look like any ordinary fight scene.  The character of Riddick
(Vin Diesel) is much stronger than my character Johns and is much faster
-- like a cat.  We wanted to make it as real as we could so we tried
some new things out.  The last scene between the characters of Riddick
and Johns is pretty extensive, using the training we received.  All the
action scenes in the film I performed on my own, without a stunt double.
Where you satisfied with the final product of Pitch Black?
Yes I was very satisfied with the final product.  It's always a bit
scary to see what ends up in the final cut because of all of the
reactions you must have to the sounds and creatures around you when
there is really nothing there.  You are always a bit hesitant during the
first screening because you want the looks, the special effects, and the
sound effects to all look authentic.
Overall, the film is a solid sci-fi piece that wasn't done for a lot of
money but appears to be a big-budget production.  We succeeded in our
acting and in our shock value as well as the visual effects.
When I was over in Europe, the response was tremendous -- better than
the American audiences.  The Germans, the Austrians, the Swiss, and the
French just loved the movie.  The entertainment factor of the film was
very strongly recognized over there and the simple storyline provided a
broad universal appeal for those audiences.
What were the main catalysts for your desire to be an actor?
Initially I got into the business to do drama. I never really thought I
would be doing sci-fi films.  It's like that old Warner Bros quote
"Educate, enlighten, and entertain." My belief is that if I can achieve
that level of entertainment by making the audience happy or sad or
angry, then I have succeeded as an actor and have done my job.  The
profits and the fame as an actor will eventually surface but first and
foremost comes the work as an actor.
I grew up watching Marlon Brando, Christopher Walken, Robert de Niro,
and Al Pacino and even Robert Duvall and was impressed by their caliber
of work.
Tell me a little about your experience working with Robert Duvall on
your latest film A Shot at Glory and lessons you took from him.
One of the main things I learned is that he comes to work prepared
everyday and he still cares about what he is doing after 45 years of an
acting career.  He doesn't take a day off at all and I respect that
because leading actors in films owe it to the audience to give 110% of
their efforts towards the production of the film.
When you were growing up, did your father Wings Hauser's acting career
propel you to take on the profession of an actor or was it an
independent choice?  I am aware that you didn't meet your father until
you were 11.
When I was growing up, I never really knew my father. I didn't get know
my father until I was about 14 years old.  When I was talking to him as
a young actor starting out, I singled out great performances of his and
talked to him about the business and how he was able to reach those
performances and it gave me confidence to take on more challenging
roles.  It was difficult though, when I was young, because growing up
away from a father figure, you develop your own ways of taking care of
yourself.  When the father figure comes back into your life and tries to
guide you and tell you what to do, it's a little weird and hard to
handle at times.
To be honest, I would like to have a completely different career than
his. He portrayed pretty much the heavy characters -- the tough guy, the
bad guy.  He did a great job in those roles but I enjoy playing the hero
as much as playing the bad guy.  The bad guy roles are much more
intriguing to an actor because you get to play a whole bunch of
different levels and be able to showcase your talent as an actor. 
Sometimes the leads and the supporting characters are the most boring
people in a film and the adversary is a challenge to successfully
portray.
I haven't spoken to him in a long time but I love him to death and hope
he is having a good time wherever he is.
For your newest film, Tigerland, you worked under the direction of Joel
Schumacher.  I've never been a fan of his work at all and was interested
in what you learned working with him and your general impression of him
as a director.
It was great working with him.  He's a dear man and is very genuine and
a good-hearted person.  His directing career has produced good stuff and
other stuff that in the eyes of the public and media has failed.  With
this movie, he casts some amazing young actors that will probably be on
the forefront of the next wave of leading mean in the next five to ten
years.  He did a wonderful job of giving the actors the freedom to
express themselves and their characters motivations.  In my part as
Sergeant Cota, he gave me as much freedom as I've ever had from a
director.  He even let me write a scene for the movie, which ended up
making the final cut of the film.  I haven't one thing negative to say
about Mr. Schumacher.
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Jamey Hughton
Starring-Vin Diesel, Radha Mitchell, Cole Hauser,
Keith David, Lewis Fitz-Gerald and Rhiana Griffith
Director-David Twohy
Canadian Rating-14A
Total crap. That would be the most accurate choice of words when
describing the majority of sci-fi monster movies that have been exposed
to in the past few years. Characters were pursued down flooded cruise
liner hallways by fake tentacles (`Deep Rising'), stalked by robotic
aliens (`Virus') and swarmed by ugly flying mammals (`Bats'). And let's
not forgot this January's `Supernova'. Holy Lord, did that movie reek.
But before you reject `Pitch Black', a science-fiction film with no
A-list stars or special trimmings, keep in mind that director David
Twohy is behind the camera. You may recollect that Twohy's directorial
debut was the highly intelligent (and highly underappreciated) alien
takeover film `The Arrival'. Sure, Charlie Sheen was in it, but the film
was executed with an unusual aura of imagination and style. Twohy also
co-scripted the excellent cat-and-mouse thriller `The Fugitive' in 1993,
so with `Pitch Black', I was expecting more than just a bloody parade of
stock characters pitted in unoriginal situations. There was also my
knowledge that, in addition, Twohy penned `Waterworld'.... but hey, we
all make mistakes.
`Pitch Black' opens with a bang. A transport ship carrying several
passengers and some particularly dangerous cargo collides with space
debris and plummets through the stratosphere in an astounding 10-minutes
of seat-gripping disorientation. The unscheduled landing site is a
desolate, seemingly uninhabited desert planet with three suns. The
handful of survivors include captain Fry (Radha Mitchell), the
strong-minded heroine with more than a dash of Ripley in her soul,
rugged lawman Johns (Cole Hauser), and the dangerous cargo - a murderous
convict by the name of Riddick (Vin Diesel). Riddick's chilling opening
narrative defines his character to a tee: `They say in cryo-sleep, the
only part of you that doesn't shut down is the primitive side...the
animal,' he says.  `I guess that's why I'm still awake.' When Riddick
frees himself from his confinement to roam the planet by foot, the
remaining passengers get spooked. But what they really should be
concerned about is the local wildlife: an endless swarm of nocturnal
creatures that could be described as carnivorous hammerhead
pterodactyls. Luckily, they only attack at night. Johns has a
breakthrough: `They seem to stick to darkness, so if we stick to
daylight, we should be alright.'
And then, a total eclipse occurs. Isn't that always the luck of
characters in this type of movie? At any rate, the survivors must
scramble across the desert plain with the necessary amount of energy
cells they will require to takeoff. The real question at hand is this:
placed in a life-threatening situation, will Riddick help the crew or
flee for the sake of his own freedom? Would you believe that this, the
extra dimension of character development, is one standout factor that
makes `Pitch Black' so refreshing? Tis true. The screenplay, by Twohy
and brothers Jim and Ken Wheat (who penned several forgettable sci-fi
movies), is a competent tension builder that boasts an absorbing set-up
and some palpable character interaction. There are memorable scenes, all
stemming from the character of Riddick. Inman (Keith David), the leader
of a small group of Islamic pilgrims, approaches Riddick to question his
faith in God. The timid English boozehound Paris (well-played by Lewis
Fitz-Gerald) is positively horrified of him, and finally there's the kid
(Rhiana Griffith), who wants to be Riddick.
Diesel, tough and lean, makes quite the lasting impression. But the real
star here is the alien foe - a massive, skittering army of clawed
monsters, sensationally well-devised and sleek in their appearance.
Twohy builds tension nicely by keeping the creatures in the shadows
until the eclipse, when they emerge from under the planet's surface in
tremendous numbers. All around, the visual effects - including the
well-edited crash sequence - are top-of-the-line in quality, despite the
relatively meager budget.
The script offers us intelligence, but it eventually degenerates into a
leftover creature feature ghoulash. The stylish, visually polished
appearance of `Pitch Black', often bleached out in a manner reminiscent
of the Gulf War comedy `Three Kings', is the film's most vital
component. Effective images such as the towering skeletonized remains of
past inhabitants are scattered across the alien landscape, and the
cinematography is spellbinding. The only time Twohy really indulges is
during a few attack sequences which reveal that he could have graduated
from the Brian DePalma school of editing; these fast, choppy cuts are
rather ineffective. My major complaint was the lack of action during the
2nd act. This all changes, however, when the lights go down and the
beasties come out to play...and not in a friendly sense.
All three primary actors - Diesel, Mitchell and Hauser - do splendidly
with building their characters. `Pitch Black' offers some aspects that
regular science-fiction does not: characters that we can identify with,
a thoughtful visual look, and a few genuine surprises for such a
simplistic plot. So, without further ado, sci-fi fans may rejoice: the
sleek, intelligent `Pitch Black' is superior monster mayhem.
Your Comments Appreciated! movieviews@hotmail.com

Author
Frankie Paiva
The entire science fiction genre has been beaten to death again and again and
again. There's nowhere to go with this type of movie, except head into the
direction of The Matrix, one of the few movies that has breathed life into this
flailing category for many years. However, some recent films made too early to
be influenced by The Matrix are still sticking to the formula. Witness the
disaster that was Supernova. But when a film like Pitch Black comes along, that
has just enough (and for this type of movie that's barely a drop) of
originality to fuel it off the ground it makes you feel that sometimes, just
rarely, they can get it right. They've obviously been paying attention to the
movies of the past. While this still does feel like yet another version of
Alien (how can a sci-fi movie today not try to be?) it manages to break free
from the mold.
Fry (Mitchell) is forced to crash land a spaceship on a deserted planet. Almost
everyone on the passenger ship dies, but some are awakened from cryogenic
slumber. These handful set foot on a desert-like planet which they later
discover has three different suns. They also discover an alarmingly high amount
of bodies hidden in the basement of a sealed building. When one of the
passengers is attacked by something hidden beneath the planet's surface they
fear the worst. Especially when they find out that a triple eclipse in going to
occur, spreading the planet with "pitch black" darkness.
Strange, bony, and silver evil bat-like things come crawling, swooping, and
lurking in the night to feed on human blood. They have one weakness, light
makes their skin dissolve. There are other dangers as well. The film's most fun
twist is the extremely muscular Riddick (An awesome Diesel, who looks to be one
of our major upcoming actors) he was a murderer imprisoned on the ship, and now
he's free to join the group of survivors. He shaves his head with a huge knife
and plays mind games with some of the crew. He also possesses a special talent
which will aid to the group's survival. Fry and Riddick take command to try and
save themselves and others from the monsters. Should Riddick be trusted? Is he
just trying to save himself? Is he more dangerous than what's attacking them?
These questions keep the film alive for it's second half.
There are several ideas in this movie that I found very interesting. The first
had to be the beginning of the film which was shot obviously by hand and is
very jerky, making the process of the crash more exciting. The second must go
to the idea of placing different color filters on the camera while each
different sun on the planet is up. In the first thirty minutes or so, we are
treated to the entire movie in an orange tint or a blue one. Kudos to the
casting director as well, Vin Diesel is perfectly cast, as is Radha Mitchell.
Though well cast, the acting is what you would expect for a sci-fi movie. There
isn't much Oscar stuff here, but Diesel gives it a surprising amount of effort.
The bad acting isn't entirely the actor's fault though. Of the ten remaining
people on the planet, we only get to know about three of them. The amazingly
underdeveloped other seven characters we never really know anything about, and
that makes us care less about who makes a stupid mistake, and is eaten to death
by the creatures of the night. This greatly impairs the building of tension
that the movie tries so hard for near the end. Speaking of those creatures,
they look pretty cool themselves. While it's rare that we ever get a full on
glance of them (that helps the film keep it's excitement) the brief glimpses we
get to see are pretty cool. Writer's block is apparent in snippets of the film.
There is an awfully slow middle where nothing really happens, and the ending is
kind of abrupt. But it doesn't take away from the entire experience. Obviously
a male film, despite the amazing lack of nudity, and most of the time cleavage.
Of the seventy or so people at my screening no more than five of the attendees
were women. But this picture would be most enjoyable for anyone who's looking
for some cheese. This is one to see in the theaters, as a video experience will
take away much of the mood and atmosphere of the movie. But this is not an epic
film (or an entirely good one), so please, take my advice, go to a matinee.

Author
Stephen Graham Jones
Pitch Black: don't let the sun do down on me
Pitch Black operates on the same premise as Asimov's "Nightfall": when the
sun goes down, the calamity starts. In "Nightfall," however, what darkness
brings with it is social upheaval, the breakdown of civilization, all that,
which is to say the cycle of destruction functions as some kind of vague
statement, warning us that the same thing can happen to us if we panic in
the face of the unknown, if we don't pay heed to the old stories, etc. With
Pitch Black, as there are some nocturnal aliens that would do Sigourney
Weaver proud, the imperative is worlds simpler: just don't let the sun set
on you.
This isn't to say that the movie is unsophisticated, however. Far from it.
The attention paid to the photography and the editing here is your first
indication, how director David Twohy says so much with camera movement and
composition that it takes the burden off the characters, allows their
dialogue to be that much less contrived. The second indication is simply the
quality of writing, how Jim and Ken Wheat manage to graft so many disparate
conventions into Pitch Black, yet do it subtly enough that things never
quite become predictable--or at least not that kind of predictable we're
accustomed to with effects-dependent horror.
It all starts with a worst-case scenario, a deep space transport proving
that Con-Air rule, that convicts are far too heavy to remain aloft for long.
So, in a camera-shaking fit that would do Blair Witch proud, Pitch Black's
2001-ish looking ship crash lands, and, per Supernova, the captain is the
first to die, meaning that now a leader has to emerge from the ragtag
survivors. Meet Caroline Fry (Radha Mitchell), who, as all final girls must,
goes by the gender inspecific 'Fry' and isn't afraid to get her hands dirty.
Getting top-billing along with her are Johns (Cole Hauser, with a
"nickel-slick" badge) and his escape-artist prisoner Riddick (Vin Diesel,
still anti-gun here, as with Iron Giant), perhaps the naturalest born killer
ever.
For an unusually long time, too, there are no Starship Trooper bugs to
contend with, just a sun-scorched, washed-out planet, shot with the same
lens as Three Kings, it seems. That bright. It's all about contrast, though,
setting us up for nightfall, which, due to some Thing-type discoveries
(abandoned research post, etc), Fry & Co. slowly learn to fear. At times it
feels a lot like Screamers, just without that Phillip K. Dick distrust of
reality. As with Screamers, however, there is some distrust between the
characters. Will Riddick kill them all? Will he steal the ship and leave
them for alien-bait? To Pitch Black's credit, you really don't know until
the final frames, simply because it's hard to tell who the main character
here is. You expect it to be Fry, the final girl, but then, too, Riddick's
voice-over started the whole thing, introduced us to everyone. As if this
was his story. So you just don't know, and that's refreshing.
You do, however, know that, once nightfall catches them unaware, anyone
without a name is expendable. And these hammerheaded bats of space make
short and graphic work of them. That's all to be expected. But then there's
the tagline, too--'Fight evil with evil.' Which is to say that, in the
absence of society, Riddick's sociopathic tendencies aren't that bad, might
in fact be what saves this crew, what redeems him. Nevertheless, though--and
counter--intuitively-Pitch Black's strongest moments are after the crash and
before the darkness comes, when Twohy can effectively fill the frame with so
much, so fast. After dark, he can't do that, and Pitch Black gets reduced
down to action and special effects. Still, as far as off-world sci-fi goes,
Pitch Black combines strong writing and excellent direction which
establishes it well above the crowd, makes the genre somehow more
legitimate. And, as far as the horror-aspects go, prepare for something
different. Fry could very well be the final, final girl.
(c)2000 Stephen Graham Jones, http://www.cinemuck.com

Author
John Beachem
I've got to hand it to actors recently, they've really been saving writers'
butts. From last year's "The Hurricane" being saved by Denzel Washington's
amazing performance, to last week's "Reindeer Games" being held afloat by
Charlize Theron and Gary Sinise, actors have been the only reason to see
several films recently. I'm afraid that "Pitch Black" is no exception. It's
a bleak, dreary, boring movie, made bearable only by the presence of Vin
Diesel ("Saving Private Ryan", "Boiler Room"), as the film's very reluctant
hero. Radha Mitchell is fairly good as the film's female lead, but no one
could have hoped to match Diesel for sheer intensity. There aren't many
actors who make you anxious to hear what they're going to say next.
A starship filled with colonists has just crash landed (for reasons never
fully explained) on a planet with three suns. Of the forty passengers, only
ten have survived. Seven are colonists, led by Iman (Keith David); one is
the ship's pilot, Carolyn Fry (Radha Mitchell); one is a police officer
named Johns (Cole Hauser); and the last is his captive, a murderer named
Riddick (Vin Diesel). The group soon finds an abandoned mining camp, where
the former residents don't appear to have left voluntarily. While there,
they discover that the day never ends on this planet, and its natural
habitants can only come out when it is completely dark, because the light
harms them. It would seem that the colonists have chosen a bad time to crash
land because an eclipse is about to take place,
and the entire planet will be plunged into darkness.
One of the things I first noticed about this movie was the way it was
filmed. Everything has a rather bleached, dried-out look to it. I think this
was intentional, and the film makers were attempting to show the effects of
three suns beating down on the planet at once; but all they succeeded in
doing was making the movie look so low budget that they had no money to
spend on good film. As if this weren't enough, the camera constantly jostles
about or quick cuts from person to person in a confusing manner. While this
might make sense during scenes when the creatures attack, it is used all the
time - even when people are only talking.
I think the biggest problem with "Pitch Black" is that it commits the
ultimate sin for a horror film. That is, of course, that a horror film
should never be dull, and "Pitch Black" is frequently. I believe that a good
horror movie should never let you relax for too long. I'm sure fans of "The
Blair Witch Project" will argue this with me, since that film managed to be
dull the whole way through but still scared some people. During "Pitch
 Black", I actually saw people in the theatre falling asleep during the
movie's frequent, very long conversations about things no one could care
less about. For example, there is a scene where we apparently learn some
grave secret about Johns; though they talk endlessly about it, I still
couldn't tell you just what exactly the secret was supposed to be.
Two more things I must make note of. First, despite Diesel's great
performance, his character's transformation is more than a little hard to
swallow. Second, could someone please explain to me how a desert planet,
with no plant life and therefore no herbivores, could support hordes of
massive, meat eating creatures? We never see anything else they could snack
on, so how do they stay alive? Oh well, just another stupid oversight in a
stupid movie I suppose. "Pitch Black" runs 108 minutes, which will feel much
longer than it actually is. I'd recommend it only to see Vin Diesel's
performance, and if you really want to see that, do yourself a favor and
wait for video. I give it two out of five stars.
Comments? Feel free to e-mail them to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
For past reviews, movie news, and other fun stuff, visit:
http://www.dependentfilms.net
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now:
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it only if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever made. See it only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Chuck Schwartz
.. . . raved a whole bunch of sixteen slash seventeen year olds on the
way out of a sneak of Pitch Black, a sci-fi thriller with more than a
couple of good shocks, great scenery, good effects and a mean mutha of a
bad guy who can take down big bad aliens, um, with both hands. Scary?
Sometimes. Watching Pitch Black is more like taking the really big,
really dangerous 'coaster ride at a nearby themepark. You know you're
going to have fun, but you also know you're walking out safe. I ain't
getting Cranky about a fun ride. The scenery is great (same location and
much of the same crew from the Mad Max flix) the effects work, and there
are at least two or three really, and I mean REALLY good ones. More than
worthy of the oversized popcorn.
Somewhere in deep space, a large transport -- three crew and forty
passengers in hypo-sleep -- crashes onto a desert planet. Docking pilot,
and now babelicious Captain of Our Survivors Caroline Fry (Radha
Mitchell) is the leader of the bunch. Second to her is a bounty
hunter/cop named Johns (Cole Hauser) who is transporting mass murderer
Richard B. Riddick (Vin Diesel), the meanest mother... you know... to
another round of imprisonment. The survivors (and I'll not comment on
who they are, lest I give away which folk don't make it -- there are a
pair of good surprises in there, too) bake under the rays of three,
count 'em three suns. They search for water and discover that the local
lifeforms may not be friendly. They bake to a golden brown. They find a
settlement, and a ship, abandoned 22 years earlier. It is readily
apparent to our victims-in-waiting that the only way off the planet is
to get the abandoned ship working. To do that, they have to transport
gear from the crash site to the settlement.
When the three suns are eclipsed by a huge, ringed planet and the
planetary natives come out in the dark for a wee bit o' lunch. Not
knowing how long "night" is, the fools decide to make the journey in the
dark, with Riddick's ability to see nocturnally (explained in the flick)
their only ticket to salvation. Otherwise, they're sushi-on-a-skeleton.
But the question hangs over their heads: will Riddick help or will he
slit the throats of everyone else and high-tail it to freedom. The
journey in the dark; the inevitable confrontation between Riddick and
Johns work beautifully. Get yourself in with an audience that talks back
to the screen and it'll get pretty damned noisy 
Writer/director Dave Twohy rightfully conceals as much about the alien
critters as possible. This builds the tension. But there are thousands
of em! At first, you get a real rush from the thought of an impossible
task and the sneaky way the forms of the creatures and their numbers are
revealed. These aliens tend to swarm, and that tires fast. Though it's
not non-stop thrilling, you get at least two one-on-one confrontations
courtesy Diesel's Riddick. Both totally rock.
Trust me. If this sucker didn't work, it'd be slammed as a second rate
Aliens (or maybe a first rate Screamers, which was a similarly themed,
real stinker of a couple of years back). Pitch Black was a fun ride.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Pitch Black, he would have paid...
Definite date flick, especially for the teen kidlets.
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 2000
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
I don't know what I was expecting from "Pitch Black", but certainly not an
extraordinarily slick and well-made little SF action movie.  Made for less
than the catering costs of some big-budget films, "Pitch Black" has the same
flavor of "The Terminator" or "The Hidden", other indie SF adventures that
made good on little resources.
The premise: A spacecraft with human cargo in deep-freeze gets blasted by a
meteor shower. Many of the passengers die, and the female second-in-command
(Radha Mitchell) jettisons many of the other passengers as a way of trying
to stabilize the craft for a crash landing.  The crash, by the way, is
spectacularly well staged, and shows how much can be accomplished on a small
budget these days with good computer graphics.
The planet itself is a sun-scorched wasteland -- actually, three suns, each
keeping the planet bathed in perpetual daytime.  The survivors salvage what
they can from the wreck (there are the usual Robinson Crusoe cliches, but
they're done with style) -- and then people start vanishing, and then
turning up dead in grisly ways.
Turns out one of the passengers is Raddick (Vin Diesel), a multiple murderer
and sociopath who has had his eyes surgically altered so that he can see in
darkness.  He is adamant, though, that he's not the one who's been
slaughtering people.  "You got a lot more to be afraid of than me around
here," he says enigmatically.  He is right. Do the captain and the killer
band together to fight off what's worse than either of them?  Do bears shine
their shoes in the woods?
There's a lot more to the film, of course, a good deal of which is not to be
spoiled, and some of which is painfully obvious.  What struck me, though,
was not the plot (which isn't particularly original,and frankly has holes
you could drive the Death Star through), but the level of craftsmanship on a
small budget and the smartly-written script.  Part of the production was
Australian; there's an edge and a wit to the lines that a wholly American
movie wouldn't have. At one point one of the younger passengers shows off
his knife skills and his intended victim retorts, "Did you run away from
your parents when they were younger, or did they run away from you?"
I appreciate the effort it takes to make a good, entertaining film.  "Pitch
Black" is not a work of art and will not live forever, but it is fun to
watch and is several notches above the usual level of SF-themed junk that
Hollywood grinds out anually.  And probably cost a lot less.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
It's a sad fact that Hollywood saves its worst films to put out in the
first two months of each calendar year.  Most of these stinkers get
yanked from theaters so quickly that you may forget that they ever
existed, unless you had the misfortune of paying to see one.  For some
reason, I seem to remember more of these early-season science-fiction
bombs than anything else.  If it has to do with space, and it comes out
in January or February, then run.  In the last two years, we've had
Phantoms, Wing Commander, Supernova and Firestorm (there's `space'
between Howie Long's ears, so it counts)  a crop that represents the
worst film has to offer.
Pitch Black certainly didn't seem like it would be an exception to the
general rule.  The pedigree is less than stellar - David N. Twohy (The
Arrival) directing from a script that he wrote with brothers Jim and Ken
Wheat (you may remember them from such sequels as The Fly 2, The Birds 2
and Nightmare on Elm Street 4).  There are no A-list stars.  There
aren't really any B-list stars, either.  In fact, the C-list might even
be out of reach.  The story isn't anything special, either.
But Pitch Black isn't bad.  I might even go so far as to say that it's
good (how about `goodish'?).  It's about a passenger freighter called
the Hunter-Gratzner, a spacecraft with thirty-nine lives on board 
including Richard B. Riddick (Vin Diesel, Boiler Room), a diabolical
prisoner that can see in the dark.  The ship crashes into a strange
planet during a routine hyper-jump, killing the captain and leaving
Pilot Second Class Carolyn Fry (Radha Mitchell, High Art) in charge of
the crew, prisoner and multi-racial travelers.  Wait a secondFry?
Prisoner?  Multi-racial travelers?  This sounds like a cross between
ConAir and Futurama.
Of course, Pitch Black is more like Alien than anything else.  The basic
plot of the movie involves these nasty nocturnal creatures that will
only attack Fry and crew when it's dark.  As the title indicates, things
become pitch-black when a rare eclipse shrouds the planet in darkness.
Heythat guy that can see in the dark should come in handy, eh?  People
predictably start getting bumped off one by one until three are left to
battle the CG monsters.
There are three things that make Pitch Black entertaining.  The first is
that the film doesn't seem to have the typical stock characters that
plague the genre.  Black also isn't as clichéd as you would expect from
a sci-fi flick released this early in the year.  That is to say, it
doesn't rip off every successful space flick, like Supernova did.  The
third and most impressive feature is the editing (Rick Shaine, Extreme
Measures) and cinematography (David Eggby, Blue Streak).  The crash
scene is really well done, using bright flashes of light and quick cuts,
but it isn't until after the crash that the feel of the film is
established.  The planet is essentially dead:  A desert littered with
barren trees, abandoned outposts and bones of humongous animals, and
Eggby shoots it like Three Kings  beautifully washed out with muted
colors.  If nothing else, it's a visual winner.
1:52 - R for sci-fi violence and gore, and for language

Author
Ross Anthony
This sci-fi horror flick is at its best simulating a hypothetical three sun
solar system. Amateur astronomers (myself one) will raise many a
deliberating eyebrow at the assumptions we swallow in order to accept this
conjectural reality.
The film opens with a space vessel transporting a load of commercial
passengers (average people, save for the hardened criminal) all enjoying
dreams in cryo-sleep (save for the hardened criminal). Suddenly, unknown
objects rip through the walls of the vessel awakening all while killing the
captain (of course). Now if this is bad luck, just wait ... "Pitch Black"
defines the meaning of the phrase. The first mate, a sassy blonde, jumps to
the pilot seat in time to see the surface of some planet swiftly
approaching. In an effort to gain control of the speeding ship she quickly
purges large sections of it ... including the payload (the passengers); but
something's wrong, the lever sticks and she's forced to land with all on
board. This sequence displays perhaps the most exhilarating graphics of the
film. Atmospheric debris shatter the windshield into a splash of dust
(miraculously, the pilot's pretty face isn't in the slightest marred). But
still the menacing rush of dust and wind create a thrilling ride for the
audience as the ship slides across the burnt orange surface of an unknown
land. You'll sigh in relief when it finally comes to a stop.
Looking out on the horizon, survivors quickly conclude that there will be no
nightfall due to the multiple suns. Which is a good thing, because the
planet is inhabited by "a lot" of nasty pterodactyl type aliens that don't
like the light. But don't forget the bad luck factor; though the place is
devoid of anything else, our travelers quickly stumble across an old mining
factory, pick up one sample, instantly evaluate it as the last one, decode
its age at 22 years (in unknown planet time, that is), then run over to a
rather cool mechanical replica of the current solar system left by the human
minors mysteriously killed 22 years back. The sharp unmarred pilot
hand-revolves the geared planetary assemblage 22 times back into the solar
system's history. The convenient counter clicks backward. Ah-oh, an eclipse!
What are the chances of that? These poor kids just happened to be marooned
on a planet inhabited by light-hating beasts on the very day of its 22-year
cycle eclipse.
With an hour's warning, the quickly dwindling troop still isn't prepared as
the huge second planet with parallel rings rotating in opposite directions
(not sure that's possible) rather swiftly blots out the sun. Despite the
potential impossibility, it's a beautiful scene; the second planet's horizon
cracking the sun as if to release from it a swarm of bat-like monsters into
the honey-golden sky. Of course, just then one passenger finds the necessity
to run out into the darkness while the remaining group attempts to determine
the duration of this eclipse in order to assess a plan. Given the pilot's
lightening speed at predicting the eclipse and that nifty solar-system
model, she could have easily determined the duration. But she didn't.
As a viewer in the theater, witnessing the rate of the eclipse, you could
have reasonably guessed its duration to be brief - an hour or so. But, no
strangers to bad luck, this entourage embraces the ever-so remote
possibility that these two planets are orbiting in sync, thus they assume
the darkness may be very very long lasting and therefore need to rush out
into it and prepare their departure. Silly kids, have they forgotten about
the other sun(s)?
A murderer in the midst and thousands of hungry aliens to dodge, "Pitch
Black" is still meant to scare you. With many a cheap (sometimes tedious)
set up, suspenseful build, followed by either a kill or a fake out to
progress it along.
Nice performance by the bad guy, Vin Diesel (voice of "Iron Giant" by the
way). Respectably acted, filmed and directed, "Pitch Black" caps off with a
surprisingly Christian theme, but may make a better platform for a beginning
astronomy class than action-packed thriller.
Pitch Black. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R. 107 minutes.
Starring Vin Diesel, Radha Mitchell, Cole Hauser, Keith David, Lewis
Fitz-Gerald, Claudia Black, Rhiana Griffith, John Moore.
Directed by David Twohy
Written by Jim and Ken Wheat and David Twohy
Produced by Tom Engelman at USA films.
Grade..........................B-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Christopher Null
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Max Messier.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/e2e728050216b2b508256889000b77b2?OpenDocument
Mama, could you leave the hall light on tonight?
One thing I love to see in a film is definition of character without the
need for a windy, Oscar speech or the death of a loved one that prompts
an "emotional release."  The only genre that gives you that type of
character is the Western.  The Western is littered with good men with
bad hearts and bad men who struggle for a clean conscious.  The words of
these men carry a heavy emotional burden and clearly define and expose
the true nature of the person.  Pitch Black is one of the best films I
have seen in a very long time, and it carves its roots from the essence
of a Western, providing amazing clarity with a direct narrative prose.
>From the moment the lights dim, the audience is thrown into an emotional
situation where innocent people go to `meet their maker' and survival is
their first instinct.  In those first moments, Pitch Black wraps its
hands around your neck and never lets go.  To wit: A passenger spaceship
carrying 40 people hits some type of space debris and crash lands on a
barren, desert plant with only 7 people walking away.  The survivors
include a convicted murder with infrared lenses for eyes, a marshal with
a hidden agenda, a selfish pilot focused on saving her own ass, a
religious leader with three followers, and various odds and ends of
characters.  The three suns shine brightly on the planet's surface, and
the hodgepodge of survivors form a loose collation to survive.  The only
problem is that something is hiding in the shadows, waiting for them in
the dark.
This simple plot lets the script take shape and lets the characters
develop and define their own prerogatives.  With amazing cinematography
that resembles the work of the David O. Russell film Three Kings,
director David Twohy gives the planet a barren, washed-out look, and all
of the interiors of the wrecked ship a cool metallic tinge.  One of main
elements that gives the film such a film grip on the senses in the
presence of Vin Diesel, currently seen in the new film Boiler Room and
from last year's Saving Private Ryan.  His cool, somewhat haunting prose
littered with poignant words reminds you of the gunslinger who has
killed one too many people and has lost touch with the human race: A man
of honor who provides the main catalyst for defining his fellow
characters' personal attributes and motivations.
By underexposing the terror that lies in wait for the survivors, the
feelings of suspense and claustrophobia are astonishing.  What lies
beyond the circle of light?  What lies beyond the light bears a strong
resemblance to the aliens designed by Geiger and the movements of the
creatures mimic those of the raptors of Jurassic Park.  But Twohy lets
us also `see' through the eyes of the aliens and take part in the hunt
for food.  (The concept was first employed in the Schwartzenegger
vehicle from the eighties, Predator.)
The most attractive element of Pitch Black is how beautiful the
cinematography is, while developing a real sense of an alien world.  You
can almost feel the heat from the ground and the dizziness of the
humidity in the air.  The mish-mash of B-actors pull together some
terrific acting, and no loose ends of the storyline are left hanging in
the lurch.  It's pretty amazing when you realize this script came from
the guys that wrote the riveting drama, The Birds II: Land's End.
For the ride of your life (or at least just two hours of mayhem), Pitch
Black will leave you with the sudden urgency to leave the hall light on
when you climb into bed that night.  But it's a lot scarier to not know
what's in the dark, waiting for you to turn the corner.  Wes Craven and
John Carpenter taught us that a long time ago.
Director: David Twohy
Producer: Tom Engelman, Ted Field, Scott Kroopf
Writer: Jim and Ken Wheat, David Twohy
Starring: Vin Diesel, Radha Mitchell, Cole Hauser, Keith David
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by David Twohy. Screenplay by Jim Wheat, Ken Wheat and Twohy.
Starring Vin Diesel, Radha Mitchell, Cole Hauser. Running time: 108
minutes. Rated AA for offensive language and violent scenes. Reviewed on
March 16th, 2000.
My first exposure to "Pitch Black" came when the preview was played in 
front of "Girl, Interrupted" a month and a half ago. The preview hinted 
at monsters which lived on a sun-drenched planet but could only come out 
in the darkness. Then: "an eclipse!" How convenient, I thought; I could 
see the whole movie playing out in my mind. I held out some hope that 
the filmmakers might surprise me, but sadly, actually watching "Pitch 
Black" did not prove to be a revelatory experience. "Pitch Black" is 
indeed as improbable, formulaic and predictable as its preview implies.
The film is set sometime in the future. Men travel the stars in enormous 
ships, cryogenically frozen for the duration of the voyage. One such 
spaceship is knocked off course and crashlands, killing all but 
a handful of the passengers and crew. The survivors include docking pilot 
Caroline Fry (Radha Mitchell), uneasy with authority and plagued by 
self-doubts; no-nonsense mercenary William Johns (Cole Hauser); and 
Richard Riddick (Vin Diesel), a convicted murderer.
The planet on which they are marooned has three suns, and as a result is 
a dry, blasted terrain without plants or water. Soon, though, the 
survivors discover evidence of a previous human expedition to the planet 
which appears to have been violently wiped out. The culprits soon become 
obvious: in underground caverns live hideous creatures which thrive in 
darkness and emerge onto the planet's surface only during a total solar 
eclipse, which in a feat of mathematical and physical improbability 
occurs like clockwork every twenty-two years. Of course, the cycle is 
almost up and soon the survivors find themselves under assault from wave 
upon wave of the terrifying, merciless monsters which are almost 
invisible in the pervasive darkness. Their only hope lies with the 
enigmatic Riddick, whose eyes have been surgically altered to permit him 
to see in the dark.
Convenient indeed. But to be fair, films have to be permitted a certain 
degree of latitude when it comes to such coincidences; without them, in 
many cases there just wouldn't be much of a movie. This is particularly 
true of science-fiction movies, which are so totally dependent on the 
imagined and the improbable to begin with. But such a leap of faith would 
be far easier to make if it were in the service of an entertaining movie. 
"Pitch Black" simply is not.
The entire movie is little more than one long, drawn-out chase scene. The 
characters have to get from Point A to Point B while avoiding the 
monsters, and there isn't much more to "Pitch Black" than that. The 
movie is punctuated only by a few token nods to character development, as 
well as the obligatory deaths which occur with almost comical timing. It 
is so easy to forecast right from the start the identity of those 
characters who survive to the end, it's criminal. This is a classic 
example of writing by the numbers; the screenplay by Jim Wheat, Ken Wheat 
and director David Twohy could just as easily have been generated by a 
computer program, it is so routine.
The best aspect of "Pitch Black" is the computer-animated special effects. 
There are some beautiful shots of the spaceship cruising past the rings 
of a Saturn-like planet, and of the onset of the solar eclipse. The 
monsters are also well-designed, although they do seem to owe something 
to "Alien". Twohy at least has the presence of mind to keep the monsters 
mostly out of sight for much of the film, adding to their sense of menace.
Even when they are fully unveiled, the lighting and camerawork keeps them 
indistinct. It's a shame, then, that "Pitch Black" utilizes them in such 
tired, unimaginative situations. They hammer against doors. They follow 
the party just out of sight in the darkness. They pop out of nowhere in an 
apparently empty corridor. There aren't many genuine frights here, and 
even the rare creepy moments are obvious and predictable.
Part of the movie's problem is that it develops few sympathetic 
characters to generate viewer interest. I found it difficult to be 
absorbed into the atmosphere of terror "Pitch Black" attempts to generate 
when I had absolutely no emotional investment in the characters 
whatsoever. I think it says something about the movie that of the three 
principals, the most sympathetic is the mass murderer, Riddick. Sort of a 
hunky Hannibal Lecter with super-powers, Diesel does a good job of making 
Riddick an intriguing anti-hero while not forgetting that he is, after 
all, still a criminal. Mitchell and Hauser, meanwhile, struggle futilely 
with their unmemorable, unlikeable characters. The rest of the ragtag 
band is largely forgettable, although Keith David does what he can with the 
underdeveloped role of the spiritual Imam.
"Pitch Black" is a dismal and tedious exercise in moviemaking, failing 
even to provide the requisite thrills and chills, let alone living up to 
the enormous potential of the science-fiction genre. Sci-f provides 
filmmakers with the opportunity to exercise the entire breadth of their 
vision and creativity, to do things no other genre permits. It is all the 
more unfortunate, then, to see a movie like "Pitch Black" dismiss this 
opportunity in favor of the banal and the ordinary. While the characters 
spend the entire movie running around the deathtrap planet, the audience 
is well advised to run in only one direction: away from the theater. 
Either that, or go into cryogenic sleep until "Pitch Black" is over.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/PitchBlack.html

Author
Michael Dequina
Much imagination can be seen in the science fiction thriller
_Pitch_Black_--and I mean "seen": in a time where all the far-off worlds
in distant galaxies have come to look the same, cinematographer David
Eggby has given the film's central planet a look that is distinctly new
and alien.  But that is the only thing free from the cookie cutter in
David Twohy's otherwise derivative action film.
The plot is a ripoff of _Aliens_, with a group of people marooned on a
desert planet being hunted down by ravenous alien creatures; these
creatures themselves resemble the Alien, with a couple of alterations
(the most major one being that some have wings).  There is another added
wrinkle--they only come out in the dark, and when the planets multiple
suns undergo simultaneous eclipse, the humans must band together to
survive.
Just who are these humans, anyway?  There is very little
characterization in the script by Twohy and Jim and Ken Wheat.  The
ostensible lead is fry (Radha Mitchell), a pilot with the requisite
personal trauma, which is linked to the crash that placed them on the
planet.  The other two main characters are just as shallow, but at least
they're given some type of memorable characteristic (everyone else
isn't).  Johns (Cole Hauser) is a lawman who is perhaps even shadier than
his prisoner, the murderer Riddick (Vin Diesel), who has special night
vision enhanced eyes.  Riddick's escape from custody makes for a tedious
timekilling subplot before the alien story gets underway; with all the
others fearing for their lives while trying to locate him, the film
resembles an outer space slasher film.
Character is not as important as action and effects in films such as
_Pitch_Black_, and while competently done, nothing here breaks any new
ground in those departments; the slow-mo and quick cut style Twohy uses
is a pale imitation of John Woo.  What is fresh, as I had mentioned, is
Eggby's sterling cinematography.  The early exterior shots on the planet
are striking, with all the colors washed out other than garish shades of
yellow.  Another interesting conceit is that each of the planet's three
sons bear a different hue; as such, when in the light of the blue sun,
for instance, the image is awash in blue, etc.
Such striking use of color goes out the window when the key eclipse
takes place, and _Pitch_Black_'s look matches its title.  From that point
on, with the action and effects failing to really dazzle, one looks to
Twohy to provide something of interest in the story.  But no such thing
ever comes, and the virtual absence of humor backfires, ironically making
the some of the proceedings laughable (the overwrought "emotional"
moments come off especially ridiculous).  _Pitch_Black_ may actually
please most audiences for capably executing most of its desired task, but
it takes something a bit more to make a lasting impression in a crowded
genre.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Dennis Schwartz
  PITCH BLACK (director/writer: David Twohy; screenwriters: Jim and Ken
Wheat/based on a story by the Wheat brothers; cinematographer: David Eggby;
editor: Rick Shaine; cast: Vin Diesel (Riddick), Radha Mitchell (Fry), Cole
Hauser (Johns), Keith David (Imam), Lewis Fitz-Gerald (Paris), Claudia Black
(Shazza), Rhiana Griffith (Jack/Jackie), John Moore (Zeke), Simon Burke (Greg
Owens); Runtime: 108; USA Films/Polygram; 2000) 
When a spaceship crash-lands on a planet of three suns that is plagued by
darkness as a solar eclipse hits, the survivors must fight the nocturnal,
batlike, alien creatures. These aliens avoid the light and strike when it's
dark. The survivors include a dangerous murderer serving a life sentence in
maximum security, Riddick (Diesel), who has surgically implanted eyes that shine
enabling him to have night vision. He also has awesome muscles that are pumped
for action. He wore specially fitted contact lenses to give him that shine job
look. 
The survivors include: Riddick, who is in chains as he is being transported to
another prison; the cruel guard, Johns (Cole Hauser), who it turns out has a few
flaws in his personality -- which include a morphine habit; and, the
spacecraft's landing pilot, Fry (Radha Mitchell), who becomes the captain when
it's discovered that the captain's throat had been slashed. These two leaders of
the plan to get off the dark planet argue all the time, and trust among the
survivors becomes the issue. Fry had her moment of cowardice when landing the
plane, as she almost panicked and pulled the cord to eject the passengers. This
is something Johns uses against her. The other survivors include: a preachy
Muslim imam, a holy man, talking up a storm about God; a prissy English
antiquities dealer whose wine collection is used as lighting fuel to get them
off this wasteland, when it's covered in pitch darkness. And a boy called Jack
who turns out to be a girl named Jackie, as discovered through the efforts of
Riddick's nose for female hormones. 
This sci-fi formula action flick is noteworthy for its splendid cinematography,
as it was filmed in the Australian Outback, and for its innovative editing cuts.
The story line left me gasping for more light and the acting left me in the dark
searching for one line of dialogue that wasn't shrill or trite. No actor was
provided with a challenging part, but Diesel uses his powerfully muscular
presence and deep baritone voice to dominate this action story. He comes to say
one-liners such as this: "They did not know who they were f*cking with!" He says
this to the dead aliens after he puts them out of their misery, but he might as
well have spoken it to a dead audience. 
The writer/director David Twohy (The Arrival) tries to bring some intelligence
to the story, but the script is too predictable to keep one interested in it.
The characters ranged from a shrill Radha to a cartoonlike Diesel, making it
easy to root for the aliens to possibly, against all formula film odds, pick off
all the survivors of the spacecraft. But three do survive and, in my opinion,
that's three too many! This film didn't have a clue about what point it wanted
to make. It was particularly unclear how good or bad they wanted to portray
Diesel's character, as he kept changing from bad to good guy at every alien
sighting. By the film's end I had an empty feeling, knowing I saw another
special effect sci-fi film that couldn't bring on a story. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ 
