Title
Review for Good Morning, Vietnam (1987)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     There is a spate of films coming out about the Vietnam experience.
Most seem to focus on large aspects of the war.  FULL METAL JACKET was
spread between Marine training and the Tet Offensive.  HANOI HILTON was
about the POW experience.  PLATOON put us into the boots of American ground
troops.  GOOD MORNING, VIETNAM is an exception.  It is mostly about what
would be a minor footnote to the war, a disc jockey (Adrian Cronauer, played
by Robin Williams) brought in to keep the troops' morale up.  Cronauer has
to fight a separate war, not against the enemy but against his own immediate
superiors, who want him to play music fit for elevators and to keep his
humor toned down.  Often in this sort of film it is the brass that does not
understand the rebel and people on his own level defend him.  One of the
interesting reversals in GOOD MORNING, VIETNAM is that here the top brass
want to keep the disc jockey.  Far from the usual cliche of dehumanized
generals making unfeeling decisions, this an anti-military film in which the
highest-ranking officer is one of the heroes of the film.
     There is another interesting reversal.  Many war films have two plot
lines, the main character's personal life and his professional life.  But
the personal plot line will have little to do with the war; only the
professional life plot line will really have the war as an important
element.  THE CAINE MUTINY is a good example--the (superfluous) love story
could easily have been moved to a non-war setting.  GOOD MORNING, VIETNAM
does just the reverse.  The main plot line could have been moved to WNBC in
New York without much change.  It is the love story that really requires the
Vietnam War setting.
     Part of what bothers me about GOOD MORNING, VIETNAM is that it feels
like it is rearing back to make some sort of powerful statement, but if the
punch ever hit, I missed it.  There is some talk about Americans seeing
Vietnamese as animals, but much of the film makes the point that there are
caring Americans and we see really only two who are not.  There is a dab of
"horrors of war" scenes but not much to emphasize the point.  Director Barry
Levison is used to making gentle human dramas like DINER and TIN MEN.  His
most biting film to date was AND JUSTICE FOR ALL and his heart just did not
seem to be into making a bitter anti-American statement.
     GOOD MORNING, VIETNAM leaves ample places for Robin Williams to "do his
thing."  He does wild improvisational comedy at the microphone, some quite
good.  It has the feel of being spontaneous and if it is, he must be some
sort of genius.  GOOD MORNING, VIETNAM is not the film it could have been,
but deserves a low +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Ritalynne Brechner
     This new film is a fabulous stream-of-consiousness riff by Robin Williams
surrounded by a remarkably dull war story.  It is supposed to be based on a
real-life 60s army radio MC, but it does no good to know that.  Perhaps the war
story is something on which he insisted.  I saw the movie a week ago, and now I
believe the purpose of the silly story is to give the audience time to relax
their mouths and cheeks, and catch some breath, as breathing is hard when
you're laughing as much as you do while Mr.  Williams is working.
     A couple of years ago Mr.  Williams rented the Metropolitan Opera House
(which seats 3,718 people) and performed an intimate monologue there.  During
that show he occasionally became less funny.  But breathing was an obstacle.
Both for him (he speaks so fast I have doubts as to how he inhales at all) and
for the audience (we were rolling in the aisles.)  I believe it was filmed for
TV.  That might be the best way to see him, with the less funny material edited
out, and a remote control so one can stop it every once in a while and respire.
     But this film has enough of Mr.  Williams being funny to make it worth the
$7 (I think I paid $30 for the Met) and enough fluff to leave time to breath.

Author
Eugene Miya
     Adrian Cronauer is a USAF DJ transferred from Crete to an early Vietnam
police action (1965).  This film is about his adjustment to Nam, and Nam's
adjustment to Cronauer.  The other characters include the General who brought
him there, his CO and NCO, and his fellow DJs.  Cronauer also takes an off-duty
stint teaching English to get close to a Vietnamese girl (Crete apparently
lacking women).  There are run-ins with terrorist bombs, mines in the jungle,
new foods, smiles from 'helping' people in a different culture: all the things
which people join the Armed forces for....  Note: since realism is being
discussed there really is an Adrian Cronauer (see the TIME review on this).
     In some ways, the film is kind of a "downer" (mimic Robin Williams surfer
voice).  There many amusing moments with Williams, but these are short-lived.
The problem is there are no good complementary (antagonistic) characters for
Robin to bounce his lines off.  M.A.S.H. had the Frank Burns and Hot Lips
characters to a minor degree.  Unlike M.A.S.H., Cronauer does not completely
spoof the bureaucracy.  He's constantly put down by it.  
     My favorite scene in the film (you have to see it, no real spoiler) is
when Adrian (being driven to the radio station) gets caught in a traffic jam as
troops are heading to the front.  This is Robin as his best.
     GOOD MORNING, VIETNAM appears like Bill Murray's attempt to cover some
serious material as in THE RAZOR'S EDGE.  This film will do well, initially,
because of Robin William's following.  Too much is made of his comedy.
Perhaps, he should have had a better hand with his writing.
     I really like Robin Williams and have seen him live many times.  What's
great about him isn't so much his comedy but his observations of the "human
condition."  I don't own any of his comedy albums because his visual
coordination is important to his delivery.  This is also a problem in this
film.  Williams has noted the problem himself between trained actor versus
comic.  By far and away, his best material is what's shown on HBO.
>From the Rock of Ages Home for Retired Hackers:
--eugene miya NASA Ames Research Center eugene@ames-aurora.ARPA
  {uunet,hplabs,hao,ihnp4,decwrl,allegra,tektronix}!ames!aurora!eugene
