Title
Review for "Earth 2" (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James "Kibo" Parry
     This is the show which is actually so bad that Steven Spielberg
wouldn't allow his name to appear in the credits; keep in mind that he
*did* have his name on "SeaQuest DSV."
     The first ten minutes or so were a lot like "SeaQuest"--quite poor,
and nonsensical--and then they *got* to the planet, and I damn near fell
asleep.  It should also be noted that these people are stranded on an
alien planet with a land-crawler and a robot whose glass head is filled
with blinking lights, and Dr. Smith's presence is sorely missed--It's
exactly the same concept as Lost In Space, and once they got to the
planet, the production values (and writing) weren't that much better.
(The big difference is that there's no bumbling evil saboteur aboard.
Like Dr. Smith, there's one of those in the EARTH 2 pilot, and like
Dr. Smith, he gets trapped aboard at takeoff, but the difference is he
doesn't make it to the planet with the colonists.)
     The premise is that children who are born anywhere but on
overpopulated Earth get "The Syndrome" which means they die at age
nine, but "the scientific and medical community" declare that this
doesn't exist, and they do not want this colonization ship (full of
families of sick children) to leave Earth orbit because "they'll lose
control" (yeah, it's one of those shows where "the scientific
community" is the most evil force in the universe.)  So they plant a
bomb (represented by a little box with enormous LED numbers
conveniently displayed on it) on board hidden on the back of one of the
video screens, and the heroes find this and discover that it's set to
go off when they turn off the video screen and so they throw the screen
out the airlock while the guy on it is still talking (aparently in the
future you don't need to plug things in.)  Then they all go into
hibernation for twenty-two years.  We see the ship plummeting to the
new planet out of control, then we see an Apollo capsule ejecting from
it, then we see the same shot again, and our dozen heroes crash on the
planet without the other hundreds of colonists.  You can tell it's an
alien planet because it looks just like Arizona except there are
feathers blowing through the air (I think they were meant to be really
big snowflakes.)  They trek across the desert and encounter three kinds
of aliens: tall guys in rubber suits with mystical healing powers,
midgets in rubber suits, and little puppets that look a *lot* like
E.T.  Of course the kids immediately befriend the little aliens;  the
show is focused on the child characters for obvious reasons.
     There was nothing new in it anywhere, and I was *amazed* that
someone could spend $30,000,000 on something without better production
values.  The model work in the first few minutes was quite nice, but
not $30,000,000 worth!  The robot was a guy in a plastic suit with
blinking lights on top of his head, the crawler was a Humvee (with a
*gigantic* "Hummer" logo on the front) with some randomly-rotating
antennae on it, the E.T.-derivative alien walked like an
audio-animatronic robot from Disneyland, and the special effects (after
the scenes with the space station) consisted of *endless* fuzzy slo-mo
sequences representing mystical inner journeys (i.e. dreams).  Oh,
yeah, and a kid got sucked into a vermiculite pit, Lost In
Space-style.  I actually found it very similar to the "SeaQuest"
pilot: quite disentertaining, and dull enough so that I didn't get the
crucial "bad laughs" from it that I can get from most things this
poor.  There are about a dozen characters, and I didn't learn any of
their names, which doesn't really matter since none of them seems to
have a personality (the closest we get is there's the token black
genius--as always--and a sick boy who has to wear a night retainer that
goes up his nose.)
     EARTH 2's pilot was about as interesting as EARTH II's pilot (from
20 years ago, starring Gary Lockwood--in a stunning display of
originality, they picked a name someone had already used for a bad
show.)
     I hope that Spielberg has his standard "Ha!  Ha!  You're stuck
with this bomb for *two years*!" contract like he did with "Amazing
Stories" and "SeaQuest," because then it'll get renewed in spite of
amazingly low ratings and the producers will know it can't possibly
survive another year and then they just won't *care*, and they'll do
something like the second season of "SeaQuest" where the show just goes
totally nuts.
     Basically, I liked nothing about EARTH 2 except the model space
station, which looked quite good, particularly since it was the same
design as the one in 2001.  This show bites the big one, even by the
standards of network science fiction series.  And it *especially* bites
the big one when you realize they threw thirty million dollars at it,
and that Irwin Allen made the same show in 1965 for a tenth the cost.
Given that there are four people listed under "Created By" in the
opening credits, I thought that they were having a competition to see
who could make EARTH 2 the most derivative.  Of course, this
hypothesis was proven wrong when I read the TV GUIDE interview where
one of the writers bragged about never having worked with science
fiction before, saying, "We won't have the tried and true ideas to fall
back on." Essentially, what we have here is a show by people who don't
have a clue about science fiction, and by not knowing what they're
doing have simply recapitulated some of the tiredest concepts, in an
uninteresting way.
