Title
Review for Waking the Dead (1999)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Steve Rhodes
WAKING THE DEAD has an unintentionally ironic title.  With exceedingly
bland acting by the leads, Billy Crudup and Jennifer Connelly, and
lethargic directing by Keith Gordon (A MIDNIGHT CLEAR), the movie is so
comatose that audiences will want to shake it or do something to wake it
up.
Gordon has all of his cast and crew on permanent slow-motion.  People
don't walk, they move at a glacial pace.  Moss could start growing on
their shoes at the rate at which they stroll across the stage.  And the
camera zooms and pans with excruciating slowness as if its gears are
frozen from shooting the film's many snow-covered scenes.
The story, which moves back and forth among several timeframes, concerns
a man who sees dead people, or, more precisely, one dead woman.
Fielding Pierce (Crudup) has a cushy job guarding New York's harbor for
the Coast Guard during the Vietnam War.  He is conflicted since he'd
like to go AWOL to Canada to protest the war but worries that it might
upset his ambition to be the President of the United States.  One
certainly couldn't be elected president, he reasons, after a visible
protest against one's own country.
Fielding's girlfriend, Sarah Williams (Connelly), is an anti-war
activist who encourages him to leave the country.  A few years later,
she is killed in Chile, where she has gone as part of the Sanctuary
movement.  After that, he follows a political career, while the dead
Sarah keeps making guest appearances in his life.
The problem is that the plot's realization isn't the least bit
convincing.  Never do Fielding or Sarah seem genuinely interested in any
of their causes or aspirations.  Both show all of the emotive power of a
stone.  It isn't clear how Fielding could get any votes, much less get
elected.  He is an empty suit without any issues or even a decent stump
speech.  Sarah says that she's committed to her causes, but shows no
authentic spark of compassion for the people to whom she devotes
herself.
This leaves the movie to succeed or die based just on their love affair,
which turns out to be the weakest link of all.  Only when having sex do
these lovers ever appear the least bit romantically inclined.  At other
times, they say the right words, but their vacant eyes show they are
just reading their lines.
"If anybody really knew Kennedy, do you think they'd have ever voted for
him?" Fielding's father asks him.  The story implies that politicians
must never reveal themselves to us if they want to get elected.  The
movie takes the same reticent approach, giving us trite speeches but
little more.  I'd recommend that you vote against it.
WAKING THE DEAD runs 1:45.  It is rated R for sexuality and language and
would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 USA Films/Egg Pictures
 Director: Robert Dillon
 Writer: Keith Gordon, novel by Scott Spencer
 Cast: Tony Calabretta, Ivonne Coll, Jennifer Connelly, Billy
Crudup, Paul Hipp, Hal Holbrook, Janet McTeer, Molly
Parker, Leah Pinsent
   "I see dead people," says Cole Sear in the key line of M.
Night Shyamalan's "Sixth Sense."  Last year's film--which
marked a breakthrough for Bruce Willis (which he later
squandered in the pathetic comedy "The Whole Nine Yards")-
-enjoyed the most expertly engineered plot twist of any we've
seen in 1999.  "Waking the Dead" has a similar theme,
though with a less than spellbinding conclusion, but gives
hope to those of us who are more than eight years old.  We
too might relish the thrill of observing the dead.  What you
have to do is not so much to believe as to love.  And boy, do
you have to love deeply, so much so that your devotion
transcends this mortal coil.  That's just what Fielding Pierce
(Billy Crudup) can effect in a film which its executive
producer, Jodie Foster, feels is so strong, so captivating, that
it simply had to be made.  Compressing Scott Spencer's
dense, 500-page novel into less than two hours, writer Robert
Dillon succeeds to a reasonable extent under the helm of
director Keith Gordon ("Mother Night").  This time around,
Gordon does not have the unenviable job of adapting an
enigmatic Kurt Vonnegut story of an American prisoner in an
Israeli jail who had posed as a Nazi propagandist on the
radio: but he is still fond of flashback techniques that
flustered us in that film's audience.  With "Waking the Dead"
we take a dizzying path from the early eighties back to the
early seventies again to the eighties and back again almost
ad infinitum until every last romantic emotion and political
idea is wrung from its two attractive principals.
    "Waking the Dead" is not so much a supernatural tingler
(though it is that) as it is a marriage between affairs of state 
and affairs of the heart--centering on a smashingly attractive
performer with a Mediterranean image and an ambitious
politician who often appears clueless.  As Fielding Pierce,  
Crudup is introduced to us in 1974 as a private in the Coast
Guard, a post he may have taken to avoid being sent to
Southeast Asia during the closing months of the Vietnam
War.  Not for him the uncompromising path, the flight to
Canada--which might have meant the throwing away of his
future.   But for the woman he meets at his hippie brother's
(Paul Hipp's) publishing firm where she serves as an
assistant, Sarah Williams (Jennifer Connelly), compromise is
anathema.  For Sarah and Fielding it's love at first sight, but
like star-crossed lovers throughout history they are destined
for an uneven future.
   While Fielding, mentored for a seat in Congress by the
well-connected Isaac Green (Hal Holbrook), walks the middle
path, his great love is an uncompromising woman of the left
who works through her church with a Chilean relief program. 
At one point she lashes out at a bigwig supporter of her boy
friend's congressional campaign for writing a Newsweek
article praising the violent overthrow of a democratically
elected Chilean regime.  When you look at Sarah, you think
Sophocles' "Antigone," a pain-in-the-butt, unyielding force
willing to die for her beliefs.  Observe Fielding and you see a
guy who has no real political program other than a vague
sense that he will work for his constituents and later,
pretentiously to help push America closer to being a paradise
on earth.  When Sarah is presumably killed by a car bomb
planted by opponents of her outspoken campaign for Chilean
democracy, Fielding is understandably shattered--so much so
that at several key moments in his political battle he "sees"
her, is certain that she is still alive, and believes that
someone else was buried in her stead to give the enemy the
impression that she had been eliminated.
   Keith Gordon negotiates this passion-filled drama of love's
intensity with a reasonable degree of success, his two
principals conveying substantial chemistry.  From the moment
Fielding takes Sarah home after their first date (at which point
Sarah coyly decides whether to invite him upstairs), to the
drama of Fielding's brief breakdown in front of his supportive
family, Gordon must assure us that the love of these two
attractive people is so intense, so unyielding, that Fielding
would break loose at one point to chase after his vision of the
woman.  We must consider that he would ultimately turn into
a political Bulworth, inspired by her memory to make the
world a better place.  A minor flaw in the story is that we
never find out exactly what it is that Sarah is doing that
arouses the intense hatred of the right-wing Chilean forces
since, after all, for the most part she is simply aiding poor
refugees from that wonderful grape-producing country.  What
is of consequence is a fine performance by Crudup who at
one point does a masculine emulation of Shakespeare's
Ophelia--whose own unrequited love drives her to suicidal
insanity.  
   The picture is overloaded with silly side characters,
particularly Fielding's hippie brother Dan, who does a pale
imitation of a weed-addicted publisher--certain to elicit
unintentional laughter from the audience when he describes
his falling in love with a Korean hooker in a massage parlor. 
Janet McTeer is knocked down a few pegs from her strong,
lead performance in "Tumbleweeds" to a nothing role as
Fielding's understanding sis.  Jennifer Connelly's sporadic
come-hither look, nicely photographed by Tom Richmond, is
the most charming aspect of this movie, the romantic tone
supported by some delightful soundtrack ballads from
tomandandy.  The big question: is she or isn't she?  You'll
have a strong impression of the answer to that one when you
catch this generally rewarding film.
Rated R.  Running Time: 103 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Waking the Dead (2000)
Billy Crudup, Jennifer Connelly, Molly Parker, Janet McTeer, Paul Hipp,
Sandra Oh, Hal Holbrook, Lawrence Dane. Screenplay by Keith Gordon and
Robert Dillon, based on the novel by Scott Spencer. Directed by Keith
Gordon. 105 minutes.
Rated R, 1 star (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
"Waking the Dead," an overwrought, underdeveloped story of a young
politician (Billy Crudup) in the '80s having visions of his
presumed-dead, activist girlfriend (Jennifer Connelly) from the '70s, is
one of the most annoying films I have endured in years. Rather than
waste valuable composition time following the standard review format,
I've decided to simply list some of the reasons why.
A) Time travel abuse: The movie leaps between the '70s and '80s so often
that I began to wonder if Dramamine works for temporal motion sickness.
Not since "Slaughterhouse Five" have characters been so unstuck in time.
But while the time jumping in "Slaughterhouse Five" was an integral part
of the story, it only serves to fracture "Waking the Dead," robbing the
film of any emotional cohesiveness.
B) Tired premise: It's love at first sight when fiercely dedicated
counterculture zealot Sarah Williams meets starchy Fielding Pierce, who
believes in working within the system. My, what an inventive concept.
Not since, oh any typical episode of "Dharma and Greg" has such a
radical dynamic been so thoughtfully explored.
C) Lame leads: She gives speeches and makes meaningful eye contact. He
gives speeches and whines. I get squirmy and check my watch.
D) Lack of chemistry: While both actors have shown promise in previous
cinematic outings, Billy Crudup and Jennifer Connelly's performances
here are painfully forced. Michael Jackson and Lisa Marie Presley were
more convincing lovers than this pair.
E) The dialogue: "I don't know what I'm going to say, what I'm going to
do, from one minute to the next,' moans Fielding. "Sometimes meaningless
gestures are all we have," Sarah intones somberly. I'm amazed that one
of them didn't blurt out "Love means never having to say you're sorry."
F) Billy Crudup's feet: After spending considerable time padding
barefoot around Sarah's bohemian pad, Fielding lies down on the bed and
we see the pink, squeaky-clean bottoms of his feet. In the real world, a
brief walk across any hardwood floor would leave at least a bit of
visible dirt. Of course, had the story been even mildly involving, I
wouldn't have noticed.
G) Endless posing: Intimate scenes are undermined by director Keith
Gordon's insistence on artful placement of the character's bodies. Nude
shots of Crudup and Connelly have the actors' forms oh-so-carefully
positioned, covering their genitals while making them look less like
lovers and more like chintzy erotic sculptures.
H) The hippie brother and his psychedelic office: Paul Hipp overacts
shamelessly as Fielding's brother, a counterculture publisher. Even more
ridiculous is his tripped-out office, the least convincing hippie set
I've seen since Samantha's wacky cousin Serena went club hopping on
"Bewitched."
I) Stereotypes galore: While Paul Hipp is the most glaring of the
walking stereotypes, talented actors like Hal Holbrook, Janet McTeer and
Sandra Oh are also wasted playing animated clichés.
J) The "Is she or isn't she?" gimmick: A decade after the reported death
of his honey-bunny, Fielding begins catching glimpses of her everywhere.
Are these hallucinations brought on by guilt and longing or did Sarah
fake her death for some political purpose, only to resurface to seek out
her lost love? By the time the answer was revealed, I didn't give a
damn. Gordon's handling of the gimmick makes one appreciate the skilled
choreography of "The Sixth Sense" all the more.
K) Election night: Sure, "Waking the Dead" is a low budget film, but the
lack of bodies at Fielding's campaign headquarters on election night is
embarrassing. Surely the filmmakers could have bought a few cases of
beer and lured enough buddies over to fill up the room.
L) The "Second Stage at Lilith Fair" Soundtrack: The film is packed with
cut-rate crooning from sensitive young women with acoustic guitars.
Quick, grab a pellet gun!
M) Fading to white: Gordon repeatedly ends scenes by fading to white, an
effect that grows old quickly and serves only to amplify the fragmented
nature of the production.
N) Fake snow: There's a lot of snow in this movie and, while much of it
appears genuine, that stuff falling on the actors looks suspiciously
like Ore-Ida Instant Potato flakes. If you can't find the real thing, or
at least secure the use of a decent snowmaking machine, don't bother.
It would be easy to finish the alphabet, but you get the point. "Waking
the Dead" is excruciating. I had to attend  it's in my job description.
But you, oh lucky reader, you get to make a choice.

Author
Scott Renshaw
WAKING THE DEAD
(USA Films)
Starring:  Billy Crudup, Jennifer Connelly, Hal Holbrook, Molly Parker,
Janet McTeer, Paul Hipp.
Screenplay:  Robert Dillon, based upon the novel by Scott Spencer.
Producers:  Keith Gordon, Stuart Kleinman and Linda Reisman.
Director:  Keith Gordon.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, sexual situations, nudity, adult themes, brief
drug use)
Running Time:  105 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
[WARNING: Elements of this review may be considered spoilers. Proceed at
your own risk.]
     On the off chance that the rest of the film hadn't already irritated
you or bored you to distraction -- and trust me, it will do one or the
other -- Keith Gordon's WAKING THE DEAD offers a special treat during its
climactic scene. It's the scene to which the whole film has been building,
a scene in which our hero Fielding Pierce (Billy Crudup) encounters his
long-lost love Sarah Williams (Jennifer Connelly) -- maybe. Nine years
earlier, in 1974, the tense but passionate relationship between social
activist Sarah and would-be politician Fielding ended when a car bomb
killed Sarah and two Chilean dissidents. Now, with his dreams of reaching
Congress nearly come to fruition, Fielding is seeing Sarah everywhere, and
has become convinced that she is still alive. Thus is the stage set for a
confrontation between them that takes place ... in a Congressional office
building.
     The wrongness of that setting may not strike you immediately, until
you consider the context. WAKING THE DEAD's brooding character study
attaches itself to one crucial question: Is Sarah really alive, having
stepped out of the way of Fielding's ambition the only way she knew how,
or is Fielding hallucinating her as the manifestation of his fear that
political aspirations are costing him his soul? The effectiveness of their
final encounter hinges on uncertainty over the answer to that question. So
rather than have them meet in a bedroom, or a park, or a church, or
virtually any-freaking-where else, they meet in a Congressional office
building. Where Sarah -- her life theoretically in danger if anyone finds
out she's really alive, if in fact she's really alive -- just wanders into
a Congressman's office. Without any identification. In the middle of the
night. Any guesses as to whether a real, living person would have pulled
off that tidy little stunt?
     It's a truly logic-numbing moment, but it's indicative of why WAKING
THE DEAD is such a catatonic failure. A tale of obsessive love-cum-
insanity based on a novel by Scott Spencer (who also penned ENDLESS LOVE,
and seems inordinately fascinated by obsessive love-cum-insanity), WAKING
THE DEAD revels in its atmosphere of all-encompassing mourning. Gordon
lays on the brooding score, the lingering close-ups and the ominous
fades-to-white, apparently intent on creating a Phil Spector-like Wall of
Despair. As a tone piece, it's beyond reproach; if you don't clue in to
how WAKING THE DEAD is supposed to make you feel, you've probably fallen
asleep.
     Not that anyone could blame you. WAKING THE DEAD may do a splendid
job of manufacturing gloom, but it's incapable of giving you any reason to
care about its characters. Crudup and Connelly are steady, competent
actors, but there's nothing they can do to make the relationship between
Fielding and Sarah as transcendently life-changing as we must believe it
was. Gordon has no idea how to give their ideological sparring any of the
passion present when two people who love each other begin to realize they
just can't coexist. In fact, Gordon shows almost no understanding for how
to play his most critical emotional moments. When Fielding breaks down and
confesses his delusions to his political inner circle, Gordon cuts away
before there's a chance to see anyone reacting; when Fielding breaks down
in front of his family, Gordon lingers on the tortured monologue so long
there's nothing left to do but marvel at Crudup's inhuman cheekbones.
     Gordon's litany of miscalculations adds up to a film that clearly
wasn't constructed to build characters. Every supporting character is an
afterthought -- wasting Janet McTeer, as Fielding's sister, should warrant
some sort of fine -- but that doesn't explain why even the main characters
are afterthoughts. In an ironic late piece of dialogue, Sarah warns
Fielding to view her as a complete person, "not an image, not an idea." 
Images and ideas are all Gordon and company have in WAKING THE DEAD; 
there's not a complete person to be found in this scattershot narrative. 
There is plenty of atmospheric intensity, though, plenty of bodies wracked
with sobs and plenty of evocative lighting and/or iconography. And there's
a final confrontation that effectively evokes surreality. It's effective
because there's nothing to ground it -- or anything else in WAKING THE
DEAD -- in the reality of human experience. Certainly not the reality of
wandering into a Congressional office. Without any identification. In the
middle of the night.

Author
Ross Anthony
It's kind of like oatmeal. Without honey or milk, it tastes rather bland,
but sticks to your ribs all day. Some wholesome thing inside you. One right
thing you did.
If you're in love, you'll empathize. But if you're not, you'll say, "Man,
it's been a long time. I'd sure like to do that again."
A new genre: political romance. A civics love story. Left meets right and
falls in love. In the farout 70's, Fielding Pierce, a young man born to
succeed in office, stumbles across Sarah, a revolutionary-minded
bleeding-heart with a twist of the Catholic. Of course they hop right into
bed -- and my goodness, these are some hot and steamy love scenes. All would
be hunky-dory hadn't the news reported Sarah's untimely death during her
libertarian mission down in Chile. A decade later and smack dab in the
middle of his campaign for office, Fielding starts to pretend he's seeing
and hearing Sarah again (or is she really there?). Coupled with gradually
corrupting powers of politics, his seductive visions set him struggling with
political goals, family expectations, personal morals, and sanity.
Billy Crudup plays the role extremely well, but mostly without pungency,
save for a few exemplary outstanding Oscar moments. In one scene, he thinks
Sarah's on the phone. He's shaking and crying and believably moved to near
vomit. In another pinnacle scene, he announces to his family that he may be
losing his marbles. It's wonderful: fancy restaurant, proper dinner party
and then this guttural outburst. Fantastic performances. Billy was very good
in another prosaic movie this time last year: "Hi-Lo Country". Jennifer
Connelly also performs well. In fact all do, and the direction is sharp;
it's just that the script is rather like oatmeal -- bland. Billy's two
moments - like unbroken, unresolved chunks of brown sugar, give a mighty
flavorful chew to this banal, but hearty meal.
The ending narrative is unnecessary and out of place in a movie that's all
about thinking and feeling. The people/letter scene is excellent and would
have served the slightly-open resolution well.
There is also an interview with director Keith Gordon on the site!
Waking the Dead. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring Billy Crudup, Jennifer Connelly, Molly Parker, Janet McTeer, Paul
Hipp. Sandra Oh, Hal Holbrook.
Directed by Keith Gordon
Screenplay by Robert Dillon, based upon the novel by Scott Spencer.
Produced by Keith Gordon, Stuart Kleinman, Linda Reisman at Egg/Gramercy/USA
(C)2000. Rated R.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com
