Title
Review for Family Viewing (1987)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
Atom Egoyan is not easy to figure out. We don't really know if he wishes to
become a bit of a David Lynch, or if he wishes to become a bit of a Luis
Bunuel.  His films are full of surrealistic details which keep our
attention, but unlike Bunuel, or even Lynch, the
storylines are rather weak, and tend to be evasive.  Bunuel, we always knew
that the story was immediate, and that tomorrow and yesterday were always
around, we just never knew when.  But with Egoyan, the concern seems to be
how the characters are feeling now, and that's that.  It may be surreal, but
it should have much interest for psychiatrists and psycho-analysts, which,
unfortunately, we are not.
Egoyan even goes so far, on occasion, as to replay the scene in its
entirety, but unlike Godard, he does not give us a different conclusion to
direct us to a different set of circumstances.  The characters are trapped
in the play/replay of their videos and
life.  They are not connected.  And the film seems to be a series of slight
vignettes that eventually come together to tell a basic story of the teenage
son that is trying to grow
out of his father's shadowy image.  The film tends to blame that image on
the fact that the father has no liking for his mother. The son, seems to
know that, and is trying to correct it. He doesn't exactly dislike his step
mother, but he is not about to like her either.  But then, he doesn't know
his own  mother, until the end of the film.
There are some curious thoughts here.... television provides  a focal point,
but no connection to anything within it in particular, starting with the
aging grandmother.  And then,  there are telephones, which DO make
connections but not  quite the right ones.  In almost all the situations,
all the phone calls are used for the wrong purposes, and not to make things
right, nice, or ok.
While Egoyan makes a valid point in his film, and the later one THE
ADJUSTER, he is still lacking in the one part of this kind of filming that
defines weather a viewer stays or goes.  He doesn't let us in, what is going
on. Everything is hidden, as it usually is,
be it behind the TV camera, the telephone, or just appearances, like those
of his childhood.  But this part is, in this film, the one thing that is
probably best be left alone to die.  It drags the meaning, and the
resolutions into a film that lures you into wondering what it is about, but
not really giving a darn about what it really is about. This, it seems to
this reviewer, is a terrible attitude to take when it comes to this film.
It destroys it, and makes it no fun to sit through.
But there are enough eccentricities to keep us amused. The satirical side of
this film is deadly, and one could only hope that it had been able to
explore that side a bit more.
3 GIBLOONS
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1995. All Rights Reserved.
Member of the Internet Movie Critics Association
