Title
Review for Bad Lieutenant (1992)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Ron Hogan
1) "There is no 'film culture'...just an awful lot of films."
   Orson Welles, THIS IS ORSON WELLES
Okay, I'm pissed.  I just spent an hour typing up the first version of
this review, and emacs decided to eat it rather than save it.  So I'm
not in a good mood, and I don't necessarily feel like retyping the long
justification I had of lumping these two films together.  Let's just say
that I don't feel like writing full reviews for both of them, and that
they each address a point that I have made passing reference to in
previous reviews.  Rather than spread that point too thin, I'd like to
deal with it a bit more fully in one posting.
2)  First, let's clear away the stuff in VAN GOGH that isn't relevant to
THE BAD LIEUTENANT: the biographical issues.  I've dealt with those
before, too, and will again when I get around to seeing CHAPLIN.  What
makes VAN GOGH different from any biographical film I've previously
reviewed for rec.arts.movies.reviews is the conciseness of its scope:
"the last 67 days of the great painter's life."  Both HOFFA and MALCOLM
X tried to provide the "big picture" to one degree or another--VAN
GOGH's scale is smaller on purpose, probably in the view that the clues
to Van Gogh's condition, the factors that led to his violent end, would
be found in concise form in those sixty-seven days.  It's important to
keep in mind that in what we've falsely called a "film culture," the
subject of Van Gogh is not new, and so VAN GOGH must be considered not
only in comparison to other biographical films, but also in comparison
to other Van Gogh films.  Most prominently, there is LUST FOR LIFE,
starring Kirk Douglas, which combined the biopic with the genre at which
its director, Vincente Minelli, most excelled--the melodrama.  More
recently, Robert Altman released VINCENT AND THEO, which focused on the
relationship between the two brothers.  Both of those films place a
high degree of importance on the paintings--Minelli holds them up as
signs of Van Gogh's genius, and of the film's authenticity; Altman uses
them as objects of value and exchange, economic objects (most notably in
the beginning).  VAN GOGH has its obligatory moments of painting, but
seems to care more about the artist than the art.
3)  Van Gogh is not a pleasant person.  "You're cranky to everyone," one
character berates him, and in fact he is, often violently so.  But it's
not that Van Gogh is an asshole on purpose.  He's sick.  As Dr. Gachet
outlines it, Vincent suffers from overexhaustion and hysteria, and other
complications brought on by his lifestyle, which includes liberal usage
of absinthe.  Van Gogh leads a destructive life, so much so that at 37,
he is (in the words of one friend) "burned out."
4)  That's an interesting anachronism--I assume it's an anachronism--
to use to describe Van Gogh, because it is loaded with modern resonances
that I picked up on throughout the film.  The life of a creative genius,
struggling to create a new art form in the face of harsh criticism ("the
colors are like puke"), living a self-destructive lifestyle, and then
embarking on an affair with a girl who can't be more than 15, 16 tops.
If it weren't in French, I'd have thought I walked in on GREAT BALLS OF
FIRE instead of VAN GOGH.  (Note--Alexandra London, who plays
Marguerite, has a rough similarity in style to Winona Ryder.  Note 2--
Jacques Dutronc is a French rock star.)  Or if you want to stay in the
19th Century, a film about Edgar Allan Poe.
5)  "For the psychopath is better adapted to dominate those mutually
contradictory inhibitions upon violence and love which civilization has
exacted of us, and if it be remembered that not every psychopath is an
extreme case, and that the condition of psychopathy is present in a host
of people...it can be seen that there are aspects of psychopathy which
already exert considerable cultural influence."--Norman Mailer, THE
WHITE NEGRO: superficial reflections on the hipster
From which we also get a definition of the psychopath: "If the fate of
twentieth century man is to live with death ... why then the only life-
giving answer is to accept the terms of death, to live with death as
immediate danger, to divorce oneself from society, to exist without
roots, to set out on that uncharted journey into the rebellious
imperatives of the self."  Hence the scenes of Van Gogh debauching
himself in a Paris bordello, complete with can-can dancers, attempting
to get his teenage mistress to take part in a menage a trois (she later
becomes the recipient of pseudolesbian affections while he watches),
drinking absinthe, plunging himself into the river in a spontaneous
death wish, etc.  And the most intense scene of the film: Vincent alone
in his room, staring down the barrel of a gun, repelled and fascinated
by the options that it presents.
6)  Not every psychopath is an extreme case.  But the Bad Lieutenant,
played by Harvey Keitel, is.  This New York cop snorts, shoots, buys and
steals drugs, extorts from thieves--the litany of his sins can go on
for more lines than I care to type.  Yet every depraved act that he
commits has a purpose; "the drama of the psychopath is that he seeks
love.  Not love as the search for a mate, but love as the search for an
orgasm more apocalyptic than the one which preceded it."  This is
literalized in a scene in which the Lieutenant pulls over two teenage
girls--in his review, Peter Travers of ROLLING STONE (I don't usually
quote PopCrit, because most of it is banal and endlessly pursuing the
quickie blurb for use in advertising--Travers is especially guilty of
this, but this time he's on to something, despite the usual PopCrit
hyperbole) says, "the obscene horror of exploitation has never been so
searingly rendered."  Which is close enough to the truth for practical
purposes--this was a scene which drove about three people out of the
theatre.
7)  Travers is also the source of BEST BLURB 1992: "Harvey Keitel whacks
you like the business end of a Louisville Slugger."  This became my
mantra for November and December, as the trailer was shown every time I
went to the Nuart in Santa Monica, which was the exclusive venue in the
Los Angeles area.  It got to the point where I would recite the trailer
as it rolled yet again ....  But the main point is that the Lieutenant
also whacks himself.  I don't mean that in the vernacular, though that
happens too.  I mean that in his search for the perfect orgasm, the
Lieutenant commits violence upon himself, through drug use and
injudicious gambling among other acts, as much as he commits violence
upon others.  The Dead Kennedys said it best: "I don't need your fucking
world / this world brings me down / I look forward to death."
8)  Contrasted to the Lieutenant is a good nun, whose rape serves as the
cynosure for the total desecration of moral civilization implied by the
film.  The amazing thing is that she forgives her assailants: "Like many
of the poor, they were rude, and they took what they needed...I ought to
have turned bitter semen into fertile sperm, turned hate into love."
She refuses to name the rapists; the Lieutenant is astounded.  "Get with
the program," he pleads with her.  Vengeance is all he knows; the idea
of forgiveness is completely alien to him.  She suggests that he talk to
God.
9)  God comes in for a good bit of abuse.  "Where the fuck were you?"
the Lieutenant screams, and it isn't an entirely unreasonable question.
Getting past that rage, though, is impossible--the Lieutenant is
reduced to the howls of a beast in pain.  Most of the time, Keitel
stares death in the face and bluffs it.  "I can't die ... I'm
blessed ... I'm a fucking Catholic."  He invites his bookmaker to come
after him, knowing that he can face any danger down.  But at a gut
level, the Lieutenant knows that his actions are self-destructive, that
his quest for the perfect high leads to doom.  Vampires have the luxury
of feeding on others, one of his suppliers muse, but "we gotta eat away
at ourselves until there's nothing left but appetite."  And nothing can
save the Lieutenant--not even Jesus.  "I try to do good," Keitel
screams.  "I'm too fucking weak!"
10)  There is no direct equivalent in THE BAD LIEUTENANT of the scene in
VAN GOGH where Vincent stares into the barrel of the gun (which in
itself seems close to a scene from LETHAL WEAPON I in which Mel Gibson
goes so far as to swallow the barrel), but there are countless rough
equivalents, including a relentlessly slow scene of Keitel shooting up
into his veins (five people walked out on that), and a scene in which
two women engage in light bondage while the Lieutenant drinks himself
into oblivion, with Johnny Ace music blaring (note--Johnny Ace died
playing Russian Roulette, the psychopath's solitaire).  The level of
their psychopathies was different, but Vincent and the Lieutenant are
two sides of the same coin--the former was able to channel his rage
into art for a while, the latter channels his rage into pure violence.
Neither one can have ultimate control over their rage, or their
inevitable destiny--at least on the terms offered within the films.
For related texts, see WHITE JAZZ by James Ellroy, which is to the LAPD
what THE BAD LIEUTENANT is to the NYPD, and Bret Easton Ellis' AMERICAN
PSYCHO, which deals with the psychopathy of upscale New York.
Van Gogh related material is too vast to mention.

Author
Jet Wimp
     In one of Charles Jackson's stories from the collection, "Earthly
Creatures," a suburbanite driving through the countryside with his wife
and two children hits a beautiful collie dog.  He cannot summon up the
courage to stop the car and inspect the dog, and so drives on.  This act
of cowardice becomes the pivotal incident which starts the collapse of
his marriage and personal life--the fulcrum for the transformation of
his world.
     Literature and film are replete with this motif:  the single
incident which signals the transformation of a person's existence.  In
Shakespeare's "Timon of Athens",one of the most cynical of the author's
works, it is when Timon realizes that his highly valued personal
friendships have been based entirely on his largesse, and when his
fortunes fail, his friends shun him.  "NOBODY KNOWS YOU WHEN YOU'RE DOWN
AND OUT...."
     In BRIDGE OVER THE RIVER KWAI it occurs when Alec Guiness suddenly
realizes that the bridge which, under his supervision, his troops built
with the cardinal British virtues of competence, and self-denial, will
be used to transport Japanese troops.  "My God, what have I done?"  
     Sometimes the transformation is triggered by a spiritual
experience.  The protagonist in I. B. Singer's novel THE MAGICIAN OF
LUBLIN, who has led a dissolute and cruel life, is touched by God.  He
seals himself into a small brick hut with a single window, through which
his meals are delivered, and ends his days there.  
     Sometimes the light of God blinds, rather than illuminates.  In
Pasolini's film THEOREMA the angel, played by Terrence Stamp, places the
seal of his sexual seduction on all members of a bourgeois family, and
they are destroyed by it--or at least their lives are transformed
unrecognizably.  
     The psychologist William James called this sort of life experience
"turning a corner within."  It is entirely personal.  Was the magician
touched by God?  Did the Bad Lieutenant actually see Christ?  James
insisted that what was important was not the viridical nature of the
experience itself, but its subsequent effect on the person's life.  He
argued that the "truth" of such experiences could never be decided.  
     Viewers sensitive to this motif will find the film, THE BAD
LIEUTENANT, a rich one.  The incident in the church, where the
lieutenant kisses the feet of Christ and looks up to see an elderly
black woman staring down in amazement at him, is one of the most
trenchant, moving, yet comical scenes in American film.  You thought you
beheld Christ, and see what he turned out to be!!  But the point is, the
vision serves to transform the lieutenant's world, enabling to make a
gesture of forgiveness--towards the two teenagers who had raped a
nun--of which he would have been incapable an hour before.  
     Those who have chosen to focus on the lieutenant's graphically
depicted vices and the squalor of his surroundings have, I think,
totally missed the point.  The Philadelphia Inquirer called the film
"confused."  Nonsense.  It is perfectly clear, as clear a treatise on
medieval scholasticism ( "Theorema" in Italian, see above.)  The
resolution of the film involves what many would call a uniquely
Christian concept: we qualify for forgiveness by extending forgiveness
to others.  In fact, the film is almost a Christian religious treatise.
     The film also utilizes humor brilliantly, a fact its detractors
seem not to have noticed.  The lieutenant's imprecations when Darrell
Strawberry strikes out in a penant game (YOU PIECE OF ****!!!  YOU
MISERABLE, SLIMY PIECE OF ****!!!)  and his firing his gun into the car
radio conveying the bad news, are funnier than nearly any incident in
memory in any Hollywood comedy.  No matter how wrecked any life is,
humor can be found in it.  Because humor is so great a part of what it
means to be a human being, even one in great distress.
     Harvey Keitel gives one of the great film performances: creative,
resourceful, convincing, free from actorish mannerism.   His acting in
the harrowing scene in which he sexually brutalizes two women has drawn
effusive praise from members of this group and the Compuserve film
discussion group.  In my many years of film viewing, I can think of
nothing that can compare with it.
     Harvey Keitel, by the way, was ignored by the Oscars nominators.

Author
Max Hoffmann
     Avoid this film at all costs (even eventual cable/video rental)
because it is an overinflated, crashing bore!  Roger Ebert gave it
"highest rating," and the "little man" in the Chronicle is falling out
of his chair.  Ironically, it's playing at the 438-seat Gateway in San
Francisco, where ridiculous reviews are causing long lines, and
sell-outs, adding to the myth that this is a real find.  (Hey, it fooled
me!)
     It's actually "R"-rated content, but because Americans (or mainly
the white males that run Hollywood) are uncomfortable with extended
views of another man's penis, it copped an NC-17.  Fortunately,
teenagers won't be subjected to the same eyelid-tugging snooze-pusher
that I went through.  There is also the controversy of a nun being raped
on an altar, and the "F"-word in grafitti on the altar.
     Why is this film a bore?  80% of it is watching Harvey Kietel snort
coke in a variety of locations, or shooting up junk and going comatose.
We never learn his, or most of the characters' names.  I think the film
could have been more interesting or worthwhile if it were set earlier in
the Lieutenant's addiction cycle when there were enough brain cells for
him to show some character development or motivation.  Neither are
present in this film.  What Ebert lauded as Keitel's "performance of a
lifetime" amounts to a convincing portrayal of a junkie cop trying to
stay upright, negotiate walking down stairs, driving a car, and
supposedly acting "normal" enough to keep his job.
     It is inconceivable that non-addicted cops would entrust tens of
thousands of dollars in World Series bets to anyone in Kietel's medical
condition.
     What about the "nun" thing?  Unless you are a vitriolic "recovering
Catholic," (who gets off on seeing sacred icons violated) or a "good
Catholic" (who can't go to this film anyway,) you'll probably "feel"
absolutely nothing during the violation of the nun on the altar.  It is
incredibly stagy, and has the suspicious look of gratuitous sex tossed
in to keep the crowd awake.  The nun and her violators are made to look
way too appealing, and due to colored filters and moody, jumpy
photography, you get the eerie feeling you just turned on one of
Cinemax's softcore 1 AM epics.  One of the rapists has the same kind of
muscled nude back you see on the cover of many Romance Novels.  (Maybe
they're trying for a title like "Love's Burning Chalice"?)
     The nun's refusal to identify her attackers (who are students from
her class whom she recognized) is supposedly the crux of the film and
its denouement.  Unfortunately, the actress who plays the nun (we don't
find out her character's name either) is merely gorgeous and can't act.
Her "Jesus would have seen it this way," stance is about as believable
as Harvey Kietel escaping the notice of internal affairs.  Harvey
Kietel's "big moment" is when he completely "loses it," has a mental
breakdown in church, and while supplicant on his knees actually "sees"
Jesus and starts swearing at him (another reason for the NC-17, I
suppose.)  Unfortunately, you have to repress the urge to laugh because
it's nearly a carbon copy of Patty Duke's overblown final scene as
"Neely O'Hare" in VALLEY OF THE DOLLS where she falls to her knees in
the alley and cries "God?  God?  Is that *you*?"  (VALLEY is coming to
San Francisco's Castro Monday January 11 and to the Sashmill in Santa
Cruz Sunday January 31.)
     I think this film falls into the same class as LAST TANGO IN
PARIS" an overated bore of a film that might provide enough prurient
interest for some middle-aged critics to "get off on," but for the rest
of us, tune into Cinemax at 1 AM and you get a whole lot more of the
same thing and at least the bodies are worth looking at.  (P.S. That
really is Harvey Kietel's body on the poster/movie ad, unfortunately
its attached to Harvey Kietel's face!)
     If this is the director's way of therapizing as a recovering
Catholic, we can only wish that he had taken Sinead O'Conner's route,
which was a lot quicker, and like jerking a Band-Aid off a hairy arm, a
lot less painful than this tepid, two-hour tug.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Harvey Keitel plays an unnamed New York City lieutenant who's a lot
worse than the criminals that infest the streets he roams.  A womanizer,
drug abuser, alcoholic, and gambler, it's virtually impossible to find
anything positive about the bad lieutenant.  When his chance at
redemption comes as the result of the brutal rape of a nun, is there
anything left within him to redeem?
     If a movie could survive on the force of a single performance, THE
BAD LIEUTENANT would be it.  Keitel throws himself into his role with
such gusto that I didn't for one moment think of him as an actor playing
a part.  No one upstages him in this film.  In fact, most of the time
when he's on-screen, whoever happens to be sharing the scene with him is
virtually invisible.  Keitel holds nothing back, and his performance
serves to hide some, but not all, of THE BAD LIEUTENANT's flaws.
     While the first two-thirds of the movie work as a lurid character
study of the lieutenant, they are incomplete.  One of the most obvious
questions that goes unanswered is how he got to where he is.  Not only
does the film make no attempt to probe that issue, it's not concerned
about it.  Even though the lieutenant appears to have hit bottom by the
time the movie commences, he nevertheless manages to find new depths to
sink to.
     Unfortunately, the movie falls apart in its final third.  The issue
of redemption arises and suddenly the film skids off its tracks,
returning to them briefly and belatedly for the chillingly realistic
final scene.  Aside from being confusing and relatively pointless, the
last half-hour is also dull.
     Baseball and religion form important backdrops to the movie.  Both
are as critical to its development as they are to the eventual
resolution.  The plot itself is simple, doing little more than showing a
few days in the life of New York's most corrupt cop, and the conclusion
is easy to guess before THE BAD LIEUTENANT's halfway point.
     At least the mood isn't unremittingly bleak.  There are numerous
instances of black humor in this film, some of which are probably
unintentional.  The excesses of the bad lieutenant are at times so
extreme as to be almost comic.  There were occasions when the audience
broke out laughing when the director didn't intend for that to be the
response.
     Aside from Keitel's often over-the-top and always brilliant
performance, there's little of value in THE BAD LIEUTENANT.  The tale it
tells is not new, although the graphic detail with which it does that
is.  There are parallels to Keitel's other recent film, RESERVOIR DOGS,
in terms of tone, uncompromising display of violence, and the nature of
the actor's characters.  However, while in RESERVOIR DOGS, Keitel's
Mr. White has a few redeemable qualities, the bad lieutenant has none.
Those who were repulsed by RESERVOIR DOGS will likely find THE BAD
LIEUTENANT unbearable.
     In the final analysis, the only reason to see THE BAD LIEUTENANT is
to watch a powerful and underrated actor take over the screen.  Because
the film is rated NC-17, there will be no Best Actor nomination,
regardless of how deserving Keitel is of one.  Beyond the actor and his
performance, however, THE BAD LIEUTENANT had little to offer.  As good
as Keitel is, he isn't enough.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
