Title
Review for City of Industry (1997)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Walter Frith
There is no honour among thieves.  Point well taken but in 'City of
Industry' there is no honour among the people who have put together
this shallow, unrelenting and downright boring montage which has a
promising start but then crashes and burns like a bad plane wreck.
A group of low life thieves (Harvey Keitel, Stephen Dorff, Timothy
Hutton, Wade Dominguez) pull of what is a seemingly smooth heist by
robbing a jewelry store and as they count up the loot in seclusion, one
of them (Dorff) clumsily opens fire in a moment of greed and kills two
others (Hutton and Dominguez). Keitel manages to escape but just barely
and all this occurs in the first thirty five minutes of the film which
begins well but goes nowhere after that.  The last hour is a slow and
monotonous opera of planned revenge as Keitel goes after Dorff since
Hutton was Keitel's brother in the film and he is helped by Dominguez's
widow (Famke Janssen) in a seedy payback scheme.  It's also about
betrayal and all those things you've seen before but with no new twist
whatsoever.
The climax is predictable and the film is sort of like having a bad
night's sleep.  You know, one of those nights where you doze off and
wake up and then doze off again and wake up again etc., etc.  It's an
uncomfortable odyssey into crime courtesy of director John Irvin ('The
Dogs of War', 'Raw Deal', 'Hamburger Hill').  Were any of these any
good?
The type of visual style that 'City of Industry' strives for is that of
'film noir' and the picture would have been much better if it had been
in the hands of such stylish men as Martin Scorsese, Quentin Tarantino
or Abel Ferrara.  All of these intense filmmakers have directed Keitel
with better results.  'City of Industry' is a copycat wannabe of films
gone by and can easily be tossed into the junk pile in the opinion of
this reviewer.

Author
James Berardinelli
     If the newly-reconstituted Orion Pictures hopes to be more 
successful than their old self, they're going to have to release more 
interesting motion pictures than CITY OF INDUSTRY, a cliche-riddled 
thriller from director John Irvin (A MONTH BY THE LAKE).  This film, 
which stars crime movie veteran Harvey Keitel, borrows liberally from a 
host of previous heist and revenge pictures, using a stale plot to 
showcase stereotyped characters.  The only good thing about CITY OF 
INDUSTRY is that it moves at a pretty fast clip, but that's not really a 
reason to see it.
     I like Harvey Keitel.  Even when he's in a bad-to-mediocre movie, 
he's fun to watch, which is the case here, where he plays Roy Egan, a 
career thief of some repute.  When his brother, Lee (Timothy Hutton), 
asks him to participate in the Palm Springs robbery of a jewelry store, 
Roy takes a bus from his home in the Midwest to Los Angeles.  The 
operation's potential take:  $2-3 million.  The Egans' partners:  Jorge 
Montana (Wade Dominguez), a family man on his way back to jail, and Skip 
Kovich (Stephen Dorff), a borderline-psycho who's "smart... sleep-
deprived... impatient and erratic."  The robbery goes down without a 
hitch, but a betrayal occurs soon after, leaving Roy and Skip gunning 
for each other.
     The only remotely involving aspect of CITY OF INDUSTRY is the 
opening half-hour, which details the planning and execution of the 
crime.  Admittedly, it's not all that original (and pales in comparison 
to similar sequences in RESERVOIR DOGS), but the character interaction 
is at least interesting.  After the film's bloody turning-point, 
however, the cat-and-mouse plotline fails to generate much interest.  
Skip is strictly a single-note character, Roy isn't very compelling, and 
Roy's lukewarm flirtation with Jorge's wife, Rachel (Famke Janssen), is 
dull and predictable.  The film occasionally seems to be on the verge of 
breaking away from the formulaic conventions of the genre, but it never 
succeeds.
     I don't know whether large portions of CITY OF INDUSTRY ended up on 
the cutting room floor or not, but there are times when the movie's 
narrative is barely coherent.  At one point, Skip is running around with 
a black gang.  Later, he's with a group of Chinese thugs.  No 
explanation is given for these associations, or of how the numerous 
minor characters relate to each other.  In fact, as far as background is 
concerned, little is presented about even the main players.  Other than 
a few sketchy details, we know very little about Roy, Lee, Jorge, or 
Skip.
     There's a big hole in the cast.  While Keitel, Wade Dominguez, and 
an underused Timothy Hutton are all fine, Stephen Dorff is awful.  For 
some unfathomable reason, this young actor, who recently strutted his 
limited stuff in BLOOD AND WINE, is hot.  Dorff, who has a James Dean 
attitude without the talent or range, is incapable of bringing any 
charisma to Skip, a character in need of more than the actor can give 
him.  Meanwhile, Famke Janssen, who was last seen as the over-the-top 
Onatopp in GOLDENEYE, makes a credible switch to dramatic acting, even 
though her character is pretty lifeless.
     It's difficult to generate much enthusiasm for a motion picture 
that's so derivative.  Separately, John Irvin and Harvey Keitel have 
been responsible for a number of memorable motion pictures.  
Unfortunately, together for the first time in CITY OF INDUSTRY, all they 
manage to fashion is an unforgettable ninety-five minutes that's not 
worth more than an energetic yawn. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Being an old crook isn't easy.  You get shot at, beaten up, and
generally abused.  It's not like the old days.  There isn't even any
honor among thieves anymore.
     Harvey Keitel gives a masterful performance  as middle-aged
criminal Roy Egan in the crime drama CITY OF INDUSTRY.  First-time
writer Ken Solarz's script connects all the dots with a standard
formula plot, but Keitel's acting raises the movie above its pedestrian
material.  Director John Irvin, known for such light-hearted films as A
MONTH BY THE LAKE and WIDOW'S PEAK, is smart enough to fashion the
picture around Keitel and let him set the pace.
     Lee Egan, played with restraint by Timothy Hutton, wants to pull
off a big jewel robbery in Palm Springs.  He has been casing a jewelry
store where once a year they have two to three million dollars in
stones from Russia.  To pull it off, he asks his brother and old-pro
criminal Roy to come to town to join his gang for the big heist.
     Jorge Montana (Wade Dominguez) and Skip Kovic (Stephen Dorff) make
up the rest of Lee's team.  Calm and resolute Jorge needs the money for
his wife Rachel (Famke Janssen) and their kids since Jorge has just
been sentenced to prison.  Skip, "the wheelman," seems ready to explode
in every scene.  Dorff, who overacted in his most recent outing in
BLOOD AND WINE, gives a little more credible performance this time.
     Most of the show, which happens after the jewel theft, consists of
an elaborate cat-and-mouse game with Roy and Skip chasing each other.
Although predictable on a macro level, the actions in any given scene
are apt to surprise you.  Still, the overall feeling is that you have
seen this story many times before.
     So what is compelling enough to make the picture worth seeing?
Harvey Keitel.  His studied and careful acting make for some
captivating viewing.  Although he seems about to ignite and does in
many scenes, nevertheless, his is a controlled burn.  Just the way his
eyes scan a room speaks more than the dialog.  Although Roy is a
brutish killer, Keitel manages to earn the audience's empathy.  His
resilience after being left for dead almost elicits applauds.
     The picture undulates with a gritty melancholy.  Thomas Burstyn's
dark cinematography, although effective, has been done before by others
and done better.  Stephen Endelman's music, with various solo
instruments wailing away, sets a soulful and sad tone.
     Although quite a violent film, CITY OF INDUSTRY derives most of
its tension from the mental anguish of its stars.  An unimaginative but
interesting film with one excellent piece of acting.  Some stars are
enough to make the difference.  Keitel alone makes CITY OF INDUSTRY
worth seeing.
     CITY OF INDUSTRY runs 1:37.  It is rated R for gory violence,
nudity and profanity.  The film would be fine for older teenagers.
For Keitel's work, I give the picture thumbs up and ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ben Hoffman
A favorite storyline for movies is the one about a criminal who wants
to go straight . . . but only after one more heist that will fix him
financially for life. Most recently there was ABSOLUTE POWER.
Fortunately for CITY OF INDUSTRY, it is a bit more believable. It also
has a powerful performance by veteran Harvey Keitel as  "Roy," the
elder brother of "Lee," (Timothy Hutton.)  The two help elevate what
would be pretty much an ordinary story and bring it up a notch or two.
Lee, as criminals are rated, is small potatoes, never having struck it
big in his chosen profession.  He wants to go straight, start life
anew.  But first he needs the one big one that can set him on "Easy
Street" for life.  For this he plots a Palm Springs jewelry store
robbery as his way out of crime and into "normal" life.
Lee induces his brother, Roy, who has been more successful in his
criminal life and has escaped into the unknown Midwest, to go along
with Roy on this last adventure.  Against his better judgment, he
agrees.  (I have seen enough movies to know he should have just said
"No.")  In addition to the two brothers, they need a good getaway
driver and they find him in Skip Kovich (Stephen Dorff).  Anyone else
would have noticed that Skip is touchy, spontaneous and not exactly
reliable but Lee never notices that; all he knows is he is a great
driver and Roy goes along with the choice even if he is not happy with
it..  Rounding out the crew is Jorge Montana (Wade Dominguez) who is
recently out of jail and could easily be back in if he is caught
violating his probation.  Jorge has a wife and children who worry
about him . . . with good reason.
Hardly does the film get rolling when brother Lee is killed.  That
caught me by surprise because stars such as Hutton are not usually
disposed of so early in a film.  However, that is the motivation for
brother Roy to seek out the someone who betrayed them . . . and Roy
wants revenge.  Hence this exciting film-noir.
