Title
Review for Surveillance (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Christopher Null
     Digital filmmaking technology can be a dangerous thing.  On the one
hand, it opens up affordable avenues of production to virtually
everyone.  On the other hand, it leads to a flood of movies on the
market that have been made for less than the cost of printing your
Christmas cards.
     Which, in the case of Surveillance, is apparently the case.
     The film's conceit is this: Digital video was not simply used for
cost concerns, but because it is integral to the story.  In the picture,
a private eye named Trip Stevens (Stephen Triplett -- get it?) is hired
by a becoming redhead named Junis Rozma (Jacqueline Carroll) to locate
her missing brother "C. Fred."  Trip, with his team of Charlie's
Angels-lite helpers, quickly learns that Fred's dead, baby, and soon he
is wrapped up in a convoluted web of trickery that revolves around a
porky cop, his inexlicable "fake prostitution stings," a Russian limo
driver, and a video dating service.  Think of it as a backyard,
undergrad version of Chinatown.
     As Trip is a P.I., the entire film is told from the perspective of
alleged surveillance and hidden cameras.  (Interesting idea, but it
turns out that just about everyone carries a "hidden camera" or two with
them, all the time, thus ruining that angle.)
     Unfortunately, the lack of attention paid to Surveillance (its
really snazzy presskit aside) shows through at the seams.  A two-hour
running time is far too long to keep an audience seated without a score
or, at the very least, some better acting than we're treated to here. 
Triplett may be funny as a sketch-comedy player on Talk Soup, but his
mooning antics grow tiresome quickly in a feature film format (which, I
might point out, is not supposed to be a comedy).  A raft of other
semi-improvising and otherwise out-of-work actors (with the notable
exception of Carroll's femme fatale) doesn't help matters.
     While Surveillance makes good use of the photographic options of
DV, it ends up relying more on handheld bouncy-cam footage a la The
Blair Witch Project than anything else.  Rotten sound design leaves much
of the film hard to make out aurally -- a problem that would have been
largely avoided had an aggressive editor chopped about 80 minutes of fat
out of the film.
     Surveillance ultimately has a few charming moments but feels more
like a weekend film school project than the daringly experimental
feature it desperately wants to be.  Nice try.
Director: Brad Grossman, Debra Matlock
Producer: Brad Grossman, Debra Matlock
Writer: Brad Grossman, Debra Matlock
Starring: Stephen Triplett, Adam Tomei, Jacqueline Carroll, Paul Richard
Kessler, Tracy Talavera, Piper Henry, Caspar Poyck, Michael Mewborne,
Emily Limbaugh
http://www.surveillancemovie.com/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
