Title
Review for Lady in White (1988)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mark R. Leeper
I understand that on July 2 the film LADY IN WHITE from 1988 will be
released on videodisk from Elite Entertainment.  Frank LaLoggia, auteur
of the film, contacted me and asked if I would be willing to re-post my
review of the film.  So I cannot claim that this testimonial is
entirely unsolicited.  However, I would probably want to republish the
review for my own purposes.  I am pleased to hear that the film is
becoming available again in some form since it is on my list of "hidden
treasures," films that I think not enough people know about and which I
think really should be made more available.  (Other films on the list
include A SUMMER STORY, RESURRECTION, TURTLE BEACH, SMILE, and perhaps
TO FIND A MAN.)
In the 1988 review below I predicted that this film would be remembered
as one of the best ghost stories on film by the year 2008.  I am a
little more cautious in my predictions these days, but who knows?  So
far its scarceness has worked against that prediction.  It seems to be
well-received by the critics but in my opinion it still seems
under-appreciated or at least under-recognized by the general viewing
public.  The film manages to at the same time be very evocative of
childhood and still work as an adult horror film.  My recommendation is
see the if you can at all manage it.  The laserdisk was supervised by
LaLoggia, a man who seems to take pains to do things just about
perfectly.  It is presented letter-boxed , includes six more minutes of
film... it looks like it will be a very nice package.  But I am not
recommending the laserdisk specifically (sorry, Frank) I am just
recommending that people may want to see the LADY IN WHITE in some form
and saying that I am pleased that the film is available again.
Capsule review:  Twenty years from now Lady in White will be considered
one of the best ghost stories ever put on film.   Frank LaLoggia has
made a beautiful film that raises more than a little gooseflesh.
Rating: +3.
Oddly enough, while the ghost story is probably the most commonly
written breed of horror story, it is very uncommon as a type of horror
film.  Perhaps there is a feeling that they do not translate well to
film.  Ghost stories are usually mood pieces and directors who know how
to capture moods generally have other kinds of films they want to
make.  Ghost stories that have really worked on film have done so by
hinting and by creating a--let's be frank--morbid mood in the
audience.  The good ones have been THE HAUNTING, THE INNOCENTS, THE
UNINVITED, and perhaps THE CHANGLING. (Hmmm.  I never noticed before
how similar the titles were.)  Two films that definitely do not make it
as ghost stories are GHOST STORY and POLTERGEIST.  While I liked
POLTERGEIST, it was really more science fiction on the astral plane
than a ghost story.  Each of these two films has been too overpowering
to make it as the subtle mood piece that a good ghost tale should be.
In fact, of the classic ghost stories I mentioned, only one was even in
color.  The other three depended on a dark mood that is very hard to
achieve in color.  Now a ghost story has come along on film that ranks
with the classics-perhaps even surpasses them.  LADY IN WHITE is a
ghost story in color, but it never overwhelms.  It is a very fine mood
piece and the use of color in the film enhances the mood rather than
fighting it.  And the story is worthy of the mood, and the photography
is worthy of the story.
LADY IN WHITE was written, directed, scored, and produced by Frank
LaLoggia.  That can be either a very good sign or a very bad sign in a
low-budget film.  LADY IN WHITE is very clearly one man's vision and
dream brought to the screen.  I grew up in New England and I can tell
you that no other place have I seen where autumn is so melodramatic.
The world turns bright hues of red and brown and yellow as it rages
against the dying of the warm.  LaLoggia captures the melancholic
autumn with a small town feel somewhere between that of TO KILL A
MOCKINGBIRD and SOMETHING WICKED THIS WAY COMES.  Like those films,
this is a story of children and growth, but it also raises gooseflesh
in ways that are all too rare in horror films.
It is, in fact, the story of Frankie Scarlatti, whom I suspect is made
up in no small part of little Frankie LaLoggia from about 25 years
ago.  Frankie loves Halloween and monsters of all sorts.  He tells such
a good Halloween story of the "prehysterical" monster that stomps
London that jealous classmates arrange for him to be locked in the
cloakroom closet.  In the old school that has served generations, years
mean very little and he is visited by the spirit of a little girl his
own age, or she was when she died eleven years earlier...a death that
the spirit must re-live over and over.
Even if the main story were not good-and it is-this would be a
marvelously textured film.  Characters like Frankie's grandfather, his
father, and his brother are drawn with a loving pen.  Frankie himself
is played by Lucas Haas who, young as he is, is the veteran of films
like TESTAMENT and WITNESS.  the film carries the viewer along, often
to unexpected vistas, without making one false move until the final
five minutes.  LaLoggia has problems ending the story without making it
a little goofy and a little cliched.  But until the final minutes of
the film LADY IN WHITE is a positive gem of film-making.  Even mistakes
in the special effects work for the film.  Rate it an admiring +3 on
the -4 to +4 scale.
-- 
      Mark R. Leeper, Lucent Technologies/Bell Laboratories
, (732)957-5619, MT 3E-433  :  Or try your WWW
http://www-bcs.mt.lucent.com/~leeper            :  search engine on 
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/6960/        :  "Mark" and "Leeper"

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Oddly enough, while the ghost story is probably the most commonly
written breed of horror story, it is very uncommon as a type of horror film.
Perhaps there is a feeling that they do not translate well to film.  Ghost
stories are usually mood pieces and directors who know how to capture moods
generally have other kinds of films they want to make.  Ghost stories that
have really worked on film have done so by hinting and by creating a--let's
be frank--morbid mood in the audience.  The good ones have been THE
HAUNTING, THE INNOCENTS, THE UNINVITED, and perhaps THE CHANGELING. (Hmmm.
I never noticed before how similar the titles were.)  Two films that
definitely do not make it as ghost stories are GHOST STORY and POLTERGEIST.
While I liked POLTERGEIST, it was really more science fiction on the astral
plane than a ghost story.  Each of these two films has been too overpowering
to make it as the subtle mood piece that a good ghost tale should be.  In
fact, of the classic ghost stories I mentioned, only one was even in color.
The other three depended on a dark mood that is very hard to achieve in
color.  Now a ghost story has come along on film that ranks with the
classics--perhaps even surpasses them.  LADY IN WHITE is a ghost story in
color, but it never overwhelms.  It is a very fine mood piece and the use of
color in the film enhances the mood rather than fighting it.  And the story
is worthy of the mood, and the photography is worthy of the story.
     LADY IN WHITE was written, directed, scored, and produced by Frank
LaLoggia.  That can be either a very good sign or a very bad sign in a low-
budget film.  LADY IN WHITE is very clearly one man's vision and dream
brought to the screen.  I grew up in New England and I can tell you that no
other place have I seen where autumn is so melodramatic.  The world turns
bright hues of red and brown and yellow as it rages against the dying of the
warm.  LaLoggia captures the melancholic autumn with a small town feel
somewhere between that of TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD and SOMETHING WICKED THIS
WAY COMES.  Like those films, this is a story of children and growth, but it
also raises gooseflesh in ways that are all too rare in horror films.
     It is, in fact, the story of Frankie Scarlatti, whom I suspect is made
up in no small part of little Frankie LaLoggia from about 25 years ago.
Frankie loves Halloween and monsters of all sorts.  he tells such a good
Halloween story of the "prehysterical" monster that stomps London that
jealous classmates arrange for him to be locked in the cloakroom closet.  In
the old school that has served generations, years mean very little and he is
visited by the spirit of a little girl his own age, or she was when she died
eleven years earlier...a death that the spirit must re-live over and over.
     Even if the main story were not good--and it is--this would be a
marvelously textured film.  Characters like Frankie's grandfather, his
father, and his brother are drawn with a loving pen.  Frankie himself is
played by Lucas Haas who, young as he is, is the veteran of films like
TESTAMENT and WITNESS.  the film carries the viewer along, often to
unexpected vistas, without making one false move until the final five
minutes.  LaLoggia has problems ending the story without making it a little
goofy and a little cliched.  But until the final minutes of the film LADY IN
WHITE is a positive gem of filmmaking.  Even mistakes in the special effects
work for the film.  Rate it an admiring +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Jeff Meyer
     To garble Dickens, "There's more Spielburg than spectre in you, my
friend."  At points, this reminds me of E.T. with ghosts instead of aliens;
other times, it contains a rather self-conscious resemblance to TO KILL A
MOCKINGBIRD.  This isn't a bad film, but it has a *lot* of potential at points,
almost all of which is unrealized.
     If I sound a bit disappointed with THE LADY IN WHITE, it's because I am.
It came with very good word of mouth; more importantly, it's professed aim -- a
ghost story without gore, that produced chills instead of shocks -- never
materialized.  I gave up on the film being another THE HAUNTING after the first
appearance of the ghost, a little girl whom the main character, a young boy
locked in a school cloakroom after-hours, sees.  It's a basic transparency
shot, superimposed on the setting; while I wouldn't shoot a film down wholly
due to a lack of technical proficiency, THE LADY IN WHITE adds to that a lack
of technical imagination.  This film is rarely spooky (it occasionally pops to
the completely cute, and concludes in a "Close Encounters" light show) and as a
ghost story is badly lacking.
     However, the director/writer has woven in several other threads besides
the spectral elements.  It's a mystery in that a child murderer is on the loose
in the community (the little girl was one of the first victims); unfortunately,
the identity of the killer is telegraphed early into the film.  It also tries
to be a "kids' eye-view" type of film, narrated by an adult version of the boy
(again, TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD seems to echo through the film).  Parts of this
work, especially the younger boy's relation with his older brother; but the
strongest element in the whole film is the racial subplot.  The film is based
in the early sixties, and the black janitor of the school is accused of being
the murderer.  This, I thought, was handled very well, but it's a very small
part of the rest of the film, and can't justify the rest.  My other complaint
is the soundtrack (*also* done by the writer-director); it's terribly
overbearing throughout the film, especially during the suspense scenes.
     It's not really a bad film, per se; it's just not a good one.  The
conclusion is a retread of both fantasy and suspense movie (talk about dragging
it out...); and while I liked the "dated feel" the film had, it just wasn't
enough.
     Rate it a $2 movie if you've got absolutely nothing to do on a fall
afternoon (and you should).  Otherwise, skip it.
