Title
Review for Dangerous Liaisons (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     It is the France of Louis XVI and the aristocracy has turned sex into a
game like chess with strategy and tactics.  The Marquise de Merteuil seems
prim and proper, but behind the facade she is a conniving power-monger who
on a whim can destroy the lives of those around her.  If less capable of
escaping notice for his sexual manipulations, no less adroit at the
manipulation is the Vicomte de Valmont.  The Marquise, to get revenge on a
former lover, suggests that the Vicomte seduce the innocent 16-year-old
fiancee of the lover.  But the Vicomte considers seduction of the innocent
too small a challenge; instead, he will attempt seduction of the truly
virtuous and proposes to bed the highly moral Madame de Tourvel.  The
Vicomte then proceeds to accomplish both challenges.  and the film becomes a
sort of sexual "Mission Impossible" as under a cultured facade this
merciless game of strategy and tactics takes place.
     Based on the stage play LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES and the 1782 novel of
the same title by Choderlos de Laclos, DANGEROUS LIAISONS comes to the
screen beautifully directed by Stephen Frears.  Losing the immediacy of a
live on-stage performance, Frears takes full advantage of the new medium by
making use of the most perfect facial expressions by John Malkovich as the
Vicomte and by Glenn Close as the Marquise.  Even if such expression were
possible in the stage play, it would be lost on all but the first few rows.
The film also stars semi-actress Michelle Pfeiffer, who is as out-classed by
Close and Malkovich as her character is by theirs.  Frears uses her as
little more than a mannequin.  It is unfortunate for her sake that she and
Frears were content to let her give such a flat performance in a film in
which there was real direction and acting going on.
     In fairness, I should mention that Malkovich has been criticized for
using such an American accent for his role.  Why he has been singled out I
am not sure.  In the syntax of cinema French accents are often used rather
than subtitling when the characters would realistically be speaking French.
Frears did not follow the convention and I was not bothered by it.  I
wondered whether an actor as plain-faced as Malkovich could play a man women
found so seductive as the Vicomte.  This too I never questioned while
actually watching the film.
     If the very most basic plot is a little too much like some of those
incompetently made French sex-romps that show up on late-night cable,
everything else is first-rate in this production.  I would give DANGEROUS
LIAISONS a +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Jeff Meyer
     I guess I look at it this way: you can stuff Close and Malkovich into the
dress of the nobility, place them in lavish sets (though, surprisingly, fairly
pedestrian photography), and give them tons of room to emote in (I didn't see
FATAL ATTRACTION, but I bet it was a lot like Close's next-to-final scene where
she starts ripping up her dressing room); however, without a lot of quality,
acid dialogue, there isn't a lot that separates DANGEROUS LIAISONS from
DYNASTY.
     This became evident pretty quickly into the picture.  The plot is complex
enough to be interesting, but since it all comes down to who-is-diddling-who,
it resulted in a plot that was only marginally more interesting than a study of
Paddington Station train schedules.  What I really started to look for -- and
what I never found -- was some witty, pointed dialogue that would supplement a
group of characters I had no interest in following for two hours.  Nada.  I
damn near fell asleep a couple of times.
     Malkovich rarely seems to show emotion, and his final agony isn't very
believable to me.  Close is fun to watch, and she really can add some interest
to the picture through her ability to look coy in 791 different ways, but it
certainly isn't enough to save the ship.  The others left next to no impression
on me, except that the young man who duels with Malkovich played Ted in BILL
AND TED'S EXCELLENT ADVENTURE.  I fervently wish those two had shown up
somewhere in this film.
