Title
Review for Perfect World, A (1993)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  This is something of a departure for
     Eastwood, a gritty and realistic crime drama that slowly
     fades into a story with warm relationships.  Costner has
     center stage as an escaped convict who forms a father-son
     relationship with his young hostage.  Rating: +1 (-4 to +4).
     Clint Eastwood has built a career on playing violent characters,
particularly his "Man with No Name" and Dirty Harry.  Two films back he made
UNFORGIVEN, an anti-violence Western that was nonetheless violent.  There
was speculation that his films would be less violent from that point on and
that UNFORGIVEN was a sort of penance.  The next film he starred in, IN THE
LINE OF FIRE, was another film in the "Dirty Harry" mold, but Eastwood
claimed that he had no artistic control and was just an actor playing a
part.  Eastwood has now directed his first film since UNFORGIVEN.  Like
UNFORGIVEN it is a film with some violence, but at the same time does not
glorify that violence.
     Kevin Costner plays Butch Haynes, who breaks out of a Texas prison on
Halloween night of 1963 together with Terry Pugh, a brutal hood.  Along the
way they pick up an eight-year-old hostage, Philip, played by T. J. Lowther.
On their trail is Texas Ranger Red Garnett (Eastwood) who has been assigned
a state criminologist Sally Gerber (Laura Dern).  This is a Clint Eastwood
film, so of course Dern is along to play the required female lead to be
subjected to the Eastwood character's insensitive male chauvinism in the
early parts of the film but to be won over by Eastwood in the later parts of
the film.  In this outing, however, Eastwood and Dern take a backseat to
Costner and Lowther, who play the real main characters of the film, Haynes
and Philip.  Eventually it is just Haynes and Philip on the run and learning
to get along with each other.  Lowther is attracted to the father figure he
was missing at home, Costner is torn between his anti-social urges and his
desire to be a better father figure to Philip than Haynes's father had been
to Haynes.  Costner make a very believable Texas con.
     Much of the story is told with very little mood music as Eastwood
adopts the realistic style of IN COLD BLOOD and BADLANDS.  Unfortunately
that is only the part of the story about the fugitives.  The witty in-
fighting of the police on the case and comic bits involving an aluminum
trailer serving as police headquarters for the Texas backroad chase tend to
sabotage the almost documentary style of the fugitives' story.  Eventually
this part of the plot gives in to more humanistic values and we get some
more background music to tell us how to feel about what we are experiencing.
     Costner's character is one of the more complex ones we have seen on the
screen in a while, particularly in an Eastwood film.  His unfinished
business with his own father has led him to idolize children and his
violence is usually triggered by his seeing a child not being treated well.
He is infuriated to discover that Philip's religion, Jehovah's Witness, does
not allow the boy to trick or treat or to go to carnivals and does not
distinguish between religious restrictions and parental brutality.  It is
the combination of his own unintended cruelty to his young companion and his
desire to protect the boy that lead the story to its denouement.
     Eastwood makes a few beginner's mistakes not expected of an experienced
director.  There are serious continuity flaws, particularly with arm
positions in a key scene at both the beginning and end of the film.  This
combined with the uneven style do not sink the film, but certainly count
against it.  My rating for A PERFECT WORLD would be a less than perfect +1
on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Kevin Costner, Clint Eastwood, T.J. Lowther, Laura Dern.
Screenplay:  John Lee Hancock.
Director:  Clint Eastwood.
     Let's face it, Kevin Costner hasn't become one of the most popular
movie stars in the world because he can act the hell out of a part.
Sure, he's been charming enough in light fare like SILVERADO and BULL
DURHAM, but he's done little to prove that his ideal dramatic role
wasn't as the corpse in THE BIG CHILL.  It therefore might not seem to
mean much to say that A PERFECT WORLD features Costner's best
all-around performance yet, and indeed it's nothing earth-shattering.
However, it's more than solid, and coupled with an impressive turn by
7-year-old T. J. Lowther creates a haunting story that packs a real
punch even through its superfluous subplot.
     Costner stars as Butch Haynes, a recidivist criminal who escapes
from a Texas prison with his cellmate on Halloween 1963.  In the course
of their escape, they take as a hostage young Philip Perry (Lowther), a
fatherless boy raised in a strict Jehovah's Witness household.  In
pursuit is Texas Ranger Red Garnett (Clint Eastwood), a veteran lawman
forced to team up with young criminologist Sally Gerber (Laura Dern).
Soon Butch and Philip are on their own, and begin to form an
attachment, Butch acting as a surrogate father to Philip and Philip
reminding Butch of his own troubled youth.  As the unlikely pair head
out of Texas, they head also for a showdown with Red, and with Butch's
confrontation with his own tortured past.
     Screenwriter John Lee Hancock makes one big mistake, and that's
spending so much time and the tired and uninteresting subplot focusing
on the law enforcement in pursuit of Butch.  It seems in the early
stages that he's setting up a parallel, or is interested in creating a
hunter-hunted conflict a la THE FUGITIVE, but neither reall proves
true.  Instead we get cliche'd characters in cliche'd conflicts.
There's an icy Fed to get on Red's nerves, and plenty of pithy good ol'
boy wisdom dispensed.  Eastwood and Dern toss off token lines of
good-natured antagonism, but neither one is interesting enough to make
their story at all significant.  A tighter, potentially classic drama
might have come from chopping their segments entirely, because the main
plot is a gem.
     The relationship between Butch Haynes and Philip Perry is one of
the most unique and interesting explored in recent years.  While at
first glance Butch might seem to be a simple "victim of a negative
environment" type, he's more complicated than that.  The picture that
develops of his father is far from clear, making Butch a less than
reliable narrator.  His attachment to Philip is based on the worst
memories of his father, yet it is his father he seeks throughout.  A
PERFECT WORLD plays out like an extended therapy session for Butch, as
he attempts through Philip to create the perfect childhood he could not
have for himself.  Costner captures a surprising amount of nuance in
his portrayal of Butch, one minute the doting father, the next an edgy
psychotic.  It's a radical change of pace for Costner, and he pulls it
off.  Perhaps the larger credit for A PERFECT WORLD's success is T. J.
Lowther.  He's not asked to say much, but his expressive face becomes
one of the most vital elements in the film.  The relationship between
Butch and Philip is the heart of A PERFECT WORLD, and it's nearly
perfectly executed.
     Director Eastwood's first outing since his Oscar for UNFORGIVEN is
a similarly dark piece about a struggle for redemption, and while the
whole may not be as strong as last year's Best Picture winner, some of
the moments are even better.  The opening sequence is instantly
gripping, and a long shot of Butch and Philip walking through a field,
the boy repeatedly attempting to hold the criminal's hand, is
wonderful.  The best sequence comes near the end, as an idyllic waltz
quickly turns into a remarkably intense confrontation.  Eastwood draws
out the ending a bit too long, but by that point I was more than
willing to stick with Butch and Philip.
     A PERFECT WORLD is really two films.  One is mediocre at best, but
the other is one of the best films of the year.  Together, they still
add up to one of the better films of the year.
     A note to inside joke watchers: look for a billboard for "Bull
Durham Tobacco" in the sequence at Friendly's store.

Author
Richard Montanari
     What makes A PERFECT WORLD such a huge disappointment is not just
the fact that it is, without peer, the worst film Clint Eastwood has
ever directed, but also that it held the rare romise of combining the
talents of two Oscar-winning directors: Eastwood and Kevin Costner.
     The story is set in Texas, two weeks before JFK's fateful day at
Dealey Plaza.  This is mentioned early in the film, then never brought
up again.  A simple "1963" at the bottom of the screen would have
sufficed, but that might have excised some of screenwriter John Lee
Hancock's precious dialogue.  And there's a *lot* of dialogue here,
bubba.
     An escaped convict, Butch Haynes (Costner), takes an
eight-year-old Jehovah's Witness boy hostage and hits the road for a
little psycho-daddy and son bonding.  We never get to know for sure
just what Butch did to put him in the joint, but we do learn that he
killed a man when he was eight, and that his mother was a hooker, so we
know he didn't grow up next door to the Cleavers.  The Meat Cleavers,
maybe.
     In lukewarm pursuit is Texas Ranger Red Garnett (Eastwood), a
Geritol-swiggin' veteran cop who doesn't take guff from anyone,
exceptin' feisty criminologist Sally Gerber (Laura Dern), who pops up
every so often for a little feminist relief and obligatory
psychobabble.  There's also a black-suited and sunglassed Fed around
for stone-faced quips.
     Oh, yeah, Red and his team phone the entire manhunt in from an
Airstream trailer which has crashed into a tree in the woods.
     When Butch finds out that Phillip (T. J. Lowther) has never been
trick or treating he decides to give the kid a taste of normal
childhood.  They stop at a general store for a costume, and things move
along just fine until, all of a sudden, The Guy at the Back of the
Store hears The Broadcast about The Escaped Convict and starts giving
them The Eye.  The duo make a run for it, and soon we discover that the
kid has stolen a Casper the Friendly Ghost costume.  Twenty minutes on
the road and the kid goes from Jehovah to John Dillinger.
     Over the next day or so Butch and Buzz (Phillip's new nom de rue)
take in a little gunpoint trick-or-treating, a little more larceny and,
after eating dinner and spending the night with a poor farmer's family,
a little pistol-whipping and duct-taping of the man, his wife and their
grandson.
     Eventually, Butch takes the mandatory gut shot as the Rangers
close in -- beginning one of the longest death scenes in cinematic
history -- and heads off to a better place.  Which, for the audience,
after more than two hours, means the lobby, the parking lot and then
home.
     What possessed Eastwood to believe that Kevin Costner could pull
off the wacko-with-a-heart-of-gold is beyond me, as is Costner's
tradition of astonishingly bad haircuts. (Although, this is the first
film where we know for a fact it was cut in prison.)
     Yet, ultimately, the blame must lie with Clint Eastwood, who
follows the brilliance of Unforgiven, and his chunky performance in In
the Line of Fire with such a lethargic, ill-conceived effort.  Had he
won the best director Oscar for Bird, like he should have, and followed
it with Unforgiven, this wouldn't seem so bad.  But alas, in spite of
its promise, The Man with No Name has made a Film with No Soul.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     A PERFECT WORLD is really two movies.  The main movie is a serious
one staring Kevin Costner and an 8 year old new comer named T.  J.
Lowther.  The other movie is a comedy with Clint Eastwood and Laura
Dern.
     The comedy takes up a full third of the movie, and it is awful and
full of cliches.  I am not sure how it got stuck in this picture.  My
only guess is that they thought the picture would be too downbeat
otherwise and might be criticized for glorifying criminals.  Eastwood
and Dern should have read the ridiculous script by John Lee Hancock and
refused the roles.  Since Eastwood was also the producer and director,
I guess he thought knew what he was doing.
     Going for it, the serious movie has two excellent performance in
the title roles.  The chemistry Costner and Lowther is quite effective.
Reminds you of a Daddy and a son who love each other very much, but in
the movie the little boy is a hostage.  Going against it, is that the
movie, except for the ending, does glorify criminal behavior, and it
certainly makes you feel sorry for Costner's character since he only
murders for reasons he thinks are valid.  Interesting logic that.
     Finally, why do movies always hold religion in a bad light, but
not murdering or stealing?  You are taught in this movie to despise the
boy's moma (Jennifer Griffin) because their religion does not allow
trick or treating, but you are set up to applaud which he steals a
Halloween costume because he deserves it.  Sigh.
     A PERFECT WORLD runs 2:18 for reasons I can not fathom.  This is a
little movie and should have a brief running time.  The editor (Joel
Cox) must have been asleep at his desk.  The movie is rated PG-13, but
I would have given it an R for its violence and adult themes.  I give
the movie ** for the two lead performances but can not bring myself to
recommend the show.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  11/24/93
Running Length:  2:18
Rated:  PG-13 (Language, violence, sexual situations, mature themes)
Starring:  Kevin Costner, T. J. Lowther, Clint Eastwood, Laura Dern
Director:  Clint Eastwood
Producer:  Mark Johnson and David Valdes
Screenplay:  John Lee Hancock
Music:  Lennie Niehaus
Released by Warner Brothers
     If you feel it necessary to classify movies, A PERFECT WORLD may
be difficult to pigeonhole.  On the surface, this might seem like a
buddy movie crossed with a road picture, but there's a depth that
defies anything normally found in either genre.  What starts out
looking like a good old Clint Eastwood cops-and-robbers tale turns into
something completely unexpected.
     Halloween night in 1963 starts out as any October 31st for
eight-year old Phillip Perry (T. J. Lowther), with his mother, a devout
Jehovah's Witness, refusing to let him go trick-or-treating.  In fact,
that's not the only thing on the boy's list of "forbidden items."  He
can't celebrate Christmas, has never eaten cotton candy, and hasn't
ridden a roller coaster.  Life seems a little dull, until Butch Haynes
(Kevin Costner) bursts into his kitchen.  Recently escaped from prison,
Butch is in need of a hostage, and Phillip happens to be in the wrong
place at the wrong time.  Strangely, the boy instinctively trusts
Butch, and goes along meekly.  The ride starts out a little bumpy, with
Butch's sadistic fellow escapee attempting to molest the hostage--a
situation that Butch sorts out permanently.  Then, when it's only the
two of them, Butch and Philip head across Texas with Police chief Red
Garnett (Clint Eastwood) and his band of Rangers in pursuit.
     Those who understand the psychology of hostage situations are
aware of the bond that develops between captive and captor.  The case
presented in A PERFECT WORLD, however, is far from normal, even for
these circumstances.  The connection between Kevin Costner's Butch and
T. J.  Lowther's Phillip isn't something nebulous, but a
father-and-son-like relationship that profoundly affects both of them.
Once they're together, neither of them can be the same--not
spiritually, physically, or morally.
     This relationship is the centerpiece of A PERFECT WORLD, and
director Clint Eastwood allows it to play out at the leisurely pace
necessary for it to achieve its ultimate depth and power.  There are a
few brief action scenes punctuating the drama, but this is not a movie
for the viewer who craves car chases and shootouts.
     On the surface, the scenes featuring Eastwood appear largely
superfluous and, while they aren't strictly necessary to the plot, they
nevertheless serve an important purpose.  A PERFECT WORLD wouldn't be
best served by presenting the Butch/Phillip sequences without
interruption.  The pacing would be too slow; the tone too somber.  The
inclusion of a storyline focusing on Butch's pursuers allows for a few
more characters, an opportunity or two of comic relief, and a subplot
that ties a few things together a little too neatly.
     Like his star, Kevin Costner, Clint Eastwood is a better director
than actor.  In A PERFECT WORLD, he again wears both hats, although his
on-screen appearances are limited.  Eastwood the actor has two
modes--the cynical tough guy and the sensitive tough guy, both of which
are on display here (the former more often than the latter).  He's in
fine form, but it's his behind-the-scenes work that really deserves the
credit.  A PERFECT WORLD has its moments of manipulation, but they are
masterfully subtle.  With films like THE JOY LUCK CLUB, we feel the
strings being tugged; such is not the case with this movie.
     Kevin Costner is an unusual actor--his performances are as
inconstant as his choices of films.  For every DANCES WITH WOLVES,
there's a THE BODYGUARD.  His job in A PERFECT WORLD, however, is
something to take pride in.  Perhaps Eastwood deserves a share of the
credit, but Costner develops a credible character who comes across as
both believable and sympathetic despite his obvious criminal nature.
The portrayal eclipses the portrayer, which is always a good sign.
     Laura Dern is wasted.  I can only assume her inclusion is an
attempt to present a strong-willed, intelligent woman as a foil for
Clint Eastwood, but her ability is rarely shown and never developed.
Ms. Dern does a surprisingly good job with what little material she
has, but her presence isn't necessary, and it adds little.
     A PERFECT WORLD is evidence that Hollywood is still capable of
producing the kinds of moving, intelligent movies that many people
today believe to be solely the province of independent film makers.
This picture is good enough to stand with THE PIANO and THE REMAINS OF
THE DAY, rightfully claiming to offer as much as they do.  The
characters here have depth and breadth, and the themes and
relationships are as complex as in any of the year's best offerings.
     Clint Eastwood won an Oscar for directing UNFORGIVEN, and A
PERFECT WORLD shows that the wellspring of talent is still bubbling
energetically.  May it never run dry.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
