Title
Review for Children of the Corn II: The Final Sacrifice (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Running Length:  1:33
Rated:  R (Violence, language, sexual situations)
Starring:  Terence Knox, Paul Scherrer, Rosalind Allen, Christie Clark, 
           Ned Romero, Ryan Bollman
Director:  David Price
Producer:  Scott Stone, David Stanley, and Bill Froelich
Screenplay:  A. L. Katz and Gil Adler
Music:  Daniel Licht
Released by Miramax Films
     Garrett (Terence Knox), a reporter for the WORLD ENQUIRER tabloid,
has come to Gatlin, Nebraska to investigate the mass murder of adults
by children.  It soon becomes apparent that the evil inhabiting the
corn fields is not dead, and that the vacant-eyed children are ready to
go to work again.  Aided by Red Bear (Ned Romero), Garrett must attempt
to uncover the deadly truth before another town falls victim.
     PET SEMATARY TWO.  THE LAWNMOWER MAN.  SLEEPWALKERS.  Now CHILDREN
OF THE CORN TWO.  These are the films of the past year to bear Steven
King's name in one capacity or another.  Although Mr. King disavows
any responsibility for all but one (SLEEPWALKERS), the movies are all
remarkably similar and unacceptably bad.  
     Personally, I don't believe that Hollywood has forgotten how to
make good horror films.  Rather, I think that the filmmakers would
rather go with the blood-and-gore formulas (because they sell) instead
of putting some effort into an inventive movie that might go nowhere.
However, judging by the audience reaction to this movie, that strategy
may be reaching the end of the line.
     Actually, watched in the right frame of mind, CHILDREN OF THE CORN
TWO can be a reasonably entertaining film--as a comedy (unintentional,
of course).  A good example of when something "horrifying" turns out to
be funny occurs early in the movie.  A man sitting in his van gets
killed by a flying corn stalk.  Javelin-like, it crashes through the
front windshield to impale him in the throat.  Tough things, those corn
stalks.
     The acting also provides another source of amusement.  Bad dialogue
can always be funny, but when it's uttered by respectable actors, it
turns sad.  However, in this case, the words fit the people speaking
them.  Take a look at the list of names above and see if you recognize
any of them.  Unless you're a relative, I doubt that the answer will be
yes.
     To be fair, there is one actor who does an adequate job.  His name
Ned Romero, and, while he wouldn't fit in with the American Indians
from DANCES WITH WOLVES, he seems to have a good time walking around 
spouting a combination of mystical wisdom and contemporary one-liners.  
This mysticism is another part of the movie's problem, since it only
manages to further confuse things.
     There are more plot threads and characters dropped, ignored, and
other- wise forgotten about than in any recent film.  Even the execrable
LEPRECHAUN wasn't as guilty as this.  In short, what little attempt
there is at creating a story ends up making no sense whatsoever.  
     The special effects are either cheap and cliched, or downright
silly.  I'm not entirely sure why they're there in the first place,
unless it's to spend a few more dollars on a project that, by having
any budget, was given too much.  With the number of high-tech movies
out these days, there's no reason to demonstrate effects that were
state-of-the-art several years ago.
     There's plenty of blood and gore.  After all, that's part of the
formula.  As I mentioned, some of the death scenes are quite funny.
The corn-stalk killing is one, and there's another where a man dies of
a bloody nose in the middle of church.  Of course, the
fire-and-brimstone preacher doesn't realize something is wrong until
the poor man is lying on the floor with blood fountaining all over.
     While I caution keeping a wide berth from CHILDREN OF THE CORN TWO,
there is an exception.  If you can wait the few months it will take for
it to come out on video, gather a large, rowdy group together, and
watch it on TV where you can yell at the screen all you want.  It may
turn out to be an entertaining experience.  On the other hand, if you
try to watch this as a serious film, you'll likely wish you were the
one to get impaled by the corn-stalk.  That way, at least you'd be out
of your misery a few minutes into this disaster.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Brian L. Johnson
98 min., R, Horror, 1993
Director: David F. Price
Cast: Terence Knox, Paul Scherrer, Ryan Bollman, Christie Clark,
      Rosalind Allen, Ned Romero
     The police find out what happened to all the adults in the town of
Gatlin.  The police move all the children to a neighboring town.  A
reporter, Terence Knox, and his son, Paul Scherrer, go to the Gatlin
area so that Knox can do a story on what happened in Gatlin.  Knox and
Scherrer stay at a Bed and Breakfast run by Rosalind Allen, who has
brought in Ryan Bollman (one of the children from Gatlin).  Bollman gets
possessed by "He who walks behind the rows" and tries to get the
children in the town to kill all the adults.  Knox begins investigating
what happened and starts coming up with some mysterious information,
while Scherrer is falling in love with Christie Clark.
     The film says that CHILDREN OF THE CORN 2: THE FINAL SACRIFICE is
"based" on the short story "Children of the Corn" by Stephen King.
Actually the film has nothing to do with the story except for the fact
that it tells the furthering story.  However this is an entertaining
film.  I can recommend this film to fans of horror films.  I don't think
that this film will be in the theaters for long.  In my area, on opening
weekend, it had just a 9:30 PM showing, so if you plan on seeing this
film you should do so soon.  On a scale of zero to five, I give CHILDREN
OF THE CORN 2 a four.  CHILDREN OF THE CORN 2 is rated R for explicit
language, adult situations, and graphic violence.
     CHILDREN OF THE CORN 2 is well done and suspenseful at times.  The
special effects for this film are excellent.  CHILDREN OF THE CORN 2 is
very well written, and the actors don't end up with too many moronic
lines, a fatal flaw that hits many horror films.  This film is not
exceptionally gory, however, those with weak stomachs will dislike some
scenes.  I also liked how the opening credits looked.  I thought they
were done excellently and improved the film.
     The cast for this film is excellent and, unlike many low budget
horror films, can actually act.  My two favorites out of the cast are
Ryan Bollman and Christie Clark.  Both give the best performances in the
film.  Paul Scherrer, also, does a good job.  Terence Knox is good and
Rosalind Allen is not on the screen very much.
     CHILDREN OF THE CORN 2: THE FINAL SACRIFICE is worth full admission
price and is definitely worth going to see (plus it is the only horror
film playing currently in many areas unless you count KNIGHT MOVES as a
horror film).  You may want to leave the children at home though (you
don't want to give them any bad ideas, do you?).
