Title
Review for Gunmen (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Tak
One-Line-Summary
----------------
     A comedy/action-adventure where a DEA agent teams up with a
smuggler to beat a drug lord's hitman to a prize of $400 million.
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     The action in GUNMEN takes place in South America and Mexico,
where we find out that drug lord Loomis (Patrick Stewart) has had his
entire $400 million fortune stolen.  He hires ruthless killer O'Malley
(Denis Leary) to retrieve it for him.  Meanwhile, temporary DEA agent
Cole (Mario Van Peebles) is forced to team up with outlaw Dani
(Christopher Lambert); only together do they have the whole picture of
where the millions have been hidden.
Tak Thoughts    ** minor spoilers -- from the first 10 minutes **
------------
     Well, this movie seems like yet more Hollywood actors jumping at a
chance to play cops and robbers on the big screen.  The result is a
silly whup-ass film.  Emphasis on silly.  There are film cliches, plot
devices from every drug-lord/cop movie every made, one-liners,
overacted parts and sappy music.  Some of the scenes are right out of
something like NAKED GUN. (a hand reaching out of a fresh grave, a
sunset burial at the beach (?!?), nuns, big black *shiny* 4x4s just
driven through the amazon basin, etc). Everyone's having great fun with
their roles though.  You need to keep in mind that it's a COMEDY action
adventure that doesn't take itself seriously at all.
     You really can predict what's going to happen next.  The plot
devices are well used, to put it kindly.  Some of the only surprises
come from abrupt jumps to odd places (an exclusive glitzy rap bar in
the middle of the Amazon jungle?).  You can even predict the end if you
think a little bit, but why ruin all your fun?
     I think Denis Leary (cd NO CURE FOR CANCER, THE REF, THE SANDLOT)
had the most fun.  He gets to play the hired killer who does everything
with a brutal grin and a sarcastic comment.  Repatedly, Leary's
O'Malley character gets to stomp around and express frustration in
amusing ways as he confronts his boss, chases our heros, and brow-beats
his help for shooting-to-kill when he needs information.  It's just so
hard to get good thugs these days.
     Patrick Stewart (ST:TNG, DUNE, LADY JANE, LIFEFORCE) played his
drug lord role with relish, especially since it is such a change for
him recently.  From the press packet:
        With his role as the captain of the starship Enterprise, "I
    became everything synonymous with honor, intelligence, and
    rectitude," he says.  "Loomis is a delightful and refreshing
    alternative to that."
Indeed.  In his very first appearance, we see him sitting at an open
grave, where he calmly has his wife buried alive.
     According to the press packet, Christopher Lambert (HIGHLANDER,
GREYSTOKE,THE SICILIAN) called up out of the blue and asked for this
roll.  Apparently, he wanted to play a comedy character, Cole's idiot
side-kick. I'm not particularly fond of idiot-comedy of this sort, but
he was good at it.
     The action was good. Lots of chases, gun-fu (all the bad guys went
to storm-trooper gun schools--nobody can shoot straight when they're
shooting at main characters), knife-fu and helicopter-fu, boat-fu, and
some good old beating-fu.  There are plenty of unbelievable action
sequences--more than your typical surviving a brutal beating with a few
scratches.  We get dives out of helicopters, over cliffs and waterfalls
and through rapids--all easily shaken off.  There's also an awesome
knife assassin--he knocks off five guards in as many seconds, some at
least thirty feet away, behind partial cover and fifteen feet up.
What's the drug lord need with O'Malley when he's got this gem?
Tak Rating system:
------------------
     I really wish they woulda left the cliched cinematic moments out
of this film.  I can only hope the more cheesy ones were in there for
their comedy effect.  The action was pretty good, though a bit of a
stretch.  And finally, I'm not sure the whup-ass mixes well with
comedy.  *However*, viewed with all those caveats, it was still a fun
movie to watch.  It's better viewed as a showcase for your favorite
actors and rappers.  They all wanted to make a comedy/whup-ass movie
and they finally got their chance in GUNMAN.
