Title
Review for Bully (2001)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Steve Rhodes
BULLY, by Larry Clark (KIDS), tells a shocking and true story about a group of
Florida teenagers who committed premeditated murder against another teen. 
Without pulling any punches, the movie shows the kids in reckless behavior from
unprotected sex to drugs to violence.  This unrated movie -- it would be NC-17
-- is a powerful anti-drug film since it shows what is possible if you live your
life stoned.  It also speaks volumes about the story's oblivious parents, who
could charitably be called "less than helpful" to their kids.
Shot handsomely on film, not video, this indie picture has a polish and an
accessibility that KIDS, which I hated, lacked.  And the scenes of the teens
engaging in one wild sex act after another -- including one with hot wax -- are
undeniably erotic.  Clark seems hell bent on making as realistic a movie as
possible, and almost none of the characters are sympathetic.  The only
significant exception is Claudia (Jeanne Orr), a teen who works at the local
Pizza Hut and is smart enough to have nothing to do with the murder.  The
victim, Bobby Kent (Nick Stahl), is easily the most despicable character of them
all.
As the story begins, we are introduced to Marty Puccio (Brad Renfro), a shy
surfer.  Marty's "best friend" since they were little boys is Bobby, a definite
sociopath.  Bobby has been ridiculing and abusing Marty since they were kids. 
Bobby thinks nothing of hitting Marty so hard that he could break his nose. 
Although Bobby beats up on Marty regularly, Bobby is an equal opportunity
abuser.  He also likes choking and raping girls just for cheap thrills.  And
cheap thrills seem to be what the kids in this story crave.  Sex with strangers
and lots of pot and acid just never seem to be enough to stave off their
boredom.  The movie is careful to cast average to attractive looking actors who
appear to be the spitting images of the kids at your local mall.
Marty gets what could be his first real girlfriend in Lisa Connelly (Rachel
Miner).  Since she doesn't like the way that Bobby treats him, she suggests that
they kill Bobby.  And when she says "they," she means basically any
acquaintances of theirs who happen to be handy, some of whom don't even know
Bobby.  These include, Ali Willis (Bijou Phillips), Donny Semenec (Michael
Pitt), Heather Swallers (Kelli Garner), "Hitman" (Leo Fitzpatrick) and Derek
Dzvirko (Daniel Franzese).  None of them seems to have a moral bone in his or
her body, and they live lives without consequences.  The actors who play the
characters deliver such flawless performances that they don't even appear to be
acting.  It is chilling watching them.
In a telling scene, Heather tries to give some advice to Ali.  "What do you
mean?" Ali asks.  "I don't know," Heather honestly replies.  These are a bunch
of teenagers whose brains were long since fried.  They aren't even capable of
helping each other.
When the time comes for the crime itself, these kids evidence all of the
planning skills that you would expect of social misfits who live their lives
wasted.  After the murder has been committed, they keep secrets about as well as
a bunch of preschoolers.  Other movies, such as THE RIVER'S EDGE, have covered
similar material, but few have done it better and more realistically than BULLY,
a movie that you won't soon forget.
One of the movie's last images is of Marty's brother wearing an ironic "DARE to
Say No to Drugs and Violence" T-shirt as he looks sadly on what has happened to
Marty.  It is a fitting ending visual.  (Be sure and stay until the credits have
completely finished in order to get some updated information on the teenagers
involved.)
BULLY runs a fast 1:46.  It is not rated but would be NC-17 for pervasive drug
usage, strong sexuality, violence and full-frontal nudity.  It would be
acceptable for college students and older.
The film is playing in nationwide release now in the United States -- probably
for just a short run.  In the Silicon Valley, it is showing at the Camera
Cinemas.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
David N. Butterworth
        If you're into watching near on two hours of bored, foul-mouthed Florida
teens having sex, doing drugs, having sex, listening to Eminem, having sex,
playing video games, having sex, and killing one of their peers, then
"Bully"'s for you.
        Based on Jim Schutze's novelization of a true-life event, "Bully" charts
the story of a handful of disenchanted teenagers who, in 1993, murdered
their high school bully in cold, calculated blood.  The film could have
provided fascinating insights into what turned these aimless kids into
premeditated killers.  In the hands of controversial director Larry Clark
("Kids"), however, it has less to say about its subject matter and more to
say about the filmmaker's pornographic proclivities.
        In terms of the incident and what provoked it, "Bully" stirs up nothing
new.  The high schoolers are presented as a uniformly screwed up lot--bored
with life, not much ambition, promiscuous, profane.
        The bully in question, Bobby Kent (Nick Stahl), is certainly an unpleasant
piece of work but he doesn't exactly tower over his colleagues in the
pathological department.  He hounds and harries and humiliates his "best
friend" Marty (played by Brad Renfro) and Marty's girlfriend Lisa (Rachel
Miner) doesn't care for it at all and comes up with the idea of killing
Bobby.  Simply remove him from the equation.  Marty and Lisa and a handful
of their promiscuous, profane, and stoner friends, plus a recruited hit man
(?), lure Bobby to a swamp one night, stab him, beat him over the head with
a baseball bat, and dump him into the canal where the sand crabs and the
gators, presumably, finish him off.
        There's no remorse--the next day they're talking about it as openly as a
homework assignment.  They did it because they wanted to, and because they
could.
        What's most troubling about the film, however, isn't the unsettling
subject matter and the matter-of-fact way these young people go about
eliminating one of their own but the way in which Clark is constantly
distracted by his own material.  Not only is the nudity plentiful and
graphic in "Bully" but there's also an uneasy, exploitative feel to it.
Gratuitous crotch shots abound (one of which makes the zipper cut-away in
"There's Something About Mary" look like the height of subtlety!).  Clark
is so pre-occupied with his female (predominantly) leads that you forget,
at times, what this movie is supposed to be about.  The stripping bare,
literally and figuratively, of these actors (who are, after all, playing
underage teenagers) becomes harder to watch over time, as you begin to feel
for them and question the motives of the man behind the camera.
        The conclusion of "Bully" offers up literal snapshots of information about
the sentences imposed on each of the protagonists for their involvement in
the crime.  It's a short sequence of stills--Heather: 7 years; Ali: 40
years; Lisa: life imprisonment, for example--but it's infinitely more
telling than the 110 minutes of rampant unpleasantness that precedes it.
        "Bully" aims for truth, exploits it shamelessly, then bludgeons it to death.
Got beef? Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Christopher Null
Larry Clark -- who wrote and directed his first film, Kids, at the
tender age of 52 and in the process, broke the mold about what we should
expect from a movie about teenagers -- returns to familiar ground in
Bully, a striking and harrowing follow-up.
A slam-dunk natural subject for Clark, Bully follows the
based-on-reality story of Marty Puccio (Brad Renfro), who along with his
girlfriend Lisa (Rachel Miner) decides to brutally slay his "best
friend" Bobby (Nick Stahl) as payback for a lifetime of abuse.  Set in
the ultra-trashy nether regions of southern Florida -- and I mean
seriously, beyond-WWF trashy -- there's little to do but drive your car,
play video games, have sex, and beat the crap out of your friends.
Bobby's brutalities extend to everyone who crosses his path -- he
punches Marty in the face for driving poorly, he rapes Marty's
girlfriend Lisa, he rapes Lisa's friend Ali (Bijou Phillips), he pimps
Marty for cash at an amateur strip night, and he even interferes with
Marty's plan when he scams on chicks at the mini-mall.  Obsessed with
gay porn, Bobby is portrayed as deeply confused and probably a closet
homosexual, a psychotic without hope of recovery.  Even Bobby's clueless
father is oblivious to his son's actions; in fact, all the parents in
the film are ignorant to the actions of their children.  So of course,
as it is decided in a moment of almost careless discusssion, Bobby must
be killed.
Masterminded by Lisa, Bobby is driven out to the Everglades by seven
conspirators, stabbed repeatedly, and left as food for the crabs and
gators.  By the time we reach the inevitable aftermath, Clark's picture
has devastated us with its deft dissection of a tormented and hollow New
American Youth.
Laden with a striking amount of graphic, sweaty, and frequently brutal
teen sex, its stars covered with a disturbing number of scars and
bruises, Bully is as difficult to watch as Kids, and it is equally as
assured.  While the script is exquisite, its actors deserve the highest
lauding.  Renfro is extremely brave and confident in his role as the
confused whipping boy.  Miner (you may know her as the former Mrs.
Macauley Culkin) is equally valiant in a character that requires her to
be completely naked in alternating scenes.  But it is Clark's
uncompromised skewering of white bread Americana that makes Bully so
compelling.  Clark pulls no punches and never panders to the Moral
Majority; he simply makes his point, over and over again: This is what
your children think is acceptable behavior.  And he's right, because it
really happened.
Still, Clark will always be more a writer than a director in my eyes. 
His hand is often unsteady as he can't decide how to frame a scene; as a
result, some bits of Bully look rushed, others amateurish.  Most notably
this occurs with a long and dizzying spinning-camera shot that adds
nothing to the picture except, well, dizziness.
Regardless of the directing foibles, Bully gets my flat recommendation. 
It probably goes without saying, but this is one summer teen movie
that's probably not for the kids.
Director: Larry Clark
Producer: Chris Hanley, Don Murphy, Fernando Sulichin
Writer: Zachary Long, Roger Pullis
Starring: Brad Renfro, Nick Stahl, Rachel Miner, Bijou Phillips, Michael
Pitt, Kelli Garner, Leo Fitzpatrick
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Bill Chambers
-a review by Bill Chambers | bill@filmfreakcentral.net
***For more film, DVD and books about movie reviews, plus annual coverage 
of The Toronto International Film Festival, visit _Film Freak Central_ - 
http://filmfreakcentral.net  | Now with search engine***
An authority figure speaks the defining line of dialogue in _Bully_, Larry 
Clark's quasi-sequel to his own hotly contested _Kids_ "I don't know what 
you're up to. I don't think I want to know." Often accused, even with only 
three motion pictures under his belt, of over-sensationalizing already 
sensationalistic material, Clark is hardly the next Oliver Stone; he is 
something of an interfering observer, but not a conspiracy proselytizer 
running with scissors down the hallway. Where Stone drew slave parallels to 
football in _Any Given Sunday_ by intercutting clips from _Ben-Hur_, Clark 
makes more organic shock statements. He can be tactless, sure. Can't we all?
The scene from _Bully_ that's causing a ruckus features the flip single 
mother played by Bijou Phillips on the phone in a salon while getting a 
pedicure. As her conversation winds down, we get a leering close-up of her 
crotch. As the vantage point of the pedicurist, it's not an entirely 
illogical insert, and with Phillips sitting there spread-eagle, the shot 
has overtones of the hetero male audience's telepathic projection. If Larry 
Clark were younger (he's 58), cleaner (he spent a lot of the 
post-production time on his _Another Day in Paradise_ in rehab), and not a 
professional voyeur of teenagers (numerous acclaimed photo essays about the 
youth scene got him a movie career), _Bully_ would've turned out different, 
but do his age and experiences mean he's a dirty old man or on to us and 
exposing our hypocritical indignation? If hatchling _American Pie_ 
directors the Weitz brothers were Clark's age, they probably still would've 
emerged unscathed from showing Shannon Elizabeth nude for the duration of a 
genre-cushioned sequence that is, I dare say, less forgivable than _Bully_ 
at its most button-pushing. Think about it a guy asks a girl (Elizabeth) 
whose English isn't so good over to his house and, knowing that she'll need 
to change clothing once there, surreptitiously videotapes her getting 
undressed and enables his friends to watch via the Internet--and we're cued 
to laugh.
What continues to appal me about _Bully_ is but a by-product of the film 
its raw depiction of sex has overshadowed an incendiary act of violence 
around which everything else orbits. That I am forced to address a glimpse 
of pubic hair ahead of manslaughter officially confirms the reversal of 
western society's hedonistic poles, and casts a doubtful shadow over my own 
sexually curious teen years. I encountered no more over-the-top knee-jerk 
reaction than these odious reader comments that Dave Poland published last 
Wednesday
"'_Bully_' is perverted for no reason I could figure out except to satisfy 
Mr. Clark's old man obsession with young people's bodies. He seems to leer 
on the actors for no reason at all and even the younger, often shirtless, 
boys like Marty's brother came across as victims of some kind of unseemly 
voyeurism and I felt dirty for being a part of it. I'm about as far away 
from being a prude as you can [sic] but this movie just felt wrong."
_Bully_ takes place in Florida, in the middle of summer. To this 
self-declared non-prude (David nicknamed him "Not Fester") I ask, what 
would a boy who is anything but shirtless be doing in Florida on a hot 
summer's day? Because DVD commentary on _Another Day in Paradise_ indicates 
that Steven Spielberg is the bane of Clark's existence, I wonder how 
squirmy the idiotic Not Fester got when a gaggle of half-naked 
pre-adolescents ogled Haley Joel Osment in Spielberg's recent A.I. 
Artificial Intelligence. Not Fester's common alloy of anatomical shame and 
political paranoia will soon castrate artistic expression altogether.
Based on a true story, though muted, in some way, by homogenizing the races 
of the actual participants, _Bully_ stars the alluring Seth Green-David 
Spade fusion Nick Stahl in the title role as the abusive, college-bound 
best friend of spacey surfer Marty (the frequently touching Brad Renfro, a 
co-producer). Marty's girlfriend, Lisa (ex-Macaulay Culkin Rachel Miner), 
grows tired of the perennially looming black cloud that is Stahl's Bobby 
and rallies the troops to kill him; she's also pregnant with either Marty 
or Bobby's child (the latter would be by rape), and seems to believe that 
Bobby's death would rule him out as the biological father. The 
protagonists' relentless, veracious witlessness is hopefully more 
unsettling than the film's explicit nature; in the case of the stoners, we 
sense a façade, and wonder if they ever inhale. (Michael Pitt's performance 
is one rife with subtext in that regard, but also so off-putting as to 
discourage repeat viewings.) Like Clark's _Kids_, the crackling 
conversation piece _Bully_ will serve parents better than it does their 
offspring because one can't see the forest through the trees. Have I 
mentioned that Bobby, however repellent, is the film's most sympathetic 
character? Go with an open mind.
Š Film Freak Central (http://filmfreakcentral.net/). This review may not be 
reprinted, in whole or in part, without the express consent of its author.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Lions Gate Films/StudioCanal
 Director: Larry Clark
 Writer:  Zachary Long, Roger Pullis, nobel by Jim Schutze
 Cast: Brad Renfro, Nick Stahl, Rachel Miner, Bijou Phillips,
Michael Pitt, Kelli Garner, Leo Fitzpatrick, Daniel Franzese,
Deborah Smith Ford
   Some years back a New Yorker named Bernhard Goetz was
surrounded in a subway car by four young men armed with
screwdrivers.  They encircled him, though I don't believe they
had produced weapons, and demanded money.  Goetz
surprised them by pulling out a small pistol, putting a round into
each of the muggers.  While one was on the floor, he pumped yet
another round into him, saying, "You don't look too bad...have
another."  Goetz is white and the young men are black.  The black
community in New York almost unanimously condemned the
action while perhaps a majority of whites thought he was justified
in shooting the bullies.
   Should Goetz have followed the protocol advised by the New
York City police department, quickly handing over his cash to
avoid greater violence?  Or, just how far should we go in dealing
with bullies--people who browbeat others, often with no real
motive, just to demonstrate their power?   Pretty darn far,
according to seven teens who inhabit the story of "Bully," based
on a true story made into a novel by Jim Schutze from a murder
that took place in 1993.  The titled bully of the story in which
actual names are used, Bobby Kent (Nick Stahl), is not the
sweetest fella around though in fact he may be no worse than any
of the four screwdriver-carrying muggers who had a strange
encounter with Bernhard Goetz.  Unlike the hapless four, Bobby
has things going for him.  His dad is supportive, giving him tough
love and encouraging him to go to college and then into a family
business.  His best friend Marty Puccio (Brad Renfro), on the
other hand, is a high-school dropout who spends his days riding
around in convertibles, smoking weed, dropping acid, and
probably resents the better future that Bobby seems to have in
store.  Having received one hard punch in the nose too much
from the excitable Bobby (after putting a minor dent in the latter's
car), he asks his girl Lisa Connelly (Rachel Miner) for advice.  "Kill
him," is the reply--two words that echo from the recent high-school
killings in Columbine, Colorado, the Matthew Sheppard case, and
even I suppose from Japan where a knife-wielding psycho slashed
several elementary school youngsters to death.
   Movie buffs will immediately pick up the Larry Clark signature,
which is scrawled all over this harrowing movie.  Clark, whose
astonishing filmmaking debut  "Kids" in 1995 gazed at a group of
skateboarding, aimless teens in New York City centering on a
young man with a knack for deflowering virgins, moved to the
actual South Florida suburb that was the locus of the actual story. 
Once again Clark uses the cinema verite style to give the step-by-
step account the feeling of reality, in one case watching his
cameraman Steve Gainer encircle a row of plotting post-
pubescents so repeatedly that some of the audience couldn't be
blamed for acquring a sudden case of vertigo worse than what
they experienced while watching "The Blair Witch Project."  While
you can dodge the giddy feeling by closing your eyes at that point,
you won't be able to take your eyes from the screen for the
remainder of the agonizing work, which not only graphically
illustrates the murder at a 'gator-filled Florida swamp to which the
unwitting victim is driven but focuses close-up on the promiscuous
sex engaged in by comely adolescents, some of whom would not
be out of place in a Calvin Klein ad.  
   Clark is intent on eliciting a psychological study as well to a
killing that appears virtually without motive--given the alternative
that the victims of Bobby's bullying to enjoin his teasing by simply
talking to him, in a group if need be.  Most alarming is the case of
Lisa who seems like a quiet enough person when we first meet
her, in fact speechless when together with her own best pal Ali
Willis (Bijou Phillips)--allowing Ali to do all the flirting with Marty
and Bobby.  A suburban girl, bored almost to the point of
caricature, she goads the man she believes she loves ("I would do
anything for you, Marty") into plotting the assassination partly
because Bobby at times appears to threaten her relationship with
her lover-boy but mainly, I think, because she gets an almost
orgasmic charge from playing the Iago role.  Watch this fine
young actress as a smile crosses her face from time to time just
as she is expressing her hatred of Mr. Kent.
   The rest of the teens, played largely by performers who may just
make a name for themselves as did Chloe Sevigny from her role
in "Kids," perform admirably as well.  Brad Renfro is a pudgy
Marty who becomes surprisingly aggressive when given the
chance to play Brutus, and Leo Fitzpatrick as "Hitman" takes
charge for the first time after having convinced the gang falsely
that he was an actual mafia killer.
   The sex scenes are among the most graphic ever displayed on
the commercial screen which is why, if the movie gets a NC-17
rating, the very youngsters who should see this film as a warning
may not be able to.  Perhaps the film will remind you of your own
adolescence, a time that your hormones raced and you did some
naughty things without the slightest regard for consequences--
only to feel intense regret and even to point an accusatory finger
to your best buddy if such an action would alleviate your guilt. 
The director has made excellent use of Zachary Long and Roger
Pullis's challenging screenplay--which itself was adopted from Jim
Schutze's novel, handing us once again a hardhitting, realistic
and even didactic drama.  Bully for Larry Clark.
Running time: 106 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Robin Clifford
On 14 July 1993 teenager Bobby Kent disappeared without a trace in Florida.
Then, his friends were arrested and tried for his murder. The reason for
their heinous crime? He was their tormenter. Filmmaker Larry Clark ("Kids")
explores this incident in "Bully."
Bobby (Nick Stahl) has been a friend, since childhood, with Marty Puccio
(Brad Renfro). He has always held the dominant hand in the friendship,
though, abusing his buddy with the unexpected, painful punch for one
infraction or another. Up until now, Marty has accepted the abrupt
violence, but when he starts dating Lisa (Rachel Miner) and complains about
the abuse, she puts the bug in his ear that he can stop it. The seed of
murder is soon planted and a conspiracy begins to rid Marty and his friends
of Bobby and his abusive ways once and for all.
Larry Clark made splash for himself with his debut feature film, "Kids," an
unabashedly harsh look into the lives of a group of unthinking, selfish New
York City teens whose mission in life is to seek sex, drugs and trouble. It
was a hard film that looked, unblinkingly, at the ramifications of
promiscuity, unprotected sex and drug abuse in the AIDS era. If kids didn't
get the message, their parents sure couldn't miss it.
With "Bully," Clark changes his focus and locale and moves to Florida to
relate the account leading to the brutal group murder of Bobby Kent. Bobby,
raised in a normal-seeming family environment, has sociopath tendencies
that cause him to take violent action against his friend Marty for any
infraction, no matter how trivial. Marty, for years, has suffered under
this abusive friendship in a resigned, accepting way without striking back.
When timid Lisa falls for Marty, she can't stand to watch him succumb to
the tortures at Bobby's hands and soon convinces her none-too-bright
boyfriend that the best thing to do is to rid their lives of the bully.
Soon, others, like Ali (Bijou Phillips), a teen mother/sometimes prostitute
who also suffered abuse by Bobby, join the conspiracy and things get
totally out of control.
Enough about the story. What "Bully" is really about, in the hands of Larry
Clark, is a film that approaches soft-core pornography with a voyeur's look
at teen sex. It seems that fully half of the action shown in the film
involves young people screwing without concern for the consequences of
their libidinous actions. The inordinate amount of flesh-based antics among
the kids is geared to peeping tom status as Clark has his young actors
strip and have sex (I won't give the film credence by calling it "making
love"). There isn't much reason for all of the skin except to serve as
prurient titillation for the viewers.
"Bully" depicts a microcosm of our society of under-educated,
under-motivated, under-employed and over-sexed teenagers with too much free
time and, if Clark's assessment is correct, under-supervised by their
parents. Neither side comes across well in this tome of teen angst as the
kids wander around, without a clue, drinking, smoking dope and screwing
indiscriminately. The parents don't come across to well, either, being
shown as clueless, too, with their children operating beyond the pale of
any reasonable authority - they are kind of like juvenile versions of
Colonel Kurtz in "Apocalypse Now."
It's difficult to assess the acting of the various characters unless the
ability to perform simulated sex is considered thesping. Technical aspects,
too, are hard to judge since camera work is relegated to shooting the skin
of the young stars, with special attention given to shots of Bijou
Phillips's crotch - in close-up. The attention to sexual exploits pushes
the true story of murder into the background with the climax (no pun
intended) given the bum's rush in the end when all hell breaks loose and
the kids do in their nemesis, Bobby.
Larry Clark comes across more as a dirty old man and less a cutting edge
filmmaker with "Bully." I go to the movies to see a story unfold. If I want
to look at naked, sexy young women, I'll buy a copy of Playboy. I give it a
D.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com
