Title
Review for Place Vendôme (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
Written and Directed by Nicole Garcia
     There are great pleasures to this silkily adult thriller set in the 
murky world of precious stones, and none is greater, silkier, or more 
adult that the presence of the great Catherine Deneuve.  As beautiful in 
her late fifties as she was in her early twenties, Ms. Deneuve has long 
since justified the Best Actress awards she won as a newcomer in The 
Umbrellas of Cherbourg (1964).
     She's never been better than she is here as Marianne Malivert, the 
dipsomaniac wife (and before too long, widow) of the head of one of the 
great jewelry firms of Paris's famed Place Vendome.  When we first meet 
her, she's virtually a full-time resident of a private alcohol clinic.  
But the sudden death of her husband (Bernard Fresson) shakes her out of 
it, and re-armed with her former expertise as a diamond specialist and 
in possession of a cache of stolen gems he showed her before he drove 
his car into a truck, she penetrates the dark and dangerous shadows of 
the diamond trade, from De Beers in London to the burrows of Antwerp in 
an effort to secure her future.
     Actress-turned-writer/director Nicole Garcia keeps the mind 
churning by gradually revealing knots and tangles as she spools out her 
story.  There are multiple links between many of the characters, of both 
a professional and a romantic character, but we only discover them bit 
by bit.  There is a determined rejection of consistency, that hobgoblin 
of little minds; instead Garcia challenges us with shifting attitudes 
and character traits.  Marianne is a drunk; when she sobers up, she can 
still slip without falling apart.  Her feelings toward the beautiful 
Nathalie (Emmanuelle Seignier) range unapologetically from hostility to 
empathy.  Strong performances from Jacques Dutronc and Jean-Pierre Bacri 
as a couple of the men in her life draw the twisted skein of this story 
tighter.  "Love means getting lied to and betrayed," Marianne muses, and 
mendacity and betrayal in love and business are at the heart of this 
often difficult but always rewarding film noir.

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
For the ignorant, 2000 may not have been the best year for film.  The
subtitled Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon destroyed records for both box
office take and Academy Award nominations.  Fellow Best Picture nominee
Traffic contains more than a few segments that feature non-English dialogue.
One could even argue that Chocolat, another Best Picture contender, should
have been filmed in French (it's not like Juliette Binoche is unfamiliar
with the language).  Some bewildered moviegoers have thrown up their hands
in frustration, saying things like, "I wanna see that there picture about
the flying lions and the ducking tigers, but the durn thing ain't in
American, Cletus."
Don't expect ol' Cletus to be in the ticket line with you for Place Vendôme
(unless inbreeding has suddenly created a race of hillbillies with a
fondness for subtle French noir).  The film was released over two years ago
in Europe, where it was a smash sensation, garnering star Catherine Deneuve
a Best Actress Award at the Venice Film Festival and racking up an
impressive 12 César nominations (the French equivalent of the Oscar).
Vendôme takes its name from a ritzy area in Paris known for being the home
of several of the world's most prestigious jewelry stores.  Deneuve (Dancer
in the Dark) plays Marianne, the alcoholic wife of one of Vendôme's biggest
diamond merchants.  Vincent (Bernard Fresson) accepts the fact that his wife
is a lush who spends most of her time in clinics, trotting her out in public
a few times each year for special occasions.
When the film opens, Vincent has, through some undetermined yet devious
means, obtained several large, valuable diamonds.  One night, he shows a
drunken Marianne the stones and their hiding place, and then kills himself
the following day.  She learns that their jewelry store is on the verge of
bankruptcy and that Vincent has been having an affair with a woman (The
Ninth Gate's Emmanuelle Seigner) who could be a younger version of Marianne
(literally, in one flashback).
The rest of Vendôme shows Marianne pulling herself together to use the
illicitly obtained jewels to free herself from the shady underworld of
international diamond trading.  She's kind of like the Catherine Zeta-Jones
character in Traffic, doing what she has to do to protect her own future, no
matter how crooked or underhanded.  Marianne uses old contacts and ex-lovers
to weave her way through the rough jewelry trade racket - a game in which
everyone's goal is to out-con each other.  Reputable dealers won't touch
Marianne's booty, leaving her to deal with seedy characters in hotel rooms.
Vendôme isn't a typical film about stolen jewels.  There isn't a lick of
action, and its slow, methodical pace may frighten off those who weren't
already scared by the subtitles.  Like any deliberately sluggish film that's
worth watching, Vendôme is held together by the very strong performance of
its star.  Sure, I'd probably watch Deneuve read a phonebook for two hours,
but France's national treasure is terrific in her subtly restrained and
underplayed role.  Not a lot of people could have pulled it off, but she
does, and, as always, with style.
Vendôme was written and directed by French actress Nicole Garcia, who penned
the script with Jacques Fieschi (The School of Flesh).  Film buffs may
notice that Fresson and Deneuve also played husband and wife 30 years ago in
Bunuel's Belle de Jour.
1:57 - Not Rated but includes nudity and adult language

Author
Steve Rhodes
In Nicole Garcia's PLACE VENDÔME, Catherine Deneuve delivers an 
exquisitely underplayed and delicately nuanced performance as the 
alcoholic Marianne.  The problem in a nutshell is that her acting is the 
only reason to see the movie.
Early in the story, Marianne's husband of 18 years commits suicide.  A 
diamond dealer, he had been caught selling stolen stones, which caused 
him to lose face at his firm although not be arrested.  Although 
threatened with bankruptcy by her husband's partners, she refuses to 
sign over her shares in the firm.  Having once been "in the trade" 
herself, she goes back to the slightly seedy marketing of diamonds to 
private customers in hotel rooms.
In her husband's secret compartment, she finds a stake, three sizable 
stones, to get her started back in the business.  But with their Mafia 
connections, these large beauties are as hot as a firecracker, so no one 
reputable will buy them from her.
Much is made of Marianne's illness.  Her husband points out that she has 
checked herself in and out of the clinic so often that she has only 
spent 17 nights at home in the past year.  After starting back to work, 
she says that she is on the wagon, but hers is a strange sobriety.  She 
still drinks all of the time, but, since she doesn't guzzle it down, she 
no longer shows signs of drunkenness.
Laurent Dailland's cinematography is heavy on the dark atmospherics with 
a muted color palette that accentuates the drab grays.  He likes nothing 
better than to give us such hazy, underlit scenes that you wonder if 
there is a brownout.  And the director sets such a languid pace that if 
a character fired a gun, the bullet would take a full two minutes to 
strike its victim.
The biggest cheat is that PLACE VENDÔME is the type of story in which 
you wait in vain for something to finally happen.  Watching Deneuve at 
work is a treat, but it isn't enough.
PLACE VENDÔME runs 1:57.  The film is in French with English subtitles.  
It is not rated but would probably be an R for brief violence and 
language and would be acceptable for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
