Title
Review for Ricochet (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian L. Johnson
95 min, R, Action, 1991
Director: Russell Mulcahy
Cast: Denzel Washington, John Lithgow, Ice-T, Kevin Pollak, Lindsay Wagner
      Criminal Lithgow is planning to get into big time crime with a
killing at a carnival.  Rookie cop Washington is there and stops him,
and subsequently becomes famous because of it.  Lithgow is sent to
prison where he follows Washington's career with intent to ruin
Washington's career, like he ruined his.
      RICOCHET is rated R for graphic violence, explicit language, and
female nudity.  I give RICOCHET a four (on a zero to five scale).  I
highly recommend this film for anyone who likes action films, but a word
of caution for people with weak stomachs; the violence in the film gets
quite gory at some points.  I do suggest that you go to see the film in
the theater for, like most films, RICOCHET will lose some of it's impact
on video it is well worth the $6.75 admission price (or whatever it is
where you are).
      RICOCHET is a very good action film (but not in the league of
TANGO & CASH, which happens to be my favorite action film).  After the
very beginning the first half is sort of like a prison drama then it
goes back to an action film.
      The basic thing that I didn't like about the film is the lack of
time that Ice-T got in the film.  This is rapper Ice-T's second film,
the first being NEW JACK CITY.  He shows up only briefly in the
beginning and he shows up again near the end of the film.  Although the
critics seem not to like Ice- T's acting I feel that he has good acting
ability and he has the ability to put humor into a role.  I was upset
also that he only did one song for the movie, for the end credits.
      The other complaint about the film is that I think that they could
have picked someone a little more sinister for John Lithgow's role.  For
instance I think that John Glover (from 52 PICK-UP) would have been a
much better bad guy.  At some points in the film John Lithgow didn't
seem to really be as cruel and as heartless as his character was
supposed to be.   In addition Lithgow's partner (I didn't catch who
played him) didn't fit his role at all.
