Title
Review for Career Girls (1997)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
James Sanford
        Director Mike Leigh's "Career Girls," the follow-up to his
American breakthrough "Secrets & Lies," is a perfect example of his
improvisational style. His method of filmmaking is to give his actors an
idea for a scene --- a starting point --- and to let them run with it.
As a result, Leigh's movies tend to be full of spontaneity and color and
light on narrative drive.
 In "Career Girls," you'd be hard-pressed to find a traditional
plot. It's an aimless but amiable little portrait of two Englishwomen
who lived together for four years during the Eighties and are reunited
for a weekend ten years after their split-up. Back in University days,
Hannah (Katrin Cartlidge) and Annie (Lynda Steadman) had little in
common, aside from a shared love for the music of The Cure and a
fondness for using a copy of Emily Bronte's "Wuthering Heights" as a
sort of oracle for fortelling their futures. The rundown little flat
they shared overtop a Chinese takeaway is far removed from the upscale
condos and luxury apartments Hannah is now shopping for.
 In the initial flashbacks to the women's younger days, it looks
as if Leigh may have let Steadman and Cartlidge run a bit too wild. Plagued
by a serious case of facial determititus, Annie is a twitching bundle of
loose nerves, while Hannah (she insists that it be pronounced "Hah-NAH"
initially) is strident and self-dramatizing. Neither seems like a real
person so much as an actor's exaggerated concept of a character type,
and these early scenes play like sketches lifted from "The Tracey Ullman
Show."
 But as Cartlidge and Steadman find the right levels, "Career Girls"
develops into an insightful meditation on the nature of friendship, as
well as a peek into the psyches of two people who think they've dealt
with the past but have actually only pushed it aside. Both women have
plenty of unresolved issues that seem to keep getting in the way of
their finding true happiness and peace of mind, and each is a bit
envious of the other. The bird-voiced and retiring Annie admires
Hannah's forthrightness and drive; Hannah, who's almost always hiding
behind some sort of a front, confesses, "I'm not strong enough to be as
vulnerable as you."
 The poignancy of moments like that offset the occasional
contrivances that develop late in the film. There's at least one too
many run-ins with faces from the past, and an encounter with a former
flatmate who's now a jabbering derelict goes on far too long after it
makes its point. Leigh is most successful when he simply let Steadman
and Cartlidge work their quiet magic together, without distractions.
James Sanford

Author
Cheng-Jih Chen

In a weird fit of synchronicity, I'm sitting in this coffee shop, and
they have the Cure on the stereo.  The "Boys Don't Cry" album I think.
The Jungian cosmic coincidence part: I saw the Mike Leigh film last
night, "Career Girls", and, in the flashbacks, the Cure provides aural
texture for many of its scenes.  The movie is about the reunion of two
college roommates, 6 years after they last saw each other.  The time
they were in college was the late 1980s, and I guess Leigh fixed on the
Cure as signature music of that time and place.
Movies that take place in whatever decade uses signature music: the
Fifties with Elvis and Buddy Holly, the Sixties with the Beatles, Beach
Boys, Stones or whatever, the Seventies with disco.  Films that span
decades, like "Grace of My Heart", changed musical style by the scene.
I'm not sure what the music of the Eighties should be.  Early Madonna?
Boy George?  U2 when the filmmaker is trying to convey "earnest?" And
ten years from now I suppose we'll hear Trent Reznor and Garth Brooks
interspersed with images of Alan Greenspan in "Forest Gump III:
Irrational Exuberance".
In any case, Leigh's previous film was the great "Secrets and Lies".
The events of that film unfolded when a young black woman decides to find
her biological mother.  Mom turns out to be a working class white woman.
The latter freaks: she never saw the baby, and put her up for adoption
immediately after birth.  The film also has a second major story,
concerning the mother's brother and his family, and their particular
struggles.  I can't say much more: you'll have to see the movie.  It's a
fantastic film.
"Career Girls" therefore has to follow one of the best films of that
year.  It's not a bad film in its own right, but comes up as
disappointing given its predecessor.  I expected more.
I'm probably following some of the reviews I've read in these comments,
but so be it; many of their points are correct.  The film takes place
in the present, over a weekend reunion.  There are extensive flashbacks
back to their college days, illuminating certain significant events.
In the present, as they go through London, they bump into people who
figure in or trigger these flashbacks.  Note that the flashbacks don't
necessarily happen after they meet someone, but may precede the
encounter.  Synchronicity by example.  It feels forced.
This may be one of the flaws of the film.  Or, rather, it's in contrast
to Leigh's usual style, as someone noted: the past is used to
illuminate the present.  In "Secrets and Lies", the present speaks for
itself:  small gestures, looks and silences describe the characters'
histories and relationships.  In "Secrets", there is nothing so crude
as a handycam traipsing through a messy flat, Robert Smith crooning
"Just Like Heaven" in the background.  These flashbacks, in my opinion,
don't necessarily make it a bad film, but they make it far less subtle
than the other one; it's less than what the director is capable of.
I have more or a problem with the past as it's depicted.  The
characters in their youth are collections of ticks and nervous gestures
verging on neurological trauma.  These characteristics are actually
funny at first, and at second for that matter, but they get tired by
the end.  And it feels like the film is using a collection of
hyperactive spasms in place of more concrete development.
The relationship between past and present is another problem.  As said,
synchronicity abounds.  It closes the events and characters in a tight
circle: very little of what's shown in the past and what happens in the
present are outside of this circle.  I don't necessarily find fault
with this particular structure: one can argue that it's tight story
telling, with these characters existing solely for this particular
tale.  But it's different from depth of character found in the previous
film.  In "Secrets and Lines", there is a background that's not quite
illuminated, a feeling that there's a great deal more than what's shown
on screen, that there's a lifetime of experience off-camera.  In
"Career Girls", the matter is closed; there's nothing more here.
And perhaps this leads to a final point.  The characters' lives are
shown as "empty" in the present.  There is a curious disconnect from
between the past and the present in this regard.  The flashbacks do
little to illuminate their lives just before the film starts.  They
only serve to give background to events during the reunion, and little
else.  It's as if the characters exist only at two points in time:
their years in college and this weekend.  

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Katrin Cartlidge (Hannah), Lynda Steadman (Annie), Kate Byers,
Mark Benton (Ricky), Joe Tucker (Adrian) Director: Mike Leigh Producer:
Simon Channing-Williams Screenplay: Mike Leigh
When Annie was young she used to speak like this:
"I study psychology you know you know and I got this rash on my face
that the boys don't find attractive I don't know why please Miss Bronte
Miss Bronte tell me why I have this awful rash open page 183 throw your
finger to the winds of fate and it lands on the word 'Heathcliff' I knew
it was a stupid and dumb thing to do you know I did you know I did so
let's try it with sex anyway Miss Bronte Miss Bronte will I ever get
laid open page to 96 it's an empty page damn book as if it had anything
good to say anyway about whether I get laid or not sorry Ricky I like
you but not in that sort of a way but I have this fantasy about men
watching me when I do it do you mind Adrian can we do it can we?"
When Hannah was young she was one very angry lass:
"Stupid bloody idiot I'll hit you I will I really will so shut up and do
what I say I'm in charge here so don't F'k with me or I'll bloody hit
you I will I'll do what I please so Miss Bronte Miss Bronte I'll do as I
please so listen Ricky you stupid imbecile don't F'k with me and stay
still Adrian you hear me I like being in control so that means I stay on
top you hear me."
You must be wandering at this moment whether Tim Voon has gone
temporarily insane, in my defence the above writing styles in some ways
embodies how this movie feels. Two students Annie and Hannah, who spent
four very troubled and confusing years of college life together, are
reunited six years later elegant, mature and much changed career women.
So during this weekend of memories, they talk, they dine and they meet
past loves and likes in what becomes a rediscovery of the past.
Some concepts I found difficult to palate include: trying to believe the
miraculous transformation of two despots like Annie and Hannah, into
comprehensible, sane and intelligent persons over a short period of
years. Also annoying, is the huge amount of flashbacks and flashforwards
between the past and present. This leaves the viewer temporarily stunned
by the large amount of friction, caused by the static past and fluid
present. However, if such characters do exist in the world, what better
than in a Mike Leigh movie.

Author
James Sanford
     Director Mike Leigh's "Career Girls," the follow-up to his
American breakthrough "Secrets & Lies," is a perfect example of his
improvisational style. His method of filmmaking is to give his actors
an idea for a scene --- a starting point --- and to let them run with
it. As a result, Leigh's movies tend to be full of spontaneity and
color and low on narrative drive.
In "Career Girls," you'd be hard-pressed to find a traditional
plot. It's an aimless but amiable little portrait of two Englishwomen
who lived together for four years during the Eighties and are reunited
for a weekend ten years after their split-up. Back in University days,
Hannah (Katrin Cartlidge) and Annie (Lynda Steadman) had little in
common, aside from a shared love for the music of The Cure and a
fondness for using a copy of Emily Bronte's "Wuthering Heights" as a
sort of oracle for fortelling their futures. The rundown little flat
they shared overtop a Chinese takeaway is far removed from the upscale
condos and luxury apartments Hannah is now shopping for.
In the initial flashbacks to the women's younger days, it looks
as if Leigh may have let Steadman and Cartlidge run a bit too
wild. Plagued by a serious case of facial determititus, Annie is a
twitching bundle of loose nerves, while Hannah (she insists that it be
pronounced "Hah-NAH" initially) is strident and
self-dramatizing. Neither seems like a real person so much as an
actor's exaggerated concept of a character type, and these early
scenes play like sketches lifted from "The Tracey Ullman Show."
But as Cartlidge and Steadman find the right levels, "Career
Girls" develops into an insightful meditation on the nature of
friendship, as well as a peek into the psyches of two people who think
they've dealt with the past but have actually only pushed it
aside. Both women have plenty of unresolved issues that seem to keep
getting in the way of their finding true happiness and peace of mind,
and each is a bit envious of the other. The bird-voiced and retiring
Annie admires Hannah's forthrightness and drive; Hannah, who's almost
always hiding behind some sort of a front, confesses, "I'm not strong
enough to be as vulnerable as you."
The poignancy of moments like that offset the occasional
contrivances that develop late in the film: There are at least two too
many run-ins with faces from the past, and an encounter with a former
flatmate who's now a jabbering derelict goes on long after it makes
its point. Leigh is most successful when he simply let Steadman and
Cartlidge work their quiet magic together, without distractions.
James Sanford

Author
Kristian Lin
He had his big success with SECRETS AND LIES, and now everyone has gone
back to ignoring Mike Leigh.  We shouldn't be surprised.  He's not the
kind of filmmaker who'd parlay his Oscar nominations into a big-time
transatlantic career.  Maybe that's too bad - it'd be interesting to see
which American actors would flourish under his direction, and what kind
of movies he'd make on a Hollywood budget (what would MY BEST FRIEND'S
WEDDING have been like with him directing?).  Nevertheless, Leigh 
keeps doing what he does best:  small, intimate, sharply observed
slice-of-English-life movies.
His new film, CAREER GIRLS, takes place during a weekend when Annie
(Lynda Steadman) returns from Yorkshire to London to see Hannah (Katrin
Cartlidge), her roommate and best friend from college.  Hannah complains
that the men she meets don't last a weekend with her, but Annie makes
the grade with her.  They haven't seen each other in six years, but they
have little trouble reconnecting.  They're like ex-lovers who still turn
each other on (in fact, they're twice mistaken for a lesbian couple). 
The movie recognizes that there's a sexual charge to any close
friendship, be it these two or Thelma and Louise or Agent Mulder and
Agent Scully.  There's little in this movie besides extended
conversation between these two, in flashbacks to their college days and
in the present day.  In this respect, the movie's like Richard 
Linklater's 1994 magnum opus BEFORE SUNRISE, and the fact that CAREER
GIRLS can stand the comparison is high praise indeed.
We see the two of them as social misfits in their student days who band
together for companionship.  Hannah is a rather alarming piece of work. 
She's a motormouth who talks in a Robin Williams-like
stream-of-consciousness deluge.  She's an English major, which is just
as well, since her mind runs frenetically in literary circles.  Her
bizarre and highly original sense of wordplay grabs at anything that 
presents itself - outrageous puns, metaphors, allusions, and
off-the-cuff impressions of Marlon Brando and Robert DeNiro.  She's also
prone to fits of rage, with a nasty attitude to go with her steel-trap
mind - witness her ruthless destruction of a psych major who
good-naturedly tries to analyze her.  No wonder people keep away from
her; aside from giving off the appearance of some kind of dementia, her
wit is so sharp that she frequently cuts herself and people she cares
about.
But if Hannah has a soft spot for Annie.  Annie touches Hannah deeply,
in fact, and it'd take a cold heart not to be moved by this pathetic
creature.  As a collegian, her hair is dyed some shade of orange, she
chain-smokes despite her asthma ("Isn't that a bit kamikaze?" erupts
Hannah), and she has a shambling walk from carrying a bag that's too
large for her.  She also has a severe case of dermatitis on her face,
and she can barely lift her eyes from the ground during a conversation. 
Hannah says, "You look like you did a tango with a cheese grater," which
is enough to send Annie to the bathroom in tears.  But Hannah's able to
sense the gentleness and resilience in Annie's heart, a quality that
comes to the forefront when Annie makes her present-day appearance as a
well-adjusted, warmly radiant presence.
Hannah, for her part, has morphed from a gangly, scowling misanthrope
into a cool, fashionable business executive, though she's still rough
around the edges.  Her nervous tics have now been replaced by the self-
consciously theatrical gestures of a woman who hasn't lost her desire to
act out, just refined it.  Nor have her verbal idiosyncracies
disappeared; she explains Annie's fear of heights by saying, "She's got
a touch of the Hitchcocks."  Annie's enthralled by her, and so are we,
as she continues to thrust herself, insecurities and all, in people's
faces.  In a Hollywood movie, a character like this would be required to
have a tearful breakdown at some point and reveal her innermost fears -
audiences want to see such a hard-shelled person (especially a woman)
exposed and made vulnerable.  It doesn't happen here, and the 
characterization is richer for it.
If Kristin Scott Thomas is a Britisher who acts like a French actress,
Katrin Cartlidge is a Britisher who acts like an American actress. 
She's unstudied, content to be unpolished, loose with her body and at
ease with herself (though this could be just simple relief at playing a
character so different from her roles in BEFORE THE RAIN and BREAKING
THE WAVES).  At the movie's end, when Annie asks her if she'll 
meet anybody exciting on the train, Hannah says, "Maybe you'll meet the
man of your dreams."  The end of this line is accompanied by a hand
gesture which, we have come to learn, is one of Hannah's trademarks. 
Cartlidge puts her whole being into it, and yet it's a delightfully
self-deprecating jab at her way of expressing things.  The effect is
terribly charming; you couldn't imagine it coming from another 
British actress (or even most American leading ladies), so ladylike and
self-possessed are they.  It's something out of the Julia Roberts
repertoire.  Hey, here's a comparison - Roberts is similarly tall, with
an excess energy that keeps pouring out of her in the form of tiny,
illuminating gestures.  But anyone can see that Cartlidge isn't Roberts
- with her severe, angular features and a cerebral ferocity that shows
even in this light comedy, Cartlidge's presence in a movie is strong
stuff indeed.
Of course, it takes two (and not a cheese grater) to tango, and the
newcomer Steadman, while overplaying the naďveté a bit in the
present-day section, is an effectively soft counterpart to Cartlidge's
hardness.  We don't see too many movies about women forming close
friendships.  We see even less of them done so convincingly.  It still
dips into clichés like Hannah telling Annie, "You're the only person
who's ever appreciated me," but the chemistry between the actresses
redeems the movie's occasional talkiness and overexplicitness.  In this
respect, CAREER GIRLS is like a down-to-earth English version of ROMY 
AND MICHELE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION.  It doesn't have the silly comic
highs of its American counterpart, but when you're watching the latter
movie, you're always aware of two funny actresses clicking together.  In
CAREER GIRLS, you're aware of two characters finding strength in the way
they complement each other instead.
Mike Leigh designs his movies to be unformed, with stray stories poking
out from the edges.  There's a funny house-hunting scene where the two
girls meet a bathrobe-clad stockbroker who lights up a joint 
while showing them his apartment and clearly wants to have sex with
them.  (Hannah spots an open girlie magazine on his bed and asks, "Going
through your family album?")  On the flip side, there's the boyfriend
that Annie rejected who turns up six years later homeless and insane. 
This vignette lacks the tragic power of a similar scene in FARGO - it
takes too long without really going anywhere.  But Leigh's films acquire
their richness from hinting at the lives that are lived offscreen and
only peripherally touch on the movie we see.
Hollywood likes movies about bland people, and does its best to smooth
out interesting actors.  Only minor characters are allowed to be
eccentric, and they tend to be grotesque caricatures.  There seems to be 
no middle ground - a movie like MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING, which allowed
its protagonists some mild oddities, amounts to a blast of fresh air. 
On the other hand, some American independent filmmakers strain mightily
to create characters who talk, act, or think in original ways.  Mike
Leigh always gives the impression that he's just found these people and
treasures them for being the way they are.  At one point, Hannah credits
her first boss with saving her sanity.  How?  She says, "He let me be
myself."  We never meet that boss, but I'll bet he was Mike Leigh.

Author
Seth Bookey
Career Girls has the feeling of going to a class reunion
or even just reading an alumni bulletin. Some people have done well, some
have done worse, and for some people, nothing has changed, and being in
the middle of that self-esteem barom eter can be very unnerving.
Regardless of the refinements that are added over time, a lot of raw
emotions and memories are still bubbling under the surface. This is the
defining essence of the film.
Career Girls is different from some of Mike Leigh's oth er works. There is
no "high concept" operating here as in Secrets and Lies (black woman with
white birthmother) or social commentary (High Hopes). Here it's just two
friends having a weekend reunion after a six-year absence. 
The storytelling works a lot like memory--there is an fair amount jumping
from the present to the past, and while this is difficult at first, it
eventually works very well. Memories being revealed at appropriate moments
as the women remember them, rather than telling a chronological narrative.
Hannah (Katrin Cartlidge) and Annie (Lynda Steadman) were roommates years
ago in a flat above a Chinese take-away in a rundown part of town. Now,
they appear average in every way--well coifed, well dressed, and quite
grown up. But years ago, A nnie was scarred with severe dermatitis and
always shied away from looking directly at people. Interestingly enough,
she studied psychology. Hannah was very passive-aggressive and very
frenetic, jerking about to and fro and causally making random cruel re
marks. 
Annie is from Yorkshire, not too far from the home of the Bront sisters.
The roommates often use Wuthering Heights as a ouija board of sorts. Annie
enjoys a close family life while Hannah has to deal with an alcoholic
mother. Both have suffered w alk-out fathers, though, and while it is
sometimes hard to figure out why they are friends, they do bond. They also
have a friend in another psychology student, the overweight stuttering
Ricky, who never seems to have his eyes open, even though he seems t o
have insights into others. 
Now, while looking at properties together, their camaraderie is
evident--it is often assumed they're a lesbian couple. One realtor turns
out to be Adrian--a man Hannah slept with and Annie was in love with years
ago. But, he doesn't remember either of them. Adrian has "moved up in the
world" and is married with a child on the way. Hannah and Annie feel a bit
left behind. 
Musical Note: An interesting backdrop to the film is the choice of The
Cure's mid-1980s work--these songs permeate certain scenes. "Love Cats"
touches on a pair who "cratch and scream" but stay together through
nightly romps. "The Catepillar Girl"  discusses metamorphosis. But unlike
butterflies, humans can change their patinas but they stay very close to
the ir upbringing and roots. Without fulfilling significant others in
their lives, Hannah and Annie are left very much on their own to dwell on
their past, and still wishing to meet someone who will "kiss them in the
water, and make their dry lips sing,"  as the song "The Walk" mentions.
Career Girls is an October Films release and they have a lovely little Website.
Copyright (c) 1997 Seth J. Bookey, New York, NY 10021
More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/Acropolis/8588/kino.html

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Mike Leigh does not create film stories in a traditional way.  His
unique method of constructing scripts out of workshops with his actors has
made it a safe bet that you won't find flat, flimsy characters running
around in his films.  You also won't find many traditional plot-driven
narratives.  Leigh prefers to drop his fully-realized characters into a
situation, allowing them to act and react as naturally as possible.  Where
most film-makers write plots, Mike Leigh writes lives.
     CAREER GIRLS is a traditionally non-traditional Leigh effort which
begins with two solid characters -- 30ish career girls Hannah (Katrin
Cartlidge) and Annie (Lynda Steadman) -- and an intriguing situation.
Hannah and Annie are old college friends and former roommates who haven't
seen each other for six years when Annie comes to visit Hannah in London.
At first, we wonder why she bothered.  The initial interactions between
the two are awkward, the talk exceedingly small.  All evidence suggests
that the two women have so little in common they don't belong in the same
genus, let alone in the same room.
     Then, gradually, we begin to see them rediscover their friendship.
They share a hearty laugh over the ridiculous advances of a would-be
playboy (Andy Serkis); they run into old acquaintances from school; they
inquire after each other's families.  With unerring perception, CAREER
GIRLS reveals that the single most important thing Hannah and Annie _do_
share in common is the four years they spent together.  Leigh understands
the power of shared history to connect people, whether friends or family,
even when personalities are polar opposites.  As Cartlidge and Steadman
hone in on the ways in which these two women connect, spending time with
them becomes a wonderful lesson in how tight some bonds can become.
     So far, so very good, except that the dynamic I've just described
comprises less than half of CAREER GIRLS' 87 minute running time.  The
majority of the film is devoted to flashbacks of the girls' college days,
where another possible reason for their friendship becomes evident:  they
are both so irritating you can't imagine anyone else putting up with them.
Annie, painfully shy as the result of a terrible skin condition, bobs her
head, darts her eyes and whines; Hannah, blunt and aggressive, tosses of
puns and rude remarks in a perpetually affected drone of a voice.  When
the ridiculously twitchy pair is joined by an even twitchier and more
ridiculous pal named Ricky (Mark Benton) -- all facial tics and compulsive
mannerisms -- the flashback segments of CAREER GIRLS become a real chore
to sit through.
     Leigh has put together more than enough fantastic work (HIGH HOPES,
LIFE IS SWEET, NAKED, SECRETS & LIES) to have earned the right to a minor
stumble, but the stumble in CAREER GIRLS points out the potential danger
in Leigh's style.  If you're going to give the audience a character-driven
drama, you'd better not give them characters likely to drive them into the
lobby.  The college-era Hannah and Annie are shrill caricatures of
bombastic and insecure college students; nothing about them or their
friendship rings as true as their modern day attempts to figure out why
they were friends.  After making several wonderful films filled with
believably complex people, Leigh has made half of a wonderful film by
making only half of two wonderful characters.

Author
Rob Reser
         Director/Writer Mike Leigh (SECRETS AND LIES) brings us another
candid into the ordinary lives of ordinary people. This time we get a
look at two women who once roomed together in a London flat during
college. The film starts 6 years later when Annie (Lynda Steadman)
arrives to meet here old flat mate Hannah (Katrin Cartlidge of BREAKING
THE WAVES) whom she hasn't seen since graduation. The movie follows the
two women over a day and half since Annie has only a short time for her
visit. We meet the girls through a series of flashbacks and through
their encounters in their search to find Hannah a new place to live.
Bumping into familiar faces along the way we seem to piece the lives of
these two women together almost as much as they do on their journey.
Starting off awkwardly unsure of how to react to each other and ending
by being closer than they had ever been. The dialect is heavy and hard
to get used to at first but by the time the girls go apartment hunting I
found myself drawn into their mysterious past. Coincidence abounds and
sometimes feels preconceived but it's not too hard to believe that these
two women might just have that kind of luck.Jumping through many
emotional hoops along the way CAREER GIRLS is a mesmerizing glimpse into
Mike Leigh's characters. Katrin Cartlidge is especially wonderful in her
role bouncing quickly between sarcasm and sincerety. 2 ˝ spots (out of
4)
Favorite Line: Hannah looking out an 8th story window over the city; "I
guess this is where you watch the class struggle from."   

Author
James Berardinelli
United Kingdom, 1997
U.S. Release Date: 8/13/97 (limited)
Running Length: 1:28
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, sexual situations, brief nudity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.66:1
     Mike Leigh's follow-up to his Oscar nominated SECRETS AND LIES is a 
different kettle of fish altogether.  CAREER GIRLS is a light, almost 
comedic drama that harkens back, in tone and temperament, to LIFE IS 
SWEET.  There's nothing bold or ground-breaking about this film -- it's 
a two-character piece that features strong writing and acting, and very 
little else.  CAREER GIRLS is also short enough (a skinny ninety 
minutes) that it's never in danger of wearing out its welcome, something 
that occasionally happens with "talky" movies like this.
     In many ways, simplicity is CAREER GIRLS' greatest asset.  Because 
the plot is so threadbare, it allows us to delve more deeply into the 
personalities of the two protagonists.  They are Hannah (Katrin 
Cartlidge) and Annie (Lynda Steadman), a pair of thirty-ish former 
university roommates-turned-business women who are spending a weekend 
together in London.  Once, Hannah and Annie were inseparable, but, since 
completing their terms at college six years ago, they have become 
victims of the gulf that time and distance often build.  CAREER GIRLS is 
about their attempts to rediscover, and perhaps redefine, their 
relationship.
     As usual, Mike Leigh uses the "fly on the wall" perspective to give 
us insights into the most mundane aspects of the women's weekend.  We 
see them eating, drinking, and getting ready for bed.  Their topics of 
conversation are often banal, but the intelligence of the writing keeps 
us involved even when the subject matter is stale.  And, to give us a 
sense of perspective about Hannah and Annie's past, Leigh employs 
numerous flashbacks to allow us to share their memories.  It's a 
technique that amplifies our understanding of the two characters.
     The reunion is presented believably, with the initial awkwardness 
and tension giving way to the gradual recapturing of an easy 
familiarity.  Anyone who has met an old friend after many years' absence 
will find the ring of truth here.  In this, as in almost everything 
else, Leigh shows that he's a careful observer of life.  Time mutates 
all of us, although, living within the shell of our body, we're unaware 
of the changes, or think that they're imperceptible.  Reunions give us a 
chance to take a step back and examine how the years have altered our 
lives and those of others.  This is the feeling that Leigh has captured 
here, by introducing not only Hannah and Annie, but three other 
important individuals from their past:  the "idiot savant" Ricky (Mark 
Benton), the callous Adrian (Joe Tucker), and another former roommate, 
Claire (Kate Byers).  Coincidence also plays a role in CAREER GIRLS, 
although Leigh seems a little self-conscious using this device, since he 
keeps mentioning it.
     CAREER GIRLS is peppered with humor, although, as was the case in 
LIFE IS SWEET, some of the comedy is underpinned by a bittersweet aura.  
The most memorable of this film's episodes has Hannah and Annie, who are 
looking at expensive condos without any intention of buying ("just to 
see how the other half lives"), encountering a sleazy owner who seems as 
interested in getting them into bed as in showing off his high-rise 
domicile.
     The film's success depends largely on how well the two main 
characters are presented, and the performances of Katrin Cartlidge and 
Lynda Steadman are rock solid.  Steadman, in her first feature film, 
captures the innocence and insecurity of a woman suffering from a severe 
self-esteem problem.  We see her as a painfully shy college girl with 
all sorts of nervous tics and a face scarred by dermatitis, then as a 
somewhat more relaxed and mature woman.  Katrin Cartlidge, who appeared 
in Leigh's NAKED (and more recently in BREAKING THE WAVES), is even 
better as the self-confident, but inevitably lonely, Hannah.  Cartlidge 
delivers Leigh's dialogue with a relish that gives many of the one-
liners their zing.
     CAREER GIRLS is a wonderful diversion -- expert film making that's 
all the more effective because it seems so natural and effortless.  The 
movie lacks the grit of NAKED and the emotional impact of SECRETS AND 
LIES, but, because it effectively transforms two strangers into people 
worth caring about, CAREER GIRLS can be regarded as nothing less than a 
success.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@mail.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
