Title
Review for Michael Jordan to the Max (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Scott Renshaw
MICHAEL JORDAN TO THE MAX
(Giant Screen Sports/NBA Entertainment)
Featuring:  Michael Jordan; narrated by Laurence Fishburne.
Producers:  Don Kempf, Steve Kempf and James D. Stern.
Directors:  James D. Stern and Don Kempf.
MPAA Rating:  Unrated
Running Time:  45 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     An important note, first of all, about the context in which your
humble narrator viewed MICHAEL JORDAN TO THE MAX: The Super Screen theater
in my home turf of Salt Lake City is operated by local auto dealership
tycoon Larry H. Miller. Miller also happens to be the owner of the Utah
Jazz, and he had set up the local premiere of the film as a thank you for
employees of the Jazz organization and their families. Never mind that the
night of the screening would have been a playoff game for the Jazz had 
they not been eliminated earlier in the week; never mind that Michael
Jordan had chosen as his grand farewell to basketball beating those same
Jazz in the 1998 NBA finals with a spectacular final minute of Game 6.
These were basketball fans -- how could they not appreciate a tale of the
greatest basketball player yet to walk the earth?
     It is testimony to the astonishing appeal of Michael Jordan that even
those partisans who should despise him still can't help admiring him. He
is the sort of larger-than-life figure it seems was born for a big screen
documentary -- and in a very limited sense, that's true. MICHAEL JORDAN TO
THE MAX focuses on Jordan's final title run with the Chicago Bulls in
1998, making stops for highlights of that year's four playoff series.
Interspersed with those highlights, accompanied by commentary from
sportscasters and former coaches and teammates, are tales from throughout
Jordan's life: his failure to make his high school varsity team; his
national championship-winning shot as a freshman at the University of
North Carolina; his father's murder in 1993; and his 1994-95 retirement
from basketball to pursue his dream of playing professional baseball.
     Directors James D. Stern and Don Kempf open the film with a shot of
Jordan alone in a gym, soaring through the air for a dunk while the camera
sweeps around him in three dimensions, MATRIX-style. The tone is set for a
story of Jordan the myth, Jordan the super-hero, which is primarily what
MICHAEL JORDAN TO THE MAX delivers. The early moments of the film touch on
pieces that added to his mystique. There's the pounding theme of the Alan
Parsons Project's "Mammagamma" that made Chicago Bull player introductions
a spectacle unto itself. There's the statue outside Chicago's United
Center, a bronze of Jordan flying over a defender rendered as a shapeless
mass with a helplessly outstretched arm. And there's a montage of Jordan's
legacy of ridiculous, physics-defying shots. He's such an unearthly
presence in the film that I began to believe he could change history --
even though I knew Chicago had lost one of the playoff games featured, I
was still surprised that the last-second shot Jordan took to win the game
didn't actually go in.
     If all one was looking for from MICHAEL JORDAN TO THE MAX was a sense
of his legend writ two stories high, I suppose you could say it was an
unqualified success. But there's such an emphasis on Jordan's inhuman will
to win that his humanity isn't often in evidence. Sure, there are scenes
of Jordan fooling around with kids at a basketball camp, and an effective
sequence capturing the ever-present crush of fans that made his every
movement a running of the gauntlet. There's just not much sense of what
makes Jordan tick. Even when the player himself speaks, it's primarily in
the well-rehearsed platitudes of a professional athlete: "I never doubted
myself;" "You have to pursue your dream;" etc. It's a shock when we see
Jordan getting misty-eyed while discussing his relationship with his
father, because it's such an unusually unguarded moment. MICHAEL JORDAN TO
THE MAX is content primarily to keep the audience at an admiring
arm's-length distance.
     It may be unreasonable to expect a piercingly insightful documentary
in this particular format. IMAX presentations have carved out visions of
the awe-inspiring as their unique dominion, and Jordan certainly fits that
description. Yet the film-makers even miss an opportunity to take
advantage of the format during their game footage. Instead of taking
viewers into the center of real-time basketball games -- in effect,
allowing them to be on the court with the legend -- Kempf and Stern use
slow-motion for most of their game shots. They don't even bother to
maintain chronology within individual games (one disadvantage of the big
screen is that you can see the scoreboard in virtually every shot, making
it obvious when the film has jumped back a quarter or two just for the
sake of a cool image). MICHAEL JORDAN TO THE MAX is all about its star
power, the kind that even appeals to a theater full of Jazz fans who would
wish for a different kind of changed history. As a big-screen experience,
it's all about keeping a hero larger than life.

Author
Michael Dequina
_Michael_Jordan_to_the_Max_  *** (out of ****)
As hard as it may be to believe, I--whose second claim to pseudo-fame on the 'Net has been my Michael Jordan fan sites, plus my work as chat host at his official website--had never once attended a single Chicago Bulls game during his illustrious run with the team.  So on the basis of that alone, I was grateful to be able to experience _Michael_Jordan_to_the_Max_ on the giant IMAX screen last summer.  In fleshing out many memorable highlights from Jordan's final NBA championship run in 1998 on a screen eight stories high and bolstering every last sonic detail in crystalline digital surround sound, directors James M. Stern and Don Kempf did Jordan fans the world over a huge favor, giving those not fortunate to ever see one of Jordan's basketball games live as good an approximation of the up-close and courtside experience as could ever be hoped for.
But _Michael_Jordan_to_the_Max_ is no mere highlight reel; interspersing images from those memorable final playoff series with interview footage with teammates and noteworthy admirers (thankfully, no Tiger Woods) as well as candid talks with Jordan himself, the film is structured less as a basic retrospective than as an inspirational piece.  On those terms, it's hard to argue with its effectiveness, especially for children.  The notable negative touchstones of Jordan's life and career are addressed: being cut from his high school team, the tragic loss of his father, the ill-fated detour in minor league baseball.  Through it all, Jordan persevered and managed to attain even greater heights of glory, and fans young and old will find it impossible to be unmoved.
Ironically, though, the most devout of Jordan fans will probably be the least affected, for this is all information with which we are more than familiar.  Ditto to an even greater degree the bulk of the basketball footage; considering how closely Jordan's final season, particularly that final championship run, was followed by the media, even more casual fans may feel a sense of déjŕ vu.  Also, the slickness of the editing and packaging, complete with regal narration by Laurence Fishburne, give the film the feeling of a video by NBA Entertainment (who, in fact, co-produced)blown up to really large proportions--not necessarily a bad thing, but it adds to the air of familiarity.
Even so, there's no denying the power of seeing the intense hoops action on such an imposing screen though for me--and, I imagine, many other ardent fans--the most memorable portions of _Michael_Jordan_to_the_Max_ are the quieter ones that offer an all-too-small taste of MJ the man.  It's a testament to Jordan's charisma that even in the few interview segments and the brief glimpses of him off the hardwood his personality shines through.  That said, it would have been nice to see more footage like the glimpses of him having fun at his youth basketball camp and goofing off during practices--stuff I suspect fans rarely get to see (though I must say I had the distinct pleasure and privilege of attending a Bulls practice back in 1997 and experienced first-hand Jordan's perspective of a typical mob scene waiting outside--a hectic image repeated a few times over in one passage of the film).
_Michael_Jordan_to_the_Max_ has been dismissed as a bit of softball puffery, an accusation not entirely unfair but one, I feel, is ultimately forgivable.  After all, it does brings the astounding accomplishments of the greatest athlete of our time to life with astonishing visual clarity and detail (however, even on IMAX, the distinctive color of Jordan's eyes still cannot be exactly captured); and, furthermore, it's a film for the fans by fans--and few within Jordan's legion of admirers will come away disappointed.
The DVD release of _Michael_Jordan_to_the_Max_ begs an obvious question: what's the point of issuing an edition of a film made for a super-large screen for the comparatively microscopic dimensions of the home screen?  The question is not entirely without validity, not to mention one I'd likely ask myself.  However, in this case, I feel the question is moot--before the release of the _Max_ disc, there was no DVD of actual Jordan game highlights on the market.  So now, at long last, some of the most memorable moments in sport are available for fans to keep in DVD's superb audio and video quality.
That fact alone would be enough to recommend the disc, but the supplements that make it an even more worthwhile buy.  Directors James M. Stern and Don Kempf, along with producer Steve Kempf, provide an informative and lively commentary.  Wags may complain that they lay on the Jordan reverence even thicker on the track, but that also adds to the charm, not to mention reinforces the "film made for fans by fans" idea; if only more filmmakers displayed the same unabashed passion for their film's subject.  However, the film's brief running time (46 minutes, per IMAX standard) means they can't get into too much detail about too many things though they are refreshingly honest about the various "cheats" they used to heighten the drama, such as editing together game highlights in non-chronological order.
Much of the buzz talk surrounding _Michael_Jordan_to_the_Max_ focused on the opening and closing shot of one of Jordan's signature slam dunks, which was captured using the "bullet-time" technique prominently featured in _The_Matrix_.  The DVD includes a fast-paced two-minute reel that shows how the various individual components were assembled to create that shot, and the actual filming of Jordan dunking against a green screen is prominently featured in a longer 21-minute featurette on the general making of the film--though the segment is clearly slanted toward the making of that effects shot.
The usual collection of television spots, trailers, and crew biographies are also included, as well as detailed stats on Jordan's regular season and postseason careers--a nice finishing touch to a classy digital tribute to a living legend.
Specifications: 1.85:1 anamorphic widescreen; English and French 5.1 Surround; English Dolby Surround; English subtitles; English closed captioning. (20th Century Fox Home Entertainment)
mrbrown@iname.com
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com
on ICQ: #25289934 | on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: www.mrbrownmovies.com
The Movie Report: www.moviereportsite.com
CinemaReview Magazine: www.CinemaReview.com
The Reel Site: www.thereelsite.com
Film Threat - www.filmthreat.com
Digital Widescreen: www.digitalwidescreen.com
Epinions: www.epinions.com/user-mrbrown
African-American Literature Book Club: www.aalbc.com
