Title
Review for Jazz Singer, The (1927)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"The Jazz Singer" is of great historical importance,
as it was the first feature to incorporate dialogue
and sound.  Although primarily a silent, the musical
numbers all have sound, and there are brief snippets
of dialogue.  The ad-libbed dialogue by Al Jolson
delighted the audience.  The tremendous box office
success launched the film career of Jolson, and put
the Warner Brothers studio on the map.
The story has an aging orthodox Jewish tenor (Warner Oland,
better known for playing Charlie Chan in 1930s movies)
raising his young son Jakie (Bobby Gordon) to take his
place in the synagogue.  Jakie wants to be a jazz
singer, however, and runs away from home.  Years later,
Jakie (now played by Jolson) is a success, about to
star in a broadway show.  But on opening night, which
falls on the Jewish Day of Atonement, his father
becomes gravely ill. Jake's mother (Eugenie Besserer)
implores him to skip the show to sing in the synagogue,
which she believes will reconcile him with his father.
"The Jazz Singer" has been been criticized for its
heavyhanded drama.  The film's story and characters are
simplistic.  Jakie's father is humorless and stubborn,
his mother is selfless and loving, and even his girlfriend
and Broadway co-star (May McAvoy) isn't more than an
ambitious pretty face.  The choices that Jakie must make,
between career and family, jazz and religion, take on
a significance in the story that is much greater than
the viewer's interest.
More interesting are the musical numbers.  Jolson
has a couple black-faced numbers, delivering "Mammy"
with mawkishness ripe for parody.  There a few
uptempo numbers, and Jolson's enthusiasm and ability
to entertain is evident.  While "The Jazz Singer"
is not a good movie, it isn't bad either.  It is
a watchable Jolson vehicle, as well as one of
the most historically significant films.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    
