Title
Review for Diary of Anne Frank, The (1959)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
You would think that "The Diary of Anne Frank" would make a
terrific movie.  There is suspense, bad guys, innocent victims,
and all are believable because they are taken from real life
incidents.  But while the basis of a great movie is here,
this film can't deliver the goods.  One problem is it mostly
takes place in an attic.  But it is talky, overlong, and our
young heroine is miscast.  Anne Frank is played by Millie
Perkins, at 21 too old for the role, and gratingly precocious
and self-absorbed.
It is World War II.  The Nazis have taken over Europe and
are bent on hunting down and exterminating jews.  A group of
jews are forced to hide in an Amsterdam attic, in a factory
owned by a good samaritan who shows up now and then to give
them food.
Among the shut-ins are Anne Frank, her older sister Gretchen, 
her parents, and a handsome young man named Peter and 
his parents. Anne's parents, as portrayed in the film, 
are ever-patient saints, while Peter's parents are often jerks.  
Anne must compete with Gretchen for the attention of Peter,
who is more interested in playing with his cat.
Life is boring for everyone in the attic.  To pass the time,
they read books, and Anne begins a diary.  They must all be
quiet during the day, or workers below will hear and report
them.
The film is at its best when demonstrating how strangers forced
to live at length in close quarters will get on each other's
nerves.  Food deprivation and fear of discovery only increase
the stress.  Shelly Winters, who won an Oscar for her performance,
plays Peter's mother.  Her character is all over the place,
alternatively charming, bitter, and hysterical.
One night a burgler breaks into the factory and hears noises made
by the jews in the attic.  Their days are numbered now, since
someday when the burglar is caught he will turn them in to
reduce his sentence.
Later, a kindly, elderly dentist joins the group.  He tells
them horror stories of neighbors getting stripped of their
possessions and shipped to death camps.  But now three food
rations must be stretched to feed eight people.  Still, no one
seems to lose any weight.
The dentist and Anne must share a room.  He is also allergic
to Peter's cat.  These scenes provide rare comic relief.
Anne begins having nightmares, waking up screaming, frightening
the others and endangering their presence.
The movie drags on, much as did their real life in the attic.
The shut-ins begin to appear miserable and catatonic.
The exception is Anne, who is still vivacious due to
a budding but platonic relationship with dreamy Peter.  
A few years pass.  The jews celebrate Hannukah with makeshift
decorations.  A bombing raid tears a small hole in the roof.
German soldiers hear noises and check out the factory, nearly
discovering them.  Peter's father is caught stealing food, 
and is nearly evicted.  They hear of D-day and have hope of 
liberation.  But their hope is proved false when German troops 
learn of their hiding place, and they are all taken away 
to concentration camps.
One must separate the film from its historical context.  When I
criticize the movie, I am not lacking sympathy for European Jews,
who suffered great losses of property, life, and liberty.
But you can't slap a gold star on a movie based upon good
intentions and a redeeming subject matter.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
