Title
Review for Citizen Kane (1941)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Orson Welles
Starring: Orson Welles, Dorothy Comingore, Joseph Cotten, Everett
Sloane, Ruth Warrick, Ray Collins
"Citizen Kane" is always being referred to as the greatest film of all
time, or at least in the top five.  Every critic loves it (it's Roger
Ebert's favorite film of all time), and we constantly hear how perfect
it is.  I'm not going to deny any of this.  I mean, if you've seen it,
you know how awesome it is.  It's 1997, yet I was still blown away by a
film that was called "innovative" back in 1941.  I've always said that
the greatness of a film is truly measured over time, and this is one of
the few films that is truly amazing to watch, and actually lives up to
all that damn hype.
So what's the big deal with "Citizen Kane?"  Well, for starters, it's
technically innovative, much in the way "Star Wars" was (I'm not saying
Kane like blows up a death star or something like that).  Orson Welles,
who made this when he was 26 (!!!), used all kinds of new techniques for
his film, including depth of field, wide angle lenses, etc, etc, etc. 
There are cool-ass shots all over the place, including some great
swooping shots, wonderful shadows on the perfect things, and even a
brilliant shot of a nurse walking into a room shot through a broken
piece of reflecting glass.  Even in these digital 90s, that looks cool.
But "Kane" isn't just innovative technical-wise; it's innovative
story-telling-wise, becoming the pre-cursor for non-linear narratives
like that of "Pulp Fiction," "The Usual Suspects," etc.  In pieceing
together the story of the mysterious protagonist, we see flashbacks told
in whatever order, making it fun to piece together.  Sure, there's an
on-going narrative - the search for who was Charles Foster Kane - but we
get to see parts of his life told by people who knew him, which was
revolutionary back then, since most people went to the movies for
straight-foward narratives, like "King Kong."  No wonder this movie
bombed financially back then.
So what's the story of this flick?  It deals with, well, as I said, the
search for who was Charles Foster Kane (Orson himself).  Kane actually
dies in the beginning of the film, but before he does, he utters the
famous last word, "Rosebud."  We then cut to a newsreel documentary on
him being viewed by some newsmen.  In it, we get the rough outline of
the film, telling us he had inherited a huge fortune at a young age, and
became a big-time newsman.  He was also hated and loved at the same
time, and even ran for governor.  But of course, this is an empty
experience, since no one can really explain why he was, and the makers
of the film think that it's "Rosebud."  But what is "Rosebud?"
The film takes us through flashbacks, as they interview all sorts of
people who were big parts of his life.  We see almost his whole life,
presented in these flashbacks, and in montages.  Kane was a very
lonesome man who, as people say, wanted to be loved, but had problems
with other people.  He has two unsucessful marriages during his life,
suffers some scandals, and dies alone and miserable in his giant palace
he built to himself, Xanadu (no relation to the early 80s Olivia Newton
John film of the same name).
The ending is ironic and totally brilliant, and brings the film to a
beautiful poetic ending.  But this film is not just a good ending; the
entire film is amazing to watch.  Orson Welles expertly breaks the
protagonist down through the flashbacks told from other people's
perspectives, showing that no one truly understands anyone else.  Of
course, we get an omnipotent view of the man, and learn what made him
tick in the final frame.
The acting is excellent from everyone (although Dorothy Comingore as his
second wife is kind of annoying, but that kind of helps her performance
a bit), but, obviously, the best part of this film is Orson.  His
direction is damn-near flawless, his writing is awesome and not corny
for a sec, and his acting is superb.  Not even half the size he would be
by the time he was in "The Muppet Movie," Welles is still a striking
presence in the film, perfectly embodying his subject.  He has a kind of
coldness which distances himself from everyone, but somehow embraces the
viewer to caring about him, even when he's being a total ass to people. 
And his make-up for when he's older is flawless; he fools everyone, and
doesn't nearly resemble his 26 year old self.
Oh, and special mention should be made to the composer of the musical
score - Bernard Herrman.  He creates a beautifully haunting score which
is nothing short of brilliant.  Of course, it's penned by Herrman, so
what do you expect?
Contrary to ignorant opinion, "Citizen Kane" is neither pretentious nor
boring.  It moves at a wonderful pace, with things always occuring in
the story.  And the symbolism is simple yet sweet, and is never overdone
in any way.  If there is a film that is pretty close to being brilliant,
it would be "Citizen Kane," and I'm not just saying that so I won't be
scrutinized by other film geeks.  It's an awesome film which hasn't
dated a bit, and a film which embodies a perfect combination of
technical artistry, as well as narrative brilliance.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Brian Koller
"Citizen Kane" has often been considered the best film
ever made.  While I don't believe this is true ("Casablanca",
among others, is better) it comes close enough to validate
such a strong judgment.
"Citizen Kane" is loosely based on the life of "yellow journalism"
newspaper magnate William Randolph Hearst.  Kane (Orson Welles,
who also directed and co-wrote the screenplay) is separated
from his parents as a child and made heir to an enormous fortune.
Coming of age, he decides to run a newspaper, sensationalizing
the news and considering himself to be the voice of the people.
He develops loyal colleagues in Jedediah Leland (Joseph Cotten)
and Bernstein (Everett Sloane).  With ambitions beyond publishing,
he runs for New York Governor, and later promotes the singing
career of second wife Susan (Dorothy Comingore).  He also
builds Xanadu, an extravagant palace that is never finished.
These various ambitions fail, and Kane dies a wealthy but
spiritually broken man.
"Citizen Kane" is a character study, about a man who
superficially has everything, but still isn't satisfied.
Charles Foster Kane has to prove something, but that
something always changes, and simply cannot be achieved.
This is demonstrated at length by Kane building a lavish
opera house for Susan to perform in, then sending her on
a cross-country tour, in the face of widespread ridicule of
her hopeless lack of talent.
The film is at its best when Kane is a young man, dynamic and
with the straightforward goal of "defending the working man".
A scene where he sings and dances with chorus girls is
marvelous chaos.  Also outstanding is a series of breakfast
encounters between Kane and first wife Emily (Ruth Warrick)
that cover several years and show the fading of the marriage.
In comparison, later scenes drag ever so slightly, as Kane
is reduced to playing lord of Xanadu.
"Citizen Kane" plays little tricks with the audience.
Early in the film, there is a perfect send-up of the
newsreels.  In the scene that Kane's parents discuss his
future, he can be seen through a window playing in the snow.
The chronology mixes past and present events, with dialogue
in the present giving away subsequent events that take place
in the past.
Welles was the leader of the Mercury players, and "Citizen
Kane" marked their transition from radio to cinema.  Welles,
Cotten, and Moorehead would also appear together in
"Journey Into Fear" and "The Magnificent Ambersons" before
nervous studio executives put a halt to Welles' projects.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
Since CITIZEN KANE mysteriously showed up at our local multiplex -- even
the manager had no idea why they booked it, I decided to attempt to
forget everything I knew about it and to try to look at it as the first
viewers might have back in May of 1941.
Even the greatest films, and CITIZEN KANE is universally considered to
be the best or at least one of the best, were once just the latest
picture playing at the local Bijou. The audience may have known
something of the story ahead of time, but they likely did not expect its
greatness.
As everyone now knows, the movie tells the story of one Charles Foster
Kane, a boy who inherited an enormous fortune and went on to become a
powerful newspaper magnate. Oscar Wells, then a beaming, fairly trim
young man, directed CITIZEN KANE, played the starring role and cowrote
the script with Herman J. Mankiewicz. Wells was a genius who would go on
to other films, but none would ever come close to his masterpiece,
CITIZEN KANE.
The film's opening has the look of a creepy old gothic horror movie. The
sounds are kept quiet, as if they might awaken some angry god, while we
start to learn about Kane's background.
This eerie tranquility is shattered by the blare of a newsreel. Theaters
then featured newsreels along with the double feature and the latest
installment of some serial. The newsreel in CITIZEN KANE, although
slightly comical, gave a documentary feel to the production, what we
would call a docudrama today. Since the movie was a slam at the life and
times of William Randolph Hearst, a fact the audiences then were likely
to have heard, the newsreel approach gave the film an immediate intimacy
and accessibility.
Having just weathered the great depression, the viewers were likely to
have identified with the film's ridicule of ostentatious wealth. Much is
made of John Foster Kane's unfinished palace, Xanadu, a reference to
Heart's San Simeon castle. "Cost?" the newsreel reporter asks himself
rhetorically. "No man can say," he sonorously answers. Just as the
audiences were probably enraged at this waste of money, having recently
worked their way back from poverty, they were also quite likely jealous.
A story within the story has a group making a movie about Kane's life.
Since it doesn't have a proper ending, they send one guy off to discover
the meaning of Kane's last word ("Rosebud"), figuring that it might be
the clue to solving the enigma that was his life.
"Rosebud -- dead or alive," is the producer's charge to his assistant.
"It'll probably turn out to be a very simple thing." This hinted to the
viewers that the film wasn't just some elaborate mystery and that they
should not feel cheated if Rosebud turns out not to be very dramatic
after all.
Audiences now know the answer to the mystery, but then it must have been
intriguing. The story uses Rosebud as a silver thread to weave the story
together. The result is a handsome gown indeed. Viewers must have had
numerous theories since the movie doesn't give any substantial clues
until almost the very end. Once the secret is revealed, it seems at
first to be unimportant, almost trivial. Upon closer reflection, the
importance that Kane attaches to it is a key to understanding his
character or what we today would call the inner child.
The radical cinematography by Gregg Toland must have shocked the
audiences then as it mesmerized them with its offbeat angles, dramatic
lighting and stark use of shadows and silhouettes.
The seamless editing by Mark Robson and Robert Wise, who would go on to
become a great director, moves forward and backward in time without ever
losing continuity.
Filled with intriguing layers, the story of Kane's life becomes an onion
that the movie keeps peeling.
Kane inherits a fortune that makes him one of the richest men in the
world before he is even 21. Once he reaches the age of maturity and
gains control of his money, he decides to have some fun with it.
Declaring, "I think it would be fun to run a newspaper", he launches
into his first career in life.
"If the headline is big enough, it makes the news bigger," Kane says,
knowing then the power of the press to make news when before there was
just a tiny, inconsequential story. With today's tabloids being so
prevalent this would be a line seemingly more tailored to today's
viewers.
Kane begins as a loveable rogue but deteriorates into a harsh old
scoundrel. The movie shows this transformation with great finesse. The
best-staged sequence in the movie may be the breakfast table
conversations with his first wife. Within just a few minutes we watch
Kane's marriage going from puppy love to bitterness to death as the
couple refuses to talk. The sketches form a perfect encapsulation of a
marriage on the rocks and an omen for Kane's life.
Kane's second career, politics, will end before it begins when a scandal
hits. As a politician, he is an old-fashioned, moneyed liberal who rails
about giving the little people a voice. Attractive and articulate, he
skyrockets in the polls. But, once the newspapers print that he had an
affair, which he honestly admits, he immediately loses the vast majority
of his supporters. That is certainly something easier for audiences to
understand then as opposed to now.
CITIZEN KANE has so much to recommend it that it is hard to guess how
the first audiences must have felt. Maybe they felt as we do today, in
awe of having witnessed a masterpiece while realizing how incredibly
entertaining it was.
CITIZEN KANE runs 1:59. It is not rated but would be PG for mature
themes and would be fine for any kid old enough to care to see it.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Chad Polenz
****
1941, not rated, 119 minutes [1 hour, 59 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Orson Welles (Charles Foster Kane), Joseph Cotton (Jedediah
Leland), Dorothy Comingore (Susan Alexander), Evertt Sloane (Mr. Bernstein),
written by Orson Welles, Herman J. Mankiewicz, produced and directed by Orson
Welles.
We have all been told money, wealth, and fame do not necessarily lead to
happiness, but time after time, we have ignored that message. "Citizen Kane"
is a powerful story of a man whose intentions were good, but as hard as he
tried, couldn't accept the fact money isn't everything.
Although the film does not tell a straight, linear story, it isn't difficult
to follow. It makes excellent use of the medium of cinema: the acting is
outstanding; the design is beautifully detailed; and the direction that
brings everything together is perfectly construed. In fact, it's difficult to
critically review it for chance of leaving out the smallest of the film's
important elements.
The film opens in an enigmatic manner as the camera pans through a
Gothic-like mansion. The word "Rosebud" is whispered. Suddenly we see a news
serial which gives a brief overview of a newspaper tycoon named Charles
Foster Kane (Welles). When the serial ends there is a scene of several
reporters discussing it. They agree they must find out more about Kane,
because as much information there is about him, no one knew who he really
was.
Welles and Mankiewicz's script is well paced and chiseled with detail. The
story is not linear, but the arrangement and composition is brilliant. The
story is told from the perspective of a reporter (Alan Ladd) who tracks down
all the important people in Kane's life. He wants to know what Kane meant
when he uttered "Rosebud" as he died. This makes for a sense of mystery and
suspense, because we are just as curious as the reporter. 
As interpretations of Kane are given, clues appear subtilely, which are
later recognized through other narrations and flashbacks. The film's
attention to detail and plot structure is intricate, yet the storytelling is
so breezy. The film's ability to do both and do them so well really makes it
a masterpiece. 
As a young man, Kane was arrogant and brash because he never had to worry
about money. He is also hypocritical: he pledges honesty to his readers, but
the paper is mostly gossip and editorials; he is married, yet he is
enthralled by showgirls. His life is obviously metaphoric of many ideas, but
it would be impossible to list and describe them all. 
The film was shot using a deep focus process which allows everything that
appears on the screen to remain constantly in focus. Welles uses the approach
to add to the rich atmosphere: the looks on people's faces; the objects on
the walls; and entirely separate actions that either influence or represent
other themes within the film.
The mysterious reporter never does find out the meaning to "Rosebud." Only
we, the viewers, realize what the term meant through brilliant, classic
irony.
"Citizen Kane" works on many levels: as a touching drama; as a perfectly
scripted and well acted story; as a timeless social commentary; and as a
breakthrough in cinematic design. Everything that could be great here is.
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1941
Screening:  Best of the Ritz Film Festival, 9/20/96
Running Length: 1:59
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.33:1
Cast: Orson Welles, Joseph Cotten, Dorothy Comingore, Agnes Moorehead, 
      Ruth Warrick, Ray Collins, Erskine Sanford, Everett Sloane
Director: Orson Welles
Producer: Orson Welles
Screenplay: Herman J. Mankiewicz and Orson Welles
Cinematography: Greg Toland
Music: Bernard Herrmann
U.S. Distributor: RKO Pictures
     For years, I have avoided writing a review of this movie, 
intimidated perhaps by its immense reputation.  Having missed the 1991 
fiftieth anniversary revival, I had only seen CITIZEN KANE on the small 
screen, and it didn't seem right somehow to discuss a picture of this 
magnitude without viewing it at least once in the manner originally 
envisioned.  Well, some five years after I started writing reviews, the 
opportunity arose at a small film festival.  This review is the result 
of that screening.
     CITIZEN KANE has been lauded as the greatest motion picture to come 
out of America during the black-and-white era (or any era, for that 
matter).  It also represents the pinnacle of Orson Welles' film making 
career.  For, although Welles lived for more than forty years following 
the release of KANE, he never succeeded in recapturing the brilliance or 
fulfilling the promise of his first feature.  Some maintain that his cut 
of THE MAGNIFICENT AMBERSONS was more powerful, but the studio took the 
film away from him, slashing more than 40 minutes of footage.  And, 
while Welles' Shakespeare movies and A TOUCH OF EVIL contain elements of 
brilliance, they are not on the same level as KANE.  It has been argued, 
most forcefully in Thomas Lennon and Michael Epstein's 1996 documentary, 
THE BATTLE OVER CITIZEN KANE, that KANE not only started Welles' 
directorial career, but nearly ended it.
     The movie opens with an unforgettable image of a distant, fog-
shrouded castle on a hill.  It's a classic gothic shot, and goes a long 
way towards establishing CITIZEN KANE's mood.  We quickly learn that 
this place, called Xanadu, is the dwelling of America's Kubla Khan, 
Charles Foster Kane (Welles), a one-time newspaper magnate who could 
have become President if not for an ill-advised extramarital affair.  
Xanadu, in the words of the faux newsreel that gives a brief history of 
Kane's life, is the "costliest monument of a man to himself."  Any 
resemblance to The Ranch, William Randolph Hearst's real-life San Simeon 
abode, is not coincidental.
     Within moments of the film's eerie, visually-stunning opening, Kane 
is dead, uttering the word "Rosebud" as he hunches over.  His death, 
like his life, is a big news event, and the paper he owned, the New York 
Inquirer, is desperate to unearth the meaning of his cryptic last word.  
Is it a woman he bedded?  A horse he bet on?  A beloved pet?  Some long-
lost, unrequited love?  The truth, which isn't revealed until the 
closing scene, represents one of the all-time greatest motion picture 
ironies, and leads us to believe that, on some level, Kane regretted not 
having led a simple, quiet life. 
     After showing Kane's death, CITIZEN KANE presents a ten-minute 
"newsreel" that details the man's larger-than-life accomplishments.  
Then, as a reporter (William Alland) from the Inquirer digs into Kane's 
past to learn the meaning of Rosebud, the mogul's history is unraveled 
through a series of extended flashbacks that represent the sometimes-
overlapping, non-chronological accounts of five eyewitnesses.  As the 
story unfolds, we see Kane, aided by his closest friend, Jedediah Leland 
(Joseph Cotton), build a nationwide newspaper empire out of one small 
paper with a circulation of less than 30,000.  To do so, he displays 
equal parts ruthlessness and generosity, willing to lose 1,000,000 
dollars a year to win the circulation wars.  His New York Inquirer 
specializes in bold, splashy headlines that don't necessarily represent 
the truth.  By the time he marries Emily Norton (Ruth Warrick), the 
President's niece, Kane is one of the most powerful men in America -- a 
public giant with designs on the White House.
     Eventually, Kane moves into the political arena, but his bid for 
the governor's office crashes and burns when his rival, Boss Jim Gettys 
(Ray Collins), exposes Kane's affair with Susan Alexander (Dorothy 
Comingore).  Following this failure, Kane divorces his first wife, 
marries Susan, then goes into seclusion in his unfinished palace of 
Xanadu.  As the years pass, he becomes progressively more bitter and 
less approachable, until Susan, weary of Xanadu's isolation, leaves him.  
Alone and unloved, Kane awaits the inescapable hand of death.
     The script for CITIZEN KANE, written by Herman J. Mankiewicz (with 
an assist from Welles), is a thinly-disguised fictional biography of 
publishing king William Randolph Hearst, who was 76 years old when the 
movie came out in 1941.  And, while Hearst was offended by Welles' 
characterization of him, he was supposedly more angered by KANE's 
unflattering portrayal of his beloved mistress, Marion Davies (who is 
represented in the film by Susan Alexander).  To add insult to injury, 
"Rosebud" was allegedly Hearst's pet name for Marion's private parts.
     Kane is not, however, all Hearst.  There's more than a little 
Welles in the character, and, when one examines the direction the film 
maker's life took after Kane, the similarities become more obvious.  
After peaking with KANE, Welles began an slow-but-inevitable descent 
into isolation, eventually dying of a heart attack in 1985.  Like Kane, 
he was a vital, passionate figure in youth, but a sad, pathetic one at 
the end. (Who can forget the Paul Masson commercials?)  In retrospect, 
Kane can be viewed as being as much a representation of Welles as of 
Hearst.
     Back in 1941, Hearst exerted his considerable power and influence 
to destroy CITIZEN KANE before it opened.  He failed, but, even though 
KANE saw the light of day, Welles' young career (he was only 25 at the 
time) did not escape unscathed.  A smear campaign in Hearts' papers 
branded him as a communist.  KANE, nominated for nine Oscars, emerged 
with only one (best screenplay), and "boos" could be heard whenever the 
film was mentioned during the ceremony.  And, before Welles had 
completed post-production, RKO wrested control of his next picture, THE 
MAGNIFICENT AMBERSONS, from him.
     As a film, CITIZEN KANE is a powerful dramatic tale about the uses 
and abuses of wealth and power.  It's a classic American tragedy about a 
man of great passion, vision, and greed, who pushes himself until he 
brings ruins to himself and all around him.  Of course, the production 
aspect that makes CITIZEN KANE so memorable is Greg Toland's landmark 
cinematography.  In fact, it's impossible to have a serious discussion 
about this film without mentioning this element.  
     The movie is a visual masterpiece, a kaleidoscope of daring angles 
and breathtaking images that had never been attempted before, and has 
never been equaled since.  Toland perfected a deep-focus technique that 
allowed him to photograph backgrounds with as much clarity as 
foregrounds (note the scene where Kane's parents discuss his future 
while, as seen through the window, the child plays outside in the snow).  
There's also an extremely effective low-angle shot late in the film 
where Kane trashes Susan's room.  The cinematography documentary, 
VISIONS OF LIGHT, devoted an entire section to CITIZEN KANE. If any 
other film has come close to the nearly-perfect artistry of this one, I 
haven't seen it.  Anyone foolishly wondering how black-and-white images 
could be superior to color needs only to watch the first few frames of 
CITIZEN KANE to understand.  Not only is it impossible to envision this 
picture in color, the very thought is blasphemous.
     There's no doubt that CITIZEN KANE was far ahead of its time.  
Uncompromising, unsentimental drama of this sort was not in vogue during 
an era that was better known for titles like THE WIZARD OF OZ, GONE WITH 
THE WIND, and HOW GREEN WAS MY VALLEY (which beat out KANE for best 
picture).  In challenging Hearst, Welles forced a clash of egos that had 
wide-ranging repercussions.  Yet, out of the conflict, CITIZEN KANE 
emerged stronger than ever.  Would the film be as compelling if we 
didn't know how close it came to never being released?  Or if we didn't 
recognize the parallels between the life of the main character and that 
of the director?
     All of this brings me back to the question that I opened the review 
with:  Is CITIZEN KANE the best movie ever made?  Many critics would 
argue "yes" without pause, but my enthusiasm is more restrained.  While 
I acknowledge that KANE is a seminal masterpiece, I don't think it's the 
greatest motion picture of all time.  Even so, there's no denying the 
debt that the movie industry owes to Welles and his debut feature.  
Motion picture archives and collections across the world would be poorer 
without copies of this film, which will forever be recognized as a 
defining example of American cinema.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Long Che Chan
How do you tell the story of such a legendary film?  Citizen Kane is not
only a powerful film, but a revolutionary one- every single movie made
today has at least some of Kane manifested in it.  This evocative motion
picture changed the way filmmakers made their films.  It is, of course,
a masterpiece of storytelling- it is nearly essential for film students
to watch.  Every second has become a classic and it has been lauded as
the greatest motion picture ever made.  Is that true?  Who knows, but it
certainly is the most studied and probably alongside The Birth of a
Nation as the most technically and structurally important picture of all
time.
Orson Welles, then 25, was given full control by RKO Radio Pictures to
make any film he so desired.  Welles, an exceptionally intelligent man,
brought along for this project his Mercury stage actors whom he had
worked with in radio and theater, and co-wrote the Oscar-winning
screenplay with the seasoned Herman J. Mankiewicz.  The resulting film
was highly controversial- it was said to poke fun at mogul William
Randolph Hearst.  The film went through hellfire to get released and
when it finally was, was ignored by the public and critics alike.  This
controversy should make Kane's being snubbed at the Academy Awards much
more understandable.  Oscar rarely succumbs to the pleasures of films
with ingenuity.
In all this hoopla about its technique, the film's story seems to have
diminished.  Citizen Kane has an extremely powerful tale to tell- it is
a story of greed, unhappiness, and the pursuit of love.  The title
character is a lonely, financially thriving man named Charles Foster
Kane.  As a young child, he was taken away by a rich man named
Thatcher.  That arrangement helped his parents in their financial woe.
Charles was promised a huge inheritance, but what he wanted was a
newspaper to run.  Kane, while still quite young, ran the flourishing
Inquirer newspaper and transformed it into a powerful empire.  He
dabbled into politics, and everything else he could get his hands on.
He had many friends, but his inability to love and his thirst for love
didn't balance out.
This disability was his downfall.  The film shows how cold Kane was
through the distance between characters.  There is a very famous montage
in the film in which Kane's first wife start out as a happy newlywed
couple sitting close together at their breakfast table and then, with
time, grow apart which is shown by the characters sitting further
apart.  At the  end of the sequence, the table seems longer than when
the montage started out and, instead of sitting on the same side, hand
in hand, Kane is sitting at one end of the long table while his wife
sits on the other end.
Kane divorced his first wife after he is seen with a mistress, which
caused scandal, thereby smashing his chances of being elected as
governor.  His mistress, an aspiring singer, later marries him, but to
her, he also cannot express love.  He buys her everything under the sun,
but, as she illustrates in an emotional monologue, it isn't what she
wants.  Kane builds an opera house for his second wife and, despite her
wilted voice, pays impatient music teachers to train her.  Her debut
opera is unsuccessful, a flop.  A memorable image during this chapter in
the film is one where Kane's wife is belting her song on stage and the
camera moves up to reveal two men on the balcony holding their noses,
hating the music.  Charles Kane is a driven man and will not be made a
fool of- after scathing reviews, he continues to force his wife to
sing.  Later, at their house in Xanadu, a monument Kane has built for
himself, Orson Welles uses the distance technique to full effect,
showing the bored wife far away from her egotistical husband in a room.
Citizen Kane is not told the way most films before it were.  Kane begins
with the famous dying sequence and with a newsreel, putting Kane's life
in a nutshell, explaining the impact he had on people.  Then, the film
goes into detail, drawing on diaries and interviews with people Kane
knew.  All this investigation of Kane's life is aiming to find the
meaning of his last word- "Rosebud".  However, that's just a prank to
draw the audience in, the film is not about Rosebud so much as it is
about the man who uttered the word.  When Mr. Berstein, one of the
interviewees, is asked about the word, he gives one of the best speeches
ever committed to film-
 "A fellow will remember a lot of things you wouldn't think he'd
remember. You
take me. One day, back in 1896, I was crossing over to Jersey on the
ferry,
and as we pulled out, there was another ferry pulling in, and on it
there was a
girl waiting to get off. A white dress she had on. She was carrying a
white
parasol. I only saw her for one second. She didn't see me at all, but
I'll bet a
month hasn't gone by since, that I haven't thought of that girl."
Citizen Kane is a maze of an enigma's life.  Those closest to him talk
about him, his ambition, and his ruin.  Gregg Toland's revolutionary
deep-focus cinematography is extremely compelling.  In the first
sequence, the dying sequence, Kane murmurs "Rosebud" on his deathbed and
drops a glass, ball paperweight.  It shatters on the floor and we see,
through the broken pieces of glass, a nurse come into the room.  The
film is a collection of sharp and distorted images- one of my favorite
uses of light in the movie is when the reporter investigating "Rosebud"
visits the library of Kane's guardian Thatcher and is sent to a room to
read Thatcher's diary.  A ray of brilliant light falls into the darkness
of the room.  Toland shot several scenes from the floor looking up which
caused quite a stir.  In older films, you almost never see the ceilings
of buildings because that was where the lights and microphones were.
Here, you see ceilings made of cloth which look real, but behind them
Toland and Welles put the microphones.  Citizen Kane is probably the
greatest work of photography ever seen on screen, most definitely the
best use of the camera in a black-and-white film.
There are several images in the film that stick in one's mind forever.
There is a scene where the old and defeated Kane walks past many
mirrors, spawning infinite reflections.  There is, of course, the scene
where the sleigh with the word Rosebud on it is thrown in the furnace
with all the rest of Kane's other stuff that is being burned after his
death.  The flames curl around the sleigh, the word Rosebud darkening
and vanishing.  The images of Kane's monumental home Xanadu and Kane at
a political rally are astonishing.
Citizen Kane is not filled with a lot of emotion and maybe that's why
some people don't respond to it.  It is a massive achievement, the first
and last famous directorial achievement of an infinitely talented man,
Orson Welles.  Can you believe people actually wanted to colorize this
film?  Watching it in a colored version would be as blasphemous as
watching the deliberately black-and-white Schindler's List in color.  It
would be a sin, a crying shame just as it is to watch the power and
enigmatic quality of Casablanca leeched out in badly colorized
versions.  What Citizen Kane has brought to the art of film is great- a
different kind of narrative structure for films.  Kane's life was not a
straight-forward story but a winding, curving morality tale.  The
earlier use of linear storytelling in films would have done the story
little justice.  Citizen Kane is one of those lasting achievements, one
of those ageless films, and one of the most gratifying film experiences
ever.
