Title
Review for Backdraft (1991)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
David N. Butterworth
     In what might already be one of the "hottest" films of the summer,
BACKDRAFT does for firefighters what GOODFELLAS did for gangsters -- it
elevates its protagonists to a level bordering on the heroic.  Only in
this case, the firefighters in Ron Howard's latest film are truly
deserving of that praise.
     Viewers expecting a turgid retread of THE TOWERING INFERNO will be
in for a surprise (unless their idea of a good time is watching Fred
Astaire spontaneously combust).  For the effects in BACKDRAFT are indeed
special, visual pyrotechnics that would make even George Lucas' head
spin.
     But BACKDRAFT is less an Irwin Allen-style disaster film than it is
a human drama consumed by fire, a film about the motivations of men that
risk their lives to save others.  Audience members are likely to feel
more sensitive about firefighters after seeing this film.  For
Philadelphians at least, this film comes hot on the heels of the Center
City fire that claimed the lives of three firefighters, making this film
all the more poignant.
     Twenty years after witnessing the death of his firefighter father
in a rooftop blaze, Brian McCaffrey (William Baldwin) returns home to
the firefighting business after a series of dead-end jobs have left him
feeling empty and alienated.  His brother Stephen (played by Kurt
Russell in a powerful and sweaty performance) has followed directly in
his father's footsteps and is now a Lieutenant in the Chicago Fire
Department.  On more than one occasion in this film is Stephen McCaffrey
referred to as "The Best."
     The sibling rivalry between these two brothers is played out
against a backdrop of danger, destruction and death.  As one of the
film's characters observes, it's the firemen who run into the burning
building while everyone else is running out!  And Stephen himself tells
his younger brother, who admits to having a bad day on the job, "You
have a bad day, and someone dies."
     Stephen believes that Brian cannot cut it as a firefighter yet
Brian sets out to prove him wrong.  However, Stephen's suspicions turn
out to be correct, and Brian ends up taking a job with the city's top
arson investigator, Donald Rimgale (Robert De Niro).
     Rimgale's world is one of smoke-eaters (firemen), crispers (fire
victims) and torches (arsonists).  Their investigations into who is
setting these fires and causing these "backdrafts" (explosions triggered
when air enters an oxygen-free room) lead them to Ronald Bartel (Donald
Sutherland).  In a scene straight out of THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS.
Sutherland, white haired and rolling his eyes a lot, has never been more
maniacal on screen.
     Away from his work, Stephen constantly battles with his estranged
wife Helen, played by Rebecca DeMornay (RISKY BUSINESS) in a quiet,
understated performance.  Not that he is away from his work for long.  
Russell's character seems to prefer putting out fires at the office
rather than those at home.
     But neither of these two sub-plots are as arresting as the actual
scenes of fire itself, which range in intensity from spectacular to
downright amazing.  Director Howard -- whose previous film was the 1989
domestic comedy/drama PARENTHOOD -- admits that to make a film about
firefighters with the sophistication of today's audiences would require
effects over and above the norm.  
     And to his credit he has accomplished that.  No gas jets under the
camera lens here.  Howard's film personifies fire as a physical entity,
a force that the firefighters must first stalk, and then kill, like a
wild animal.   As Robert De Niro's character says, "It's a living thing.
It lives.  It breathes.  It hates.  The only way to beat it is to think
like it.  The only way to kill it is to love it a little."
     BACKDRAFT is a first rate action yarn - dirty, loud and full of
explosive special effects.  It is also a well crafted personal drama,
replete with uniformly fine performances.  But perhaps it's greatest
triumph is that it bestows a renewed respect on a profession all too
often taken for granted.

Author
Frank Maloney
     BACKDRAFT is a film by Ron Howard.  It stars Kurt Russell and
William Baldwin, with Robert DeNiro and Donald Sutherland.
     BACKDRAFT celebrates the heroism of firefighters, a subject seldom
addressed in films for some reason.  BACKDRAFT also celebrates the
beauty of fire with some the most breath-taking photography and special
effects I have ever seen.
     The real reason to see BACKDRAFT, in my humble opinion, is the
photography.  I had never seen fire until I saw it through the eyes of
this film.  And there are some eye-popping effects.  I read that
Lucasfilms' Industrial Light and Magic is responsible for some of the
effects, including models.  These must have been hellacious models
because they convinced me in a way I am seldom convinced.  I wish I had
the name of the person responsible for the fire photography here.  This
is an easy prediction for an Oscar.
     Alas, the rest of the film is a little more problematical.  Kurt
Russell is an irritating screen-presence and I wish he'd go away; except
for some remarkably well-developed jaw muscles I cannot think of thing
to recommend him.  BACKDRAFT lets him wallow in some major macho b.s.,
much of which is fortunately lost in the general noisiness of the film,
but more about that later.  William Baldwin is somewhat better, both as
a presence and as an actor, but even he cannot rise above the generally
inadequate script.
     The only actors who shine in BACKDRAFT are old pros in small parts.
Robert DeNiro is the arson investigator and as usual DeNiro threw
himself into his part, studying with a real inspector; DeNiro is one
actor who truly believes there are no small parts.  Donald Sutherland
does a wonderful arsonist, a part that invites comparison with Hannibal
Lecter in SILENCE OF THE LAMBS; where Hopkins nailed you with his eyes,
Sutherland chills you with a giggle.  The scenes with DeNiro and
Sutherland playing off each other are the best  acting scenes in the
movie.
     And forget about the women's parts.  They are strictly throw-aways
as the estranged wife and the girlfriend.  There are no women
firefighters in this superbutch world (and the black firefighters are
limited to silently admiring the principals).
     Really, the story, two brothers who find each other through the
ordeal of fire, is negligible, set-ups for the action sequences.  The
music, BTW, is dreadful, melodramatic and obvious, when you can hear it
over the noisy backgrounds.  Mostly it seems unnecessary.  Hey, I was
already excited, I didn't need musical clues.
     But, I enjoyed the film for what it had to offer.  As spectacle, as
eye-candy, it's well worth the price of a ticket.  Go and indulge
yourself.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The first movies were all non-fiction.  The early filmmakers simply
shot the world they saw around them.  One of the more common subjects was
firemen fighting fires.  In 1902 Edwin S. Porter (who the next year made THE
GREAT TRAIN ROBBERY) made what is considered to be the first non-documentary
film.  He took previously shot footage of firemen and edited the pieces
together to tell the first fiction story in cinema.  He called it LIFE OF AN
AMERICAN FIREMAN.  As time went by, however, the subject of firefighting
showed up less and less.  It is difficult to think of a sound film that is
mostly about firefighting.  Films such as TOWERING INFERNO occasionally have
firefighting as a substantial subplot, but rare is the film with
firefighters as its main characters.  That is perhaps unfortunate since
there is great dramatic potential in the idea of the firefighter.
     There certainly seem to be enough films about soldiers fighting an
enemy who, in the case of most American wars, will be vanquished within five
years or less.  Firemen fight battles in a war they can never in their
lifetimes hope ultimately to win.  Films such as GHOSTBUSTERS turn to the
supernatural to provide a towering dramatic force that a few brave people,
with whatever equipment they can carry, have to stand up to.  It is not hard
to see parallels to firefighting, in which a person can be called on to
fight an enemy ten stories high.  As one of the characters in BACKDRAFT
describes fire, "It's a living thing.  It breathes, it eats, and it hates.
The only way to beat it is to think like it....  The only way to truly kill
it is to love it. a little."  The dramatic potential for a powerful and
frightening film about firefighting is there, but unfortunately it is only
partially fulfilled by BACKDRAFT.
     As the film opens in 1971, we meet a young firefighter idolized by his
two sons.  He takes his younger son, Brian to watch him fight a fire, not
knowing that Brian will also be seeing him martyred by his hazardous
occupation.  Flash forward twenty years and the older son is now a hotshot
lieutenant in the fire department.  Lt. Stephen McCaffrey, now nicknamed
"Bull," is played (as his father was) by Kurt Russell.  The younger son
Brian McCaffrey (played by William Baldwin) has been unsuccessful at several
abortive careers and now is himself trying his hand at firefighting.  Brian
is assigned to the same fire company as Stephen is.  This opens the way for
the first of several themes, the rivalry of the two brothers.  Complicating
matters is an alderman intent on budget-cutting by shutting down fire
companies.  And one more complication: there is an arsonist loose setting
small but very explosive sorts of fires.  Fire Inspector Donald Ringate
(played by Robert DeNiro) is doing the detective work to try to track down
the deadly firebug.
     In the war against fire it is possible to win battles, but the war
never ends.  There will always be another fire.  This is probably why the
plot relies so heavily on its arson subplot.  A film does not feel right
unless it has a conflict which is resolved.  Since it is impossible to
conquer fire the script, unfortunately, creates an enemy that can be
conquered--a single arsonist.  That unfortunately turns this film into a
rather pedestrian mystery story.  Too much of BACKDRAFT is about people
against other people; not enough is about people against fire.  Too much of
the script is very unoriginal, including one sequence toward the end that is
very nearly a direct steal from another current thriller (or at least from
books by the author of the thriller).  While visually this film is a genuine
spectacular, some of the touches of the script are very weak.  In one scene
Stephen is talking to someone on the street while his friends surprise him
by hooking up a fire hose and spraying him.  It does not seem that there can
be an unobtrusive way to hook up a hose four inches in diameter.  That sort
of thing attracts attention!  In the last fifteen minutes the writing and
even the acting seriously deteriorate.  There are some incredibly cliched
scenes.  William Baldwin seems to stop at one point during an alarm and he
poses on the firepole for Ron Howard's cameras.  There is an action sequence
to match any in a James Bond film, but it seems designed mostly to give
BACKDRAFT a punch finish.  It is extremely melodramatic.
     The fire photography is very much the star of BACKDRAFT as much as any
of the humans.  Assisted by Industrial Light and Magic effects crews, the
camera shows many different textures of flame.  Sometimes the flame is
beautiful enough that some audience members may go out and try to duplicate
the arsonist's crime.  There are many fire sequences, but there are two
extended sequences that are particularly exciting.  Hans Zimmer's score
makes a very impressive contribution to the film also.  I would give
BACKDRAFT a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
