Title
Review for House in the Hills, A (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Sometimes, although very rarely, movies can unintentionally
serve as some form of autobiography for actors. A HOUSE IN
THE HILLS, 1993 low-budget thriller by Ken Wiederhorn is one
of such examples. The protagonist is played by Helen Slater,
actress who used to enjoy some peak of her career in late
1980s and early 1990s, although she didn't get the roles she
had truly deserved. This film, unfortunately very obscure,
is one of those rare examples that truly illustrate her
talent, unused by Hollywood.
In the film, Helen Slater plays Alex Walker, struggling
Hollywood actress who wants to make her big break in the
soap operas. But, until that big break happens, she is
forced to take many job offers, including house sitting for
one of Los Angeles millionaires. In an empty house she gets
a wild idea to put her acting abilities to the test by
impersonating the millionaire's wife. However, that idea
turns out to be bad when the exterminator (Michael Madsen)
knocks at the door. After coning his way in, exterminator
takes Alex as hostage and reveals himself as an ex con. Alex
is suddenly found herself in dangerous situation, but
surprises continue to happen.
Screenplay by Miguel Tejada-Flores and Ken Wiederhorn is
hardly a masterpiece, but the sheer quantity of unusual, yet
believable plot twists is enough to keep audience at the
edge of a seat. The ending is also rather unconventional and
makes this film really refreshing in a multitude of more
formulaic low budget thrillers. Most notable assets in A
HOUSE IN THE HILLS are the actors. Helen Slater literally
carries this film on her shoulders, providing us with
charming yet believable character. And, of course, in one
scene she actually reveals the reasons of her not so
spectacular career advancement in Hollywood. Her partner
Michael Madsen is reliable in his role of quiet, and
charismatic thug with the heart of gold, and Slater and him
have a great chemistry together. On the other hand, some of
the minor characters aren't that effective (Jeffrey Tambore
overacts in his episode). But this is the hardly reason
enough for the audience to avoid this charming little, yet
unjustifiably forgotten B-grade gem.
