Title
Review for Manny & Lo (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Edwin Jahiel
MANNY & LO *** Written and directed by Lisa Krueger. 
Photography, Tom Krueger.  Editing, Colleen Sharp.  
Production designer, Sharon Lomofsky. Music, John Lurie. 
Producers,  Dean Silvers and Marlen Hecht. Cast:  Mary Kay 
Place (Elaine), Scarlett Johansson (Manny), Aleksa 
Palladino (Lo), Paul Guilfoyle (Humphreys), et al. A Sony 
Classics release. 90 minutes. Rated R (language, short 
sexual scene). 
A road movie that's not quite a road movie, "Manny and Lo" 
is named after its two sisters on the lam , Amanda, 
precociously wise at 11, and Laurel, sexually awake at 16, 
orphaned when their (unseen) mother dies. We know little 
about mom except for hints ("Was she stoned or drunk?") 
and nothing of the father. The girls were placed in foster 
homes. Lo escaped from hers, obtained an older car (the 
mother's? Unclear) and "rescued" Manny.
They take to the road, in a purposefully vague (albeit 
contemporary) period, and anonymous locations (New 
Jersey and upstate New York in reality), sleeping in the 
car, or outdoors, or in model houses they break into. They 
steal gas, shoplift food, but never behave aggressively or 
defiantly. 
The movie is the feature debut of Lisa Krueger who has an 
interesting background in film, academic in Berkeley and 
Paris, practical, as a Jill-of-all-trades, in New York and 
elsewhere. She made a short, "Best Offer" with brother 
Tom as cinematographer and brother Matthew as 
production designer. It premiered at the 1993 Sundance 
Festival,  won awards in San Francisco, Chicago, 
Oberhausen and other festivals. "Manny and Lo" was 
carefully developed at the Sundance Institute. All this 
means to me that Ms. Krueger goes well beyond the 
casual, new independent filmmaker, that her success with 
"Manny and Lo" is no flash in the pan.  
Funny what thoughts come into a film-buff's mind while 
watching pictures. Manny's narrating of parts of the this 
film recalled, in a different way, the scratchy, working 
class-voiced narration of Linda Manz (whatever became of 
her?) in the masterful "Days of Heaven" (1978)--but the 
resemblances stop there between that spectacular fresco 
and the small budget, essentially three-character "M & L."
There is solid originality in "Manny and Lo," along with a 
quiet way of presenting the girls' quandaries. Manny, 
inside a model home (desirable yet soulless) swipes 
mantelpiece photos of families. This  clear, unspoken wish 
for a normal life may be obvious but  is not pat. Obvious 
too, and on the forced side is when the sisters play, in the 
model house, a rather incongruous home video labeled 
"Welcome to Tiffany" (what is it doing there?), which turns 
out to be the record of a baby's birth. 
Lo, who keeps gaining weight and, with bad faith,  blames 
it on junk food, is in a state of advanced pregnancy. This 
leads the sisters to an illogical but eloquent visit to a 
maternity store. The temporary salesperson, Elaine, is a 
weird, authoritarian, know-it-all,  "I'm never wrong," 
figure full of advice on everything. The girls abduct her to 
an empty vacation cabin and shackle her. Why? Because, 
mixed up and lost, they need help with the pregnancy. 
While it is obvious that the pregnancy is most unwelcome 
by Lo, in one of the film's major and better ambiguities 
this "I'm my own boss" young lady, while putting up a 
strong front, is badly in need of a mother figure. Confused, 
she doesn't seem to know which evil is the lesser, having 
the baby or aborting it. 
Elaine gradually supplies the missing link, the maternal 
presence. Her odd  personality hides a mysterious past, 
her authoritative character hides her own insecurities and 
wounds. Mary Kay Place regularly steals the show. Now as 
a prisoner who goes on hunger strikes, now wobbling on 
her tied up feet, preparing healthy meals for the trio, 
serving...  The girls may think she is a real nurse, but is 
she, or does she have the experience without the title? 
Elaine goes through small but significant changes, ever 
forceful but never transformed into a sentimental or 
overtly appealing movie cliche.  
Complicitous bonding between Elaine and Manny forms 
gradually, sometimes amusingly, sometimes with 
restrained pathos. It will expand quite late into rapport 
between ever-suspicious Lo and kooky Elaine. The 
climaxes is not so much a closure as a condition curative 
for all concerned. 
I will not get into the details, whose accumulation makes 
up the movie. Some miniature episodes seem throw-away, 
irrelevant. Some red herrings are included--at one point, 
late in the film, a visitor and his car even conjured up 
"Psycho" for me. Even so, the parts fit well together, their 
mix of semi-violence and semi-sweetness has a 
consistent tone of a musical scale in a minor key. 
In this not-so-hidden but cool paean to maternity, family, 
roots and women supporting one another, it is the three 
characters' characterizations that carry the load. The 
dialogue is not especially interesting, arguments and 
dialectics are noticeably absent. But it is precisely this 
combination of what is done and what is unspoken that 
gives the film a look and feel all its own. 
No minor virtues are the good music by John Lurie and the 
picture's length. Its hour-and-a-half qualifies it for 
inclusion in the Golden Book of the famous BBNMM Society, 
"Bring Back the Ninety Minute Movie."

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Scarlett Johansson, Aleksa Palladino, Mary Kay Place.
Screenplay:  Lisa Krueger.
Director:  Lisa Krueger.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     There is nothing quite as sad for someone who loves movies as
watching a rookie film-maker who really wants to say something, but turns
out not to have very much to say, or appears unable to say it in a way
that connects.  Lisa Krueger states in the production notes for MANNY & LO
that she began with questions of "what is motherhood" and "what is family
made of," and you can tell that she is quite earnest about answering those
questions.  She has a Sundance Institute-approved screenplay, and all the
studied quirkiness she can fit into 89 minutes.  But Krueger has created a
predictable story with characters who still look like they exist on 3x5
notecards on her desk.  MANNY & LO is a comedy-drama without enough of
either.
     The title characters are two orphaned sisters:  16-year-old Laurel
(Aleksa Palladino), known as Lo, and 11-year-old Amanda (Scarlett
Johansson), known as Manny.  Runaways from their respective and separate
foster homes, Manny and Lo travel together, stealing groceries, gas and
free lodging in model homes in an effort to stay a step ahead of the
authorities.  There is about to be a major hindrance introduced into their
lifestyle, however.  It turns out that Lo is pregnant, and into her third
trimester before her deep denial gives way to reality.  Desperate for
someone to help them, Manny and Lo kidnap Elaine (Mary Kay Place), an
employee at a maternity store who seems to know everything there is to
know about babies, and hole up in an unoccupied mountain vacation home to
hide out until Lo gives birth.  Though they begin as enemies, the three
develop an understanding, and slowly begin to become an unlikely family.
     I suppose one of the things which irritated me most about MANNY & LO
is that for an ostensibly original independent film, its basic premise has
been done and done and done again.  As comedy, think of RUTHLESS PEOPLE;
as social drama, think of last year's WHITE MAN'S BURDEN.  And those are
just recent examples of stories which make the very Psych 101 observation
that kidnapers and their hostages aren't always so different, and
sometimes bond to fulfill their respective needs.  MANNY & LO doesn't
offer much of a twist on the movie truism that if the plot is about a
kidnapping, abductors and abducted will go from antagonism to uneasy truce
to friendship.  There wasn't a moment when I didn't know exactly where
Krueger was taking me.
     Her only chance at selling MANNY & LO was to create characters who
were interesting and worth spending time with in spite of the stock
situation, and she doesn't exactly set the world on fire.  Manny and Lo
are like a collection of eccentric traits from a screen-writing exercise
rather than fully realized people -- Manny collects pictures of happy
families, is obsessive about time and measurements, and sprays her
mother's preferred deodorant on whatever bed she is sleeping in; Lo
likes to practice for her chosen career as flight attendant by standing on
Manny's unstable back.  Scarlett Johansson and Aleksa Palladino look
adrift, young actors struggling to find the center of characters without a
center; it is as though Krueger had built them a house with lovely
curtains and landscaping, then didn't put up any walls.  Mary Kay Place, a
much more experienced performer, turns Elaine into something intriguing
almost in spite of Krueger.  There is a unique dignity about her, though
there are carefully parceled out hints about a troubled past, and Place
uses her own experience as a writer and director to fill in the blanks.
     I think there is a tendency to give first-timers the benefit of the
doubt on independent projects like this, because critics are usually aware
of the limitations of time and money.  I'm not sure that any of that
matters to the audience.  Lisa Krueger's intentions are good; she wants to
explore what can make a dysfunctional family functional, and how whether
or not you perceived your family as dysfunctional can determine the effect
it has on you.  She also leaves threads dangling, introduces characters
who do little or nothing to advance the story (like Cameron Boyd as the
terribly cute Chuck, who hands out his signature to Manny), and doesn't
direct her script with an eye to making either the humor or the 
relationships as effective as they might have been.  MANNY & LO is a slow,
rather simple and not terribly entertaining film, and that doesn't change
because Krueger is inexperienced, or a woman, or not working for a major
studio.

Author
James Berardinelli
     MANNY & LO, the debut feature from writer/director Lisa Krueger, is 
a wonderfully-textured comic fantasy about family life.  With only a few 
missteps along the way, this film takes us on a deceptively complex 
journey of discovery into a world that is similar, yet different, from 
the one we travel through every day.  For, although Krueger presents her 
characters as the human flotsam of modern-day life, there is a timeless, 
placeless quality to this story.  Ultimately, it doesn't matter when or 
where MANNY & LO takes place, but how the characters' trajectories bring 
them together at their final destination.
     Eleven-year old Amanda (or Manny, played by Scarlett Johansson) and 
sixteen-year old Laurel (or Lo, played by Aleksa Palladino) are sisters 
on-the-run.  After the death of their mother, they were placed in 
separate foster homes, only to be reunited after Lo ran away and "so-
called kidnapped" Manny from her substitute family.  Together, the pair 
lives life on the road, watching out for state troopers who may have 
their description, stealing food from small convenience stores, sleeping 
in model homes, and checking the milk cartons to make sure that their 
pictures aren't on the "missing" panels.
     Their unorthodox lifestyle is seriously disrupted, however, when Lo 
becomes pregnant.  By the time she acknowledges that it's not just a few 
extra pounds, she's too far advanced for an abortion.  Unwilling to turn 
herself in for medical care, but recognizing that she needs help, Lo 
decides to kidnap Elaine (Mary Kay Place), a "baby expert".  With 
Manny's help, Lo uses a shotgun to encourage Elaine to accompany her to 
a deserted mountain cabin retreat.  There, the three of them, captors 
and captive, await the baby's arrival while growing into a strange 
pseudo-family.
     Each of the main characters in MANNY & LO is a loner in search of a 
place to belong.  Despite her air of self-sufficiency and keen 
intellect, Manny wants nothing more than to have a mother.  She collects 
photographs of other families, and, every night before going to sleep, 
sprays her sheets with Arid Extra Dry -- a scent she associates with her 
dead mother.  Lo is equally emotionally needy, but conceals her pain and 
uncertainty with a show of false bravado. And, in her own way, Elaine is 
as much of an outsider as the two girls.  Although she has cousins, 
nieces, and nephews, she has no immediate family, and her distant 
relatives could care less whether she disappears off the face of the 
earth.  So, although the girls' relationship with Elaine starts out as a 
kidnapping, it develops into something more meaningful and intimate for 
them all, filling needs in each that they tried to keep hidden.
     Another thing that Manny, Lo, and Elaine have in common is a strong 
capacity for self-deception.  Each lives in a fantasy world where their 
own importance is heightened.  Manny and Lo believe that they are wanted 
fugitives, but, as becomes apparent, no one notices their comings and 
goings, or even cares who they are.  Likewise, Elaine is convinced that, 
once she is kidnapped, her friends and relatives will notice her absence 
and immediately mount search parties.  No such thing happens.  
     The best parts of MANNY & LO are the quiet, character-driven 
scenes, when it's just the three women alone, exploring their new 
relationship and contemplating the future.  A subplot involving the 
cabin's owner (Paul Guilfoyle) shows us something about how desperately 
Elaine wants to be part of Manny and Lo's life, but there are aspects of 
this sequence that strain the film's delicately-struck balance between 
reality and fantasy.  While I didn't exactly mind this chunk of the 
story, it didn't seem as well-considered as the rest of the picture.
     A sizable portion of MANNY & LO's success should be attributed to a 
trio of fine performances.  Aleksa Palladino, appearing in her first 
major feature, finds the right blend of prickliness and vulnerability to 
make Lo a sympathetic character despite her streak of unpleasantness.  
Mary Kay Place essays Elaine as a complex individual who gradually 
realizes that her kidnapping is a blessing, not a curse, since it places 
her in a position where someone actually needs her.  However, the real 
find in MANNY & LO is Scarlett Johansson, whose unaffected and 
thoroughly-engaging portrayal of Manny is so perfectly on-target that, 
while watching her, it's easy to forget that this is an actress playing 
a role.
     There's something magical about the way Lisa Krueger's film 
transports us to its unique reality.  There have been many films about 
family and belonging, but none with quite the same perspective as this 
one.  MANNY & LO is always pleasant, never confrontational, and comes to 
a conclusion that is emotionally true.  With its carefully-modulated 
combination of light comedy and drama, the film casts a gentle spell.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
