Title
Review for That Darn Punk (2001) (V)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Christopher Null
This unapologetic indie certainly feels like a festival-circuit entry. 
Alas, no -- Kung Fu Films has poured its $21,000 into That Darn Punk
with intent to make a profit.  Hence, it's straight to video and a big
soundtrack release.
Foolish?  Hardly.  According to the press notes, soundtrack preorders
have covered the cost of production fourfold.  Now that's a business
plan!
It's no surprise the soundtrack is inspiring some enthusiasm.  Scored by
The Ataris, Nerf Herder, Rancid, AFI, No Motiv, Lagwagon, The Vandals,
and a half-dozen other punkish outfits, That Darn Punk is indeed an ode
to, well, punk.  And its star, Joe Escalante, just so happens to be the
bassist for The Vandals.
So what's it all about?  Oh, the plot.  Yeah.  Well, Escalante plays a
punk rocker in a Vandals-like band called The Big Tippers, and after an
ill-advised near-fling with a music video moll, his girlfriend kicks him
out in nothing but his boxers, he is abducted and taken to the desert,
and a series of wacky hijinks involving murder, drugs, and aliens occurs
-- all so unlikely that you'll be drawing comparisons to Ed Wood flicks.
It's not a bad comparison to make.  That Darn Punk is goofy fun with
basement-level production values a la Repo Man.  Is it a witty ride
through existentialism?  No.  Is it something you might want to put on
at a party if for no other reason than to hear the kickin' soundtrack
and hope that your drunken guests will get a laugh out of the video?
Director: Jeff Richardson
Producer: Jeff Richardson, Joe Escalante
Writer: Jeff Richardson, Robert Stinson
Starring: Joe Escalante, Katalina, Mia Crowe, Kandis Scalise, Lisa
Hannan, Zander Schluss, Warren Fitzgerald
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
