Title
Review for Double vie de Véronique, La (1991)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Gareth Rees
     THE DOUBLE LIFE OF VERONIQUE is a strange film.  The structure is
typically Kieslowskian--Veronika lives in Krakow and Veronique in
Paris, each feeling that she is not alone--and it seems that the stage
is set for a philosophical contribution to the nature/nurture debate, as
in his earlier BLIND CHANCE, but instead, the film drifts off into
whimsy.  Veronika's singing kills her, and Veronique, feeling the death
of her twin, gives up music and wanders moodily round her flat and her
father's house at night.  Bored with her boyfriend, she seems to find
fulfillment with a man who makes puppets and writes fantasies for
children.  There is a hint that THE DOUBLE LIFE OF VERONIQUE is a fairy
story or just-so fable about how we came to be ourselves rather than
someone else--because we didn't catch our finger in a car door or
because we gave up singing.  But it's only a hint; there's never really
any point where we grasp what the film is about--expecting pointful
contrasts between the two lives of this woman, instead we're left
adrift.  The film goes its idiosyncratic and fleeting way in a rich
mixture of beautiful images--especially the dreamlike slow-motion
quality to the anti-communist demonstrators fleeing from police in
Krakow--and sublime music courtesy of van den Budenmayer, that
composer who should have been but alas never was.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
105 min., R, Mystery, 1991, In French (?) with English subtitles
Director: Krzysztof Kieslowski
Cast: Irene Jacob, Phillippe Voltar, Sandrine Dumas,
      Aleksander Bardini, Louis Duereux, Claude Duneton,
      Halina Gryglaszewska, Kalina Jedrusik
     In Poland, Veronika (Irene Jacob), who is a singer, has feelings
that she has a counterpart.  In France, Veronique (also Irene Jacob),
gets premonitions that something is going to happen to her.  She starts
receiving strange mail from an unknown person and tries to figure out
what it all means.
     I found THE DOUBLE LIFE OF VERONIQUE to be a great movie, and wish
that I could have gone back to see it again, but I saw it on the last
day it was being shown.  I highly recommend this film, I think that you
will probably enjoy it.  This film has been released on video cassette.
However, many video stores may probably not get this film (like mine
didn't).  If your video store has gotten the film, there is no real need
to go see it in the theater, unless you prefer to see films in the
theater.  On a scale of zero to five, I give THE DOUBLE LIFE OF
VERONIQUE a five.  THE DOUBLE LIFE OF VERONIQUE is rated R for female
nudity, adult situations, and explicit language.
     All of the actors/actresses do a great job.  Irene Jacob, who won
the Best Actress Award at the Cannes Film Festival, is excellent, as
well as being extremely beautiful.  Veronika's aunt and Veronique's
father were also both great.  A nice thing about the film is that the
two main characters (Veronika and Veronique) are shown separately.  At
only one brief time are the two shown almost together, and that keeps
the film from getting confusing.  
     This film is definitely not for mainstream audiences.  I feel that
those who don't ever venture to their local art theater will most likely
find this film to be a waste of time.  Those who tend to enjoy
imports/alternative cinema will most likely be entranced by the film,
although you may have to see the film twice for everything to make
sense.
     The idea behind the film is interesting, but I don't think that it
is a new idea.  The film is well written.  Well, I should say that the
subtitles are well written (I don't understand the language spoken so I
don't know what the actors were really saying).  The subtitles are done
with white lettering, and is almost always easy to read.  The locations
used, I assume in France and Poland, are great and really set the film
well.

Author
Myra VanInwegen
     I saw THE DOUBLE LIFE OF VERIONIQUE about a week and a half ago and
figured that while I was writing reviews I might as well write about
this one too.
     The basic idea is this: there are two women, Veronika in Poland and
Veronique in France, whose lives are somehow connected.  In addition to
looking a lot alike and having similar lives and talents, each feels that
she has a counterpart somewhere in the world although they have never
met (they did come close enough to see each other once).  Also I found
it amusing that Veronika's aunt looks a lot like Veronique's Dad.  But
anyway...
     I felt that the idea of the movie was interesting, but there wasn't
enough in the actual film to hold my attention.  There was some
interesting photography, but it was insufficient to save the movie by
itself.  It moved very slowly, and though things happened I was left
with the strange impression that nothing very important occurred.  Now I
have no complaint about slow-moving films as long as I find something to
hold my interest, but I couldn't find it in this movie.  It was a bit
confusing and seemed mysterious for no apparent reason.
     Suffice to say that I didn't like it much.  But, to present an
opposing view, the friend that I went with liked it, enough that he
would like to see it again to understand it better.  Evidently it gave
him plenty enough food for thought, though it left me still hungry.

Author
Stig Oppedal
[These are some thoughts I wrote down a year ago after watching La
double vie de Veronique for the fourth time. I thought watching it on TV
would be a huge anti-climax, but it proved to be anything but!
SPOILERS: If you haven't seen the movie (and preferably at least twice)
then don't read this!]
La double vie de Veronique is Krysztof Kieslowski's beautiful and
mystical film about two virtual twins, and the effect they unknowingly
have on each others lives. Weronika is a vibrant, yet melancholic Polish
girl, blessed with an extraordinary voice, who ultimately dies of heart
failure during a performance of Van den Budenmayer's Concerto in e
minor. Veronique is a French music teacher, who, stricken by sudden
loneliness, becomes intrigued by and pursues the enigmatic puppeteer
Alexandre Fabrri.
Central to the theme of the movie are the repeated similarities in
character and circumstance, which also serve to draw the viewers into
the movie and keep them alert:
1. Both have strong father-daughter relations as a result of their
mothers dying young. The movie implies that the mothers had a hereditary
heart condition that the two Veronikas also suffer from. The movie opens
with Weronika's mother telling her about stars and Veronique's mother
telling her about leaves. To me, this also signifies a difference
between the two: Weronika seems more "otherworldly", while Veronique is
more pragmatic (or "down to earth", so to speak), which is reflected in
their choice of singing and teaching, respectively.
2. Both have beautiful voices - Weronika dies singing, while Veronique
quits her singing lessons for reasons she doesn't know until the last
scene of the movie.
3. A transparent, yellow rubber ball with stars inside - Weronika
gleefully bounces it and uses it as a lens to view the world, while
Veronique keeps it in her crammed purse. Yet again, I feel this also
underlines their difference in character - the former is more
effervescent, playful, and childlike, while the latter is more grown-up
and "sophisticated" (as seen by her willingness to perjure to help her
friend).
4. Distorted image of a red brick church - Weronika sees it on a train
ride through her rubber ball, Veronique alludes to seeing it in a dream
(we see this dream after she goes to sleep in the hotel room). This is
the most direct link between the two.
5. Weronika habitually plays with a shoelace, and Veronique receives one
in the mail from Alexandre (who serves as the link between the two
Veronikas). As an aside note, mythologies have often portrayed destiny
as the Fates weaving or knitting, and in that respect a short string
such as a shoelace is a symbol of an early death.
6. Both have a habit of rubbing their eyes with a gold ring.
7. Both see an old woman on the street through a second-story window -
though it is an open question whether it is the same old woman (forming
a sort of double Maiden-Mother-Crone trinity with the scowling woman
mentioned below), or whether the apparent similarity is merely the
result of Kieslowski's direction. In any case, both Veronikas show a
marked, though fleeting, interest - indeed, since the old woman in
Krakow is carrying heavy bags, Weronika offers to help (similar to
Valentine in "Trois Couleurs: Rouge").
8. Van den Budenmayer's Concerto in e minor - Weronika sings it,
Veronique teaches it to her pupils, and Alexandre uses it in his puppet
show and to entice Veronique.
9. Weronika sees a scowling, middle-aged woman after being accepted as
the concerto soloist. An identical person - the same woman? - seems
startled when she sees Veronique at the metro station and then again at
the train station, as Veronique searches for Alexandre (who is the link
once again).
10. Weronika's boyfriend, Antek, tells her that he's in room # 287 at
the Holiday Inn. After their initial, and failed, meeting at the train
station, Veronique and Alexandre stay in room # 287 at a Paris hotel.
What I feel is the key to the film, however, is the fundamental
difference between the two Veronikas, brought about by their psychic
link itself. Weronika tells her father that she doesn't feel alone in
the world. When he replies, puzzled, "But you're not", her response
suggests she means it in a more profound sense. Later, when she's on a
bus after coming back from Krakow, Antek follows her on his moped. He
reveals that he had been following her for some time, and Weronika then
realizes it is not because of Antek she doesn't feel alone - otherwise,
she would have felt his presence. Because of this disappointment,
Weronika does not visit Antek's hotel room, and she is unable to say "I
love you" to him.
In contrast, Veronique tells her father she feels utterly alone - this
is of course due to her twin's death, though she does not know this. She
becomes allured by Alexandre, however, and feels a need for him, because
he provides the link to Weronika. This leads to Veronique letting
Alexandre into her hotel room and giving a quick response when he says,
"I love you". It is in this room, and because of these events, that
Veronique becomes aware of Weronika's existence (see below), thus
fulfilling the circle.
As mentioned above, the puppeteer Alexandre is throughout the movie the
link between the two Veronikas. We first see him at Veronique's school,
enacting a drama about the death and then rebirth of a dancer. It is
clear what this represents, and it is emphasized when Alexandre employs
the Van den Budenmayer concerto at the end of the performance (after The
Puppets). This link is highlighted by the repeated use of the Van den
Budenmayer theme (Contemporary Instrumentation Nr. 2) when Veronique is
gradually seduced by Alexandre's enigmatic devices:
1. A mysterious phone call, which ends with the Van den Budenmayer
concerto.
2. An envelope containing a shoelace - which is a literary device
featured in his book.
3. Light reflected into her apartment.
4. An empty box of Virginia cigars - as she guesses beforehand, after
reading his book.
5. A cassette of noises, along with a segment of the Van den Budenmayer
concerto, that serve as directions to his whereabouts. He sends it to
her father's country residence, and the letter's postage is two
identical stamps featuring a woman.
It is also Alexandre who, in the final sequence at the hotel, looks at
Veronique's snapshots from Warsaw and points out the particular frame
that shows Weronika. Veronique breaks down in tears when she sees it,
and he comforts and then gradually arouses her. At the climax we see a
close-up of the contents of her purse: the photos, the transparent
rubber ball, the Van den Budenmayer score (presumably) - all linking the
two Veronikas. This is followed by the Van den Budenmayer concerto as we
cut to an active camera following Veronique down a green corridor to
Alexandre's puppet room (i.e. time has elapsed and their relationship is
more permanent). There he has made two puppets - he needs one as a
replacement, because "in this particular play the puppet is used a lot
and is easily worn down". There is a close-up of Veronique and Alexandre
manipulating one of the puppets, before the camera focuses on the other
lying prostrate on the table - they obviously symbolize the two
Veronikas.
Alexandre recounts the idea behind his next book: two identical girls
grow up, unaware of each others existence, yet intertwined - when one
two-year old is burned by an oven, the lesson is learned by the other.
Veronique finally realizes why she quit singing and why she feels so
alone - she has learned her twin's fatal lesson. Alexandre then says,
"I'm going to call it 'La double vie de --', but I'm not sure what I
should call them". The implicit answer is given when Veronique leaves
the room in silence and passes a mirror. The movie ends enigmatically,
with Veronique at the country residence, touching an old tree (a
reference to the opening sequence) while the Solitude theme is played.
Kieslowski's direction and camerawork is typically elaborate. La double
vie de Veronique is visually stunning and, not least, very yellow -
almost every scene is resplendent in a lush, yellow glow. There are
unusual close-ups of objects: a tea-bag, as it colors reddish-brown the
water in a transparent cup; Weronika/Veronique's eye, as they play with
the gold ring; an uncovered light bulb, which Veronique switches on when
she climaxes (similar to the white screen effect in "Trois Couleurs:
Blanc"); Weronika's face, as she sings "You will come" and the rain
starts to pour down. Objects are also used as lens filters: the rubber
ball; the reflection of the cafeteria door; a semi-opaque,
semi-transparent door, when Veronique hides from Alexandre.
The camera is often active, as the moving shot when Weronika runs with
joy after the concerto rehearsal. The camera then spins when she
clutches at her heart, and, when she's catching her breath on the bench,
it tilts when the flasher approaches. Scenes are often joined by quick
cuts - Weronika calls a friend in Krakow (whistling "The
Internationale") and is told of the choir rehearsal, and then there is
an abrupt cut to the male choir rehearsing the Van den Budenmayer
concerto.
Unusual camera angles and gradual transitions are also used, as during
the concert. The camera alternates between Weronika's view towards the
conductor and the conductor's view towards her, before spinning wildly
around (as does the music) when she falls to the floor and dies. The
camera then floats over audience, as if her spirit is departing, then
goes back to people rushing towards her body. The camera cuts to the
view from Weronika's coffin as her loved ones throw soil into her grave,
before the light is completely shut out. Finally, there is a transition
from death to life as the camera cuts to Veronique making love.
To stress the theme of the movie, there are repeated examples of double
images - Weronika smiling as she looks at an enlarged picture of herself
in her room, and Veronique looking at the photo frame. Veronique's
reflection in shop window when she sees Alexandre's book, her reflection
in the background mirror when she is awakened by the reflected light,
and her mirror reflection in the final scene underline Alexandre's role
as the link.
La double vie de Veronique is also an audio experience, not least
because of Zbigniew Preisner's haunting, evocative soundtrack, largely
based on "Van den Budenmayer's" (i.e. Preisner's) beautiful Concerto in
e minor. The film is also enhanced by interesting sound effects, for
example when Veronique repeatedly rewinds and listens to Alexandre's
cassette, and during her subsequent search for him.
The dialogue is minimalist, yet reveals much. For example, at the train
station cafeteria:
This short exchange shows that he has waited a long time for Veronique
to show up (two days, in fact, as he tells her). The dialogue, never
expository, also rings true, with non-answers and interludes of silence
that are more interesting than heavy-handed clarifications:
The same minimalism and lack of clean-cut explanations is applied to the
movie as a whole, for example in the quick cut in the final scene from
the hotel room to the corridor in Alexandre's house - it is up to the
viewer to fill in the gap. Another example is the Communist statue being
driven away at the beginning of the movie - it shows that the movie
takes place in the post- Communist era, something that is never
explicitly mentioned.
Irene Jacob is outstanding, bringing life to two similar yet distinct
characters and conveying a wide range of emotions. When Weronika sings
in the rain, she vividly conveys the joy of living central to the
character, especially with the final flourish of the head and radiant
smile. She also shows her wistful melancholia, as when she asks her
father, "What shall I do with my life?". Weronika's disappointment at
not seeing Antek on the bus, a pivotal scene in the movie, is portrayed
in a subtle way, with a fleeting facial expression, a change in body
language, and a short silence. In the cafeteria, when Alexandre explains
the reason for his strange behavior - namely, psychological research for
his next book, and not love - Irene Jacob is masterful in showing
Veronique's gradual realization and abrupt, emotional outburst. The rest
of the cast follow up with superb acting, with Philippe Volter suitably
enigmatic, and the two fathers who love their daughters but are unable
to fully understand them.
All in all, La double vie de Veronique is a masterpiece in every respect
- direction, camerawork, acting, music, plot, characters, and dialogue -
and is together with Lawrence Of Arabia my all-time favorite movie.
