Title
Review for Unzipped (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
     UNZIPPED is a documentary by first time director Douglas Keeve.
It follows famous fashion designer Isaac Mizrahi as he attempts with
his Fall 1994 collection to redeem himself after several disappointing
years.  In short, the movie is a hoot and a lot of fun.  As a
documentarian, Keeve has a lot to learn.  The naturally hilarious
antics of Mizrahi save the movie no matter how amateurish the
production.
     One of the delights of the show is that we get to see many clips
of old movies (NANOOK OF THE NORTH, THE CALL OF THE WILD, THE RED
SHOES, and WHAT EVER HAPPENED TO BABY JANE?) and TV shows (THE MARY
TYLER MOORE SHOW and others).  Besides quoting the shows verbatim,
Mizrahi designs his collections based on some of them.
     The movie is full of uproarious dialog.  As one example, after
watching NANOOK OF THE NORTH on TV, Mizrahi decides to model his 1994
Fall collection after the movie, but there is a big problem.  He muses
that "All I want to do is fur pants, but I know that if do them, I will
be stoned off of Fifth Avenue."
     Mizrahi's mannerism are as outlandish as his speech.  When he
mimics Eartha Kitt for whom he is designing clothes, the audience is in
stitches.  After seeing her house, he tells his dinner friends that he
would "kill for a swatch of the wallpaper in her bathroom."
     Watching the preparation for the fashion show we get to see the
models interviewing for positions.  My favorite is a woman who looks
like a recent concentration camp survivor, who walks a storm trooper,
and who promises Mizrahi that her almost totally shaved head will be
completely shaved for the show.  I don't think he hired her, but it is
not clear.
     The movie is full of the glitterati (Eartha Kitt, Cindy Crawford,
Richard Geer, Liza Minnelli, Sandra Bernhard, etc.).  Cindy Crawford
has one of the better lines.  When the cameraman is zooming in on her,
she tells him, "You are a little too close.  My pores are not that
small."
     Mainly what works in the show is the dialog and the mannerisms,
but there is one special scene that has neither.  When he gets bad
news, Mizrahi is shown walking slowly in blowing, dark, dirty, gray
snow in New York City.  The ugly snow is a apt metaphor for his
emotions and the cinematography captures it perfectly.
     His 1994 Fall collection is as outlandish as its designer.
Moreover, to provoke and involve fashion critics, he decides to use a
scrim like they do at the ballet.  He asks his models if they would
mind changing clothes behind the scrim so that the audience could see
them.  He assures them that this will be okay since they will have
their underwear on.  Most models agree, but some reject the proposal.
When it comes time for the show, they appear to all go along anyway.
     Coming back to the poor quality of the documentary, it is as much
of a mess as is Mizrahi's hair.  Just as we learn in the movie, that
Mizrahi has a stylist that works hard to give him just the right messy
look, so it is clear that Keeve likes having a movie that makes you
feel sure that you could do better with your own camcorder.
     The cinematography by Ellen Kuras is almost a parody of bad film
making.  The film stock appears to be a speed of ASA one million as the
grain is about the size of silver dollars.  The editor (Paula Heredia)
seems proud that she leaves in scenes that are of such poor quality
that if you shot them, you would immediately erase the tape.  Scenes
start out of focus and then we get to watch as the camera operator
moves the lenses back and forth until it is finally in focus.  Many
scenes are so white, they may be scenes of polar bears in Siberia for
all I know.  Sometimes these scenes then go to total black as the
operator decides to adjust the iris.  I am sure Kuras shot tons of film
and most of it has to be better than what we are shown.  Although most
of the film is in black and white, the few color scenes are in perfect
focus and well lit.  Sometimes the camera is dropped, but hey, why not
show these mistakes to the audience too.  Suffice it to say that the
filming and the editing are too cute for words.  I kept wanting to
scream while watching it.
     UNZIPPED reminds me of the wonderful British TV show, THE HOUSE OF
ELLIOT.  They are both about fashion designers who are working
extremely hard to be a success and both are high energy shows.
Finally, the music in UNZIPPED, especially during the runway scenes of
the fashion show, is great and full of energy.  You want to go see one
of these shows yourself and soon.
     UNZIPPED flies by at 1:13.  It is not rated, but would probably be
PG-13 for a little profanity and models in their underwear.  Any
teenager could see it with no problems.  If you feel like a fun show
where you can just have a good time, I recommend UNZIPPED to you, and I
award it ** 1/2.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: September 7, 1995
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Bryant Frazer
     Who would have thought that one of the year's most satisfying
movies would be a 79-minute documentary about a clothing designer?  A
year ago, who would have guessed that Robert Altman's fashion industry
barbecue, READY TO WEAR (then called PRET-A-PORTER), would seem so
baggage-laden, and that unknown documentarian Douglas Keeve's doting
portrait of Isaac Mizrahi would seem lighter than air?
     Your mileage may vary, but for this jaded movie-goer, UNZIPPED is
an unmitigated treat, as much a relief from the practiced heaviosity of
Hollywood buckbusters as an air-conditioned movie house is from the
burning city streets.  Keeve's movie feels so free because it's a
portrait of the fashion industry from the inside, from a vantage point
that those with cynical intent could never reach (it's no secret that
Keeve and Mizrahi were in the throes of a relationship during the
shoot, but any reference to this has been excised from the finished
product).
     This is perhaps the most absurd of all big-ticket industries, and
Keeve shows what it feels like from the inside, when it lets its guard
down.  Mizrahi looks as much like a Peter Pan as any pop superstar,
using NANOOK OF THE NORTH as a springboard for his fall collection or
cavorting with beautiful supermodels as though all the streets of New
York lead to Neverland.  What's at stake, though, is his professional
reputation.  In the opening scenes, we see a little crowd following
Mizrahi through Manhattan as he reads the decidedly unflattering
reviews of his latest collection.  This tragedy in miniature sets the
story in motion, as we watch Mizrahi struggle to recreate his own image
as well as some cool clothes.
     Followers of the biz will no doubt enjoy seeing Mizrahi at work,
expounding on his personal philosophy, switching into depressive mode
when he learns that Gaultier may beat him to the "Eskimo chic" punch,
and confessing to his mother that he used to steal money from her purse
as a child (home movie footage reveals that he sported that Eraserhead
'do even then).  Douglas Keeve works stylishly enough to suck in the
unconverted, as well, with sometimes-arty composition within the frame
and occasional inserts of film leader to remind us of the documentary
process.
     The centerpiece is the all-important fashion show in New York's
Bryant Park, captured in full brilliant 35mm color with swooping crane
shots and a throbbing soundtrack.  The glossy shots of the catwalk
itself are intercut with more jittery footage from backstage, as the
models struggle to change from outfit to outfit, and Mizrahi himself
hops around, coaching them like a high school drama teacher.  These
scenes are breathtaking, and Keeve helps us understand what all the
fuss is about, even if we still believe the whole business is a little
weird.  We come away feeling like we know a little bit about Isaac
Mizrahi, even if the movie concentrates conspicuously on painting a
picture of the fashion industry as a perfect world, and turning Mizrahi
into a hero.  But when you consider the standard Hollywood alternatives
for hero worship (Stallone, Segal, et al), that might not be such a
bad thing after all.
DEEP FOCUS: Archived Movie Reviews by Bryant Frazer
http://www.panix.com/~bfrazer/flicker/ bfrazer@panix.com

Author
James Berardinelli
Featuring: Isaac Mizrahi, Nina Santisi, Sarah Mizrahi, Cindy Crawford,
           Kate Moss, Christy Turlington, Naomi Campbell, Linda
           Evangelista, Eartha Kitt, Sandra Bernhard, and others
Director: Douglas Keeve
Producer: Michael Alden
Cinematography: Ellen Kuras
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
     UNZIPPED is a cinematic portrait of Isaac Mizrahi, an artist whose
palette is fabric.  Ostensibly, the film is a documentary, but use of that
term requires stretching its meaning.  Many scenes appear staged, and a
great deal of cutting-and-pasting has been done in the editing room.  The
cinema verite effect is a conceit -- genuine spontaneity is at a premium,
and everyone is aware of and playing to the camera (especially would-be
actresses like Cindy Crawford).  Director Douglas Keeve (who was Mizrahi's
lover at the time) freely admits that he "couldn't care less about the
truth" but was more interested in capturing "the spirit and love in Isaac
and in fashion."
     Despite violating nearly every rule of "legitimate" documentary film
making, however, UNZIPPED is a remarkably enjoyable piece of entertainment.
While it sheds only a little light on the behind-the-scenes world of the
fashion industry, it presents a fascinating, if incomplete, picture of
designer Mizrahi.  This man is the perfect subject for this kind of study --
he's funny, energetic, and eminently quotable.  He has unusual views on just
about everything, from fashion ("It's about women not wanting to look like
cows") to Mary Tyler Moore ("Between her and Jackie Kennedy, they shaped
this country") to style ("It's almost impossible to have style nowadays
without the right dogs").
     UNZIPPED also gives a glimpse into the creative process by which
Mizrahi turns an idea into a dress.  It's almost certainly different that
anyone would imagine.  The designer draws on a variety of sources for his
look, including NANOOK OF THE NORTH and old Bette Davis movies, then enlists
the aid of a Ouija board to help form the collection.  In particular,
UNZIPPED traces Mizrahi's development of his Fall 1994 line from its
inception in the Spring to the final fashion show, which highlights a number
of prominent models, including Cindy Crawford, Naomi Campbell, Kate Bush,
and Linda Evangelista.
     On the technical side, a number of interesting choices were made in
filming UNZIPPED.  A variety of film stocks were used: Super 8, 16 mm
black-and-white, and 35 mm color.  There is a purpose to this beyond simple
artiness -- the stock often serves as an emotional key to the movie, and,
during the climactic fashion show, color is used to show the audience's
perspective, while black-and-white is for the behind-the- scenes sequences.
Nevertheless, some viewers will be put off by this treatment.
     While UNZIPPED isn't an expose on the fashion industry per se, Keeve
has enough clips of petulant models to make the viewer realize how tame
Robert Altman was with READY TO WEAR.  Overall, however, this movie is far
more about Mizrahi than anything else, and only when viewed from that
perspective does UNZIPPED succeed.  When the designer declares that
"everything is frustrating except designing clothes -- that's beautiful and
liberating," it fits perfectly with the image of him that UNZIPPED has
constructed.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
