Title
Review for Winner, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Alex Fung
THE WINNER (Live - 1997)
Starring Vincent D'Onofrio, Rebecca DeMornay, Delroy Lindo, Frank
  Whaley, Michael Madsen, Billy Bob Thornton
Screenplay by Wendy Riss, based on her stage play A DARKER PURPOSE.
Produced by Ken Schwenker
Directed by Alex Cox
Running time: 92 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
To assess Alex Cox's film THE WINNER as a loser would be so indolent.
It would be derisive.  It would be glib.  It would be dismissive.
Rarely have I seen a film as excruciatingly annoying as THE WINNER, a
would-be comedy which quickly proves to be tedious, unfunny, and
unengaging. The film attempts to be fresh and quirky, utilising a
myriad of colourful characters to weave its absurd tale, but appears
to overlook the fact that nobody in the film is remotely interesting
and that all of the characters are essentially preposterous.
The film is set in Las Vegas, and the focus in THE WINNER is on Philip
(Vincent D'Onofrio), an aloof, naive young man blessed with the odd
gift of luck; he virtually cannot lose at the tables.  Despite this
prodigious talent, Philip is perpetually mournful and quite
indifferent about his gambling fortunes, neither taking joy in his
winnings nor having the foresight to mask his abilities.
Consequently, he becomes an easy target for those who would ride upon
his coattails and take advantage of his talent.  Louise (Rebecca
DeMornay), a sultry lounge singer, insinuates herself into Philip's
life for the purpose of swindling him, while Philip's estranged
brother (and, conveniently, Louise's ex-beau) Johnny (Michael Madsen)
arrives on the scene.  (To add some colour, Johnny also happens to be
toting their father's corpse, sans one hand.)  Meanwhile, Philip is
also befriended by a trio of low-rent, opportunists (Frank Whaley,
Billy Bob Thornton, and Richard Edson), who have every intention of
taking advantage of their new buddy's gift with the dice.  Serenely
overlooking the chaos from behind the scenes is the casino owner
(Delroy Lindo); it is probably not giving away much to reveal that
his role in THE WINNER is essentially that alluded to at the end of
the flashy sequence in Martin Scorsese's CASINO which details the
organization hierarchy of a casino's operations - he *is* the eye in
the sky.
It could be maddening to endure a film whose central protagonist is so
oblivious of the ongoing blatant manipulation, but fortunately this is
not the case in THE WINNER, if only because our sadsack hero is such a
sap; not even remotely sympathetic or compelling, it becomes
impossible to root for Philip or even care about his fate, and the
would-be swindlers of Philip's fortunes are all drawn out as such
ludicrous, transparent buffoons with entirely unimaginative and
uninteresting schemes that one watches THE WINNER with a complete
sense of disinterest.
It is a shame, as THE WINNER features a talented cast - Mr. D'Onofrio
is an underrated and gifted actor with a huge range; Mr. Lindo has a
remarkable screen presence which infiltrates every film in which he
appears; Mr. Madsen, Ms. DeMornay, and Mr. Whaley have all done good
work in the past.  None of the actors in THE WINNER are in top form
here, and this film won't likely be a prized addition to their
respective resumes.
Director Alex Cox does what he can with Wendy Riss' screenplay, and it
is to his credit that this film at no point feels like an adaptation
of a stage play; I was startled to learn that THE WINNER was in fact
based upon one.  While tedious, the film is well-paced and does not
meander, but it would be near-impossible task for Mr. Cox (or, for
that matter, virtually any other director that comes to mind) to
overcome the film's widespread shortcomings in plot and
characterization.  To his credit, my understanding is that he has
chosen to distance himself from the project in acknowledgement of its
deficiencies.
I caught THE WINNER at its world premiere at the Toronto International
Film Festival in September 1996, and in fairness it is entirely
possible that the film has been extensively revamped since then due
to the lacklustre audience reaction generated - there were more
walkouts on this film than any of the others I screened.  To be
honest, though, I couldn't begin to isolate what could be done to
this film to improve it - I assume that throwing the whole thing out
and starting over is out of the question.  THE WINNER has apparently
played on cable television in the United States and is beginning a
limited theatrical release at the time of this writing.  The film has
a nice upbeat score by Pray For Rain, but I am honestly not being
facetious when I state that the thing I treasured most about my
screening of THE WINNER was the bag of popcorn upon which I was
munching.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"At one point when berated and bloodied by her male military superior,
 Moore screams out a guttural invitation to him to enjoy partaking in the
 absorption of a certain anatomical member." - Dan Cox, VARIETY, on G.I. JANE

Author
Chuck Dowling
Cast: Rebecca DeMornay, Vincent D'Onofrio, Delroy Lindo, Frank Whaley,
Michael Madsen, Billy Bob Thornton
Written by: Wendy Riss (based on her stage play)
Directed by: Alex Cox
Running Time: 92 minutes
When I see something has been based on a stage play, that's usually a
sign that the movie I'm about to watch will be horribly bad.  Stage
plays very rarely (if ever) translate well to the film screen.  Then I
thought that maybe the top-notch cast in The Winner would make the
film an exception.  I was wrong.
In The Winner, Vincent D'Onofrio plays a seemingly dimwitted gambler
who all of a sudden starts to win every time he plays on Sundays.
Soon, all sorts of low-lifes are trying to swindle him out of his
money.  Sound good?  Well it sure should have been.
The film had some potential, but it was wrecked by the staging of each
and every scene.  Each scene feels like a scene in a play and not one
in a movie.  They feel as though they are all being improvised,
something which may fit right into a play, but just is uncomfortable
to watch on film.  Especially since these are exactly stage actors out
there on the screen (don't get me wrong, it's a great cast... but some
actors just can't do both stage and screen).  And even though it seems
that I've written this many many times lately, but Frank Whaley is
again woefully miscast, this time as a cheap thug.  Is anyone advising
him on his choice of roles?
I guess if I was one of those silly critics like Joel Siegel I'd end
this review with something retarded like "The Winner is a loser".
Wouldn't that be cute?  Well, it might be true, but I'm just not going
to do it.  [R]
The Jacksonville Film Journal -- Film Reviews by Chuck Dowling
URL: http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Email: chuckd21@leading.net
Š 1995-1998 of The Jacksonville Film Journal.  No reviews may be
reprinted without permission.

Author
Ben Hoffman
Set in Las Vegas this black comedy is offbeat even for the genre.
Add to it the fine performance by Vincent D'Onofrio who plays
Philip, the gambler who cannot lose.    Coming off two successful
roles, as a writer in THE WHOLE WIDE WORLD and as the Frankenstein-
like monster in MEN IN BLACK, D'Onofrio is a delight to watch at
work.
Philip, gambler extraordinaire who attracts those who like to be
with a sure winner, finds himself  the cynosure of everyone.  Women
flock to him but casinos are not happy with the character with the
Midas touch.  Con men and mobsters also have their eye on him.
However, Philip is as much in the dark as others about why he wins
but he wants run his good luck to wherever it leads.
Out of the woodwork come all sorts of people who want to have
Philip's good luck somehow benefit them or swindle him if that is
how it must be done.  There is Louise (Rebecca DeMornay), the
story's love interest, who starts off as a villain but by film's
end has found out something about herself that changes her way of
life.  For that matter, almost everyone in the film experiences
changes.
Pretty straightforward for most of the film, it suddenly takes a
surrealist turn when Joey (Frank Waley) enters the casino with
blazing gun looking for Philip.
The movie is based on the stage play, A DARKER PURPOSE, by Wendy
Riss who also wrote the screen version.   It is in part the story
of Las Vegas, where everyone arrives with great expectations but
whose dreams are almost always dashed to pieces.
Ably assisting the film are cast members Richard Edson, Saverio
Guerra. Delroy Lindo. Michael Madsen and SLING BLADE's own
Billy Bob Thornton.

Author
Marty Mapes
*** (out of 4) "Unfortunately, there are many great pianists who don't
have careers." -- Lawrence Tucker, Columbia Artists
The lack of demand for classical music is just one of the pitfalls young
musicians face, even exceptionally talented ones. THE WINNERS
is a documentary that looks at four winners of a world renowned Belgian
music competition. Each has worked hard to forge his career in music,
and yet world fame and worldly fortune have eluded them all.
The most cheerful of the four is Berl Senofsky, an American who teaches
music in Baltimore. He entered the competition just to see where he
stood in relation to his colleagues. In this documentary he looks back
on a life well-lived. He has no regrets and seems to truly enjoy what he
does.
Yevgen Moguilevsky is a timid Russian pianist whose career was damaged
for twenty years because the USSR wouldn't let him leave the country (he
was labeled "politically unreliable"). During the filming of the
documentary, he was getting photographed for the cover of a new
recording, but Lawrence Tucker, his new manager, confides to the camera
that the novelty of a Russian pianist is wearing off now that the cold
war is over, and that Moguilevsky may not have the "swagger" necessary
to make it big.
Mikhail Bezverkhny comes across as a perfectionist, and as such, the
classical music business has taken a toll on him. One of the most
telling scenes involving Bezverkhny shows him berating his accompanist
(also his wife) over a detail most people can't hear. At the start of
his career, he couldn't practice in his first apartment because his
neighbors wouldn't tolerate the classical music. He had to buy an old
van in which to practice. He complains that the globalization of
classical music has caused musicians and audiences to sink to a low,
common, "gray" level of performance which is unsatisfying for him.
The musician who's had the roughest breaks is perhaps Philipp
Hirschhorn. His early career was the most promising of the four. His
contemporaries had him pegged for worldwide fame and importance, and the
archival footage supports their claim. Yet at the time of the interview
(he died shortly thereafter) he had been forced to give up his career in
music because of cancer. His tone and mannerisms make it clear he had
not yet come to terms with his loss - he builds an emotional wall that
denies the importance of music in his life.
Some might see "The Winners" as an ironic title. After all, its subjects
are not household names, even in the most musical of houses.
But I don't think filmmakers Paul Cohen and David van Tijn intended it
that strongly. Their subjects have all pursued careers in music --
recording, performing, and teaching. All still work in music, and two
still perform for a living. Bezverkhny is shown playing for the King and
Queen of Belgium and Moguilevsky is beginning a new American contract.
All four are a far cry from being losers, and they all make interesting
subjects for a documentary.
Nevertheless, the bitter point is made that bad luck, ill health, or the
wrong personality can easily keep one from achieving the world renown
that is the unspoken dream of so many musicians.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/
