Title
Review for Isä meidän (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Andreas Kutschera
Plot synopsis:
     PATER NOSTER is a film about a father/son relationship.  Johani
returns to his childhood home afters years spent "sailing the seven
seas."  It is a desolate house somewhere in the Finnish countryside.
Johani's father lives in a hospital for the elderly, where he is tied
to a wheelchair and generally seems to be unable to understand what is
going on around him.  Soon after Johani starts cleaning up the house,
he takes his father home.  Throughout the whole film, Johani tries to
"come to peace" with his father.
speed rating: *** (recommended, comparable to NAKED)
     This is a very slow-moving film, no action, no car chases, very
few jokes, if any.  So what makes it interesting?  The story flows very
nicely, each tension block is built up slowly (though some are pretty
obvious) and a lot of times it is *after* you watched a certain scene
that you realize the impact it has.  Aaltonen manages to put a lot of
characters on the screen who seem one-dimensional at first but show
more and more diversity throughout the film.  He uses dialog very
consciously and often lets the pictures speak for themselves, which
works due to his good cameraman.  This film is a good example of a
picture being worth a thousand words.  Very often you see something and
you do not need the dialog to grasp what's going on (though reading the
sub-titles does help at times :-).  In fact, just by listening to the
dialog you will miss some major parts of the story.  The movie sets a
depressing tone but also, at the same time, there is always reasonable
hope that things will get better.  And, yes, there are love scenes in
the movie.
     All in all, if you want a movie for a first date, I suggest you
try something else, but if you want something you can still talk about
after you left the theater, something that grabs you somewhere other
movies don't reach, this might be the one.  But since it is a Finnish
movie and it is black and white, I doubt it will even make the video
stores, so look for it at a film festival near you.
