Title
Review for Abyss, The (1989)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Jeff Meyer
     THE ABYSS is an interesting flick, and pretty entertaining; it's also an
interesting "case study," in that the entertainment comes much more from the
surroundings than the plot.  The story works well enough -- nothing special,
buoyed mostly by earnest if non-glowing performances by most of the cast; it
seems mired in molasses at times, or maybe liquid oxygen.  The audience can
breath it, but they do it in gulps -- it doesn't flow well.
     What *does* leave you with an impression -- and, after time, communicates
more emotion than cast or dialogue, really -- is the setting and the way the
film was shot.  THE ABYSS takes place underwater, WAY underwater, and
everything about the film gives that impression; the technical details may be
off, but it *feels* right.  Cameron has, without a doubt, shot about the best
underwater adventure film I can think of.  It gives (when seen on a big screen,
preferably 70mm -- this film is *not* going to translate into video well,
folks) a wonderful sense of claustrophobia, of being under *all* *that*
*water*...  And the deep dive ascents -- whew!  You stop thinking about what
they're doing, and just goggle at the spectacle of it all.  I think the idea to
really shoot this underwater was a good one -- it adds to Suspension of Belief
factor immeasurably.  (I am curious how much of the underwater vehicle scenes
were done with blue-screen effects, though -- perfect place for them.)
     Other good points: liked the relationship between Harris and Mastrantonio,
though it never really flamed, and was a touch too earnest.  And the early
"unknown entity" bits were able to get me excited, mainly due to Mastrantonio's
acting.  Ed Harris shows that 1950s movie heroes can still muddle along in the
1990s.  (Though I got this feeling, right towards the end, that he was going to
say "Ready to go -- 100%!" in the best John Glenn tones.)  Finally, I guess
there's still some New Race Contact fascination left in me that wasn't totally
sucked out by CLOSE ENCOUNTERS, but the climax seems really visually derivative
at points -- kept expecting Richard Dreyfuss to help Harris off with his
helmet.  ("Hi!  Got any Cheetos?")
     Still, it's a decent yarn, at least by summer standards; the look of the
film is not to be missed, though.  Find a 70mm theater this weekend and jump
in.

Author
Steve Copold
     A review of THE ABYSS that reaches beyond technical descriptions is, at
best, very difficult to depersonalize.  This is a film that does not lend
itself to neutral feelings.  THE ABYSS literally assaults the viewer's senses
within moments of the opening credits.  The style of the film, now well
established by Gayle Ann Hurd and James Cameron in the earlier TERMINATOR and
ALIENS, is that of forcing the viewer into a participatory role.  Only in a
very few shots is one allowed to sit back as an observer and watch the ongoing
scene.  Rather, Cameron is relentless in making the camera maintain an active
role in the narrative.
     This motion picture attains new heights (or depths) of cinematic
claustrophobia.  The one film in memory that comes even close to THE ABYSS in
this area, is DAS BOOT with its hydraulically operated steadicam plunging
headlong through the narrow passage- way and water-tight doors of the German
U-Boat.  In THE ABYSS, this is far surpassed as the camera doesn't limit its
high speed charges to straight lines, but runs around corners, ducking
bulkheads, power cables, and walls of rushing water.  Most of the people
sitting near me in the theater were tightly gripping the armrests on their
seats and moving visibly in reaction to the events on screen.
     The cinematography is simply astonishing.  Underwater photography can
often be really distressing to watch.  Often the view is muddled, the
voice-overs and foley work are guesses, and the lack of continuity between the
two is very disconcerting.  There is none of this in THE ABYSS.  Working in the
controlled environment of an abandoned nuclear power facility, Cameron was able
to maintain a near perfect balance of sight and sound.  The specially made
diving gear always allows a full view of the actor's face, and built-in
microphones, provide a measure of realism that has never been seen before in an
underwater film.  It takes awhile to realize that most of the brilliantly
conceived miniatures and matte paintings you're seeing are not miniatures and
paintings at all, but full-size set constructions.  The few models and mattes
utilized in THE ABYSS are so clever in their construction and use, that it will
require some serious nit-picking to spot most of them.  The special effects are
the best that Industrial Light & Magic has to offer.
     The acting is top notch, with Ed Harris really coming into his own in the
lead.  An interesting choice was that of ALIENS and TERMINATOR veteran, Michael
Biehn, as the "pressure psychotic" heavy.  Aside from Harris, Biehn, and a few
others, the cast is pretty much made up of little known character actors.  They
form a terrific ensemble, and are thoroughly convincing in their respective
roles.  Chris Elliot, of the David Letterman Show (The Guy Under the Seats) has
a small role as a technician on the surface support vessel.
     As disorienting as the relentless pace of the film is, the viewer never
has problem staying with the film's tightly woven narrative.  This is due in
part to Cameron's direction, but equal credit must go to the intelligent
screenplay and "world-class" editing.  Any entertainment that can achieve this
frenetic pace and still hold you for well over two hours is remarkable indeed.
     One of the texts we use in a History & Significance of the Motion Picture
course states that, "To succeed in all respects, a film must tell a story, set
a mood, and entertain the audience."  On this score THE ABYSS is right on
target.  I cannot recall another film which more quickly, or effectively ,
suspends reality and draws you into the world on screen.  As a film, THE ABYSS
gets four stars....as a roller coaster it gets five!

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Still making rounds around town is the director's cut of THE
ABYSS, a definite must-see for action fans and a perfect warm-up to the
July release of TRUE LIES.
     The story presses a team of oil-drilling divers (led by Ed Harris)
into the service of the Navy, who requests their aid to locate and
disarm a missing nuclear sub.  Along for the ride is one ex-wife (Mary
Elizabeth Mastrantonio), some less-than-playful SEALS (led by Michael
Biehn), and a handful of luminescent, underwater aliens.
     Director James Cameron's undersea adventure received a soggy
reception in 1989, despite grossing somewhere between $50 to $80
million in the States.  Critics couldn't accept the aliens and with good
reason.  The truncated film--cut by 27 minutes per the studio's
request--gave zero explanation for their existence.
     Now, with the footage restored, THE ABYSS is finally fathomable.
The ending is still way-too-literal, but Cameron was young when he made
this movie.  (Remember the awful editing in TERMINATOR 2?  The man is
still learning.  Let's talk after TRUE LIES.)
     If nothing else, THE ABYSS is a bonafide technical masterpiece.
The actors spent months underwater and did all of their own diving.
Their efforts helped to win the Oscar for Best Visual Effects.  (The
film was also nominated for best cinematography and best sound.)

Author
Max Hoffmann
     The long-awaited release of the Special Edition laserdisc sets of
James Cameron's 1989 film THE ABYSS has finally happened, and for once
all the anticipation has been worth it.  This review attempts to cover
the different aspects of this landmark release in a half-critical,
half-informational light, and though some things here have been noted
by others on rec.video.releases, I'm putting my two cents' worth in
anyway :-)
OVERVIEW
~~~~~~~
     THE ABYSS: SPECIAL EDITION comprises an extended version of the
1989 film, containing, by the director's count, twenty-eight minutes of
new footage and three minutes of expanded credits.  The total running
time of the feature film is 171 minutes versus the original version's
140.  This release is available in either an original aspect ratio
"letterbox" version at 2.2:1 aspect ratio, or a "Director's Pan And
Scan" version presented full-frame.  The set also includes an extensive
supplement disc containing a new one hour documentary about the making
of the film, and an exhaustive CAV supplement containing a wealth of
information about the production.  The release is the first to be
mastered to the new THX LaserDisc standard.  Also included is a colour
tri-fold brochure containing full restoration notes and a short essay
by Cameron about the restoration and his views on the Widescreen Vs
Pan-and-scan debate.  The recommended retail price in the US is $99.95,
and as this reviewer lives in Australia, the set cost $190 in
Australian currency, or about US$140.  The version reviewed is the
Widescreen edition.
THE FILM
~~~~~~~
     I should point out first and foremost that I am an unashamed fan
of this film, not only for its incredible visuals but also for the two
amazing performances put in by Ed Harris and Mary Elizabeth
Mastrantonio, and Cameron's naively romantic script.  So watching an
expanded "Special Edition" of the film I have grown to count as one of
my favorites was a strange experience.  The trouble with being so
familiar with the pace and structure of a film is that when scenes are
added, there's the possibility that they may jar with what is expected
and take the viewer out of the world of the film for an instant as they
notice, "hey, that's new" and often give a small restored scene more
attention than it should be given in the context of the film.
     The restored scenes are many and varied, the longest sequences
appearing at the film's climax, when the legendary wave sequence
finally makes its appearance.  But the scenes added earlier are of a
far more personal nature; the relationship between Bud and Lindsey is
far more clearly defined and coloured, as is that of the crew amongst
each other.  I could have done without the "camaraderie" shot of One
Night and the gang all singing along to Linda Ronstadt as they tow
their rig along the ocean floor, but hey, Jim's always had a redneck
streak appear somewhere in his movies.  Hell, the man was a trucker
once, after all :-)
     Technically the inserts vary.  Most of the cast returned for
additional ADR and the one notable exception, as throughout the whole
three discs, was Mastrantonio.  Her dialogue has been restored from
secondary audio sources, easily identifiable due to the mains hum and
hiss in the background.  Visually a few of the new scenes are
noticeable immediately due to the shift in colour balance and less
careful negative storage procedures, and there's an editing mark or two
visible in there.  Having said that, the new shots still look fine, and
the added footage for the Wave sequence and Bud's extra dialogue with
the NTIs looks sharp, crisp, and perfect.
     A curious thing is Cameron's assertion that in the release version
of the film, he ran the end credits in tiny text lightning-fast to save
time, and that he has now re-shot them with new info, bigger text and a
slower crawl.  Certainly, if you check the VHS release of the film,
there are those pesky fast credits.  But on the original LD of the
original cut of the film, the credits had been mysteriously
re-composited and slowed down, making them slow, big, and legible.
They ran for exactly 9.5 minutes.  The new credits run for slightly
less than that, and faster!  So why did Cameron have to re-score the end
credits using some of Robert Garrett's music, when a full 9.5 minute
Alan Silvestri end credit score was available?  Hmmm....
     All in all, and as Cameron himself says, this is in some ways a
very different film to the original release.  The mood of the film has
noticeably changed, and there's more *character* in the characters.
I'll reserve judgement until I've seen it a few more times, but I like
the way it's turned out.  A lot.
THE DOCUMENTARY
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
     Titled "Under Pressure: Making The Abyss" this one-hour
presentation, completed in 1993 by Ed Marsh, is entertaining,
informative, and thankfully almost hype-free.  It contains contemporary
interviews with the cast who retuned for new ADR (sorry, Mastrantonio
isn't interviewed) and old ones shot by Fox's promo crew back in 88/89
(strangely, not one word from Mary here either, unfortunately).
There's a wealth of behind-the-scenes footage, some humour, Gale Anne
Hurd and Jim Cameron in separate rooms, anecdotes, drama, and a truly
massive water-filled nuclear reactor.  If you like the film, you'll
find this fascinating.  As you also will if you don't.  However good
the documentary is, though, in matters of pure information it pales in
comparison to...
THE SUPPLEMENT
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
     A 23-minute CAV side packed to the rafters with everything you
could possibly want to know about the film and its production.  There's
a complete early script treatment, the complete final shooting script,
the full storyboard collection, detailed info on the creation of the
individual effects including copious stills and raw video footage,
costume design info and stills, casting, Cameron's actual epic memo to
SFX houses saying what he wants and how he wants it, and more.
Sequences such as the pseudopod scene are explained from conception to
execution; there are loads more archival photos of the cast, posters,
the old LD sleeve (!), crew t-shirts, promotional stuff, restoration
info; there are three trailers including Ed Marsh's terrific theatrical
trailer which was never seen outside the US.
     This, simply, is unbelievable--there's enough here to fill a
large glossy colour book, and it's only after viewing this supplement
that you'll really realise how much of a bargain the set is.  I have
spent a good hour reading over it thoroughly and still haven't seen
a quarter of it in detail.  Unprecedented access to materials has
helped of course, and the closet in these terms seen before this would
be Terry Gilliam's "Fisher King" supplement--in terms of co-operation,
not content.  This supplement out-contents them all.  Period.
DISC TECHNICAL
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
     The only word that can be used is PHENOMENAL.  For starters, I
don't know which Japanese plant Fox got these discs manufactured at,
but these three platters are the cleanest, most dropout-free discs I
have ever seen.  Then there's the mastering.  A D1/D2 digital video
transfer, the image has been immeasurably aided by the THX program,
which as it turns out is essentially a reference test signal inserted
in the vertical blanking interval at the telecine stage and referenced
during all stages of mastering, the image quality surpasses just about
any other disc I've seen.  I compared this with the original Fox LD of
the film, and the difference is astounding.  The original, which I'd
always considered to look fairly good, is in comparison with the new
disc grainy, contrasty and lacks definition.  I recorded a section of
the new disc onto VHS tape and played it back whole a/B comparing with
the old disc.  Guess which looked better?  Yep, the *tape*!  This new
transfer from interpositives struck from the origianl negatives,
conveys more detail, colour, and outright resolution than the
original.  The transfer was, according to the packaging, supervised by
Cameron, and the restoration, unlike the "Aliens" Special Edition, was
completed not on videotape but on film.
     The wide-screen edition is letterboxed at 2.2:1, which is probably
as close as we're ever going to get to the original theatrical 2.35:1
aspect ratio (I finally had the theater aspect confirmed by a friend
who's actually projected the thing!).  The original version of the film
on LD was presented at 1.85:1, and A/B comparison reveals some extra
image, usually, strangely enough, at the bottom of the frame, and some
side information missing.
     Cameron's philosophy on Super 35mm -> anamorphic presentation is
(and this is even noted in his notes to the SFX crew before production
began, as seen on the supplement side) "You get *more* on the
pan-and-scan version than you did in the cinema".  Look Jim, if that's
so desirable, why not just present the thing in Academy ratio to begin
with?  The wide-screen edition contains the film as seen in the cinema,
and if you're used to letterboxing already you won't have it any other
way.  Cameron's worries about the resolution of NTSC video have been
offset by the wonders the THX mastering process has done for the
image.
     Sound is superb, mastered with dynamic range to spare--and it's
used--with the exception of the final credit music, which has
obviously suffered master tape damage, as dropouts of the analogue
variety that don't appear on the original film's soundtrack are
present.
     And the THX chord is there at the start of the disc, sounding
amazing but regrettably shortened for video, missing out on the
surround channel effects that accompany the "Audience Is Listening"
text in the cinema.
     Side changes are well-placed at the end of key sections of the
story, and notably the film has been spread over four sides despite the
fact that it would have fit on three.  The last side is CAV, and it
includes the wave sequence.
     The discs are well-packaged in plastic-lined paper sleeves sitting
in a perfectly-sized box that doesn't allow the disks to move around
when closed.
SUMMARY
~~~~~~
     A bargain, if you love the film.  Still worthwhile if you have an
interest in the technology of film-making and/or presentation.  Fox
have outdone themselves here, and presented a worthy opening salvo for
the THX disc program to boot.  Lets hope this technology filters down
from collector's sets to standard LD releases--as in time it no doubt
will.
     But what could simply have been a very good LD edition of the film
turns out to be beyond anyone's wildest dreams--the correct aspect
ratio, the startling image and sound quality, and the comprehensive
supplement make this set not only a benchmark for future reference and
a stunning showpiece for your home theater, but also the entire "Abyss"
story and the film itself, all wrapped up in a neat box.
Congratulations, James Cameron, Van Ling and crew, and Fox.  You've come
up with a masterpiece.


Author
Steve Kong
The Abyss was release to theatres unfinished, in my mind and that of the
director James Cameron. That is why Cameron went back and added 30 plus
minutes of cut footage.
The footage was cut, not because Cameron wanted too, but because the studio
thought that no one would sit and watch a three-hour film. The studios were
wrong; the cuts resulted in a film that confused audiences.
The Abyss starts off with a bang. A US nuclear submarine tracks a strange
high-speed object travelling through the water. The skipper of the boat
wants to investigate and gets into trouble. Moreover the sub runs into the
wake of the object and smashes into a canyon.
The Navy needs to get the warheads off the sub, but they cannot get a crew
as far down as the sub is at. The Navy calls upon a deep sea drilling crew
located on a one of a kind deep-sea oilrig. Lindsey Brigman (Mary Elizabeth
Mastrantonio) designed the rig. She's a tough woman who is hard to get
along with and nobody really likes her and she's just flown in to help with
the rescue operation.
Down below, on the rig, we have a rag-tag group of workers. Bud Brigman (Ed
Harris) leads these people. Bud and Lindsey have been divorced a few years
ago, and Bud is not expecting Lindsey to come down. Sent down to the rig
are a group of Navy SEALs. The group of SEALs are led by Lt. Coffey
(Micheal Biehn).
Writer/Director James Cameron spins up many plot threads in The Abyss,
including one about aliens in the water. It is this plot thread that
suffers the most with the original cuts. I often hear my friends, after
seeing the original version, talk about how the first two-thirds of the
film are rather normal, and then the end takes a strange tangent with the
aliens. And of those, that saw the original version, they did not
understand why the aliens were doing what they were doing. The restored
footage is added for that exact reason.
Another thread plot also suffers from the original cuts. This is the thread
that follows the relationship between Bud and Lindsey. The restored footage
adds much background on their relationship.
Cameron who is known for his big budget special effect driven action film
does not hold back on The Abyss. He does though rearrange the priorities.
The film focuses on the characters heavily, developing some interesting
relationships. The special effects are spectacular, but they never get to
the point of being the driving force behind the film. There is action, but
it also is not the driving force behind the film. He makes the characters
and their stories the driving force behind the film.
What I found interesting about the film is the theme of cleansing and the
small, though direct, religious undertone. Cameron puts the aliens in the
sea, and makes the aliens powerful beings that are able to control the
forces of water. After seeing the humans on ground go through so much, and
killing so many other humans, the aliens put up a very unambiguous warning
for mankind. Stop killing each other or face another Biblical scale flood.
The additional footage shows this clearly.
Known as the hardest film shoot ever, we find out why. Cameron decided from
the git-go to shoot The Abyss wet-for-wet. What wet-for-wet means is that
every shot that has an actor in the water is actually an actor in the
water. That is opposed to a wet-for-dry shoot where scenes with actors are
shot on a foggy soundstage with blue filters on the cameras.
Many people have expressed that The Abyss is a long confusing film. But,
most of those have only seen the original theatrical release of the film.
The director's cut of the film fixes all of the problems of the original
release. With the extra 30 minutes of footage The Abyss is a complete film,
worthy of the three hour running time. Don't miss the director's cut of
this film. Unlike other director's cut films which add only periphery
details such as more special effects or short small additions. The Abyss SE
adds more story and clears up a lot of the confusion of the original release.
Cameron did the Director's Cut of The Abyss not directly on video but on
film. Here in the San Francisco Bay Area it has been shown a few times in
small art houses. If you can't catch it on the big screen, the Director's
Cut is also available on laserdisc. Don't miss this version of The Abyss.
"Hold on to your pantyhose." - Bud Brigman. 

Author
Carl Miller
        A submarine carrying nuclear warheads is sunk off the American 
coast.  The action begins when a crew goes down to investigate the crash 
-- they are not alone.
The Abyss is one of the best science-fiction thrillers I have 
seen.  Director/writer James Cameron builds suspense perfectly as the 
movie progresses, involving the audience in every scene.  It's successful 
for the same reasons as ALIENS -- it makes the viewer feels as though 
they are part of the story.
Bud (Ed Harris) and Lindsey (Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio) are
the battling spouses who lead the crew's descent.  It's interesting to
compare Harris's appearance in this movie to his role in JACKNIFE, where
he played an alcoloholic war veteran.  Without the beer gut, he looks six 
inches taller.  Also among the crew is Michael Biehn from THE TERMINATOR 
and ALIENS, both directed by James Cameron.  Biehn does a good job as the 
psychotic crew member, though it is not a particularly challenging role.
Except for a few scenes at the beginning and at the end, the 
entire film takes place underwater, giving the viewer a good idea of the 
claustrophobic effects the characters feel.  As the film goes on, major 
complications arise -- Lt. Coffee (Biehn) succumbs to pressure-induced 
psychosis, and some very strange things start happening.  The water rises 
up into the cabin as if it were alive.  There's something else down there.
When Coffee and a few other crew members attempt to take over the submarine 
and detonate the warheads, the story really gets going.
There were two scenes in movie I found particularly memorable -- 
the first was Coffee falling down the trench in an undersea capsule, as
the water pressure increases.  The capsule cracks, Coffee screams, and
the vehicle implodes.  Silence.  That was a great effect.  The second was
Lindsay gasping for air as the cabin filled with water.  Cameron is one
of the few directors who could make that scene as effective as it was.
The film climaxes with Bud going down to the bottom of the trench 
in a fluid-filled suit to disarm the warheads.  Unfortunately, the final 
ending is disappointingly abrupt, which is the only thing that keeps this 
from being a four-star movie.  It's still a terrific movie, and one which 
I'm sure all science-fiction fans will not want to miss.

Author
Jon Drukman
     Director James Cameron has a big reputation to live up to, having helmed
action classics like THE TERMINATOR and ALIENS and fans of his early works will
certainly go to see THE ABYSS expecting something special.  Fortunately,
they'll get something close to a masterpiece, certainly not the "instant
classic" that the newspaper headlines blare at us, but a good entertaining
movie, nonetheless.
     The plot isn't super-relevant, as Cameron's eye is tilted more towards
creating a sombre atmosphere, and characterizations.  One unusual thing about
the film is the way it opens: you see the logo THE ABYSS with the tail on the
"y" hanging down, the camera zooms into the "y" and WHAM! the film starts -- no
credits, no nothing.  This was a very effective technique, because you find
yourself plunged into Cameron's vision instantly and totally.
     The underwater scenes are beautifully shot, and they practically steal the
film away, much the way the gorgeous sets and camerawork stole the show from
the lame script of BATMAN.  The characters, which Cameron has confessed to
making his number one priority in the film, seem a bit flat when confronted
with the billions of dollars of technology surrounding them, although Ed Harris
delivers a highly competent performance.  Michael Biehn did a commendable job
at portraying a psycho military officer without any of the usual Hollywood
"over the edge" cliches.  His performance was a masterwork of restraint, if
anything.  Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, on the other hand, was annoying from
frame one, although this might be considered a success as her character was
supposed to be a "cast-iron bitch."  Her softening at the end was predictable
and not very well executed.  
     In fact, the ending of the film in general was not very well executed.
Certainly, the effects and camera work were up to par, but the plot took a
standard Hollywood nosedive.  Why is it that so few films are willing to take
risks and show us a world where everyone doesn't live happily ever after?
Presumably, the idealistic worldview is justified by studio management as being
"escapist" entertainment, with the rationale being that people go see movies to
feel better about the world, but implausibly saccharine endings such as the one
in THE ABYSS leave this reviewer feeling much worse about the world.
     Cameron may see THE ABYSS as a love story first, but it seems as if he is
more in love with the machinery of the film than the characters.  Still, some
viewers will find that desirable, and the mastery of the film craft that
Cameron shows will pay off for them.  Just ignore the hopelessly hokey ending,
and you'll have a good time.
+------------------------------------+
|  |   |\        | jsd@gaffa.mit.edu |
| \|on |/rukman  | jsd@umass.bitnet  |
+------------------------------------+

Author
Greg Goebel
     Given the skills of the Cameron-Hurd team (which has already brought us
the memorable TERMINATOR and ALIENS), it would be a shame to say that they let
us down with their latest film, THE ABYSS -- so it is pleasant to say that THE
ABYSS is one of the more worthwhile films of the summer.
     A nuclear submarine has a disastrous accident in the waters of the
Atlantic; the Navy sends a SEAL team to commandeer an undersea oil rig in the
vicinity to perform, if possible, a rescue operation.  Of course, nothing is
goes right -- if it did, would there be much of a story?  -- and everyone
involved finds themselves in an ever-widening predicament that tests their
ability to survive.
     I am told $45 million was spent on producing this picture.  Large budgets
don't always translate into impressive productions -- sometimes they're the
result of mismanagement -- but in this case, the special effects are so
spectacular that one wonders how they managed to do it for that small a sum!
     This is fortunate, because if THE ABYSS had to rest on the virtues of its
story line, it would most likely sink into a financial abyss even deeper than
the watery canyon which threatens the heroes of this underwater epic.  While it
is hard to be unkind to a team which has done their level best (and then some!)
to give the customers their money's worth -- not only is the production
superlative, but all the actors (Ed Harris in particular) put in good
performances -- the script is, alas, almost as mechanical as the special
effects, resembling nothing so much as the kind of story Irwin Allen might tell
on a good day; it punches all the right buttons, sometimes very effectively,
but never with enough subtlety to make the viewer fail to realize that his or
her buttons are, indeed, being punched.
     But I will not be cynical; while this film does fail to reach the margins
of greatness, it is very definitely on the high side of good; and I suspect
there are some less jaded and finicky than myself who will be absolutely blown
away by it.  As for myself?  I count myself satisfied.  My compliments to the
chef.  

Author
Randy Parker
Review written in 1989  (original theatrical release reviewed)
   Mix together 2001, CLOSE ENCOUNTERS, ALIENS, and THE POSEIDON ADVENTURE
and you have THE ABYSS, director James Cameron's incredibly ambitious
underwater adventure.  Cameron has gone for broke in his attempt to chart
new cinematic territory--to boldly go where no director has gone before. 
He has created a sci-fi love story of epic proportions, one that is
surprisingly provocative.  Despite flaws in the film's execution, one has
to be impressed by the scope and scale of Cameron's vision.
   In one of the most grueling shoots in film history, THE ABYSS was
filmed 30 feet underwater in a 7.5 million gallon concrete tank.  The
movie is set aboard Deepcore, a submersible, commercial oil rig which is
commandeered by the Navy to investigate a crashed nuclear submarine.  The
Navy sends a team of SEAL (Sea, Air, and Land) divers down to the rig to
lead its civilian crew on a search expedition.
   In the lead roles, Ed Harris and Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio hold their
own against the hardware and special effects--playing, respectively, Bud
Brigman, the foreman in charge of Deepcore's crew, and his estranged wife
Lindsey, a self-described "cast-iron bitch" who designed the revolutionary
oil rig.  The two characters rekindle their love while all hell is
breaking loose on the ocean floor; they find themselves contending with a
hurricane, some mysterious alien sea creatures, and a Navy officer who is
suffering from water pressure-induced psychosis.
   Technically, THE ABYSS is dazzling--a cinematic knockout.  The movie's
budget is rumored to have exceeded $50 million, and it's a good bet that
nearly every penny is on the screen.  Perhaps most startling and
awe-inspiring is the sound; THE ABYSS offers the most dramatic utilization
of Dolby stereo surround I've ever heard.  The movie is a triumph of sound
editing, especially when blasted through a state of the art THX sound
system.  Clinking chains, whirring motors, and gasping breaths engulf the
audience from every direction.
   Visually, THE ABYSS is no less stunning.  Cameron's direction--as well
as the movie's cinematography, underwater sets, and special effects--are
spectacular.  One particularly gripping moment comes when Cameron shoots
from inside a diver's helmet; the tension and claustrophobia are almost
unbearable.  THE ABYSS passes its most important test: it creates the
illusion that the action is actually unfolding half a mile beneath the
ocean's surface.  Cameron's film is beautifully and lovingly crafted and
so overwhelmingly massive that it leaves you in a state of sensory
overload.
   Cameron also wrote THE ABYSS, but unfortunately his spiritual story of
the unknown is full of leaks.  First, it's riddled with too many loose
ends, holes, and above all, implausibilities.  The movie strains its
credibility at every twist and turn to the point where it sometimes even
unintentionally draws laughter from the audience.  The characters seem to
rely on luck more often than their own resources to get themselves out of
sticky situations.  For example, a crew member awakens from a coma at just
the right moment to save his comrades.  Second, except for the two leads,
the members of the rescue team are forgettable, stock characters.  When
three crew members drown early in the film, their deaths have no emotional
impact whatsoever.  None of the supporting actors leaves a lasting
impression, except for Michael Biehn (TERMINATOR, ALIENS) as the deranged
SEAL officer; Biehn deserves credit for trying to flesh out his cardboard
character.  Third, the movie takes itself so seriously that it often
borders on pretentious melodrama. 
   For the above reasons, THE ABYSS is often difficult to swallow at face
value, and you never totally buy the situation.  Unlike THE TERMINATOR and
ALIENS, Cameron's two previous films, THE ABYSS fails to completely absorb
you into its fantasy world.  The movie hit the theaters over a month
behind schedule because of production and special effects delays, which
perhaps explains its unfinished feel.  It almost seems as if Cameron
hurried his final cut, in which case the holes and loose-ends may be
rooted in the editing room rather than in the screenplay.
   At two hours and twenty minutes, THE ABYSS is about half an hour too
long.  Cameron spends too much time setting up the conflict, and he also
tries to cram too many themes into the film.  The alien subplot, while
providing an excuse for some nifty special effects, is ultimately no more
than a recycled Hollywood cliche.  The movie also superficially
introduces, and then fails to explore, the political undercurrents
surrounding the issue of nuclear weapons (the sunken sub houses warheads
with 5 times the power of Hiroshima).  THE ABYSS tries to tread through so
much water that everything seems half-baked, except for the touching love
story between Bud and Lindsey.
   In Cameron's capable hands, however, the cup is definitely half-full
rather than half-empty.  Once all the plot strands are in place, the movie
kicks into high gear and offers the intense, riveting action that is
Cameron's forte.  One of the most nerve-wracking scenes has Bud and
Lindsey stranded in a flooding capsule with only one oxygen suit between
them in which to swim back to the oil rig.  Panic sets in as they (and we)
realize that only one of them can escape alive.  While THE ABYSS doesn't
match the breakneck pace of ALIENS or the frightening suspense of THE
TERMINATOR, it contains enough nail-biting tension to leave you without
finger nails.
   THE ABYSS will undoubtedly spark heated debates between its fans and
its foes, like two other recent big-budget extravaganzas with lofty
aspirations: BATMAN and THE ADVENTURES OF BARON MUNCHAUSEN.  Visually, all
three films are astonishing.  They differ considerably, however, in the
strength of their scripts.  In BATMAN, director Tim Burton complements the
film's dramatic film noir look with a story that, while not fully
developed, is absorbing and compelling.  BARON MUNCHAUSEN, on the other
hand, is all flash and no substance; it leaves you altogether indifferent
to the characters and plot.  THE ABYSS, by comparison, falls somewhere in
between these two extremes.  The blossoming love between Bud and Lindsey
and their desperate battle for survival on the ocean floor provide enough
human drama to make THE ABYSS more than just a technical achievement.
   After all is said and done, THE ABYSS is not Cameron's strongest work. 
The film really doesn't break that much new ground.  Its mystical feeling
is too reminiscent of 2001, and its climax makes me wonder if THE ABYSS
should have been called "Close Encounters of the Sub-Oceanic Kind." 
Without the spiritual and extraterrestrial nonsense, THE ABYSS would have
worked splendidly as a straightforward survival thriller.  Even so, it
remains a complex, challenging must-see for adventure fans, one that will
leave your ears ringing, your heart pumping, and your head spinning.
NOTE:  THE ABYSS (1993 Special Edition):  ***1/2

Author
Mike Watson
This reviewer is ignorant of what hands were responsible for
delivering the original version of THE ABYSS in 1989.  Whether it was
the meddling of studio executives, or the work of writer/director
James Cameron himself, the original cut of this underwater sci-fi
thriller was entertaining enough but also quite seriously flawed.  The
main problem was fairly simple: the film's climax was unworthy of its
build-up.
Someone at 20th Century Fox - and no doubt Cameron himself - must have
agreed, because in 1993 came the theatrical release of THE ABYSS: 
SPECIAL EDITION.  Now available on video, it seems timely to
re-evaluate what, in its newly revamped state, is now a
near-masterpiece despite its borrowings from films like 2010: ODYSSEY
TWO, ALIEN and CLOSE ENCOUNTERS OF THIRD KIND.
The plot is thus.  We meet the crew of an experimental underwater
mobile oil rig designed by the hard-nosed Lindsay (Mastrantonio) and
captained by her soon-to-be-divorced husband Bud (Ed Harris).  The rig
and its crew are diverted from their normal duties when the Navy seeks
their help in investigating the mysterious sinking of a U.S. nuclear
submarine.  Requiring a dive part-way down a three mile deep trench,
three Navy divers arrive to command the operation, led by the edgy
Lieutenant Coffey (Biehn).  But a series of strange sightings soon
convinces at least one member of the civilian crew that whoever or
whatever they're dealing with, as she memorably puts it, "aren't
speaking Russian".
Meanwhile on the surface a hurricane is brewing and, even worse, a
series of incidents around Cuba involving Russians ships and an
increasingly nervous U.S. Navy sets off an international crisis of
possible catastrophic proportions.  This crisis is mirrored in the
confines of the now isolated underwater rig, with the trigger-happy
and increasingly paranoid Lieutenant Coffey at odds with the crew
about how do deal with the mysterious goings-on around them.  The
human drama is often riveting, with the principal players performing
with an intensity that recalls the fine ensemble acting in Cameron's
ALIENS.
The stunts, hardware, special effects and underwater cinematography
are all outstanding.   And so they should be: Cameron's technical
credentials are well established.  But what ultimately makes the film
so gripping is three intersecting plot strands: 1) the tension between
old sparring partners Lindsay and ex-hubby Bud;  2) the war of wills
between the civilian crew and the Navy divers as a series of
escalating crisis' befall them; and 3) the slowly unfolding revelation
of what lies at the bottom of the three mile deep abyss.
THE ABYSS: SPECIAL EDITION is an improvement on the original film in
two major respects.  One is that it further fleshes out the
relationship between Bud and Lindsay, a relationship at times
touching, at others incredibly intense and volatile.  The second
improvement is the restoration of some absolutely crucial scenes
towards the film's end, when the aliens demonstrate their control over
water with a terrifying and extraordinary display of power to a world
on the brink of nuclear war.  With the inclusion of these startling
scenes, the story's climax is now given real weight.  Why on earth
were they left out of the original?  This reviewer finds it utterly
incomprehensible.
So then, we have 25 minutes of additional footage that's turned a
decent underwater thriller into something quite magnificent.  I say
"quite" because some flaws do remain.   The most grating is several
moments of corny Hollywood schmaltz - some new, some old - that may
well have you reaching for the barf bag.
Nonetheless, THE ABYSS: SPECIAL EDITION now stands this somewhat
maligned film among James Cameron's greatest achievements, alongside
ALIENS and TERMINATOR 2.  See it and be moved, gripped and spellbound.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  A science fiction and adventure film
     that just misses a +4 rating.  Alistair-MacLean-type action
     combines with 2001-type vision to make a whale of a film that
     blows BATMAN right out of the water.  Rating:  high +3.  If
     only it had more interesting science fiction ideas.
     [Note:  THE ABYSS is a fairly long film at 140 minutes.  Enough happens
that it would be impossible to say much about the film without revealing a
surprise or two.  I will try to keep my comments general enough to avoid
marring the enjoyment, at least for some one who has seen other reviews--
still, I wouldn't want to read what follows before seeing the film.]
     THE ABYSS has two kinds of scenes: exciting scenes where suspense is
building and exciting scenes where there is slam-bang action.  And they must
have about equal screen time.  As such, it may well out-Lucas the "Star
Wars" films.  In style most of the film resembles less fantasy films than
films in the Alistair MacLean tradition.  In fact, embedded in this long
film is really a normal-length MacLeanesque adventure that would not even be
science fiction.  Not that MacLean adventures are not somewhat far-fetched
themselves.  And like a MacLean film THE ABYSS is not above throwing in the
occasional far-fetched coincidence to keep the story going.  But the pacing
and adventure-plotting are reminiscent of a film such as THE GUNS OF
NAVARONE or ICE STATION ZEBRA.  The action is not even delayed for opening
credits; the film starts under a single opening title and we cut directly to
the action.  The U. S. S. Montana, a nuclear submarine, has picked up
something unusual on sonar: a very fast-moving craft.  They see it
accelerate to over 130 knots before the sub is physically grasped by
something.  They are freed, but not in time to avoid piling into the edge of
the Cayman Trench.  A team of civilian divers from a nearby oil driller is
brought in by the Navy to try to rescue any survivors.  The chief diver is
Bud Brigman (played by Ed Harris), a strong-willed commander in the process
of divorcing the designer of the drilling facility, Lindsey Brigman (played
by Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio).  The antagonistic couple, a team of four
Navy SEALS, and the divers go to the site of the downed sub.  But there is
something else there, an apparent intelligence--perhaps alien, perhaps
indigenous--that is watching the mission with marked curiosity.
     The script of THE ABYSS shows definite James Cameron touches.
Cameron's films usually feature strong, intelligent, self-reliant women and
never more so than in THE ABYSS with its character of Lindsey Brigman.  The
dialog is crisp, but also very humanizing.  As usual, Cameron's heroes are
common, blue-collar types.
     One of the virtues of a good science fiction film can be to make
technology comprehensible.  THE ABYSS uses state-of-the-art technology--such
as recently developed breathable fluid that will allow exploration of
greater depths.  It also required new technology to be developed simply to
allow the film to be made.  In this category are diving masks designed to
let the camera see who is behind the mask, but which coincidentally also
allow a much wider field of vision for the divers than previously available.
     Like BATMAN, this film also had a large budget and was kept very much
under wraps until its release.  BATMAN turned out to be a film that was
visually fascinating, but which short-changed the story elements.  THE ABYSS
is rumored to have a pricetag of $43 million and, unlike in BATMAN, there
are no big-name stars to soak up large pieces of the budget--or rather there
is one, but it is the Atlantic Ocean, and shooting underwater made the film
much more complex to produce.
     As with any major film that has been kept under wraps, THE ABYSS has
generated a certain amount of rumor.  One rumor on the positive side is that
Hugo-winning science fiction author Orson Scott Card participated strongly
in the scripting.  He supposedly was on the set to ask the actors, "Ignoring
the script, what would you do in this plot situation?"  The next morning the
revised script would have the character doing just what the actor wanted.
And Card would add his own science fiction influence so that it is at least
claimed that THE ABYSS ranks with THINGS TO COME and 2001 for the degree of
participation of a science fiction author in determining plot.  A second and
more negative rumor is that the life form was much better explained in the
pre-release (and in Card's novelization) but that the film was cut by 25
minutes, down to 140, to make it more marketable.  In the cut the real logic
of what is happening was considered to be the dispensable portion.  (This is
strongly rumored to be what happened to the film HIGHLANDER, also from
Twentieth Century Fox.)  Cameron denies that any logic was cut from the film
and says instead that where Card's book varies, it is purely Card's
invention.
     But even as it stands, THE ABYSS is one of the best science fiction
film ever made.  This remains true in spite of a rather superficial
treatment of the some of the science fiction elements.  It is very much a
2001 with all the slowish parts replaced by a good fast-paced adventure
film.  It is entertaining, educational, and exciting, and has compelling
(albeit manipulative at times) drama.  All it lacks is a sufficiently
engaging concept.  Perhaps that was left on the cutting room floor, perhaps
not.  I would give it a high +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.  It could not do much
better than that.
