Title
Review for Grumpy Old Men (1993)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
James Berardinelli
     Sometimes the films I enjoy the most aren't the ones I give a 9
to.  For example, while FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE (to which I gave a 9.5)
is an example of superior, powerful film making, this isn't a movie to
be enjoyed for the pure magic of the entertainment that it brings.
GRUMPY OLD MEN, on the other hand, is such a film, and while it won't
come close to my top 10 best list for 1993, it will be right up there
among the pictures that I had the most fun watching.
     John Gustafson (Jack Lemmon) and Max Goldman (Walter Matthau) have
been neighbors since they were kids, and the feud between them has
lasted almost as long.  A state of uneasy coexistence is in place, with
namecalling and practical jokes being common activities.  Their rivalry
turns more serious, however, when both of them become interested in the
new neighbor across the street.  Ariel (Ann-Margaret) is vivacious,
beautiful, and alluring, and both John and Max find themselves
smitten.
     While not without its problems (some of which are readily
apparent), GRUMPY OLD MEN works more often than it doesn't.  It's an
example of a frothy, good-natured holiday picture that adults can relax
and enjoy.  As a comedy, the movie is an unqualified success, with
enough fresh humor to keep the laughs coming.  Dramatically, however,
things aren't as impressive.  The attempts of GRUMPY OLD MEN to tackle
a few serious themes come across as inoffensive but trite.  There are
formulas at work here, and anyone admitting to be surprised by the
"plot twists" should hang his or her head in shame.
     Fortunately, drama always plays second fiddle to comedy, and this
is a very funny motion picture--surely one of the most consistently
amusing of the year.  There's everything from slapstick to puns, with a
lot of clever audio and visual gags.  Witness Jack Lemmon and Walter
Matthau's "performances" to the song "I'm too Sexy", Lemmon's send-up
of Macaulay Culkin's aftershave scream from HOME ALONE, and the little
dance number Lemmon does in his underwear.
     The most amusing part of the film arrives at the least expected
moment: during the end credits, which appear over a series of
outtakes.  These are real gems, especially the final one (which
features Walter Matthau in a bathtub and occurs at the very end of the
credits).  This is one time when it's worth staying for the entire
film.
     Lemmon and Matthau are perfect for their roles as lifelong
sparring partners, and while the development of John and Max as
individuals is lacking, their relationship is brought into sharp
focus.  Of course, the pair are no strangers to this sort of interplay,
having done it several times before, most memorably in THE ODD COUPLE.
This is an example of perfect casting, as is the choice of Burgess
Meredith as the tough- talking, dirty-minded patriarch of the Gustafson
family.
     Ann-Margaret is adequate as the catalyst of the newest phase in
the Gustafson/Goldman feud, giving an energetic but not particularly
memorable performance.  Likewise, Kevin Pollack and Daryl Hannah are
kept in the background and saddled with poorly-written characters whose
functions are minimal (to her credit, Ms. Hannah does a pretty decent
job with her material, and her unexpected competence caught me off
guard).  Ossie Davis, consummate professional that he is, takes a minor
role and turns it into something special.
     Most of those that attend a showing of GRUMPY OLD MEN will leave
the theater with a smile on their face, which is basically what the
movie is going for.  The relatively unsuccessful dramatic elements,
which are overly-sentimental and hamstrung by a too-pat resolution, are
a small price to pay for everything else.  This film joins recent
productions such as THE CEMETERY CLUB and USED PEOPLE in delivering a
more "mature" romantic comedy (i.e., one featuring older actors).
However, where both of those films came across as rather hollow
efforts, GRUMPY OLD MEN has enough vitality to see it through the thin
spots.
     I can't think of many better ways to spend the holiday season than
with John Gustafson and Max Goldman.  They may be irascible and
stubborn, but they're a lot of fun--as long as you don't have to eat
dinner with them.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
James Hursey
     The film GRUMPY OLD MEN has been around a while but I have
deliberately avoided seeing it.  I suspected that it would simply be
another two-hour long, boring-after-the-first-five-minutes joke at the
expense of not just men, but of older men, and, for that matter, in
this case, of older men who happen not to have permanently sunny
dispositions.
     However, the video is now available and at my wife's insistence we
rented it, and I can say, after watching the film, that my worst
expectations were confirmed.
     But what was worse than being proven right was that apparently the
film was not simply meant to be funny, but was deliberately and
calculatingly meant to be derogatory and insulting to the title group.
     Now I like a joke as well as anyone and we can say that it was all
in fun, just a comedy to give us a few laughs in this generally not
very funny world.  And it may also be true that producers don't have a
lot of groups they can laugh at anymore so old men, particularly grumpy
ones, may be the only people left.
     Political correctness demands that we not make light of women,
ethnic groups, children (unless they are disgustingly precocious
brats), animals or spotted owls; that we respect the sensibilities of
those who are different, unfortunate or simply scarce.  Yet somehow it
is still okay to make fun of old men who, often, are all three.  With
the success of GOM, can we expect a spate of films on this subject
until such time as older males raise their voices, start protesting,
and picket a few theatres?
     Now obviously all humor, by definition, is at someone or
something's expense.  We cannot have jokes unless there is something to
joke about.  Not only old men but sex, too, is another of the few
things left that everybody still seems to think is funny.  So combine
them and you have the running joke throughout the film, which might
have been somewhat humorous the first time but got stale rather
quickly, about older men's supposed impotence.
     It is all simply a further demonstration of the age-as-decline
mystique that is the topic of Betty Friedan's book The Fountain of
Age:  the mistaken perception that old people are necessarily in mental
and physical decline, old people can't have sex, old people are
irascible, idle and by implication useless.  This, at bottom, is the
theme of the film.
     Why do you suppose the sport of fishing, among the many
possibilities, was chosen as the two retired protagonists' principle
time-filling activity? It was done with due thought and deliberation
because they wanted to show that these men were basically incapable of
doing anything other than fish or fight.  Walter Matthau's character,
when asked what he does, responds, rather gruffly, "I fish."  That's
all.  No explanation, no hint of joy, not even a rationalization of the
pleasures that fishing can, for many, give.  Fishing is really the only
thing we ever see them doing other than fighting with each other.
     Now I hope all those serious fishermen out there will not get too
upset, but I think most will have to admit that aside from a long
difficult struggle reeling in a swordfish in deep ocean water, or
spending a day casting flies in a remote mountain stream, neither of
which many fishermen get a chance to do, the vast majority of fishing
consists of sitting in a boat or on the shore (or, as in the movie, an
ice fishing shack), with a cooler of beer, a can of bait and simply
waiting for the bobber to jump.  Occasionally the line is pulled in,
re-baited, dropped back in the water and the fisherman sits back with
another cold one.  Not by any stretch of the imagination, a physically
or mentally challenging pursuit.
     Done this way, fishing is an activity with little other purpose
than to fill empty time, which, if that is one's purpose, it does
admirably, akin to sitting on a park bench feeding the squirrels and
pigeons.  Now, fishermen, vent your wrath at the producers who
exploited your sport in such a negative way, not at me.  I have dropped
a line myself occasionally and admit it can be a pleasant and relaxing
recreation.  But one of the points of the film was that these old men
(and we see a whole lake full of them just to make sure we get the
point) are clearly not enjoying it; they just sit there glumly,
drinking, bickering, staring into space as if the lake were just one
big frozen nursing home for the hopelessly senile.  Other than when the
younger woman catches the big fish, we see no one taking joy in the
sport.
     I submit that a similar film called GROUCHY OLD LADIES could never
be made or at least would never be as successful or considered as funny
as this one was because women would now allow it.  Feminists are much
more successful and united in protecting the image of their sex than
men are.  The very idea of "masculinists" is ridiculous.
     There would be nothing very funny about older women portrayed as
aged, half-decrepit, totally idle, with nothing to do but bicker,
fight, and, the equivalent of fishing, gossiping over a game of
bridge.  If such are shown in films they have never been, at least
recently, to my knowledge, since the age of liberation, as the butt of
an on-going, two-hour long joke.
     We get a bit of a sop at the end, of course, with the Jack Lemmon
character marrying the sexy neighbor.  But note how the scene was
rather abruptly and gratuitously thrown in.  They had milked the stale
joke as long as they could and figured they had better have an upbeat
ending or people might begin to see what they were really up to.  And,
anyway, the upbeat part amounted to about two minutes of the entire
film.  This is a further insult since it assumes the viewer would know
no better.
     I suppose one might start a movement, something on the order of
"old men of the world, unite!" but I don't think it would work.
OMOTWU!  Nah, just doesn't have a ring to it.  Guess I'm just getting
old and grumpy.  Think I'll go fishing.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Jack Lemmon, Walter Matthau, Ann-Margret, Kevin Pollak,
           Daryl Hannah, Ossie Davis, Burgess Meredith.
Screenplay:  Mark Steven Johnson.
Director:  Donald Petrie.
     In a sense, there's really not all that much to say about a movie
like GRUMPY OLD MEN.  It's the kind of movie one generally describes
with somewhat faint-praise adjectives like "cute," or "fun," or
"entertaining."  GRUMPY OLD MEN is all of these things, to a point.
There are a couple of belly laughs, but there's not much genuine
spark.  For all its manufactured whimsy, GRUMPY OLD MEN is basically a
sit-com, a moderately diverting 105-minute episode of "The Golden
Boys."
     The GRUMPY OLD MEN of the title are John Gustafson (Jack Lemmon)
and Max Goldman (Walter Matthau), 50-year acquaintances and next-door
neighbors in Wabasha, MN who carry on a long-standing feud.  John
throws fish into Max's back seat; Max changes John's television
channels with his remote control.  However, their bickering takes a
turn for the even worse when Ariel Truax (Ann-Margret) moves in across
the street.  The beautiful and spirited Airel attracts the attention of
both men, but neither is brave enough to make the first move.  So when
Ariel makes the first move--for both of them--old animosities are
stirred to the boiling point.
     GRUMPY OLD MEN opens with a great deal of promise.  For one thing,
it's simply a pleasure to see Lemmon and Matthau together again.  They
have little trouble creating the impression that their characters have
known each other for years, slipping easily into the good-natured
antagonism that fueled THE ODD COUPLE, THE FRONT PAGE and BUDDY BUDDY.
Matthau is particularly fun to watch, an ear-flapped hunting cap
comically framing his basset hound face.  The trouble is that they're
not given all that much to do besides call each other "moron" and
"putz."  There are a few nice bits of physical humor, notable Lemmon
spraying Matthau with a garden hose and Matthau taking an ax to a foot
of ice in a futile attempt to retrieve his prized ice-fishing pole.
But for the most part GRUMPY OLD MEN just strolls along, apparently
convinced that we're so comfortable with the actors that we'll find
anything they do amusing.
     The other characterizations in GRUMPY OLD MEN are wildly uneven.
On the plus side is Ann-Margret, who is positively luminous.  She's
perfect for the role of Ariel, radiating a joie de vivre which would
clearly be appealing to the two icy septugenarians.  There is a
marvelous warmth to her scenes with Lemmon and Matthau, and I was sorry
that her part wasn't even larger.  Ossie Davis, as a bait shop owner
who has put up with the bickering of John and Max for decades, is also
good.  On the down side is Burgess Meredith as Lemmon's father, playing
a male version of Estelle Getty's Sophia from "The Golden Girls."  He
appears briefly for the express purpose of being cantankerous and
sexually suggestive, once again proving that it's supposed to be funny
that older people think about sex, too.  One of the script's bigger
disappointments is a tacked-on relationship between Kevin Pollak and
Daryl Hannah, playing Max's son and Lemmon's daughter respectively.
Their characters don't serve much purpose, and while both actors are
very appealing, I couldn't figure out what the point was.  The time
spent on their flirtations would have been time better spent making
John and Max fuller characters.
     GRUMPY OLD MEN does nothing to offend overtly.  The photography of
the snow-covered Minnesota town is bright and atmospheric, particularly
the ice-fishing village; Alan Silvestri adds a cheerful if somewhat
pedestrian score.  There are enough chuckles in the film to make it a
decent matinee diversion, but overall GRUMPY OLD MEN relies far too
much on the history between Lemmon and Matthau, and far too little on
anything particularly clever in Mark Steven Johnson's script.

Author
Sarah M. Elkins
PLOT/KICK-OFF:  A free-spirited teacher moves in across the street from
two old guys with an old feud, inspiring them to woo her and play dirty
tricks on each other.  The plot is a little contrived in a few places.
CHARACTERS/ACTING: Jack Lemmon plays John Gustafson, a retired teacher
alone except for his daughter (Daryl Hannah) and nasty neighbor Max
(Walter Matthau).  John's relationship with his daughter is a bit
strained, but Max gets along fine with his son (Kevin Pollack), who
tries to keep the guys from getting out of hand while campaigning for
mayor.  Ann-Margaret plays Ariel, the new neighbor.
VIOLENCE/GORE/LANGUAGE:  Some of the insults and sexual euphemisms are
a bit crude, but didn't seem out of character for those who said them.
One fight, but everyone's well-padded in winter clothes.
SKIN/SITUATIONS:   A kiss and Ann-Margaret in a leotard is the most we
see; more is suggested.
ANALYSIS:  The comedy in this movie is mostly, but not completely,
derived from the feud.  It ranges from insults to simple slapstick to
some tricks with clever set-ups.  Refreshingly, the movie doesn't
depend on a lot of pop-culture references to show how hip it is, and it
takes some time to develop its characters subtly instead of firing off
10 jokes a minute in the hopes that one will stick.  I'm a big fan of
Jack Lemmon so it's to be expected that I would like it as much as I
did  -- nice to see him in an entertaining comedy for once, instead of
all these deathly serious things he's done lately -- but my friend who
saw it with me is not a big fan and she laughed as much as I did.  If
you can roll your eyes to get past some of the crudities and
contrivances, you might enjoy this simple, unpretentious little
comedy.
- Sarah Elkins (elkins.wbst139@xerox.com)

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The town of Wabasha, Minnesota, has seen for years the battle of two
now crotchety next-door neighbors, friends from youth and at the same time
enemies since not long after.  John (Jack Lemmon) and Max (Walter Matthau)
seem to live to play nasty jokes on each other.  In their 70s, there now is
little in either's lives but watching television, ice fishing, and
tormenting the other.  Then a likable, sexy kook moves in across the street.
Now the two old men have a new activity, stairing out the window at Ariel
(Ann-Margaret).  And they have a new conquest to be rivals for.  Ariel is
someone who lives life rather than retreating from it the way John and Max
do.  Ariel is like a mystical force in Max and John's lives.  Her presence
in Wabasha is never very well explained, nor is what she lives on, nor even
her interest in Max and John.  But her presence will transform them.
     Jack Lemmon and Walter Matthau are almost a classic comedy team after
THE ODD COUPLE, THE FORTUNE COOKIE, and THE FRONT PAGE.  But director Donald
Petrie seems at a loss as to how to tap into that comic potential.  The
fault is not his and is certainly not his actors' but that of a poorly
written screenplay by Mark Steven Johnson.  At its best, the screenplay
makes palatable some trite points about living life and taking risks.  But
the film indulges itself too much in showing old men cussing and using
sexually explicit language as if that was in itself supposed to be
hilarious.  Actually we get to see that Lemmon and Matthau really do have a
chemistry together still as we see them joking with each other in the
outtakes run under the final credits.  But when the cameras were rolling for
real and they had to follow Johnson's script, somehow all the chemistry
evaporates.  Petrie did much better with MYSTIC PIZZA a much more keenly
observed regional comedy.
     GRUMPY OLD MEN is over-powered with a very good cast who just are not
needed in the parts they have gotten.  At 52 Ann-Margaret is starting to
lose her figure but little of her appeal.  And in addition somewhere along
the way she has learned to act to the point I would almost classify her as
under-appreciated.  Burgess Meredith is incredibly wasted as a foul-mouthed
nonagenarian.  Daryl Hannah and Ossie Davis are around in smaller parts than
they deserve and ones they should have let go to less familiar actors.
     GRUMPY OLD MEN is a very fluffy film people who think it is funny to
see old men fighting like children and repeatedly calling each other "putz"
and "moron."  If you list ten crises that old men might face, two of them
will probably be in this film.  This one has a moment or two, but the rest
fails to click.  I give it a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Most people should be able to find better things to do than 
spend two hours hearing 80-year-old hemorrhoid sufferers yell "Eat 
my shorts!" at each other. That's pretty much the maturity level of 
this movie. After all, what could you expect Walter Matthau to 
follow DENNIS THE MENACE with? The sad part is, though, I 
actually found a lot of this amusing.
        GRUMPY OLD MEN consists of Walter and Jack Lemmon 
hurling childish insults at each other and pulling equally childish 
pranks. Over the course of your two lucky hours watching this 
movie (which hopefully you didn't pay $7.50 to see), you'll see 
Matthau sink Lemmon's icehouse, Lemmon put a fish in Matthau's 
car, Matthau arrange for a giant mound of snow to fall on Lemmon's 
head, Lemmon cancel Matthau's social security, etc. This movie 
may make the nation's opinion of the elderly fall even lower than 
the Medic Alert commercial ("I've fallen... and I can't get up!") 
did.
        Then, midway through the movie, the plot shifts as 
Lemmon and Matthau make a bet on which one can bed Ann 
Margret first. That's got to be more than any sane individual can 
take. But if you stick around for the closing credits, you'll hear a 
90-year-old Burgess Meredith's colorful euphimisms for sex. Oh, 
great. Nothing seems more funny to me than the "horny old man" 
stereotype saying things like, "Looks like he's about to take the 
skin boat to tuna town." Maybe euthanasia's not as cruel as we 
thought...
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
