Title
Review for Golem, Le (1936)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     To start with, what is a golem?  It is a statue that has been brought
to life by mystical means.  The Bible claims that God created man by
bringing the dust of the earth together and breathing life into it.  Legend
has it that God can be invoked to do it again by special Ceremonies, though
the formula is imperfect and the resulting Artificial human will lackthe
power of speech.  FRANKENSTEIN was inspired by golem legends.  The most
famous golem story is of the Golem of Prague, brought to life to protect the
Jewish community.  Films about golems are unusual though there had been two
made in Germany previously starring Paul Wegener.  One of them is a lost
film, but the other is considered a classic.  Since that film was made a
tide of anti-Semitism had risen in Germany.  In 1935 the Nuremburg Laws
institutionalizing German state anti-Semitism.  About the same time afilm,
a French and Czech co-production, was being made with veiled anti-German and
not so veiled pro-Jewish sentiments, THE GOLEM.  The film has interest as a
political document as well as a fantasy film.  For many years this has been
a rare film, but this year it is starting to become available on videotape.
     The time is the 17th Century in Prague.  Rabbi Loew, who createdthe
Golem is dead, but Rudolf II is still emperor.  The troubled Jewish
community is now led by the young Rabbi Jacob, student and friend of the
late Rabbi Loew.  Rudolf's tolerance of the Jewish community has lasted
about as long as the life of Loew.  Now he is reinstituting persecution
albeit warily.  His dreams are still troubled with visitations of theGolem
and he will not rest easy until he possesses it and is sure the Jews cannot
reanimate it.  He is willing to torture and kill to get his hands on the
magical statue.  All his attempts to confiscate it fail until one night it
just appears in his palace, still stone-like and inanimate.  With theGolem
under his thumb, the Rudolf safely returns to persecution.
     Except for the metaphor of its politics, and perhaps not even that at
the time, this is not a film of extreme subtlety.  The filmmakers were
primarily interested in getting their idea across.  The feeding of Jews to
lions is probably anachronistic, but it is an image that the audiences could
probably find meaningful.  The writers obviously felt very strongly about
the film's message and was neither shy nor particularly subtle about
expressing that message.  When somebody tries to warn the Jews "Your
brothers are in the hands of murderers" it is clear that the message is
meant for more than the characters in the film.  When the Emperor calls
himself a friend of Jews while torturing one the analogy may break down
slightly--at least the Nazis admitted their motives toward the Jews--but
still it is clear that it is another dig at the Third Reich.  The burning of
the Jewish ghetto also seems to be a very contemporary image in the film.
The motto of the film, often repeated, is "revolt is the right of a slave."
The French filmmakers do not say the French will come to the Jews' aid if
they revolt, but it definitely affirms their right.
     Julien Duvivier directed the film as a somewhat fancy costume drama,
perhaps to attract a wider audience in the bleak days of the late thirties
in Europe.  In a golem film, of course one of the main considerationsis the
design of the Golem itself.  Ferdinand Hart is perhaps one of the least
imaginative visualizations.  It looks more or less like a statue of alarge
bald man.  The reasons for toning down the horrific aspect of the Golem are
again likely to be political.  If the film is supposed to instill a sense of
solidarity with the Jews, it would not make sense to have them be the
creators of monsters.  The script then seems intentionally to build suspense
about the appearance of the Golem.  He is not shown on-screen until well
into the plot and only at the end of a suspenseful sequence of a nighttime
walk through the big empty palace.  Disorientation and insecurity on the
part of the emperor are often created with a tilted camera.
     Harry Baur as the emperor is goggle-eyed and insecure.  He was at the
time a familiar actor, I believe.  Charles Dorat as Rabbi Jacob is young and
handsome but his performance is not particularly inspired.  Finally there is
Ferdinand Hart in the title role as the mystical statue.  What can you say
about a role that for most of the film requires you to stand absolutely
still, then in the inevitable climax for this sort of film suddenly in the
final reel turns into Machiste.  The role requires more broad shoulders than
depth.
     I would say that the film is less a work of art and more a piecewith
some entertainment and an artifact of a dramatic period of history.
Nevertheless, as someone with a particular interest in golem legends I am
very pleased to see this particular film, usually only available at campus
showings, now on videotape.
