Title
Review for Breaking the Waves (1996)
Number of Reviews
16

Author
Chad Polenz
Breaking The Waves
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair)
1996, R, 159 minutes [2 hours, 39 minutes]
[drama]
starring: Emily Watson (Bess), Stellan Skarsgard (Jan), Katrin Cartlidge
(Dodo), Adrian Rawlins (Dr. Richardson), written by Peter Asmussen, David
Pirie, Lars von Trier, produced by Peter Aalbaek Jensen, Vibeke Windeloev,
directed by Lars von Trier.
        I like independent movies, but lately they have become such brutal
depictions of humanity they're too emotionally exhausting to appreciate.
"Breaking The Waves" is a good example of this. It certainly has an original
premise, but the elements that make up this premise and tell the story are so
strange it's hard to see as a thematic love story, but as an exploitation of
its characters.
        Basically, this is another story of true love, but it's forbidden love so
that automatically makes it good - right? Here our lovers are the
simple-minded Scottish girl Bess (Watson), and the huge-but-tender Danish oil
rigger Jan (Skarsgard). The first hour does a fine job in establishing the
passion they have for each other. But here is where the film's first and
biggest flaw becomes evident: it mistakes horniness for love. Yes, you can
tell Bess and Jan do love each other, but why not show how the two met and
fell in love rather than showing them as newlyweds? Communication is the key
to a good relationship but there are few scenes of interactive dialogue here,
so you really have to wonder what their relationship is based on.
        The first act also establishes the rigid religious society in which the
story takes place. Bess loves God and the church as much as she knows how to,
but she is somewhat mentally challenged, almost schizophrenic at times. She
seems to have a split personality when she engages in conversations between
herself and "God" (or what she thinks God would say). It's hard to tell just
how seriously this is supposed to be taken considering Bess's mindset and the
strict, orthodox community she has grown up in. The film should only use one
of these extremes or the other, using both is trying way too hard to depict
Bess as an innocent victim in a cruel, hypocritical world.
        Eventually something happens in terms of plot when Jan goes away to work but
is involved in a serious accident. Bess is devasted when she hears this, but
is relieved because now she can be with him again despite the fact he may be
paralyzed for life. Here is where the strange film starts to become rather
twisted: Jan knows he'll never be able to experience physical love with Bess
again, so he asks her to find someone else to do it with and pretend it's him
and then to tell him about it, that way they can remember what it's like to
love each other and that feeling of love is what will "save" Jan from dying.
        Most religions say the physical act of love is the closest two people can
get to each other and express their love, but the way it is symbolized here
seems almost perverted. Bess believes she will be "honoring thy husband" by
doing what he asked, and in turn, following God's word and sacrificing
herself as Christ did for her. Now maybe I'm way off, but isn't adultery a
sin? Considering the Amish-like society, I find it impossible to believe none
of the characters realize this (especially Bess!). When Bess's sister Dodo
(Cartlidge), and Jan's doctor, Dr. Richardson (Rawlins) learn of their plan
they say it is wrong but not why or what basis it's wrong. 
        I'm not sure what von Trier is trying to say with this film. The story is
told in such a way that the deal between Bess and Jan is neither condoned nor
condemmed. This is supposed to be a character study to see just how far and
how much a person would do if they really love someone. How can we appreciate
Bess's feelings and the things she does if she can't really be held
accountable for what she does? If there's any reason the film fails it's not
because of the premise but because of the slow, boring, uninteresting
storytelling. 
        What also kept me from enjoying the film was the production itself. The
entire film was shot using a hand-held camera which wouldn't have been a
problem if every shot hadn't been so close up. Every time the camera moves
suddenly and/or quickly I became disoriented, sometimes nauesous. The film is
also edited in a choppy manner with no smooth transition from shot to shot
and scene to scene, even individual shots themselves are assembled poorly.
        It's hard to see "Breaking The Waves" as a modern tale of "The Ultimate
Love." You have to give it credit for the chances it takes, as it is a fine,
offbeat character study if nothing else (the acting is superb - I'll have to
admit it). Still, it puts the wrong characters in the wrong situations to
attempt for a theme of grand proportions, and it really doesn't have the
right to.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
Christopher Roberson
"Breaking the Waves" was one of the most highly praised films of 1996,
on many different critics' top 10 lists. I had been unable to see the
film in theaters, and was pleased when it became available on video. My
eagerness to see it, however, rapidly turned to a sense of betrayal. It
turned out to be a cheesy melodrama coated with a thick layer of
"artistic" film techniques that rendered it virtually unwatchable. I
have never been so disappointed after seeing a critics' favorite, and I
think the widespread praise it has received needs to be answered with a
dissenting opinion. 
Earlier reviews typically provide the basic plot outline, so I'll skip
that task. I do reveal some plot secrets, though. I appreciate that some
readers may not yet have seen the film, so I have placed the
plot-revealing paragraph at the end of the review, flagged in advance. 
I'll move (roughly) from the film's best features to its worst. Clearly,
its strongest suit is acting. Emily Watson deserved all the praise she
received for her outstanding portrayal of Bess MacNeil, a slow-witted
young Scottish woman who lives in an appallingly backward fishing village.
Whatever else may be problematic about the film, at least this character
stands out as fully-conceived and memorable. Also, a word of praise for
Stellan Skarsgard, who plays Bess's husband Jan: he takes a severely
underwritten role (his character has about ten lines total) and gives a
sense of the character's presence and good humor.
I suspect that some critics were impressed by how well Watson took
advantage of the histrionic opportunities provided by this role (which
called for vomiting, screaming, eye-rolling, and stagey monologues where
Bess talks to God, speaking for both herself and The Lord). But I think
that Watson comes off well _despite_ the way her role is written: she
took a scenery-chewing, meatball role and made the character convincing
when it might have been just silly and overwrought. My only major
reservation about the performance is her ripe, overdone faux-Scottish
accent.
The production techniques also deserve some praise, for inventiveness at
least. After being filmed on standard film stock, the image was
transferred to video and then back to film. This produces a grainy,
washed-out effect, devoid of bright colors or sharp outlines. Although the
effect becomes wearisome, for a while it is striking. One is reminded of
archival footage from some poverty-stricken Eastern European country, or
the murkiness of the images in many of Fassbinder's films.
It seems likely that the director, Lars von Trier, was influenced by
Fassbinder in more respects than his cinematography. His screenplay is
like some of Fassbinder's, but unfortunately not in a good way. Von
Trier seems to have seized on Fassbinder's use of melodrama while
missing everything else that makes Fassbinder worth watching.
Melodramatic elements are only worth retaining in a work of art if they
are handled with sublety, or at least critical distance. Fassbinder was
able to pull this off; von Trier doesn't even come close. Many reviews
praised the film's "exploration of ideas" (such as the meaning and
limits of love and the forms of religious devotion). But the "ideas" in
_Breaking the Waves_ could probably be expressed in about three
sentences. (Three brief sentences, using words of one syllable.) 
Part of the problem is created by the strength and uniqueness of its
central character, Bess. She is such an unusual character that many of
the film's themes seem tied to her particular circumstances, and
difficult to extend to normal people in any convincing way. But the main
problem is that most of the characterization is thin and unconvincing.
The film is dedicated to telling us how deeply Bess loves Jan, and to
what depths she is willing to sink in her devotion to him. It tells us
these things, but it never tells us _why_. Bess loves Jan more deeply
than anything else, and presumably that's because he is special in some
way; but as far as the audience is concerned, Jan is two-dimensional,
hard to distinguish from any of the other young male characters. What
attracted her to him initially? Why did she fall so deeply in love with
him? We never really know. Von Trier doesn't bother to develop Jan's
character or the relationship between Jan and Bess. He seems to have
thought that long, explicit sex scenes were sufficient; but they're not.
The superficiality of the script becomes more evident as the film
proceeds. Astonishingly, some critics seemed to think that von Trier was
making a brave statement about sex and love: but his statements are
hackneyed, and he aims at easy targets. For instance, he boldly suggests
that the church elders of Bess's village, all dour, women-hating
Scottish Calvinists, might be wrong about sexual morality and what love
really means. When (since Hawthorne, anyway) has this been a shocking or
original idea? Who in the audience is likely to side with the church
elders? Who would side with them even if von Trier had tried to portray
them as anything other than dogmatic, cruel, and hateful?  For a film
that makes a point of "savaging the drab conformity of community life,"
there is absolutely no sense of community among these people -- after
the first ten minutes, I never had a sense that the villagers
related to each other in any way that wasn't directly intended to
advance the plot, usually by showing how repressed and judgmental
they were.
Even worse than the writing, though, is the cinematography. The director
chose to use only hand-held cameras. His aim seems to have been a
"cinema-verite feel," but any hint of cinematic realism is constantly
undercut by the framing, which includes numerous close-ups and
unconvincing camera angles which would never occur in actual cinema
verite. Far from being realistic, the camera is constantly calling
attention to itself, diverting attention from the actors.  One
constantly wonders whose perspective the camera work is supposed to
capture. Certainly not any of the film's characters. Not the camera
operator, either, since this isn't _real_ cinema verite, and the actors
never react as if there's a camera present. I'll also rule out the
audience, unless the director was trying to reach an audience of people
who suffer from neck spasms and tremor. Even scenes without any movement
or action never stand still, not for a second. 
And then there is the worst aspect of _Breaking the Waves_: the editing.
Von Trier's confused notions of cinematic "realism" led him to
include gratuitous cuts in the middle of static sequences, for no
apparent reason, while eliminating normal shift-of-perspective cuts in
other scenes. In the latter scenes, the hand-held camera follows the
action with quick, vertiginous pans. The effect, sadly, is not so much
realism as nausea. And even this pales when one considers the editing of
most of the individual scenes: slack, bombastic, intentionally "arty."
In almost every scene, Von Trier seems to have gone out of his way to
include tedious extra footage that no one could possibly care about. It
is this, above all, that makes _Breaking the Waves_ not just an
overwrought melodrama, but a 160-minute-long overwrought melodrama. 
I should probably repeat that this film is _two hours and forty minutes
long_, and it feels longer. Much longer. Much, much longer. It could
easily have been forty to sixty minutes shorter, simply by cutting out
extraneous scenes and editing the remaining ones less slackly. One
particularly grating element is the inclusion of long, unnecessary
"chapter title" sequences (complete with snippets of mediocre early-70s
pop songs), which serve both to break up the narrative flow and to drag
things out even more. 
If you are still interested in seeing the film, you may want to
stop reading at this point. 
One question that doesn't really fit anywhere else: what the hell
does the title mean? 
Although the plot is never particularly convincing, it completely
unravels in the last twenty minutes. It's bad enough that Jan recovers
miraculously from his paralysis after Bess martyrs herself. By golly,
she wasn't schizophrenic, she was Really Talking To God. (Perhaps this
was one of the "original, challenging ideas" critics mentioned?) But the
film tops itself with a jaw-droppingly literal, saccharine conclusion.
Early in the film, we are told that Bess's church has no bells; but Bess
remarks to a friend that she likes church bells. The final scene,
believe it or not, is of bells ringing miraculously in the open sky
above Jan's oil rig. We know that the bells are miraculous because we're
told that they don't show up on the rig's radar. Yes, that's right,
folks: God was on Bess's side the whole time, and now we have proof. 
What's particularly depressing is not so much that the film is bad.
What's depressing is that it was greeted with rave reviews. This leads
me to two pessimistic conclusions. One is that critics are far too
willing to overlook artistic bombast if they're captivated by a good
performance, or if the film has one or two more ideas than is typical.
The other is that von Trier can only have been encouraged by the
critical reaction, and is likely to produce something even worse next
time. At least when his next film comes out, I'll know in advance that I
should avoid it. 

Author
Martin Rich
In the 1970s, a closed, puritan, religious community in a remote part of
Scotland is transformed by the arrival of oil-workers from around the
world.  A young local woman falls in love with, and marries, a Norwegian
oil worker against the advice of the elders of the community.
Lars von Trier's film, Breaking the Waves, is the story of what happened
to this marriage - the husband is injured and, at his behest, his wife
searches for other men to have sex with.  Superficially this is a slight
story, but it has been made into an epic and powerful film.  Many of the
images are uncomfortable, especially of the stifling effect of the
closed community, and the ability of the village's elders to hurt a
family by ostracising its members.  If you are prepared for these
images, it is an excellent film which certainly deserves the awards that
it has received.
The styles of the 1970s were characterised by browns and oranges, and
the cinematography in 'Breaking the Waves' gives the scenery an orange
tint that somehow seems appropriate to the era.  Bess, the central
character played by Emily Watson, and Jan the husband played by Stellan
Skarsgaard, appear in the fashions of the 1970s and are in stark
contrast to other villagers whose appearance and lifestyle seem to have
changed little with the centuries.
Between the chapters there are short, beautiful, still shots of the
Scottish scenery, accompanied by music from the 1970s.  Between these
interludes there is little music - conveying the atmosphere of a place
where even the church bells have been removed because they are deemed
unnecessary.
The film is about the effect of an oppressive society, and about the
difficulties of a troubled person in finding a way to live their life. 
These difficulties are most graphically expressed in Bess's curious
dialogues with God, where she speaks both parts and is tortured by
whether her every move is going to earn God's favour.  It isn't
anti-religious, but condemns such a dour expression of religion that can
sentence a woman to silence because she dares to speak in church, and
allows its elders to consign a dead person to hell at their funeral.
Emily Watson's performance is remarkable for her range of emotion, and
her ability to convey the turmoil beneath a troubled exterior.  Also
very fine is the performance by Adrian Rawlins as the English doctor,
unfamiliar with the ways of the community, whose reaction to Bess moves
from professional concern, to support, to pure frustration.
It's rarely comfortable viewing, but an exceptional film nonetheless

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     BREAKING THE WAVES is an unusual and extremely compelling film set
in the remote north of Scotland.  It is set in a town long closed to
outsiders where life is ruled by a tight little group of church elders,
all male.  As the film progresses we find that stern Calvinist values
suffuse everyday life.  One of the loyal daughters of the church is
Bess (played by Emily Watson in an Oscar-worthy performance).  Bess is
a childlike woman with a strong abiding faith in God.  But her feelings
go beyond simple faith.  She has conversations with God, voicing both
parts and has formed God in the mold of the cold an unforgiving clique
who run the church.  Hers is a demanding and unforgiving God in this
world with all rewards postponed until the next.  But as the film
opens, God has made a rare exception to give His Bess something
wonderful.  A man has fallen in love with Bess.  True, Jan (played by
Stellan Skarsgard) is an outsider and the elders do not trust
outsiders.  Still, something has opened up in the quiet, mousy Bess and
she can pour out her love on a man.  Jan is a rough North Sea oil
driller, but Bess loves him with a fierceness that startles the people
of the village. But her happiness cannot last and after a week of
marriage, Jan must return to the rig.  To Bess any separation is
tragedy.  After missing Jan unbearably she makes a deal with God to
take whatever consequences to get Jan back.  Then as an apparent
fulfillment, Jan has a violent injury and is paralyzed and perhaps even
dying.  He is back to the village but unable to be with Bess in any but
the most superficial way.  Jan does not want to see Bess waste herself
devoted to a dying man.  He wants her to taste life and asks her to go
and make love to men and come back to tell him about it.  This request
sets in motion a series of unfortunate events and a storm of
conflicting emotions.
     This is the fifth feature film of Danish director Lars Von Trier,
best known in this country for ZENTROPA. That was a good film; this is
a better one.  The one thing that has not improved and, in fact, has
gone considerably downhill, is the look of the film.  For reasons best
known to Von Trier, much of this film was apparently shot with a hand-
held camera.  What is more it is a camera that seems to be forever
fidgeting, jumping from one person to the next.  The scenes that the
camera shoots, except for the chapter titles--the story is split into
chapters, are almost all in subdued color.  Some of the chapter titles
are so beautiful they seem to be more paintings than actual scenes.
The narrative is clean and well-told up until the final half hour.
Then the telling becomes a little muddled.  The final image of the film
does things to the plot that I personally did not care for, but up
until that point the story was extremely good.  It is not easy to make
a character as simple and straightforward as Bess as likable as she is,
but the script written by Von Trier makes the viewer really feel for
Bess.
     Emily Watson turns in a beautiful performance, at times genuinely
heartbreaking.  She plays a woman who is simple--not to say dim-
witted--and so totally consumed by the love of her man that nothing
else has any meaning in her life.  Even her love of God is superseded
by her love for this gift.  Hers is a degree of devotion the screen
usually reserves for dogs' love of their masters.  Watson is a stage
actress new to the screen but whose acting instincts seem rarely short
of perfect in a difficult role.  Stellan Skarsgard is stolid as Jan,
but his role is not one of much complexity.  For much of the film he is
in a horsecollar lying in bed, paralyzed from the neck down.  A
somewhat more interesting role goes to Katrin Cartlidge whose looks are
reminiscent of Amanda Plummer.  She is Bess's sister-in-law who ends up
Jan's nurse.  She is hostile to Jan, suspicious at first of his love of
the simple Bess.  Eventually she realizes the degree that he loves
Bess, but then does not approve of his methods to give Bess a life
independent of himself.
     BREAKING THE WAVES is a powerful and a moving drama, one of the
best of the year.  It does not seem to be getting a lot of play, but it
is worth looking for.  I give it a low +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
Denmark/France, 1996 
U.S. Release Date: beginning 11/13/96 (limited) 
Running Length: 2:39 
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, sex, nudity, profanity) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1 
Cast: Emily Watson, Stellan Skarsgard, Katrin Cartlidge, Jean-Marc Barr, 
      Adrian Rawlins, Udo Kier 
Director: Lars von Trier 
Producers: Vibeke Windelov, Peter Aalbaek Jensen 
Screenplay: Lars von Trier 
Cinematography: Robby Muller 
Music: Joachim Holbek 
U.S. Distributor: October Films 
     According to writer/director Lars von Trier, BREAKING THE WAVES is 
"a simple love story", but "simple" hardly begins to describe this 
deeply disturbing, multi-layered drama.  In fact, nowhere is the 
picture's complexity more evident than in its study of contrasts -- it 
is highly spiritual yet anti-religious, triumphant yet tragic, and 
personal yet universal.  Love forms the film's core, but rather than 
approaching the subject from a cliched perspective, BREAKING THE WAVES 
examines no less than six facets of the emotion:  transformative love, 
sacrificial love, redemptive love, destructive love, romantic love, and 
sexual love.  And, despite a slightly disappointing conclusion, this 
movie still rates among the best of the year.  
     To date, von Trier's best-known international effort was the 1991 
release, ZENTROPA (called EUROPA outside of North America).  Those whose 
familiarity with the director dates to that movie will find BREAKING THE 
WAVES a surprising experience.  Gone are the artistic, stylized flairs 
that dominated ZENTROPA.  The nearly-antiseptic perspective has been 
replaced by something far more involved and intimate.  It's easy to view 
the characters in ZENTROPA from a detached vantage point; a similar 
approach is impossible for BREAKING THE WAVES. 
     This epic-length film is divided into nine sections:  a prologue, 
seven "chapters", and an epilogue.  BREAKING THE WAVES transpires 
sometime during the 1970s in Scotland. (The exact year is irrelevant 
since there's a timeless quality to the material -- it could be taking 
place today if the music, clothing, and automobiles didn't argue for an 
earlier decade.)  Most of the action occurs in a closed village with 
deeply-rooted fundamentalist Christian beliefs.  According to the elders 
who rule with an iron fist, life isn't for enjoyment; it's for serving 
God.  Sex isn't for pleasure; it's for procreation.  Outsiders aren't 
welcome; they're consigned to hell.  So when meek, kind-hearted Bess 
(Emily Watson) announces that she intends to marry oil-rig worker Jan 
(Stellan Skarsgard), an unbeliever, the entire community is stunned. 
     Despite the stern disapproval of all the elders, the marriage goes 
ahead, and Bess finds herself happier than she ever could have imagined.  
She enjoys sex almost as much as she does the simple joy of lying in her 
snoring husband's arms.  But heartbreak looms ahead.  Jan returns to his 
rig, leaving a lonely Bess behind.  Even her best friend and sister-in-
law, Dorothy (BEFORE THE RAIN's Katrin Cartlidge), can't lift her out of 
her profound depression, but when a local doctor (Adrian Rawlins) is 
called in to evaluate her mental state, he proclaims her sane.  Then 
tragedy strikes as a freak work accident renders Jan paralyzed from the 
neck down. 
     Central to the narrative is Bess' relationship with God.  For most 
of the movie, von Trier keeps it ambiguous whether she is psychotic or 
truly involved in some kind of special communion with the Almighty.  
Does she really hear God's voice, or is she exhibiting signs of a split 
personality?  Is she His instrument of salvation, or is she merely 
experiencing potentially self-destructive delusions?  Unfortunately, in 
a late scene, von Trier tips the balance in favor of one interpretation, 
and this dilutes the film's overall impact. 
     That said, there's little doubt that von Trier is using BREAKING 
THE WAVES as an opportunity to contrast the elders' rigid, unforgiving 
attitudes with Bess' gentle, giving spirit.  Because her unorthodox 
attempts to save her injured husband involve breaking the Law, she puts 
her status within the community at jeopardy.  To further emphasize the 
strength of her position's spiritual foundation, von Trier parallels 
Bess' sufferings with those of Jesus -- she is condemned by the holders 
of the Law, suffers for the sake of those she loves, and, ultimately, 
offers a path to salvation. 
     BREAKING THE WAVES is presented as an excursion in cinema verite.  
Von Trier, in collaboration with cinematographer Robby Muller, uses a 
handheld camera throughout.  In addition, in order to obtain a grainy 
image with muted colors, the film makers took the original widescreen 
print, transferred it to video, then brought it back to film.  So, while 
there are times when BREAKING THE WAVES may threaten to induce nausea 
(especially to those who sit close to the screen), this style 
effectively creates a faux documentary environment that breaches 
invisible barriers and brings us into painfully close contact with the 
characters. 
     One area where von Trier errs is in his use of artistic "chapter 
breaks".  Each chapter has a title that's presented during a brief 
intermission from the action which features a richly-hued, painting-like 
image on screen while '70s rock tunes (like Elton John's "Goodbye Yellow 
Brick Road" or David Bowie's "Life on Mars") play in the background.  
The biggest problem with these inserts is that, while they offer a brief 
respite from the film's unrelenting intensity, their interruption of the 
mood becomes an unwanted intrusion. 
     As the deeply disturbed Bess, British stage actress Emily Watson 
turns in an award-worthy performance.  Since Bess must endure a number 
of physically and mentally degrading events while her volatile 
personality veers from emotional calm to complete hysteria, Watson's 
task of creating a believable character becomes more difficult as the 
movie progresses.  To her credit, she never falters.  The supporting 
players, including Stellan Skarsgard and Katrin Cartlidge, do fine jobs, 
but none captures the lens the way Watson does. 
     There's no denying that BREAKING THE WAVES is a difficult motion 
picture to endure, yet, despite its length, it holds the viewer's 
attention for the full one-hundred fifty-nine minutes.  Excepting the 
chapter breaks, there isn't a wasted moment.  And, if not for a somewhat 
forced catharsis during the epilogue (the weakest segment of the movie), 
BREAKING THE WAVES would have been more wrenching than it is.  This 
achievement announces that von Trier's aptitude for fashioning 
characters equals, if not exceeds, that which he has previously 
displayed for images. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Dave Cowen
At the end of each episode of his television show THE KINGDOM, Lars 
Von Trier appeared as a presenter, dressed in his dapper best, offering a
teaser for the next show with the most smirking and derisive expression 
imaginable.  Von Trier's appearances were my favorite part of THE 
KINGDOM -- it was as if he was goading the more naive viewers in the 
audience lest some would take his fantastic modern-day ghost story 
seriously.  Von Trier doesn't show up at the end of BREAKING THE WAVES, 
but I envision him standing there, chortling to himself: with this new 
film, Von Trier has created a completely indefensible, illogical and 
incredibly badly shot video which through the assistance of art-film 
cliches, overacting and an strangely audience-pleasing ending is playing 
in movie theaters to four-star reviews around the world.  If you see 
BREAKING THE WAVES and enjoy it, you're being mocked.  If you've seen 
BREAKING THE WAVES and disliked it, you've wasted your money.  Both ways, 
it's not worth seeing under any circumstance.
[This review contains extremely major spoilers, separated at the end from 
the rest of the text.]
If Lars Von Trier were a beginning director, it would be possible to see 
BREAKING THE WAVES as a bold and audacious beginning revealing a hidden 
talent.  Unfortunately, Von Trier has already proven his talent: 1991's 
EUROPA (ZENTROPA in the United States) is a technically and thematically 
outstanding film, full of breathtaking visual effects, tight editing and 
wonderfully subdued emotional performances -- which unfortunately went 
unnoticed in most film markets.  While his earlier feature-length film 
THE ELEMENT OF CRIME lacked as strong a thematic backbone, some of its 
imagery was similarly striking and revolutionary.  In BREAKING THE WAVES, 
however, a hand-held video camera captures the action on the screen, 
yielding grainy, out-of-focus shots which would not seem out of place in 
the video library of any camcorder owner's.  The editing of the video is 
equally jittery, often making arbitrary jump cuts to scenes which provide 
no action, or the same actor reciting different dialog.  The film opens 
on a title card (which, in standard Von Trier fashion has Von Trier's 
name larger than the name of the film itself) while the camera shakes and 
wobbles -- literally, any home movie enthusiast could shoot a video with 
more grace and stability than this one.  Then as if to poke fun at the
blatantly amateurish production values, Von Trier mattes the video in the
widescreen Cinemascope aspect ratio and divides each section of the story
with an richly colored and beautifully animated title-card. 
Emily Watson's performance as the dim Bess has been universally praised 
for the simple reason that Watson takes very basic emotions and projects 
them for miles, turning a smile into a full-blown wide-eyed gape and a 
frown into a shreiking fit of self-loathing.  Her performance is so 
ridiculously overstated that it's difficult to give her character any 
credulity: one thinks while watching the film not so much about what her 
character is feeling, but how hard Watson is trying to project the raw 
emotions that the character is supposed to be showing.  Katrin Catrlidge 
and Adrian Rawlins, on the other hand, offer extremely fine performances 
as Bess' sister-in-law and doctor -- Rawlins especially does a very good 
job of minimizing some of Watson's overstatement.  The rest of the cast 
are also believable, creating a strong counterpoint to Watson's 
overexaggerated performance of Bess.
The story of BREAKING THE WAVES is one linking spirituality and sexual 
abuse.  The video begins when good-spirited but slightly crazy Bess 
marries Jan, an oil-rig worker on holiday, and enjoys her newly found 
sexuality.  When Jan leaves to work on the rig, Bess prays to her God 
to bring him back (Watson plays both parts, intoning God's words with a
lower-pitched tone) and gets her wish, although not as she intended.  Jan 
is brought back to town after being hit on the head, and is paralyzed: 
doctors expect Jan to live, but to never walk again.  While in the 
hospital, Jan asks Bess, in order to help him feel better, to go out and
perform sexual acts with the local men.  Bess begrudgingly obliges him,
allowing men to abuse her sexually more and more as she believes that her 
actions will cause God to heal Jan in return for her own selfless acts.
Further discussion of the story continues below, underneath the spoiler 
warning.
What is shocking is that in the epilogue of the film, Von Trier affirms 
Bess' faith: Bess dies, Jan appears on crutches, and church bells ring 
from the heavens.  This would,on first thought, to seem offensive to all 
parties watching the film.  I would imagine that those watching the video 
from a religious background would be offended by the idea that the road 
to salvation is forged through acts of abusive sex, and that those 
watching the video from a less faithful background would be put off by 
Von Trier's quite literal portrayal of God.  I'd be wrong, however, and 
here's why:
In fashioning his film, Von Trier has created a pornographic fantasy 
which the average moviegoer would never have the "decency" to rent 
outside the trappings of an art film: when you take this production on 
its literal level, a story shot on video about a woman who is forced to 
perform sexual acts with random men, it sounds (and occasionally looks) 
like the kind of film you'd rent in the back room in your local video 
store and not see at your local art theater.  However, by making the 
individual forcing Bess to have sex God, and by making the reward for 
these actions the survival of her lover and a place in heaven, Von 
Trier makes Bess' demise through absusive sexual acts carry an air of 
false nobility.  But what nobility?  In the real world, regardless of 
one's take on spirituality, anyone with half a brain knows that Bess' 
actions would do nothing but get her killed.  This is sleazy, sleazy 
stuff here.  "Make the main character act out of a selfless notion to 
a higher power," Von Trier seems to be saying, "and the audience will 
watch anything."  The viewer can have it both ways, being titillated 
by the boyish sexual fantasies in the film while feeling righteous by 
agreeing with the spiritual elements and sympathies with Watson's 
easily understood performance at the same time -- even when these parts
of the film's narrative don't logically hold together.  A test of a 
viewer's hypocracy, perhaps?
After Von Trier's EUROPA lost to (the admittedly superior) BARTON FINK 
at the Cannes film festival, Von Trier gave the Cannes jury "the finger." 
Now, after releasing EUROPA, which astounded on visual and spiritual 
levels and that film going nowhere in the cinematic world, Von Trier 
has taken the ultimate revenge on the movie-going public by making a 
deliberately poor film which is designed to be a smash on the art-film
scene: I really could see Von Trier giving the finger and chortling at 
the audience throughout every frame in the film^H^H^H^Hvideo.  It's a 
brilliant guerilla tactic -- but please excuse me for being a bit upset 
after paying 7 dollars for the experience.
Signed: ESCHATFISCHE, david     h t t p : / / w w w . f i s c h e . c o m
(esch@fische.com) -------------------------------------------------------

Author
dsassoc@neponset.com (D&S Associates)
"Breaking the Waves" is Danish writer/director Lars von Trier's odd
fable about a simple Scottish woman who marries a Swedish oil rig
worker and tries to save him after he's paralyzed in a work accident
by sleeping with other men and telling him about it, at his request.
It was recently awarded Best Actress and Best Director by the New York
Film Critics.
"Breaking the Waves" is a truly unique film - it's concept and
execution are completely original, but once the story gets going
everything that happens is just what I expected.
Stage actress Emily Watson plays Bess in a star-making turn.  She's a
saintlike naif with big emotions and strong love and lust for her
husband. Yet an other Oscar calibre performance (it's that time of
year). Stellan Skarsgard is Jan, Bess' husband who looks upon her with
bemusement, adoration and concern.  Katrin Cartlidge is the dour Dodo,
Bess' best friend who has suffered through the death of her husband
with Bess' help and who now stands by Bess as she suffers the decline
of her man and the community turns against her.  Sandra Voe ("Local
Hero") is Bess' mother, a woman who cares for daughter but is too
caught up in the Calvinist church to turn against it in defense of her
daughter.
"Breaking the Waves" is divided into 8 chapters, beginning with "Bess
Gets Married".  Each chapter begins with a static shot of the Scottish
coastal scenery and a different classic rock tune ("Life on Mars"
anyone?). von Trier seems to be regressing in the technical aspects of
his style. His first internationally released film, "Zentropa", was
sharp black and white with splashes of red.  His television miniseries
"The Kingdom", was shot on video and transferred to film, giving it a
grainy quality. "Breaking the Waves" mostly employs hand held camera
that frequently (and annoyingly) goes out of focus - a strange choice
for a production this ambitious.
Bess runs to embrace her final destiny and joyously sacrifice all
for the love of her husband and we witness what can only be described
as a miracle.  von Trier rapturously provides a second miracle at the
conclusion of his oddly affecting film.
I was hoping for that "Breaking the Waves" would be what I call a
'movie rush' film (the last one I experienced was "Red" in 1995), but
it didn't quite achieve that masterpiece level for me - the technical
glitches and predictability of the story held it back.  But "Breaking
the Waves" is anything but unoriginal and features a truly noteworthy
character and performance in Emily Watson's Bess.

Author
Andy Wright
For all of my admiration of the work of director Lars Von Trier
(particularly ZENTROPA, in my opinion one of the most visually
enveloping films of the last decade), I've always been left with a
slightly chilly feeling, as if the director had expended so much care
and energy on the look and texture of his films that he forgot to
include emotional content. After seeing Von Trier's new masterpiece,
I'm pleased to report that my worries have been put to rest; in every
regard, this was the most deeply felt film of 1996, with an
astonishing performance by Oscar-nominated newcomer Emily Watson. (I
wasn't all that surprised when Watson failed to win the award; her
performance was entirely too bold and uncompromising for the Academy
to feel comfortable with.)  Visually, Von Trier is still up to his old
tricks (using a technique that he pioneered in his epic haunted
hospital miniseries THE KINGDOM, the image was transferred through
several different formats of film stock and video, resulting in a
picture that is constantly shifting in quality - sometimes
intriguingly washed-out, sometimes painfully clear), but rather than
distracting the viewer, the results serve to instead blur the
boundaries between reality and fiction, further drawing the audience
into the events on screen.  This is a film that should probably be
experienced without knowing too much in advance, so just let me say
that, much like the long-suffering heroine, it is necessary to get
through some excruciating scenes before reaching the transcendent
finale (this is rated `R' for a reason, folks!) but stick with it if
you can, you won't soon forget it.
Copyright 1997: The Critic Formerly known as Andrew Wright
http://www.seanet.com/~louk/
e-mail louk@seanet.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
I saw this Cannes Grand Jury Prize winner at the press screening.
I know of two people in the movie industry that claim it is the best
film they have seen this year.  It has already opened in Europe and is
just now starting to open around the United States.  Locally in the San
Jose area, it will be coming to the Camera Three this Wednesday,
November 20, and they actually moved up the opening date because of all
the positive buzz in the press.
     "I thank you for the greatest gift of all - love.  I thank you for
Jan (pronounced Yah'n)" says newlywed Bess McNeill (Emily Watson) to
her God.  Bess lives on the desolate Isle of Skye in Scotland, and she
is a member of a very strict Calvinist church.  Thus begins a tragic
story of faith and love by Danish director Lars Von Trier.
     Trier's first English language film and his first love story is
BREAKING THE WAVES.  Trier is an intense director whom you may remember
from his film EUROPA.  People in Denmark will remember him for his 1994
TV miniseries "The Kingdom" since as the press kit said, the streets
were empty when it was playing.  It was the hottest show ever on Danish
television.
     I could not set up the film better than the quote from actor
Stellan Skarsgaard (THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER) who plays Bess's outsider
husband Jan.  He said of the film that "it's melodrama's answer to
INDIANA JONES AND THE LAST CRUSADE because the emotions are constantly
given free rein."  The epic length and the risk taking emotional scenes
by Emily Watson got the film the Grand Jury Prize this year at the
Cannes Film Festival.
     "We do not need bells in our church to worship God," says The
Minister (Jonathan Hackett).  This is a church that views seriousness
and rules as a virtue and frivolity and fun as a sin.  "I would say to
you that if there is one of these commandments you do not love and do
not obey, you have no business at the Lord's table," preaches The
Minister.  When the men (women are not allowed) bury people they can
and do pronounce, "for your sins you are confined to hell," so the
sermons are taken quite literally by the congregation.  The church
elders rule the community and are not to be taken lightly.  Bess loves
her god and her church and strives to be faithful to them both.  Many
scenes have her in the church alone with her angry God talking back to
her through her voice.
     The acting is incredibly beautifully all around, but none is in
the same league as that of first time screen actress Watson.  Her
naivete, her mother (Sandra Voe) calls her "a feeble girl," places her
in incredibly vulnerable situations.  Through her innocence she goes
from intense physical and emotional love down to the depths of
depravity and insanity.  Through it she has incredible faith in her
husband and her God, but it is this very faith that becomes her
undoing.
     As the show starts, the sex is so intense and frequent, I began to
wonder if this was going to be a low budget and more realistic NINE 1/2
WEEKS.  Until Jan has to go back for another long stint on the oil
drilling rig, they are one of the most joyous young couples you are
likely to meet.  Of the many scenes of special beauty, my favorite was
when virginal Bess sees her husband naked for the first time.  Looking
on a his male nudity puts her into a state of giggles.  The human body
is kind of funny when you think about it.
     Bess becomes so obsessively attached to her husband, that she
confesses to him, "everyone says I love you too much."  This part of
the film is full of simple pleasures and reminds you of all the
inherent beauty in the world.
     The picture is filmed in sepia by Jean Paul Meurice and Robby
Mueller. They use a handheld camera so that the actors can walk all
around the set without being confined to playing just in from of the
camera.  This sounds better than it turns out.  Sometimes I thought the
title referred to the waves on the screen, and I felt as if I was going
to get seasick.  My home videos are more stable, and with only a single
camera, it was pan here and then pan there resulting in many a sequence
being out of focus.  At any rate, the sepia color was an effective
choice.  Before each chapter they have a computer enhanced full color
video clip that is reminiscent of a Bierstadt landscape painting.  An
interesting juxtaposition.
     In sharp contrast to the bleak outdoor openness, the drilling rig
is a happy, but claustrophobic place to work.  The job's physical
endurance makes the environment dangerous.  As shown in the trailers,
Jan is paralyzed in an accident.  The scene where Bess gets her friend
and nurse Dodo McNeill (excellent actress Katrin Cartlidge from BEFORE
THE RAIN and NAKED) to knell down and pray with her outside the
operating room will elicit tears in even the toughest movie goers.  If
you do not empathize with poor Bess throughout the film, then you
probably need to have your emotions checked at your next physical.
Watson's performance is Oscar quality throughout.
     The script by Peter Asmussen, David Pirie, and Lars Von Trier and
the direction have such a naturalness that it feels less like a movie
that a home video of someone's life.  Bess becomes all the shy and
innocent women that you have ever known.  When Jan is hurt, Bess's
brain begins to snap as she explains, "what happened on the rig was my
fault.  I prayed to God to send him home."
     When he regains consciousness, Jan places a single demand on Bess
that sends her over the edge trying to fulfill it.  I will not give
this key plot twist away even if the trailer does.  Jan's command is
the subject of the entire last half of the film.  The very last scene
of the picture is something special and not one you will guess so hang
in there even if you think your bladder is going to burst.
     There is not a bad performance in the show.  Besides the actors
already mentioned, Jean-Marc Barr plays Jan's friend Terry, Adrian
Rawlins plays young and handsome Dr. Richardson, and Udo Kier is a
sadistic sailor.
     The film was way too long and the camera work drove me crazy, but
Emily Watson's performance and her childlike acceptance of faith was
something it would be an absolute shame to miss.  A brilliant if
somewhat flawed picture.
     BREAKING THE WAVES runs 2:38.  The film is rated R for explicit
sex, full male and female frontal nudity, some profanities, one drug
usage scene, and some violence.  Teenagers should be mature to be able
to go.  I recommend this touching picture to you and award it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Peer Wandel Hansen
Date Released: July 5'th 1996 (Denmark)
Running Length: 2:38 
Starring: Emily Watson, Stellan Skarsgaard, Katrin Cartlidge, Jean-Marc Barr,
Adrian Rawlins, Jonathan Hackett, Udo Kier and more .. 
Director: Lars von Trier
Story: Lars Von Trier, David Pirie, Peter Asmussen
Cinematography: Robby Mueller, Jean Paul Meurice
Music: Joachim Holbek
   The latest epos from Lars is a blast, although a rather moody one.
This lovestory is situated in a small town in the rough dreary cliffs in the 
vestern part of Scotland in the 1970 something. The church (Calvinistic) is so
strict that the church bells has been removed from the clocktower, they are
considered being too unrestrained. In these surroundings we find the to-be-weds
Jan and Bess, played by Stellan Skarsgaard and the remarkable new movie actress
Emily Watson. Jan is on leave from the Oilrig and Bess .. is just Bess, a bit
naive and innocent (in every aspect of the word), at first. At the wedding
party we are told an anecdote, illustrating her infinite kindness, she once
lend a bike to an stranger, her best friends bike however. But Bess is
suffering in this scary religious society. We soon take part in a funeral
where a man, fallen off the orthodox path, is laid to rest while doomed to 
Hell. Women are not allowed to attend funerals or speak up in the church.
When the end of the honeymoon approaches we see Bess idolizing Jan in such
an intend, almost manic, that her friends try to calm her down a bit. The
time has come when Jan is to return to the rig, Bess is falling into the
darkness of depression, her yelling of grief and sorrow are heard above the
breaking of the waves. She can't stand the thought of life without her
husband. We witness her dialogues with God (she speaks both parts, Paranoia ?) 
convincing God to return Jan from the Oilrig, and her prayers are heard.
An accident on the rig bring him back, paralysed from the neck and down. Now
he can't satisfy her need for physical love, he try to persuade her into
finding a lover, with the ulterior motive to make her describe these affairs
to him in every detail. At first she resist, but her love for Jan and his
assurance that this will make him recover more rapidly make her comply.
Imagine what this is doing to the poor girl ?  
The story is cleverly divided into eight chapters parted by beautiful pictures
made by Danish artist Per Kirkeby, accompanied by music from the era; Procol
Harum, Deep Purple, T-Rex and others. The use of hand-held camera and lack of 
any make-up make the characters solid and help to separate this movie from
others in the sentimental genre. The incredible performance from the actors
makes the movie brilliant, though a bit too gloomy for my taste. I would 
say that it is in the genre of Betty Blue (37.2 le Matin) and Bitter Moon
(Lunes de Fiel). Emily Watson as Bess and Katrin Cartlidge as her best friend
Dodo deliver outstanding performances, this must be the reason for giving it
the "Grand Prix du Jury" in Cannes this year (although we had hoped for the
"Palme D'or"). The screenplay is now available in print, the transformation
being made in the period from ultimo May to July, just in time for the
Danish premiere.

Author
Pedro Sena
    The only thing that seems to work against this film, is that it has no
positive values, as it were, and therefore, no hope, in many ways, specially
for the character/person, who makes this film go. But if one can, put aside
that value judgement, this film has one performance that is absolutely
excellent, and well deserving of its accolades. Not many people can stand
out so much, anywhere at all.
    This is the story of Bess, who marries outside of her family and
village, to an oil derrick worker. She is, very aloof, does crazy things,
and in her spare time has conversations with God, with whom she seems to
have a reasonable rapport.... except that this is mixed to the point that it
makes her feel guilty, and responsible for the chain of events that change
her life.
    Her marriage seems fine, and as might be customary, she misses her
husband. In one of her prayers/conversations with God, she asks that he come
home. But he comes home injured, and ends up paralyzed. This adds some
strain to their marriage, and jan decided that Bess should have affairs and
then tell him about it, as a way for him to enjoy something while in pain
and paralyzed. Bess is at odds with the whole thing, and starts out with a
lie, which of course, Jan sees through anyway. And in her second attempt,
she decided to give herself away to the first person that crosses her path.
    This progresses, as is expected, and Jan is not getting better. he has,
however, met another nurse, who seems to be more helpful. The nurse quickly
sees the predicament that they are both in, and the story changes. Bess
makes another mistake and joins a band of foreign shipmen, whose attitudes
towards women and sex seem to be more sadistic than otherwise, and this
brings about her total demise. The new nurse has called Jan's bluff, and his
healing and desire to live has finally improved, and in the end we catch
Bess getting a burial, at their hands, after the elders had condemned her,
and decided that she could not have a decent burial at all.
    Startling as it may be the greatest thing in this film is watching Emily
Watson do her Bess thing all the way through. From the innocent little girl
having her talks to God, to her eventual reckless abandon, in giving herself
away, to prove that she loves her husband, which is something that he has
requested in the first place. In between is a massive acting job, the likes
of which is rarely found.
    For the most part, this film is done with a camera in hand, as if it had
Bess' point of view as the most important part of its story. Around her, the
camera moves, and at times it seems to move faster than otherwise, which is
a nice analogy for what is happening around her, and she has a hard time
keeping up with it. In comparison, the rest of the film is slow and boring,
with some rather pointed places... like Jan's hospital room, where the
camera does not move as much, or very little, thus suggesting that he is
boring, if one takes that to be a theme. However, Bess has given herself
away to this man, and she will do what she has to, to feel like she can love
him unconditionally. The down side, of course, asides from a religious
community that relishes in judging people, even if they are from their
families, as outlaws, renegades, and disgraced people.
    Lars von Trier, has used the hand style before, although it was never
used in such an incredible abandon with which it is used here in this film.
This enhances Bess' plight, and we can't help but feel sorry for her and her
predicament. And it never slows down, or makes the film less attractive for
what it is trying to do, and accomplish. It is the story of Bess, and the
film ends with Bess, though we know what else has happened.
    It's hard not to get caught up in the emotions of the moment in this
film, as the visual style tends to drag you in.... when jan gets hurt, it is
as if we are also getting hurt, or at least a part of the hard work that he
is doing.
    A very good film, though sad, but very strong in the acting department,
specially Emily Watson, who turns in what is considered a career
performance. But the film has its vicious edge at times, specially when
looking at the elders and their attitudes.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott
For more reviews, go to www.nuvo-online.com and click on "film."
Great movies shake you up. They make demands on you, challenge your 
beliefs, force you to look at things through another person's eyes. 
"Breaking The Waves," the first English-language film from Danish 
director Lars von Trier, is transcendent filmmaking. Using a tragic love 
story as his framework, Von Trier takes an unflinching look at the chasm 
between the rational and the spiritual sides of our lives. A haunting, 
brutal fairy tale, this masterfully detailed character study is 
uncompromising and emotionally exhausting. It's a great movie.  
Set in the early 70's, the North Sea oil boom brings outsiders to a 
remote Scottish community on the Isle Of Skye. Bess (Emily Watson,) a 
"simple-minded" local, meets and falls in love with Jan (Stellan 
Skarsgaard,) a Norwegian oil-rigger. Their impending marriage disturbs 
the religious community, a group of Calvinists  whose severe 
fundamentalism makes the Amish seem like anarcists by comparison. Bess' 
determination wins out, though, and life with her new husband becomes a 
blissful journey of personal and sexual discovery for the naive young 
woman. 
Eventually, Jan has to return to the rigs, leaving a devastated Bess 
begging God to bring her husband home. When an industrial accident sends 
Jan back, paralyzed from the neck down, Bess is convinced the disaster 
was caused by her prayers. She stays by her husband's side, acutely 
depressed and desperate to atone. Then, under the influence of drugs and 
despair, Jan makes an startling request of his wife that sends her 
spinning madly on a frenzied and shocking quest of self-sacrifice in the 
name of love.
In lesser hands, this sort of story could easily have been presented as 
simple melodrama. Von Trier's vision, however, is far more expansive. 
Using a jittery, hand-held camera, he creates a feeling of immediacy. The 
grainy close-ups are intensely personal, giving the movie the look of a 
documentary. At the same time, he uses extended shots of idyllic 
psychedelic landscapes to divide the film into chapters, underlining the 
romantic side of the story.
"Breaking The Waves" is populated by a host of memorable individuals, but 
the remarkable character of Bess is the center of the film. Because she 
is "not right in the head," her family treats her with benign 
condescension. Jan, however, views her as a miracle, and his wife 
blossoms in this new phase of her life. As Bess, Emily Watson gives a 
breathtaking, remarkably evocative performance. Shortly after their 
wedding, Jan lies naked in front of his bride. Bess, a virgin who most 
likely has never seen a nude man before, studies his body carefully. In a 
matter of seconds, her face registers surprise, amusement, fear, awe and 
lust. It's a wonderful scene and a tour de force for Watson. 
Bess is an avid churchgoer, but her approach is wildly different from 
that of the righteous townsfolk. They trudge through their days with grim 
faces. For them, life is endurance, a dour investment for an eventual 
payoff in the hereafter. Bess, however, is full of wonder, doubt, joy and 
fear. She talks with God routinely, working through dilemmas by 
verbalizing both sides of the conversation, using a childlike voice for 
herself and a stern one for God. Again, Watson plays these scenes 
superbly, providing delicate shades of character without overdoing it. 
As Bess' spiritual guilt increases, and her actions become more desperate 
and erratic, you may think you have her, and the whole movie, figured out.
 I certainly did. But, at the last moment, von Trier throws in an amazing 
and totally unexpected scene. I won't elaborate, except to say you will 
leave the theater reevaluating everything you thought during the film's 
156 minutes. The scene is an epiphany for a film that was already 
stunning. Von Trier refers to "Breaking The Waves" as "undismissable." He 
is absolutely right.

Author
Eugene Xia
If I am to look at this film objectively, I will
say that this is a very good film in the sense that
it accomplishes what it sets out to do.
Emily Watson did a great job as Bess McNeill in
portraying her as an innocent girl who falls in
love and ultimately sacrifices herself for her
love.  Perhaps Watson did too great a job.  For
much of the film Bess has the emotional maturity
of a 5 year old and her reaction to Jan going away
to work is that of a kid parting with her favorite
doll.  I am not even sure one can call what she and
Jan (the husband) had love.  We certainly don't
see much emotional connection or even adult
conversation between the two.  In fact, we don't see
anything going on between them other than sex.
As it is, Bess' character is not very interesting
(It is hard to portray a 5 year old with any complexity).
Towards the end, she did grow a bit, but not much.
The other characters fall into two groups, the sympathetic
and the judgemental--all one dimensional with one exception.
In relative terms, Jan is the only one who exhibits
some emotional complexity.  He is basically a good man.
After the accident, he is willing to let Bess
get on with her life.  Bess, of course, rejects
such a request.  So he conjures up a lie and tells Bess
that she should take up a lover for his sake.  However,
what started as a self-sacrificing gesture quickly
degenerates into perversity and ultimately let to Bess' death.
One sees how easily a person, especially someone in Jan's
condition, can fall.
On the technical side, I think it is a brilliant idea
to make the film feel like it is made on a hand held
video camera, especially with the wedding.  However,
it is a bad idea to do it for the entire
film--all 2 and half hour of it.  I developed a headache
after 90 minute of this.  No matter how great an idea,
it is self-defeating if it gives the viewer a headache
half way through.

Author
Ben Hoffman
The ads say "On over 75 Ten Best lists," to which I say that I would
hate to believe that is true..  This endlessly boring film took almost
165 minutes before, thankfully, it came to an end. What is it with
editors who will not cut long dull scenes, who will not delete
unnecessary action?   What is it with critics who go wild over
pretentious films?
Breaking the Waves is about miracles and having chats with God; Bess
(Emily Watson) talks to God and from what she is saying and at what she
is smiling, He apparently is on the same channel.  However, the advice
He seems to be handing her is really not very good, ungodly, and gets
her into an awful lot of trouble.
Bess, who has a sweet expressive face, lives in a small town in
Scotland.  She marries. Hwr husband (Stellen Skarsgard) works on a ship
at sea doing something with pipes and oil (?).  When an accident occurs
and Bess's husband is paralyzed, bedridden and with a prognosis of his
never being able to walk again nor really improving, Bess takes it very
hard.
Wife Bess is one loyal woman, always at his bedside. When her husband
says he would like her to have sex with "someone" and then come back
and tell him about it, it would be as if he and she had had sex.
Sure.  First Bess says she cannot do that but then she hits on the
doctor.  He very ethical will not touch her.  While she lies in the
nude on a mattress, inviting him, he tells her to get dressed.   But
there are many others in the city, on ships, in bars, on a bus, who
accept her offers.
Bess is doing this for her husband who, it is quite obvious to even
this layman, is on his deathbed.  As Bess tells everyone, she is not
making love, she is only offering a sacrifice for her husband, hoping
God will work a miracle.
Also stars Katrin Cartlidge, Jean-Marc Barr and Udo Kier. 
Directed by Lars Von Trier.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Early in Lars von Trier's shattering new drama BREAKING THE WAVES,
there is a scene in which Bess MacNeill (Emily Watson), an innocent young
woman living in a coastal Scottish town, is deflowered by her husband Jan
(Stellan Skarsgaard) in a bathroom at their wedding reception.  It is the
kind of situation you might have seen before played for laughs in low-brow
comedies, usually because one of the parties in the bathroom is not the
bride or the groom.  In one astonishing moment, however, von Trier shows
that he is not going to take you anywhere you have been before, allowing
his hand-held camera to linger on the face of a woman whose reaction is
nothing as simple as lust or anxiety.  It is nothing less than awe at the
overpowering emotions of making love for the first time which plays out
before us, and introduces us to one of the most utterly fascinating film
characters I have ever seen, played by an actor of unbelievable range.
     Ladies and gentlemen, please meet Emily Watson, and do yourselves the
favor of remembering that name.  It is true that she has been given the
kind of role which most actors (particularly women) would commit several
felonies for -- a fragile, unstable woman who risks the censure of her
strict Calvinist community in pursuing her love for lusty outsider Jan --
but Watson brings to it the kind of performance which doesn't so much
impress you as transport you.  When we first see Bess kneel in prayer to
God, only to hear her play both roles in a dialogue, it is startling and
disturbing, and makes her somewhat pitiable; later, when Bess finds
herself unable to summon God's voice, it is somehow just as terrible.
Watson is as gloriously innocent touching male genitalia for the first
time as she is anguished when Jan leaves to return to the offshore oil rig
on which he works.  There is not an emotion she does not touch, or which
does not leave you fumbling for superlatives.
     Watson is so good that her performance might overwhelm a lesser story
made by a lesser film-maker, but BREAKING THE WAVES is no simple love
story.  Much of the action takes place after an accident on the oil rig
renders Jan paralyzed, a tragedy to which he responds by asking Bess to
have sex with other men and describe the encounters to him.  That
storyline alone would make BREAKING THE WAVES a risky venture, but von
Trier takes it to another level of audacity by making it an exploration of
love and religious faith at its most extreme.  As Bess gradually descends
into a world of degraded sexuality she can't possibly understand, von
Trier begins to build up imagery which suggests Bess as a Christ figure.
She experiences her own agony in the garden as she pleads to have her
burden taken away; she is condemned by the religious elders of her
community; she is first betrayed, then shunned, by those closest to her;
she even undergoes her own Way of the Cross, pelted with stones by a group
of kids.  It is powerful, resonant, and not a little bit sacrilegious.
     And BREAKING THE WAVES is nearly as likely to offend those of a
liberal sensibility as those more conservatively inclined.  It would be
easy to recoil against the idea of a woman with a history of mental
illness subjected to violence and indignity by her own husband and,
perhaps, even God.  Those whose knees would jerk at the mere notion of a
woman who would sacrifice anything for her man are going to have major
problems with BREAKING THE WAVES, yet the film's indescribable final shot
may address outrage on both sides with wordless daring:  our earthly
notions of good and evil, of right and wrong, may be burdens that only a
simple mind motivated only by love can overcome in order to know the will
of God.
     BREAKING THE WAVES, at once intellectually challenging and
emotionally draining, is presented by Lars von Trier in a visual style he
also used in THE KINGDOM, a film-to-video-to-film trick which renders
everything a dirty brown.  The day-to-day world is a bleak thing in
BREAKING THE WAVES, but between the chapters in the film are hypnotic
motion-postcards (computer manipulated by artist Per Kirkeby) which
provide surges of hope.  That structure, along with the jittery
photography, are as much a key to the title of BREAKING THE WAVES as
anything which occurs in the film.  Lars von Trier takes his audience for
a ride on a sea of emotions which cannot leave it unmoved.  Love it or
loathe it, you will not be able to ignore BREAKING THE WAVES, or the work
of Emily Watson as a woman who proves that love is a mighty power.

Author
Bryant Frazer
BREAKING THE WAVES, the powerful new movie from Danish
director Lars von Trier (ZENTROPA, THE KINGDOM) is as
daunting as it is satisfying. The satisfaction comes from von
Trier's audacious and ever-deepening sense for filmmaking --
BREAKING THE WAVES is his most ambitious and skillfully drawn
narrative so far, and it offers the pleasure of undertaking
an uncertain journey, unsure of where it might all end.
That's also what's daunting. BREAKING THE WAVES is epic in
scope, careering wildly from warm and fleshy love story to
grim tragedy to something else entirely over the course of
its 158 minutes. It's a film that demands your rapt attention
bit by bit, plumbing ever-deeper corners of the soul and
plunging at one point into the abyss. Finally, once it's
over, it will return day by day to haunt its audiences. This
is seriously nervy filmmaking.
BREAKING THE WAVES derives its truest power from Emily
Watson's fevered performance in the lead. Watson makes her
film debut as Bess, a young woman in a small Scottish village
who's getting married to Jan, a strapping oil-rig worker, as
the movie begins. The union is looked on with disapproval by
the Presbyterian village elders, who muzzle women's voices in
church and take their greatest apparent satisfaction in
consigning sinners to damnation. To the villagers, Bess is a
suitable case for treatment, an emotional basket case in a
community that prides itself on restraint. But Bess is
determined to marry, and the post-wedding scenes detail her
giddy sexual awakening in explicit yet gentle detail. With
Jan, she has found happiness.
It's not long before Jan is called back to sea, and Bess
lives in dread of the day that he will leave. She can't help
herself -- just before Jan's airborne, she cries out in pain
and rushes the helicopter, pulling the hatch open to take one
last look at her beloved. In another scene, Bess waits all
day beside a country road in the rain, under cover of the
telephone booth where she has arranged to receive Jan's phone
call. The erotically charged conversation is testimony to her
newfound comfort and maturity. She's a woman who takes the
most profound and life-affirming satisfaction in sexual
pleasure, and she prays to God for Jan's swift return. The
prayer is answered -- Jan is clocked on the head by a piece
of heavy equipment and returns to the village on a stretcher,
paralyzed.
Bess blames herself, believing that her prayers are
responsible for Jan's horrible misfortune. Upset that he
can't make love to her, Jan instructs his wife not to dress
in tight clothing, lest he be too aware of her body, out of
reach. And then he tells her she must have sex with other men
so that she can return to his bed and recount her lovemaking
to him -- in this way, he insists, he can be reminded of her
sexuality and his otherwise worthless life can be saved.
We get the distinct feeling that while Bess is nothing but
sincere in her devotion to her husband, Jan's motivations are
at best misguided and at worst downright malevolent.
Ostensibly, he's trying to give her life back to her, but how
could he be unaware of the pain his demands cause her?
Moreover, how can he stand to direct his beloved to debase
herself by, say, sitting next to a 50-year-old stranger at
the back of a bus and giving him a hand job? Or by making a
clumsy, naked pass at Jan's doctor? Still, Jan's condition is
seen to improve as Bess puts out, and that's reason enough
for her to clothe herself in the borrowed trappings of a
cheap whore.
Is this beginning to sound ridiculous, like the thinly
constructed plot of a softcore porn movie on late night cable
TV? Von Trier dares to walk that line, and such is his skill
and conviction that he staves off the inherent tawdriness of
such a concept and invests it with a fierce gravity.
Stylistically, BREAKING THE WAVES has a lot in common with
the director's television project, THE KINGDOM. In his
breakthrough, ZENTROPA, von Trier used every optical trick in
the book to create a highly stylized world -- replete with
rear-projection effects and process shots -- that was more
memorable for its visual impact than for its overreaching
characterization and narrative. But THE KINGDOM was a marvel,
a four-and-a-half hour ghost story that seemed to pass in
little more than a moment. Propelled by a fitful documentary
film style and a picture drained of most color and detail,
THE KINGDOM's supernatural pretensions were validated and
even amplified by a mood that felt like cinema verite.
BREAKING THE WAVES takes much greater risks, and
cinematographer Robbie Mueller (PARIS, TEXAS) was obviously
directed to take a similar approach. The film's bleak look is
reminiscent of THE KINGDOM's -- both were shot on film,
transferred to video and then back to film again, which
leeched out color and detail and imbued the image with an
odd, nearly ethereal quality -- but where THE KINGDOM took
place mostly within the institutional confines of a single
building, BREAKING THE WAVES allows that highly processed,
unnatural patina to infect a village, a countryside, and
indeed the whole world. In this bleak context, Muller, whose
extensive work with Wim Wenders is justly admired, showcases
the fine naturalistic portrayals of the characters peopling
that dim vista. If the bleak imagery represents von Trier's
intellectual guidance, in the rhythm of the camerawork and
the editing we can feel the movie's heartbeat.
And when Mueller's camera hovers for long moments in front of
Emily Watson's face, it finds the movie's soul. Hers is one
of those rare performances that it's impossible to
overpraise. The relationship between Watson and the camera is
reminiscent of nothing so much as the cold and exacting gaze
that delineates Renee Falconetti's monumental performance in
Carl Theodor Dreyer's THE PASSION OF JOAN OF ARC (perhaps
significantly; like Saint Joan, Bess is more or less accused
of heresy). The character of Bess becomes inarguably flesh,
and Watson inhabits that flesh with preternatural aplomb.
With wide, round eyes and slim lips the dark shade of blood,
there's nothing vague about Watson's emoting. Her feelings
are communicated with a precision that can be charming, as
when those lips curl near the cheek to puff a strand of hair
out of her eyes, or wrenching, as when her shriek suddenly
pierces the movie's uncommon quiet. Her marriage has
transformed her suddenly from virgin into a woman of full
sexuality whose very essence seems saturated with pleasure by
the act of lovemaking. (Helena Bonham Carter, who could
hardly be so unspoiled a presence, reportedly won the role of
Bess and then turned it down.) Even when she's carrying on a
two-way conversation with God -- or on those occasions where
she glances directly at the camera -- the character is never
overplayed, and our understanding of Bess is key to our
willingness to follow her on what seems to be rather a
dispiriting journey.
The performances are, in fact, uniformly excellent. The beefy
Stellan Skargaard plays Jan as an imperfect yet admirable
husband, the kind of robust fellow who can truly demand your
sympathy when he's laid up in a hospital bed. His playful
physicality in the early scenes is key to the rest of his
performance, since we need something to remember him by once
he's supine and under the influence of drugs and depression.
And Katrin Cartlidge as Bess's loving sister Dodo, who's at
all times wary of Jan's influence, is the essential
intellectual bridge between the outcast Bess and the rest of
this fundamentalist community. Von Trier's heroine is a Good
Woman, but Dodo helps remind us that her selflessness isn't
wholly admirable, or rational.
That having been said, the real crux of BREAKING THE WAVES is
a circumstance which can't be revealed in a movie review.
Let's just say that once the narrative concludes, von Trier
gives us an "epilogue" that confounds all expectations. The
last moments of this film are by far the most challenging,
and after some reflection I've decided that without them --
the final shot in particular -- BREAKING THE WAVES would
simply be an extraordinary film. As is, it's a great one.
Without resort to mere words, von Trier breaks the bounds of
narrative and presents a resolution that's as troublesome as
it is fulfilling. In a bold refutation of its own grim,
nearly sardonic logic, BREAKING THE WAVES cuts to the quick
of religious faith, personal sacrifice, and human existence.
