Title
Review for Infinity (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Scott Renshaw
(First Look)
Starring:  Matthew Broderick, Patricia Arquette, Peter Reigert.
Screenplay:  Patricia Broderick.
Producers:  Matthew Broderick, Patricia Broderick, Joel Soisson, Michael
Leahy.
Director:  Matthew Broderick.
Running Time:  119 minutes.
MPAA Rating:  PG (adult themes)
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Here I offer a bit of free, friendly advice for film-makers:  if you
are going to make a two hour long film, please don't make it feel like a
four hour long film...and for heaven's sake, don't title it INFINITY.  You
just can't feed a critic a straight line like that; I'm only human, and
it's too easy.  INFINITY is a Moebius strip of a movie experience, a film
which goes on and on and on without a single compelling situation or
character to hold your attention.  Under the rookie direction of Matthew
Broderick, INFINITY inspires an almost suffocating boredom and the
question of why he even bothered to hire an editor.
     Broderick also stars in this fact-based story as Nobel Prize-winning
physicist Richard Feynman, who is a brilliant young student in Queens, NY
when the main plot begins in 1934.  He meets Arline Greenbaum (Patricia
Arquette) at a high school party, and the pair soon become inseparable.
Their romance continues while Richard attends college, but an even greater
impediment than distance soon arises.  Arline is stricken with an illness
which eventually is diagnosed as tuberculosis, at the time an incurable
and contagious disease.  Despite the grave circumstances and against the
wishes of family, Richard and Arline marry in 1941.  That is also when
Richard is recruited to join a top-secret program in Los Alamos, New
Mexico as part of the team handed the task of developing the atomic bomb.
     On one level, INFINITY is a difficult film to hate actively, because
it clearly was made with some care.  The film is lovingly photographed by
Toyomichi Kurita and scored by Bruce Broughton, and its period detail is
meticulously re-created by production designer Bernt Capra.  That makes
INFINITY a nice film to look at, at least for a little while, until it
becomes apparent that there is not a single thing going on worth caring
about.
     The crushing flaw of INFINITY is that it is almost entirely about the
romance between Richard and Arline, and not once does a spark fly between
Broderick and Arquette.  The script (by Broderick's mother Patricia)
focuses on the intellectual nature of their relationship without paying
much attention to developing them as individuals, resulting in characters
constructed mostly of thick Queens accents and episodic eccentricity.
Arquette is more successful at giving Arline some small measure of appeal,
but she is unable to make this love affair matter.  With no other
character in the film provided even a glimmer of a personality, INFINITY
rapidly begins to sink under the weight of a painfully dull central
relationship.
     It is not Broderick's fault that the real-life circumstances of this
story have Arline dying for nearly four years, but it is definitely his
fault that I was placed in the ghoulish position of hoping she would just
get it over with and die already.  For nearly ninety minutes Arline is
alternately sick and well, and over the course of that ninety minutes we
move abstractly between Richard's personal and professional life, with
scene after scene inspiring me to throw up my hands in exasperation at the
utter lack of a point.  I counted ten scenes in INFINITY which literally
served no narrative or dramatic purpose, and countless other instances
where the judicious use of a knife on several hundred frames of film might
have made me less eager to use one on my own throat.
     Much is made of Richard's unwavering rationalism, as when he reads to
Arline from a medical book detailing what her condition might be while her
doctors insist on protecting her, and I suppose the intention is to convey
the unique nature of their love.  What it really does, however, is make
for a love story without a drop of emotion until Broderick breaks down in
the film's last scene.  At that point, I was sort of feeling like crying
myself, mourning two hours of my life which had begun to feel like
infinity.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Matthew Broderick, Patricia Arquette, Peter Riegert, Dori Brenner, 
      Peter Michael Goetz, Zelijko Ivanek, James LeGros 
Director: Matthew Broderick
Producers: Patricia Broderick & Matthew Broderick, Joel Soisson & 
      Michael Leahy
Screenplay: Patricia Broderick based on the books of Richard Feynman
Cinematography: Toyomichi Kurita
Music: Bruce Broughton
U.S. Distributor: First Look Pictures
     INFINITY is a biographical look at the early life of Richard 
Feynman (played in the film by Matthew Broderick), the noted speaker, 
writer, and Nobel Prize-winning physicist who died in 1988.  And, as 
strange as it may sound, the central tragedy of this film is likely to 
affect viewers far more than it appears to affect the main character. 
The conscious decision to strip out all melodrama was made by 
screenwriter Patricia Broderick and her son, actor/director Matthew (who 
makes his debut behind the camera with INFINITY).  They believed that 
only in this way could they properly capture the essence of the man 
whose experiences they were dramatizing.  However, Feynman himself once 
said, "the way to hell is paved with good intentions", and this may be a 
good example.  For, as effective as much of the film is, Feynman's 
apparent detachment at the end leaves us cold -- almost as if things 
matter more to us than they do to him.
     INFINITY tells two stories:  Feynman's relationship with his 
beloved first wife, Arline (Patricia Arquette), and his involvement in 
the Manhattan Project's development of the first atomic bomb.  While the 
tales cannot be split, it's clear that the Brodericks have a much better 
feel for Feynman's personal life than they do for his ethical struggles 
about unleashing a force of mass destruction.  As background, the Los 
Alamos material is effective, but, on those occasions when it is thrust 
into the foreground, it pales in comparison to the love story.  
     The bulk of the film has nothing to do with Los Alamos, the bomb, 
or J. Robert Oppenheimer.  Rather, it's about Richard and his intense, 
unwavering love for Arline.  He meets her one day in 1934, when both are 
still in high school.  He wanders into a room where she's singing and 
playing the piano, and is immediately smitten.  The attraction is 
mutual, and, from that day forward, they are a couple.  During Richard's 
undergraduate years at MIT, they make long-term plans, intending to 
marry after he completes his graduate work, believing they have all the 
time in the world.  Fate, however, has a cruel sense of humor.
     In 1941, Arline falls ill.  The initial diagnosis is Hodgkin's 
Disease, a fatal ailment.  Eventually, however, it turns out to be 
tuberculosis, the AIDS of the time.  Over the protests of his family, 
who are afraid that he might contract the disease, Richard decides to 
marry Arline, then accept a government job so he can support her.  
Shortly after they elope, he moves to Los Alamos to join the Manhattan 
Project as a theoretical physicist, and the head of the project, 
Oppenheimer, makes sure that Arline has a place in an Albuquerque 
sanitarium, where Richard can visit her each weekend.  For two years, 
things continue like this, until Arline's illness reaches its crisis 
point just as victory is declared in Europe.
     As told here, Arline and Richard's touching love story is devoid of 
sensationalism.  Only in the end, when Richard fails to display any 
significant emotion following Arline's death, does INFINITY strike a 
wrong chord.  Feynman may have really given this rather clinical, 
dispassionate assessment:  "Everybody dies.  It doesn't stop the world."  
But it's tough to get an audience to accept that a loving husband could 
turn into such a cold fish.  SHADOWLANDS, this isn't.
     Despite this possible miscalculation regarding the character, 
Matthew Broderick gives a fine portrayal of Feynman.  The physicist's 
natural curiosity about science and the natural world are very much in 
evidence.  And Broderick's enthusiasm is contagious.  If, as Feynman 
suggests, mathematics are a foreign language, we're more than willing to 
let him translate for us.  Meanwhile, Patricia Arquette turns in her 
most mature and fully-realized performance to date, drawing on the 
lessons she learned from ETHAN FROME and BEYOND RANGOON, then going one 
step further.  
     Even though there are a few anecdotes involving protons, electrons, 
neutrons, splitting atoms, inertia, and infinity, a detailed knowledge 
of physics and mathematics isn't necessary to enjoy the film.  Arline 
is, after all, an artist, so Feynman has to explain his work in a manner 
that she, and the audience, will understand.  INFINITY represents a 
journey of emotional and scientific discovery.  It's just unfortunate 
that the ending isn't more fundamentally satisfying.  That single flaw 
keeps this from being a remarkable feature.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin
"We go away from our parents in youth and then we gradually come back to
them; and in that moment, we have grown up." -- Ingmar Bergman

Author
Steve Rhodes
     So what is the cube root of 1729.03, and what algorithmic short
cuts can you employee to arrive at the answer?  Do you think you could
get the answer quicker than a high speed abacus driver?  These are some
of the conundrums that form the side show of INFINITY.
     In Matthew Broderick's directorial debut, he tells the romantic
and true story of Nobel prize winning physicist Richard Feynman
(Matthew Broderick) and his wife Arline (Patricia Arquette from BEYOND
RANGOON).  Science does enter the picture as a subplot, but most of the
show is devoted to the nine year romance between him and his dying
wife.
     Broderick knows exactly what he wants to do as a director and does
it.  He lovingly crafts an extremely slow moving film.  His acting in
the title role is dispassionate and unhurried with his emotions
carefully kept in check.  He is in no hurry to do anything nor get
excited about any event.  Even his wife's inevitable death brings
barely a rise out of him.  I have an image of Broderick in the
director's chair coaching his cast to slow down and take each scene
with carefully measured paces.
     The entire show moves with strange rhythm that you will either
find so languid you fall asleep or will cast a spell over you and draw
you into the quiet world of a scientist's love affair.  For some
inexplicable reason, I found myself in the latter category, but if you
see the film and find it feels like infinity watching it, I will
understand.  And yet, I found the film soothing as a warm bath and
tranquil as a gentle breeze.
     Early in his life, Richie's father Mel (Peter Riegert from
CROSSING DELANCEY) demonstrates the value of science to him through
simple experiments.  I liked the little scene where his father corrects
him with, "Richie, how old are you?"  To which he replies, "six."
"Well then, act your age," admonishes his dad.  As a Daddy, I have
found that fatherly advice sometimes seems to make little sense even
when I am the one giving it so this scene hit home.
     Richie falls in love with Arline and eventually marries her, but
before the wedding date is even set, she develops a problem with her
lymph glands.  I'll spare you the medical science behind what might or
might not have been the problem.  The bottom line is that the show is
about their time together before her almost inevitable death.
     Richie loves to talk Math and Physics to her.  He explains,
"Mathematics is a language for the dead.  I talk to Copernicus
everyday."  He loves doing household experiments like seeing if he can
detect the last book she touched just by the smell.
     Arline is a spunky and imaginative patient who lives in a hospital
nearby for all of their married life.  She sends him pencils with "I
love you Popsie" on them.  He scratches the words off so that his
fellow graduate students at Princeton will not ridicule him.  Another
time, she sneaks a portable stove into her hospital room so they can go
cook steaks out on the hospital lawn.
     Their life does not change, but their locale does when, during
World War II, they go to Los Alamos so he be part of the Manhattan
Project to develop the first atomic bomb.  My favorite scenes there are
of the key punches, card sorters, plug board calculators they used in
lieu of real computers.  Since I saw these at my first programming job
at Texas Instruments in the mid-60s, they brought back fond memories.
     A typical scene in the show has Richie and a sick Arline making
small talk together while he stacks milk bottle lids up top of each
other, house of cards style.  Other than convey serenity, the scene has
no real purpose.  Again, somehow, I found these little vignettes
charming.
     When the atomic bomb is finally denoted in the desert near Los
Alamos, one scientist announces, "I'm giving odds we blow up the state
of New Mexico.  Any takers?"  But, another muses, "How could we
collect?"
     Many technical aspects of the film are worth mentioning.  Mary
Jane Fort's costumes capture the look of a nerd in the 40s without
overkill.  The cinematography by Toyomichi Kurita is warm and almost
hazy, and is nicely complemented by Bruce Broughton's dreamy music.
     Finally, I must admit a little regret that the movie wasn't a
stinker.  I could have done a great two line review, "INFINITY is."
Terse and to the point.  Oh well, I guess I'd rather enjoy a good movie
that write a funny review.  Then again, ...
     INFINITY runs a finite 1:59.  It is rated PG, and there is no sex,
nudity, violence, or bad language.  The only reason it got a PG rather
than a G is that the topic of realistic love and death by long term
illness is not a theme for young children.  On the other hand, any kid
old enough to want to see it should be able to.  I give the show a
thumbs up and award it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
