Title
Review for Welcome To Sarajevo (1997)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Luke Buckmaster
REVIEW: Welcome to Sarajevo
By Luke Buckmaster (bucky@alphalink.com.au)
Cast: Stephen Dillane, Woody Harrelson, Marisa Tomei, Emira Nusevic,
Kerry Fox, Goran Visnjic, Emily Lloyd, James Nesbitt
Director: Michael Winterbottom
Screenplay: Frank Cottrell Boyce, based on the book "Natasha's Story" by
Michael Nicholson
Australian theatrical release date: June 25
If any film has perfectly pitched exactly the right characters for both
Stephan Dillane and Woody Harrelson, Welcome to Sarajevo would be it.
Both as arrogant yet genuinely devoted reporters; Dillane sums up both
of their roles with the smug quote  "We're not here to help, we're here
to report."  Sadly, they both end up woefully incomplete performances -
Dillane's due to the film's disoriented script, Harrelson's because of
limited screen time.  Perfect in concept perhaps, but all over the place
in execution (chalk that down for a good description of the film also).
Shortly after the opening credits, we witness a group of citizens on
their way to a wedding.  Unexpectedly, one of them is shot dead by an
unseen sniper.  The press are there in no time, working from a
distance - taking photographs and pointing cameras.  Led by Michael
Henderson (Dillane), these brave reporters scour the streets of
Sarajevo, searching for stories that will not only fare well in ratings
but also bring home a powerful message that something needs to be done.
They soon discover that the western world is concerned with other
matters, illustrated when their report comes in second place to Fergie's
divorce.  And when UN troops arrive in the war-torn city, one soldier
offers little inspiration by pointing out that "Sarajevo is only the
14th most dangerous place on Earth."
Welcome to Sarajevo will no doubt find an audience of content critics
and audiences alike, who will no doubt dub the film as a powerful,
horrifically realistic documentary.  I grudgingly agree to some extent
with that statement - the film is powerful and realistic - but only as a
documentary.  When director Michael Winterbottom attempts to incorporate
an emotional core to the story - subsequently distracting us from his
Big Political Message - most of the strength he builds in the film's
opening half hour is lost.
I cannot understand why on Earth Winterbottom could let the plot decline
so severely - maybe this is due to the film's writing (based on the
novel "Natasha's Story"), but even then, Welcome to Sarajevo could have
been anyone's story and still have worked well.  The maverick American
journalist Flynn (Harrelson) would have made a great central character;
whilst cameraman Gregg (James Nesbitt) and native driver Risto (Goran
Visnjic) are at times very intriguing to watch.  This is not to say that
the main character in the film, Henderson, is not wonderfully
portrayed - he is - but his tale is not conceived enough to have a
lasting impact.
The emotional core of the story is centered on Henderson becoming
personally attached to a young orphan, and whilst this is potentially
riveting stuff, the benefits of a well-written screenplay simply are not
here. Frank Cottrell Boyce (and the novels author, Michael Nicholson)
has written a complex, beaming documentary but a crumbling, apathetic
drama.  Welcome to Sarajevo tries too hard to be a contemporary film -
Winterbottom has made sure that it has clear-cut film "necessities,"
with a definite focal story and obvious supporting roles.  Ironically, a
documentary type creation would have been much more successful for this
kind of subject matter.  There was no need for a focal story when there
were countless civilian lives to explore, and no need to define a main
role when every journalist character had a fascinating story to tell.
For a film that pitches at the right note but executes way off mark, we
can perhaps respect the fact that Welcome to Sarajevo may have been
victim to mainstream cliches had it fallen on lesser hands.  But Stephan
Dillane is just too talented for this type of work; ditto for Woody
Harrelson and Michael Winterbottom.  All may have their heart in the
right place, but Welcome to Sarajevo is a film that pitches but not
hits, thus drastically reducing the impact of it's Big Political
Message.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com.au for any
inquiries or feedback
Read more of my reviews at Movie Zone: http://moviezone.alphalink.com.au

Author
Ben Hoffman
Beautiful Jugoslavia only a few short years ago was a most
delightful vacation spot offering tourists lovely picture-postcard
locations such as Mostar with its bridge across the river.  Bombed
to hell!   There is nothing like a civil war to bring out the worst
in what is euphemistically referred to as humans.  Point blank
shooting of prisoners who only a little while ago were one's
neighbors is a daily occurrence.
This exciting film, based on true stories, is about one typical
city, Sarajevo, caught up in a bloody war.   It was world-famous a
few years ago when it hosted the Winter Olympics.  It is also about
the foreign correspondents who live dangerously while snipers peck
away at anyone or anything that moves. 
Michael Henderson (Stephen Dillans) has been all over the world
covering many Wars-Of-The-Month.   But for sheer inhumanity,
Yugoslavia wins the prize.   His job is to get the best stories, the
best pictures, for the media's viewers, readers back home. What is
difficult to understand is that these correspondents risk their
lives to bring us the news but back home many people have never even
heard about Sarajevo and that its stories can be bumped for the
less than earth-shaking news of the divorce of the Duke and Duchess
of York, Andrew and Fergie.
Nightfall finds Henderson and the others meeting in the dimly
generator-lit hotel's bar where they exchange stories about what
they witnessed that day. . .  while bombs and sniper shots are heard
in the background.  American journalist Flynn (Woody Harrelson)
daily risks his life for a story.  Some feel he is engaged in
glamorizing his own heroics rather than telling the story of the war.
Flynn, however, maintains that no one knows Sarajevo but they
certainly have heard of Flynn.
The movie follows the story of the Ljubica-Ivezic orphanage run by
Mrs. Savic (Gordana Gadzic).  The orphanage houses newly-orphaned
children as well as those who were orphaned before the war.  Because
of the political-religious climate in this divided country, some children
are ruthlessly kept from being evacuated from the front line area.
At the orphanage, Henderson is enchanted by Emira (Emira Nusevic) a
young orphan who is determined to get out and away from all this.
Without fully realizing what difficulties and situations lie ahead,
Henderson promises he will help her.
Marisa Tomei has the role of an American aid worker.   Others in
the cast include Kerry Fox, Gorn Visnjic and Emily Lloyd.
With heartbreak and excitement WELCOME TO SARAJEVO will keep you on
edge.  This is a film not to be missed.

Author
James Berardinelli
United Kingdom/USA, 1997
U.S. Release Date: 11/26/97 (limited)
Running Length: 1:40
MPAA Classification: R (Graphic violence, profanity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Stephen Dillane, Woody Harrelson, Marisa Tomei, Emira Nusevic, 
      Kerry Fox, Goran Visnjic, Emily Lloyd, James Nesbitt
Director: Michael Winterbottom
Producers: Graham Broadbent, Damian Jones
Screenplay: Frank Cottrell Boyce, based on the book "Natasha's Story" by 
      Michael Nicholson
Cinematography: Daf Hobson
Music: Adrian Johnston
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
In English and Bosnian with subtitles
     Considering the wealth of material provided by the recent tragedy 
in Bosnia, it's surprising that Michael Winterbottom's WELCOME TO 
SARAJEVO is the first major Western motion picture to take place in the 
war-torn country.  It's possible to argue that the reason for this is 
that English-speaking directors are intimidated by the sheer scope and 
complexity of the conflict, and they somehow feel that any attempt on 
their part to chronicle even an aspect of the war would be inadequate.  
More likely, however, it's a pragmatic realization -- films about this 
particular subject are anathema to the public, and, because of that, 
they are likely to result in an anemic performance at the box-office.
     There are many possibilities why movie-goers would react negatively 
to a film about Bosnia, but the most likely reason has its roots in the 
way the media covered the conflict.  During the early 1990s, we were 
bombarded by images from the war on a daily basis.  All the networks had 
reporters on the front lines, and, as a result, every nightly newscast 
featured images of bodies, soundbytes of world leaders condemning the 
attempted genocide, and pictures of bombed-out cities and villages.  
But, to keep viewers from turning to another channel, it was all 
sanitized.  There was no sense of true horror; this was half a world 
away.  It didn't seem real, and the television coverage was edited in a 
manner designed to keep our repugnance at bay.  Consequently, the public 
became apathetic about the Bosnian war, and, after a while, began to 
tune it out.  Yet, on some level, everyone recognized that something 
genuinely terrible was transpiring; we just didn't want to understand 
the depth of it.  So a movie that challenges us by revealing truths 
about this conflict threatens our comfort level in a way that 
SCHINDLER'S LIST (about events that happened 50 years ago) never did.  
We don't want to know; it's too unpleasant and disquieting.
     WELCOME TO SARAJEVO isn't just the story of an outsider's 
perspective of the conflict; it's a compelling examination of the role 
the media played in reporting and shaping the average person's views of 
the war.  And, while there's nothing revolutionary or extraordinary 
about the dramatic narrative, the subtext gives Winterbottom's movie its 
force.  As a tale focused upon the horrors of war, WELCOME TO SARAJEVO 
doesn't cover any new ground, but as an autopsy of what the conflict 
meant to a worldwide television audience, this is new and disturbing 
material.  Oddly enough, the film has as much in common with Gus Van 
Sant's attack on television news, TO DIE FOR, as it does with pictures 
like VUKOVAR and PRETTY VILLAGE, PRETTY FLAME.  
     Unlike those two films and numerous others that show the Bosnian 
war from an insider's viewpoint, WELCOME TO SARAJEVO makes its main 
character a British TV news reporter.  The movie does not delve deeply 
into the reasons for the conflict, nor does it burden viewers with 
lengthy discourses on the centuries-old racial and religious strife.  
Instead, we are presented with a shocking snapshot of how things were 
during several months in late 1992 and early 1993.  We witness the 
bodies, the carnage, and, most chillingly, concentration camp images 
that echo those seen in post-World War 2 photographs.  
     The British newsman at the center of WELCOME TO SARAJEVO is Michael 
Henderson (Stephen Dillane), whose character is based on a real-life 
individual (just as the movie's script was developed from the non-
fictional account, "Natasha's Story").  He's a veteran war reporter 
stationed in Sarajevo along with his cameraman, Gregg (James Nesbitt), 
and his producer, Jane (Kerry Fox).  Other reporters include the cynical 
American Jordan Flynn (Woody Harrelson) and a freelancer named Annie 
(Emily Lloyd), who is young and driven.  For his part, Michael is 
growing disenchanted with his network's coverage of the news, and this 
leads to his involvement in an ongoing story about a front-line 
orphanage.  What begins as a series of reports turns into a crusade, 
with Michael imperiling both his career and his life to get one 9-year 
old girl, Emira (Emira Nusevic), out of the country at a time when the 
official policy is "no evacuation."  WELCOME TO SARAJEVO charts 
Michael's progress from dispassionate watcher to activist.
     Throughout the film, we are given glimpses of the way the 
journalists on the scene report the news, and what becomes of their 
stories.  One particularly graphic massacre is bumped from the top of 
the hour in favor of an item about the separation of the Duke and 
Duchess of York.  Michael's producer, Jane, warns him that his crusade 
about the orphanage may be falling on deaf ears.  It's all about 
ratings.  Information is less important than entertainment, and it's 
difficult to make such a grotesque, twisted war, where sniper fire kills 
innocent bystanders, entertaining.  By using a combination of real 
archived video, faux video filmed specifically for this movie, and 
normal 35 mm footage, Winterbottom creates a kaleidoscope of juxtaposed 
images.  We're never sure what's true and what isn't -- whether a video 
of writhing, bloody bodies is genuine or a realistic recreation.  This 
technique further illustrates how blurred the line has become between 
authentic, hard news and its controlled, entertainment-controlled 
counterpart.
     In previous films like GO NOW and JUDE, Winterbottom has shown a 
keen understanding of character and an unwillingness to toy with an 
audience's emotions through overt manipulation, and both of these 
characteristics are evident in WELCOME TO SARAJEVO.  The main characters 
of Michael, Emira, and Flynn are all well-defined and strongly 
portrayed.  Stephen Dillane is entirely believable as the lead, and 
Woody Harrelson, who is slowly developing into an effective dramatic 
performer, fleshes out Flynn.  Young Emira Nusevic is heartbreaking in 
her pivotal role.  There are also several noteworthy supporting players, 
including Goran Visnjic as a citizen of Sarajevo who works as Michael's 
driver and Marisa Tomei as an idealistic "do-gooder."
     WELCOME TO SARAJEVO debuted at 1997's Cannes Film Festival, where 
it received numerous plaudits but no awards.  This impeccably-crafted 
movie is a daring and powerful piece of work, not only for its 
willingness to film an unpopular subject, but for the unique perspective 
it offers, and it stands proudly alongside Winterbottom's other films.  
Hopefully, neither the title nor the subject matter will deter viewers 
from experiencing this memorable motion picture.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Miramax Films/Channel Four Films
 Director:  Michael Winterbottom
 Writer:  Frank Cottrell Boyce, based on "Natasha's Story" by
Michael Nicholson
 Cast: Stephen Dillane, Woody Harrelson, Marisa Tomei,
Kerry Fox, Emily Lloyd
   There are many ways for a film maker to deal with political
events on the international scene.  In "The Long Way
Home," Mark Jonathan Harris contributed quite a revealing
job using the documentary style to portray the plight of Jewish
refugees following World War II.  In "Peacemakers," Mimi
Leder exploits Hollywood technology to fashion a story of a
violent struggle between terrorists (the bad guys) and U.S.
authorities (good guys).  Costa-Gavras, himself an ideologue,
treats revolutionaries as freedom fighters and right-wing
governments as terrorists, as he does so forcefully in his most
celebrated film, "Z."  And in the January 1998 Miramax
release "Four Days in September," Bruno Barreto involves us
without taking sides in a fictionalized drama of the kidnapping
of the U.S. Ambassador to Brazil by anti-government
revolutionaries.
   Michael Winterbottom, whose directorial credits include
films as diverse as "Butterfly Kiss" (about serial killers) and
"Jude," (based on the Thomas Hardy novel), takes still
another tack with "Welcome to Sarajevo."  Basing his film on
real events much like Costa-Gavras and Harris, Winterbottom
employs Frank Cottrell Boyce's screenplay about the fighting
in Sarajevo during the early 1990s, highlighting the tragedy of
war by focusing on the plight of children orphaned by the
combat.  Training his camera principally on British journalist
Michael Henderson (Stephen Dillane) who covering the war,
he uses a semi-documentary style to unfold a fictionalized
drama as seen through Henderson's eyes.  
   Henderson is seen interacting with his colleagues,
particularly the cynical American reporter Flynn (Woody
Harrelson), who expresses his misanthropy with rhetorical
questions to Henderson such as, "Your queen...I know she's
the richest woman in the world, but enlighten me: what does
she do?"   He shares with his English buddy a disgust for the
scant attention which the media afford to Bosnia, particularly
when he notes that the lead story in one evening's papers
deals with the separation or divorce problems of Andrew and
Fergie, the Duke and Duchess of York.
   Filmed on location by cinematographer Daf Hobson,
Winterbottom shows us the bombed-out buildings of a city
once considered among the world's prettiest, a place of parks
and outdoor cafes, now reduced in many areas to rubble by
fighting among ethnic factions--the Croats, the Serbs and the
Muslims.  "Welcome to Sarajevo" opens with black-and-white
scenes of hit-and-run warfare, the rooftop snipers acting as
though they were rehearsing from Jules Feiffer's prescient
play "Little Murders"--at one time considered an absurdist
comedy of people firing on the neighbors for no apparent
reason.  Though "Little Murders" gains irony by taking place in
the politically stable U.S., the subtext of "Welcome to
Sarajevo" is that the bloodletting is occurring in a "civilized"
European city, its fighters seemingly bent on self-destruction
in the name of ethnic cleansing.  The human drama of the
movie comes from an act of compassion: Henderson, a tough,
hard-drinking Pete Hamill type who loves to banter with his
American buddy about the relative merits of the UK and the
U.S., is moved to an act of compassion.  When the city's
unhappy orphans are being evacuated to other areas of
Europe such as Italy and England, he takes steps to adopt an
orphanage favorite, Emira (Emira Nusevic), though such a
step is illegal because Emira is already about eleven years
old.
   Winterbottom cleverly shows the mixture of altruism and
vanity in the deeds of these two journalists.  Flynn does risk
his life to save a civilian who is shot by a sniper, but he is
also propelled by his interest in getting recognition among his
readers.  As he tells Henderson, "Back home nobody's heard
of Sarajevo, but they've all heard of me."  For his part
Henderson hopes his country will afford him a solid chunk of
TV time since he is focusing sentimental stories culled from
one of the city's orphanages.  When social worker Nina
(Marisa Tomei) sets up a busload of infants to be evacuated
from Sarajevo, Henderson put into motion his plan to take
Emira with him to his family in England.
   Given the relative lack of interest by Americans in the
Bosnian war--which ended at least temporarily in December
1995--"Welcome to Sarajevo" makes an important addition to
the year's motion picture output.  Dramatizations can capture
the attention of millions of people far better than newsreels
and talking heads programs.  But somehow Winterbottom has
distanced us from his material.  We do not really get to know
Emira, nor do we learn much about Henderson to explain his
motivations.  Too much of the early part of the film is taken up
with a loosely structured series of scenes created to provide
us with the texture of this strange confrontation.  The idle chit-
chat and serious drinking and smoking of the journalists is by
now prosaic: we are all familiar with this stereotypical
perception of the grizzled people in the profession of war
correspondent.  
   Since we do not get to know much about the child, her
mother's eventual and all-too-sudden willingness to allow the
girl to stay with her new guardians in the UK does not have
the impact it should.
  Still, "Welcome to Sarajevo" does provide us with the feel of
the place, with the strange impulses of its combat units,
particular the Serbian officers who pull infants of their ethnic
group off the bus which is carrying them to safety: they insist
that these kids be allowed to grow up in the "Greater Serbia"
which they are creating by driving out the Muslim population.
Rated R.  Running Time: 100 minutes.  (C) 1997
Harvey Karten

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Michael Winterbottom's WELCOME TO SARAJEVO is a lot like its central
character, British reporter Michael Henderson (Stephen Dillane).  An
observer on the front lines of the Serbian siege of Sarajevo, Henderson is
torn between conflicting instincts.  As a journalist, he believes he
should be detached and objective as he tells the story of Sarajevo to the
world; as a human being, he feels compelled to beccome emotionally
involved, to take action which will help ease the suffering.
     Henderson eventually chooses the latter course.  The film, on the
other hand, isn't quite so resolute.  Much of the time, Winterbottom seems
content to provide a documentary-style history of the conflict in the
former Yugoslavia.  Archival footage of speeches and politicians' comments
are strewn throughout the narrative, while bombings and sniper attacks are
depicted with gruesome real-life footage of dead bodies and mangled limbs.
The images are powerful and immediate, but they become the story rather
than complementing it.  Henderson begins to seem like a character
digitally insterted, Forrest Gump-like, into historical events.
     When the story does focus on his actions, it fumbles away too many
opportunities to personalize its grand-scale tragedy.  Character
relationships, like those between Henderson and a brash American reporter
(Woody Harrelson) and his no-nonsense producer (Kerry Fox), get just
enough attention to be frustrating; Henderson's devotion to an orphan
named Emira (Emira Nusevic) is rushed until it feels more like a cinematic
necessity than a genuine connection.  Even the film's most potentially
intense sequence, involving the illegal transport of a bus-load of orphans
out of the country, feels strangely sedate despite one gripping encounter
at a Bosnian checkpoint.  That sequence doesn't even serve as the film's
climax, leading into a dry 20-minute search for Emira's birth mother which
grinds WELCOME TO SARAJEVO to a halt.  Far too often, Winterbottom and
screenwriter Frank Cottrell Boyce demonstrate a clumsy disregard for
building a narrative with an emotional pull beyond its bursts of authentic
violence.
     I can easily imagine a film like WELCOME TO SARAJEVO degenerating
into pathos in Hollywood hands, so perhaps it deserves some credit for
avoiding copious shots of sad-eyed waifs.  Winterbottom simply goes too
far in the other direction.  The performances and direction are sturdy but
rarely inspired, resulting in a film which makes us feel terrible about
this tragic conflict in a very abstract sense.  WELCOME TO SARAJEVO is
good reporting, but it's not particularly good drama, treating its subject
with the concerned detachment of a newsmagazine feature story.

Author
Bryant Frazer
       Director Michael Winterbottom's new WELCOME TO SARAJEVO opens
       fiercely, with the kind of moment that snaps your eyes wide
       open and makes you remember what the movies can really be
       about. As a wedding party leaves a Sarajevo church, one of
       the members is shot dead by an unseen sniper. The group
       scatters. The bride runs away in slow motion, a vision in
       white. Cut to the press, a cadre of photographers and
       videographers huddled together at a semi-safe vantage,
       cameras clicking in a staccato fury. It's a footnote to
       history recreated in widescreen and Dolby stereo.
       Winterbottom stretches the moment just long enough for us to
       understand its subtext -- how important it is that somebody
       be present to take those pictures, lest this bombed-out city
       be forgotten by the Western world, and what it must mean to
       be a journalist, covering these horrifying everyday events
       but staying (at least in theory) at a clean remove, like a
       Wenders angel.
       If only the rest of the movie were as riveting, as demanding
       of our attention. WELCOME TO SARAJEVO has the makings of a
       small masterpiece, but it loses its way. It's a fascinating
       film, to be sure, even if Winterbottom does resort to such
       hardball tactics as cutting video footage of real Sarajevan
       casualties into the mix in order to focus our attention and
       our sympathies. That's fair play, I suppose, for a film that
       indicts the unresponsiveness of the Western world during the
       years when innocent men, women, and children were being shot
       dead and blown to bits on the streets of the Bosnian capital.
       ("We have to deal with 13 countries in the world which are
       worse than Sarajevo," a United Nations type tells the press
       corps at one point.) But it's used to enliven a film that
       doesn't muster a sufficient sense of outrage through its own
       drama. As social commentary, WELCOME TO SARAJEVO is acrid and
       spiky. As cinema, however, it becomes just a little bit dull.
       But it gets by on the strength of its convictions, not least
       of which was Winterbottom's determination to shoot on
       location, beginning in the post-war summer of 1996. If you're
       not familiar with the Bosnian conflict, this film will serve
       as a crash course on the hostilities as well as a record of
       the damage wrought on the city itself. In short, the Bosnian
       capital of Sarajevo was uniquely positioned to take the brunt
       of violence as the former Yugoslavia broke into independent
       nations. Sarajevo was caught in the crossfire as radical
       Bosnian Serbs began a campaign to cleanse Bosnia of Muslims.
       Although tensions between Serbians, Croations and Muslims
       have long sparked violence in the region, Sarajevo was a city
       where all three ethnic groups lived in close proximity, which
       fueled the fires as the war raged on. Eyewitnesses to the
       fighting in Sarajevo reported that neighbors were opening
       fire on one another.
       Based on the nonfiction book NATASHA'S STORY by British
       journalist Michael Nicholson (and "inspired by" actual
       events), WELCOME TO SARAJEVO is the story of the Western
       press corps living in the besieged city, struggling to
       galvanize the world's conscience against the fighting.
       Coverage of what became known as the "bread-line massacre,"
       for instance, when Bosnian Serbs bombed a group of Sarajevans
       waiting to buy bread, killing 16 and wounding many more, is
       shunted into second place on the news programs by the divorce
       of Andrew and Fergie.
       Modeled on Nicholson, Michael Henderson (Stephen Dillane) is
       particularly appalled at the world's reluctance to condemn or
       even acknowledge the continuing tragedy. And he's
       particularly drawn to the plight of Sarajevan children,
       especially those at an orphanage he discovers and focuses his
       energy on covering. "As long as the U.N. are here," he tells
       his colleagues, "I'm going to keep those kids on the screen.
       Every night, different child, same message: get me out of
       here." Like his real-world counterpart, Henderson will
       eventually take it upon himself to smuggle one of these
       children, Emira (Emira Nusevic), out of the country.
       Woody Harrelson plays Flynn, a cynical hotshot from America
       who steps into the story he's covering at one point, when he
       carries a wounded civilian out of the line of fire. Rounding
       out the ensemble are Emily Lloyd as a freelancer, Marisa
       Tomei as the American aid worker who wants to get the orphans
       out of Sarajevo, Kerry Fox (of SHALLOW GRAVE) as Henderson's
       producer, and Goran Visnjic as their driver. Much of the film
       depicts their everyday existence at a local hotel, where the
       procurement of a few eggs is cause for celebration. By the
       time Flynn shows up at the Holiday Inn with footage from Serb
       concentration camps -- which are bone-chillingly reminiscent
       of those *other* pain-stricken concentration camps -- the sense
       of outrage is complete.
       But since there must be a story, we're soon caught up in
       Henderson's scheme to get Emira out of the country. Welcome
       to Sarajevo gets certain things just right, like Henderson's
       wife's flabbergasted but understanding reaction to the news
       that he is bringing a Sarajevan orphan home with him. Even
       so, the film remains at a cool distance to these characters,
       never quite forcing our identification with either of them.
       Later, when it's discovered that Emira's mother is alive --
       and wants her back -- Henderson's inescapable journey back to
       Sarajevo is intriguing, but we're not emotionally involved in
       the story. These characters seem almost purely
       representational -- they're different types of people rather
       than people in their own right. I can't help but think a
       little more imagination in the screenwriting department might
       have helped flesh everybody out and make us closer witnesses
       to their desperation.
       Winterbottom is no stranger to the desperate situation. His
       two previous films to receive a U.S. theatrical release were
       the lesbian serial killer drama BUTTERFLY KISS and the Thomas
       Hardy adaptation JUDE, both of which leave you with the oddly
       satisfying feeling of having been whalloped in the midsection
       so hard as to have your breath knocked out of you. (He also
       directed the acclaimed GO NOW, starring Trainspotting's
       Robert Carlyle as an MS victim.) WELCOME TO SARAJEVO has a
       similarly lasting impact. The picture feels slight, and
       disappointingly understated as you watch it. But it's a
       persistent little film, and it sticks with you. Maybe this is
       what it would be like to really be there. Day by day, the
       sickening violence takes on a sameness, and the siege becomes
       unremarkable on its own terms. Still, it scars you. And when
       you leave this country, you're haunted for life by the ghosts
       of the Sarajevans.
       --------------------------------------------------------------
       Directed by Michael Winterbottom
       Screenplay by Frank Cottrell Boyce,
       based on the book NATASHA'S STORY by Michael Nicholson
       Cinematography by Daf Hobson
       Edited by Trevor Waite
       Starring Stephen Dillane, Woody Harrelson, Emira Nusevic,
       Emily Lloyd, Marisa Tomey, and Kerry Fox
       U.K., 1997
       --------------------------------------------------------------

Author
W. Waffle
Are you tired of all the hot new releases being gone by the time you get to the
video store?  
WaffleMovies.com is dedicated to finding those hidden gems that lie on the
shelves.  Everyweek, WaffleMovies.com reviews independent film and big studio
pictures that deserve a second chance on video.  Here is a sample review:
In light of America's recent intervention in Kosovo, Welcome to Sarajevo is a
reminder of the horror America and the world ignored for years. 
Set in Sarajevo 1992 and based on actual events, this picture examines the
human and societal casualties of war. The picture opens with a family escorting
their young bride to her wedding. As they make their way down the street, a
sniper shoots the mother of the bride. Yet another reminder that daily life in
war torn Sarajevo can never escape the horror of war. 
In this scene, we meet Joe Flynn (Woody Harrelson), an American reporter who
stops reporting to help a priest carry the mortally wounded mother into a
church. Joe is cocky, but also good at heart as he continues to carry out kind
deeds for people he doesn't even know. 
His fellow reporter is the British Michael Henderson (Stephen Dillane). Michael
is quickly growing tired of the horror that surrounds him and the world's lack
of interest. Henderson is haunted by the memory of an altar boy who witnesses
the mother's death as well as a young girl who he finds orphaned in a hospital
after a mortar attack on citizens waiting in line for bread. He decides to take
action when a United Nations' delegation descends upon the area to declare
Yugoslavia the fourteenth most dangerous place on Earth. 
Henderson begins a series profiling an orphanage located on the front lines. He
finds children of all ages living in fear and taking care of each other with
the help of one adult. During his visits, he befriends a pre-teen girl, Emira
(Emira Nuseric) who serves as surrogate mother to baby Roadrunner. He promises
to get Emira out of harm's way if he gets the chance. After the UN delegation
leaves the country without rescuing any of the children, Henderson loses hope. 
However, his reporting has grabbed the attention of Nina (Marisa Tomei) and her
children's aid group that helps to find homes for the Yugoslavian orphans.
Unfortunately, only babies are wanted for adoption, so Henderson pledges to
take Emira to England. The group of children, Nina and Henderson depart the
front lines on a dangerous escape for Italy. Can they complete this dangerous
trek through the war torn countryside and avoid hostile troops gathering up
Muslims for concentration camps? 
The movie was beautifully and sensitively made. Director Michael Winterbottom
and screenwriter Frank Cottrell Boyce vividly express the societal destruction
that has occurred. They show the destroyed lives, families that have been split
up, and the desolation that everyone attempts to cope with. This is best
exemplified by the group of Yugoslavians Henderson, his producer and Flynn have
befriended. 
The group of twenty-somethings reside in a bombed out bar without life's
simplest pleasures and amenities. One of them is an accomplished musician who
spends his days playing the piano and promising to play a concert when Sarajevo
is declared the most dangerous place on Earth. Like the rest of those deeply
effected by the war, this small group tries to survive instead of trying to
live. 
Winterbottom brilliantly intersplices scenes with actual news footage to give
the film the feel of a documentary and keeps the viewer aware that many of
these horrors are being carried out thousands of miles away as you sit safely
in your living room. The picture is also bolstered by beautiful cinematography
that captures the devastation of this city that hosted the 1984 Olympics. 
Winterbottom and Boyce also produce a realistic portrayal of the reporters
covering the atrocities. This portrayal is much more flattering to reporters
than earlier Wafflemovies.com selection Mad City. We watch them struggle to
cover the horror, while trying to remain professionally detached. However, they
are human and question the reason behind it all, why no one cares, and how they
can get out. 
Stephen Dillane is wonderful as Henderson. He portrays the character as an
everyman caught in the middle of extraordinary events. Dillane avoids making
the character overly heroic and preachy. Henderson realizes that he cannot save
the world, but he can help a few. It is a wonderful opportunity for Dillane
after he had to suffer through the Denis Leary-Sandra Bullock disaster Two if
by Sea. 
Woody Harrelson continues to prove that he is one of the finest, most versatile
actors of his generation. Harrelson plays the cocky celebrity reporter with a
heart of gold by allowing the character's caring nature and vulnerability shine
through. Harrelson is equally adept at taking on roles as zany leading men
(Cheers, White Men Can't Jump) as well as excellent supporting roles such as
this one. This ability will serve him well and give him a long, successful
career. 
America's involvement in this struggle comes seven years after the events of
the movie take place. For those who do not have a full understanding of the
history of the conflict, the entire movie, most importantly the opening scenes,
provide a history lesson. War is a foreign concept to most of us in America.
Battles are fought thousands of miles away among people we have no attachment
to. Televised images of the Gulf War are all the experience most of us have
with war. This picture brings it right into your living room and makes you
think outside of our own small world, something we don't do enough of in 90's
America. 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "Welcome to the 14th worst place on earth," Michael Henderson, the
British journalist covering the siege in Sarajevo, tells Nina, a
recently arrived children's aid worker.  Since the new head of the UN
peacekeeping force gave that ranking to Sarajevo, the foreign
journalists have begun to mock his comments.  Flynn, the American
journalist on the scene at the time of the infamous quote, demanded to
know if Sarajevo was going up or down in the rankings.
     In WELCOME TO SARAJEVO, director Michael Winterbottom bravely
tackles a war most filmmakers have shunned.  Winterbottom's last film,
JUDE, made my list of the top 10 movies of last year, so I looked
forward to his latest.  It is hard to be critical of a film so bursting
with good intentions, but I thought the film's style only served to
obfuscate an important subject.  I predict that most people who see the
picture will rate it highly, and I posit that most of those ratings
will actually be out of respect for the valiant people of Sarajevo and
not for the film itself although I suspect that few viewers will admit
it.
     The movie's fatal flaw can be summed up in one word -- editing.  I
cannot remember a film so destroyed by the splicing of its film stock.
Editor Trevor Waite, who did a fine job in JUDE, tries a TV newscast
approach in WELCOME TO SARAJEVO.  The movie is rife with little
fragments all pasted together.  Combine this with Frank Cottrell
Boyce's incoherent and confusing script of Michael Nicholson's book
"Natasha's Story," and the result is chaos.  To further aggravate the
situation, Daf Hobson's cinematography relishes scenes shot in almost
total darkness.  Although this makes some sense given the lack of
electricity in Sarajevo, he carries this to extremes and even has one
sequence set in England equally and unnecessarily dark.
     The first third of the film has little to say other that war is
hell, which is not exactly a revelation.  Finally, towards the middle
the film's main message begins to emerge.  Using stock footage of world
leaders, the story argues that the world should have somehow gotten the
kids out of the war zone in Bosnia.  This is one of many potentially
valid points that this film of frequently indecipherable images has
trouble making effectively.  (Although the gory war carnage may look
real, it was all recreated.  Since the film is presented in such a way
that it looks like genuine video clips, viewers could rightly claim to
have been deceived.)
     Stephen Dillane, whose last film, TWO IF BY SEA, made my worst
movie of the year list last year, gives a wooden performance in the
staring role of Michael.  Most of the movie is devoted to a string of
short clips about the war, but, when they cut back to the storyline,
Michael is in most of the scenes.  His acting in the film consists of
small variations on a highly concerned look.
     In contrast, Woody Harrelson plays the canonical wisecracking
American named Flynn.  He and Marisa Tomei, playing Nina, seem to have
signed on to do the film in order to show solidarity with the cause.
Lending their names will probably double the film's prospective
audience.  And since the movie covers important subjects, albeit not
very well, this noble act on their part should be acknowledged.
     The movie is told from the perspective of the journalists.  Their
typical day has them in the hotel dining room having breakfast when
someone comes through shouting about a fresh mortar attack.  Grabbing
cameras, they all head for the front, which in a civil war is
everywhere.
     Bound by a code of ethics that says they cannot help and they must
only observe in anguish, some break the rules.  After Flynn risks his
life to pull a wounded woman out of harm's way, his coworkers are
nonplused.  "I suppose he was just trying to help," reflects one
reporter.  But Michael corrects this notion.  "We're not here to help,"
he says, explaining their inverted Hippocratic oath.  "We're just here
to report."
     Most of the last two-thirds of the story is devoted to an heroic
act of Michael's.  Once he realizes he could get someone out of the war
zone, he does.  He arranges for a 9-year-old girl named Emira (Emira
Nusevic) to be evacuated and to come and live with his family back in
England.  On the way out she meets various partisans, but the extremely
confusing story will leave you wondering who is who, and what are they
are and why?
     Never has a fictional movie made me so wish it had been a
documentary instead.  With a documentary they could have provided the
much needed context and, hopefully, would have had enough respect for
their material to stay with scenes rather than constantly flitting.
     In 1986 we stayed at the now infamous Holiday Inn in Sarajevo,
which was then one of the most luxurious hotels in that chain.
Providing the headquarters for the journalists during the war as well
as a bombing target, it became a symbol of the war.  As I watched the
film, I was saddened by thoughts of the nice people we met then,
knowing that many of them must be dead by now.  All of this
notwithstanding, WELCOME TO SARAJEVO is a frustrating and tedious film
to watch and does at best a mediocre job of telling their story.
     WELCOME TO SARAJEVO now runs 1:41, but we were told that the final
cut will have about ten minutes trimmed.  The movie is rated R for
brutal images, war atrocities, profanity, and a brief male nude scene.
Some of the movie is in Bosnian with English subtitles.  The film would
be appropriate for teenagers only if they are quite mature and not
prone to nightmares.

Author
Louis Proyect
Director Michael Winterbottom's "Welcome to Sarajevo" is a rancid and
self-righteous film that reflects the pro-interventionist outlook of
the "laptop bombardiers." During the civil war in former Yugoslavia,
this group, which included such notables as NY Times editorialist
Anthony Lewis and cultural critic Susan Sontag, advocated NATO bombing
of the Bosnian Serbs. In their moral calculus, the Muslims stood for
European Jewry in the late 1930s, while the Serbs were the moral and
political equivalent of Hitler's executioners.
Frank Boyce bases his screenplay on British journalist Michael
Nicolson's "Natasha's Story," an account of his attempt to adopt a
Bosnian child. He seeks to spirit her out of Sarajevo to England where
he can provide a pleasant life for her in his comfortable home. This
story is supposed to lift our spirits and make us believe that there
is one good human being left on earth. Stephen Dillane plays the
saintly British journalist, whom we encounter in opening scenes as a
prototypical cynical Western television reporter trying to come up
with lurid footage of urban battle casualties. The reporters in
Sarajevo send back footage like this to their studios each day. Their
job is to provide the sort of visceral shock on the evening world
report that stories about tenement fires and auto crashes provide for
local news coverage. Woody Harrelson plays Flynn, a star American
journalist who has a daredevil attitude toward street fighting. As
long as there is gripping footage to be shot, the hard-drinking Flynn
will dodge bullets and be there first. Now that the film has
established cynical, risk-taking, hard-drinking reporters as the
central male characters, one wonders where it can drift next in an
ocean of clich=E9.
The answer to this question is Nina (Marisa Tomei), the head of an
orphanage, and Emira (Emira Nusevic), the fetching young orphan girl
he decides to rescue from the hell of Sarajevo. Nina is everything
that the reporters are not: idealistic, selfless and pure. Which is to
say that she is as lacking in complexity as they are. Emira reminds
one of the sort of children who used to pop up in Hollywood war movies
in the 1950s. These adorable Italian or Korean war orphans are adopted
by some grizzled, war-weary American infantry company after begging
for a chocolate bar. Aldo Ray would play the Sergeant while Dana
Andrews would be cast as the Lieutenant. The children, according to
formula, are never German or Japanese. That would not be marketable.
The Bosnian Serbs, according to the formula of 1950's war movies, are
Terminators put on earth to kill innocent people. God only knows why.
They are ruthless killing machines whom any reasonable, humane person
would like to see destroyed by a NATO bomb. The film version of the
British journalist at one point confesses to a Bosnian Muslim that he
feels shame over the failure of his government to bomb the Serbs into
oblivion.
To prove how inhuman the Serbs are, the film includes a horrifying
scene. A bus carrying the orphaned children out of Sarajevo into the
safety of Italy is stopped at gun-point by ranting Serb soldiers. They
board the bus and take Muslim babies with them, presumably to be
barbecued and eaten later. It is astonishing that "Welcome to
Sarajevo" puts forward the notion that the Serb army would exterminate
innocent children in this manner. The real crime of "ethnic cleansing"
was beastly enough, but it was designed to carve out pieces of Bosnian
territory in order to exclude one ethnic group or another, not
exterminate them. While the Serbs were certainly more aggressive than
the Muslims, both sides took part in the blood-letting.
A much more powerful scene would have dramatized how Muslim and
Serbian villagers, who lived peacefully for generations, came to the
boiling point and eventually decided to destroy each other. This was
not the agenda of the film-makers who were more interested in a
good-versus-evil scenario rather than the complexities of the
Yugoslavia tragedy. The production notes indicate how little the
film's creators understood about Yugoslavian history. It blames the
war on "rivalries between the Serbian, Croatian and Muslim communities
in the region" that "go back centuries."
Catherine Samary observes in "Yugoslavia Dismembered" (Monthly Review,
1995) that peace between various ethnic groups was possible when there
was economic well-being:
"The periods of Yugoslavia's or Bosnia-Herzegovina's greatest cohesion
corresponded to the times when the populations concerned experienced
real gains in living standards and rights. It was by contrast threats
to those gains during the 1980s--not interethnic hatred--that gave
rise to Yugoslavia's fragmentation. The socioeconomic and political
crisis of the 1980s was in this respect a turning point."
The author of "Natasha's Story" and the director and screenwriter of
"Welcome to Sarajevo" are not interested in this history of real human
beings. All of Bosnia is simply a backdrop for the narcissistic
display of the British journalist who wants to prove to the world that
he is better than everybody. In a scene that reveals his inability to
empathize with the people of Yugoslavia, he confronts the mother of
the child he seeks to adopt. She is a cigarette-smoking, slatternly
woman who nobody in their right mind would want to put in custody of a
child. She has one final phone conversation with her daughter, who is
safe and happy in England, and the two fail to communicate. Her
daughter says that she never wants to come back to Sarajevo again.
This spells victory for the British journalist, who was anxious that
the mother would regain custody of the child. He is everything that
the unfortunate Yugoslavians are not. He is clean, tobacco-free and
sensible. They, on the other hand, are violent, self-destructive and
irrational chain-smokers. Why can't everybody get a proper public
school education like the protagonist and learn proper, civilized
values. This is the rankest sort of hypocrisy. It was the United
States, England and other European powers that brought down poor
Yugoslavia, awash in debt in the 1980s, just as they are bringing down
Thailand and Malaysia today.
Someday there might be a film about the tragic civil war in former
Yugoslavia that will probe the causes of the horrible destruction of
life and property. It certainly can't come from writers and directors
who are cocksure of their "civilizing" mandate. Fortunately, NATO
bombers never got involved in the civil war. If they did, it is
entirely possible that the war would have spilled beyond the borders
of Yugoslavia and involved the former Soviet Union in the fighting. As
"Welcome to Sarajevo" appears several years after the conclusion of
the war, it  lacks the propaganda power to spark intensified fighting.
As politics, it is retrograde. As film, it is clich. This is a movie
to avoid.

Author
Vallejo
  Starring Stephen Dillane, Woody Harrelson, Marisa Tomei,mira Nusevic, Kerry
Fox, Goran Visnjic, Emily Lloyd, James Nesbitt, Igor Dzambazov, Gordana
Gadzic. Produced by Graham Broadbent and Damian Jones. Produced by Graham
Broadbent and Damian Jones. Script by Frank Cottrell Boyce (Based on the book
"Natasha's Story" by Michael Nicholson. Directed by Michael Winterbottom.
Running Time: 110 mins. Rated R.
 ________________________________________________________________
  The central focus of Michael Winterbottom's "Welcome to Sarajevo" is
Sarajevo itself, the city under siege, and its different effect on the
characters unfortunate enough to be stuck there. It proves the backdrop for a
stunningly realized story which refreshingly strays from mythic portents (
"Platoon" ), racial tumultuosness ( the risible "The Walking Dead" ) or a
tinge of schmaltziness ( "Schindler's List" ). The two leads, Stephen Dillane
as a reporter and Emira Nusevic as an orphan with a plight few can identify
with, are extremely believable; not one moment with them involved rings false.
 The question is not what went right. The question is what went wrong. For
one, the film fails to provide a political overview of the war as it
progresses ( the Dillane characters reports an American plane departing from
Sarajevo as it departs, and that's about it.). The assortment of high-profile
supporting actors, ranging from Woody Harrelson as a Yankee reporter "into"
liquor and cigarrettes to Marisa Tomei as a huggable children's aid or
somesuch are incapable of rising above the sketchiness of their characters,
albeit they strive.
 The interrupted use of authentic war footage somewhat hampers the rest of the
film, it makes the fictional characters seem powerless by comparison.
 Still, Winterbottom eschews mawkishness  through flashy, frantic editing and
imaginative use of music. And it's a plus, because he doesn't toy with our
emotions with sentimental blandness. He wants us to know that in war, no one
is victorious.
 Starring Ian Holm, Sarah Polley, Bruce Greenwood, Tom McCamus, Gabrielle
Rose, Arsinee Khanjian, Alberta Watson, Maury Chaykin, Caerthan Banks.
Produced by Atom Egoyan and Camelia Frieberg. Script by Atom Egoyan (Based on
the novel by Russell Banks). Directed by Atom Egoyan. Running Time: 110 mins.
Rated R.
 __________________________________________________________
   Atom Egoyan's powerfully meditative "The Sweet Hereafter" is as anything as
haunting and transcendental as I've seen this year.
 It not only explores the aftermaths of a terrible tragedy with magnificent
subtlety , with cold,  and stunning shots of the backdrop of this mistfortune
but also by telegraphing the sense of devastation that has permeated the small
town with an enormous amount of dignity and respect for each and every soul
affected.
 Ian Holm as the somber, lonely lawyer seeking compensation for the
townspeople, has a decency and a restraint uncommon with lawyers, he's a lion
for the wrong reasons: the pain for having lost his daughter ( she's a druggie
who frequently calls him begging for money  ) is reflected on the town. And in
some mesmerizing flashbacks, we witness how she lost her purity. It's one of
the most strikingly breathtaking takes on the loss of innocence I've ever
seen.
 But the most astounding part goes to Sarah Polly, the peaceful, benevolent
girl who, in contrast to the other characters, remains the most mentally
stable during past, present or future. Her ability to convey concealed pain
and unconditional love is the opposite, yet near-revolutionary role that won
Emily Watson an Oscar nomination for "Breaking the Waves". Both women are torn
apart by an extraordinary incident but it is only then that we truly see,
truly feel, their wordless, omnipotent love. 
 "The Sweet Hereafter" though, is Atom Egoyan's movie and as of now, he is
emerging as the definite face of independent cinema. After surging to
worldwide recognition with 1994's "Exotica", "The Sweet Hereafter" makes him
something few people in this industry can call themselves: an artist. He
interweaves time with a delicacy and sees a soul with a purity that is just
not common.

Author
Jamie Peck
WELCOME TO SARAJEVO
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
Based on the true-life account recorded by British journalist Michael Nicholson 
in the book "Natasha's Story," "Welcome" tells the story of a group of varied 
war reporters stationed in Sarajevo in 1992. Nicholson's film counterpart comes 
in the form of Michael Henderson (Stephen Dillane), a veteran television 
correspondent who, along side of his colleagues (including Woody Harrelson, 
Emily Lloyd and Shallow Grave's Kerry Fox), are angered and perplexed as to how 
Sarajevan troubles are taking backseat to the Royal Family's marital 
difficulties on the news and in the papers. Henderson then sets his sights on 
the impoverished, victimized children at a local orphanage in hopes that people 
will realize how monumental their situation is.
"Sarajevo"'s visual spectacle is so fierce and gritty that rarely does five 
minutes go by without the urge to look away from the screen becoming a tad 
unbearable. Of course, just because a movie is difficult to watch -- and this 
one is -- doesn't make it bad by any means (need I say more than "Schindler's 
List"?), but sights are really the movie's only powerful element. Characters and 
their relationships here are so blank and underdeveloped that they barely 
register; try to tell the female parts from one another -- I dare you. The 
film's eventual focus is on Henderson's effort to rescue a young, saucer-eyed 
urchin (Emira Nusevic), but their scenes are hurried and half-formed. It's hard, 
then, to invest much emotional baggage in the potentially harrowing moments that 
are devoted to them. 
At least we can be happy that "Welcome to Sarajevo" doesn't degenerate into 
blatant manipulation. The screenplay, while frustrating in patches, does allow 
for noble performances from its cast -- especially Dillane and newcomer Nusevic 
-- and provide a handful of memorable (though not necessarily in a good way) 
segments. Technical credits are also fantastic; it's impossible to tell what 
shots are genuine and which ones aren't, giving the movie a very appropriate, 
documentary-like feel. It just seems as though the film is uneven to the point 
of disappointment. "Welcome to Sarajevo" is an extremely admirable effort on 
behalf of its filmmakers, and I'm afraid that's nearly all it is. 

Author
Dennis Schwartz
WELCOME TO SARAJEVO (director: Michael Winterbottom; cast: Stephen
Dillane (Henderson), Woody Harrelson (Flynn), Marisa Tomei (Nina), Emira
Nusevic (Emira), Kerry Fox (Jane Carson), Goran Visnjic (Risto), Emily
Lloyd (Annie McGee), 1997-UK)
What gets into the headlines determines how most of us view the world.
When the civil outbreak in Bosnia reared its ugly head, it had the
unwanted task of painfully reminding the rest of the world that this
troubled area was coming back to haunt the world again. Hatred of other
ethnic groups has never gone away, even in the relative calm of Tito's
post-war Yugoslavia. Now that ethnic war is here again with a particular
vengeance, as ethnic cleansing becomes a government policy, pitting
Serbs against Muslims, the problem is dangerously out in the open.
In this film, the first welcome to Sarajevo you get to this forsaken
region, with burnt out buildings and visable carnage everywhere, after
briefly seeing the joy in the faces of a family coming out of a church
from a wedding, is them being suddenly startled by the shots fired by
snipers as a bullet strikes the mother of the bride, killing her
instantly, as you watch her lying on the street, as reporters snap their
photos from a safe distance until her body is removed by a priest and
Flynn (Woody), who is a loud mouth American reporter, who backs up his
big talk with brave deeds making him a likable enough person among the
other foreign reporters covering the war and a bit of comic relief for
the audience. The film will try to depict the horrors of the war on the
civilian population balanced against the media's reaction to what they
are covering, who are only there for the story of the day, but are
caught in the harsh reality of the situation, surrounded by constant
danger, they are trying to find a way to keep things in perspective for
themselves, to get their story while remaining sane about the madness
enveloping them, to do whatever they can to make some difference in the
conflict, even if they act somewhat glib in doing their job. But there
is no way for a reporter to put out of his mind that more than 200,000
civilians died in this Bosnian war and of the countless other human
tragedies that are so numerous, that most go unreported.
Winterbottom focuses on the true story of a British TV reporter who grew
miffed at his stations uncommitted coverage and shifted gears on them by
going to an orphanage and doing a human interest story, but getting so
entangled with his emotions, that he ends up adopting an abandoned girl,
living and working in the orphanage, bringing her back to Great Britain
with him by using some guile to make this illegal adoption possible.
Stephen Dillane plays Henderson, the British reporter who felt
compassionate enough to keep his promise to the young girl to free her
from the misery of her country. Emira Nusevic plays herself, with the
realistic sense of danger emanating from one who actually lived through
this story. Henderson is shown at work along with his cameraman, Gregg
(James Nesbitt), and his producer, Jane (Kerry Fox), as they compete
with the rest of the media for a story and engage in untold pressures
from their bosses back home. Goran Visnjic (Risto) is movingly portrayed
as the local hired by the TV crew to do the driving and translating for
them, while Marisa Tomei (Nina) is stereotyped as the "do-gooder",
working for a relief agency, sort of a throw-in role that has no depth.
Since the war is precipitated at this point in history by the Serbs, the
film has little choice but to point out that the Serbs are mainly
responsible for what is happening now. To argue back and forth, to say
that atrocities are committed by everyone, as it actually was during the
course of this long historical conflict, would not properly explain the
problem that is now occuring (1992-93) by the genocidal practice of one
side. What is so forcefully happening in Sarajevo, even though it is on
the news everyday, has not caught the American people's attention as
much as you might think it would.The reasons for that are many-fold, but
probably one of the best reasons to explain that, is that the Clinton
adminstration was too preoccupied with domestic policies to turn its
full attention on a situation it had no clear policy on, and European
countries also had no answers and therefore chose to safely not get
involved in their own backyard affairs.
This film offers an honest portrait of the media in action, as it also
depicts a public that is more interested in being entertained than being
informed. The film makes its point by showing after a particularly
disasterous slaughter caught on film, it being replaced from the British
front page headlines with a story about the impending separation of the
Duke and Duchess of York. It seems as if the public could care less
about what is happening there. So it shouldn't be all that surprising
that the public also showed its indifference at the box-office to this
heartfelt film.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
