Title
Review for Sexecutioner (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
Like several other cable channels, Cinemax
shows soft porn films late at night.
As you would expect, most of these aren't
very good.  Made quickly with a low budget,
acting, script, story and sets are secondary
to presenting erotic cinematography featuring
the bodies of some very beautiful women.
"Sexecutioner", at first glance, seems
like just another one of these male fantasy
skin flicks, which hardly anybody bothers
to see from beginning to end.  (They come
in the middle, so to speak.)  The cast is
full of no-names.  The plot is ridiculous
and seems fabricated to throw in lengthy
gratuitous sex scenes.  There's some
occasional bad acting here as well.
The 'story' has Mr. X taking a gig as
executioner for a California penitentiary.
X is dressed from head to toe in a black
robe, with only eyes showing.  Before
throwing the switch to the electric chair,
X insists on spending some quality time
alone with the doomed death row inmates.
At which time, it is revealed that Mr. X
is actually Alexandra (Jennifer Thomas),
a beautiful woman who proceeds to tease
and torture the convicts.  These include
mass murderer Melnick (Robert M. Shaw,
who gives the best performance), cannibal
Decker (Kenny McCabe) and fiance Swanson
(C. Johnston).  There's also subplots
involving the publicity-hungry warden
(Skip Dumas), and his guards, drunken
Hank (Bob Cain) and single mother Wanda
(Loryn Miller).  Jamaica Charley has a
good cameo as an erotic dancer.
But besides the obvious quality of the
writhing bodies of the female leads,
there's something else that's good about
the obscure soft porn film "Sexecutioner".
It's the writing and direction served
up by J.T. Finch, who throws in plenty
of cynical, black humor.  And while the
sex scenes generally detract from the
film's momentum, there is at least an
attempt to incorporate them within
the plot.
briankoller@usa.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
http://www.epinions.com/user-briankoller
