Title
Review for Brokedown Palace (1999)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
John Sylva
Brokedown Palace by John Sylva    Rating: A
http://hometown.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html
Just when you thought the teen movie craze was over, as films like Varsity
Blues and She's All That stopped being released every weekend, Brokedown Palace
comes around as a late summer, teen movie- sort of.  Brokedown Palace features
a teen friendly cast of Claire Danes, Kate Beckinsale, and Lou Diamond
Phillipps, but has a premise not so teen friendly, with a plot similar to that
of the 1998 film Return to Paradise and 1978's Midnight Express.
Best friends Alice (Claire Danes) and Darlene (Kate Beckinsale) are looking to
take a vacation.  Somewhere exotic, yet different from the same old vacations. 
Their destination becomes a 6 dollar a day hotel in Thailand, an eleven day
vacation in which the two hope to find freedom from their everyday lives.  What
they find is the exact opposite.  After sneaking into a first class hotel, the
two meet Nick Parks (Daniel Lapaine), a friendly, suspicious guy who invites
them to Hong Kong for the weekend, while he is on business.  Purchasing their
airline tickets?  Buying them drinks?  Taking them to Hong Kong?  Where does
the niceness end? 
While waiting to board the flight to Hong Kong, Alice and Darlene are assaulted
by police officers, who find heroine in Alice's bags.  The two are immediately
sent to a dirty prison, in which they have no freedom whatsoever.  In seek of
desperate help and freedom, the two contact Hank Green (Bill Pullman), an
American lawyer who resides in Thailand, whom attempts to remove these two
seemingly innocent teens from serving undeserved jail time.  Alice and Darlene
both insist that Nick Parks is involved, but no trace of such a person can be
found.
Throughout the film we see both worlds of Thailand, good and bad, starting with
the beautiful, busy city streets, and then the disgustingly grotesque, dark,
moldy, damp prisons which resemble a concentration camp.  The prison settings
are amazingly realistic, letting you feel the pain,  suffering, and frustration
Alice and Darlene are going through, as they may very well spend the rest of
their lives there.  Thanks to the great acting from Danes and Beckinsale the
film does what it is supposed to- make you feel and route on these two likable
teens.  The screenplay, which is written by David Arata, doesn't have a plot
hole to be found, as every possible way to get the teens out of prison is used,
and every possible way to find Nick Parks is used.  Unlike many screenplays,
Brokedown Palace is complete, answering any questions that might arise from the
situation the two are in.  
Claire Danes steals every scene she is present in, acting her character to
perfection, as Alice becomes a person in the viewer's life, as you feel for her
deeply as she is treated harshly in the smucky prison.  Danes, who at the age
of 20 is one of today's most talented, young actresses, makes a smart move with
Brokedown Palace, after performing in last spring's flop, The Mod Squad.  I
must not be the only one realizing her great talent, as she will be working
with famed director Robert Altman and Academy Award winner Jodie Foster in the
coming years.  After stealing the show in 1997's The Rainmaker, and doing a
fine job in 1996's Romeo and Juliet, Danes proves she has the right stuff to be
a leading actress in Brokedown Palace.
Kate Beckinsale, who was deprived of an Oscar nomination last spring for her
1998 film, The Last Days of Disco, gives an equally terrific performance in
Brokedown Palace as she did in Disco, but her character isn't the main focus of
the film, as Darlene is a static character, while Alice learns who she is and
develops greatly from what you could call, the vacation from hell.
Bill Pullman's role serves as the knot that ties the plot together.  Pullman's
credible performance doesn't act or subtract to the film, but Brokedown Palace
would have been nowhere without Hank Green.
Director Jonathan Kaplan couldn't have done a better job with Brokedown Palace,
as he cleverly uses the effective setting to make you care about the outcome of
the film, as the film engulfs you as to what is happening on screen, keeping
you guessing and wondering until the film's final moments.  After Brokedown
Palace, I felt like I just watched my best friends go through a living
nightmare, due to the acting, screenplay, and direction by Kaplan.  The two
friends act like teens act, using their language, expressions, and actions,
which is the opposite of how last spring's She's All That and Varsity Blues
portrayed teens.  Every element of Brokedown Palace works together perfectly,
creating a film that is virtually flawless.  Hands down the biggest surprise of
the summer.
The Bottom Line- Brokedown Palace will flop at the box office, and many kids
will think its boring and/or pointless.  That's not surprising, considering
that's usually the definition of a four star film.
Rated PG-13 (Mature themes, language, some violence)

Author
Michael Dequina
_Brokedown_Palace_ (PG-13) * 1/2 (out of ****)
The perky print ads for this gravely earnest drama suggest a cosmetics
campaign and, ironically enough, end up painting a more accurate picture
of what the film is really like--and, hence, what is so wrong with it. 
After high school graduation, best friends Alice Marano (Claire Danes)
and Darlene Davis (Kate Beckinsale) decide to take a clandestine trip to
Thailand, where they meet an affable Australian stranger (Daniel Lapaine)
who, after charming them both, frames them for a drug deal.  Suddenly
both of our heroines are each serving a 33-year sentence in the
"Brokedown Palace," and their only hope is an oily American lawyer (Bill
Pullman) with a practice in Bangkok.
_Brokedown_Palace_ shares the basic Americans-in-dirty-foreign-prison
setting with 1978's _Midnight_Express_ and last year's
_Return_to_Paradise_, but that's where the similarities end.  The
"Brokedown Palace" certainly is brokedown, but, compared to most prisons,
it is somewhat of a palace.  What horrors do our normally pampered teens
face?  An involuntary haircut (Alice even admits that she's had worse)
and a bitchy, troublemaking inmate who stuffs fish heads in Alice's
bedroll and coaxes her into touching some (literally) forbidden fruit. 
The rest of the time, the prison resembles nothing more than an unusually
strict and exceptionally unsanitary day camp.  As a result, all drama and
suspense is diminished, and then vanquished completely by Jonathan
Kaplan's glossy direction (the song soundtrack actually would sound at
home in a fragrance commercial) and David Arata's formulaic and
unconvincing screenplay.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline:  http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Fox 2000 Pictures
 Director: Jonathan Kaplan
 Writer:   David Arata, story by Adam Fields & David Arata
 Cast: Claire Danes, Kate Beckinsale, Bill Pullman, Daniel
Lapaine, Jacqui Kim, Lou Diamond Phillips, Amanda De
Cadenet, Paul Walker
   When Mark Twain wrote about innocents abroad, he had
no idea just how much trouble spoiled American kids could
get into when traveling outside their own liberal democracy. 
But Joseph Ruben certainly did when he directed last year's
"Return to Paradise," about two New York City men who are
strongly advised to return to Malaysia to confess their part in
a drug crime lest their friend get hanged.  Like Ruben's film,
Jonathan Kaplan's "Brokedown Palace" is about motifs like
responsibility, conscience and redemption, but his three
principals do not give him the strong performances turned out
by Vince Vaughn, Anne Heche and Joaquin Phoenix in last
year's dramatic movie about a similar subject.
For all its vivid camera work in photogenic Bangkok,
Thailand, "Brokedown Palace" is the sort of melodrama that
would fit more into a quality TV movie niche than it does on
the big screen.  The film is absorbing at times--a movie about
teens which, like "Election," is really directed toward a more
mature audience--but on the whole rings false because the
lawyer's redemption is not at all credible and the final
affirmation of one of the young women is uncalled for and
thereby bogus.
   Despite these faults what you've got to hand to the
production team is its guts in daring to imagine a pattern of
corruption in one of America's friendly nations abroad, a
design which, however exaggerated, has a ring of
authenticity.  The government of Thailand would obviously
not welcome the filming of this movie in Bangkok.  (It was
shot in the Philippines.) After all, if you were a high-ranking
minister in charge of film regulation in a tightly governed
monarchy (actually more of a military dictatorship), would you
welcome a shoot whose script reveals your beloved land as a
Third-World stinkhole? 
   The innocents abroad, teens Alice (Claire Danes) and her
bosom buddy Darlene (Kate Beckinsale), are presented by
their folks with trips to Hawaii for their high-school graduation.
Instead they head out secretly to Thailand because the fun
that should await them there seems less "middle class." 
Indeed.  After sneaking into a fancy hotel pool, they are
caught charging their drinks to an actual guest's room and
are bailed out by charming 20-something Australian
businessman, Nick Parks (Daniel Lapaine), who wines and
dines the two and generously gives them two tickets to Hong
Kong for the weekend.  He is allegedly to join them later. 
Unbeknownst to the girls, Nick is a drug smuggler responsible
for stashing a stash of heroin into their luggage where it will
presumably be picked up by an accomplice in Hong Kong. 
Seized at the airport by police, the girls are tried, quickly
found guilty, and hire money-grubbing, ambulance-chasing
ex-patriate lawyer Hank the Yank (Bill Pullman) to help them
out.  
   Director Kaplan places heavy emphasis on the tense
friendship between the two teens.  Though they have known
each other for years seemingly without conflict, Alice deeply
resents Darlene's behavior in stealing away the dashing
Australian with whom Darlene spends the night.  When
Darlene convinces Alice to fly with her to Hong Kong only to
be arrested along with her, Alice, already on edge from the
romantic interlude, suspects Darlene of yet another, far more
serious betrayal.  Yet when put into a primitive Thai jail to
serve a sentence of 33 years, they stick together, surrounded
by women prisoners and guards whose language they do not
speak.  When the crunch comes and Alice has a chance to
free her friend, she must decide how far she will go--just how
precious their lifelong friendship has been.
   Danes has done better work in the edgy, postmodern
"Romeo and Juliet" and a year after that in "The Rainmaker," 
while some believe that Beckinsale should have been Oscar-
nominated for her role in last year's "The Last Days of
Disco."  Their talent notwithstanding, they have little of
substance to work with this time around, coming off like a
couple of foolish, banal kids--one naive enough to sign a
statement (actually a confession) written in Thai, the other
flustered enough to think she owes her idiotic friend a huge
favor despite her being conned into signing on to the fateful
trip to Hong Kong.  Bill Pullman comes off the best, as
expected, as a sleazy lawyer who sees better opportunities
defending rich kids in a faraway place than he could find in a
far more prosperous country that for all its litigiousness has
too darn many attorneys.  Kaplan takes some fairly
hackneyed tourist shots of the famed temple area in
Bangkok, the seedy, commercial side streets, and best of all
the rank prisons in which inmates have to shout in a group to
their visitors across thirty feet of space.  But the movie will
have served its purpose if only to warn prospective tourists
headed for foreign lands to check their luggage before
heading to the airport and once again before passing through
customs.  After all, what chance have you got to be found not
guilty when everyone from the hotel bellmen to the Minister of
Justice is on the take--not to forget high U.S. officials in our
embassies abroad--their financial assets dependent on how
many unsuspecting tourists they can railroad to the brig?

Author
Chuck Schwartz
CrankyCriticŽ movie reviews: Brokedown Palace
Rated [PG-13], 100 minutes
Starring Claire Danes, Kate Beckinsale, Lou Diamond Phillips, Jacqueline
Kim and Bill Pullman
Screenplay by David Arata
>From a story by Adam Fields & David Arata
Directed by Jonathan Kaplan
website: http://www.foxmovies.com
Sure, stories of innocent Americans wrongfully busted and languishing in
the hellish conditions of foreign jails have been done before . . . but
we don't compare to 'em. Probe your video store owner's memory 'cuz
Cranky can only think of two, offhand.
Brokedown Palace is the story of two bestest of friends who sneak off to
Thailand (their parents think they're in Hawaii) as a post-high school
graduation jaunt. Why Thailand? Well, it's a particularly teenage bit of
reasoning that leads 'em to this destination, and an amusing couple of
seconds of film which I won't spill. It's one of the lighter moments in
David Arata's screenplay, which tries to stress the bonds of friendship
between Alice (Claire Danes) and Darlene (Kate Beckinsale). It doesn't
work well, which explains some of the audience reaction reported below.
Most of the front half of Palace is narrated by Danes via a cassette
tape she's managed to send to "Yankee Hank" Greene (Bill Pullman), an
American lawyer partnered legally and matrimonially with a Thai local
named Yon (Jacqueline Kim). Hank ain't no white collared, built on
principle, legal eagle. He's not above shmoozing the local Drug
Enforcement Agency liaison (Lou Diamond Phillips) for information or
doing the investigative work the local police don't (or won't) do. But
when the money is gone, so is Hank.
And money doesn't go very far in the Thai justice system.
What remains is a friends against all odds story, with all the twists
that that would imply, and another twists and turns filled subplot which
I won't spoil. Danes' character is more street savvy, Beckinsale's more
naive and both actors do decent work. The problem, at least for me, is
that the pair didn't click as true friends. They come off more as
partying buddies, though that may be the generation of years gap between
Cranky and these kidlets.
When the big dramatic climax came, the woman to my right was sniffling
mightily. Those in front of me were cackling like hyenas and many walked
out calling Brokedown Palace "ridiculous." Those were the women, who
should be more sympathetic. Geez, I'm the one who's supposed to be
cranky . . .
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Brokedown Palace, he would have
paid...
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 1999
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. On the web at
http://www.crankycritic.com

Author
James Sanford
         "One night in Bangkok, and the tough guys tumble," sang Murray
Head in the musical "Chess." Unfortunately for Alice Marano (Claire
Danes) and Darlene Davis (Kate Beckinsale) that lyric proves prophetic
in "Brokedown Palace," the latest cinematic sermon about the dangers of
visiting Asian countries. Fresh out of their Ohio high school, Alice and
Darlene jet off to Thailand for a post-graduation vacation -- "Hawaii
seemed so middle-class," Alice explains -- and wind up staying quite a
bit longer than they expected after they're caught with two kilos of
heroin in one of their backpacks.
 Had the girls gone to the movies in the last few years they
would have known travelling abroad will put you on the highway to Hell.
Didn't they see "Red Corner," in which poor Richard Gere was framed for
murder while on a business trip to China, or last year's "Return to
Paradise," which found Vince Vaughn and his buddies rotting in jail
after trying to export drugs from Thailand? No, they didn't -- and
neither did anyone else, for that matter.
 It's unlikely "Palace" will attract much of an audience either,
since it's about as thrilling as a long line at customs. The screenplay,
apparently based on those recorded warnings played in airports, follows
Alice and Darlene on a downward spiral as they hook up with a slick
blond Australian (Daniel Lapaine) who offers to fly them to Hong Kong
for a weekend of high times. Instead, the duo are railroaded by shifty
bureaucrats into a prison populated entirely by stock characters (the
easy-going Jamaican, the inscrutable dragon lady, the jaded
Englishwoman, etc.); somewhere, the Hawaii tourism board is chuckling.
 If "Palace" aims to be the female version of "Midnight
Express," it consistently rings false. For one thing, the jail is
frequently shot through gauzy golden filters, making it look more like a
dullish day camp than the nightmarish hole everyone keeps insisting it
is. Secondly, even though Darlene and Alice are supposed to be naive,
they keep doing such foolish things -- signing statements they can't
read, plotting escapes within earshot of their enemies -- you can't help
but feel they're to blame for their bad luck, not the Thai court system.
         Director Jonathan Kaplan, seemingly aware of the script's
failings, often resorts to dreamy montages of his stars to fill out
half-baked scenes. These sequences are accompanied by ethereal
dance-trance songs by Delirium and Sarah Brightman, and though the music
doesn't really jibe with the action, it's a lot easier to listen to than
David Arata's stale dialogue.
 Through it all, Danes and Beckinsale struggle to bring some
conviction to a story sorely in need of it. Though Danes occasionally
has to strain to hit Alice's emotional peaks, she's a good deal more
credible here than she was playing a former junkie in the disasterous
"Mod Squad," and Beckinsale, the fabulous British actress who did
memorable work last year in "Shooting Fish" and "The Last Days of
Disco," eloquently captures Darlene's confusion and despair. As the
lawyer who tries to spring them, Bill Pullman is undermined by an
unconvincing character. James Sanford

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Less effective than last year's Return to Paradise, Brokedown Palace
dwells on several of the same themes as the almost-straight-to-video
Vince Vaughn/Joaquin Phoenix thriller  narcotics, making the ultimate
sacrifice for your best friend, and the injustice of Third World legal
systems.  New here are a thinner script, a weaker ending, and the
casting of two females in the lead roles.
The two women in question are Alice (Claire Danes, The Mod Squad) and
Darlene (Kate Beckinsale, The Last Days of Disco).  They are both recent
high school grads that work as hotel maids in safe, suburban Upland,
Ohio.  Alice and Darlene plan a summer vacation, but decide that Hawaii
is too `middle class' for them.  They settle on Thailand after a bottle
of beer from that country shatters during a party - talk about a sign
from above.
Since `Thailand' actually means `freedom' in English, both girls escape
to the Asian paradise, although Darlene still tells her parents that
they're headed for Hawaii.  Before long, the duo are squealing at their
six-dollar-a-night roach-infested hotel, whining about the unbearable
heat, and complaining that the city's river is contaminated with feces
and unsuitable for swimming.  Acting?  Probably not.  Remember the Thai
government forcing a real-life apology from Claire Danes after she
mewled that the country was full of giant cockroaches, babies with flies
buzzing around their heads, and people missing arms and legs?
Before long, the two brats sneak into the pool at a five-star hotel,
charging their drinks to a made-up room number.  As security closes in
on them, a hunky Aussie named Nick Parks (Daniel Lapaine, Dangerous
Beauty) saves the day by saying that Alice and Denise are with him.
Within twenty-four hours, both girls have fallen for him, are fighting
over him, and they decide to meet him in Bangkok for a couple of days
after his business weekend in Hong Kong.
Of course, Alice and Darlene don't know that Nick Parks is really Skip
Karns (his alias is an anagram), a drug smuggler that uses naďve
Americans as mules to transport his wares.  Somehow, two giant tins
containing 2 kilos of heroin are sneaked into Alice's backpack, and both
women are immediately dragged off to a dank and even more roach-infested
prison and soon found guilty of drug trafficking.  So how did the drugs
get into Alice's backpack and how could she not notice the extra
weight?  Never mind that.  The real question is why someone would use an
anagram for an alias.  And if you need to be that clever, why not use
Sink Prank?  Or K. Crap Skin?
Enter `Yankee Hank' Green (Bill Pullman, Lake Placid), an expatriate
American barrister that agrees to help the prisoners.  He tries to talk
to the American embassy and its ambassador (played by Lou Diamond
Phillips, The Big Hit), but seems only to be spinning his wheels.  Hey,
speaking of spinning wheels, Palace's script comes from two debut
screenwriters (David Arata and Adam Fields, the latter a producer on
Fox's other box office flop Ravenous) and is directed by the guy who
made Bad Girls (Jonathan Kaplan).  Credit cinematographer Newton Thomas
Sigel for the moody, atmospheric feel to the film.
Other things to keep an eye (or ear) out for are a horrible cover of The
Clash's `Rock the Casbah,' a cameo from ex-punk rocker John Doe as
Alice's dad, and one odd moment during the weepy finale where the pixie
Brit Beckinsale flubs her impeccable American accent.  Males 18-35 will
also relish the scene where Danes and Beckinsale `spoon' each other on a
bed.  The remaining demographics will have to look a bit harder for
something to enjoy.  (1:46 - PG-13 for brief strong language, drug
related material and some violent content)

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Jonathan Kaplan's cautionary tale explores the same territory
as "Midnight Express" (1978) and "Return to Paradise" (1998), as
Americans suspected of drug smuggling wind up in a Third World
prison. Claire Danes and Kate Beckinsale stars as Ohio teens who tell
their parents they're off to Hawaii when they trek to Bangkok for an
11-day getaway to celebrate their high school graduation. After seeing
the usual sights, they sneak into a posh hotel where they pretend to
be guests enjoying the swimming pool. But when they invent a room
number to sign a bar check, their ruse is discovered. A charming young
Australian (Daniel LaPaine) comes to their rescue, paying court to
them both. When he invites them to join him in Hong Kong for the
weekend, they accept the plane tickets. But when they get to the
airport, they're arrested by armed police who find heroin in their
luggage. Thai justice moves quickly, so they're convicted and sent to
a dark, dank, filthy prison to serve 33-year sentences.  No one really
cares if the Australian may have planted the drugs in their luggage -
they're still guilty of carrying them. And the Thai penal system is
riddled with corruption. The girls' only hope is a mercenary
expatriate American lawyer, "Yankee Hank" (Bill Pullman). Writers
David Arata and Adam Fields and director Jonathan Kaplan weave a
cynical tale and elicit strong performances, particularly from Claire
Danes. But it's curiously similar to a story printed in "Marie Claire"
last year about two young women serving sentences on drug-smuggling
charges in a Peruvian prison, even to the detail of having cockroaches
crawl into the girls' ears. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Brokedown Palace" is a depressing, disturbing 4. It's a grim reminder
about the danger of gullibility.

Author
Michael Elliott
DIRECTED BY:      Jonathan Kaplan
STARRING:         Claire Danes, Kate Beckinsale, Bill Pullman, Jacqui Kim,
Daniel Lapaine, Lou Diamond Phillips
WRITTEN BY:       David Arata
RATED:            PG-13 for brief strong material, drug related material,
and some violent content.
SCRIPTURE
REFERENCES:       2 Corinthians 5:10, Ecclesiastes 12:14, Romans 14:12
BROKEDOWN PALACE has three things working against it.  It has been done
before.  (MIDNIGHT EXPRESS)  It has been done recently.  (RETURN TO
PARADISE)  And it has been done better.  (Both of the above)  But since
lack of originality has never stopped filmmakers, we find ourselves with
another opportunity to examine what happens when American tourists are
arrested for drug smuggling while in a foreign country.
Alice and Darlene are best friends.  Deciding that they are deserving of
one last unforgettable vacation together after their high school
graduation, they make plans to travel to Thailand.  Why?  They have no
real reason except a hotel room there can be had for six dollars per
night.  Besides, Thailand means "freedom", a piece of trivia that proves
irresistible to two naive and iconoclastic young girls.  Looking for a way
to break free of the "oppression" of their privileged upbringing, they
pack their bags and head to Thailand, giggling all the way.
Upon encountering the intense and unrelenting heat of Eastern Asia, Alice
gets the brainstorm to fraudulently lounge pool side at a five star
resort.  There they meet Nick Parks who, after partying with them, invites
them on a weekend jaunt to Hong Kong.  But a funny thing happens on the
way to Macao... they get busted for possession of heroin and tossed into
prison without a moment of hesitation.
The rest of the movie deals with their attempts to prove their innocence,
first to the authorities, then to their lawyer, and finally to themselves.
Claire Danes (THE MOD SQUAD) is Alice, the "wild" one of the duo.
Throughout the film, Miss Danes, bravely defiant and wearing her teen-aged
angst on her shoulder like a badge of honor, poses and postures more than
she acts.  Whatever it is that she's doing is not enough to lift the story
by newcomers Adam Fields and David Arata out of the melodramatic rut that
it has dug for itself.
Kate Beckinsale (THE LAST DAYS OF DISCO) plays Darlene with a bit more
subtlety.  The more reserved of the pair, Miss Beckinsale conveys a
sweetness and charm that is set in contrast to the bleak and unforgiving
environment into which her character is thrust.
Bill Pullman (LAKE PLACID) and Jacqui Kim (STAR TREK: GENERATIONS)
portray the girls' lawyers, Yankee Hank Green and his wife Yon.  They take
the case, at first for the money it brings and then later for the
injustice being levied against their clients.  Mr. Pullman's performance
as a man trying to work in a strange and crooked system is the best thing
about the movie.
Director Jonathan Kaplan (THE ACCUSED) obviously positioned the film to
appeal to the teen-age market.  It has the feel of being made with the
same arrogance of youth and counterculture mentality that seems to be so
prevalent among our teens.  The parents of the film are either helpless
and weak or hopelessly opinionated fools.  They are rendered powerless
because they work within the system rather than against it.
It is a system that does not look favorably upon our heroines.  The girls
learn that in Thailand, when accused of a crime, their entire lives come
under scrutiny.  As the Republicans tried to tell us in 1992, "character
does matter."
Ultimately, we will all be judged according to our actions and words.
Not by a crooked or corrupt system which operates on bribery and pride but
rather by the Judge of all righteousness before whom all will eventually
stand.
"For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ; that every
one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he hath
done, whether it be good or bad." 2 Corinthians 5:10 [KJV]
At that time, neither bribes nor excuses will have an impact.  The only
things that will change the outcome of our time before the judgment seat
of Christ  are the actions we take and the decisions we make prior to
reaching it.

Author
Bruce Miller
Directed by Jonathan Kaplan
Written by Adam Fields (story) & David Arata
Cast: Claire Danes (Alice Marano), Kate Beckinsale (Darlene Davis),
Bill Pullman ('Yankee' Hank Green), Jacqui Kim (Yon Green), Daniel
Lapaine (Nick Parks), Tom Amandes (Doug Davis), Aimee Graham (Beth Ann
Gardner), Kay Tong Lim (Chief Detective Jagkrit), Beulah Quo (Guard
Velie), Henry O (Emissary to the Crown), Bahni Turpin (Jamaican
Prisoner), Amanda de Cadenet (Australian Prisoner)
I rented "Brokedown Palace" last night blind, having heard nothing
about it beforehand, and I enjoyed it immensely despite some flaws.
For anyone wishing to have the same experience I would suggest
reserving judgement of the movie until viewing it in its entirety.
That is no easy task.  Superficially, it bears an unfortunate (and not
necessarily unintended) resemblance to several other movies, notably
"Return to Paradise" and "Midnight Express."  As a result nearly every
review of "Brokedown Palace" I subsequently read became hopelessly
entangled in making the obvious comparisons.  The consequence was
nearly universal condemnation, which is a shame as this is a fine film.
For those who have yet to view the movie, let me say that it is not an
attempt to portray the nightmarish reality of the Third World criminal
justice system (as was "Midnight Express") nor completely the moral
dilemma and examination of the meaning of friendship and humanity that
was the heart of "Return to Paradise."  In my view, if this film is to
be compared to any other source it would have to be Joseph Conrad's
acclaimed novel, "Lord Jim."
Problematically, the basic storyline seems more than familiar: two
American teenage girls on vacation are sentenced to spend most of their
lives in a Thai prison for drug smuggling in an obvious set-up
involving a suave con-man, a shadowy criminal conspiracy and a corrupt
Third World "justice" system.
The girls are Alice (Claire Danes) and Darlene (Kate Beckinsale).
They're life-long buddies who planned a high-school graduation trip to
Hawaii, and then secretly changed their destination to the more exotic
Thailand without telling their parents. Once there, they find a $6
hotel and go sight-seeing, which includes sneaking into a luxury hotel
to sip expensive drinks poolside. They get caught trying to charge the
bill to the wrong room, a minor transgression which will later come
back to haunt them, but they are saved from hotel security by a
charming, friendly Australian, Nick (Daniel LaPaine), who takes care of
the bill with a more polished execution of the girl's scam.  He then
proceeds to separate the girls and make smooth moves, first toward
Alice, then toward Darlene.
By now alarm bells are going off among viewers.  The ever-present Nick
is too slick and his stories don't add up (to us)--the girls, of
course, are too naive to notice.  Long before it happens, we're
anticipating the inevitable disappearance of the fast-talking smuggler
and the arrest of our teenaged sitting-ducks at the airport en route to
Hong Kong caught holding the bag (literally) containing heroin.  Just
as predictably, the Thai police and courts do their part in meting out
injustice and our trusting tourists are prison-bound for a long
stretch.  Left unanswered is the red herring issue of whether one or
the other of the girls was a willing accomplice.  For those in need of
a ready answer, might I suggest closer scrutiny of the bell hop at the
girl's fleabag hotel.
As one door after another to their comfortable former life is closed,
the girls and their families turn in desperation to the noiresque
expatriate lawyer/fixer "Yankee Hank" (Bill Pullam) and his Thai-born
partner-wife.  A recurring element of the movie is the tension between
appearance and reality as expressed in one of the film's tag lines,
"Who do you trust?," and Hank is no exception although seasoned movie-
goers and those familiar with Pullman's oeuvre will find few surprises.
Much of the remainder of the movie is a smorgasbord of intriguing
themes incompletely explored in short-hand fashion.  Lou Diamond
Phillips, for instance, plays a delightfully sinister and callous DEA
agent who, while appearing to be casually accommodating to Hank,
withholds vital information at crucial moments.  Is he part of a wider
conspiracy? With an inherently powerful, if somewhat tired premise, the
film offers by parts a riveting courtroom drama, a prison story, and a
potential character study of American teens, their relationship, and
what constitutes friendship between them.  The result is reasonably
engaging and suspenseful, with the girls' interaction, Hank's
investigation, and the various trials and hearings, offering hope for
their release, delivering tension--as does the foredoomed possibility
of their escape.
If "Brokedown Palace" has a major flaw, it is its creators' tendency,
like time-constrained tourists, to take frequent side trips down
fascinating alleys only to reverse direction half-way down and return
to the story's main avenue.
And, if that were all there was to "Brokedown Palace," it wouldn't be a
very good movie.  But I believe the writers and director were after
bigger game and, in this, they succeeded.  For the main theme of the
movie, like the proffered name of its location, is freedom--in all its
permutations.  Ultimately, the other sub-themes may be considered
window dressing.
Young and pretty, Alice (Danes) is an old soul; a wild, streetwise
teenager with a thirst for freedom and adventure. Presented as a
perfect blend of yin and yang, dark and light, is her cautious best
friend, Darlene (Beckinsale).  Clear-eyed and straightforward, Alice is
more complex than her friend. She comes from a poorer background, has a
reputation for getting into trouble and has lost the trust of everyone
(including her own father). Whereas Darlene's life is "on-track," aimed
at college, marriage, kids, a career, a suburban home, middle age and
"fulfillment," Alice's is uncertain, unfocused, and yearning. One
poignant scene in the film shows Darlene shouting across an open moat
to visitors--friends and relatives from home, whose lives continue
while hers is in limbo. Tellingly, Alice is present but not included.
Just as revealing of their different personalities, when Alice and Dar
first come to Thailand, the openness and delight on Alice's face
doesn't read as simple naiveté; the way she stands up and stretches as
she and her friend ride along in a small boat, reaching toward the sun,
she really is drinking in what she believes to be freedom, while "Dar"
remains seated in the shade.
"Brokedown Palace" begins with an admission by Alice of her guilt in a
tape recording sent to Hank.  However unintentional, it's all Alice's
fault.  She's responsible for persuading her friend to lie to her
parents, to sneak away from the safety of Hawaii to the perils of
Thailand, to try the petty scam which places them in the clutches of
the evil Nick.  (In case one misses this point in the inevitable
confusion of a film's beginning, Darlene obligingly reminds Alice of
her culpability in prison.)  Dar, of course, is the willing dupe which,
in her view, confers innocence.  Never mind that it was her coercion of
a reluctant Alice to accompany her to Hong Kong which placed them in
police custody in the first place or that her naive confession sealed
their fate.  Dar is innocent.
It doesn't matter.  Alice is the subject of this movie.  She and her
journey toward personal freedom.  Along the way we are treated to an
unsympathetic portrait of the shallow American culture which created
these girls with their half-baked sensibilities and materialistic
goals. In the end, that culture, like its representatives,"Yankee" Hank
and Dar's father (a "man who knows how to grease the wheels"), proves
as impotent as its government in the face of the girl's tragedy.
Thailand's culture, contrary to most opinion, comes off much better by
comparison.  It amazes me that reviewers argued this point at both
extremes.  I believe the filmmaker's view was that Thai culture is
vastly different from the American but not necessarily inferior.  The
Thai (with the sole exceptions of a corrupt official and a spiteful
prison spy) were uniformly consistent in their behavior and true to
their principles.  The girls were shown to be treated no better but
certainly no worse than the native-born.  Their prison (in stark
contrast to the probable reality) was no hellhole, being relatively
clean and sunlit.  The prison authorities demanded good hygiene,
provided medical care when needed, and "hard manual labor" consisted of
picking grass!  The Thai guards were authoritarian (what else?) but
certainly not routinely sadistic.  As for the Thai justice system, the
reasoning of the Thai judges, during both an appeal hearing and in the
film's penultimate scene was devastating in its logic and morality.
'Freedom' has many faces and "Brokedown Palace" explores many of them.
In the extreme, we have freedom of the body and freedom of the spirit.
Some settle for the former alone while others remain imprisoned with an
entire nation to roam without the latter. But freedom seldom comes
without a price.  Which is why the movie's other tag lines are: "What
is your dream?" and "How far would you go?"
I believe I could make a good case for the interpretation that the
person who attains freedom, incarcerated or not, by film's end is
Alice. She finds redemption and salvation through the acceptance of
personal responsibility.  I think the light bathing only her figure
among the assembled prisoners in the final scene visually signals that
fact.  Kate Beckinsale's character might more properly be likened to
the "released" temple bird referred to twice during the film, "trained
to fly back to its cage." As the Thai magistrate observed in the film's
climactic scene, the issue was always one of "character;" and the
Jamaican prisoner made it clear that "freedom" is achieved within
oneself.  If one thinks back over the movie, which character was
transformed by their experiences?
Increasingly, the cinema landscape seems to have become littered with
endless permutations of 'Kung Fu Woman'--female characters virtually
indistinguishable from male action figures.  Here, at last, is the
story of a modern heroine.
In reading the many user's comments, I was struck by what seems an
unusual phenomenon: whether or not a person liked the movie, almost
everyone praised the actors.  Think about that.  When was the last time
you came away from a motion picture possibly hating it, but raving
about all the performances in it?  Do yourself a favor: rent "Brokedown
Palace" and watch it with a open mind.  There's more there than meets
the eye.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     In the bowels of a Thai prison, two American girls learn about the
horrors of bad judgment -- the hard way.  Alice Marano (Claire Danes) and
Darlene Davis (Kate Beckinsale), two high school grads from suburban Ohio,
had only intended their trip to Thailand as a final pre-college fling.
That was before Australian seducer Nick Parks (Daniel Lapaine) played them
for suckers and set them up as heroin smugglers.  Now, in the first year
of a 33-year sentence, Alice and Darlene are beginning to discover what
damnation really means.  It means vaguely drab pixie haircuts, heavily
filtered sunlight streaming into an exercise yard, and a non-stop
soundtrack from some techno-Thai concept of Lilith Fair.  Truly, this is
hell on earth.
     Jonathan Kaplan's BROKEDOWN PALACE is one of those gritty "issue"
dramas that stabs itself in the heart by assuming the audience's
sensibilities can only handle so much grit.  The opening half hour works
well enough, following the two friends on their early youthful adventures
and establishing the basic framework of their relationship.  Alice, the
instigator, makes all the daring choices; Darlene, the good-girl follower,
plays along with her best pal's caprices.  Danes doesn't go overboard with
her character, keeping Alice's devilish streak within the realm of
rebellious plausibility, while Beckinsale struggles a bit more with
Darlene's naivete.  When Nick enters the picture, submerged jealousies
begin to surface, establishing how easily a life-long friendship can be
strained.  It may not be particularly inspired story-telling, but it's
solid enough.
     Then the girls become inmates, and the whole thing falls apart.  The
theme of BROKEDOWN PALACE may not be "look at the squalor of Thai
prisons," but it shouldn't have been "look how attractive a Thai prison
can be with the right cinematography."  Kaplan shoots bridge sequences as
elaborate music videos, turning his actresses into cute models instead of
tormented characters.  Meanwhile, the various government officials who
sneer and smirk their way through the film -- including Kay Tong Lim as a
corrupt Thai detective and Lou Diamond Phillips (in a gruesomely bad
performance) as a nonchalant U.S. embassy flunkie -- provide the tidy
villainy we require.  With a script by first-time screenwriter David Arata
that forgets sub-plots and provides simplistic outrage, BROKEDOWN PALACE
proves itself to be fairly lazy film-making.  It pre-digests its story
into over-wrought melodrama.
     There's a hint of promise when Bill Pullman enters the story as
Yankee Hank, an expatriate American attorney with that typically
expatriate American sense of me-first-ism.  It's fairly obvious from the
get-go that his character arc will be straight out of CASABLANCA -- a 
jaded pseudo-Rick Blaine who gives up his own financial interest for the
greater good -- but Pullman is an interesting enough actor to pull it off.
Unfortunately, his story also pulls us away from the two central
characters.  Though in a way that's a good thing -- the fewer scenes spent
in the meticulously unpleasant prison, the better -- it's also a
distraction from Alice's theoretically central conversion to selfless
friend.  
     Comparisons between BROKEDOWN PALACE and last year's RETURN TO
PARADISE are inevitable -- both are tales of Americans languishing abroad,
seasoned with self-sacrifice for the sake of a friend.  But as uneven as
RETURN TO PARADISE was, it approached every similar point with more
provocative shades of gray.  Instead of RETURN TO PARADISE's two casual
acquaintances, the friends are best buddies from the cradle, making the
choice considerably less complicated; instead of making the protagonist
convincingly selfish from the outset, it makes her a misunderstood wild
child.  Kaplan and Arata want desperately for the plight of their
characters to matter, but the final hour is too irretrievably phony to
provide an emotional pull.  Viewers who find this sort of morality play
uplifting may find their hearts swelling at the conclusion.  I found mine
sinking as BROKEDOWN PALACE closed on the beatific smile of an actress,
placed center stage while a well-placed beam of sunlight captured her
soaring spirit in an MTV prison.

Author
Steve Rhodes
"We shouldn't be here," the frightened girl says on the tape that she's
sent to their prospective lawyer in Thailand.  "We're from Ohio, for
God's sakes!"
No, Jonathan Kaplan's BROKEDOWN PALACE is not based on a true story, but
most of it plays like some true-life tale that you've read before in
your newspaper.  Two girls, life-long buddies, have one big fling before
they go their separate ways after high school.  Where better than
Thailand -- an exotic and beautiful country in which they've heard that
you can live for an entire summer on $500?
As Alice, the poorer of the two, Claire Danes plays a good kid with a
little bit of a wild streak.  Kate Beckinsale, who was the best thing in
last year's wonderful and under-appreciated LAST DAYS OF DISCO, plays
Darlene, the slightly more naive of the two.  Actually, they are close
enough in looks and morals to be non-identical twins.  Both are quite
credible as likable, all-American teens who get sucked into a tragedy in
which they quickly lose all control.
It starts off innocently enough.  On a lark, Alice suggests that they
sneak into a swanky hotel in order to beat the heat with a swim.  When
the waiter asks their room number for the food and drinks that they
ordered, it's easy -- way, too easy -- to just pick some three-digit
number at random.
After being caught, they are saved and later wooed by a handsome
software instructor.  Soon he invites them to go to Hong Kong with him
for a few days, but he has to leave on an earlier flight.  In the
check-in line, soldiers with automatic weapons surround the girls and
pull out drugs that have somehow gotten into their backpack.  Before
they know it, they're sentenced to spend the next quarter century of
their lives in a Thai prison.
"I wasn't that scared at first," Alice continues on the tape that she
sent to the lawyer whom they hope to hire.  "I mean, I've had worse
haircuts."  The script by Adam Fields and David Arata has many such
tonality problems.  The girls are sometimes suitably scared and other
times unrealistically flippant, as in the comment about haircuts when
they are trying convince this lawyer, whom they've never met, just how
desperate they are.
On a more positive note, the prison has the feel of a real prison rather
than the overdrawn ones typically shown in films.  The girls' problems
include barely edible soup, a little sadistic treatment and bugs
everywhere; but most of all it is the lack of freedom and the daily
tedium of prison life that are their chief tormentors.
The best of the supporting cast is the ever-reliable Bill Pullman, as
their disheveled and slightly sleazy lawyer, Yankee Hank.  Hank, who
really has a heart of gold, has an early scene in which he calls
Darlene's father back in the states in order to negotiate his fee.  Hank
writes down successively smaller figures on his paper pad.  Before Hank
mentions a figure to her father, he has already negotiated himself down
on his own price.  Hank tells his wife and law partner that he doesn't
care if they win; even the reduced fee will pay for a new car.
Lou Diamond Phillips, on the other hand, overacts with a vengeance as
Roy, a smarmy, hard drinking, fast living DEA agent.  Roy's agenda isn't
clear, nor is his purpose in the story.
The funniest scene in the film, which is either boldly bad or terribly
cute, has Hank threatening a corrupt official with the most awful
retribution America has to offer.  If the official doesn't help, he'll
unleash Larry King and Barbara Walters on him.  Once they start, the
official's life will be unbearable.  Imagine Barbara, for example,
walking through Darlene's bedroom on national television as her sobbing
parents say that it's just as she left it.
The story takes many turns along the way.  Sometimes the writers are
quite inventive, and other times they borrow heavily from similar
movies.  The best and worst of the story is its resolution.  Your
thoughts afterwards are liable to be a conflicting mixture of
fascination and disbelief.  The ending visual image is definitely the
low point of the entire movie and the least credible.
BROKEDOWN PALACE runs 1:40.  It is rated PG-13 for brief strong
language, drug related material and some violent content and would be
fine for kids 12 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Walter Frith
How much trouble can you get into abroad when trusting strangers?  Quite a
bit if you witness the film 'Brokedown Palace' which is sort of a female
version of 1978's 'Midnight Express'.  In that film, based on a true story
(which won Oliver Stone his first Oscar in the category of Best Adapted
Screenplay), an American named William Hayes was caught trying to willfully
smuggle drugs out of Turkey and was caught at the airport and sentenced to
life imprisonment.  That film showed his criminal attempt, his capture, his
trial, his sentencing and his torture at the hands of prison officials which
was disturbing to watch at times.  Director Alan Parker was able to capture
the sadistic aspects of human rights gone awry and the film had depth,
brutal imagery and an overwhelming sense of violence necessary to the film's
point.  'Brokedown Palace' is a lukewarm version of this, told with a
sedated sense of benign occupancy and little power to really make it fly.
Two high school graduates from Ohio (Claire Danes as Alice Marano and Kate
Beckinsale as Darlene Davis) are about to enjoy freedom away from the
classroom.  They decide to embark on a journey for the summer to Bangkok,
Thailand where a friend told them that it is possible to spend the whole
summer there for about $500 U.S.  Deciding to expand their horizons, the two
young women go and find this third world tourist spot isn't all it's cracked
up to be.  Their $6 a night hotel is infested with cockroaches, and it's
dirty, tiny and they have to share the same bed.  After seeing the sites,
dancing away the night life and getting closer to the leisurely side of life
they meet a seemingly friendly Australian chap named Nick (Daniel Lapaine)
to whom they open their hearts.  He is able to convince them both to take a
trip with him to Hong Kong.  The girls are nabbed by Thai authorities at the
airport in the form of a small army, complete with machine guns to
intimidate the most erratic criminal and the girls are arrested.  Their
crime?  Smuggling drugs out of the country without their knowledge.  Of
course, they're innocent.  This happens when they trust a cab driver to put
their bags in the trunk on the way to the airport and the girls are duped
into being naive patsies and a diversion for the real drug smuggling to go
off without a hitch.
At their trial, they are both deemed to be of poor character.  An incident
is brought up by the prosecution regarding how the two tried to pass
themselves off as guests at a ritzy local hotel, sitting by the pool and
ordering expensive drinks.  This doesn't look good for them and based on
this fact and different circumstantial points they are convicted and
sentenced to 33 years behind bars.  An American lawyer practicing in Hong
Kong (Bill Pullman) tries to handle their case and finds little support from
a U.S. embassy official (Lou Diamond Phillips) who doubts the girls are
innocent.
Director Jonathan Kaplan who made the very lacerating 'Unlawful Entry' in
1992 and directed Jodie Foster to her first Oscar for 'The Accused' in 1988
strikes out this time around with a story too sedated for its own good.
There are some good moments in the film and there are moments of deep
dramatic presentation and a fairly good performance from Claire Danes as one
of the convicted but Kate Beckinsale gives a rather stiff performance and
the screenplay by Adam Fields and David Arata lacks emotional fire and the
overall presentation of the film is comparable to having the feeling that a
nightmare such as this should be more intoxicating and should put the
audience over more with its protagonists but little sympathy is generated
for them and this is wrong since they are innocent!  The film has a good
ending in my view.  It's a mix of sorrow and happiness together but may be
the wrong way to end the film in the eyes of many and you may feel that
nothing concrete has been accomplished and that the whole point of the film
may be lost since the bad will seem to over shadow the good.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Eugene Novikov
 Starring Claire Danes, Bill Pullman. Rated PG-13
I've seen Brokedown Palace twice before. The first time it was called
Red Corner and then Return to Paradise (you are welcome to click on the
link and refresh your memory concerning the latter as I will come back
to it numerous times in this review). This, then, is nothing but typical
Hollywood recycling of earlier, superior movies. Such rehashing almost
never makes anything decent and the resulting film suffers all the more
if its predecessors are still fresh in our minds.
The first scene has "Yankee" Hank, a lawyer, receive an audio tape in
the mail. He inserts the tape into a player and listens to the story of
Alice (Claire Danes) and Darlene (Kate Beckinsale) two recent high
school graduates who come to Thailand on vacation and meet a charming
Australian fellow who convinces them to go to Hong Kong with him. At the
airport they are stopped by police who find an inordinate amount of
cocaine in one of their backpacks. Alice was carrying the backpack and
Darlene was the one who packed it but both claim to have no idea where
the narcotics came from.
They are arrested and taken to a typically brutal and unlivable Eastern-
world penetentiary where one of the girls is deceived into signing a
confession. The girls are then urged to consult with a lawyer, as there
is no sign of the mysterious Aussie, whom the girls suspect of planting
the drugs in their luggage. The lawyers they talk to both advise that
they plead guilty to the crime in hopes that the judge is lenient and
sentences them to a mere 40 years in jail as opposed to life. If they
plead innocent and are unable to provide indemnifying evidence, the
lawyer says, then the judge will not think twice before sending them to
jail for the rest of their lives.
In the movie's most compelling act, Darlene's father arrives at the
scene and attempts to enlist the help of the American embassy. Not
surprisingly, he gets no help from the embassy, leaving Alice and
Darlene with but one hope: the services of "Yankee" Hank Green, who is
more than sympathetic to the girls' cause but is equally concerned about
money and his other pressing cases.
Brokedown Palace is most reminiscent of last year's near-brilliant
Return to Paradise which placed a riveting moral dilemma in what was
essentially the same plot. This is the Hollywood version of Return to
Paradise; a sanitized reworking of what was a breathtakingly real work.
That movie was resolved mercilessly and believably while the resolution
here comes off as a contrivance. Paradise was a brilliantly pulled off
morality play which asked a thoughtful, (hopefully) rhetorical question:
would you sacrifice X years of your life to save a friend by taking
responsibility for your own mistakes or would you let him hang? Palace
is the "Monkey-see monkey-do" movie; a film in which the director leaves
the audience with nothing to do but just watch the protagonists' dilemma
unfold and sympathize with them.
But my biggest problem with Brokedown Palace isn't its blatant
hollowness but rather its ending. It's not even the fact that it's
contrived, as I mentioned earlier. What angered me is how the filmmakers
found a way to have their cake and eat it too, and in the process ended
their film on a glaringly false note. As much as I want to describe
exactly what I mean here, I cannot for fear of spoiling the film for
those who, despite my fervent admonitions, decide to see it; I will,
however say this: Brokedown Palace has one of its characters do
something that it claims is the right thing to do. At first glance the
here unspecified action may ring true, but with a little thought you
realize that it is probably the worst possible thing said character
could have done.
There are some things worthwhile in this most flawed of films. Although
Kate Beckinsale is phony in a lead role, Claire Danes is wonderful. Her
extraordinary talent manages to surprise me even the times when I fully
expect a compelling performance. Bill Pullman, never known for emoting,
is stoic but effective as "Yankee" Hank, although his character is taken
directly out of the proverbial "Screenwriter's Guide to Movie Cliches."
Somewhere near you there is a video store. Instead of going to the
theater to see Brokedown Palace rent Return to Paradise instead. Please.
It is the American moviegoer who needs to show Hollywood that sub-par
pseudo-remakes of good movies will not fly. I'm starting a crusade.
Š1999 Eugene Novikov
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Author
Bob Bloom
 If I were pitching "Brokedown Palace" to a movie producer, I could do it
in one sentence: "Midnight Express" meets "Chicks in Chains," MTV-style.
 In other words, this turgid melodrama is derivative of every other movie
involving Americans jailed in Third World prisons.
 There is not an original frame of celluloid in this tripe, which is aimed
at impressionable, MTV-watching young girls who movie executives hope swoon
over Claire Danes and would enjoy watching her suffer nobly.
 "Brokedown Palace" also commits the cardinal sin of being boring.
 The two young women caught in this dire predicament are so self-absorbed
and naive that you really can't muster any sympathy for them.
 Danes and Kate Beckinsale portray Alice and Darlene, recent high school
graduates who decide to have one last summer of fun before going off to
college. The girls are told about scenic Thailand, where they can enjoy
themselves for weeks for a mere $500.
 Of course, the girls' parents nix the Far East, so Alice and Darlene lie,
telling them they are going to Hawaii. And they go to Thailand, anyway. I
mean, how much fun can Hawaii be?
 Once in Thailand, the girls take in the sights and meet a smooth-talking,
charming young Australian who wines, dines and beds them.
 Nick, who claims to work in software, invites the girls to meet him in
Hong Kong for a weekend of fun. He even buys their tickets.
 As the girls are about to board their plane - faster than you can utter
"Return to Paradise" - they are busted by armed Thai police who find a
hefty supply of drugs in their backpack.
 Thai justice is swift, and before you can mutter "Brad Davis," Alice and
Darlene are tried, convicted and sentenced to 30-plus years in prison.
 There, they must cope with all manner of indignities - tough guards,
crappy food, American-hating inmates - as well as the disintegration of
their friendship as each begins to blame the other for their plight.
 "Brokedown Palace" is a testament to cliché. The film's only glimmer comes
during its finale - the "noble sacrifice" moment that will have all the
teens in the audience reaching for the Kleenex.
 Danes and Beckinsale try hard to breathe some life into this turkey, but
nothing can revive it.
 Bill Pullman as the girls' lawyer shows some spunk, but his role calls for
him to mainly look quizzical at Alice and Darlene and try to figure out who
is lying and who is telling the truth.
 Lou Diamond Phillips is totally wasted as a DEA agent at the U.S. embassy
who won't lift a finger to help the girls.
 Watching "Brokedown Palace" is like a long prison stretch. Unlike Alice
and Darlene, though, you can escape.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Jonathan Kaplan.
Cast: Claire Danes, Kate Beckinsale, Bill Pullman, Jacquelyn Kim, Daniel 
Lapaine, Lou Diamond Phillips, Aimee Graham.
1999 - 101 minutes.
Rated PG-13 (for profanity, drug use, and violence).
Reviewed August 14, 1999.
Jonathan Kaplan's "Brokedown Palace" feels throughout like an outline for a 
movie--one that has been scrupulously planned out, to be sure--rather than 
one that has an actual screenplay. Far too reminiscent of 1998's "Return to 
Paradise" to feel the least bit fresh, the film is often uninvolving and 
needlessly simplistic, with the characters' motivations severely muddled. As 
opposed to "Return to Paradise," which was a thought-provoking, complex 
drama, "Brokedown Palace" never really allows you to satisfactorily connect 
with the two central characters, and their harsh surroundings are portrayed 
in such a bare-bones light, that when the somewhat unpredictable ending 
arrives, you come out feeling a tad more indifferent to the whole ordeal than 
the filmmakers probably wanted you to.
Recent high school graduates and lifelong best friends Alice (Claire Danes) 
and Darlene (Kate Beckinsale) are planning to take a trip to Hawaii together, 
but while at a party, they catch word on the more-appealing Third World 
country of Thailand, which is so cheap that the hotel rooms cost only six 
dollars a night. "Besides," says the more rebellious Alice, in narration, 
"Thai means freedom, which was the exact thing we were looking for." At first 
enjoying themselves in Bangkok, they soon have a chance encounter with the 
engaging, handsome Australian, Nick Parks (Daniel Lapaine), after almost 
getting caught sneaking into a ritzy hotel and hanging out at the swimming 
pool, putting their drinks on other peoples' tabs. Inviting both Alice and 
Darlene to fly to Hong Kong and meet him a day after he leaves for there on 
business, they agree to, but while at the airport awaiting to board the 
plane, are abruptly accosted by the police, who find bags of narcotics in 
Alice's bag. Thrown into a dehumanizing, roach-infested prison, both girls 
firmly claim that they have no idea how the drugs got into her backpack, and 
after receiving a bogus sentence of 33 years each, they enlist the aid of 
supposed-to-be-fabulous lawyer "Yankee" Hank Green (Bill Pullman), an 
American himself who knows all about the strict Thai laws, to help get them a 
second hearing.
"Brokedown Palace" would have what it takes to be highly-charged, moving 
motion picture if not for two setbacks: the release of the superior "Return 
to Paradise" last year, and the lackluster screenplay by David Arata. 
Particularly in the first half-hour, the dialogue between the two best 
friends, which is a vital relationship that is not developed nearly enough, 
seems to have been cut to a minimum, with their few-and-far-between lines 
improvised--none to well--on the spot. Whether this is the case or not, the 
script could have benefitted from an extensive rewrite in order to strengthen 
the characters and depict the prison experience in a more raw, gritty light. 
As is, the film is akin to a tablet of cliffs notes, rather than getting us 
involved in the full experience. The brutality of the Thai prisons does not 
give us a large enough taste of its harshness, nor are Alice and Darlene 
instructed to react in a fully believable manner, considering that they are 
facing almost their whole lives in prison for something they were not even 
involved in.
The sympathy that we do develop for Alice and Darlene mostly owes itself to 
the young, talented actress' performances. Claire Danes, in my mind, has been 
someone to look out for ever since her star-making turn on the best 
television series of the decade, "My So-Called Life," but with her 
involvement in this film and last spring's "The Mod Squad," she needs to be 
more choicy on the projects she makes. Equalling Danes in every way is the 
British Kate Beckinsale who, with 1998's sparkler, "The Last Days of Disco" 
and here, is able to pull off a near-perfect American accent, and seems to 
fully embody every one of her characters, even when they are as underwritten 
as this picture.
Holding no such close scrutiny is the subplot involving Hank Green and his 
transformation from a determined lawyer in it for the money, into a more 
compassionate soul. Hank's cause for inner change is never really vindicated, 
and his relationship with his wife, Yon (Jacquelyn Kim), couldn't have 
possibly been any more thinly-written. Bill Pullman makes no impression in 
this other major role in the film, as he simply goes through the well-worn 
paces without any distinguishable character traits. 
If too flawed to be recommended, "Brokedown Palace" still is not without its 
merits. Aside from the performances by Danes and Beckinsale, the one powerful 
sequence in the film arrives midway through, when Darlene's father arrives at 
the prison, along with all of the other visitors, and we watch as the 
prisoners and their free family and friends must yell back and forth amidst a 
wire fence and a long space in between them. The scene jumps out at the 
viewer because it is the one moment that feels completely authentic, and is 
emotionally devastating just from the thought that that space in between the 
imprisoned and the visitors is their path to freedom, if only they could 
reach it.
Attempting to have its cake and eat it too, director Kaplan has devised an 
infuriating ending that is both downbeat and upbeat at the same time, which, 
no doubt, left a sour taste in my mouth. Being very vague about the 
particulars of the conclusion, the last image we are shown is of someone 
smiling, which, sorry to say, is an outrageous strain for a falsely happy 
ending and doesn't even make much sense when you stop to think about it. What 
one of the characters does in this final act is a courageous act, but it also 
doesn't sit well with what we already know about the character, and the fact 
that this person smiles is ludicrous. "Brokedown Palace" yearns to be a 
meaningful morality tale about two teenagers who don't realize what they've 
got until it's gone, but what it really is is a glossy Hollywoodization of a 
serious subject that is as far from the bright lights of Hollywood as could 
possibly be.
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman.
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html
