Title
Review for Dancing at Lughnasa (1998)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
James Sanford
 Just after the climactic moment in "Dancing At Lughnasa," the five
Mundy sisters stand facing one another, breathless and yet strangely
invigorated. They look at each other in silence, perhaps sensing for the
first time how much they need each other. Or maybe on a subconscious
level they each know it's only a matter of time before their way of life
comes to an end.
 "Lughnasa," adapted from Brian Friel's acclaimed play, so beautifully
captures the details of its time and place and its characters' lives
that it's difficult to resist being drawn in. Director Pat O'Connor did
a similarly fine job evoking 1950s Irish life in the lovely sleeper
"Circle of Friends," and here he recreates 1936 Ireland, specifically
rural Donegal, where the Mundys live quietly on a tiny farm that has
probably seen better days.
 The same can be said for most of the women. Self-righteous
schoolteacher Kate (Meryl Streep) rules the roost, ordering her siblings
around like servants. Her sole delight seems to come from seeing others
take a fall: "Her dancing days will be over," she smirks, when a snooty
former student is forced into marriage. Clownish Maggie (Kathy Burke)
does what she can to inject a little levity into the house. Quiet Agnes
(Brid Brennan) looks after the mentally challenged Rose (Sophie
Thompson); the youngest sister Christina (Catherine McCormack) looks
after her eight-year-old son Michael (Darrell Johnston), the result of
her affair with a devil-may-care Welshman named Gerry (Rhys Ifans), who
drops by every 18 months or so.
 None of the sisters have had much luck with love or money; their only
luxuries are a bicycle and a wireless set that occasionally picks up a
bit of music. When brother Jack (Michael Gambon) returns to Donegal
after doing missionary work in Uganda and announces he thinks he's come
home to die, Maggie gasps, "Jesus, don't! We can't afford to bury you."
 Jack's reappearance is just the first harbinger of changes for the
Mundys. He went to Africa as a Catholic priest but has since become
obsessed with the rituals and practices of the natives, much to the
dismay of Kate. Instead of saying Mass at the local church, Jack would
rather investigate the celebrations of the pagan Feast of Lughnasa, in
which drunken participants leap over bonfires and dance.
 Dancing becomes a recurring motif in the film as the only way the women
can escape the drudgery of their day-to-day routines. Small wonder Kate
and Agnes look on with just a touch of jealousy as Gerry waltzes with
Christina; the only thing better than dancing is dancing with someone
else.
 With very little in the way of plot, "Lughnasa" must rely on character
development for its drama. In lesser hands, Kate might have come off as
a stern, humorless old maid, but instead we can see how much she really
cares about keeping her family together and holding on to their home. As
expected, Streep's accent is flawless but what's even more impressive is
how she brings out Kate's hidden colors, which this woman has cloaked in
multiple layers of acid and ice.
 Burke's buoyant Maggie, McCormack's tolerant Christina and Brennan's
timid Agnes also reveal unexpected personality traits as "Lughnasa"
progresses. The screenplay falters only in a slightly melodramatic
episode involving Rose's infatuation with an unsuitable man; that
O'Connor intercuts scenes of a fox raiding a henhouse into this sequence
doesn't help matters.
 "Lughnasa" is much more effective at showing how the Mundys manage to
survive their many disputes and differences and find some peaceful
common ground. Like most families, they're often so busy worrying about
the future that they don't realize how happy they should be. They may
not be wealthy or blessed with much in the way of material possessions,
but the women of "Lughnasa" prove that sisterhood can truly be powerful.

Author
Susan Granger

Susan Granger's review of "DANCING AT LUGHNASA" (Sony Pictures Classics)
 Give two-time Academy Award winner Meryl Streep a juicy role
with a foreign accent and, once again, she delivers a performance that
shimmers with Oscar gold. In this screen adaptation of Brian Friel's
Irish play about five unmarried sisters living in Donegal in 1936, she
plays the self-righteous eldest, an imperious schoolteacher whose
determination holds the family together - until, one magical August,
everything changes. After spending 25 years as a missionary priest in
Africa, their befuddled brother (Michael Gambon) returns. It's a
family reunion complicated by the re-appearance of the wandering
Welshman father of the eight year-old love-child of one of the sisters
(Catherine McCormack) and the festival of Lughnasa, a pagan ritual to
celebrate the harvest with music and dance. All of this emotional
upheaval is set against a time of change - the first radio, which
brings music into the modest farmhouse - and the industrial
revolution, which puts an end to two sisters' occupation of knitting
woolen gloves at home. Director Pat O'Connor not only delves into the
hardscrabble beauty of the rural Irish landscape - aided by the
magnificent cinematography of Kenneth MacMillan - but also elicits
remarkably strong performances from each of the actors. Nevertheless,
this is primarily a cerebral piece, not a cinematic one - which may
prevent it from reaching a wider audience. How does the film compare
with the play? It's better in that, on-stage, several of the Irish
actors spoke with such thick brogues that - while the concept was
clear - individual speeches were often indecipherable. On-screen, with
the added advantage of close-ups, each word is easily
understandable. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Dancing at
Lughnasa" is an eloquent 7, a gritty tale of hardship and heartbreak.

Author
Joy Wyse
        This is definitely an ensemble film.  Because of it, Meryl Streep is
miscast.  Her fame calls for her character to be bigger and stronger than
the others, but it's not and it shouldn't be.
This is a lovely story of the Mundy family, a group of sisters and their
brother, as told through the eyes of the boy, Michael.
The sisters live simple lives with average jobs such as teaching and
factory work.  They live together in their parental home.  None of them
are married although Michael is the result of an affair by Christina. 
Rose is attracted to a married man.
Their brother Jack, a Catholic priest, has come back home from Africa as
a missionary after suffering a breakdown.   Shortly thereafter the boy's
father, Gerry Evans, comes back into their lives.
The movie is based on the Broadway play.  Although it garnered many 
Tony nominations, I doubt that it will attract any Academy Award votes.  
It's a nice story told in a delightful way.  There is nothing
objectionable portrayed although some people may take offense at the
actions of some of the characters.
Lughnasa is not a location, but rather a festival to Lugh, the harvest
deity, the God of Music and Light.  Knowing this helps explain some of the
actions.
Because the movie is fairly slow moving with little plot, I give it a C.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: Change comes to a household of five unmarried sisters
during the Donegal, Ireland summer of 1936.  Some well-observed
performances, but this is not a film in which a whole not happens.  It
is unusual for Meryl Streep to play so negative a person, though she
does make the character understandable.  Rating: 7 (0 to 10), 2 (-4 to
+4)
   - Kate (Meryl Streep), Christine, her out-of-wedlock son Michael,
     Agnes, Maggie, and Rose live in a small cottage.  Michael (as a
     man many years later) is the narrator.
   - Kate, the eldest, is a self-righteous tyrant.  In town she is
     everybody's least favorite schoolteacher, cruelly but well-
     nicknamed "the gander".  She is incredibly judgmental and
     inflexible.  Always can sum up in one or two well-chosen sentences
     why someone else should be serious and should not enjoy life.
   - Two visitors come this summer.  Uncle Jack (Michael Gambon), a
     missionary physically back from Africa, mentally still there.
     Also visiting is Jack Evans, Michael's handsome father, on his way
     to fight for the Republicans in Spain.
   - A Michael Gambon performance is always worth seeing.
   - Nice photography of Irish country life.
   - Puritanical Kate is fighting the coming of change.
   - Rose is a little simple-minded and is tempted to go off with Danny
     Bradley who is married but separated.
   - Michael has no memories of his father and father must win over
     son.
   - Uncle Jack is like the fool in KING LEAR.  From his strange and
     addled mind come the most logical thoughts.
   - A different and mostly unsympathetic role for Streep.
   - Interface of religion and two different kinds of paganism.
   - Release will probably be in November accompanied by ads in Variety
     saying "For your consideration..."

Author
Thaiphong Vo
                Frank McGuinness
Stars: Meryl Streep, Michael Gambon, Catherine McCormack
Rating: *** out of  **** (quietly affecting)
        Upon taking a seat at the theater, and surveying the crowd, I soon
realized that I was the only person under forty in the premises.  I'm
twenty-two, but have been accused of looking sixteen.  Yet as the film
began, any consciousness of setting shifted to the home of five
close-knit, yet troubled sisters.          Director Pat O'Connor (Inventing the
Abbots, Circle of Friends) weaves a quiet yet affecting tale of loss,
need, and the bonds between five sisters.  The family is ruled by Kate
(Meryl Streep), an unconsciously strict schoolteacher, who is completely
conscious of the deterioration of her family.  There is very little
background given to the viewer, as we are thrust into a tense but loving
home.  Squabbles take place one after the other, caused by years and
years of history.  Perhaps one of the best things about this film, is
its naturalness.  No situation is over-wrought, and characters react as
real people do, to real problems.  This probably is a result of the film
being from a stage play.  The play was in turn is based on a time in the
life of the playwright.
What seems to be an underlying theme are the pagan rituals and dances
of peoples, both in Lughnasa and Africa.  In fact, dance seems to be the
glue that holds the family together and most expressively shows their
closeness.  Legs tap, and bodies sway even in the midst of impending
disaster.  Only after the music stops, and the characters stand
breathing heavily do we sense any trouble.  In the quiet after the music
we muse that it's sad that music has to cease, and families falter.
The movie is framed by a scene of Michael Mundy, the narrator of the
movie, as a young child flying a kite.  He trips over a bump and loses
hold of his string, and the kite floats off farther into the distance. 
Drawn on the white diamond of the kite is a face that looks at once
pained, and at another glance mischievous.  The Mundy family itself
follows a similar fate to that of the kite, and Kate's hold of the
family isn't strong enough to hold off the winds of change.  As Michael
stands, staring at his kite fly away, we hear the adult Michael, looking
back at the season that his world changed forever.  The movie is not
overpowering, but it gives us a beautiful window into the life, love,
and trouble of a household of lonely women.
Note: this is the first movie review I've ever written, any responses on
it would be greatly appreciated. : )

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Director:  Pat O'Connor
 Writer:  Brian Friel (play), Frank McGuinness
 Cast: Meryl Streep, Michael Gambon, Catherine McCormack,
Kathy Burke, Sophie Thompson, Brid Brennan, Rhys Ifans,
Darrell Johnston, Lorcan Cranitch, Peter Gowen, Dawn
Bradfield, Marie Mullen, John Kavanagh, Katherine O'Toole
   Recent films like "Pleasantville," "Waking Ned Devine," and
"The Truman Show" convey the spirit of small-town life, all
executed quite well with original ideas, creative expression,
and satiric impact.  But however intelligent they are, none
bears the depth of character, the simultaneously earthy
and mystical, romantic and hard-scrabble intensity of
"Dancing at Lughnasa."  Successfully made into a film from
Brian Friel's notable play by director Pat O'Connor, "Dancing
at Lughnasa" is now opened up, creating variety to the
primarily verbal exchanges that took place on stages from the
Abbey to Broadway some years back.  Movies like this one
make me realize still again why I gave up going to theater in
favor of focusing on the cinema.  How else but in
photographer Kenneth MacMillan's camerawork could we
marvel at the elegant framing device, which highlights a lad
of eight years flying a kite which is illustrated with a
countenance at once Celtic and pagan, letting his plaything
glide optimistically into the sky, then tripping ominously and
losing his hold on the trinket?  Nor could staging, however
shrewd, transport us to the craggy hills of the Emerald Isle,
knolls over which a young lover would arrive unexpectedly by
motorcycle and beyond which a rickety bus would carry home
a lost old man ejected from service to lepers in Africa.
   Rich in language as you'd expect from the writer of such
works as "Philadelphia, Here I Come" and "A Month in the
Country," Brian Friel's autobiographical tale is notable for
capturing the ambiance of a particular time and place.  More
important, though, it celebrates the fortitude of five women,
sisters who have lived together, all unmarried, in a land
suffering from a dire shortage of eligible men.  Through an
potent analysis of their dissimilar characters, Frank
McGuinness, who has adapted Mr. Friel's play to the screen,
portrays a hardy bunch, often acquitting themselves as a
quincunx of quidnuncs, who skirmish and forgive one another,
following each minor tempest with a steaming cup of bracing
tea.  The story is narrated by Michael, a love child of one of
the sisters, who looks back some years after a fateful
summer of 1936 when things irrevocably changed for the
family.
   The title comes from the feast day honoring Lugh, the
pagan god of music and light, a fellow whose renown bring
forth a Dionysian gambol in the back hills of a small town in
Donegal. During the feast of Lughnasa men and women
dance about a fire, the men not unfriendly to the bottle
occasionally dashing across the flames.  The five Mundy
sisters who have brought up the illegitimate Michael, son of
Christina (Catherine Mc Cormack) and her lover Gerry Evans
(Rhys Ifans), can barely piece together a living, sustained
largely by the small salary brought home by the family's
guide, schoolteacher Kate (Meryl Streep).  Two others bring
home handiwork, making gloves for the sale in the town, but
all are determined to find what happiness they can in what
must seem to modern, urban denizens as an awfully grim
existence.  
   Perhaps psychologists can have a field day analyzing how
these women, presumably inheriting similar genes and
carrying on their tasks in the same, circumscribed
environment, could vary so much.  Rose (Sophie Thompson)
is simple-minded and bonds most closely with Agnes (Brid
Brennan), who sees Rose as the child she has longed to
have.  Christina, the most attractive of the bunch, pines for
her wandering boy friend, who motors through the village
periodically and unexpectedly. Kate, known to some as a
"righteous bitch" and who, in one point of genuine insight
agrees with the harsh verdict, disapproves of pagan rituals
and is appalled by dancing, especially if engaged in by
"mature ladies"--which she considers her hardy band of
women.  Perhaps the most involving character is Father Jack
Mundy (Michael Gambon), an all-but-defrocked priest, who
has spent most of his career in Uganda with the aim of
teaching Christianity but who has come back converted to
paganism by the African people he has grown to love.
   Director O'Connor has easily fulfilled what must have been
his principal aim--to make a staged work with all the blocking
and other conventions that the theater entails into a drama of
cinematic interest.  The linguistic richness comes across,
words spoke with a variety of fascinating Irish accents which
American actress Meryl Streep manages to maintain
throughout, utterances which unfold the passions and
unfulfilled dreams of the five women and the three men who
have come into their lives.  The muted nature of the
enterprise makes one particular burst of passion all the more
electrifying, as the old, shoddy radio they have named
Marconi comes to life with lilting music bringing the five
women to their feet in a explosion of dance.  
   Gerald McSorley's narration brings a special poignancy to
the proceedings in an ensemble piece made particularly
trenchant by Michael Gambon as a befuddled priest whose
long affiliation with a people far different from him endows
him with a humanity scarcely approached by the others of his
clan.

Author
Steve Rhodes
The five lonely Mundy sisters, played by Meryl Streep as Kate, Catherine
McCormack as Christina, Kathy Burke as Maggie, Sophie Thompson as Rose
and Brid Brennan as Agnes, live in a bleak and remote Irish village in
DANCING AT LUGHNASA.  Living with them is Christina's 8-year-old "love
child," Michael (Darrell Johnston), and their recently returned brother,
a priest named Father Jack (Michael Gambon).
The movie, based on Brian Friel's play, is set in the hauntingly
beautiful Donegal area of Ireland.  Jack, a gristled old missionary, has
returned after 25 years in Africa.  An ordained Catholic priest, Jack,
with his African background, is much more interested in pagan religions
than Christianity.  His scrambled brain, which appears to have been
fried by too much time in the hot African sun, has his mouth rambling
and speaking nonsense.  One of his recommendations to his sisters is
that they all have a love child since it's quite popular in Africa.
Streep, a vocal chameleon, gets to add a rich Irish accent to her list
of vocal tricks.  Called "a damn righteous bitch" by one of her sisters,
Kate actually has a fairly mild disposition.  One wishes that Frank
McGuinness's script would have made her bitchier to add more tension in
the lackluster drama.  The family's matriarch, she imparts such wisdom
to her brood as, "a woman's modesty is everything."
The sisters look and dress similarly, and the script does not create
enough depth to make them stand out as individuals.  They seem instead
to be collectively, "the sisters."
"Are you really my Daddy?" Michael asks his father in one of the few
funny lines in a laugh-starved movie.  "You've seen me 5 or 6 times,"
his father replies.  "Don't you remember?"
A slow moving tale of poorly drawn characters, the movie has a strong
cast, but the script gives the players little to say that is worth
hearing.  Shot mainly with interior scenes, the movie spends most of its
time in uninteresting small talk among the sisters.  One keeps hoping
that something awful will happen to one of them to get the narrative
going.  Instead, we get an hour and a half of director Pat O'Connor
running out the clock.
Bill Whelan's luxurious music and Kenneth MacMillan's radiant
cinematography outshine the threadbare storyline.  This dreadfully dull
film will have you looking in vain for something to keep your interest
lest you begin to nod off.
It is hard to believe that the poorly scripted movie would have been
green-lighted for production without Streep.  Given the script, it is
equally hard to understand why Streep agreed to do the movie.  On stage,
the play may have worked, but this movie version doesn't.
"Do you know what I'm thinking?" Maggie asks toward the end of the
picture.  I confess that my immediate reaction was, "no, and I don't
care."  By then they had wasted an hour and half of fine film stock with
nothing to show for their work other than wasting the audience's time.
Sometimes even a fine cast is unable to save a dismal endeavor.
DANCING AT LUGHNASA runs 1:32.  It is rated PG for mature themes and
would be fine for kids around 12 and up.  There is nothing to offend
younger kids, but they will probably be bored.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com
