Title
Review for Prophecy II, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Jerry Saravia
Whatever promise the original "The Prophecy" had is lost on the filmmakers with
this cheap. darkly lit, quickly pasted together sequel that will make you wish
the horror genre did not bounce back after the success of "Scream." 
The Second War of the Angels rages on as the angel Danyael (Russell Wong) is
nearly killed in a car accident by an RN named Valerie (Jennifer Beals).
Danyael forgives her by impregnating her with the sole savior to be - the one
who will set right from wrong in the heavens and beyond. Not unless Gabriel
(Christopher Walken) can help it, as he continues his quest of bringing "heaven
back to what it was. When we mattered most." Gabriel is relentless and uses a
human named Izzy (Brittany Murphy from "Clueless") as a "monkey" for his
merciless killings - pulling beating hearts from eyeless angels. Izzy has the
best line as Gabriel is unable to drive a car or operate a PC: "You are keeping
me alive so you can use DOS?" 
Walken keeps things afloat but there is precious little of him. We are
subjected to countless scenes of violent beatings, pumping hearts, car crashes,
and many canted angles inside churches, alleys, and abandoned factories (some
scenes are so dark that it is impossible to discern what is happening). Oh, and
there is one heavy sex scene of course. Did I mention the Garden of Eden is one
of those abandoned factories?
Beals is purely uncharismatic and devoid of energy throughout this whole
affair - she seems unaffected by all the crazy events around her. Murphy as the
frazzled "monkey" has some quirky moments but not to the degree that Adam
Goldberg's "monkey" had in the original. Eric Roberts also grates the nerves as
the angel Michael - what happened to the wonderful actor from" Pope of
Greenwich Village" and "Star 80"? 
The original "Prophecy" had humor and horror in equal spurts and had some
degree of conviction and atmosphere. There was also a level of poignance as I
recall with the possessed Native American child and her relationship with a
good angel. This sequel is in-name only in the most literal sense - there is no
horror, no thrills, no humor, no sympathy and no real stake in anything
concrete. Seen one prophecy, seen them all.
For more reviews check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/ 
E-mail with questions, concerns or arguments at   Faust667@aol.com  or  
jerry@movieluver.com 

Author
Chuck Dowling
Cast: Christopher Walken, Jennifer Beals, Russell Wong, Eric Roberts
Written by: Matt Greenberg and Gary Spence
Directed by: Gary Spence
Running Time: 87 minutes
"The Prophecy II" is a vast improvement over the original. This
direct-to-video sequel again stars Christopher Walken as the evil
angel Gabriel, who's been cast out of hell and again wants to cause
havok in heaven and on Earth.
This time Gabriel is in pursuit of nurse Jennifer Beals, who is to
give birth to a half angel child. What this all means, I'm unclear
on. The film's story is pretty murky about details. But I do know that
Walken gives a very spirited and entertaining performance. Whenever
he's on screen, the film shines. It doesn't matter what's going on at
the time, because Walken's making it all worth while. Unfortunately,
he's not on enough to really make the film work. Most of the film is a
lot of religious psychobabble, none of which is really all too
interesting.
Eric Roberts has a small role as the angel Michael (who I'm assuming
is also who John Travolta played in 1996's "Michael").  His role seems
pointless though, as he never really does anything except share a
couple of lines with Walken.
"The Prophecy II" is a very good attempt, but still falls short of the
mark of being something good. At least though the finale of this film
isn't a meaningless duel between the evil angel and the devil, as was
the case in the original. [R]
The Jacksonville Film Journal -- Film Reviews by Chuck Dowling
URL: http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Email: chuckd21@leading.net
Š 1995-1998 of The Jacksonville Film Journal.  No reviews may be
reprinted without permission.

Author
Matthew Biller

The Prophecy II
 Starring :Christopher Walken,Russell Wong, Jennifer Beals,Brittany
Murphy,with Glen Danzig as Samayel and Eric Roberts as Michael
The war in heaven between angels over God's love for humans rages on and
is reaching a point of biblical anarchy. Something must be done. Lucifer
no longer wanting Gabriel (Christopher Walken) sharing any power with
him in the bowels of Hell, resurrects Gabriel and sends him forth to
complete this war and let order come once again to heaven and hell.
Unfortunately for all of us, the battle will be fought on earth. This
storyline has grasped me from the start. The first movie was a triumph
of imagination and Gothic storytelling, the second one is not greater
nor of lesser value, it is simply.a second chapter, but as far as
sequels go, and especially ones like this which go straight to the video
shelf, The Prophecy II has power. Christopher Walken is hypnotic as the
archangel Gabriel, who despises humans and renounces God for loving
them. His movements are fluid and professional. He is on a mission and
does not ever waver from his task. Walken's dialogue seems written
especially for him because he delivers it with such smoking sarcasm and
fury. This time the savior of Earth comes in the form of an unborn child
growing inside an LA nurse. (Jennifer Beals) given to her by another
angel;Danyael whom she befriends (Russell Wong) She learns of her
mission to keep the child alive and is pursued by Gabriel. Brittany
Murphy who played Tai in "Clueless" makes a surprising turn around in
her role as Izzy, a poor depressed teenager who is brought back to life
by Gabriel after an attempted suicide. Gabriel does not know how to
manipulate things like a gun or computer in the real world,so he enlists
the help of this lost soul. Best line in the film belongs to Izzy "Your
keeping me alive because you dont know DOS?"
Great performances all around although there were too many shots of
Jennifer Beals with her eyes wide open. Walken is always a treat to
watch, images of angels at war with each other including, bloody wings
and carnage in the clouds lingers in your head long afterwards and the
film's dedication to the strong and compelling story makes this movie
not just another horror sequel. And definately leaves the door open for
The Prophecy III. IMHO They should complete the story with a third
chapter and movie goers like me can own a trilogy unlike any other. 
***1/2 out of *****
:please note that all of my reviews will never turn me from the fact
that Titanic is the greatest movie that I have ever seen in my 19 years
of life. Thank you.
