Title
Review for Melody Time (1948)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Andrew Hicks
        The parade of Disney re-releases continues with the 50th 
anniversary edition of MELODY TIME, one of the mediocre cartoon / live 
action anthologies from the 1940s. After last year's video release of 
FUN AND FANCY FREE, I assumed the Disney vault had been cleansed of 
its bad post-war compilations, but this embarrassing piece of fluff 
proved me wrong. Whereas FUN AND FANCY FREE only had two real 
segments, MELODY TIME has seven and only three short ones I'd ever 
watch again.
        Most of the segments are in the FANTASIA vein of letting the 
music and visuals tell the story rather than relying on dialogue. 
They're also in the FUN AND FANCY vein of letting stars of the time 
narrate and sing. I don't know about you, but I don't feel incredibly 
privileged here in 1998 to hear "Pecos Bill" come from the mouth of 
Roy Rogers and the Sons of the Pioneers, or to see Carmen Miranda 
wannabe Ethel Smith spice up "Blame it on the Samba."
        MELODY TIME begins with "Once Upon a Wintertime" (*1/2), 
a story about two pairs of lovers, one human and one furry, who go ice 
skating, have fights and end up floating away on broken ice floes. Let's 
just say it doesn't rank up there with SNOW WHITE or DUMBO. That 
segues into "Bumble Boogie" (***), which looks like an outtake from 
FANTASIA. We've all seen in other Disney collections this trippy visual 
of a cartoon bumblebee trying to escape the sound and fury, and it's 
still cool to watch.
        Then comes the familiar Disney version of "Johnny 
Appleseed" (**), the story of a man who is visited by his guardian 
angel one day and is told his purpose in life is to plant apple trees. 
Quite a calling, I'd say. So Johnny wears a cooking pot on his head, 
grabs his Bible and bag of appleseed and heads off to introduce the 
world to the glory of apples. All around the country, you sense, other 
young men are being called to similar missions. Jimmy Orangeseed, 
Sammy Peachpit, Greg Cantaloupespore... when will Disney tell their 
brave stories?
        It pretty much sucks, but "Johnny Appleseed" holds a certain 
nostalgic value for me, if nothing else because we had to sing the 
theme song before every meal at summer camp when I was a kid. 
("Oh, the Lord is good to me, and so I thank the Lord for giving me 
the things I need -- the sun and the rain and the appleseed.") It's not 
the Lord's Prayer, but it'll do in a pinch. Then there's the short, 
beautiful "Trees" (***), based on a Joyce Kilmer poem. It even ends 
with an allusion to the cross. If Disney had kept this up, Pat Robertson 
wouldn't be wishing meteors on Orlando.
        My favorite part of MELODY TIME is "Little Toot" (***), even 
if it is sung by the Andrews Sisters. This is another frequent selection 
of Disney anthologies, about a rebellious tugboat that frustrates its 
father tugboat and eventually causes an oceanliner to crash into a 
seaport city, foreshadowing the end of SPEED 2 by a good 49 years. But 
since it's Disney, after the little tugboat is escorted to the city
limits, he manages to find a chance for redemption in an apocalyptic
seastorm, foreshadowing the end of THE TRUMAN SHOW by a good 50 years.
        Then comes "Blame it on the Samba" (**), where Smith plays 
her organ and shakes her maracas for a mute Donald Duck and his 
cartoon parrot cohort to boogie on down. This blend of live action and 
animation isn't so bad, but most people preferred it the first time, when 
it was called THE THREE CABELLEROS.
        Finally comes the tall tale "Pecos Bill" (*1/2). I'd call it a 
short tale, actually -- short on entertainment. The only part worthy of 
note is at the beginning, when Bill is being raised by wolves. He walks 
into a cave where a group of baby wolves are breastfeeding. Bill crawls 
into the fray and begins suckling as the camera pans up to show a 
surprised look of glee on the mama wolf's face. It's pretty funny, but I 
know if Disney had kept this up, Pat Robertson would _definitely_ still 
be calling for meteors to destroy Orlando.
Visit the Movie Critic at Large homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Close to 1,000 reviews with a comedic flair...
