Title
Review for Love and Other Catastrophes (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Peer Wandel Hansen
Directed by Emma-Kate Croghan
Written by Helen Bandis, Yael Bergman, Emma-Kate Croghan
Cast: Alice Garner, Frances O'Conner, Matthew Day, Matthew Dyktynski,
Radha Mitchell, Kym Gyngell and others
Cinematography by Justin Brickle 
Running Time 82 minutes 
This campus-story is situated around Melbourne University with a setting of
confused students and their problems with school, sex, money and drugs. It
is difficult to outline a plot but it all fit together, nice and easy. It
is a fresh movie with an unknown but very talented cast. The atmosphere is
sort of a mix between 'Trainspotting' (especially in the beginning) and
'Reality Bites'.
Michael (Matthew Day), a shy medical student, has difficulty getting along
with his room-mates, they seem to party and smoking dope round the clock.
Finally one morning he has had it with them, while Michael is brushing his
teeth a guy rushes into the bathroom and vomit in the wash basin. Michael
goes househunting for a room but no one seems interested to share their
flat with a med. student. At the same time Alice (Alice Garner) and Mia
(Frances O'Conner) is looking for a new room mate to their three-room
apartment. Mia doesn't want her girlfriend Danni (Radha Mitchell) to have
the vacant room, she has other plans with her professor Leach (Kym 
Gyngell). Michael learn about the vacant room from Ari (Matthew Dyktynski),
a fellow student, part-time gigolo and a friend of Mia. During his inter-
view for the apartment, Danni find she is not moving in with Mia and find
another lover.
Alice has problems of her own. Her thesis on Doris Day as a feminist
Warrior is long time overdue and she is always on the run from her guidance
counsellor who want to see some results. She is also looking for a 
boyfriend but her standards is a bit high, she has not had any luck in 
three years. Ari seems to fit her demands but he can't quite comply to the
honesty part, his part-time gigolo job is in the way and he is not that
interested in Alice.
Mia decides to change department at the University, it is too painful to
have professor Leach as a counsellor. He is oppose to the plan and Alice
must fight the bureaucracy which is complicated by the sudden death of the
doughnut-addicted Leach. By the help of Alice and Ari they break in to the
late professor Leachs office and stamp the transfer form.
At the end Alice and Mia is throwing a big party. All the girls are 
attracted to Ari, Michael on the other hand feels like the odd man out and
find refuge at the bathroom. At the end Alice meet Michael and she realise
that he is the one. Mia confide to Danni that their breakup was a mistake
and ask her to move in.
I found Love And Other Catastrophes both refreshing and fun. The cast are
brilliant and director Emma-Kate Croghan manages to control all the 
sub-stories with a steady hand in this day-in-the-university-life story.
The cast are unknown here in europe except for Matthew Day (Muriel's Wedding).
My favourite is Mia as the self-centred lesbian with a crush on her mentor
and is always getting into hopeless situations. 
The movie is apparently made for only $50,000 and shot in two weeks, a
masterpiece in my mind. It is a pity that it has not received a wider
audience. In Denmark it has only been shown at the NatFilFestival a total
of 6 times and is not planned for further distribution.
Peer Wandel Hansen - Copenhagen, Denmark 

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Fox Searchlight)
Starring:  Frances O'Connor, Alice Garner, Matthew Dytkynski, Matt Day,
Radha Mitchell.
Screenplay:  Helen Bandis, Yael Bergman, Emma-Kate Croghan.
Producer:  Stavros Andonis Efthymiou.
Director:  Emma-Kate Croghan.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, adult themes, sexual situations)
Running Time:  76 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     For what it's worth, I suppose I learned something from LOVE AND
OTHER CATASTROPHES:  romantic comedies can be just as predictable and
uninspired in Australia as in the U.S.  If attractive, likeable actors and
a non-threatening lightness of tone count for anything -- and heaven knows
that they can -- LOVE AND OTHER CATASTROPHES may find an audience
receptive to its nominal charms.  I suspect audiences are more likely to
discover that it has absolutely nothing new to say, and that its
moderately eccentric/neurotic characters are very familiar.  LOVE AND
OTHER CATASTROPHES is a ride on flat, straight ground to nowhere in
particular.
     The plot follows a day in the life of five Australian university
students coping with various minor dilemmas.  Mia (Frances O'Connor), a
flighty lesbian, is forced to navigate a bureaucratic obstacle course to
change programs, on the same day she is struggling with commitment issues
with her girlfriend Danni (Radha Mitchell).  Mia's roommate Alice (Alice
Garner) is trying to complete her film studies thesis on Doris Day as
feminist icon, while pining from afar for a notorious womanizer named Ari
(Matthew Dytkynski).  Meanwhile, medical student Michael (Matt Day)
responds to Mia and Alice's ad for a third roommate, unaware that Alice is
the coffee shop clerk to whom he is attracted.
     There is a certain energy to LOVE AND OTHER CATASTROPHES which makes
it hard to dislike actively.  Director/co-writer Emma-Kate Croghan keeps
things moving at a brisk clip, and provides at least a couple of amusing
sequences; the best involves Mia racing from place to place trying to find
someone to approve her change of program before the deadline at the end of
the day, dealing with dilemmas like the inconvenient death of her advisor.
The cast is uniformly appealing, and unlike may romantic larks about young
people, the characters never start to grate on your nerves with their
insecurities and crises.  All things considered, these five seem pretty
well-adjusted.
     So much for the damning with faint praise.  The fact is that LOVE AND
OTHER CATASTROPHES is a 76-minute movie which takes forever to end.  As
nice as the characters are, most of them never progress beyond a single
dimension.  Alice is the most complex character, a perfectionist whose
impossibly high standards for a significant other take a back seat to some
animal lust for Ari, but Croghan and her co-writers never explore that
dynamic; it's just a blip on Alice's emotional radar which quickly
vanishes.  The characters march with such ease toward their respective
happy endings that there is not a moment of tension, and it's all so
shallow that you may forget every relationship half an hour after
watching.  Even the very 90s twist of making one of the couples lesbian
can't generate much spark.  A couple without chemistry is a couple without
chemistry, gay or straight.
     Among the more perplexing aspects of LOVE AND OTHER CATASTROPHES are
Croghan's few attempts at idiosyncrasy, all of which fall flat.  A
farcical scene of film students dressed like their idols (Quentin
Tarantino, Woody Allen, etc.) seems wildly out of place, and the burnt
orange cinematography makes you wonder whether Don Simpson and Jerry
Bruckheimer hijacked the production somewhere along the line.  I suppose
Croghan had to do something to spice up the material, but it might have
been a better idea to write a complete script, develop the characters and
their relationships, _then_ put together a good-looking cast of
characters.  Frances O'Connor's bright smile and Matt Day's geeky
handsomeness can buy few minutes of good will, but sooner or later people
have to do something vaguely interesting.  LOVE AND OTHER CATASTROPHES
isn't a catastrophe; it's just the kind of aimlessly frothy romantic
comedies America has churned out a hundred times before.  Only the accents
have been changed to distinguish the guilty.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Frances O'Connor, Alice Garner, Matt Day, Matthew Dyktynski, 
      Radha Mitchell, Kym Gyngell
Director: Emma-Kate Croghan
Producer: Stavros Andonis Efthymiou
Screenplay: Helen Bandis, Yael Bergman, Emma-Kate Croghan
Cinematography: Justin Brickle
U.S. Distributor: Fox Searchlight
     LOVE AND OTHER CATASTROPHES is one of those movies that's so light 
and airy that's it's almost impossible to hate.  Unfortunately, it's 
also terribly predictable, which makes it difficult to like.  In 
addition, the film tries so hard to be hip and trendy that at times it's 
almost painful.  Put that all together and what you get is a pleasant-
but-dissatisfying motion picture that seems to be trying to copy Cameron 
Crowe's SINGLES, but ends up a lot closer to Ben Stiller's REALITY 
BITES.  
     LOVE AND OTHER CATASTROPHES is the most recent in a veritable flood 
of comedies from Australia.  At least this one is a little different in 
temperament and style.  For one thing, the soundtrack isn't saturated 
with '70s songs (nothing by ABBA is even hinted at).  Secondly, few of 
the actors will look familiar.  In fact, for many of them, like for 
director/co-writer Emma-Kate Croghan, this is their first feature.
     The film follows five college students' romantic and academic 
misadventures, concentrating far more on the former than the latter.  
The two characters with the most screen time are roommates Mia (Francis 
O'Connor) and Alice (Alice Garner).  Mia is a lesbian and Alice is 
straight, but they're both having problems with their love lives.  
Fearful of commitment, Mia is pushing her lover, Danni (Radha Mitchell), 
away -- perhaps into the arms of another woman.  Meanwhile, Alice is 
lusting after the seemingly-unattainable Ari (Matthew Dyktynski) while 
being admired from afar by Michael (Matt Day), a shy med student.  There 
are also a couple of subplots going on, one involving a guy who is 
contemplating circumcision to please his girlfriend, and another 
centering on a film studies professor (Kym Gyngell) who is never without 
a donut in his hand or mouth.
     LOVE AND OTHER CATASTROPHES falls into the category of the 
singularly unambitious romantic comedy.  Too many of the jokes fall 
flat, including brief jabs at the fanatical followers of directors 
Quentin Tarantino, Woody Allen, and Spike Lee.  The film has a little 
fun equating the wisdom of philosophers like Nietzche with that pop 
icons like John Lennon, Paul McCartney, and Alfred Hitchcock.  Perhaps 
the best line (although not necessarily the most appropriate) is a quote 
from the famous thriller director:  "Always make the audience suffer as 
much as possible."  
     For the most part, the fresh-faced actors, especially Francis 
O'Connor and Alice Garner, give likable performances.  Unfortunately, 
there isn't much romantic chemistry in evidence, although it's easy to 
envision all these characters as platonic friends.  There's a simple 
playfulness about their relationships that's never effectively 
transformed into heat, even though we have a pretty good idea from the 
beginning who's going to be paired up with whom.
     The best part of LOVE AND OTHER CATASTROPHES has nothing to do with 
romance or relationships.  It focuses on Mia's desperate attempt to 
change classes on the final day of the add/drop period.  One 
bureaucratic mine after another lines her path:  unpaid library fines, 
uncooperative professors, and a computer hacker who demands payment for 
services rendered.  This sequence is about the only spontaneous-seeming 
aspect of the film; the rest of LOVE AND OTHER CATASTROPHES is at least 
a notch below it.
     I suppose Croghan thought she was bringing something new to the 
screen with LOVE AND OTHER CATASTROPHES, although I can't imagine what.  
Admittedly, this is the first Generation X comedy that I can recall 
being photographed through an amber filter, but I don't think that's 
what the director had in mind for her hallmark achievement.  
Unfortunately, that's one of the most memorable aspects of this 
unremarkable film.  LOVE AND OTHER CATASTROPHES isn't funny enough, 
romantic enough, or offbeat enough to distinguish itself from the many 
films it's in direct competition with.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     For me, Australia will always be the land of koalas, beautiful
beaches, twangy "English" accents, and delightful romantic comedies.
But I guess, every rule is made to be broken.  After being charmed by
two recent movie imports from Down Under, ALL MEN ARE LIARS and HOTEL
DE LOVE, I went into LOVE AND OTHER CATASTROPHES expecting to see
another fun Aussie independent film.
     While not a bad film, LOVE AND OTHER CATASTROPHES suffers from
terminal triviality.  Insubstantial films, SIRENS for example, can be
deliciously enjoyable if done with enough imagination and wit, but LOVE
AND OTHER CATASTROPHES is like a fluffy meringue without any taste.
     First-time screenwriters Helen Bandis, Yael Bergman, and Emma-Kate
Croghan tackle the problem of a large cast of leading characters by
making them out of interchangeable parts.  Since the characters and
their demeanors are remarkably similar, the writers are able to assign
pieces of dialog almost round-robin style among the characters.  To
continue this modularity, various characters profess to being asexual,
bisexual, homosexual, and heterosexual, thus providing an easy
Tinkertoy approach to building the script.
     Printed quotes from recognized sources are used as scene
transitions in an attempt to ameliorate the lack of adequate character
development.  ("Everything's got a moral, if only you can find it."  --
Lewis Carroll.  "Always make the audience suffer as much as possible."
-- Alfred Hitchcock.)  At other times, the characters will leap from
their normal, mindless banter into a pseudo-intellectualism in hopes of
obtaining the heretofore missing laughs.  ("Now that I realize I've
been suffering from a simple psychotic depression, I feel empowered,"
Mia (Frances O'Connor) in a revelation tells her therapist.)
     LOVE AND OTHER CATASTROPHES happens at a college campus in
Australia.  Two stories are developed to advance the minimal
slice-of-life plot.  In one, a premed student named Michael (Matt Day)
tries desperately to find a new room after fleeing from his
life-is-a-party roommates.  In the other, Mia fights the college
bureaucracy in her quest to change majors.
     Most of the show is as exciting as white bread.  The movie's
population consists of excessively pleasant people who in addition to
Michael and Mia also includes Suzi Dougherty as Savita, Matthew
Dyktynski as Ari, Alice Garner as Alice, Adrian Martin as Adrian, and
Radha Mitchell as Danni. Only Professor Leach (Kym Gyngell),
representing the establishment, possesses an evil bone in his body.
Although there is a gross scene of a man, listed as "Vomit Man" in the
credits, throwing up in a sink while Michael brushes his teeth, the
film strives hard never to offend or take any risks.
     The upbeat and lyrical songs reminded me of those from THE
GRADUATE.  I rarely notice the songs, and when I do, it probably means
I am getting bored, which I was.  The print we saw had major problems.
The colors looked liked washed out sepia, and the backgrounds were
overexposed.  Some of the soundtrack had a problem too.  Whether this
is endemic to all of the prints, I have no idea.  The choppy editing by
Ken Sallows reminded me of a print that had been spliced together too
often and small parts were now missing.  The net result was that it
felt like a 60s film that was being rereleased without any restoration.
     As a film critic, I see just about every film that gets a US
distributor and some that never do.  I, for one, am growing tired of
seeing college students where everyone drinks and smokes dope.  Surely
there are some who abstain from these substances.  Never in a college
age film, do I see anyone who says a simple, "no thanks, I don't do
that stuff."  I am not looking for a big statement, just a recognition
that not everyone thinks its cool to get drunk and stoned.
     LOVE AND OTHER CATASTROPHES runs an amazingly short 1:16, but I
bet you will think it feels longer.  It is rated R for sex, profanity
and some drug use.  It would be fine for older teenagers.  Flaws and
all, the film does a least have an upbeat spirit.  Still, it never
engaged me enough to be able to recommend it.  I give a generous **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
