Title
Review for I'll Be Home for Christmas (1998)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Jamie Peck
I'LL BE HOME FOR CHRISTMAS
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
Bemoaning "I'll Be Home for Christmas"' lack of originality is pretty 
much a waste of time and effort, since you're aware going in that this 
isn't the type of film to break new ground as far as narrative or 
characters are concerned. And though things here have higher sugar 
content than a sleigh full of candy canes, this tinsel-laden tale's 
simple-minded pleasantness and sporadically clever writing make it 
awfully hard to dismiss in Scrooge-like fashion. 
At least it's a given that young female fans of "Christmas" star 
Jonathan Taylor Thomas will refrain from bah-humbugging on the way out 
of the theatre; they'll presumably get their allowance money's worth of 
the photogenic "Teen Beat" coverboy and erstwhile "Home Improvement" 
star due to the fact that he's in just about every scene. JTT 
comfortably plays a suave California college student named Jake, who, 
after crossing some campus bullies in a botched attempt to help them 
cheat on a history test, is left for dead in the desert clad in only a 
glued-on Santa costume. 
That's a bummer, mostly because Jake was promised a '57 Porsche by dad 
(Gary Cole) if and only if he'd make it to his family's New York home in 
time for Christmas Eve dinner. What's worse, his girlfriend (pretty 
Jessica Biel) is traveling with the studly mastermind (Adam LaVorgna) of 
the plan to deter Jake from vintage automobile paradise. Typical road 
movie situations are given a festive spin as our hero trails his gal pal 
and attempts to get from one side of the country to the other.
As cliche, cloying and laden with plot coincidence as it can be, "I'll 
Be Home for Christmas" musters up more than a handful of good scenes and 
decent laughs. Worth the price of admission alone is a sizeable story 
thread that finds JTT helping a cop (Sean O'Bryan) rekindle a dampened 
romance with his waitress wife; the payoff borders on imaginative. A 
brief bathroom interlude as Thomas tries out his Santa voice on an 
extremely honest little boy is a rib-tickler. For once, a non-animated 
Disney release is more ho-ho-ho than ho-hum. And for that, we can be 
thankful.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
I'll Be Home For Christmas (1998)
Jonathan Taylor Thomas, Jessica Biel, Adam Lavorgna, Gary Cole, Eve 
Gordon, Lauren Maltby, Andrew Lauer, Sean O'Bryan, Lesley Boone. 
Screenplay by Harris Goldberg and Tom Nursall, from a story by Michael 
Allin. Directed by Arlene Sanford. 
Rated PG, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
Like "Planes, Trains and Automobiles," "I'll Be Home For Christmas" is a 
cross-country road story about the travails of trying to return home for 
the holidays. Jonathan Taylor Thomas stars in this lightweight Disney 
comedy that, while far from memorable, is at least pleasant. 
With holiday films of this sort, no one expects any surprises. Thomas 
plays a self-absorbed young man trying to go home for all the wrong 
reasons, and there is absolutely no doubt that he will make it home and 
will learn valuable life lessons along the way. It's a standard film 
structure and the entertainment factor depends on how well the filmmakers 
and cast connect the dots. In this case, the results are, well, pleasant.
Jake (Thomas) is a smooth talking con artist at a Los Angeles college. 
Uncomfortable over his father remarrying a mere 10 months after his 
mother's death, the kid has avoided visiting the homestead. Anxious to 
see his son, Dad (Gary Cole) offers a bribe: if Jake makes it to the 
family's home in New York state by 6 p.m. Christmas eve, he gets a 
vintage Porsche. 
Things go awry, of course. A group of football players, angered over one 
of Jake's botched scams, dumps him in the middle of the desert, dressed 
in a Santa suit with the beard and hat glued to his head. To make matters 
worse, his girlfriend Allie (Jessica Biel) is also on the road east, 
traveling with Eddie (Adam Lavorgna), Jake's loutish arch enemy.
Naturally, as Jake strains to make it home before the deadline, two 
things have to happen: he must encounter a variety of colorful eccentrics 
and repeatedly almost catch up with his girlfriend. To their credit, the 
filmmakers show some imagination while working the formula. Jake meets a 
clueless thief (Andrew Lauer, the guy on skates from "Caroline in the 
City") and a heartsick cop (Sean O'Bryan), leading up to a cute scene 
that is both sentimental and funny. 
A meeting between Jake, Allie and Eddie in a Midwest Bavarian village is 
also cleverly staged, although it contains a "Three's Company" style 
scene that falls flat on its face. Jake finds his girlfriend's motel room 
which, out of sheer necessity, she shared with Eddie. While Jake and 
Allie are talking, Eddie comes out of the bathroom wearing only a towel. 
Allie quickly makes it clear that she is not romantically or sexually 
involved with the guy and Eddie makes a smart-aleck remark. What's Jake's 
response? He inexplicably jerks Eddie's towel off, leaving the 
athletically-built young man standing nude in front of his girlfriend. 
The mildly-embarrassed Eddie grabs something to cover his genitals, Allie 
shows no reaction whatsoever, and I scratched my head, wondering why a 
scene as illogical, poorly-staged and unfunny as this one was left in the 
film.
That peculiar episode aside, "I'll Be Home For Christmas" works more 
often than not. The performances range from pretty good (Biel, O'Bryan 
and Lauer), to fair (Lavorgna), to cardboard (everyone in Jake's family). 
As for Jonathan Taylor Thomas, the "Home Improvement" graduate really 
needs to work on his facial expressions. Regardless of the emotional 
state of his character, there's always a vague hint of a smirk on Thomas' 
face, rendering his scenes of redemption less than convincing.
As far as holiday movies go, "I'll Be Home For Christmas" ranks right in 
the middle of the pack. It's mixture of smiles and sentiment is good 
enough for the film to qualify as a mildly pleasant diversion, but lacks 
that special magic necessary for it to rise above average. If you're a 
Jonathan Taylor Thomas fan, prepare for a veritable Thomas-fest. If not, 
rent "Planes, Trains and Automobiles" and see how the big boys work the 
holiday formula. 

Author
Steve Rhodes
That Allie, a college kid played by Jessica Biel, was caught kissing the
nefarious Eddie (Adam Lavorgna) under the mistletoe is certain.  The
question is whether it was a meaninglessly brief three-second encounter
or a more significant full five.  Her boyfriend Jake, played by teenage
heart-trob Jonathan Taylor Thomas, is worried that he may be losing her.
A host of studios stand at the ready to deliver the R-rated slasher
flicks and the crude sexual humor movies that teenagers flock to in
droves.  There aren't many studios, however, who still attempt to make a
buck off of innocent, PG-rated fare featuring teens.  Disney is one of
the few, and, even if they sometimes come up with harmless duds like
I'LL BE HOME FOR CHRISTMAS, they should be commended for trying.
Jonathan Taylor Thomas, Tom Sawyer from TOM AND HUCK, plays a
good-natured, college con man.  Although he organizes quiz-cheating
scams and hacks travel agency computers, Jake is a loveable rogue with a
heart of gold.
The jokes in the movie are so silly that some of the laughs become
almost embarrassing.  Typical of these comes from the actions of Jake's
jock clients when he can't supply the answers to the big test.  They
glue a Santa suit on him, which he wears throughout the rest of the
movie, and leave him unconscious in the middle of the desert.  When he
wakes, he sees a buzzard sizing him up as a possible morning snack.
The most awkward aspect of the movie is the dialog.  Written at a junior
high school level, the setting at a college campus seems inappropriate.
The kid locked in his locker routine, for example, isn't something that
usually occurs in a college movie.  Jonathan Taylor Thomas seems stuck
in a time warp where he is still given comedy routines that would have
been more appropriate for him 5 or 6 years ago.
The setup for the road picture is that Jake's dad has made a deal with
him.  If Jake can get home in time for Christmas dinner, his dad will
give him the 1957 Porsche that they worked together in restoring.  Since
Jake attends college in California and his parents live on the East
Coast, he has to travel across the country to get there.
After getting stranded in the desert, Jack sets off to hitchhike across
America.  Along the way, he keeps crossing paths with Allie and Eddie,
who are riding together in Eddie's car.  Allie was supposed to have
ridden with Jake since they live in the same hometown, but, when he
didn't show up, she accepted a ride from his archenemy, Eddie.
The casting of Jessica Biel as Allie is a nice and unexpected touch.
Rejecting the typical cheerleader type, the producers chose a young
woman who, although attractive, has that honor student look to her.  She
seems much more likely to hang out at the library than the mall.
In a movie set at Christmas time, starring a sweet kid stuck in a Santa
Claus suit, the question is why did Disney decide to open it before the
middle of November?  This is a small movie that will probably be long
gone way before Christmas.  One supposes that the marketing department
was worried about the crush of all of the movies opening at Christmas.
Even if it is generally lame, the movie is not without its charms.  In
one nice visual, there is a 5K race open only to people in full Santa
Claus regalia.  Lose your hat or beard, and you're disqualified.  The
race manages to show both sides of Jake.  His mind is determined to win,
but his heart embodies the true spirit of Christmas.
I'LL BE HOME FOR CHRISTMAS runs about 1:30.  It is rated PG for a few,
quite mild profanities and would be fine for the whole family.
My son Jeffrey, age 9, thought the film was "really good" and gave it
*** Ë.  He laughed a lot during the film, especially during his favorite
scene, the all-Santa race.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Matt Williams
It must be the holiday season already.  Stores are stocked with
decorations galore, and the local theaters are stocked with "feel-good"
holiday films, like I'll Be Home for Christmas.  However, don't be
fooled by its title...you aren't likely to build up much holiday cheer
by forcing yourself to sit through this torturous ninety-minute debacle.
Jonathan Taylor Thomas stars as the annoying prep school kid, Jake. Jake
is the type of smarmy kid who tries to talk his way out of everything,
and mostly succeeds.  His father (Gary Cole), believing the only way his
son will return home for the holidays, resorts to bribery.  If Jake can
make it home by 6:00 Christmas Eve, he will get his dad's classic
Porsche as a present. Jake would do anything for the car...but he runs
into a little bit of trouble along the way...
A group of angry jocks, angry at Jake for a failed scheme of his,
kidnaps him, glues him into a Santa suit, and strands him in the
California desert.  Penniless, Jake must make his cross-country trek in
a few short days if he ever hopes to see that car...or his girlfriend.
You see, his charms have been wearing thin on his girlfriend, Allie
(Jessica Biel).  She's had one too many stories and lies, and when he
fails to meet her for the Christmas return home, she decides to take a
ride with Jake's rival, Eddie (Adam Lavorgna), instead.
All of this might be the slightest bit interesting if we cared one iota
about Jake and/or his predicament.  But we don't.  From the get-go, his
cocky attitude is extremely off-putting, and his "charms" never grow on
us.  Frankly, his dad might as well keep the car, and Allie would
certainly be better off with the only slightly-less annoying Eddie.
Of course, we are treated to all sorts of wild adventures and wacky,
"colorful" characters which Jake runs across in his cross-country trek.
Anyone who's seen any sort of road-trip movie will be intimately
familiar with the type.  Most of these are not near as interesting, nor
as entertaining, as they might have appeared on paper (though it's even
doubtful that some of these appeared interesting there either).
I'll Be Home for Christmas is reminiscent of an annual present that you
don't really want to get.  It means well, but is best left alone and
forgotten.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 650 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Arlene Sanford.
Cast: Jonathan Taylor Thomas, Jessica Biel, Adam Lavorgna, Gary Cole, 
Eve Gordon, Andrew Lauer, Lauren Maltby, Sean O'Bryan, Lesley Boone.
1998 - 85 minutes.
Rated PG (for mild profanity).
Reviewed November 14, 1998.
By Dustin Putman 
Dustin Putman's Film Reviews >
"I'll Be Home for Christmas" surprised me. Granted, I wasn't expecting 
very much, especially when most live-action Disney films are admittedly 
terrible, but this film was actually quite enjoyable, thanks to mostly 
likable characters and a worthwhile, if not all that original, story.
Jake (Jonathan Taylor Thomas), an 18-year-old student at Palisades 
College in Southern California, has a sweet, understanding girlfriend, 
Allie (Jessica Biel), but is the type of person who mostly just thinks 
about himself. He is very apprehensive about going home to his family in 
New York for Christmas, especially after his father (Gary Cole) married 
another woman (Eve Gordon) only ten months after Jake's mother's death. 
Things turn around for him when his father makes him a proposition he 
can't refuse: be home by 6 p.m. on Christmas Eve and get the family's 
vintage porsche. Although Jake plans to ride home with Allie, who also 
lives in his hometown, he finds himself stranded in the desert with a 
Santa Claus suit glued to him, thanks to a bunch of jocks at school, 
leaving Allie no choice but to get a ride with Jake's rival at college, 
Eddie (Adam Lavorgna). Meanwhile, as Jake desperately tries to get home 
by any means possible, he has several run-ins with different people on 
the road, and through it all, he begins to understand what's really 
important in his life.
This sort of story and moral has been done in many other films, and is 
very closely related to the wonderful 1987 comedy, "Trains, Planes, and 
Automobiles," but what I liked about," I'll Be Home for Christmas," was 
the treatment that it was given. It was a delight to meet the different 
supporting characters, and a few of them were especially memorable and 
brightly written, particularly a policeman (Sean O'Bryan) whom Jake 
meets along the way that is trying to get his own girlfriend (Lesley 
Boone), a bubbly waitress working at a restaurant, back.
Jonathan Taylor Thomas has yet to make a great feature film, but it is 
obvious he is talented, and could be amazing in a more challenging role. 
And Jessica Biel, who starred in last year's "Ulee's Gold," is perfect 
as his girfriend, and perhaps the standout in the cast.
There are elements that don't work in the film, however, starting with 
the character of Eddie, who was very annoying and basically a 
one-dimensional creep. The overall plotting was also highly predictable, 
and it was obvious from the beginning how everything will turn out in 
the end. 
No one, I doubt, will be expecting a cinematic masterpiece when they 
see, "I'll Be Home for Christmas," though, and sometimes it is fine just 
to sit back and watch an entertaining, harmless family film for a 
90-minute duration. Nothing that occurred in it was earthshaking or 
shocking or particularly inventive, but it was well-done, all the same, 
and I really did like it.

Author
Michael Dequina
_The_Rugrats_Movie_ (G) ***
_I'll_Be_Home_for_Christmas_ (PG) * 1/2
November not only marks the unofficial start of the holiday season, it
also signals the arrival of the first of a flock of films fashioned for
families.  Leading the opening wave are two films coming from
less-than-distinguished cinematic pedigrees: a non-Disney animated feature,
_The_Rugrats_Movie_; and a live-action comedy from the Mouse,
_I'll_Be_Home_for_Christmas_.  While Paramount is able to buck the
generally lackluster non-Walt animation trend with the fun _Rugrats_, the
Mouse strikes out once again in the flesh-and-blood arena with a most
uninviting _Home_.
My experience with Nickelodeon's smash cartoon series _Rugrats_ has been
confined to just an episode or two caught during breaks from channel
surfing.  But as limited as my familiarity with the show is, I have seen
enough of it to know that it's not something strictly for the tykes,
despite of its title's implication.  While clearly targeted at the
preschool demographic, the adventures of diaper-clad Tommy Pickles (voice
of E.G. Daily) and his friends Chuckie Finster (Christine Cavanaugh) and
twin siblings Phillip and Lillian Deville (both voiced by Kath Soucie) show
mature flashes of wit, and that smartness extends to the film.  Only adults
will appreciate such wry touches as a hospital sign tracking the arrivals
of newborns like flights at an airport, references to _The_Fugitive_ and
_A_Cry_in_the_Dark_, and the children's numerous instances of malapropism
(e.g. "custardy" for "custody").
The majority of the film, on the other hand, is equally accessible and
amusing to grown-ups and wee ones alike.  As can be expected, there is only
a sliver of a story in David N. Weiss and J. David Stem's script.  At
center of the plot is the arrival of a new child in the Pickles household,
Dylan a.k.a. "Dil" (Tara Charendoff), who, much to Tommy's chagrin,
immediately dominates all the attention of their parents Didi (Melanie
Chartoff) and Stu (Jack Riley).  But Tommy must learn to live with and love
Dil when they, Chuckie, Phillip, and Lillian find themselves lost in the
forest, thanks to a runaway toy wagon.  Not too far behind is Tommy's
bratty cousin Angelica (Cheryl Chase), determined to reclaim her beloved
Cynthia doll, which Dil has taken with him.
The adventures that ensue in the forest setting, ranging from some wild
river rafting to an encounter with circus monkeys, are sure to keep the
children enthralled (the kids at the screening I attended were noticeably
silent) and amuse the adults.  Part of the appeal for the older set is the
distinctive art style, which is rough and simple yet remarkably expressive.
 Wisely, directors Norton Virgien and Igor Kovalyov resist the urge to
punch up the visuals with gratuitous computer animation--at least, for the
most part: a boulder, clouds, and Dil's head-trippy arrival into the world
are the instances of CGI, and they are brief and effective.  The directors'
big misstep, though, was bowing to Disney animation tradition and grafting
on a few musical numbers to the film, which feel like they're, well,
grafted on, with the exception of one inspired number where Angelica breaks
out into a modified version of Blondie's "One Way or Another," sung in
reference to her missing Cynthia.  Production numbers aside,
_The_Rugrats_Movie_ is essentially just a big-screen episode of the series,
and that's more than enough to satisfy any audience.
While Disney has a rich tradition in animated family entertainment, but
its track record in live-action film is, to put it mildly, less than
stellar.  The wan _I'll_Be_Home_for_Christmas_ will do nothing to change
that.  This piece of warmed-over sitcom-level schmaltz casts _Tiger_Beat_
pinup du jour Jonathan Taylor Thomas as a cocky prep school student who
goes on a cross-country road trip to make it home in time for Christmas.
Sounds harmless enough, but then there's the gimmick: JTT is stuck in a
Santa Claus outfit, and along the way he learns the true meaning of
Christmas.  As lame and predictable as the story is, the key problem is
Taylor Thomas himself.  His character is supposed to undergo a gradual
attitude change as the film progresses, but he plays the character as such
a smug bastard the whole way through that one senses no change, nor does
one care if he changes.  Less than halfway through _I'll_Be_Home..._, I
wanted to go home myself. 
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Susan Granger

Susan Granger's review of "I'LL BE HOME FOR CHRISTMAS" (Walt Disney Pictures)
Curious coincidence: when Tim Allen of "Home Improvements"
made a splash on the big screen, his movie was called "The Santa
Claus," now his TV-son, Jonathan Taylor Thomas, dons the red suit to
star in "I'll Be Home for Christmas." He plays a slick college kid
whose nefarious plan to provide exam answers, using electronic pagers,
to a bunch of jocks fails, and he gets stranded in the California
desert wearing a red suit and black boots with a white beard glued to
his face. Not only is his predicament unpleasant but it has
unfortunate consequences. If he cannot make it home to Westchester by
6 P.M. on Christmas Eve, he cannot claim an expensive gift from his
father: a red Porche. He's been avoiding going home since his dad
re-married - perhaps in haste, he judges - after his mother's
death. And, if that's not enough incentive, his girl-friend, Jessica
Biel, is traveling home from college during the holiday break with his
arch-nemesis, Adam LaVorgna, who fouled up his cheating scheme. Thomas
accomplishes his cross-country journey hitching rides with various
people - and learning more about himself along the way. He joins
senior citizens en route to Las Vegas to see Tom Jones perform;
discovers a van loaded with stolen toys, which he distributes to sick
kids; wins a five-kilometer race and uses the $1,000 prize to feed the
needy; and reunites a love-troubled state cop with his estranged wife
at a roadside steak restaurant. All in all, we're supposed to believe
that he becomes a better person for his troubles. Writers Harris
Goldberg, Tom Nursall, and Michael Allin with director Arlene Sanford
pepper a basic road comedy with sophomoric humor, including a farting
dog. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "I'll Be Home for
Christmas" jingles in with a 3. Bah, humbug!

Author
James Sanford
My parents like to hold it over my head that I once insisted on being taken
to see "Santa Claus Conquers the Martians" many moons ago; they remember it
as one of the many trying sacrifices they've had to make over the years. Ha!
They don't know from suffering. It's painful to think about how many
innocent Moms and Dads will be subjected to the excruiatingly awful "I'll Be
Home For Christmas" because it stars Tiger Beat cover boy and ex-"Home
Improvement" regular Jonathan Taylor Thomas.
Next to this, "Santa Claus Conquers the Martians" looks like a work of
depth and brilliance.
Keeping his lousy post-"Lion King" cinematic track record up -- his
other bombs include "Man of the House" and last year's "Wild America" --
Taylor smirks and snaps his way through the role of Jake Wilkinson, a
student at a California college where everyone looks 15 and behaves as if he
or she is still in junior high. After his girlfriend Allie (Jessica Biel)
refuses to spend the holidays with him on the beach, Jake reconsiders the
offer from his father (Gary Cole) to return home to New York. As an
incentive, Dad offers a 1957 Porsche.
 Unfortunately, Jake has crossed some vengeful jocks who glue him
into a Santa suit and strand him in the desert. Supposed hilarity ensues as
the smart-mouthed St. Nick tries to scam his way across the country while
struggling to catch up with Allie, who's hitched a ride home with a would-be
Romeo named Eddie (Adam Lavorgna).
 Humor is hard to come by in "Home," unless your ribs are tickled by
gags about flatulent dogs or crazed Tom Jones fans, and anyone looking for a
bit of early seasonal cheer will find instead a few gross caricatures of
senior-citizens, just enough sexual innuendo to make pre-teens and their
parents blush and a host of hollow, loud performances of the sort normally
found only in TV commercials. Thomas strides from scene to scene with that
annoying air of superiority that finally sealed Macaulay Culkin's cinematic
fate. Don't believe the hype, child; you're not all that.
Vapid, sloppily made and utterly without merit, "I'll Be Home For
Christmas" qualifies as ho-ho-horrible.
