Title
Review for Star Kid (1997)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Joseph Mazzello, Arthur Burghard, Alex Daniels
Ingredients: 
Preteen boy who is underconfident, talking armored cybersuit from outer
space, evil space monster
Synopsis: 
Spence (Joseph Mazzello) is a young kid who doesn't have much
confidence. He is too shy to talk to the girl he has a crush on. He lets
a school bully harrass him. He is afraid of spiders. His dad doesn't pay
enough attention to him. His sister thinks he's a fungus.
One day Spence befriends a talking armored cybersuit named Cy that
aliens from outer space have stashed on earth for safekeeping. Wearing
the cybersuit gives Spence super powers. At first Spence use the suit to
scare the bully and to spy on the love of his life. But when an evil
space monster called the Brood Warrior kidnaps Cy, Spence must overcome
his many insecurities, rescue Cy, and defeat the Brood Warrior. 
Opinion:
The bad news is that for an adult this film would be totally
predictable, and the fight scene at the end would be ten minutes too
long. But the good news is that STAR KID represents the fantasy of
almost every young boy from age 5 to age 12, and it is squeaky clean in
terms of lacking bloodshed, swear words, or frightening material. In
other words, parents, if you want to score quick brownie points with
your male youngster, take him to this movie and call it family hour.

Author
Ben Hoffman
It was indeed with great expectation that I looked forward to seeing
this newest version of Dickens' classic story.    In the past there
have been several films that with varying success tried to capture
that great work.  52 years ago, with a great cast consisting in part
of John Mills, Alec Guiness, Valerie Hobson, and Jean Simmons, David
Lean directed perhaps the best of all..   In 1988, BBC did an
admirable TV version.  A year later, there was an excellent
mini-series made in Britain that starred Anthony Hopkins, Jean
Simmons, John Rhys-Davies, Ray McAnally,  and Kim Thompson, directed
by Kevin O'Connor.  Pretty much of a disaster was the 1983 animated
version directed by Jean Tych. ThE 1987 GREAT EXPECTATIONS ---THE
UNTOLD STORY was the worst of all.
 We come now to this new attempt..   Perhaps taking a cue from the
modern Romeo and Juliet of 2 years ago,  the well-known producer Art
Linson decided to make an updated GREAT EXPECTATIONS.  A big
mistake.    Too many changes had to be made in the plot so that it
no longer resembled the Dickens work. Despite that the credits list
"Based On The Charles Dickens classic" or words to that effect,.
Dickens would have been horrified with the result.
 Perhaps the only element common to both the book and the current
film scripted by Mitch Glazer,  is that both rely on the themes of
trying to obtain respect, the aspect of coincidence, and wanting
things one could not have.   While the Dickens story is very much
concerned with the conflict between the rich and the poor, the
commoner and the aristocracy, Glazer opted to delete that part
"because it didn't have to be about that at all."    Really?!?
As screenwriter Glazer did not want to do a literal remake of the
novel (Then why use the book's name?  Why say "based on the book by
Dickens?)  he even changed the names of all the characters except
for Estella.   One of the charms of reading  Dickens  is  the unique
names he gave his characters.  Glazer did not think "Magwitch" and
"Miss Haversham" were suitable names for this version.
 The story, you will recall, is of an 8-year-old, Finn Bell
becoming a man (Ethan Hawke), his life being changed by three
people.    They are convict Lustig (Robert De Niro) and Ms. Dinsmoor
(Anne Bancroft) and Estella (Gwyneth Paltrow.)
 When the young Finn (Jeremy James Kissner) meets the beautiful
Estella (Raquel Beaudene), they are both 10-years-old.   Ms.
Dinsmoor warns Finnegan that Estella will break his heart and even
if he is warned, he will pay no heed.  And that is what happens.
She runs off with someone else; he turns to painting and becomes
famous.   The film ends in a corny and unbelievable scene.
 De Niro is the one redeeming feature.  Others in the cast include
Hank Azaria, Chris Cooper, Josh Mostel, Kim Dickens.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     After the simple looking little spacecraft lands in a automobile
wrecking yard, out steps a steel-gray, human-like creature with
aquamarine eyes and clad in a muscular suit.  Spencer, the boy who
observes this, having seen his fill of science fiction flicks, figures
this thing must be a robot from outer space.
     With the exception of Disney and a few others, most studios view
children's films as a way to ship a cheap and unimaginative product and
thereby make a quick profit.  STAR KID stands out as that rare kids'
film that is undoubtedly low-budget but is also highly imaginative.
     Remember, the robot?  It wasn't one at all but rather a "Phase One
Assault Cyborsuit." The Cyborsuit is actually a prototype combat
enhancer developed by the Trelkins and jettisoned for latter retrieval
when they are under attack from the invading Broodwarriors.
     The significant twist in the story is that Spencer gets to go
inside the Cyborsuit, and the Cyborsuit, nicknamed Cy, has plenty of
spunk.  Cy keeps questioning the kid about everything including words
like "cool."  Upon hearing that "command," Cy starts rapidly decreasing
the temperature in the Cyborsuit until Spencer screams for him to stop.
And when Cy speaks, we see Spencer's view, the backside of Cy's lips
and eyes.
     As 12-year-old Spencer, Joseph Mazzello from the JURASSIC PARK
film series gives a remarkably good performance as a wimpy and
initially tongue-tied kid.  Even when enclosed in his powerful new
Cyborsuit, he has his fears but he learns to overcome them.
     "If you run away, things don't get better, whether it's bullies,
spiders, or girls," his science teacher advises him after he has
difficulties dealing with all three.  Turbo (Joey Simmrin), the
school's chubby bully, beats up on him, spiders frighten him, and, most
embarrassing of all, he can't speak when in the presence of his
would-be girlfriend.  With his Cyborsuit on, he learns some bravery
that transcends his time inside Cy.
     Spencer lives with his Dad and his older teenage sister Stacey,
played by a smart-mouthed Ashlee Levitch, who looks like a younger
Sarah Jessica Parker.  Stacey derides her brother, whom she barely
tolerates, by referring to him only as "the fungus."
     This whole setup for Spencer's downtrodden and delightfully funny
life makes his acquisition of some superhuman powers a source of mirth
and empowerment.  The beauty of Mazzello's performance is that you can
vicariously experience his fear and share in his enjoyment when he goes
after the bully to teach him a lesson he'll not soon forget.  The
ensuing mayhem has some of the HOME ALONE antics, but the slapstick is
kept tightly under control by writer and director Manny Coto so that
one never feels embarrassed to be laughing.
     The romantic angle is handled ever so delicately.  When Cy wishes
to know if Spencer wants to mate with the object of his desire,
Michelle (Lauren Eckstrom), his eyes open wide in revulsion.  "Mate
with her!" Spencer exclaims.  "Pllllleeeeease, I just like her that's
all."
     The show has many funny twists.  In one, Cy sees a man in a
Barney-like costume and begins firing at him, thinking he is an alien
life-form.  Soon things get way out of hand, and Cy and Spencer have to
beat a hasty retreat.
     As proof positive of the show's class, it actually contains
tasteful bathroom humor -- thought that was an oxymoron in a kids'
picture, didn't you?  Cy cannot allow Spencer to leave the Cyborsuit,
and what happens when he needs to urinate becomes both sweet and
hilarious.  The director's staging of this sequence is one of the
film's more charming moments.  Oh, and eating is pretty funny too.
     Spencer, whose idol is the comic book character "Midknight
Warrior," gets to face the challenge of a lifetime when a Broodwarrior
comes to capture the Cyborsuit.  Spencer's valiant battle gives him a
chance to find his mettle.  And the action sequences in the battle
manage to be quite respectable for a kids' show full of inventiveness
and lacking the usual repetition.
     For a family movie mixing humor, fantasy, and action, STAR KID
delivers.  Although it's probably not the sort of movie you'd want to
see without kids, with them you'll have a magical time with a
relatively straightforward but well developed story.  You'll be rooting
for and laughing with Spencer and his buddy Cy all the way through.
     STAR KID runs 1:41.  It is rated PG for fantasy combat.  Although
the basically cartoonish Broodwarrior might scare the littlest kids, I
saw none of this in evidence in our packed screening, so I would say
the show is fine for kids five and up, and possibly the younger ones.
     My son Jeffrey, age 8, got really excited about the picture.  He
called it "an especially good movie" and gave it ****.  When I asked
him to tell me his favorite characters, he mentioned almost everyone in
it from the boy to the Cyborsuit to the bully.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
by Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
    As sick as it may sound, my New Year's resolution was to see every
film that opens in 1998. I didn't really think about some of the films I
might find myself sitting through, or what the experience would do to
me. So, imagine my state of mind as I sat alone in a theater, waiting
for Star Kid to begin. As mothers and fathers with their young children
began coming in, I couldn't recall a moment in time when I had felt more
out of place. Lucky for me the theater was very dark.
    But that's irrelevant, I guess. I just wanted to share my theater
experience. A more important note about me is that I tend to deplore any
and all films intended for children. I find them overly silly, banal,
and usually thoughtless about their own subject matter. Star Kid,
although clearly not intended for adults, is quite a surprise. Not only
did I find it somewhat entertaining, but it seems an appropriate kind of
film for today's younger generation (the ones that haven't been exposed
to a lot of violence and gore already). The themes are all in place, and
the simple fact is that it's a pleasant little film.
    Joseph Mazzello stars as Spencer, an intelligent young boy who has
no confidence in himself. He frequently gets harassed by the local
bully, and he can't speak a coherent sentence to a girl that he really
likes. He also has to deal with his father, who spends more time at work
than he does anywhere else, and his mean older sister who threatens him
and calls him names. One night while sitting in his bedroom, he sees a
flash of light and an object crashing into the local car dump. He goes
to investigate and finds Cy, a cybernetic suit that requires a bionic
host to operate. Naturally, he finds this very cool, and jumps right in.
    At first he just uses the suit to get back at the bully and to prove
to people that he is powerful. In the process of doing so he
accidentally destroys two houses because the suit is difficult to
control. Later, though, he uncovers an alien plot--he must stop them
from getting a hold of Cy, or Cy's makers and their planet will be
destroyed, as will Earth in the long run.
    I think what made the film for me is the performance of Joseph
Mazzello. I can't think of a child performance that is more convincing
than this one. Especially in one scene where Cy shows him memories of
his mother, Mazzello proves that he has a rare talent for such a young
kid.
    I also enjoyed the film because it's energetic and creative, which
is just what kids these days need to get the blood flowing. There are,
however, numerous Terminator 2 rip-offs (and some scenes stolen directly
from that film), but they're so blatant that I imagine the writers
intended for fans to notice these things. The sets and costumes are all
well done (except for a really bad-looking B-movie alien), and the film
feels well-made overall.
    It probably won't change your life, but Star Kid has enough in it to
keep your attention as your kids revel in the special effects and the
visual presentation. This is certainly a refreshing entry into the
dubious "kid" genre, and maybe I won't be so wary of a film like this in
the future.

Author
James Berardinelli
     While STAR KID isn't based on a comic book, it might as well be.  
However, unlike most superhero action movies, which aspire to be 
embraced by viewers of all ages, this feature is aimed at an exclusive 
sex and age group:  preteen boys.  But, while the picture is likely to 
appeal to many members of the target audience, those on the outside may 
be irritated by STAR KID's silly humor, flat characters, and juvenile 
writing.  When it comes to live-action comic books, this is uninspired 
fare.
     The basic premise of STAR KID (which was re-named from its more 
appropriate, original title, THE WARRIOR OF WAVERLY STREET) is that 12-
year old Spencer (Joseph Mazzello), a comic book-loving nerd, sees a 
spaceship crash-land near his house one night.  When he goes out to 
investigate, he discovers the "Phase I Assault Cybersuit," a living suit 
of armor that is designed to encase a humanoid host.  Once locked inside 
"Cy," Spencer has some fun using his newfound abilities to do things 
like torment the local bully and get some drive-through fast food.  But, 
with the arrival on Earth of a monstrous Broodwarrior, an enemy of the 
race that created Cy, the situation turns serious.
     As superhero stories go, this one has all the necessary elements:  
an underdog who emerges on top, an oddball friendship (in this case, a 
boy and his alien armor), a nasty villain, lots of neat powers for our 
intrepid protagonist, and a big, climactic battle.  Although competently 
brought to the screen by director Manny Coto (DR. GIGGLES), most of what 
goes on during STAR KID is strictly generic and by-the-book.  It's worth 
noting that, while the special effects aren't state of the art, they're 
pretty impressive considering the film's low budget.
     If you're looking for top-notch acting by "name" stars, this isn't 
the right movie.  The most impressive performance in STAR KID is given 
by a special effect (Cy).  Joseph Mazzello is adequate as Spencer, but 
his work here doesn't come close to his impressive turn in SHADOWLANDS; 
instead, it's more in line with his listless JURASSIC PARK output.  The 
other actors are adequate, and one or two of the faces may look vaguely 
familiar, but no one is likely to get another job based exclusively on 
their dubious accomplishments here.
     If the premise -- a human being gaining superpowers as a result of 
a special costume – sounds familiar, that could be because it was the 
idea behind last year's Shaquille O'Neal feature, STEEL.  However, while 
the basic plot is a retread, at least the dialogue transcends the level 
of nonstop, predictable clichés.  Although there's nothing in STAR KID 
that's likely to be mistaken for modern-day Shakespeare, surprisingly 
few of the lines are cringingly awful.  In fact, from time to time, the 
characters in this movie speak like real people.
     One thing that STAR KID has going for it is that it's rarely boring 
(although the repetitious climactic battle goes on for about 10 minutes 
too long).  That's because of the notoriously short attention span of 
the target audience.  Twenty years ago, I suppose I would have enjoyed 
this movie.  Since then, however, my tastes have matured, and now I 
demand a little more intelligence and sophistication than STAR KID 
offers.  Unless you're a boy between the ages of about 8 and 13, you're 
likely to find little of interest in this picture.
More than 1300 archived reviews.
ReelViews web site:  http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"
