Title
Review for Waydowntown (2000)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Gary Burns (Kitchen Party) may not be trying to establish himself as the
Canadian Kevin Smith, but his quirky humor, fast-paced dialogue and
dirt-cheap production values can't help but make me think of Silent Bob's
alter-ego.  His latest is a terrific blend of Office Space and the legendary
Seinfeld episode known as "The Contest" (it's the one with the bet to see
who can hold out the longest).
The competition in waydowntown involves four Calgary office drones who each
kick one month's salary into a kitty that will be claimed by the person who
can go the longest without venturing outside.  Like many large cities,
Calgary is full of underground tunnels and gerbilesque tubes that connect
residential apartments, office buildings and retail shops, so a person can
literally never go outside...unless, of course, they want to experience
things like fresh air, puppy-dog breath and whatever else happens up there
in Canada.
We're introduced to the game on Day 24, and each of the four contestants are
slowly going insane from the mind games they're playing with each other.
Sandra (Marya Delver) is convinced the recycled air is poisoning her and
thinks sniffing perfume ads from magazines is the key to keeping her lungs
all spiffy and clean.  Smarmy Curt's (Gordon Currie) fiancée won't have sex
with him until they're married, so he targets a vulnerable co-worker
(Jennifer Clement) to get some sweet release.  Randy (Tobias Godson) keeps
tabs on his competitors by befriending a nerdy security guard (James
McBurney), allowing him to watch surveillance cameras like he was Big
Brother, and the brooding Tom (Fab Filippo) becomes infatuated with a
superhero and his suicidal cubical-mate, played by the hysterical Don
McKellar (eXistenZ).
The rest of the plot revolves around a party being thrown in honor of the
company's decrepit founder, who turns out have some pretty serious social
flaws of his own.  waydowntown is narrated by Tom, who keeps an ant farm on
his desk (a not-so-subtle reference to people spending their lives trapped
in a big, glass structure).  Burns shot the film with a digital camera and
blew the finished product up to 35mm for use in theatres.  The result is a
dark, grainy, colorful mess, but there's no denying that Burns is a
filmmaker with a bright future ahead of him.
1:27 - R for language, drug use and some sexuality

Author
Laura Clifford
In downtown Calgary, a complex of shopping malls, offices and
apartments are interconnected via glass walkways for block after city block.
Five wildly different office colleagues have wagered a month's salary that 
whoever can stay inside the longest wins the pot in cowriter (with James 
Martin)/director Gary Burns' "waydowntown."
Playing in relative real time over the course of a lunch hour on
the 24th day of the bet, we first meet Tom (Fab Filipo), the new guy in the 
office, a marijuana smoking Goth and the bet's chief architect.  Tom takes
pleasure in rattling go-getter Sandra (Marya Delver) with creepy facts about
recycled air, while growing somewhat concerned with the mental health
of 'Sadly I'm' Brad (Don McKellar, "Last Night"), a twenty year office
veteran.  Randy (Tobias Godson) informs Tom that Curt (Gordon Currie), the
engaged-to-be-married-for-two-years office lothario, won a bet like this 
before, so Tom nudges Curt towards easy prey - the also engaged, mousy clerk
Vicki (Jennifer Clement).
Tom's been tasked with picking up a gift for the firm's octogenarian owner, 
Mr. Mather (Harris Hart), but is consistently kept off course by one comic
incident after another.  He keeps crossing paths with Sandra, who's just been 
given the important job of following Mather during lunch hour because he's
a kleptomaniac.  Tom becomes troubled by his ethics when he won't go outside
to check on the possible suicide he may have caused while Sandra manically
steals perfumed magazine inserts which she uses like a gas mask.  Randy hangs 
out with a shopping mall security guard, commenting on the passers-by.  Back
in the office, while the receptionist eavesdrops on Curt and Vickie's bathroom
encounter, Brad escalates from stapling himself with motivational mottos
('Don't compromise - prioritize') to dancing ever closer to the glass windows
clutching a marble-filled bottle. By film's end, all five will have shifted
their priorities when they realize where their bet as led them.
Martin and Burns' script is amusing and often inventive, although some
choices,
such as making Mather's gift a $3,500 crystal vase, are nonsensically plot 
driven.  Visually, "waydowntown" is more like a music video than a theatrical
film, with Tom frequently flying around corridors like the super heroes he
sees
darting around corners.  We see his imaginings of an arch villain taking
hostage the enclosed inner city visualized like a floating snow globe.  The
office interiors look like temporary structures and are photographed with no
imagination.  Use of a French language cover of the Petulia Clark hit
"Downtown" is a witty acknowledgement of its Canadian location.
"waydowntown" joins the likes of "Office Space" and "Haiku Tunnel" in the
genre of cubie comedy.  It's a cute flick, but its small screen look
makes it better suited for video.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by Gary Burns. Screenplay by Burns and James Martin. Starring Fab
Filippo, Marya Delver, Gordon Currie. Running time: 87 minutes. This film
is not yet rated by the MFCB. Reviewed on March 7th, 2001.
I attend and work at Memorial University of Newfoundland. Virtually every 
structure on the campus -- academic, administration and residence -- is 
linked in some way, either via skywalk or by a sometimes labyrinthine 
network of underground tunnels. Fortunately, I don't actually live on 
campus, so at the end of every day, I escape that closed network for the 
real outdoors. Not everyone is so lucky; I've known people living in 
residence who have purposely planned their schedules so that they never 
actually need to go outdoors. For them, MUN is a sealed environment: they
experience the world beyond only second-hand.
So I can relate to "Waydowntown", directed and co-written by Canadian 
helmer Gary Burns. "Waydowntown" is set in Calgary, Alberta, which sports 
a similarly enclosed downtown complex, complete with restaurants, 
corporate offices, shopping malls and living accommodations: it's a 
universe unto itself. Four employees working for a company headquartered 
somewhere in this amalgamation of edifices have made a bet to see how long 
they can last without actually going outdoors; the losers each give up a 
month's salary.
The movie begins four weeks into the wager, when it's beginning to take 
its toll on all the participants. Slick but manic Curt (Gordon Currie) is 
longs for the pleasures of the flesh, and has set his sights on vulnerable 
co-worker Vicki (Jennifer Clement), whose relationship with her fiance is 
on the rocks. Randy (Tobias Godson) passes time engaging in meaningless 
conversation with dorky security guard Phil (James McBurney). Sandra 
(Marya Delver), newly saddled with the responsibility of keeping an eye on 
her kleptomaniacal boss, finds herself suffocating in the recycled air of 
the downtown. And the competitive Tom (Fab Filippo) finds himself assailed 
on all sides -- by an attractive but flighty woman with a possibly 
suicidal boyfriend, by his oddball officemate Bradley (Don McKellar), and 
even by fleeting visions of a superhero in tights.
Burns and co-writer James Martin have devised a clever concept in 
"Waydowntown". The general set-up may seem like something out of a 
"Seinfeld" episode, but it's also a nice reflection of the way modern 
society has become so focussed, centralised and ultra-efficient that the 
simple beauty of life is sometimes forgotten. Being able to, say, go for a 
walk in the park might seem frivolous and superfluous -- especially when 
there are "more important" things to do -- but imagine actually being 
unable to indulge in that kind of activity. All of a sudden, it doesn't 
seem so frivolous and superfluous. It's the sort of thing that places the 
pursuit of money and power and achievement in context; what's the point in 
making millions of dollars if it becomes the sum total of your existence?
Burns directs the film at a manic pace, evoking the hectic state of 
everyday existence. He even slips occasionally into the mindstate of his 
characters. For instance, Tom feels like he's just floating through life, 
and Burns actually portrays him levitating down the corridors and walkways 
of the downtown. Burns also nicely captures the claustrophobia and 
sterility of the complex, a feeling enhanced by his decision to shoot the 
movie digitally and then transfer over to film afterward. "Waydowntown" is 
relentless from start to finish, sucking the viewer into its warped vision 
of reality right from the unusual opening credit sequence, and not letting 
go until the very end.
But as good as the premise of "Waydowntown" is, Burns is never quite able 
to elevate his script above the central idea. There are a lot of funny 
sequences -- I liked the way Sandra kept chasing after her elderly yet 
elusive boss only to become a shoplifter of sorts herself, stealing 
perfume inserts out of magazines to give her something to breathe in 
besides the stale downtown air. And a scene in which Brad attempts to 
replicate a local legend with a pop bottle full of marbles is downright 
hilarious.
But too often, Burns and Martin fall back on rather dodgy sitcom-style 
humour. An extended subplot involving Tom and an expensive crystal vase 
plays out, for the most part, like something that might have been on last 
night's rerun of "Three's Company". Other elements just feel like they 
could have been milked for more: Curt's bathroom-stall conquest of Vicki, 
for example, ends not with a bang (excuse the pun) but with a whimper. And 
in some areas, the script simply feels as though it needed tightening. 
Randy's entire existence is never really justified: he enjoys no 
interesting subplot like the other three participants in the bet, and is 
really only takes part in a couple of genuinely funny sequences (one 
involving Sandra and a cell phone is delightful, but Randy's presence 
isn't particularly germane).
Still, Burns does manage to encourage a number of good performances. 
Filippo -- despite the distracting affectation of wearing dark lipstick 
throughout -- hits all the right notes as Tom, whose natural state of 
climbing the corporate ladder is challenged by his awakening appreciation 
of a broader view of life. Initially appearing as little more than a 
corporate smooth-talker, Tom steadily develops a conscience as 
"Waydowntown" progresses, and Filippo does a good job of portraying this 
growth. Meanwhile, McKellar plays his oddball part well, making Bradley 
sufficiently weird and distant without losing a sense of reality (or 
humour). Currie is saddled with a rather stereotypical role as would-be 
jock Curt, but handles his material well all the same. Also noteworthy in 
a smaller role is McBurney, who steals practically every scene he's in. 
Phil's abortive efforts to stand up to the businessmen who are oblivious 
to his existence account for some of the movie's most sublime scenes.
Given all this, then, it is unfortunate that "Waydowntown" isn't as funny 
as it could and should have been. Burns is clearly on to something here, 
but isn't aggressive enough in complementing his high concept with an 
equally challenging execution. But despite its flaws, "Waydowntown" 
remains an effective, entertaining and incisive parable for our times.
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/Waydowntown.html
