Title
Review for My Giant (1998)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Michael Lehmann
Cast:  Billy Crystal, Gheorghe Muresan, Kathleen Quinlan, Zane Carney,
Steven Seagal, Joss Ackland
Screenplay:  David Seltzer
Producers:  Billy Crystal, Peter Schindler
Runtime:  1:37
US Distribution:  Columbia
Rated PG:  language, mild violence, crude humor
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
If there's one thing I just can't stand, it's a film that oozes with
sentimentality.  Here's a note to all film makers:  films are more
effective when the emotions of the characters speak for themselves. 
Swelling, saddening music is not a good way to tell us that the people
in the film are unhappy, and that the situation is hopeless.  Alas, My
Giant is a film that uses manipulative sentimentality so frequently and
with such high intensity that I forgot as I watched it that there are
other ways of getting audience members choked up.
What reminded me was that I wasn't choked up, or even the slightest bit
moved, for that matter.  My Giant is a forced, contrived, and
conspicuously un-cute (I detest the word "cute" but I've chosen to use
it because the makers clearly wanted to create a "cute" film here).  It
takes a premise that might have been interesting (I liked the preview),
and bogs it down with endless plot turns and cliches, all of which are
intended to get some kind of easy emotional rise from the audience. 
Maybe it will work for some people.  It didn't work for me.
Billy Crystal plays Sam Cayman, an agent who, at the beginning of the
film, is in Romania.  He's in Romania because the kid actor he made
famous is doing a film.  The screenplay has him in Romania so he can get
fired, get in a car accident, and get saved by an enormous individual
who stands almost eight feet tall.  His name is Max (Gheorghe Muresan),
and Sam thinks he'd be a great movie star because of his size.
Subplots are as follows:  Sam has a son and a wife (Kathleen Quinlan),
and he's never around for them, so they move to Chicago.  Max is in love
with a woman named Lilianna who moved away from Romania twenty years
before the film begins.  Sam convinces Max to go back to America with
him so they can make lots of money, and so their various subplots can
all be resolved.  Sam is broke.  Max is dying.  Pass the kleenex.
My Giant, as a comedy, is only moderately funny.  It has its moments,
the best of which features Steven Seagal making fun of himself.  In one
great scene, Sam gets his son on the phone to talk to Seagal; of course,
his son doesn't believe that he's actually speaking to Seagal, and he
goes off about how bad of an actor he is (I would quote the line I like
but it would probably lose its effect).  
Crystal is always entertaining, and he has a few good lines here (some
of which are subtle throwaways that many will miss entirely); often,
however, he's countered by a slew of jokes that aren't funny, and cause
an involuntary rolling of the eyes.  Muresan is kind of fun to watch,
but he just can't act very well.  Quinlan, on the other hand, is a great
actress who needs to get a role that shows off her talents.  She was
underused last year in both Event Horizon and Breakdown, but at least in
those films she had moments in which she could show us her stuff.  Here,
the best thing she gets to do is fake a Romanian accent.
All of these disappointing ingredients create a film that, for much of
its running time, is simply mediocre.  As My Giant lumbers to its
inevitable conclusion, however, director Michael Lehmann (who did a
great job directing the underrated Hudson Hawk) and scriptwriter David
Seltzer pile on every cliche imaginable, each one intended specifically
to pull at our heartstrings.  Sam's multiple engagements with his family
are all completely hackneyed (how about a main character who has a
healthy relationship with his family?).  Later, it turns out the entire
story is supposed to be a great big metaphor signifying Sam's reunion
with his family.  And some people might think that what Sam does for Max
towards the end is a valiant thing, but I had a few morality problems
with it (and I apologize for being vague).
It's icky.  It drips with gooey, wannabe human emotions.  My Giant
could have been a straightforward and funny family film.  More
importantly, it could have been moving on a level far deeper than it
is.  Instead, it's a complicated, overlong, and under-engaging film that
elicits too few laughs and strives for superficial tears.  And since it
left me feeling completely unmoved, I stand by my position that
sentimentality is evil and will ultimately destroy the world.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Billy Crystal, Gheorghe Muresan, Kathleen Quinlan, Zane Carney, 
      Steven Seagal, Joss Ackland 
Director: Michael Lehmann
Producers: Billy Crystal, Peter Schindler 
Screenplay: David Seltzer
Cinematography: Michael Coulter 
Music: Marc Shaiman
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     I don't know what it says about a movie when the best sequence 
features Steven Seagal.  That's right -- the same Seagal whose harsh 
monotone, unchanging expression, and wooden performances have earned him 
a worldwide following.  And, while Seagal doesn't have a major role in 
MY GIANT, his five minutes represent the film's undisputed highlight, 
because the humorless actor permits himself to be the object a 
particularly biting satire.  In fact, not only does Seagal allow his 
dubious thespian talents to be skewered, but he actively participates in 
the process.  After seeing MY GIANT, I'm willing to admit a certain 
degree of respect for the man.  (I will ignore the possibility that 
Seagal didn't realize this to be a parody -- nobody could possibly be 
that obtuse, could they?) 
     Billy Crystal is a naturally funny performer.  Put him in front the 
Oscar crowd of 1 billion people, and he shines, with his ad-libs 
generating more laughs than the material flashing up on the 
TelePrompTer.  In fact, it's only because of Crystal's innate ability to 
make people smile that MY GIANT is remotely watchable.  The comic's 
self-deprecating humor, highlighted in a number of stinging one-liners, 
provides a partial antidote to the mawkish sentimentality that floods 
the film's second half.  Director Michael Lehmann appears to have been 
going for RAIN MAN meets JERRY MAGUIRE, but falls considerably short of 
the mark.  MY GIANT will give THE ODD COUPLE 2 (another major April 10 
release) a run for its money in the "pointless mediocrity" category.
     Speaking of Lehmann, few directors in Hollywood have had such an 
uneven career.  (Bruce Beresford is the only other one who immediately 
comes to mind.)  On the positive side, he has helmed such top-notch 
comedies as HEATHERS and THE TRUTH ABOUT CATS AND DOGS.  But he has also 
been responsible for duds like MEET THE APPLEGATES, HUDSON HAWK, and now 
MY GIANT.  About the only noteworthy thing Lehmann can claim for this 
film is that he had an opportunity to work with one of the tallest 
actors ever to grace the big screen.
     That actor is Gheorghe Muresan, a 7'7" man with an Eastern European 
accent so thick that he makes Arnold Schwarzenegger sound American-born.  
Muresan is described as "fluent" in English, but, while he may 
understand the words, he isn't always intelligible.  Half the time, I 
wasn't sure whether he was speaking in Romanian or English, and, when he 
delivers a speech from Shakespeare's "Henry V," it took me a moment to 
realize who he was quoting.  Muresan, who is plagued by limited range, 
isn't a great performer, but he's at least competent enough to develop a 
sympathetic character.  Then again, when it comes to casting giants, 
Lehmann probably didn't have much of a group to pick from.
     MY GIANT opens with mild-mannered Sam (Crystal) driving around 
Romania, looking for a town whose name he can't pronounce.  Sam is an 
agent (or, in his words, "a leech, a vulture, ...a scum-sucking pig"), 
and his lone client is on-location doing a BRAVEHEART-like epic.  When 
an unexpected flock of sheep forces Sam to drive his car off the road 
and into a water-filled ditch, he is saved from drowning by Max 
(Muresan), the biggest man he has ever seen ("Please don't say 'fe fi fo 
fum'").  Max, who lives at a local monastery doing odd-jobs for the 
monks, is actually a gentle soul whose time is spent pining after his 
lost love, a girl he once knew who moved to America.  Sam, sensing a 
chance to make Max into a big star, uses the lure of seeing her again as 
a carrot to persuade the giant to travel to the United States, where he 
can audition for a role in the new Steven Seagal action film, DOUBLE OR 
NOTHING.  However, as Sam spends more time with Max, he develops a 
genuine affection for his new client, and comes to re-discover the 
importance of family -- namely, his son, Nick (Zane Carney), and 
estranged wife, Serena (Kathleen Quinlan).  
     MY GIANT is surprisingly lean in the laugh department, especially 
once the buddy story kicks into high gear.  The scene in MY GIANT 
guaranteed to generate the loudest guffaws happens early in the film, 
and features projectile vomiting.  Yeah, it's gross, but so was the 
overeating bit in MONTY PYTHON'S THE MEANING OF LIFE, and that had me 
laughing so hard that tears were running down my cheeks.  This isn't 
nearly as funny, but for those who aren't turned off this sort of stuff, 
there's a payoff.  
     At its heart, MY GIANT tries to be a feel-good tale, but it's too 
pat and cloying to be effective.  Like JERRY MAGUIRE, it's about a jaded 
man learning to place friendship and love above being shown the money.  
>From the start, MY GIANT feels plotted and manipulative, with a story 
that seems pieced together using scraps of other, better movies.  
There's also too much going on -- Lehmann should have chosen to 
concentrate on one particular plot element (the relationship between Sam 
and Max, for example) rather than throwing them together with an ample 
dose of saccharine and setting the cinematic blender to "puree."  The 
result is predictably mixed up and dissatisfying.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Berge Garabedian
Michael Lehmann's follow-up to the funny and touching THE TRUTH ABOUT
CATS AND DOGS (7.5/10) doesn't come close to that film, or his
directorial debut of HEATHERS (8/10), one of JoBlo's personal
favourites. Crystal is also credited as one of the people who came up
with the "story" for this film.
PLOT:
Fast-talking agent from New York (Crystal) gets his life saved by a
gigantic man in Romania (Muresan) and decides to bring him back to
America for a shot at success in the world of entertainment.
CRITIQUE:
This film is anything but a comedy. Yes, it does have some funny
scenes. Yes, it does feature Billy Crystal, the successful host of the
Oscars, cracking us up from year to year. But no, unfortunately for all
those going into this film expecting a yuck-fest...'tis not to be, my
friends. This film is rooted in sentimentality and the manipulation of
emotions (in its characters and for the audience). Most of the film
involved a sub-plot about the "giant" coming to America to find his
long-lost love (nothing funny about that), and the fact that he may
have some health problems (nothing funny about that either).
As a general film, it does work on some emotional levels, but as a
comedy, it is definitely not something you would recommend to your
friends for a "good laugh". Muresan is excellent as the puppy-eyed
"giant" who doesn't want nor need much out of life. Crystal is generic
as usual, and does little to distinguish his character from every other
neurotic, wise-cracking Jewish yuppie that he's played over the years
(Did I just describe Crystal as a "person" or his "character"? Too
close to call. I guess the man's acting abilities don't necessarily
stretch from his own persona). Funny at times, overly sentimental at
others.
Overall, the movie doesn't deliver many laughs (one unique scene
featuring the real Steven Seagal is pretty cool, and pretty big on
Seagal's part, as the scene essentially makes fun of him-word on the
street is that Seagal originally turned the part down, but after
hearing that Van Damme might take it, he curiously reconsidered), has a
disappointing ending, and seems to use Muresan's pure innocence and
naiveté to garner emotional attachment from the audience (worked a
little bit, but after a while....). The good points, well, not too
many, but I guess I was never really bored or angry during the entire
screening, so that's a plus. A flaccid recommendation indeed.
Little Known Facts: 
The film is dedicated to Andre. That's "Andre the Giant" to the laymen.
A scene featuring Mr. Muresan having to drink wine to get "tipsy", and
being hauled onto a horse by a crane, is based on an actual occurence
during the filming of Rob Reiner's PRINCESS BRIDE (8/10), when Andre
the Giant also ran into some problems attempting to mount a horse.
Billy Crystal stands 5"8, while Muresan towers at 7"7. Muresan's mom
was 5"7 and his dad was only 5"9. He wears a size 19 shoe, and plays
professional basketball in the NBA with the Washington Wizards.
Billy Crystal once studied film and television direction at NYU,
partially under the tutelage of filmmaker Martin Scorsese (TAXI DRIVER
8/10, GOODFELLAS 9/10 ).


Author
Jon Popick
Apparently, while Billy Crystal spends all of his free time tying to
figure out how to work the names of all five `Best Picture' nominees
into an irritating song and dance number, he has his mongoloid nephew
read scripts and recommend projects for him.  Note to Billy – IT'S OVER!
In his latest big screen blunder, Crystal (Father's Day) stars as an
unsuccessful New York talent agent named Sammy.  He currently has but
one client, an annoying pre-pubescent douche bag that is currently
filming a `Crusades' picture in Romania.  After travelling around the
world to the location, Sammy in unceremoniously dumped by the little
brat.  Why he had to go there at all, I will never know.
Thankfully, Sammy gets into a car wreck, but he doesn't die.  In fact,
he is saved by a seven-and-a-half foot glandular case named Max (NBA
star Gheorge Muresan).  The giant lives with a bunch of monks because
the townsfolk call him mean names.  These monks are the kind that don't
talk.  Or maybe they're the kind of monks who just don't talk in front
of Billy Crystal because they were raised to not say anything if they
can't say anything nice.  I do think there was one in the background
giggling about Mr. Saturday Night.
Anyway, Max drags Sammy back to his lair (which oddly resembles
Crystal's home in The Princess Bride) and prattles on and on about his
long lost love who moved to Gallop, New Mexico.  He even has stacks and
stacks of letters that he has written to her.  Why they are still in his
possession, I will never know.
Not the type of guy to pass up the exploitation of a big stupid freak,
Sammy talks Max into becoming a movie star as well as an opportunity to
reunite with his beloved.  This Max is some actor.  His dopey grin and
cross-eyed blank stare make Andrew Shue look like an acting great.
Although he is a better screen presence than Shaq and Michael Jordan,
Muresan still makes my want to bash something apart with some type of
power tool.
Here's an idea – when you make a movie about a big tall guy, how about
showing him in places that normal people find cramped.  Max gets to go
on an airplane and in a cab, but we don't get to see either.  I would
have loved to have seen him crushing his Frankenstein head into the
overhead compartment or try to use the bathroom.  Something…anything.
Instead, My Giant's script is loosely held together by one of the
greatest vomiting scenes in history.
Or here is an even better story – instead of helping Sammy, Max eats
him.  He still becomes a big movie star and even gets to present an
award at the Oscars.  Instead of reading the names of the nominees, Max
pulls down his pants and craps out Sammy, who burst into a song and
dance number.  Jesus, I've got to write a script.  All I need is the
address for Billy's nephew.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     I can't remember a film getting as much mileage out of a single
visual gag as MY GIANT gets out of its one and only visual gag.  The gag,
of course, is the premise:  diminutive Billy Crystal teamed in a
buddy-bonding comedy with 7'7" professional basketball player Gheorghe
Muresan.  Crystal plays Sammy Kamin, a low-rent talent agent whose best
clients tend to work car shows or wedding receptions; Muresan plays Max, a
gentle, Shakespeare-quoting Romanian giant who saves Sammy's life when his
car plunges into a river.  Sammy immediately sees dollar signs in the
massive Max, persuading him to try movie acting with a promise to visit
Max's long-lost love Lillianna in America.  Soon the unlikely pair are on
the road together, every scene between them something that momentarily
fools you into thinking there _must_ be some special effects at work.
     It's enough to make you wonder why they don't make silent films
anymore, when this one could have been thoroughly enjoyable without a
single character opening his or her mouth.  Crystal, for his part has
always been good with a reaction take and a vaudevillian's sense for
milking a laugh visually.  Unfortunately, he has become obsessed with
plots in which he invariably plays workaholics who learn What Really
Matters -- two CITY SLICKERS movies, FORGET PARIS, MR. SATURDAY NIGHT and
now MY GIANT.  David Seltzer's script piles on the pathos so thick --
tender moments between Sammy and his estranged wife (Kathleen Quinlan),
sad-eyed tete-a-tetes with his son (Zane Carney), Lillianna's rejection of
Max, a potentially life-threatening ailment for one main character -- that
it threatens to crush everything in its path.  The few decent jokes
Crystal manages to squeeze in between the heart-felt glances hardly seem
worth the effort.
     Muresan, meanwhile, is just too endearingly goofy not to look at, a
Great Dane puppy in a peasant shirt.  If you've seen his hilarious
Snickers commercial, in which he hawks an eponymous cabbage-cented cologne
on a home shopping channel, you know Muresan has charm and a surprising
comic sense.  You would also know that, compared to Muresan's
marble-mouthed diction, Andre the Giant sounded like he studied with Henry
Higgins.  It's an undemanding role, one in which Muresan demonstrates
infinitely more screen presence than fellow hoopster-cum-thespians like
Shaquille O'Neal and Michael Jordan.  You just can't help wishing that the
big guy would continue to smile engagingly while embarking on fewer
adventures into the English language.
     Whatever its failings, MY GIANT is almost worth watching simply for a
few jaw-droppings cenes featuring Steven Seagal.  Playing himself on the
set of an action movie where Max might play the villain, Seagal shows more
willingness to poke fun at his image than I ever suspected he had in him.
When his director asks if a scene could be better with one more take, a
casually arrogant Seagal answers, "No;" when he makes a call to Sammy's
son as a favor, he allows the skeptical boy to mock his look ("that stupid
ponytail"), his acting ("lessons...how about taking a few?") and his
muttered line-readings ("are you going to go hang out with Stallone so I
can understand you _less_?")  For five minutes, MY GIANT is comic genius,
and Seagal deflates himself masterfully.
     And then, it's back to swimming through they syrup of Marc Shaiman's
score to get to the warm-n-fuzzy denouement.  MY GIANT has its moments,
but its generally such a tepid and non-threatening comedy that the moments
can't add up to much.  Feel-good shmaltz like this works much better when
you don't have to listen to the shmaltz being spelled out for you.  Call
me old-fashioned, but I prefer to imagine a version of MY GIANT made 70
years ago, where no precious speeches got in the way of chuckling at
mis-matched protagonists.

Author
Matt Williams
Billy Crystal reappears in yet another high concept comedy.  He tries to
infuse some life into it, but it gets bogged down with sentimentality
and a lack of sophistication.
Sammy (Billy Crystal) is a struggling agent at the end of his ropes.
He's separated from his wife, Serena (Kathleen Quinlan), and down to his
last serious client...in a low-budget film shooting in Romania. But in a
turn of bad luck, Sammy wrecks his car...only to be mysteriously saved
by a giant (Gheorghe Muresan).
But this giant has a heart of gold.  He leads a solitary life, helping
out the monks at a local monastery.  His only longing is for his long
lost love, Lilianna (Joanna Pacula), who has since moved to America.
Sammy, seeing a golden ticket, convinces Max to become an actor
(represented by Sammy, of course), and come back to America.
And so Sam and Max bounce from pathetic job to pathetic job, with Sammy
dangling a meeting with Lilianna as a carrot before Max's nose.  But
slowly Sammy's deceptions begin to haunt him.  But will he develop a
conscience before the innocent Max becomes disillusioned.
The humor in My Giant isn't the world's greatest.  Mostly, it falls
under the category of "boy...he's so big!", and that can only go so far,
no matter how hard the talent tries.  Still, its slightly amusing parts
are longed for when the movie gets bogged down in sappy moments.
The film's best moment (and that's not saying much) is a bit part by
Steven Seagal, playing himself.  Between Executive Decision and this,
all of Seagal's best roles have been cameos.  Maybe he should consider a
change of work:  Steven Seagal, the character actor!
Gheorghe Muresan isn't a natural actor at all, and his thick
cotton-mouthed accent certainly doesn't help.  In fact the only thing he
adds to the role is his immense stature.  Originally, the concept was
designed several years ago for  Andre the Giant.  Andre also had a hefty
accent, but he displayed a knack for comedy in The Princess
Bride...something Muresan should have studied for some pointers.
Why does Billy Crystal continually get caught in these pathetic
comedies? He's proven that he can be much funnier than these formulaic
films allow him to be, and yet, like a glutton for punishment, he keeps
coming back. That doesn't mean we have to.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Billy Crystal, Gheorghe Muresan, Kathleen Quinlan, Zane Carney,
Steven Seagal, Joss Ackland
Director: Michael Lehmann
Producers: Billy Crystal, Peter Schindler
Screenplay: David Seltzer
Why have Billy Crystal's films been so disappointing of late? I think
the answer lies in the fact that when he plays the main lead – he has a
tendency to be overpowering, like a spilt bottle of perfume in a small
room. The screen is over-permeated with Billy and this is the problem
with MY GIANT. His co-star Gheorge Muresan, is big, but has zero
personality. With nothing to counteract Crystal, it's like he's just
talking to a wall and that's what Billy does in this movie – he talks to
himself.
The fact that giant Gheorge, doesn't carry much charisma or charm, does
not help the cause. The poor darling suffers from acromegally, a
hormonal imbalance that results in overgrowth. We are meant to feel
sorry for his dilemma of being cursed with being big and for his
impossible search for love. Unfortunately, his accent is so thick that
it comes across like a rumble of thunder – vaguely understandable.
The highlight of the movie is undoubtedly Steven Segal. MY GIANT was
badly in need of life, and I started wishing that a Segal action
thriller would take over (not a good sign). Unfortunately, there were no
thrown daggers, kicking heads or gunfire. I badly needed be entertained
and woken from the monotony of the overwhelming, characteristic Crystal
whine. I believe that Billy Crystal does best when he is co-starring and
providing the comic relief for otherwise serious acting. Either that or
hosting the Oscars.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     MY GIANT is two movies for the price of one, but neither is worth
the cost of admission, even if you get in free.  As lamely directed by
Michael Lehmann, the picture tries to be a comedy by using and reusing
every giant joke in the book.  ("Without Goliath, David is just some
punk throwing rocks.")  Languidly paced throughout, the movie becomes
increasingly lugubrious as the screenplay by David Seltzer (THE OMEN)
meanders toward its sad ending.  Since it's rarely funny or
convincingly dramatic, what the filmmakers thought they were doing
remains a mystery.  Other than a few nice visuals, there's nothing to
recommend the picture.
     With great film comedies under his belt from WHEN HARRY MET SALLY…
to the original CITY SLICKERS, Billy Crystal has shown that he's more
than the world's best Oscar host.  He does, however, have a propensity
for choosing hopeless material as in last year's FATHER'S DAY and this
year's MY GIANT.  One wonders if he reads the script before agreeing to
go ahead with a project.  Surely reading the one for MY GIANT would
have shown that there was nothing there.  Perhaps he thought he could
ad lib it into success.  Or maybe he wants to be a dramatic actor and
thought he could do something serious with the movie's somber tone.
The most charitable thing that could be said about it is that it is so
ineffectual that people will probably forget they saw it by the next
day.
     This one-joke movie's single idea is to place real-life basketball
player Gheorghe Muresan, who stands seven and a half feet tall, into as
many visually striking situations as possible.  Sammy (Crystal), an
agent currently without clients, is rescued after a car accident by a
sweet Romanian giant named Max (Muresan).  After throwing out constant
one-liners ("Either God is in the salvage business or Big Foot just
took my car."), Sammy decides to get serious, seeing Max as his meal
ticket.  And although he doesn't like it, he's willing to sign Max up
to do disgusting events like a wrestling match with a half-dozen
dwarfs.  (The movie itself knows no bounds as it contains one of the
most putrid and lengthy vomiting scenes ever.)
     After a series of missed opportunities, the comedic part of the
movie is over, and it turns into a cheap and maudlin disease movie.  We
learn that Max's condition is terminal, and he will soon die.
     To be fair, the movie does contain a few good scenes - all of
which you can see in the trailers.  Let's hope Billy gets himself a
pair of reading glasses before he signs up for another movie.
     MY GIANT runs too long even at just 1:37.  It is rated PG for
violence and profanity and would be acceptable for kids around ten and
up.
     My son Jeffrey and his friend Matthew, both 9, gave the movie a
single star and had nothing good to say about it.  Matthew pointed out
that it "is not as good as it could have been or should have been."
(Amen.) He went on to comment that he did not like the way the movie
changed completely in the middle.  Jeffrey complained particularly
about how gross the movie was.

Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
     Billy Crystal's films are innocuous.  They don't say a lot but they
they do manage to entertain with language kept tasteful and in a mixture
of immature and downright stupid comedies, Crystal finds the wit and
charming self-consciousness that appeals to all age groups.  His best
film, 'City Slickers', spawned a sequel that was more contrived and less
ambitious and his most talked about film is probably 1989's 'When Harry
Met Sally' in which Crystal and the extremely likable Meg Ryan starred
as a pair of on again off again relationship seekers who find each
other's true nature after many years.
     'My Giant' has two things going for it.  An original story and the
unusual presence of a nearly 8 foot tall actor named Gheorge Muresan who
is extremely likable and remarkably, holds his own with Crystal in his
film debut.
     Crystal plays Sam, an agent travelling through Romania and a client
whom he represents is the star of a 'Braveheart' kind of film, full of
men in armour, wielding large swords, riding swiftly on horses and
Crystal is fired by his client and in the frustration and shame of being
fired, crashes his car into a ditch attached to a river and is saved by
Max (Muresan) who works at a monastery helping with the daily chores who
longs to be reunited with a teenage sweetheart who moved to America
years before.  Sam tells Max he can put him in the movies and after a
hard sell job of convincing Max that he can be a movie star, Max agrees
and the two of them are in tow.
     Watching Muresan walk down the streets of New York City is funny
with everyone looking up and a scene where Muresan gobbles up twenty hot
dogs in a couple of minutes and runs up a vendor's bill of over 50
dollars is what audiences probably remember most from the ads promoting
the film.  Crystal also takes his new client home to meet his family and
there are some funny scenes at the dinner table that contain some
genuine belly laughs.
     The film fails to expand on some characters that have potential
such as the boy who plays Cystal's isolated son and even Crystal's wife
in the film (Kathleen Quinlan) has a role that is key in the film's
final minutes but her talents are far above that of only one key scene.
     Crystal always looks to be playing himself in his films as his
personalities are always the same but Crystal gets away with it
constantly surrounding himself with other talent.  Sometimes with actors
better than him (Jack Palance, Debra Winger) and other times by telling
stories that sell on the strength of their appeal which ordinary people
can relate to ('City Slickers').  You can accuse Crystal of being a one
dimensional comedian but for an actor who started in television ('Soap'
and a little known appearance on 'All in the Family'), he's done quite
well for himself with acceptance among both critics and audiences alike.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Ben Hoffman
Billy Crystal is one of the top standup comedians.  Despite his
boyish demeanor he has been around a long time.  In recent years no
one has been better as Master of Ceremonies of the Oscars than he.
How then explain that he wrote the story, along with David Seltzer
(who did the screenplay) of this one note boring movie?     An
essential attribute of every comic is timing.  How then explain that
he did not see (in his capacity as producer) that the director was
dragging his tail in this very slow-moving film.
 As an agent, Sammy (Billy Crystal) has been almost always
unsuccessful. Opening scene is of him driving his car in Romania
looking for talent he can sign up.   Did it have to take what seemed
like a half hour of driving and voice over before he finally came
across Max, a 7'7" giant (Gheorghe Muresan) ("He can play 8' if he
has to.").    Max is happy as a caretaker living in a monastery but
he longs for his long gone girlfriend Lillianna (Joanna Pacula) who
for the past 22 years has resided in New Mexico.   New Mexico?  22
years ago?  What kind of story is this?
 When Sammy convinces Max that he will be made into a movie star if
he goes to America with Sammy, the giant jumps at the chance.   Let
us spare you any more of the story.  Suffice it to say that Max was
mean and selfish to entice the giant to leave his homeland but
before the film ends, he realizes he has been a scoundrel and
changes into a good human being.   Give me a break.   Sounds like
Amateur Night.
 Others who contribute (but not much)  to this lost cause are
Kathleen Quinlan as Sammy's wife, and Zane Carney as their son.

Author
Liz Rizzo
Starring Billy Crystal, Zane Carney, Walt G. Ludwig, Gheorghe Muresan,
Kathleen Quinlan and Steven Seagal (as himself)
Written by David Seltzer
Directed by Michael Lehmann
Produced by Castle Rock Entertainment/Columbia Pictures Corporation [US]
and distributed by Columbia Pictures[US]/Sony Pictures Entertainment
[US]
My Giant begins with a monologue that's more funny than not and a
distinctive `Princess Bride,' medieval fairy-tale-in-the-‘90s feel.  I
was pleasantly surprised how sharp the comedy was, with very funny
scenes occurring on a movie set in Romania where talent agent Sammy
(Billy Crystal) is visiting a client and in the monastery where Sammy
ends up after being mysteriously saved when he accidentally plunges his
car into a stream.  And when Sammy meets Max, his giant, mysterious
savior played by Gheorghe Muresan, there is magic in the air; albeit it
a bit goofy, I loved every minute of it.  The film, of course, plays on
the size difference between the two, and at times you would almost swear
it must be special effects.  I particularly enjoyed a shot of Sammy
dangling his legs from a Max-sized chair as the two face each over an
enormous table and eat from oversized bowls and spoons.  I also liked
Jere Burns' (from TV's `Something So Right') performance as the director
of the film in Romania.
At this point, the primary flaw in the film is that Gheorghe Muresan is
incredibly hard to understand, particularly during his fast-paced first
scene.  It is unfortunate that the script required him to speak quickly
right out of the gate, as I did understand him more as the film
continued and I became accustomed to his speech.  However, about the
time Muresan becomes coherent, the characters head to New York and the
film takes a dive.  Off the high board.
Suddenly, we are expected to believe Sammy is a do-whatever-it-takes
slime ball.  Up until this point he was pursuing his own interests to be
sure, but he didn't come off as a desperate jerk.  If he had, the first
scenes could never have been so lighthearted and magical.  But now, in
New York, we are further introduced to his neglected wife and son, and
his character is desperate enough to involve Max in a disturbing giant
vs. midgets wrestling match, which I found quite unpleasant and jarring
within the framework of the film.  Indeed, many scenes stuck out of this
film like incorrectly placed puzzle pieces.  
This includes the scenes featuring Steven Seagal, when Sammy gets Max a
role in a big, Hollywood movie filming in Las Vegas.  While I enjoyed
seeing Seagal poke fun at himself, the scenes appeared to exist solely
because of his participation, rather than because the film demanded it. 
And the audience is required to take a huge leap to believe that Max
would win the role based on his quotations of Shakespeare.  At this
point I found myself thinking, `We're supposed to believe that someone
would cast this guy in a film?'  Then I realized he was, and I was
watching it.
In the final third, the film undergoes another transformation, this time
to unbridled sentimentality.  Note:  Major plot points are revealed in
this and the final paragraph. Max went to America because Sammy promised
to reunited him with his childhood love, Lillianna, who hasn't seen him
since he was a normal-sized kid.  Her refusal to see Max (unbeknownst to
him) leads us to an awkward `ends justify the means' scene as Sammy's
wife Serena, played nicely by Kathleen Quinlan, poses as Lillianna.  I
found this scene offensive.  Not only did it rely on deception to induce
warm, fuzzy feelings from the audience, it reduced Max to someone we
should pity and coddle, which I thought was quite undeserved.  I think
Max could have handled the truth, gratuitous illness and all.  Late in
the film we learn Max, and in fact all giants, have a heart condition
which shortens their lives considerably.  This could be an enlightening
revelation, but the film seemingly presents it only to justify Sammy's
transformation into a caring, sensitive guy -- and hey, a great dad and
husband, too!
`My Giant' suffers from a poorly constructed story line and undeveloped
characters whose actions are determined by plot points rather than their
own internal persuasions.  A stronger story with more room for character
growth might have been possible if the focus was on Max's struggle to be
accepted and cast in movies instead of Sammy's struggles to get money
and become a better person.  In this scenario, Max's illness could have
been a integral part of the film not a story motivator.  Sentiment and
emotion would have followed naturally.  Instead, we're apparently not
supposed to like Sammy until the end, but we're not allowed to focus on
Max.  Crystal and Muresan give adequate and at times enjoyable
performances, but in the end, `My Giant' left me feeling like I'd been
fed gruel from a giant spoon.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Columbia Pictures/ Castle Rock Entertainment
 Director:  Michael Lehmann
 Writer:  David Seltzer
 Cast: Billy Crystal, Gheorghe Muresan, Kathleen Quinlan,
Zane Carney, Steven Seagal
   "What should I wear," asks Max, a 7'7" man played by
Gherghe Muresan in director Michael Lehmann's leviathan
movie.  "Stay away from vertical stripes," quips his best
friend, Sam (Billy Crystal), in one of the many throwaway lines
of this sentimental comedy.  "My Giant" starts off like
something out of "Saturday Night Live" and ends up like the
conclusion of a Frank Capra film, mixing shtick, sentiment,
pathos and Hollywood satire in a brief story which works well
because of the chemistry between its two principal
performers.  The long and short of it is that Billy Crystal, one
of our most natural and funny comics, teams up beautifully
with Gheorghe Muresan, a Romanian basketball player for the
Washington Wizards, as an unlikely duo who teach each
other some of the most valuable lessons that could be offered
about life.  Each needs the other almost more than he can
imagine.  Sam, a second-rate, flat-broke talent agent, requires
an actor who can generate income for him.  Max, a lovesick
man living a secluded life in a Romanian monastery, pines for
his childhood sweetheart whom he cannot contact without
Sam's help.  Thinking that he is doing far more for his gangly
pal than he can ever get in return, Sam recovers his
innocence and learns to get a life.
   For Billy Crystal fans the opening scenes are a gem.  His
character, Sam, is driving through Romania to meet a young
actor who has employed him and who is now filming a
juvenile action movie complete with shields, swords and
cornball dialogue.  To avoid a flock of sheep that suddenly
cross his path, he swerves, flips over, and is about to drown
when he is saved by what appears to be two giant hands--
which he assumes are those of God Himself.  Waking up
before a team of silent monks looked over by a large crucifix,
he believes he's in heaven, but the wrong one: "My real name
is Kaminsky...get my drift?" he quips in the movie's greatest
one-liner.  Upon hearing an explanation from the 7'7" man
who saved him and who speaks fluent English, Sam believes
that this Max is just the guy who can save his career, one
who can act scary and perform the role of villain in many
movies to come.  As the two fly--first to New York where Sam
sees his estranged wife Serena (Kathleen Quinlan) and
adoring son Nick (Zane Carney), then to Vegas on the way to
Gallup, New Mexico, where Max's childhood sweetheart
resides--their friendship deepens. Sam soon learns a dismal
truth about his pal which changes his ideas about the
meaning of success and fulfillment.
   While some in the audience may not easily swallow the
sticky sentimentality that informs the final one-third of the
movie, "My Giant" is overall a likable film which, like many
others of the genre, begins with a barrage of sallies, runs into
the zaniness of cultural misunderstandings, and concludes
with the warm fuzziness which Crystal is so capable of
bringing off.  While Muresan may never achieve the superstar
status which Billy Crystal enjoys, his enthusiasm for acting
can be traced back to the very preparation he made for the
role.  Unable to speak much English at first, he was trained
by Crystal who had the large man read the script a great
many times and essentially memorize the entire story so that
he fully understood his role.  Life followed art in Pirandellian
fashion as both actor and his character struggle to master a
role that neither ever intended to pursue.  
   "My Giant" is not a major comedy or, despite the nature of
the eponymous character, a very original idea, but it should
please a diverse audience of assorted ages with its message
of tolerance and family values.  The picture is acted well and
features lovely country scenes filmed in the Czech Republic,
which doubles for Romania.  Rated PG.  Running Time: 97
minutes.  (C) 1998 Harvey Karten
