Title
Review for Waiting to Exhale (1995)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1995
U.S. Availability: 12/22/95 (wide)
Running Length: 2:04
MPAA Classification: R (Sexual situations, profanity, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Angela Bassett, Whitney Houston, Lela Rochon, Loretta Devine, 
      Gregory Hines, Leon, Dennis Haysbert, Michael Beach, Wesley Snipes
Director: Forest Whitaker
Producers: Ezra Swerdlow and Deborah Schindler
Screenplay: Terry McMillan and Ronald Bass based on the novel by 
      Terry McMillan
Cinematography: Toyomichi Kurita
Music: Kenneth "Babyface" Edmonds
U.S. Distributor: 20th Century Fox
     The first thing to note about WAITING TO EXHALE, Forest Whitaker's 
theatrical feature debut as a director, is that it will likely be a huge 
success with its target audience.  Many black women will see themselves 
in this motion picture, and, subconsciously using their personal 
background to fill in gaps left by the screenplay, they will declare 
this film a triumph.  I wish I could be as positive with my opinion, but 
I found WAITING TO EXHALE to be seriously flawed -- a string of 
connected vignettes that propel the four main characters along easily 
predicted character arcs.
     Of the quartet of stories, Bernadine's is the most compelling.  
It's no coincidence that this character is played by Angela Bassett, the 
best actress in the cast.  Bernadine has been dumped by her husband of 
eleven years (Michael Beach), a rather slimy fellow who has left her 
with their two children so he can move in with his white mistress.  
Needless to say, Bernadine doesn't react well to this news and her 
response -- torching his car with all his possessions in it -- will 
almost certainly garner loud cheers from women in the audience.
     Although not as interesting as Bernadine, Loretta Devine's Gloria 
offers some worthwhile moments.  She's a single mom trying to cope with 
her son's growing need for independence, her ex-husband's confession 
that he's gay, and her own lackluster sexual life.  Fortunately for her, 
a handsome new neighbor (Gregory Hines) moves in, and he seems to have 
all the answers.
     WAITING TO EXHALE's other two characters -- Savannah (Whitney 
Houston) and Robin (Lela Rochon) -- are basically separate aspects of 
the same personality.  Both are stuck in bad relationships that they are 
unable or unwilling to escape from.  Neither of these stories is of more 
than passing interest, and the movie slows to a crawl when Houston or 
Rochon takes center stage.
     Whitaker's direction, like the tone, is uneven.  Some of the 
switches from comedy to drama are forced and abrupt.  That said, 
however, WAITING TO EXHALE contains a fair number of genuinely humorous 
sequences, many of which make pointed comments about male insensitivity.  
There are also several memorable serious scenes, the best of which team 
Angela Bassett with Wesley Snipes.  Not only does this pair sizzle, but 
the dialogue is intelligently-written and the performances are on-
target.  
     The most significant fault in WAITING TO EXHALE is its character 
presentation.  With the exception of Bernadine, I never felt anything 
for the women populating this film, as they failed to capture my 
interest or sympathy.  Part of this can be attributed to bland 
performances by Houston and Rochon, but the script must bear an equal 
share of the burden.
     No doubt about it -- this is a "women's movie" (or, as it's 
alternatively referred to, a "chick flick"), but it's among the year's 
weakest.  HOW TO MAKE AN AMERICAN QUILT and MOONLIGHT AND VALENTINO 
covered comparable ground earlier in 1995, and there are similarities 
between WAITING TO EXHALE and THE JOY LUCK CLUB (especially since co-
writer Ronald Bass was involved in the book-to-screen transition of Amy 
Tan's novel).  Of all those films, however, this one has the most 
artificial and disjointed "feel".  Personally, I don't buy the "male 
bashing" accusation that has been leveled at WAITING TO EXHALE.  The 
treatment of men in the movie seems fine, and there are other problems 
more worthy of attention.  Given the dearth of significant roles for 
black women in motion pictures, it's refreshing to see these four 
bonding on the big screen -- and that's almost reason enough for this 
film to have been made.  Nevertheless, it's difficult to deny that 
another layer of substance is needed to lift the movie about this 
superficial level of melodrama.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Ben Hoffman
     The good things to be said about WAITING TO EXHALE can be summed
up in a few words:  it has given employment to many black actors as
well as a black director.  Having said that, there is little else good
that merits more than 2 Bytes.
     For instance, of the four starring actresses, three of them are
beautiful in the sense that white people look upon beauty.  I suspect
that blacks look upon them as white beauties with dark skin.  Further,
while it is not written in The Ten Commandments that every film about
blacks should be meaningful in the sense that films by Spike Lee are,
it would still be nice if the film did not have 4 women who, whatever
the reason, smoked, drank, went to bed with men after a slight meeting,
held conversations that were always sexual and whose lives seemed to be
devoted only to finding "a man."
     Where, I kept asking myself, are the role models which the blacks
need?  For years, Savannah (Whitney Houston) has been asking God to
send her a decent man.  Then there is Bernadine (Angela Bassett) whose
husband announces he is leaving her to marry his white secretary.  How
does she deal with it?  She sets his fancy car and clothes on fire.
Robin (Lela Rochon) is business-wise but man-stupid.  Lastly, we have
Gloria (Loretta Devine) who is on the heavy side, the most sensible of
the lot.
     All the women are well-dressed, live in beautifully decorated
apartments.  One wonders how the average black will relate to these
characters?   The normal looking men have the supporting roles:
Gregory Hines, Dennis Haysbert, Mykelti Williamson, Michael Beach and
Leon.
     There is no question that the acting rings true and the directing
is on target but the story . . .

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Like the recent HOW TO MAKE AN AMERICAN QUILT, this is another 
one of those "you go girl" films; that harmless subgenre of "chick 
flicks" in which a group of women gather to piss and moan about the 
stupid men in their lives, while never acknowledging that *they* 
are the stupid ones for having stayed with them.  The message of 
"needing a man to make me happy" is inappropriate, sure, but no 
worse than, say, the legions of big-gun testosterone poisoners that 
teach violence as a method of problem-solving.
     Even as a feminist fantasy, WAITING TO EXHALE is tremendously 
watchable.  Director Forrest Whitaker, making his feature-film 
debut, evokes genuine emotion from this stellar cast of leading 
ladies.  Standout sequences include a hilariously frank sex scene 
and the early show-stopper of Angela Bassett torching her hubby's 
BMW.  You go girl!  Equally engaging are the *male* roles; a parade 
of liars and cheats that could rival the entire rogues gallery of 
any DIE HARD, James Bond, or Batman movie.
     Writers Ronald Bass and Terry McMillan (from her novel) 
deliver a staggering number of mixed messages.  Only one of the 
characters (Loretta Devine) consistently acts responsible, and 
she's the least-glamorous of the lot.  More women are likely to 
identify with Bassett's character, a devoted wife whose husband has 
left her for a younger, whiter woman.  How does she react?  By 
having a "quick one" herself.  Sigh.  Ladies, go and enjoy this 
movie.  Laugh, cry, and talk back to the screen.  Get your 
catharsis and then go pay a counselor for some *real* advice. 
(Rated "R"/124 min.)
--
Michael J. Legeros - Raleigh, NC        
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Check triangle.movies for weekly reviews from MOVIE HELL

Author
Andrew Hicks
        WAITING TO EXHALE follows the relationship struggles of 
four black women, showing a bleak world where men are pigs. No, I 
don't take offense at the depiction. I know I'm not a pig, even though I 
do eat like one. And for those of you who are wondering if a white boy 
like me could ever begin to appreciate a movie about black women, I 
must remind you I was a black woman in a past life. And I spent my 
entire senior year in high school immersed in their culture and queen, 
Aretha the #551 bus driver.
        The characters in this movie were waiting to exhale. I was 
waiting for the movie get good. They got their wish, but I never did. 
WAITING TO EXHALE is an uneven movie with some good scenes 
and some bad scenes, some that work well and others that don't. The 
cast is likeable,though, and the performances are exemplary, especially 
from Angela "Tina Turner" Basset. Pop star Whitney Houston has 
even matured acting-wise from THE BODYGUARD, though her theme 
song this time, "Exhale (Shoop, Shoop)" is no "I Will Always Love 
You."
        Savannah (Houston) enjoys casual sex with various people, 
but is in love with a married man who promises time after time that 
he's going to leave his wife, but never quite gets around to it. 
Meanwhile, Angela Basset's husband has already left her for a white 
woman, so she does what any woman would do in that situation--she 
gathers all her husband's belongings up, takes them out to his car and 
lights it on fire, in what is undoubtedly the most powerful scene in the 
movie.
        Meanwhile, Robin is in Savannah's predicament and also has 
a crackhead boyfriend, while Gloria, the heavyset woman, is 
contemplating a renewed relationship with the on-again/off-again 
father of her teenage son. All of them are looking for love in all the 
wrong places with all the wrong people, but rest assured the movie 
does end for the most part happily, with uncredited performances from 
Wesley Snipes and Gregory Hines livening things up.
        I couldn't say how much of this movie accurately portrays the 
contemporary dating scene, because I've never been part of the 
contemporary dating scene, but there is a lot of sex involved (in the 
movie, not with me), not the nude kind, but the fully-clothed bump-
and-grind stuff. WAITING TO EXHALE has a lot of good elements, 
but a lot of mediocre or bad ones bringing it down. The four leads are 
all good and the depictions of their strong friendship are touching, but 
the story could have been told with some tigher editing and a few less 
voiceovers from the characters in corny prose lifted directly from the 
novel this movie was based on... There, I'm done. I can exhale now.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
and check out the 40+ new reviews since Christmas.
