Title
Review for Spoorloos (1988)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Daniel Barrett
THE VANISHING (1991)
Starring Bernard-Pierre Donnadieu, Gene Bervoets, and Johanna Ter Steege.
Directed by George Sluizer.
In French and Dutch with (very readable) subtitles.
Distributed on Fox Lorber Home Video.
     The videocassette cover of THE VANISHING proudly announces that the
movie has won "10 leading international awards" and calls it "the first
genuine sleeper of 1991," claiming that the "terrifying conclusion...
will haunt you long after the movie ends."  I agree wholeheartedly --
this is an extraordinary suspense film with a truly terrifying ending.
This review contains *no* spoilers, so you may read it freely.
     The premise is simple:  Rex, a young man, is baffled when one day
his wife Saskia mysteriously disappears.  He devotes his life to solving
the mystery of what happened to her.  Does he find out?  Will WE find
out?  These questions form the basis for the suspense that fills this
movie.
     And THE VANISHING is a true suspense movie.  There is no blood, no
gore, and almost no violence (a few punches).  The suspense builds VERY
subtly; we hardly notice it for the first hour.  At that point, Rex is
asked to embark on a mysterious journey, and the tension quickly mounts.
The final 10 minutes are simply riveting and (to me) very surprising.  I
will indeed remember the conclusion "long after the movie ends."
     THE VANISHING deals with several fundamental questions about human
nature.  The first question is "What is the nature of innocence?", or
more naively, "Why do bad things happen to good people?"  What did Rex
do, if anything, to deserve this trouble?  Was Saskia at all to blame
for her disappearance?  The film may not necessarily answer these
questions, but the viewer will certainly confront them.
     The second question is "What are the limits of human decency?", or,
"How evil can a person be, yet still remain human?"  This is a difficult
question to address in a movie that has no blood, gore, nor violence,
yet it is handled masterfully.  Hidden in this issue is the third
important question:  "Could *I* have committed such an evil act?"
     The fourth question, the one which I found most disturbing,
involves a choice that Rex must make:  the choice between knowledge or
ignorance of what happened to Saskia.  Both choices are clearly "the
wrong one" to make, and yet he must choose.  So the chilling fourth
question is what we ask ourselves both before *and* after the event:
"If I had been Rex, which would I have chosen?"  And after answering it,
one can also ask "Am I being honest with myself?"
     THE VANISHING has several parallels to one of my favorite suspense
films, THE HITCHER.  (If you didn't like THE HITCHER, don't let that
prevent you from seeing THE VANISHING -- they are very different movies
in many respects.)  Both films feature an "innocent" protagonist who is
thrust into a strange situation and forced to make paradoxical, yet
irrevocable choices between equally bad (or unknown) outcomes.  There is
perhaps nothing more terrifying than making a conscious choice,
regretting it, and knowing that the choice can never be undone.  But
where THE HITCHER is a story of corruption of innocence, THE VANISHING
asks "What *is* innocence?"
     I should note that the first 15 minutes of the movie are the least
interesting -- the acting seems forced, and the plot is slow and almost
amateurish.  Do not worry; the film improves rapidly after this, and the
acting is quite excellent.  Although the viewer is never required to
like Rex and Saskia personally, nor any of the other characters who
appear, all relevant personalities are firmly established.  I purposely
have not described any other characters because their mysterious actions
add greatly to the suspense.
     I recommend THE VANISHING very highly to anyone who likes
intelligent suspense movies.  But BE WARNED: some parts are truly
horrifying in a manner I have rarely seen on film.  It may well give you
nightmares.  I haven't been able to stop thinking it about for the past
24 hours.

Author
Lon Ponschock
     It hooked me.  After a bunch of false starts in watching this
foreign film--winner of all kinds of prizes--it hooked me and I had to
finish it.  I had started watching the show on several occasions and it
looked pretty much like the average import.  But it hooked me with the
idea of 'man who has to know' beyond all costs, out of time ...
forever.
     THE VANISHING is a mystery.  It concerns the disappearance of
'Saskia' and the search to find out what happened to her by her lover.
This search goes on over years, starts and stops, always in the
background of the man's life-- an obsession.
     This man is confronted by another who will tell him, he says, what
he needs to know about Saskia.  From there, the viewer is taken on a
psychological journey into the minds of two men: one obsessed, the
other a sociopath.
     But THE VANISHING said something different to me than 'what is the
perfect crime'.  In the old Hitchcockian mode we have seen many
variations on this and I, for one, just don't care a whole lot about
crime stories.
     What hooked me was the 'need to know' at any cost.  The drama
turns on this.  The man's love turns on this.  And the difference
between the casual discussion of what it means to sustain a loss and
the reality are here ... in THE VANISHING.

Author
Paultje Bakker
     Have you ever gone to a public place, like a shopping centre, or a
pool, or a petrol station, and lost track of your friend/
sibling/wife/husband/child?  Have they then inexplicably failed to show
up at a pre-arranged meeting place, leaving you to torture yourself with
horrible thoughts about what might have happened to them?
     This is the topic of the newly released Dutch film, THE VANISHING.
This is no horror movie, and yet it can be very scary; it evokes that 
mildly terrifying experience of loss and panic that most of us have had.
     Although it's a Dutch movie, most of the dialogue is in French and
almost all of the action is set in France.  It's about a young Dutch
couple who drive to France for their summer holiday, as young Dutch
couples tend to do.  They stop at a petrol station, and red-headed
Saskia goes inside to buy a Coke and a Beer.  She never returns.  Her
husband (Rolf?) freaks out, but is unable to locate her and eventually
has to return to Holland.  For three years he runs a desperate poster
campaign to locate her.  Then, .... well, I don't want to spoil it for
you!  Suffice to say that the plot takes a devious turn, and the movie
climaxes in one of the  most surprising and emotional endings I have
ever seen.
     And most distressing of all, it's 100% believable.  SEE THIS MOVIE!
and if anyone tries to tell you the ending, KILL THEM!
     It's currently showing in Brisbane; I don't know about any other
cities.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

VANISHING, THE (SPOORLOOS)(director/writer/editor: George Sluizer;
screenwriters: from Tim Krabbe's book The Golden Egg; cinematographers:
Toni & Tom Kuhn; editor: Lin Friedman; cast: Johanna Ter Steege
(Saskia), Gene Bervoets (Rex), Bernard-Pierre Donnadieu (Raymond
Lemorne), Gwen Eckhaus (Lieneke), 1988 - Netherlands / France)
The Vanishing is a challenging psychological thriller about a nightmare
that comes true and an obsession that leads to bizarre results. It makes
the most of its tale by its vivid dream sequences and the masterly
holding off of its inevitable findings until its conclusion, as it
relies on the viewer becoming overwhelmed with curiosity to hang on
until the end. It is a superbly done suspense yarn relating to what
lengths someone will go to find out something that he feels he must know
about himself, as this tale is told without the usual horror film
special effects. It consists of the real everydayness situations, which
makes the mystery seem even scarier.
The theme of disappearance has been attempted by many great directors,
such as Hitchcock, in his The Lady Vanishes, but it has never been done
as spookily as it is here and from such a simple storyline.
A young couple, Saskia (Johanna Ter Steege) and Rex Hofman (Gene
Bervoets), from Amsterdam, are on a vacation to go cycling in the south
of France, hoping to go to Bois Vieux. They are driving casually on the
highway, being very playful with each other and finally getting on each
other's nerves with their teasing, evidently they are still getting to
know one another and don't know each other's deadly sore point. Saskia
tells him about a recurring dream that she is having about her being
lost and lonely in a golden egg forever and another one where both of
them are sealed in separate eggs and floating through the universe.
The ominous car ride is halted when their car runs out of gas in the
middle of a tunnel and despite her anxious cries of not wanting to be
left alone, Rex leaves her there to go to the nearest gas station.
Expecting the worst, there is a certain amount of surprise when she
turns out to be fine when he returns with a can of gas, though she is
irritated at him for treating her so unconscionably. They make up and
are glad to stop at a service center and get gas and refreshments. She
goes to the toilet and returns to buy a Frisbee and they bury a few
coins by a tree to mark the spot as a reminder of their holiday and he
makes a promise that she insists on, that he will never abandon her
again. When she goes back into the convenience store to get some liquid
refreshments, she never returns, seemingly vanishing into thin air.
There are no clues worth pursuing and the police offer little help, and
three years go by with Rex becoming obsessed with finding out what
happened to her. For him, it is like an intellectual jigsaw puzzle that
he must compulsively put back together. He returns to the spot in Nimes
with a new girlfriend, Lieneke (Gwen). They go to where the service
station is and he puts posters out of Saskia. His campaign results in
his receiving 5 different postcards from someone who claims to know what
happened to her and who offers to meet him. Each time he goes to the
designated spot of the meeting there is no one there, but he feels the
presence of that person. Strangely, he starts having the same dream as
Saskia had about the golden egg, and he becomes even more obsessed with
finding out what happened to her.
The audience is suddenly informed of who the kidnapper is and the film
tells the story of Raymond Lemorne (Bernard-Pierre Donnadieu), a
middle-class science professor with a wife and two daughters. He says
that he can be labeled as a sociopath and is shown to be a very precise
and intelligent man, living an ordinary life. He is obsessed with a
defect he has in his personality, which he noticed when he was child. He
jumped, for no reason at all, from the balcony of his house, breaking
his arm and losing two fingers in the fall. He also displayed courage by
jumping off a bridge to save a young girl from drowning and became a
hero to his family. He is currently interested in exploring the depths
of his evil side to balance the good deed he once did, and thereby the
viewer sees how he tries to clumsily lure a score of different women
into his car without success, until that fateful summer day, when he
spotted Saskia.
Rex goes on a French TV program telling about the disappearance and how
he had to borrow money to continue the investigation on his own, since
the police have uncovered nothing. He pleads with the person who
kidnapped her to come forward with some information as to her
whereabouts. One day, near his home in Amsterdam, the kidnapper comes to
meet him face-to-face, and a cat-and-mouse game develops, as the two
tangle with each other, going back to the spot of the crime in France.
The performances are particularly good, with Gene Bervoets being made
into a victim, becoming a Kafkaesque figure, trapped in a world that is
not of his making. While Johanna Ter Steege gives the film an inner
light that captures the prevailing mood of the mystery. She is so sweet,
honest, and endearing, that the continuing curiosity Gene shows for what
happened to her is very understandable. And, Bernard-Pierre Donnadieu is
perfectly credible as a self-absorbed psycho, someone who is devoid of
passion, as his crime is not sexually motivated even if he seems to only
target pretty woman (he says that he does so because they don't expect
to be victims). He becomes an example of how banal evil can be. What is
the scariest thing about him, is that his family does not see this evil
side of him, as he is a good husband and father to the children, and he
fits so well into the community that no one would ever suspect him.
This film is so well-crafted, that it is easy to get carried away and
think that more is being said here than what has transpired. But in the
simplicity of its story, it becomes easy to identify with the Amsterdam
couple and feel caught up in their dreamworld which intermingles with
their real-life. A film that is very much in the Hitchcock suspense
mode, as a real-chiller.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Frank Maloney
     THE VANISHING is a Franco-Dutch film directed by George Sluizer,
adapted by Tim Krapp'e from his own novel, and starring Gene Bervoets
(Rex), Johanna Ter Steegel (Saskia), and Bernard-Pierre Donnadieu
(Raymond).
     THE VANISHING is a thriller in which a woman suddenly,
inexplicably, and unaccountably disappears.  That much is rather
familiar territory, at least since Hitchcock's wonderful THE LADY
VANISHES began delighting and frightening us 55 years ago or so.  The
questions of how did it happen, why, and by whose agency are pretty much
the standard ones is this particular subgenre.  Here Sluizer efficiently
disposes of  these in reverse order starting early on into the film.  We
get to see the events leading up to the vanishing first as they relate
to the young Dutch couple on holiday in the South of France and then we
begin again with the bad guy and the long road to leads ultimately to
the vanishing.
     Predestination is a theme here.  Dreams, signs, and defying fate
are the engine that moves all the major characters.  
     After a fight, Rex promises Saskia never to abandon her again.
After Saskia vanishes at a French service station, Rex becomes obsessed
with finding out what happened to her.  If there is horror in this
movie, it is the arbitrariness and accidental nature of life.  The bad
guy, Raymond, wants to find out how bad he really is; incredibly Raymond
is something of klutz, an awkward, unconvincing, subtly alarming stalker
of women and it takes a long time and lots of practice and failures
before providence or shall we call it accidence gives him the victim he
wants.
     In the end, Sluizer leaves only the question of how to the end.  I
would rather he had not.  The penultimate scene would have been better
left on the cutting room floor.  The film does not really answer the
question of why because it ultimately posits an arbitrary world in which
motivation is irrelevant.  Therefore, how becomes mere tidiness.
Without that the how being tidied, we would have been left with a
delicious, savory mystery, rather as we were in PICNIC AT HANGING ROCK.
     Still, the performances are uniformly fine, if not especially
showy.  The character of Raymond is the most interesting and subtly
acted; but then the devil always gets the best lines.  This particular
devil is rather funny at times with his clumsiness and endless
scribbling of notations and timings.  Sinister, of course, but also a
smug bourgeois lecturer and family man.  A man driven by mechanism you
and I can barely fathom, but also a man who spills on himself.
     I enjoyed THE VANISHING despite the weak ending and can recommend
it to anyone who isn't put off by subtitles, subtlety, no music telling
us when we're scared, or low  budgets.
