Title
Review for Yeogo Goedam (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David Dalgleish
"Empty classrooms give me the creeps."
        WHISPERING CORRIDORS is a South Korean horror movie which avoids
the blatant tactics of most contemporary horror movies, but replaces them
with mere competence.  There are well-crafted sequences featuring darkened
rooms, billowing white drapes, long pregnant silences, elusive restless
spirits, abnormal phenomena, and sudden bursts of bloody violence.  But it
is no more than craftmanship.  It doesn't generate the desired frisson of
dread, doesn't scare the hell of us, and so it doesn't succeed.
        The action takes place entirely within the walls of an all-girls
Korean high school, which, unlike the high schools I attended, seems eerily
deserted even during school hours.  One morning, two students discover the
body of a middle-aged teacher unaffectionately known as Old Fox.  She seems
to have committed suicide by hanging, but we know better: the opening
sequence shows her  murder at the hands of a ghost.
        As events progress, we piece together the history of the ghost: she
is the spirit of Jin-Ju, a girl who attended the school a decade ago and
has not yet departed.  Jin-Ju was stifled in her creativity and passions,
and she committed suicide.  The room where she took her own life is now
off-limits.  Aspects of Jin-Ju's experiences seem to be reflected in the
lives of several students in a senior class, each troubled in her own way,
including a strange loner, an aspiring artist, her melancholy friend, and
the ace student of the class.  One of the teachers, former student
Eun-Young, was Jin-Ju's best friend, and tries to resolve the haunting
before more deaths occur.
        The villain of the piece, however, is not Jin-Ju but Mr. Oh--or Mad
Dog, as his students call him.  He is a hyperbolic authoritarian who,
having apparently missed his calling in life as a drill sergeant, hurls
invective at the girls, telling them that they must consider their
classmates as enemies if they are to achieve good grades.  Not content with
verbal abuse, he strikes girls who break the rules.  He makes advances on
others, toying intimately with their hair.
         Mad Dog, despite being caricatured as a swaggering overgrown
schoolyard bully, is a suitable focus for the film's anger, which is
directed toward the education system, of which both Jin-Ju and the
present-day students are victims.  After a strikingly savage incident
involving one of the girls--who, like Jin-Ju, has artistic
inclinations--Mad Dog has become a genuinely hateful figure.  Then, in a
prime example of the movie's maladroit handling of narrative development,
he becomes the ghost's next victim, effectively eliminating the antagonist
halfway through.  The movie founders from then on, trying to mount a climax
which will make us both afraid of Jin-Ju's ghost and sympathetic to her
adolescent need for friendship and acceptance.
        WHISPERING CORRIDORS is overtly concerned with the stifling effect
that the school's rules have on the girls, who must curb their tendencies
to act in anything other than a respectable manner.  Outside the class,
they swear and smoke and pierce their noses; they paint disturbing pictures
and listen to rock music.  Within the classroom, they sit in ordered rows,
demure and deferential in their staid school uniforms.  The ghost story is
an apt vehicle for the notion that the repressive atmosphere of the
classroom, and perhaps of South Korean society at large, results in
dangerous outbursts of uncontained desires, as embodied by Jin-Ju's acts of
violence, which are, ultimately, the acts of a confused and insecure young
woman.
        Less obviously, and perhaps unintentionally, the movie also
explores the girls' developing sexuality: it is inevitable that a movie
featuring adolescent girls and repeated shots of dripping blood is, on some
level, a dramatization of menarche and female sexual self-knowledge.  There
is also the barest hint of a suggestion that the "friendship" that Jin-Ju
seeks is not Platonic, but the movie sidesteps the issue--perhaps enforcing
the very codes of repression it criticizes.
        If the subtexts of the movie are far more intriguing than the
ostensible story, that's because it is transparent and ineffectual as
horror.  One problem is the heavy-handed use of frequent close-ups of
trembling-lipped, teary-eyed women as a substitute for emotional subtlety.
Another problem is that it tries to be an ensemble drama, rather than
providing us with a central viewpoint character.  Consequently, the ghost
of Jin-Ju is not seen as a dominant force in one person's life, but rather
remains a peripheral presence impacting on several lives.  We learn about
her in flashbacks and inferences, and, kept at a distance, it is difficult
to either fear her or empathize with her.  She suffers the same problem in
the movie as she did in life: she is marginalized when she should be the
centre of attention.
                Subjective Camera (subjective.freeservers.com)
        Movie Reviews by David Dalgleish (daviddalgleish@yahoo.com)
