Title
Review for Cruise, The (1998/I)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: Black and white documentary about Timothy Speed Levitch,
free soul and tour guide on the Gray Line.  This is a 76-minute
portrait of a very strange person, advocate of the existential "The
Cruise" and enemy of the Anti-Cruise. Levitch seems to have strong
opinions about nearly everything.  Rating: 6 (0 to 10), high +1 (-4 to
+4)
   - Bennett Miller directs and edits footage a film about Timothy
     Levitch, a $200/week tour guide from New York City who is a
     genuine original.
   - Levitch talks in similes, opaque metaphors, literary references,
     and just plain strange comments.
   - Levitch seems incredibly overqualified for his job on occasion.
   - Other times he seems little more coherent than some of the
     homeless.
   - Recently Levitch was certain that the city was angry at him for
     some wrong it imagined he committed.  Manhattan has now forgiven
     him, also for no obvious reason.  He sees this anger in the
     shortness of the lower buildings.
   - His customers on the Gray Line are flooded with literary allusions
     and quotes.
   - Levitch sees the grid street plan of Manhattan as being stifling.
   - He took great offense when someone told him, "Everybody likes the
     grid plan."  He also took great offense when the Gray Line told
     him he had to wear a red T-shirt as part of his uniform.  These
     restrictions are part of the "anti-cruise" and he is "in love with
     the frantic chaos of the limitless universe."
   - His favorite diversions include going to the plaza between the
     World Trade Center towers, spinning himself dizzy, then lying on
     his back and looking up at the towers.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Timothy 'Speed' Levitch, the Spalding Gray of New York City tour guides,
is the subject of director Bennett Miller's documentary, THE CRUISE.
Speed, a quintessential New Yorker, has the encyclopedic knowledge of a
humanities graduate student.  As his bus snakes though the crowded
Manhattan streets, he talks a blue streak.  Every building, it would
seem, holds some literary or historical story, and Speed knows them all.
With a harsh, twangy voice, hair like an old mop, rumpled, torn clothes,
and a splotchy face, Speed is an energetic veteran of the tour guide
wars.
A fatalistic philosopher, Speed has opinions on every subject and many
are pretty bizarre.  "I think of every double-decker loop as another
loop toward my death," he tells us in one of his more lucid moments.
Many of his musings leaves one baffled as to their exact portent.
The movie has two parts, on the bus and off, which are interspersed.  In
his environment as a guide to the city, the other star of the movie,
Speed is elegant and poetic.  He describes New York City as, among other
things, a "Cyclops" and a "scintillating mermaid."
When he is off the bus, negotiating assignments with his dispatcher or
telling a rambling Jewish story, Speed doesn't hold our attention as he
should.  But, like patient tourists, we wait for the bus to leave and
for him to get back on it so we can continue our journey.
To be fair, if success means pleasing your customers, Speed appears to
be a failure.  The many shots of his bus audience show them so near
boredom that they look like moving zombies.
"One of the great tragedies of this experiment of the thing we call
civilization is that we have to work," Speed tells us.  This is ironic
since he seems happy only when he is working.  Even if his riders don't
appreciate him, he loves every minute he gets on his little stage.
The short movie feels longer that it's hour and a quarter length,
probably because it has one natural ending scene after another before it
finally stops.  Although the movie is worth seeing, the actual guided
tour looks a lot more interesting.
THE CRUISE runs 1:16 and is filmed in black and white.  The movie is not
rated but would probably be PG-13 for mature themes and would be fine
for kids around 12 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
David Chute
Credits: Director/Producer/Photographer: Bennett Miller; Executive
Producers: J.B. Miller, Theodore Miller, David Yamner, David Cohen;
Editor: Michael Levine; Music: Marty Beller. Featuring: Timothy
"Speed" Levitch. No MPAA rating." Running Time 76 minutes. B&W.
        Timothy "Speed" Levitch, the one and only subject of Bennett
Miller's documentary gem "The Cruise," is an authentic improvisational
master of the non-stop rant, an unproduced 28-year-old Manhattan
playwright whose only venue is the windblown upper deck of a Grayline
tour bus. 
        Miller, working as a one-man film and sound crew, records big
chunks of Speed's tourist-baffling workday spiel ("The sun, another
great New York landmark, above you on the left") and follows him from
one temporary dwelling to another, as he pursues his dedication to
"the cruise," a free-flowing passionate interaction with the world,
and above all with the inexhaustible metropolis. ("I couldn't believe
how angry the city was with me," Levitch recalls, of an especially
dicey period in their relationship.) Anything that impedes or
restricts his intensely focused drifting is dismissed as an aspect of
"the anti-cruise."
        We can imagine Speed Levitch making the transition to a job in
radio or performance art; he's certainly a more bracingly original
voice than a lot of what passes for greatness now in either medium.
Several chunks of his monologue here, particularly an extended
denunciation of "the grid plan," initially as a function of urban
design and then as an extended metaphor for  boxed-in modes of thought
and behavior in general, are polished enough already.
        Miller seems to revere Levitch's principled devotion to all
things shapeless and impulsive, but a note of sadness creeps in.
Levitch wonders aloud if his judgmental relatives are right after all;
if he really is just one more babbling urban nut-case. In order to
shape his eddying perceptions into performance pieces he'd have to
collaborate with the anti-cruise in a way that may be impossible for
him.
        Luckily, Speed Levitch had Bennett Miller to shoot and
re-shape this very raw material, to craft something durable from
Speed's ecstatic ramblings.
                                      -- David Chute        

Author
Joy Wyse
Visually and vocally, Timothy Levitch is a cross between Woody Allen
and Tiny Tim. Unfortunately he doesn't have the talent of either
and his voice is reminiscent of fingernails on the blackboard. This is
particularly unfortunate as he is the narrator of the film,
essentially the only one who speaks.
It has been said that each person will ultimately have his 15 minutes of
fame. In this movie, even 15 minutes is too long. The premise is a good
one: following a sightseeing cruise bus through the streets of New York
City. There are occasional shots of points of interest, like the Empire
State Building, the Chrysler Building, and The World Trade Center, but
they are too few and far between. Sights such as the UN Building, Fulton
Fish Market, etc are but a blink of the eye.
A very nice musical score is almost hidden beneath the rambling
narration. The viewer is asked to care about this totally strange
person. It is learned that he works twenty hours a week; clears $200
per week after taxes; carries his belongings with him; sleeps in a
friend's room; and has a criminal record.
In all I counted 27 people who walked out of the theatre. There are
sure to be people who may be moved by Levitch's wordy dialogue and
repetition of `big' words such as cacophony and malaise, but I
cannot recommend it for most people. All in all, I not only feel sorry
for the people who buy tickets to this film, but I really sympathize
with those tourists who paid to go on sight-seeing tours of NYC with
him as their guide.
I have no desire to ever see this movie again. I give it a D-.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

CRUISE, THE (director: Bennett Miller; cinematographer: Bennett Miller;
cast: Timothy "Speed" Levitch, 1998)
"The Cruise" could be described as a whirling dervish tour both of New
York City and of Levitch's fertile persona. The guide, a struggling
28-year-old playwright, living in other people's homes to help him get
by on his $10 an hour pay scale at Gray Line Tours (he earns about $200
a week). He chose to work at this smaller tour company because his
former job at the bigger Apple Line, did not pay as much. This
documentary gives us a rapid-fire tour of the city and his lifestyle,
and is both an encyclopedic look at the city and a slyly amusing look at
the loquacious tour guide. According to him, the cruise is his
philosophy of life: "it is about flesh, respect, exhibitionism-- it is
looking at a flower's beauty and becoming the flower, and the flower
looking back at him." He is the eccentric, Bob Dylan look-alike, named
Timothy "Speed" Levitch, in need of approval from an audience for a job
well done.
In a place like Manhattan where it is easy to get lost in its few
million people, it is non-conformists' characters like Speed that make
things interesting and worthwhile. His tour emphasizes his love-hate
relationship with the city, which is now in its August love phase. A
tour that became legendary in the few years he worked for this company,
drawing an international array of tourists atop the double-decker bus
that tours Manhattan's 2.4 million people (under his breath he says he
heard the other day the figure might actually be 1.7 million, but I
don't care).
There are 200,000 people who work at the World Trade Center, he
mockingly tells us, as it sinks in how much humanity that is to be in
such a small space. He, also, tells us that he likes to
spin around under the twin towers of the World Trade Center and, when
thoroughly disoriented, to look up and reel under the illusion that the
buildings are toppling down on him.
His knowledge of the literary figures and where they lived is truly
spellbinding, as he tells about where Thomas Paine died, Mark Twain
lived, where the opium smoking Edgar Allan Poe wrote the "The Raven,"
how the poet Dylan Thomas died in the White Horse Tavern after having 16
martinis and his last words were bring me another.
His view of the Chrysler Building, quoting the critic Lewis Mumford,
that the top three floors which are an imitation of the Chrysler's car
front grill, is of an "uninspired voluptuousness." That Central Park was
designed by the transcendentalist Fredrick Law Olmstead, whose vision
for the park was not to play baseball or jog or roller blade or a place
in which to work up a sweat but to focus on nature in a peaceful
meditation.
Speed confesses he took the job mainly to pick up girls. Work to him is
one of the poisons of civilization. Civilization is a place that is
splitting us part; it encourages people to never say the truth. One
feels nauseous but not sick in it. This is a most unusual opinion for a
tour guide to have who is promoting the accomplishments of one of
civilization's most advanced cities. Speed is more at home telling us
the cruise is a way of being yourself and about how Henry James lived
his life here, than he is about impressing the tour with the huge
phallic symbol the tour bus approaches, called the Empire State
Building.
He drops the names of celebrities to point out where they reside, but
when he mentions Greta Garbo, he says she chose to live in NYC because
it was the only place in the world where she could be alone.
He gets a childish glee when reading from a sign he sees on one of the
buildings near where he is free-loading, saying 'Everything You Know Is
Wrong'. For him, it is these little things in life that one notices that
give it its relevance. What apparently irks him, is that his
grandparents consider him to be a failure because he doesn't have a
regular type of job and is materially floundering. This causes him to go
off on one of his diatribes about his need for personal freedom, which
shows him to be a bit insecure, even with all his bravado when he
intellectualizes. But he was confident enough of himself to quit his job
and go into business for himself after this documentary; he now gives
his own private tours.
I loved this ecclectic tour; it is shot in a clear video which is
blown-up to 35mm, and looks magnificent in B & W, giving the film the
proper atmospheric expression for its tour; the documentary works so
well because Speed's for real, as is his flowery monologue and his
genuine NYC nasal accent. His battle with his tour line wanting him to
wear a uniform to work or else they will have to let him go, is one that
I side wholly with him: Stop trying to make people conform. If you were
ever interested in a tour of NYC, this is a good one to catch, and you
don't even have to visit the city.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus'  World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Michael Dequina
After the first five minutes of _The_Cruise_, I wanted to shoot the
documentary's subject, wildly eccentric New York tour bus guide Timothy
"Speed" Levitch.  Ceaselessly babbling in a nasal voice just a tad more
listenable than Fran Drescher's, he got on my nerves instantaneously.  But
as Bennett Miller's beautifully photographed black-and-white film
progressed, I became fascinated by him.  Though ostensibly about his love
affair with every last aspect of the city, _The_Cruise_ gradually reveals
itself to be a most unique character study, where the subject reveals
himself not through the personal information he imparts (there are vague
allusions to a bad relationship with his parents and failed attempts at a
writing career), but all else he talks about--and talk he does, in florid
verbiage that reveals less about objects than his poetic nature.
A little more straightforward on the surface is the dark and depressing
_Unmade_Beds_, which follows four New Yorkers on their never-ending (and
never-successful) quests for true love and happiness.  Our subjects: Aimee
Copp, a goodhearted 28-year-old with a weight problem (she weighs 225
pounds) who longs to be married before the big 3-0; Mikey Russo, a
54-year-old struggling screenwriter who is proud of his womanizing past;
40-year-old, 5'4" Michael DeStephano, a bitter but likable guy who more
than reminds of _Seinfeld_'s George Costanza; and, most memorably, Brenda
Monte, a brash, buxom 40-something divorcee who is less interested in love
than a man with deep enough pockets to support her and her 16-year-old
daughter.
But, as I said, _Unmade_Beds_ is only straightforward on the surface.
While these are real people followed over a period of nine months, as the
opening disclaimer says, it is not stated that the happenings onscreen are
fictionalized.  Writer-director Nicholas Barker based his script on
extensive interviews with his cast, using their real-life happenings as a
jumping-off point for those in his script.  While these people's true
personalities and pain are clearly revealed throughout, sometimes
discomfitingly so (Aimee's pain is most acutely felt), it is that unique
veneer of fiction that makes the film fall short.  Instead of enhancing the
real truths that Barker is after, the fiction, appropriately enough,
diminishes any truth he finds; this is especially the case with a late
"plot twist" involving Brenda's fortunes.  While _Unmade_Beds_ is
engrossing, engaging viewing, I cannot shake the feeling that it would have
been moreso had I seen the whole truth.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
