Title
Review for Pardes (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David M. Arnold
Robert Burns conjectured what a marvelous gift it would be
to see ourselves as others do.  The Indian film "Pardes" gives
Americans a glimpse of how others might view us.  About half
the footage in "Pardes" was shot on the American west coast, in
Hollywood, Las Vegas and Vancouver.
"Pardes" opens with Kishori Lal (Amrish Puri), a NRI (Non
Resident Indian) returning to India to arrange the marriage
of his son Rajiv (Apoorva Agnihotri).  Kishori Lal left India
for America 35 years ago with a few dollars in his pocket.
By now he has built himself a fortune, and lives in a
mansion in Hollywood along with many members of his extended
family.  Rajiv was born in the US and has never set foot in
India.
Rajiv has a poor cousin with the auspicious name of Arjun
(Shah Rukh Kahn) who came to America after his parents died.
Arjun is employed by his uncle, for whom he runs an automotive
repair facility and has a recording studio above the garage.
Kishori Lal wants Rajiv to wed an Indian girl in hopes of
stirring some appreciation of his heritage in his son.
Kusum Ganga (Mahima Chaudhry in her film debut), the
daughter of a childhood friend is his selection.  Arjun
and Rajiv are sent to India to fetch Ganga home to America
for the nuptials.  Arjun dutifully sells Ganga and her family
on Rajiv's virtues.  Once she gets to America, however, Ganga
discovers that Rajiv is not as advertised.
"Pardes" represents America as a land of plenty, and one
commodity that there is plenty of is licentiousness.  Rajiv
is a pathetic character, truly at home neither in the US nor
in India, full of self-loathing, and spoiled by the affluence.
The film walks the center path, cautioning against the
indulgences of Western culture while at the same time
acknowledging the evils of an Eastern patriarchal tradition
in which women are not much more than their fathers' chattel
(Ganga's father loves her, but he values the traditions and
family honor above her life).
The film has excellent production values and features lots
of gorgeous location photography in rural India.  The plot
moves along well, although a subplot about Ganga's rival
suitor could very well have been left on the cutting room floor.
Typically for the Hindi movie genre, the filmmakers invent sly
contrivances for segues into the requisite half-dozen or so
musical numbers.  Performances by two of India's top stars
(Shah Rukh Khan and Amrish Puri) are first rate.
I recommend "Pardes" to thick-skinned Western viewers who
would not be offended by a less than flattering portrayal of
Americans, and who are intrigued by the exotic sights, sounds
and culture of India.
"Pardes" is available on DVD from DEI.  The disc is letterboxed
to approx. 2.0:1 aspect ratio, and includes a good-sounding
stereo soundtrack.  The video transfer is good if less than
excellent, but does exhibit some transfer anomolies (in particular,
shifting aspect ratios).  The film is in Hindi with optional
English subtitles.
Essay copyright (C) 2000 David M. Arnold.  All rights reserved.
