Title
Review for Return of the Jedi (1983)
Number of Reviews
14

Author
Brian Koller
"Return of the Jedi", of course, is the third
chapter in the first "Star Wars" trilogy.  Which
isn't to be confused with the second trilogy,
which takes place before the first trilogy.
This would all be confusing, except that media
hype has ensured that we know all these things
already.
"Return of the Jedi" packed the theaters as
well as its predecessors, becoming the biggest
grossing film of the year.  Perhaps the most
sentimental film of the series, the combination
of action, special effects, and the good versus
evil theme again proved to be a winner.
The story picks up where "The Empire Strikes Back"
left off.  Solo (Harrison Ford) is still frozen
in carbonite, and hangs on the wall of Jabba's
palace.  Luke (Mark Hamill) and Leia (Carrie Fisher)
make separate attempts to free Solo, and after
much peril are successful.  The action then shifts
to the Empire's latest death star, which must
be destroyed or the rebellion will be crushed.
The death star is protected by a force field
generated on a nearby planet.  Our heroes land
on the planet to disable the shield, on the
way encountering a furry, pygmy tribe called the
Ewoks.  Meanwhile, Luke tries to turn Vader
(voiced by James Earl Jones) from the dark side,
but instead is taken to the evil Emperor
(Ian McDiarmid), who has plans of his own for Luke.
After praising the first two films, critics
weren't as complimentary to "Return of the Jedi".
It is much easier to take potshots at "Jedi".
Yoda (voiced by Frank Oz) has lived 900 years,
but dies of old age within ten minutes of Luke's
arrival.  While the revelation that Vader is
Luke's father is a shocker, to learn that Leia
is his sister seems bogus, turning the trilogy
into a soap opera.  Leia's character, so
independent and combative in the first "Star Wars",
here has been softened and reduced to Solo's
love interest.  The Ewoks are a cross between
teddy bears and aborigines, and a sign that
George Lucas may be targeting kiddies rather
than adults.  (This marketing trend would be
further in evidence in 1999's "The Phantom
Menace".)
Still, there are many entertaining moments.
Jabba the Hutt is an original villian, the
speed chase through the forest is exciting, and
the final confrontation between Vader, Luke and
the Emperor is suspenseful.  And Leia's costume
at Jabba's Palace makes the viewer wish for a
gust of wind.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     RETURN OF THE JEDI (1983) features the same old cast as the first
two STAR WARS episodes in a rehash of previous themes.  Now with a cast
this talented and material this strong, rehashing is not necessarily
bad.  This time the Galactic Empire's forces lead by Lord Darth Vader
(David Prowse acting with James Earl Jones's voice) has again build a
Death Star and is still out to destroy the Rebel Alliance.  This Death
Star is, of course, even more powerful than the previous one and has
the Emperor (Ian McDiarmid) personally supervising its construction.
     You may remember from the last episode that Han Solo (Harrison
Ford) owed Jabba the Hutt (Mike Edmonds) money so Jabba in a fit of
rage had him frozen and sent to Jabba's planet.  The film starts with
the rescue of Han from Jabba by Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill), Princess
Leia (Carrie Fisher), Lando Calrissian (Billy Dee Williams), C-3PO
(Anthony Daniels), R2-D2 (Kenny Baker), and Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew).
The rest of the movie is ostensibly about the destruction of the Death
Star by the rebels, but actually the film is about the inherit conflict
in the duality of man and the thin line between good and evil.  Will
Darth Vader turn Luke to the dark side or will Luke turn Darth Vader to
the good?  Each is confident, and until the end it is not clear whose
power will prove stronger.
     The character creations in all the STAR WARS series are
delightfully imaginative.  Jabba and his minions are testaments to the
grotesque and the obese.  After being grossed out by Jabba's huge rolls
of jelly like fat, I suspect a large number of people must have run out
of the theater to hit the pay phones to call 1-800-OutFat or some such
number.  A better advertisement for fat clinics I have not seen.  By
the way, I thought one of Jabba's entourage was at least a kissing
cousin to the gargoyles that populate the movie GREMLINS.
     Yoda (Frank Oz) appears again in the show to complete Luke's
training as a Jedi.  Luke thinks he is already one, but Yoda admonishes
him, "Not yet.  One thing remains.  One things remains, Vader.  You
must confront Vader, and then a Jedi you will be."  I love the flowery
language the writers (Lawrence Kasdan and George Lucas) give Yoda.
Yoda poetically warns Luke, "Anger, fear, depression.  The dark side
are they."  Luke's training also needs help from his old mentor Obi-Wan
(Alec Guinness).  He appears in a vision telling Luke, "You will find
that many of the truths we cling to depend upon your point of view."
This is a show of secrets revealed, but you will not find them out
here.  See the movie.
     The sets (Norman Reynolds) and visual effects (Richard Edlund,
Dennis Muren, and Ken Ralston) are even more elaborate than in the
first two episodes.  My favorite is the little hover-bikes on which
they go screaming through the California redwood trees.  That they
could control the bikes while traveling at the high speed they are
going makes no sense, but hey, this is science fiction afterall.  The
special effects continue to be a great blend of the old and the new:
bows and arrows vs. blasters (laser guns) and hang gliders vs. large
mechanical dinosaurs outfitted with laser cannons.
     RETURN OF THE JEDI introduces sweet furry new creatures called
Ewoks.  They were a hit at the time, but I am surprised there wasn't at
even a bigger marketing tie in with them.  Looked like great toys for
the age 2-9 set to me.
     The acting in the movie was good.  My favorite was James Earl
Jones.  His voice must be the richest and most powerful of any actor
living today.  Hamill, whom I found to be a big disappointment in the
last episode, has more energy and does his part less on autopilot in
this one.  His performance here still pales in significance to his work
in STAR WARS, which is the only film he has ever been great in.
     Although the show was excellent, there were several letdowns for
me.  First and foremost, I missed the incredible humor from the first
two.  There are laughs in RETURN OF THE JEDI, but overall the writers
and the director (Richard Marquand) approach the show too
reverentially.  Second, I missed the romantic angle.  There was some
aspects of it in this episode, but not much.
     RETURN OF THE JEDI runs a bit long at 2:14.  The film is correctly
rated PG and the scariest part is the monsters which I suspect will be
more than most kids under 5 or 6 can handle.  There is no sex, nudity
or profanity I can remember, but the STAR WARS groupies will
undoubtedly send me one or two minor cuss words I missed.  Most of them
pointed out after my review of THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK that Mark Hamill
had been in a car accident with some sure that it was before the movie
and others equally sure it was after.  I recommend RETURN OF THE JEDI
strongly as does my son Jeffrey (just turned 7).  Since my favorite was
STAR WARS, I asked Jeffrey which one of the three he liked best, and he
said this one, but would refused to say why.  In the end he voluntarily
confessed that the reason was the skimpy harem outfit that Jabba has
Princess Leia wear.  Not a reason I would have guessed!  I give the
movie *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Christopher Null
     I'll skip the cute introduction.  Let me cut to the chase and tell
you what you want to know.
     Yes, the reissue is as good as the original.  Yes, it lives up to
the greatness of the rest of the series.  Yes, the enhancements are
top-notch and they really add to the enjoyment of the film.
     What's new?  Basically three things:  A new, surprisingly funny,
song-and-dance sequence in Jabba the Hutt's palace, preceding the Jedi
knight Luke Skywalker's arrival to save his friends.  Enhanced footage
of the creature inside the sand pit, where the heroes are forced to walk
the plank at Jabba's whim.  And a new, much more satisfying ending
sequence -- showing the celebrations of victory over the Empire on
different planets throughout the galaxy, instead of the little Ewok
party on Endor.
     What's the same?  Well, the guts of this epic finale from this
terrific trilogy.  The thrill of good finally conquering evil, seeing
the upright son converting his once-lost father -- the first feel-good
sci-fi movie series ever produced.  (Never mind the still-horrendous
blue-screen footage of Luke fighting the Rancor monster in Jabba's
palace.)
     People ask me what they should go see in the theaters right now,
and I always point them to the STAR WARS trilogy.  These films
absolutely deserve another viewing on the big screen, and I just can't
push you in that direction hard enough.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Return Of The Jedi
A review by Joe Chamberlain
Starring Mark Hamill; Harrison Ford; Carrie Fisher & Billy Dee Williams
Return Of The Jedi is the third installment of the Star Wars trilogy, and
the second best of the three. (Star wars being the best.) It picks up where
The Empire Strikes Back left off -- Han Solo is feeling somewhat confined
and Luke Skywalker is dealing with some serious parental issues. In this
film, Han Solo (Harrison Ford), Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill), and Princess
Leia (Carrie Fisher) travel to the forest moon of Endor. There they must try
to deactivate a generator that is powering a shield protecting the Empire's
new Death Star. Once the shield is removed the Rebel armada plans to attack
the Empire's new space station in their final showdown with Darth Vader and
friends. If you don't know all this by now, most likely you have either been
in a coma or living in a South American jungle for the last 15 years.
Unlike The Empire Strikes Back, which bordered on depressing in places,
Return Of The Jedi is much more fun. Especially the scenes on the Endor Moon
involving the Ewoks -- probably the cutest creatures to ever hit the big
screen, with the possible exception of E.T.. Return Of The Jedi also
benefits from what seems like the most action of the three films. This is
highlighted by the spectacular battle between the Imperial forces and the
Rebel/Ewok team.
I must confess to being a much bigger Han Solo fan than I am a Luke
Skywalker fan. So if I have one criticism of the movie, it is the extended
periods in the film that focus on the Emperor's attempts to turn Luke to the
dark side of the Force. A minor complaint, but one point worthy of note.
Although it is not a point large enough to prevent me from ranking Return Of
The Jedi as one of my favorite films of all time. Return Of The Jedi serves
as a fitting end to one of the greatest series of movies ever produced. It
ties up all the loose ends of the previous films and stands as a reminder
that sequels don't necessarily have to be inferior knockoffs of the original
film.
Whether you've seen the first two films or not, Return Of The Jedi is easily
two of the most enjoyable hours you will ever spend watching a film.

Author
David Wilcock
STARRING MARK HAMILL, CARRIE FISHER, HARRISON FORD, JAMES EARL JONES,
FRANK OZ, BILLY DEE WILLIAMS
DIRECTED BY RICHARD MARQUAND
A LUCASFILM PICTURE
And so we come to the final part of the Star Wars trilogy. Many people
consider this to be the least of the trilogy, but I find this one just
as entertaining as the other two. The start of the film, in Jabbas
palace, is good, and right through to the end, the film is highly
enjoyable. The film seems to centre more on action scenes than actual
plot and character relationships, but this dosen't affect it one bit.
The director handles the action and plot revelations very well, John
Williams booming score goes with the film very well, and the special
effects are excellent. OK, so Marquand may spend a bit more time than
needed than the Ewoks, but he makes up with the storming of the shield
generator by the Empire, and the battle that follows in space.
So, I find this film to be entertaining, hugely enjoyable fun, and a
fitting end to the trilogy. If there was a bit less Ewoks, and maybe
some Empire scenes (the bad guys hardly feature in this film except at
the end) this would be perfect. However, it is great as it is! Highly
recommended.

Author
Dragan Antulov
The year that is about to pass was supposed to be the year
of GODZILLA. However, that unfortunate film by Devlin and
Emmerich would be remembered less by its own quality than by
the unprecedented marketing campaign and its main slogan
"Size does matter". Intended to symbolise the supremacy of
quantity over quality in contemporary Hollywood, that slogan
was also a direct challenge to Star Wars fans with its
mockery of immortal words of Yoda in THE EMPIRE STRIKES
BACK. Star Wars fans were enraged, and Lucasfilm briefly
cashed on the sentiment with its own marketing campaign for
STAR WARS: EPISODE ONE with the words "Plot does matter" as
its rebuttal of Devlin-Emmerich claims. Some Star Wars fans
welcomed that move, while the others were more cynical.
"Plot does matter? Really? To the same people who gave us
RETURN OF THE JEDI?" Those were the words of my friend who
is also an avid Star Wars fan and who simply can't forgive
Lucas for the disappointment he had experienced with the
third film of the original Star Wars saga.
Perhaps it would be too harsh to put Devlin-Emmerich's
GODZILLA and RETURN OF THE JEDI in the same basket. Those
two movies are undoubtedly light years away in their
quality. In the case of the latter, bad reputation was
deserved mostly because it failed to reach the extremely
high standards of cinematic and artistic perfection, set by
its two great predecessors - STAR WARS and THE EMPIRE
STRIKES BACK. I noticed this things even when I had seen the
film for the first time, almost a decade and half ago. For
me it was a bitter-sweet occasion - the last film of the
great saga that had used to capture my imagination. But I
was disappointed; partly because I grew up and my movie
going preferences matured; partly because I knew what was
going to happen in the final part of the trilogy; and partly
because the RETURN OF THE JEDI was really bad in comparison
with the previous two films. To this day, I watch RETURN OF
THE JEDI, but only as the last film of the trilogy; never as
original and captivating works of art like previous two
films. Without them, RETURN OF THE JEDI is a mildly
entertaining second-rate science fiction spectacle, not very
different from an average infantile blockbusters that almost
ruined the genre in the mid 1980s.
Problems of the RETURN OF THE JEDI begin with the plot which
had to solve the cliffhanger from the previous film and also
to finish the trilogy. The story begins with the attempts of
the small band of Rebels, led by Jedi knight Luke Skywalker
(Mark Hamill), to free their comrade Han Solo (Harrison
Ford) from the clutches of evil galactic crime lord Jabba
the Hut. Despite being imprisoned by Jabba themselves, our
heroes succeed in freeing Solo, but now they are faced with
a greater and more important challenge. Evil Galactic Empire
is building the new version of Death Star, battle station
able to destroy entire planets. The construction site is in
a orbit of a forrest moon of Endor, so Rebels carry out the
commando raid on a power generator on the moon's surface,
which would make station vulnerable to the attack of the
entire Rebel fleet. Rebels don't know that the evil lord
Darth Vader (David Prowse, voice by James Earl Jones, face
by Sebastian Shaw) and Emperor himself (Ian McDiarmid) are
on the station and that they have some sinister plans of
their own. The raid on the surface doesn't go well, until
the Rebels find help in the form of Ewoks, primitive but
brave natives that look like teddy bears. In the meantime,
Luke feels that he must finally confront his oldest nemesis
and father, lord Vader, and try to snatch him away from the
dark side of the Force.
The need to wrap up the story forced the screenwriters -
Lawrence Kasdan and George Lucas - to cut corners, but in
the process they sacrificed plausibility and in some
instances even contradicted themselves (like in case of
Vader's true loyalty to the Emperor). Some bad guys are
conveniently present in the movie only to receive their
comeuppance (Boba Fett), some nine hundred years old people
decide to die just in the course of the film, only to
provide some cheap melodrama (Yoda), and some of the new
additions to the story are almost on the level of daytime
soap operas (Leia Organa as Luke's long lost sister). Such
decisions are responsible for RETURN OF THE JEDI having the
weakest script in the trilogy. In previous two films we saw
what could happen to our heroes and we learned to care for
them; here we don't have to. In the beginning, almost all of
them are in the hands of the evil Jabba, but we simply know
that they would get away without the scratch. Even their
lines aren't as powerful as they were in previous two films.
Leia, who used to be feminist icon in the first movie, is
now reduced to object of Jabba's infantile lust in the first
part of JEDI. Original characters - Jabba and the Emperor -
are intended to be cannon fodder, so they weren't very
developed. Jabba is nothing more than grotesque, and Emperor
looks like a caricature of Death in Bergman's SEVENTH SEAL.
His sadistic evilness is deprived of any seductive quality,
and without it he is reduced into less complex and
second-rate villain. Forced again to play stereotypes,
actors didn't have much opportunity to excel. Hamill is
here, unlike previous two films, better than Ford, who
unsuccesfully tries to turn romance with Carrie Fisher's
Leia back into unresolved sexual tension.
The look of the film is good, though. Six years have passed
since the first film, so the special effects technology has
improved. Sadly, in some instances, those effects look
cheaper. The worst example is the beginning in the Jabba's
palace - pandemonium of different and bizarre aliens looks
too much like a bad episode of Muppet Show, and the obvious
blue screen of the Luke's fight with Rancor monster haven't
been improved even in the Special Edition. On the other
hand, space battle in the end, with literally hundreds of
different spaceships fighting each other, looks really
stunning. Same is with the forest battle between Ewoks and
Imperial stormtroopers. Scenery of the desert planet
Tatooine, forest moon Endor and ominous empty halls of Death
Star is really grand and impressive. Musical score by John
Williams is good, although it doesn't offer anything new or
especially memorable, with the exception of the final duel
between Luke and Vader.
However, the biggest addition to the visual identity of the
JEDI is also the most notorious one - Ewoks. Perhaps it was
really nice idea to introduce the primitive race able to
cope with technologically superior enemy (Lucas in
interviews said that he was partly inspired by the U.S.
experience in Vietnam, although Ursulla K. Le Guin's novel A
WORD FOR WORLD IS FORREST could also be seen as a source of
inspiration), but it was compromised in the moment when
Ewoks became teddy bears, obviously intended to provide huge
profits as toys. For many hard core science fiction fans,
including the fans of the trilogy, Ewoks are the symbol of
infantilism that reigned supreme in Hollywood in 1980s.
Movies like JEDI were the reason why people stopped
considering SF to be genre for adults, and thus the Ewoks
became the object of intense hatred among hard core SF
people. One of the most bizarre expressions of that feeling
is the Endor Holocaust theory, that can be found on some
Star Wars sites, and that gives entirely different spin on
the final moments of the film. Perhaps the only redeeming
quality of the Ewoks is their innocence towards the world of
the Star Wars - the scene when C3PO tells them the epic saga
is probably the most moving and, in the same time, most
charming moment of the entire film.
Despite the Ewoks, and despite the alarmingly low quality of
screenplay, RETURN OF THE JEDI remains a good piece of
cinema. It is far from perfection, and far from the heights
reached by its two predecessors, but it still can entertain
the audience - not just the children who would enjoy Ewoks,
not the usual family crowd but even the ordinary space opera
aficionados, even those who fell in love with Star Wars
saga. As a film per se, RETURN OF THE JEDI is a very good
entertainment; but as a part of a saga, it works beautifully
despite all of its flaws. The end sequence - in its original
form and in the "improved" version of the Special Edition
(the author of this review prefers the former) - is the
reason enough to watch this film.

Author
Steve Kong
RETURN OF THE JEDI SPECIAL EDITION (1997)
"Die Ewoks!  Die!"  This is the phrase my Star Wars friends and I
chant after every viewing of Return of the Jedi.  Return of the Jedi
could have been a good, no, great ending for the Star Wars Trilogy but
there were those damn Ewoks.
After finding out that his father was Darth Vader in The Empire
Strikes back, Luke Skywalker and his friends set out to end the reign
of The Empire once and for all.  What the Rebels find out is that The
Empire has been working hard on another Death Star, this time bigger
and better than the original.  What are the Rebels to do but to
destroy the Death Star again and claim victory?  But, first Luke and
Leia must rescue Han Solo, who was carbon frozen in The Empire Strikes
back.
Return of the Jedi was the long awaited finale to the Star Wars
Trilogy.  Given the brilliance of the predecessors, Return of the Jedi
should have been the best of the series.
There are some great qualities about Return of the Jedi.  The movie
was made far enough later than the original Star Wars that the special
effects were perfected enough to create a huge space battle.  The
space battle near the end of the movie is well crafted and fun to
watch.  The story about Darth Vader and his redemption is great.  The
story about Luke and his quest to stay with the Light Side of the
Force is also good.  The evil Emperor is cool also.  And it was great
to see Yoda back again, though so briefly.
What stunk about Return of the Jedi are those damn Ewoks.  A blatant
aim at commercial success in the after-movie market, the Ewoks were
introduced.  I'm sure most of you know who the Ewoks are already, but
for those of you who don't, the Ewoks are a bunch of cuddly looking
teddy bear like creatures that live in the forests of Endor.  The
Ewoks are cute and make for great stuff animals that kids will beg for
once they step out of the theatre.  But for us Star Wars fans the
Ewoks are a plain insult.  These snuggly cuddly creatures should have
been digitally erased during the Special Edition production.  They are
plain annoying and ruin the mood for most of Return of the Jedi.
For the Special Edition there was not much added to the film.  The
film itself is so new that most of the special effects still look
pretty good.  What was added, and is most noticeable is the end
sequence.  Instead of the plain Rebel celebration with the Ewoks, we
now get to see a grant universal scale celebration.  This end
sequence, with new music from John Williams, changes the overall feel
of the Trilogy for the better.
Overall, Return of the Jedi is a good film.  But I wish that Lucas
would have done something with those Ewoks.  Don't Miss Return of the
Jedi Special Edition, even if you've seen the original Return of the
Jedi.  The ending is much better in the Special Edition form.

Author
Michael Redman
As I have mentioned before, the "Star Wars" trilogy makes much more
sense as one work than as three separate films. "Jedi" ends the tale
and, taken with the rest, is a part of one of most successful films of
all times. By itself, it is something of a weak ending.
When I saw this during its original release, I couldn't help but feel
disappointed. By that time, the great god "Merchandising" had reared its
ugly head and much of the movie seemed to exist to sell toys. The teddy
bear Ewoks would have contributed much more to the mythos with their
tribal teamwork versus the technology of the Empire if they weren't so
damned cute. But then they wouldn't have sold so many t-shirts.
Some of the problems exist for no reason. One of the strengths of the
project has always been the spectacular special effects, yet someone
must have been asleep when some of the "Jedi" scenes were executed. The
rubber-masked pig-men guards at Jabba's headquarters look like big kids
out trick or treating =97 and are just as convincing. The insipid blue
elephant creature appears as real as someone waving a stuffed animal
back and forth.  In an unfortunate decision, the musical number has been
extended for the Special Edition and works even more poorly than it did
in the original.
The attack on the new Death Star is remarkably similar to the attack on
the first one in "Star Wars".
I will also have to admit that I enjoyed the film much more this time
than during the eighties. Not having such high hopes, I was able to
concentrate on its strengths. Luke has his third (or is it fourth?)
father killed and must stand on his own. The character of the Emperor is
wonderful and the scenes with him, Vader and Luke are filled with
tension.
"Jedi" may be the weak link, but it is still better than 90% of the
other stuff out there.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more Star Wars reviews and screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
The gang of our favorite futuristic rebels must save their buddy Han Solo
from the evil clutches of Jabba the Hut, attempt to break through the shield
of the Empire's brand new Death Star complex, blow it up, and allow for Luke
Skywalker to partake in a showdown with Darth Vader (aka Dad), while saving
the galaxy. All that and....meet the cute and cuddly Ewoks!
CRITIQUE:
The most kid-friendly film of the trilogy, this one features plenty of great
special effects, cool hover-scooter chases in the Forest Moon, a better
understanding of the entire Star Wars universe and the players' roles
within, and a few surprises thrown in for effect. The ending is also a
complete 180 degree turn from the darker Empire conclusion, with just enough
space left over to maneuver a few more episodes, if they so desired. I
especially liked the last 45 minutes or so, which featured three separate
scenarios happening all at once, with the action in the film alternating
effectively between the three.
Quite entertaining to say the least, and while the Ewoks were pretty
childish, I did still enjoy their goofy presence, and Leia in a skimpy
belly-dancer's outfit was just, well....inspirational! :) One thing that
totally stuck out with me during the first few scenes, was the obvious use
of puppets as some of Jabba's henchmen, and the god-awful blue screen
techniques utilized in the underground monster scene with Luke (And I was
watching the digitally re-mastered version...go figure!). Other than that
little scaffoo, all else was very cool, with plenty of great new added
scenes, cool space fights and mechanical monsters, a better grasp of Darth
Vader's origin, and a surprisingly tender father/son moment near the end of
the film. All in all, a formidable bookend to the greatest science-fiction
trilogy of all-time.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars: (Most facts gathered from
the IMDb)
Director David Lynch, was originally offered the chance to direct this
episode of the series. He turned it down because he believed it was "Lucas'
thing." Director Richard Marquand died of a heart-attack in 1987.
Lando Calrissian and The Millennium Falcon originally scripted to perish in
the Death Star explosion, but this was changed after a poor preview audience
reception. Note Han's line when departing in the stolen Imperial shuttle: "I
got a funny feeling, like I'm not going to see her again."
Several Ewok lines are in the Filipino (Tagalog) language.
Jabba's sail barge was filmed in Yuma, Arizona. The film crew had problems
avoiding the 35,000 dune buggy enthusiasts in the area. To preserve secrecy,
the producers claimed to be making a horror film called "Blue Harvest
(Horror beyond your imagination)", and even had caps and t-shirts made up
for the crew. A chain-link fence and a 24-hour security service could not
prevent die-hard fans from entering the set and sneaking some photographs.
*The dancer that Jabba drops into the Rancor pit loses her top as she falls
in.
The Endor shots were filmed near Crescent City, California. Forest work was
especially hard on the Ewok actors. Production Assistant Ian Bryce arrived
on the set one day to find a note from the Ewok actors saying that they had
all had enough and they were on their way to the airport. Bryce tried to
drive to the airport, but got a flat tire not far from the set. He found
another car and was about to leave when the Ewoks' bus pulled up, and all
the Ewok actors got off wearing "Revenge of the Ewok" t-shirts.
One of the songs that the Ewoks sing sounds like: "Det luktar flingor har",
which is Swedish for "It smells of cereal here."
Darth Vader's body was played by David Prowse, his voice by James Earl
Jones, and his face by Sebastian Shaw.
The title "Revenge of the Jedi" was leaked early in production, so that
pirated merchandise could be easily spotted when the film was released. The
official reason for the change was that "...a Jedi would not take revenge".
Some authentic pre-release movie posters actually had "Revenge", and are
worth a lot of money today.

Author
Phil Curtolo
There's an old saying that states something about leaving the best for
last. George Lucas certainly followed that adage when crafting the
original Star Wars Trilogy. Return of the Jedi, the final installment of
the series, is easily the most innovative, action-packed, and
entertaining of the three films. 
The dark, eerie atmosphere that oozed from every frame of The Empire
Strikes Back is gone. Instead, for Return of the Jedi, we have good
triumphing decisively over evil, a resolution to a love triangle, and
walking teddy bears. Even Darth Vader doesn't seem very intimidating
this time around. With the arrival of the Emperor (an apparition-like
creature played by Ian McDiarmid), Vader has turned into somewhat of a
henchman. 
Return of the Jedi picks up at an unspecified time after the conclusion
of The Empire Strikes Back. Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill), Princess Leia
(Carrie Fisher), Lando Calrissian, (Billy Dee Williams), Chewbacca
(Peter Mayhew), C3P0 (Anthony Daniels) and R2-D2 (Kenny Baker) are on a
rescue mission to Luke's home planet of Tatooine. Their goal: to save
Han Solo (Harrison Ford) from the clutches of the intergalactic gangster
Jabba the Hutt. It is at Jabba's home, a creepy-looking stone fortress
guarded by hog-nosed beasts, that most of the added special effects come
into play. From a hysterical scene involving a music group to the
dreaded beast outside Jabba's sand barge, the effects are top notch.
As soon as Han is freed from his cryo-freeze and rescued from the
clutches of the evil Jabba the Hutt, it's back to outer space, where the
Rebel alliance is about to face the Empire's newest threat: a second,
more powerful Death Star, that, if activated, could spell doom for
anyone who stands against the Emperor. So, while the fleet prepares for
the final battle, Luke and company travel to the forest moon of Endor to
knock out the shield that defends the Death Star against all attacks.
There, they are befriended by the Ewoks, the teddy bear-like native
race, and Luke, fearing that his presence is endangering the group,
turns himself over to Vader. 
Return of the Jedi has some interesting elements. The scenes which
pitted Luke against the Emperor and Vader are suitably tense and
well-acted. From a technical point-of-view, the space battles are
amazing, easily hindering anything depicted in the previous films. Not
only are there many, many more ships, but their speed and range of
movement have been dramatically improved. On one level, Return of the
Jedi is almost worth watching for the special effects. In the Special
Edition, even more ships are added, making the final space battle
incredibly fun to watch.
The acting in Return of the Jedi is stronger than in the previous
films. By now (or then - 1983), Mark Hamill, Harrison Ford, and Carrie
Fisher have all matured in their on-screen personas. The chemistry
amongst the trio is terrific. As in Empire, Billy Dee Williams gives us
another human hero to root for. Newcomer Ian McDiarmid plays the Emperor
as a suitably creepy, cunning, and evil creature, although he's not as
imposing as Vader was in Star Wars. 
Although it was great fun watching Star Wars and The Empire Strikes
Back on the big screen, Return of the Jedi generates a greater sense of
enjoyment. With the spectacular, new special effects, the adorable
Ewoks, the sinister Jabba the Hutt, the evil Emperor, the same old
Millenium Falcon, Darth Vader's incredible betrayal, the destruction of
the new Death Star, and the always lovable Yoda, Return of the Jedi
concludes one of the greatest trilogies ever made with a huge bang. 
Congratulations to George Lucas, whose innovative mind entertains us
now and will continue to entertain generations to come.
Grade: A+, ***** out of *****

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1997 (original 1983)
Release date: 5/25/83 (wide)
Special Edition Release date: 3/14/97 (wide)
Running Length (special edition): 2:15
MPAA Classification: PG (Mild violence)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Mark Hamill, Harrison Ford, Carrie Fisher, Billy Dee Williams, 
      Ian McDiarmid, Anthony Daniels, Peter Mayhew, David Prowse, 
      Kenny Baker, Alec Guinness, Frank Oz, Sebastian Shaw, 
      voice of James Earl Jones 
Director: Richard Marquand
Producer: Howard G. Kazanjian
Screenplay: Lawrence Kasdan and George Lucas, based on a story by 
      George Lucas
Cinematography: Alan Hume
Music: John Williams
U.S. Distributor: 20th Century Fox
     There's an old saying that states something about leaving the best 
for last.  George Lucas certainly didn't follow that adage when crafting 
the original STAR WARS trilogy.  RETURN OF THE JEDI, the final 
installment of the series, is easily the least innovative and most hokey 
of the three films.  In fact, most of the enjoyment derived from this 
motion picture comes from the simple act of getting together with old 
friends and enemies one more time.  If Luke, Han, Leia, and Vader were 
replaced by nameless, faceless characters, RETURN OF THE JEDI wouldn't 
be a whole lot more interesting than INDEPENDENCE DAY.
     Cuteness is the watchword here.  The dark, eerie atmosphere that 
oozed from every frame of THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK is gone.  Instead, for 
RETURN OF THE JEDI, we have good triumphing decisively over evil, a too-
pat resolution to a love triangle, and walking teddy bears.  Even Darth 
Vader doesn't seem very daunting this time around.  With the arrival of 
the Emperor (a gaunt-looking Ian McDiarmid), Vader has turned into a 
second fiddle.  It's decidedly unsatisfactory to watch him engage Luke 
in a civilized conversation.  
     RETURN OF THE JEDI picks up an unspecified time after the 
conclusion of THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK.  Luke (Mark Hamill), Leia (Carrie 
Fisher), Lando (Billy Dee Williams), Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew), and the 
droids (Anthony Daniels and Kenny Baker) are on a rescue mission to 
Luke's home planet of Tatooine.  Their aim:  to save Han (Harrison Ford) 
from the clutches of Jabba the Hutt.  Once this goal is attained, it's 
back to outer space, where the Rebel alliance is about to face the 
Empire's newest threat:  a second, more powerful Death Star, that, if 
activated, could spell doom for anyone who stands against the Emperor.  
So, while the fleet prepares for the final battle, Luke and company 
travel to the forest moon of Endor to knock out the shield that defends 
the Death Star against all attacks.  There, they are befriended by the 
Ewoks, the teddy bear-like indigenous race, and Luke, fearing that his 
presence is endangering the group, turns himself over to Vader.
     RETURN OF THE JEDI has some interesting elements.  The 
Luke/Vader/Emperor scenes are suitably tense and well-acted, and, if the 
resolution isn't a complete surprise, at least it's a little more 
original that it could have been.  From a technical point-of-view, the 
space battles are amazing, easily dwarfing anything depicted in the 
previous films.  Not only are there many, many more ships, but their 
speed and range of movement have been dramatically improved.  On one 
level, RETURN OF THE JEDI is almost worth watching for the special 
effects.  In the SPECIAL EDITION, a new, equally repugnant dance number 
has been added to the Jabba the Hutt scene.  Additionally, there are 
some impressive touches tacked onto the ending.  Once again, while the 
improvements don't significantly alter the viewing experience, they're 
fun to spot.
     While there isn't much of a down side to STAR WARS or THE EMPIRE 
STRIKES BACK, RETURN OF THE JEDI has some serious drawbacks.  First and 
foremost are the Ewoks, an unbearably cuddly race that seem handpicked 
to generate toy sales.  Children enjoy these creatures; everyone I know 
over age 12 finds them insufferably annoying.  Then there's the 
unbelievably cheap cop-out that Lucas uses to erase the Luke/Han/Leia 
triangle.  Whether Lucas had this in mind from the beginning is 
irrelevant -- it's a bad idea.  Not only does it defuse romantic 
tension, but it leaves viewers shaking their heads in incredulity.  
There are other problems too -- the death toll on the rebel side seems 
shockingly small for a "final battle" and a bit of foreshadowing 
regarding the Millennium Falcon's fate is thrown out the window.  Of 
course, I could also make the rather obvious observation that large 
elements of RETURN OF THE JEDI are lifted from the original STAR WARS, 
indicating that the creative wellspring of writers George Lucas and 
Lawrence Kasdan had perhaps run dry.
     The acting in RETURN OF THE JEDI is stronger than in the previous 
films.  By now, Mark Hamill, Harrison Ford, and Carrie Fisher have all 
matured in their on-screen personas.  The chemistry amongst the trio is 
terrific, with the only awkward moments coming during the Luke/Leia 
conversations when they discuss their origins.  As in EMPIRE, Billy Dee 
Williams gives us another human hero to root for.  Newcomer Ian 
McDiarmid plays the Emperor as a suitably creepy, cunning, and evil 
creature, although he's not as imposing as Vader was in STAR WARS.  
     Although it was great fun re-watching STAR WARS and THE EMPIRE 
STRIKES BACK again on the big screen, RETURN OF THE JEDI doesn't 
generate the same sense of enjoyment.  And, while Lucas worked 
diligently to re-invigorate each entry into the trilogy, JEDI needs more 
than the patches of improved sound, cleaned-up visuals, and a few new 
scenes.  Still, despite the flaws, this is still STAR WARS, and, as 
such, represents a couple of lightly-entertaining hours spent with 
characters we have gotten to know and love over the years.  RETURN OF 
THE JEDI is easily the weakest of the series, but its position as the 
conclusion makes it a must-see for anyone who has enjoyed its 
predecessors.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z rating: **** (out of 4 = excellent)
1983, PG, 133 minutes [2 hours, 13 minutes]
[fantasy]
starring: Mark Hamill (Luke Skywalker), Harrison Ford (Han Solo), Carrie
Fisher (Princess Leia), James Earl Jones (voice of Darth Vader), Billy Dee
Williams (Lando Calrissian), Ian McDiarmid (The Emperor), produced by Howard
Kazanjian, written by George Lucas, Lawrence Kasdan, directed by Richard
Marquand.
In "Star Wars" we got a swashbuckling tale of a few good guys against a lot
of really bad guys. In "The Empire Strikes Back" we got a great study in
character and vivid definition of the universe and the powers that be. Now
with "Return Of The Jedi" we get that innocent thrilling adventure but at the
same time a philosophical portrait of the good and evil battles within a
person and how they can be much more brutal than the Death Star.
As the story opens we once again see our favorite droids, C3-PO (Anthony
Daniels) and R2-D2 (Kenny Baker), on their way to Jabba The Hut's palace.
Here is where Han Solo's (Ford) frozen body lies, property of the gambler he
never had a chance to pay back. Jabba is a huge, worm-like creature weighing
thousands of pounds. He is disgusting to look at, but he also gives forth an
image of power as everyone seems to do his bidding.
Eventually all of the main characters end up in Jabba's palace, either
through a disguise (Princess Leia and Lando Calrissian - Fisher, Williams),
mock imprisonment (Chewbacca - Peter Mayhew), or by walking in the front door
(Luke Skywalker - Hamill). 
Luke claims to be a Jedi Knight but he seems powerless against the mighty
Jabba. The battle and escape scene out in the desert is pure swashbuckling,
as Hamill seems more like Eroll Flynn up against pirates than a Jedi Knight
fighting evil aliens. This is not one of the most original scenes in the
trilogy, but it is probably the most fun as it is all hand-to-hand combat
instead of spaceships.
Luke goes back to Degobah to complete his Jedi training with Yoda (voiced by
Frank Oz), but we learn he does not need any more, the only thing left to do
is to "confront" Darth Vader (voiced by Jones). Yoda tells Luke another
Skywalker exists, and Ben Kenobi (Alec Guinness) again appears to Luke and
elaborates further. This adds to the great mythology of The Force and the
Jedi Knights. We also know a final battle between Luke and Vader is imminent,
which adds to the metaphysical suspense.
Back at the Rebel Alliance the final assault against the Empire is about to
occur. Another Death Star has been constructed and is orbiting a forest moon
where it is protected by an energy shield. Han Solo will lead a team to
infiltrate and destroy the shield generator while Lando Calrissian will lead
the attack on the Death Star. In "Star Wars," this great feeling of uniting
together to fight the evil power didn't occur towards the end, the fact it
happens early here is fantastic because the intense excitement lasts for the
rest of the film, not just the climax.
The Emperor (McDiarmid) is the epitome of the ultimate evil character. He
hides his red eyes and wrinkled face under a dark cloak, he speaks in a
devilish tone without raising his voice, and of course he has that wicked
laugh. When Skywalker comes face to face with him, we realize it is his words
that make him so evil. He encourages Luke to act on instinct and strike him
down, but Luke knows the power of the Dark Side cannot be used against
itself.
Han Solo and Princess Leia's strike team gains victory over the Imperials
with the help of primitive, bear-like creatures called Ewoks. The Ewoks are
so cute and innocent that when they launch an attack against the Imperial
Army the irony of it all is really exciting (I almost cried!). 
What is even more moving is Darth Vader's ultimate salvation. It's amazing
the Alliance's savior would be the person they had been fighting against all
along.
Needless to say the rebels do win in the end, and the space battle is even
more detailed this time than any other scene in the trilogy, but it isn't the
most important point. "Return Of The Jedi" has once again taken us as far
away from own reality as possible to make a statement much closer to the
heart. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz

Author
Scott Renshaw
(20th Century Fox)
Starring:  Mark Hamill, Harrison Ford, Carrie Fisher, Billy Dee Williams,
Ian McDiarmid, voices of Anthony Daniels, James Earl Jones, Frank Oz.
Screenplay:  Lawrence Kasdan and George Lucas.
Producer:  Howard Kazanjian.
Director:  Richard Marquand.
MPAA Rating:  PG (violence)
Running Time:  130 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw
     I'll admit that I was surprised when I heard of plans for the Special
Edition of STAR WARS, and not because I thought of the original film as
inviolate.  I just wasn't sure why George Lucas would feel the need to
make STAR WARS "the way (he) really wanted to make it," since it seemed as
though he had already done it.  It was called RETURN OF THE JEDI.  Yes, I
know Lucas didn't direct JEDI -- the way Steven Spielberg didn't direct
POLTERGEIST -- but it was clearly an amped-up version of the original
film, with all the things Lucas couldn't do the first time around.  The
climactic dog-fight was more complex, the destruction of the Death Star
more spectacular...even Jabba the Hutt finally made it on-screen.  After
the moody second act of THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK, RETURN OF THE JEDI was a
return to the playful adventure of STAR WARS, only with six years' worth
of ancillary revenue burning a hole in Lucas' pocket.
     Unfortunately, RETURN OF THE JEDI turned out to be an example of what
happened when film-makers became conscious of what ancillary revenue could
be.  The introduction of the cuddly, teddy-bear primitives called the
Ewoks has long been reviled by STAR WARS aficionados as an obvious bow to
commercial interests, but they were only the most obvious example.  Entire
sets in JEDI seemed to have been designed around features for an action
play-set -- Jabba's palace with trap door and Rancor cage!  Endor forest
with catapult launcher! -- and many moments of comic relief were so
utterly goofy that it was had to imagine they weren't designed for an
audience under 12.  In my comments on the STAR WARS: SPECIAL EDITION, I
noted that the original film never could have worked if Lucas had been
aware of the merchandising potential, because its innocence would have
been compromised.  RETURN OF THE JEDI, I think, is proof of that.  STAR
WARS was made for the kid in all of us; JEDI was made for kids.
     That doesn't make JEDI a bad film; it would take a concerted effort
for one mediocre film to spoil the goodwill of two great ones.  JEDI 
provides a necessary sense of resolution with the rescue of Han Solo from
Jabba the Hutt, as well as answers to questions about the Skywalker family
tree.  Lawrence Kasdan and George Lucas' script does take advantage of our
familiarity with the characters, playing with C-3PO's sense of dignity and
propriety when Luke levitates him in a show of "god-like" power to
intimidate the Ewoks, and making Chewbacca's reunion with the thawed-out
Han Solo a reunion between a boy and his loyal puppy.  The speeder bike
chase on Endor is tremendously impressive, a dizzying piece of action
film-making which still out-classes most of the attempts at chases scenes
you'll see in contemporary films.  There are plenty of satisfying moments
in RETURN OF THE JEDI, even if most of them come from the pleasure of
visiting once again with old friends.
     If there is anything the SPECIAL EDITION emphasizes, however, it is
that JEDI is much longer than it needs to be.  Among the new scenes are a
re-tooled version of the musical number performed by Sy Snootles in
Jabba's lair -- the once-puppeteered Snootles is now a computer-generated
Snootles -- is a ridiculous piece of technical flash which looks like it
belongs in a 3-D feature at Disneyland.  Worse still, it slows down a film
which got repetitive even in its original incarnation.  The simultaneous
battles on the surface of Endor's moon and in the sky above go on for an
awfully long time, all the while inter-cut with the taunting of the
Emperor (Ian McDiarmid) as he tries to woo Luke to the Dark Side of the
Force.  It is those scenes on the Death Star which grow particularly
insufferable; if I were Luke, and I knew all it took was going over to the
Dark Side to get the Emperor to shut up his incessant yammering...well,
just call me Darth Vader Jr.  By the time Vader has his moment of
redemption, revealing himself to be something resembling Ray Milland in
pancake makeup, the effect is undercut by a desire just to see the whole
thing wrapped up already.
     There is one very effective addition to this SPECIAL EDITION, an
extension of the epilogue which shows celebration on several different
worlds after the defeat of the Empire in addition to the celebration in
the Ewok village.  When one of those scenes shows a massive statue being
toppled, it's hard not to think of Lucas turning the STAR WARS trilogy
into a grand metaphor for the defeat of Communism, with the galaxy made
safe once again for private enterprise.  The film industry was certainly
made safe for private enterprise after the massive success of the STAR
WARS films.  RETURN OF THE JEDI might have been the first glimpse at the
down-side of that victory.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
    This is the dopiest of the three movies and, thus, the easiest to
pick on.  The tone is insufferably broad.  The cross-cutting is hideous.
Even wise old Yoda is a bore, hacking his way through an embarrassing
death scene.  (Eh heh, eh heh, eh heh, throat lozenge please pass.) And,
and, and, so what?  To quote someone else's .signature, "The ability to
criticize STAR WARS is insignificant next to the power of The Fans." For
all the stuff that sucks-- two words: Ewok babies-- there's something
else that sends even the casual fan soaring.  My favorite moment is
watching Vader watching his son getting creamed by the Emperor.  Those
hollow, plastic eyes chill me to the bone.  (That is, once I accept the
fact that no amount of purple electricity is going to make Mark Hamill's
hair stand on end.)  And don't miss the added footage, at the very end,
showing celebrations on a couple of other planets.  These are the first
glimpses into what we'll likely see in two years, when George Lucas
unveils the first of his STAR WARS prequels.
    RETURN OF THE JEDI was screened at Mann's Chinese Theater, in Los
Angeles.  Lines had formed for both the afternoon and evening shows.  I
had my picture taken with three costumed characters, an Imperial pilot,
a Stormtrooper, and an Imperial guard.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
I'm also on the Web!  http://www.pagesz.net/~legeros/
