Title
Review for Family Thing, A (1996)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: 3/29/96 (wide)
Running Length: 1:49
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Violence, profanity, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Robert Duvall, James Earl Jones, Michael Beach, Irma P. Hall, 
      David Keith, Grace Zabriskie, Regina Taylor
Director: Richard Pearce
Producers: Robert Duvall, Todd Black, and Randa Haines
Screenplay: Billy Bob Thornton and Tom Epperson
Cinematography: Fred Murphy
Music: Jerry Goldsmith
U.S. Distributor: United Artists
     Richard Pearce's A FAMILY THING is a pleasant, if not especially 
groundbreaking, motion picture that takes the "buddy movie" concept a 
step forward by introducing themes of race relations and kinship.  The 
film has more to say than might be initially obvious from the seemingly-
straightforward script, which was written by ONE FALSE MOVE scribes 
Billy Bob Thornton and Tom Epperson.  All the topics presented on an 
intimate level are equally applicable to society as a whole, which has 
become more sensitive to issues of skin color than those of basic 
humanity.
     If you thought Arnold Schwarzenegger and Danny DeVito made strange 
brothers, how about Robert Duvall and James Earl Jones?  A FAMILY 
THING's premise is that Duvall's character, Earl Pilcher, has been 
raised as the son of white parents, even though his real mother was 
black.  After the death of the woman he called "Mom", Earl learns about 
his true heritage, and heads north to Chicago to meet his half-brother, 
Raymond (Jones).  However, Ray is less than pleased to see Earl, because 
he associates his white sibling with tragedy.  His mother died giving 
birth to Earl, and Ray has nursed this bitterness for more than sixty 
years.
     For Earl, the challenge is putting aside the bigotry bred into him 
by his rural Arkansas environment.  Learning the truth about his mother 
forces him to abandon his black-and-white perceptions.  As A FAMILY 
THING chronicles one man's gradual acceptance of himself, it reminds us 
that skin color is an artificial, not a natural, barrier.  After meeting 
Ray, Earl realizes that intolerance is the product of ignorance, and, 
when it comes down to it, he and his black brother aren't fundamentally 
very different.
     One character central to bringing Earl and Ray together is their 
blind aunt, played brilliantly by scene-stealing Irma P. Hall.  In Aunt 
T's words, she doesn't "have the blessing of being able to separate 
people by looking at them."  So what if Earl's skin is lighter than 
Ray's -- that doesn't change their shared parentage.  She recognizes 
that the rift between the brothers is carved out of pride and 
stubbornness, and decides that it's her job to bridge it.  To that end, 
she forces Ray to stop blaming Earl for his mother's death while 
encouraging Earl to embrace his heritage.  Gradually for both men, 
stereotyping gives way to understanding, and understanding to 
brotherhood.
     Most of A FAMILY THING is devoted to Earl and Ray's struggles to 
reach common ground.  The usual "mismatched buddy" film conventions are 
present:  initial resentment and dislike that leads to a physical 
confrontation, followed by bonding and grudging admiration that grows 
into genuine affection.  With actors of Duvall and Jones' caliber, 
however, such formulas attain a higher-than-ordinary level.  Despite its 
good intentions, A FAMILY THING could easily have been a mediocre drama, 
but the excellent performances elevate the film considerably.
     Several scenes are over-the-top, and the character of Ray's son, 
Virgil (Michael Beach), is woefully underdeveloped (the result of 
editing choices), but, overall, this film is an agreeable exploration of 
what it means to be part of a family.  Much like THE BIRDCAGE, although 
without that film's comic excesses, A FAMILY THING isn't just about 
accepting one's circumstances, but embracing them.  The actors, playing 
characters it's easy to sympathize with, bring the story alive.  Because 
Duvall and Jones establish a successful rapport, A FAMILY THING has an 
unexpectedly strong emotional resonance, and that's a key reason why 
viewers are likely to leave this movie satisfied.  
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
web: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin (or) http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Earl Pilcher, Jr. (played by Robert Duvall), is an Arkansas good
ol' boy, complete with a pick-up truck that works a lot better than his
family does.  When his mother dies she leaves him a letter explaining
that she really is not his biological mother.  His real mother was a
black servant whom his father had raped and who died giving birth to
him.  The final wish of the only mother Earl has known is that he find
and get to know his black half-brother, Ray, in the Chicago police
department.  Earl takes his blue pick-up truck to navigate the
Interstate and find his brother.  What he finds is that Ray (James Earl
Jones) has buried just beneath the surface the hate he still feels for
Earl Sr. and Earl Jr.  Having discharged an unpleasant responsibility,
Earl starts for home only to be mugged and have his precious pick-up
stolen.  Ray finds he must care for Earl while Earl recovers and tries
to get back his pick-up.  Earl stays with Ray and gets to know Aunt T,
their mother's sister (played by Irma P. Hall).
     Earl describes his football days by saying he was small but made
up for it by being slow.  Much the same could be said of the plot of A
FAMILY THING, but the texture of life in the black neighborhood of
Chicago is more the point of the film than the pacing.  The plot is
just a bit contrived to give Earl a grand tour of the black experience
in America.  It does more than just show it to him; he also experiences
the feel of being an outcast and a minority.  All this happens while he
is thinking over the implications of his being black, all the while
still looking and thinking white.  Charles Gross's jazz score matches
in style the low- energy story-telling.  It pushes the right buttons,
but is not very creative.  Special credit should be given to Fred
Murphy's photography which is constantly engaging in both the Arkansas
town and especially in the Chicago black neighborhood with its El track
supports.
     If I were to choose whom I thought was the best American actor,
there is no doubt in my mind that Robert Duvall would be my first
choice.  Here he gives a quiet but rich performance.  The scene in
which he reads his white mother's letter to his father is a beautiful
piece of acting.  Reportedly his approach is to get someone with the
same background as his character and record him reading the lines, then
to mimic it.  Whatever he does, he is clearly sweating the details and
turning in a totally authentic performance.  James Earl Jones has a
much narrower acting range, but within that range he is a joy to watch.
However, Duvall's and Jones's acting styles do not quite mesh since
while Duvall slightly understates his acting, Jones overstates.  And
both are often upstaged by Irma P. Hall whose Aunt T seems to have more
personality than the two main characters combined.

Author
Robin Redcrest
The URL of this review is

http://moviereviews.com/janesreviews/afamilything.html
When a movie is a lot like life, it can be startling and thought 
provoking or just plain dull. "A Family Thing" has moments of both.
Robert Duvall stars as Earl, the good old boy owner of an auto shop 
in Smalltown, Arkansas, with a neck as red as a home grown tomato. 
His mother's deathbed revelation to him is that he's really the half 
black by product of her husband's rape of the family cleaning lady. 
Not the kind of news that's going to get you elected Grand Poobah of 
the local Elks lodge in the deep south.
Obediently, Earl cusses out his Daddy, then honors his mother's last 
wishes and sets out for Chicago to meet and put a face to his half 
brother Ray, marvelously played by James Earl Jones. The two men 
dislike each other instantly, but a funny thing happens. It's clear 
that if the pair had been 30 years younger, they would've gone at 
each other until only one was left standing. But Earl is 63 and Ray 
is 69. Try as they might to maintain the hatred that history
and culture should have fostered between them, they just can't. Age 
and maturity have ravaged their once rampant testosterone, and shown 
that life is a lot better handled as grownups. 
One very funny scene does show the two trying to get into a fist 
fight, and ending up rolling over each other and bursting into 
laughter. Oh that every living human being who harbors
anger and hatred against a ridiculous stereotype could have this 
experience! The two form a bond - albeit, a somewhat uneasy one - 
and set out to discover what the new meaning of family might just 
be.
See what I mean? Not a high concept adrenaline rush of a plot, but a 
gentle, matter-of-fact story about how life really is. Parts of it 
were conducive to nodding off. Any part that contained the salty 
Aunt T. (played by the earthy and wonderful Irma P. Hall) was
hilariously funny. 
Mostly, "A Family Thing" was just a simple, reassuring story that 
after all is said and done, the bitterness of life's troubles just 
ain't that big of a deal.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     It has been only two days since the Oscars were awarded and
already I am certain that the film I saw last night,  A FAMILY THING,
is going to be one of those nominated for the 1996 Oscar's Best
Picture, Best Actors and Best Supporting Actress.    This is a film
with an original story , written by Billy Bob Thornton and Tom
Epperson.   This one will get to you.
     Earl Pitcher, Jr. (Robert Duvall) who is in his sixties, lives in
a little town in Arkansas. Very soon after the film opens, his aged
mother dies.   Several days later he is given an envelope by a trusted
friend of the family who had been instructed by the dying woman to
give the envelope to Earl when she died.   Upon opening the envelope,
Earl is in for the shock of his life. He discovers that the woman he
thought was his mother and who had raised him was not his mother at
all.   Some sixty years ago, his father had "slept" with a young,
pretty, black woman and she became pregnant.  When the child was born,
it was white.   Earl's father's wife decided she would raise the
child.
     The letter speaks about a half-brother, gives his name , Ray
Murdock (James Earl Jones) but is vague as to his whereabouts
somewhere in Chicago.    Earl confronts his father, Earl Sr.. (James
Harrell) and  the guilty look is evidence that the story is true.
Earl sets out for Chicago to try to find the truth of what happened,
who his blood family really is.   Before the film ends he learns a lot
about  "life" and about blacks and mostly about himself.
     The film's direction is perfect with pathos and hilarity vying
with each other every moment. Beautiful support is given by Ray's
Auntie (Irma P Hall), a blind, old lady who does not give an inch as
she raises her nephew and his son, Virgil (Michael Beach) to be decent
human beings. No attempt is made to soften the "bad" sections of the
black area.  Everything about the film rings true.    You will be
talking about it long after you have left the theater.  Excellent.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
A FAMILY THING  *** 1/2. Directed by Richard Pearce. Written
by Billy Bob Thornton and Tom Epperson. Photography, Fred
Murphy. Editing, Mark Warner. Production design Linda
DeScenna. Music, Charles Gross. Produced by Robert Duvall,
Todd Black, Randa Haines. Cast: Robert Duvall (Earl), James
Earl Jones (Ray), Michael Beach (Virgil), Irma P. Hall (Aunt
T.), David Keith (Sonny), Grace Zabriskie (Ruby), Regina
Taylor (Ann), Mary Jackson (Carrie), Paula Marshall (Karen),
James Harrell (Earl, Sr.),Patrice Pitman Quinn (Willa Mae), et
al. A United Artists release. 109 minutes. Rated PG-13.
Do you remember "Pinky" (1949) or the 1934 and 1959 "Imitation
of Life," both filmizations of a Fannie Hurst novel? Do you
remember what dramas or tragedies resulted in those movies
where a black girl passed for white?
We've come a long way since, but not all the way, as "A Family
Thing" shows. The film' s acting is unarguably superb. The
story is gripping. The direction is warm without corniness,
serious without preachiness, theatricality or sensationalism.
Earl Pilcher, Jr. (Robert Duvall) has a small business in his
rural Arkansas town. From our brief initial look, the place,
though not romanticized, feels like one that must be good to
live in, at least if you're white.
Earl's old mother dies, in an unusually realistic scene. A
couple of days later Earl is handed a posthumous letter, in
which Mrs. Pilcher reveals a big secret. Back in the early
Thirties, she was the friend--but only inside the house--of
her black domestic help. Young Willa Mae, who already had a
son, one day turned out to be pregnant by Mr. Pilcher. She
died giving birth to a very Caucasian-looking boy whom the
Pilchers passed as their biological child Earl,Jr.
Now over 60, with a wife, two grownup children, a father whom
he employs and treats lovingly, and an essentially
uncomplicated life, Earl is stunned. How will this man's heart
and mind deal with the revelation?
In her letter, the defunct lady urges him to get to know the
black half-brother he never knew he had. The reeling Earl 
confronts now penitent Earl,Sr. in a scene made all the more
effective by its avoidance of high-voltage dramatics. Later,
in a fine-tuned cut, sleepless Earl goes from his bed to his
shop's trash can to retrieve the crumpled letter.
With few clues, he abruptly takes off for Chicago in his
pickup truck to track down his brother Ray (James Earl Jones),
a cop, and succeeds. Following an awkward and far from
kiss-kiss reunion (Earl was no surprise to Ray), Earl starts
back for Arkansas. But after a bloody mugging and the theft of
his truck, he lands in a Chicago emergency ward. 
In a plausible development the hospital people contact Ray, 
deliver the wounded man to the policeman who most reluctantly
accepts to look after him for one day. He takes him to his
home ("we have a niggertown in the North too"), in which are
crowded widower Ray's son Virgil (Michael Beach) a city bus 
driver, and Willa Mae's sister, the now blind Aunt T.(Irma P.
Hall).
Ray and Virgil don't exactly warm up to Earl, but Aunt T.
does. She is an authentic character, as sharp as a samurai's
blade. She cannot see skin color and diferences, dispenses
matriarchal authority and wise comments that are deciding
factors for future relations.
Expectedly yet fascinatingly, events change the brothers'
initial antagonism gradually change to rapprochement and to
Earl's tentative understanding of "the others." It's done
without the expected cliche's, sentimental drivel or
cookie-cutter progressions. Instead we get an intelligent,
sensitive, believable approach. 
Less believable is how the senior Pilcher couple managed to
present baby Earl as their own to their small community. But
then, I was so engrossed by the film that I may have missed
something. I still wonder, though.
There's also the matter of  Earl's "whiteness," especially
when you think of Duvall in palefaced roles like Tom, the
Irish-American  Consigliere to the "Godfather"'s Corleone
clan. Then again, a geneticist would say that the unusual is
not the impossible.
The acting by the Duvall-Jones-Hall trio is right on the
button and most moving. Little-familiar Hall is a revelation.
The amazing variety of convincing roles Duvall and Jones have
held is too rich to list. Let cinephiles check their files.
Here, while ever consistent with their personalities, the
three lead portrayals are never obvious, yet they cover a
large spectrum of emotions and reactions. A homily delivered
by Earl to chip-on-his-shoulder Virgil might have been
sententious. It is affecting instead. Secondary characters are
drawn with deft economy.
The credit to the performers ought not to obscure the
contribution of the scriptwriter team (their 1962 "One False
Move" was excellent) or of director Richard Pearce
Pearce, a cinematographer in major movies ("Woodstock," "
Hearts and Minds," etc.), debuted in direction with the
marvelous "Heartland." He went on to make, among others, such
unusually good films as "Threshold," "Country," (with Jessica
Lange), or the little-seen "The Long Walk Home," (Whoopi
Goldberg and Sissy Spacek).
He brings to his work his camera experience, an eye for sets
and textures and a first-rate selection of scenarios. Above
all, this educated Californian (English at Yale, Political
Econmics at the New School for Social Research), has genuine
perceptions, sympathy and empathy for his subjects.
"A Family Thing" is beautifully detailed, pulls no punches,
doesn't impose political correctness. Chicago blacks are
Earl's hijackers and muggers. Later, others try the same stunt
on Ray, in a delicious scene reminiscent of "Lethal Weapon."
(The movie is not without humor that comes naturally).
In the black area, Earl witnesses affluence and misery as he
attempts drunkenly to begin coming to terms with his
negritude. Ray's apartment is so tight that surly Virgil,
resenting Earl being given "my couch," has to sleep inside the
bathtub. Yet Ray drives a shiny late-model car, which makes
the home situation less a comment on income than on housing
and ghettoizing.
Virgil has two cute daughters whom he loves, but these live
with their mother. In a structure of discreet yet telling
parallels, a train passes by Earl's Arkansas house and an El
by Ray's. Not too incidentally either, we get a depressing
view of big city hospital overcrowding.
There's no true closure to this film. It is after the brothers
visit their mother's grave and the movie ends that the really
hard part for Earl will come. In Chicago, he was in a foreign
culture. Adapting was relatively easy. In Arkansas he'll have
to deal with family and friends within their (and his) own
rural culture. Who knows what will develop. Perhaps a sequel?
The movie is easily as touching as "Mr. Holland's Opus."
Neither feelgood nor uplifting, it is stirring and
thought-provoking. All this without your ever looking at your
watch while the film is running.

Author
John Schuurman
     Alright, there is one mighty stretch of credulity that we viewers
must make if we are to become fully engaged with this movie. The film
asks a lot in this one regard but once the concession is made we are
pleased we have made it and congratulations are in order. If we can do
this -- suspend our native skepticism -- this fine film and America's
two best actors take over and provide a wonderful encounter with that
which is best in the human condition.
     OK, here is what you have to get around: Robert Duvall and James
Earl Jones as biological half-brothers. Of course, not in a million
years. So we all agree. But then we can get back to the movie.
     The story takes place in modern day America. It is a simple story
and one gives nothing away by telling some of it. Earl Pilcher (Duvall)
a deeply Southern man from a thoroughly Southern place learns that
though he was brought up white and though he looks white and acts
white, he is in fact half black.  It seems that his biological father
forced sexual relations on a black woman who worked for the family.
The woman became pregnant and died while giving birth to little Earl.
The child is light skinned and is then brought up in his father's home
under the ruse of being the natural son of two white parents.
     The movie begins with Earl being told the truth about his origins
and composition. He is also made aware that there is a brother, a
half-brother named Ray Murdock (Jones), a policeman who lives in
Chicago.  The rest of the film is a dance between these two -- a
sometimes painful, often angry, deeply touching, frequently humorous
dance -- through the minefield of contemporary race relations.
     The partners, Earl and Ray, move across the screen toward each
other. Carrying all the baggage of their respective cultures, they are
wary and suspicious, even hateful at the outset. But the music of --
biology? duty? decency? -- slowly draws them towards one another and
they become friends and at the end of the dance, we think they find the
special love *phileo* of brothers.
     Assisting them, (and arguably the music personified), is  blind
Aunt T. in an inspired performance by Chicago stage actress Irma P.
Hall. Go see this movie just for Aunt T. She steals the show. Since she
can't see, she tells us that she no longer "has the benefit of being
able to judge between people on the way they look." But blind Aunt T.
is the catalyst that brings the best out of her two reluctant dancers.
     As I watched, I was at once frightened and hopeful for the rest of
us. If a suspension of disbelief is necessary to view Duvall and Jones
as half-brothers, no such act is asked of us to believe that we are in
a terrible and frightening crisis of racism in America. Self-evident
though that is, this film made my heart quake over the vastness of the
gulf between cultures.
     And yet, here we saw one relationship in which healing occured. It
was just one, (and the movie is not silly or so naive as to suggest
that something so vast and unwieldly as the contemporary racial gulf is
fixable), but it was one sign that there IS something better than
racial divide. Such relationships can happen and as a sign, this was
for the moment -- enough.
for more reviews by John see:
http://www.mcs.com/~sjvogel/wcrc/movies.html

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Though you can't believe a minute of this rousing, racial drama,
you can certainly *enjoy* yourself.  The plot-- about a good ol'
Arkansas boy (Robert Duvall) who discovers, meets, and eventually
befriends his black half-brother (James Earl Jones)-- is absurd, sure,
but the dialogue crackles and the actors sparkle.  Though Duvall is a
bit too tightlipped, his foil, James Earl Jones, is fantastic.  (I love
his range: cowering and commanding all at once.  After this and CRY, THE
BELOVED COUNTRY, it's *great* to see Jones emerge from behind all of
those voice-overs and assorted supporting roles.) As good as their
unexpected chemistry gets, both Jones and Duvall pale before
schoolteacher-turned-actress Irma P. Hall.  Her scene-stealing
performance as their blind-but-still-sees-everything aunt is one of the
first Oscar-worthy turns of the year.  Directed by Richard Pearce (LEAP
OF FAITH). 
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Steve Rhodes
     A FAMILY THING is a poignant and beautifully life affirming film.
It tells the story of the reunion of two older half-brothers, one black
and one of a mixed race who always thought he was white.  The film
deals both with racial tolerance and with the larger meaning of life.
It is a little film without any pretensions to be more that it is, and
it has three outstanding performances in it.  If you are lucky enough
to walk into its door at the local multiplex, you will find you have
discovered a small cinematic gem.
     A FAMILY THING starts off in a little town in Arkansas, but that
part is actually filmed in Tennessee.  When I first saw the garage that
Earl Pilcher, Jr., hereafter called simply Earl (Robert Duvall) and his
father Earl Sr. (James Harrell) own in a small Southern town, I thought
it was Shugart's Garage from my old hometown of Garland, Texas.  It
wasn't, but everything from the sets (Linda DeScenna) to the dialog is
authentic, right down to Earl saying, "yes, sir" to his father and
"yes, ma'am" to the telephone operator.  Even the traditional southern
inherent dislike of potential carpetbaggers is displayed in Earl Sr.'s
complaining to his son about a customer, "I've never seen a damn Yankee
yet that could operate more than a wheelbarrow."
     At the beginning of the picture Earl's mama dies and leaves him a
sealed letter revealing the family secret that his father raped a black
girl and that he is the result of that rape.  Earl's real mama died in
childbirth, and his adoptive mama raised Earl as her own.  In the
letter his adoptive mama tells Earl to go to Chicago and look up his
completely black half brother, Raymond "Ray" Lee Murdock (James Earl
Jones) who is a policeman.  Earl does this in his pickup truck which
turns into a classic fish out of water sequence.
     After meeting Ray, Earl ends up having to spend the night in his
tiny place along with his old and blind Aunt T (Irma P. Hall) and Ray's
son Virgil (Michael Beach).  Ray and Earl want to part company quickly.
That Ray lives near a bad part of town further complicates things.
     The show has two stars and a scene stealer, Irma P. Hall, who I
think is a shoe-in for a best supporting actress nomination for her
bossy, funny, and upbeat role as Aunt T.  She tells Earl to get salted
butter because, "Don't know why anybody'd eat unsalted butter.  Might
as well eat Vaseline.  Got about as much flavor."  She is also wise
telling them, "Nobody ever knows what it's like for somebody else.
That's always the problem."
     In another incredible performance by James Earl Jones, he plays
Ray as a reserved man with deep feelings, but one that is able to laugh
at others and at himself.  He tells Earl, "I guess everyone is entitled
to make a complete and utter fool of himself every now and then."
Jones's character overflows with humanity.
     In this ensemble cast, Duvall's acting is the great, although I
would rank it third here.  He gets off many a good line.  One of my
favorites has him telling Virgil about playing football in school, "I
used to play a little ball.  I was small, but I made up for it by being
slow."  As easily the slowest player on a high school football team
that won two AAAA state championships, this line really hit home.  Earl
advises Virgil another time that, "Being happy ain't nothin' more than
havin' something to look forward to."  Another piece of advice well
worth pondering.
     The movie shows Earl as having definite racial prejudices, but
milder than you might guess.  He even sinks to using the N word twice
which, to be fair, is a lot less that the blacks use it in the film.
The script (Billy Bob Thornton and Tom Epperson) is one of the delights
of A FAMILY THING.  The dialog is smart and the characters are not
drawn as cliches as it would have been easy to do.  In a plot where
little happens, there are many surprises, scary moments, and many
unpredictable twists.  At its best, as when Earl and Ray share an
intimate discussion about their roles in the Korean War, the story
resonates with a beautiful harmony.  The direction by Richard Pearce
has great attention to detail.  Watch, for example, the body language
in the way Earl and Ray sit together on the couch and on the bed.
     The movie's ending is set up perfectly, but I would have preferred
them to end a couple of minutes sooner and let our imaginations take
over after they set it up.  The rich music by Charles Gross provides
just the right nostalgic atmosphere.
     A FAMILY THING runs just about right at 1:49.  It is correctly
rated PG-13 for a small amount of violence and some bad language.  I
think the film would be fine for kids over say 8 or 9 if they are
interested in the subject.  I loved the film and see no reason why you
wouldn't too.  I recommend the picture and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
