Title
Review for One Man's Hero (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Joy Wyse
One Man's Hero, Starring Tom Berenger, Daniela Romo, Patrick Bergin,
Joaquim de Almeida, Stephen Tobolowsky.
Directed by Lance Hool.
Most historical films produced in the United States are presented with
the Americans as the `good Guys'.  One Man's Hero dares to do otherwise. 
It tells the true story of the San Patricios who fought against America in
the Mexican-American War.
At the time of the potato famine in Ireland, numerous emigrants arrived
at our ports seeking work and citizenship.  They were greeted as they got
off the boat by Army recruiters who promised American citizenship in
return for a hitch as a soldier.  It was an offer too good to refuse. 
These Irish could have a roof over their heads, three meals a day, and
receive payment that they could use to bring their families to this land
of opportunity.  And, there was no war going on.
Those that arrived at Galveston and such were stationed in Texas, mostly
in Southern Texas, near the Mexican border.  Tom Berenger plays John
Riley, an Irishman who has risen to the rank of Sergeant.  The Commanding
officer is a fair man and a good leader, but when he is away, his
second-in-command, Captain Gaine, (Steve Tobolosky) takes a sadistic
enjoyment in tormenting the Irish.  When Sgt. Riley asks for a pass to go
to Mass he is chastised by this tyrant for cavorting with the enemy,
although he issues the pass.  Once at church, Sgt. Riley finds several
other Irish who are AWOL in order to attend Mass.
The underlying question that is asked is:  What about a man's freedom of
religion?  By attending Mass, they were not pledging allegiance to Mexico.
 They were simply honoring their God.  Of course, it was felt that they
were placing allegiance to Rome above faithfulness to America.
Although Sgt. Riley could safely return to camp with no repercussions, he
elects to stay with his men in an attempt to obtain justice for them.
It is a beautifully taught history lesson and I highly recommend it.  You
will find yourself questioning your awareness of the past as you have
learned it.  What else is there of which we are unaware?  I give it B+ for
this reason.  I definitely want to see it again.
