Title
Review for Unmade Beds (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Louis Proyect
"Unmade Beds" is a riveting portrait of two men and two women living
in the greater New York area who rely on personal ads in order to meet
the opposite sex. Their tales of woe are delivered with a
self-deprecating and mordant wit that make for an grimly entertaining
documentary.
The first person we meet is a Jersey City Italian-American woman in
her forties who is up-front about her purposes. She makes $2000 a
month, but her expenses come to $3000. So she is not interested in
romance, but in balancing her checkbook. She tells one man that he
will have to pay her $100 for their date, even if there is no sex
involved. The money is supposed to pay just for her time and trouble.
She is totally without illusions. She says that she can get "dick"
whenever she wants. Men find her sexy, even though she is starting to
worry about some bulges appearing around her midsection. "Where did
that come from," she tells the camera as she eyes herself in the
mirror in a skimpy bra and panties, while grabbing a fold of her flesh
in her fingers. "I woke up one morning and it was just there." She is
proud of her ability to attract men, but has no use for men who can't
deliver some cash. Younger men have been following her around lately
because they want to learn about sex and love from an older and wiser
woman. She blows them off because there is nothing in it for her. If
they want an education, let them pay her tuition.
We then meet another Italian-American, a 40 year old man who lives in
a very traditional ethnic neighborhood in one of the outer boroughs
where it is considered abnormal to be a "bachelor." He spits the word
out and tells us how much he hates it. He is cursed to be a mere 5'4"
tall and rails against all the baby-boomer women who demand that their
men be taller than them. He describes the agony he has to go through
when he has to confess his height to a woman while setting up their
first date. He is an only child and visits to his parents in Florida
have become hellish as they broach the subject of his bachelorhood and
their need for grandchildren one more time. He resolves to visit them
only at Christmas time in the future. While in a neighborhood deli, he
overhears an old woman referring to him in Italian as a "fag" because
he is unmarried. Knowing Italian, he is offended and considers
defending himself. He changes his mind at the last minute because it
is not socially acceptable to yell profanities at an 80 year old
woman. As a last resort, he goes to a dating counselor. He looks into
the camera and wonders why he is spending his hard-earned money on
learning about life. You shouldn't have to pay for that, he complains.
The next character we meet is a 28 year old woman who has moved to NYC
from the Midwest. She is 220 pounds and states that fact openly in her
ads. She is a professional woman with conventional attitudes who seems
fairly oblivious about her appearance. If anything, she is overly
critical about the appearance of her dates. One man was balding and at
least 225 pounds, she huffs. Like most Manhattanites, she considers a
mate to be part of making it. It is a sign of success. Her big fear is
that she only has two years to go until she is thirty, when her
chances will be over. Notwithstanding her weight, she has a rather
active social life constructed through the personal ads. Her last
affair was with a cab-driver who was into S&M. She laughs about their
first sexual experience. She brought him back to her apartment, where
he opened an overnight case filled with whips, handcuffs, leather
masks and a French maid's uniform. After agreeing to be the dominant
one, she discovers that she sort of enjoyed the sex although it wasn't
exactly her cup of tea. She is crushed after he leaves her. "Can you
imagine being dumped by a submissive," she tells the camera.
The final character is a man in his fifties. He is a classic case of
arrested development. His attitudes toward women haven't changed since
the 1960s and 70s when he only went out with beautiful women, like
belly dancers and Playboy waitresses. He shows photos of himself and
some of these women. He is dressed in clothing straight out of
"Saturday Night Fever." He doesn't seem to realize that life has moved
on and that he has gotten older. He escorts the camera crew through
his apartment which is furnished in a garishly "erotic" manner with
dim lighting and nude sculptures. "My apartment spells sex. If a woman
doesn't like the looks of it, she can take off." The only problem is
that he doesn't seem to realize that he, like the furnishings, has a
dated and seedy quality. Sometimes the brute realities sink in on him,
such as the time he is charged for a senior citizen's admission at a
movie theater. "Can you imagine that? She thought I was 65?" Anybody
looking at his weathered appearance will of course understand the
ticket seller's mistake. The only thing that makes this character at
all sympathetic is that he describes his personal ads hell with a
masochistic relish. He describes taking a woman out to a fancy
restaurant on their initial date where the bill came to $190. She was
a judge and spent the entire dinner telling him why she wouldn't see
him again. She moved in elite social circles and he wouldn't be
appropriate for her. What would you expect from a judge, he comments
bitterly.
I answered a personal ad myself once. The woman who had placed it was
Kerri Jacobs, a high-profile journalist who wrote for Metropolitan
magazine on architecture. She has moved on to New York Magazine, where
she is a regular columnist on the same topic. New York Magazine is one
of the prime locations for personal ads, especially for conventional
New Yorkers. She had placed her ad in the New York Review of Books, a
locale for the more intellectually pretentious. Since she was an
extremely good-looking young woman, I couldn't exactly figure out why
she had placed an ad. After a few moments, I figured it out
completely. Nobody was good enough for her. The ads were supposed to
help weed out "losers," as she put it. I didn't even want to find out
if I was a winner and never called her back.
What dates like these remind me of is job interviews. Everything is
riding on your initial appearance. Not only do you have to look right,
you also have to find the words that the interviewer wants to hear. I
had to put up with this nonsense when I worked on Wall Street. Why
would I or any sensitive person have to put up with it in affairs of
the heart? One of the reasons that Columbia University was such a
deliverance for me was that I would no longer have to put up with the
stupid questions of people in the Personnel Office. "Why do you think
Paine-Webber and you are suitable for each other?" "I don't know. The
thought of working at another one of these Wall Street dumps makes me
sick to my stomach. I just need the money to pay for my rent,
scholarly Marxist books and African music CD's."
The unstated, and therefore more powerful, message of this movie is
that the cash nexus distorts everything. Everything in capitalist
society, including people and nature, are seen from the point of view
of their exchange value. This colors everything. The way we speak
reflects this alienated existence. We speak of the "investment" we
have in an intimate relationship. We are worried whether our "assets"
are to be found in our appearance, like Richard Gere's, or in our
intelligence or wit, like Woody Allen's (well, from 25 years ago
anyhow).
Director Nicholas Barker, who hails from England, allows the stories
of the four subjects to speak for themselves, but the points they all
make cry out for a different way of human beings relating to each
other. There are some very effective cinematic means he uses to
enhance this theme. In an early scene in the film, we see an Edward
Hopper poster on somebody's living-room wall. Hopper is the poet
laureate of urban loneliness. His figures are always depicted in
isolation from one another. Barker cuts between this Hopper poster and
shots of real New Yorkers sitting at luncheon counters or staring out
their windows. New York never looked more Hopper-esque than it does in
this film.
The film score is also very effective. He alternates between Charlie
Mingus big band sounds, which usually accompany one of his characters
on their way in a taxi cab to a date, and minimalist electronic music
when they sit home alone after the disappointing evening.
There is an epidemic of loneliness in America. The Communist Manifesto
hails the process of urbanization that destroys traditional societies.
We are accustomed to grieving the loss of peasant villages as this
takes place. Another loss that people have not been able to connect to
the ravages of capitalism is the breakdown of our social lives. The
vast impersonal cities where corporations are located serve the
interests of the employer, but make no provision for the social life
of the working people. They drift from bar to health clubs in search
of the significant other. They blame themselves when they can't make
the right connection. Some day all these poor souls will wake up to
the reality that capitalism is the cause of their loneliness and not
their height, weight or income.
For Marxist discussion: www.panix.com/~lnp3/marxism.html

Author
Dennis Schwartz
DENNIS SCHWARTZ   "Movie Reviews and Poetry"
UNMADE BEDS (director: Nicholas Barker; cast: Brenda Monte, Michael De
Stephano, Aimee Copp, Mikey Russo, 1997)
Whether the story is entirely true or in some parts made up, as the
director stated it is, is unimportant; the film covers the intriguing
subject matter of how four single New Yorkers exist for a period of
nine months, featuring the real lives of two female and two male
actors who play themselves, concerned with getting older and still
being single. Their single scene is provocatively portrayed as being
sad and luridly comical. It is a film that highlights the problems
that can be found in urban areas across America, as we bear witness to
the plight of these singles trying to search for a mate through the
internet and the personals, faced with agonizing loneliness and
unresolved psychological problems. That these four are not
particularly people that I can readily sympathize with, does not alter
the fact that this is a very human story being told, one that has many
implications on our culture, relating how alienated a people so many
of us have become in this modern world.
The result is an interesting and stylized docudrama, a "Rear Window"
for singles. The film imitates those famous apartment windows Jimmy
Stewart looked into for that 1950s look at New York City. This time it
is not a crime that we see, but is a voyeurist's delight, and there is
something that seems to excite us when we sneak a look at what someone
does in the privacy of their own home, as if we are seeing something
about them that we shouldn't see. But it is the four singles who
remain the focus of the film, which is really not a documentary,
except in its style.
Brenda Monte is Italian, she does not care for Jewish men and will not
even consider dating them because she does not find them attractive,
she is most proud of her big breasts, has a 20-year-old daughter from
a previously failed marriage, and she tells us she receives no child
support for her. This could be a personal ad about her, if it also
included that she wants a guy not for sex or love(she can have sex
whenever she wants to), but for monetary reasons. She wants to work
out some deal with a guy where they come to some arrangement
satisfactory to both of them, but she must get money for it, and it
should be clear that she is not a prostitute. Her vulgar story is
interspliced with the three other stories, but there is no connecting
links to the others.
Michael De Stephano is the nicest one of the four, except this little
negative fixation he has about homosexuals. It probably stems from his
fear that people will think that he is queer because he is not
married. He is a 40-year-old romantic, who is troubled that women find
his diminuitive height to be a no-no for them. He wants a permanent
relationship with marriage in mind. He is serious, stable, and
straightforward, and sounds a lot like what women want in guy, but he
says that is what they say they want, but in reality they are really
attracted to the jerks who lie to them and treat them badly, going
after them just for the sex.
Aimee Copp has the most serious problems of the four, she is obese,
depressive, has lost hope, suffers from a poor image of herself, and
desperately wants to get married.  She relates these feelings to her
lifetime childhood friend Laurie, who happens to be skinny, and is not
faced with the tormenting dating problems her 28-year-old friend is
having.
Mikey Russo is a braggart, who backs up his claims that he only goes
out with beauties by showing snapshots of some of his previous
dates. He is obnoxious but not as obnoxious as he makes himself out to
be. Though it is very hard to feel sympathy for him, especially after
he shows us how he will get out of a date with a mutt, which in his
lingo, is an ugly dog, by having someone at work beep him so he can
make an excuse to leave. This 54-year-old failed screenwriter and
current security director prides himself on being a gentleman, and
makes no bones about the fact that he is a womanizer, and admits that
he is his own worst enemy. All he wants in life is to take an
attractive lady to bed.
This film might be upsetting to some, but it is a fresh look at an old
problem, and its aim is readily accomplished, as it offers us an
unorthodox study in human behavior under the guise of being a
documentary.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Whatever happened to the swinging bachelor and the
liberated, single female?  In writer-director Nicholas Barker's
new movie, the number of such persons in New York City is
zero, and to prove it writ small, he explores the lives of four
zeroes who are whining and depressed residents of the Big
Apple.  Each day they mix in with the city's lonely crowd and
each day they return to their pads bewildered and frustrated
with their inability to meet permanent partners.  Why are
these four, who are so motivated, nay, obsessed with the idea
of locating someone to share their lives, unable to connect? 
The answer lies not in their ages, though one is 54 years old,
but in their self-delusion, their inability to make necessary
changes in themselves, their hostility toward the opposite sex,
and perhaps even an unconscious desire to remain single.  In
a town of seven million people, it should not take one guy
fifteen years of advertising in the personals and hanging out
in bachelor classes like "Cooking for Singles" to find just one
other human being.
   "Unmade Beds" is a fictional documentary, and if that genre
sounds like an original, the movie indeed is an archetype. 
Originality is not always coincident with quality, and while
Barker's efforts--which apparently won him the audience
award at the 1997 Telluride Film Festival in Colorado--evoke
poignancy and at times hilarity, the story sinks in a sea of
redundance after the first forty minutes.  What's more, the
story could probably be better told on the stage, the director
dissolving time and space in the style that theater can do
best.
   About this oxymoron, "fictionalized documentary."  What
Barker did was to send a research team into the singles field,
each disguised as a guy or gal on the prowl.  They
interviewed hundreds of New Yorkers on the phone and with
camcorders, then chose four principals to be the center of the
narrative.  Treating these performers like subjects in a typical
psychological experiment, he told them that he was using
them for a feature and not a documentary, which would get
them to lower their defenses.  Based on extensive
interviewing, Barker scripted a movie which dramatizes the
flaws in the unhappy quartet.
   He first introduces Brneda Monte, once a lap dancer and
now the divorced mother of a teenager.  She insists that her
problem is not finding men but mining gold.  Like an earnest
CPA she sums up her plight: she takes in $2,000 per month
but spends $3,000.  She wants an older man with lots of cash
and little libido to finance her life, and as payback is willing to
toss him some sex, maybe three or four times a month. 
The other woman in the cast is Aimee Copp, who is 28, and
who is determined to marry at age 30.  (She does not say
what she will do if she does not achieve her goal, but let's not
imagine the potential damage she will inflict on herself.)  Her
trouble, she says, is that she is 225 pounds and that only big-
woman fetishists are interested in such a heavy package.
   Of the men, the more sympathetic is 40-year-old Michael
De Stefano, a nice-looking guy who works for the city
transportation department and who is dogged by comments
like "Why aren't you married" from people who, he thinks,
suspects that he is gay.  He claims to be searching for a wife
for 15 years, placing ads in the personals column of the New
York Press and attending singles functions--all to no avail. 
Fifty-four year old Mikey Russo likes movies, writes
screenplays, but is as unsuccessful in selling his stories as he
is in selling himself to women.
   From time to time director Barker, in a homage to Alfred
Hitchcock, takes a brief break from the intense personalities
to sneak looks through apartment windows, where New
Yorkers seem not to care a fig about privacy as they undress
and make love.
   The good news and bad news alike--depending on your
interpretation--is that you'll want to throw rocks and sticks at
the people on the screen.  They don't invite sympathy from
the audience.  Because of their flawed personalities and base
motivations, they rouse disgust from the viewers.  The best
example is Aimee, who bitches and whines to her girl friend at
every possible moment.  She admits that she has always had
a weight problem but says that her main man will just "have
to be OK" on that since she will weigh this much for the rest
of her life.  She has apparently not heard of the concept that
you can lose weight if you burn more calories than you
consume and seems to blame the gods for making her fat. 
She is a woman with no redeeming features, either physical
or personality-wise...well, maybe one, as she boasts: "I have
health benefits."  She considers herself better than guys she
dates who don't have this advantage.  She insists that she
has a good job as well, as she well may, given the fact that
she rides around the city in taxis and totes large bags from
Balducci's.
   Brenda Monte is also repugnant, but has the redeeming
value of humor.  Almost every word from her mouth summons
laughter from the audience. She thinks she wants a mate
not to fill up her lonely hours but simply to support her
financially.  She is the traditional gold-digger but doesn't have
the looks or the charm to succeed in that profession--though
she seems to attract males who want to show her their
penises.  "I get to see two dicks a day," or so she says.
   Mikey Russo is a liar and a ne'er-do-well who despite his
ordinary appearance insists that he will not date a "mutt." 
When he is stuck on a blind date with a mutt, he has a friend
beep him.  He then tells his date that he has an emergency
situation in the office and must leave forthwith.  Yet he, like
the others, has no idea why women are turned off on him. 
"I'm not cheap," he boasts, "Every woman who comes to my
apartment gets a new Oral B toothbrush."
   The last time audience members wanted to throw things at
the screen was at Neil LaBute's "In the Company of Men"
which featured a sleazeball's plan to dump on a vulnerable
female and ultimately on his own best friend.  That movie was
so good that it never wore out its welcome.  Nicholas Barker
should have quit while he was ahead, while his characters still
had some charm and an ability to tickle our funny bones. 
When we spent as much time with them as we would with a
date, we tend to become nauseated.
