Title
Review for Miller's Crossing (1990)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Joel Coen
Writers: Joel and Ethan Coen
Starring: Gabriel Byrne, Albert Finney, Marcia Gay Harden, Jon Polito, John
Turturro, J.E. Freeman, Mike Starr, Al Mancini, Steve Buscemi, Michael
Jeter, Danny Aiello III, Richard Woods, Frances McDormand
With the Brothers Coen finally getting the recognition they deserve, what
with the whole "Fargo" thing and "The Big Lebowski" opening in a couple
days in wide release, so it's really a blast going back and retracing their
entire filmography to see how exactly they arrived at what seems to be the
pinnacle of their career thus far (back to the whole "Fargo" spiel). 
"Miller's Crossing," their third film, is a nice combination of story,
substance, and style, as well as being one of the most underrated films
dealing with gangsters, and is actually one of their best films.
"Miller's Crossing" is named after the place in the forest where the
gangsters in this movie go to shoot some of their more pestful problems,
and is the location for the big twist in the movie, where the protagonist
makes a fatal decision because of a cheap and stupid reason.  The
protagonist is Tom Reagan (Gabriel Byrne), an Irish gangster working for
the big political boss in town, Leo (Albert Finney), who not only controls
the police, but also the various mafiasos in town.
One of them, run by the eccentric Italian Johnny Casper (Coen Brothers'
regular Jon Polito), is an angry at Leo over the proposed assasination of a
little gangster rat, Bernie Bernbaum (John Turturro), who just happens to
the brother of Leo's girl, Verna (Marcia Gay Harden).  In the first scene,
an almost-parody of the opening of "The Godfather," Casper asks Leo to have
him killed, but Leo won't budge.  However, Leo doesn't know that his
right-hand man, Tom, is screwing Verna on the side, and she seems to the
person who the characters revolve around.
Soon, Tom and Leo find themselves at odds over her, and Leo kicks Tom out
of his job, so he crosses over to Casper's side, who's trying to overthrow
Leo throughout the film with the help of his menacing henchman, Eddie Dane
(J.E. Freeman).  As the film goes on, Tom tries to manipulate everything,
but towards the middle of the film, rats on where Bernie is, and finds
himself with the task of shooting him at Miller's Crossing.  Here's where
the big twist lies, and it sets the stage for the rest of this film, which
reaches a fateful conclusion.
The story, which is extremely labyrinthine and complex, is nevertheless one
that is endlessly fascinating, as we're introduced to a wide variety of
wacky and eccentric supporting characters, such as the homosexual annoyance
Mink (Steve Buscemi, in a one-scene role), and two hitmen working for
Casper, named Frankie and Tic-Tac (Mike Starr and Al Mancini,
respectively).  The world of the Coen brother is always intriguing in all
their films, as they allow every character to have a distinct personality
and various weird quirks.  While some may argue that the world of David
Lynch's is much more weird and thus more interesting, the Coens combine
style with a better grasp on all their characters and an overall better
control over their world.
What's most interesting about "Miller's Crossing" is how it's always
interesting and fun to watch, but how it also has an interesting take on
the world of classical gangsterdom.  The men in this movie may seem to
dominate, but most of them have a soft spot for women, especially seductive
women.  Poor Marcia Gay Harden is burdened with the role of being the woman
who is manipulating everyone whether she likes it or not.  Not only is Leo
reluctant to have her brother killed for fear that she won't marry him, but
also Tom, who seems all cold, is smitten by her.  What do you think is on
his mind in the famous Miller's Crossing scene of this film?  Is he really
influenced by Bernie's "Look into your heart" pleas?  Gangster pics should
always present an interesting and if possible original take on gangsters,
and that's what "Miller's Crossing" does.  It's a film that shows that
women really ran the show.
But besides that, the style of the Coens, which is eccentric and wild, is
clearly here, not only in how they handle the camera and cinematography (by
none other than director Barry Sonnenfeld), but also in how they present
their story.  This film is filled with lots of black comedy and various
cartoonish effects.  Who can keep a straight face in the scene where a
little boy steals the toupee off of a corpse in the streets?  And who
doesn't giggle every time Tom picks up his hat after it being knocked off? 
Even the violence in this film is handled with cartoonish effect: take a
scene where Tom is beaten around by a bunch of guys and all he gets is a
lip bleed - this film is almost as cartoonishly violent as another 1990
release, "Dick Tracy" (although this is considerably more graphic).
The acting in Coen Brothers films is always over-the-top and just this
shade of camp, but they're always pretty amazing.  Here, we get a barage of
wonderful performances from everyone, like Gabriel Byrne's wonderfully
stone-faced performance, hiding himself under his facade; Marcia Gay Harden
playing oblivious to what she's doing and ending up showing a different
side of the traditional mob moll; John Turturro's wonderfully energetic
performance; Steve Buscemi's wacky little cameo; Mike Starr doing another
fine small role as a doofish hitman; J.E. Freeman exhuming scariness, and
being one of the absolute best things about this movie; and, of course,
Albert Finney's brilliant work (as usual), portraying Leo as not being a
monster, but really being a tough but gentle man, albeit being a bit on the
ignorant and naive side.  Also, look for Coen wife (I can't believe I
forget which one she's married to) Frances McDormand in a small role as a
mayoral secretary.
And what about all those magnificent cinematic treats, like the scene where
Leo beats up Tom after discovering he's been sleeping with his girl; the
scene where Tom is forced to go kill Bernie in the woods; a later intense
scene where Tom is dragged back to the woods; a masterfully frightening
scene in a dark room with a blazing fire where Eddie tries to kill Tom;
and, of course, the famed "Danny Boy" sequence, which is one of the best
directed scenes I've ever viewed.  The Coen Brothers definitely have a
knack for creating beautifully layered films with lots of cinematic
goodies, like these, which linger in the mind long after the film has
ended.
I remember watching "Miller's Crossing" years ago when I was watching all
of their films for the first time, and not being really impressed with it. 
But rewatching it, I was absolutely blown away.  It's a film that almost
requires multiple viewings, not because of the complex story, but for the
sheer pleasure of watching it.  It's the kind of film that blows you away
with its amazing style, and intriguing and darkly comical take on the role
of the gangster, and even if it doesn't impress you the first time, trust
me and give it another try.  Trust me anyway.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Jon Cohen
     I thoroughly enjoyed MILLER'S CROSSING, a powerful, original, and
sometimes very funny gangster picture written, directed, and produced by
Joel and Ethan Coen, the same team that created BLOOD SIMPLE and RAISING
ARIZONA.
     The story is about rival gangs--Irish, Italian, and Jewish--and
their struggles to control the rackets, cops and politicians in a
nameless American city that might be Boston in the 1920s or early 1930s.
One of the impressive achievements of this film, I think, is how the
Coen brothers create a generic city of darkness and lawlessness that
refers as much to the history of gangster films as any real time and
place.
     These guys make movies with great style--lots of surprises, lots of
rolling cameras following characters around, moving in slowly on people
or chasing after them, constantly changing the audience's point of view.
No doubt, Alfred Hitchcock is one of the big influences on their style.
When they do a violent scene, it always contains a surprise of some kind,
an unpredictable and uncontrollable element,  sometimes a laugh: the
message, I think, is that violence is the height of human stupidity.
     The Coen brothers also have something to say about greed and
corruption in this movie.  We get a vision of life without love and
trust and the ethical codes that come from respect for other human
beings.  Characters are corrupted to different degrees.  We hear them
rationalize about the compromises they make, and some even take pride in
the "ethics" that they bring to their business of using, hurting,
robbing, and killing people.  The movie asks the audience to reflect on
its own compromises, its own fearful obedience to the system, our own
inabilities to love and trust.
     At the center of the film are great performances: the
always-wonderful Albert Finney as the Irish boss, whose soft heart is
his tragic flaw; Gabriel Byrne (remember this guy from SIESTA?)  as a
dark-hearted, black Irishman who is brilliant at the art of survival but
too damaged to love or trust anyone; and John Turturro (ferret-faced
actor who was Sal's racist son in DO THE RIGHT THING) as an especially
slippery and desperate Jewish punk.  There is also a great performance
by a bald-headed, fat actor as the Italian crime boss (anybody catch his
name?).  Also, the characters in the film often refer to Turturro's
character as a "Shmata" or "The Shmata."  Does anybody know what this
means--is it Jewish, Irish, Italian?  ["Schmata" is Yiddish for "rag."
--Moderator]
     Altogether, a memorable bunch of grotesque characters, lost in the
darkness.

Author
John Beachem
"I can't die! Not here, among the trees, like an animal!" These words are
screamed by Bernie, played perfectly by John Turturro (Rounders, The Big
Lebowski). One can't help but admire lines like this, which are sprinkled
throughout "Miller's Crossing". In this particular scene, Bernie grovels on his
knees before the man who has been told to kill him. While he begs for his life,
screaming for his killer to look into his heart, beautiful irish music plays in
the background, and the camera moves slowly over the gorgeous forest where the
execution is to take place. "Miller's Crossing" is a movie filled with
wonderful dialogue, scenery, music and performances. Yet, there's something
detatched about all this. It feels like we're watching it from afar, and as a
result, we're never becoming involved with the characters. Oh well, I'm
basically nitpicking I suppose.
Tom Reagan (Gabriel Byrne) is a black hearted, Irish mobster in the 1920s. Tom
works for Leo O'Bannion (Albert Finney), the big crime boss of the town. The
problem is, Leo's slowly losing everything due to his sweetheart, Verna (Marcia
Gay Harden). You see, Verna's brother is Bernie, and Bernie has been troubling
another local crime boss, Johnny Casper (Jon Polito). So Johnny wants Leo to
kill Bernie, but if he does, Leo thinks that  Verna won't marry him. Another
problem, is that Tom is seeing Verna behind Leo's back. Give me one moment now
to catch my breath. If this sounds a little convoluted, that's because it is.
We're not even given an introduction here. The film simply starts right in the
middle of all this.
It took me awhile to realize what was troubling me throughout this beautiful
movie. I think the problem is, as we listen to this gorgeous, poetic banter
between the characters, it dawns on us that no one speaks like this. As a
result of this, we never believe any of these characters could possibly be
real. Okay, my nitpicking is done. Allow me to now express how brilliant the
rest of this film is. The casting all around is perfect, but the real standout
performances come from Gabriel Byrne ("The Usual Suspects", "End of Days"), and
J. E. Freeman ("Go", "Alien: Resurrection") as Casper's number one flunky, The
Dane. Freeman simply oozes with menace as he hovers around Casper, glaring at
his adversaries with hate filled eyes.
The set design is magnificent; from Leo's antique furniture in his mammoth
office, to the interiors of the clubs run by the two gangs. Everything has an
otherworldly feel about it; like a dim, shadowy reflection of a real
prohibition era town. For example, Miller's Crossing itself is a heavily
forested area in which gangsters take people to be executed. The grove features
a deep blanket of dead leaves, a constantly overcast sky, and tall, thin, dead
trees leering over the condemned man. It's an eerie, unnatural place, worthy of
a Tim Burton movie. To further enhance the beautiful scenery at work here,
we're given a strangely moving irish score. The soft, melodious sounds play, as
men are shot full of holes, or as they stumble, sobbingly through Miller's
Crossing, approaching the scene of their demise.
Watching "Miller's Crossing" is like watching poetry in motion. It may not
always be involving, but we sit in awe struck silence at the amount of effort
put into this film. The film runs a fast 115 minutes, and not a single scene is
wasted. Exquisite scenery, brilliant performances and a standout soundtrack
would already have made this film worthwhile; the fact that the script is
involving only enhances the experience. I recommend the film to anyone who
enjoys gangster movies, and heck, to everyone else for that matter. See this
one right now. I give it a well earned four and a half out of five stars.
Feel free to e-mail with comments at: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick. Try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad. See it if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever. See it only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Evelyn C. Leeper
     Since the movie reviews are normally handled by the more hirsute member
of the Leeper Consortium, it is rare indeed that I take pen in hand (or in
this case, keyboard in lap) to review a film.  But circumstances compel me
to do so for MILLER'S CROSSING.  What circumstances?  Well, if I don't, you
won't know to drop everything and go see this movie.
     Of course, for many of you, just the statement that this is another
movie from Joel and Ethan Cohn (RAISING ARIZONA, BLOOD SIMPLE) is enough.
And if I say Albert Finney is in it, that will drag a few more of you down
to your local cinema (or not-so-local cinema--this film is not exactly in
what might be termed wide release).  But if that isn't enough, how about the
following:
   - Excellent acting, especially by Gabriel Byrne (as Tom Regan) and Joe
     Polito (as Joe Caspar).
   - Wonderful cinematography by Barry Sonnenfield
   - Beautiful Irish-inspired score by Carter Burwell, including the most
     perfect rendition of "Danny Boy" I have ever heard (special screen
     credit was given to tenor William Preston Robertson for this).
     Regarding the script, you should be warned: buy your popcorn and make
your rest stops *before* the film starts.  If you leave the theater, even for
five minutes, you will never figure out what's going on when you get back.
This is a very dense plot, and much of what is important about the
relationships between the various people is given in "toss-away" lines.
This, of course, is a lot like real life, where people generally do not say,
"Well, ever since Tom passed Bill over for that promotion, Bill has had it
in for Tom," but rather things like, "You shouldn't be surprised at what
Bill did; after all, remember that promotion."
     Unfortunately, this film has come and gone in most areas (or, more
likely, not come at all).  Luckily, this means that it will probably be on
videocassette in a few months.  While the wide screen is better for the
appreciation of the technical details in this film, the ability to pause,
play back, and in general analyze the script may make up for that loss.
This is a definite "must-see" film.
