Title
Review for Bringing Up Baby (1938)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Bringing Up Baby" is the first of four screwball
comedies starring Cary Grant and directed by
Howard Hawks.  While the second film, "His Girl Friday",
is considered to be the best, the fact is that all
four films are excellent and of nearly equal quality.
"I Was a Male War Bride" and "Monkey Business" are
the last two films, made about a decade later than
"His Girl Friday".
"Bringing Up Baby" has a deceptively simple storyline.
Grant is a blustering, bumbling, bespectacled paleontologist,
who has spent the last four years assembling a brontosaurus
skeleton.  His fiance is lovely but frigid, and henpecks
him mercilessly.  They are to be wed the next day.
Grant is given the task of convincing a wealthy
philanthropist to donate a million dollars to the
museum that employs him.  Attempts at securing this
endowment are endangered by Grant's encounters
with Katharine Hepburn.  Hepburn has fallen for Grant,
and causes endless troubles for him in an attempt
to get his attention.
The plot relies on several incredible coincidences.
Hepburn lives with her aunt, who just happens to be
the wealthy philanthropist.  Grant just happens to be
getting married the next day.  Hepburn lies to her
aunt, saying that Grant is a big game hunter.  It just
happens that the aunt's dinner guest is also a big
game hunter.  Finally, what are the odds that two
leopards would be roaming the woods of Connecticut
on the same night?
While these coincidences would be infuriating in a
serious drama, they are enjoyable here, perhaps due
to the expressions of alarm and confusion they cause
on Grant's face.  Grant was a terrific comic actor,
and a perfect foil for Hepburn's imaginative machinations.
Grant's character struggles to find normalcy, and
to escape from Hepburn, but he ends up bound ever
closer to her, and in increasingly ridiculous
situations.
There are some really funny scenes in "Bringing Up Baby".
My favorite has Hepburn dragging a wild leopard by
a leash, and berating it for its resistance.  Another
great scene has Hepburn and Grant frantically seeking a
dinosaur bone, digging holes at random in the front yard.
Character actor Charles Ruggles has a great turn as a game
hunter fond of imitating leopard calls, while Barry Fitzgerald
once again plays a cantakerous Irishman.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
