Title
Review for Fan, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Robert De Niro, Wesley Snipes, John Leguizamo, Ellen Barkin, 
      Benicio Del Toro, Patti D'Arbanville-Quinn, Andrew J. Ferchland, 
      John Kruk
Director: Tony Scott
Producer: Wendy Finerman
Screenplay: Phoef Sutton based on the novel by Peter Abrahams
Cinematography: Dariusz Wolski
Music: Hans Zimmer
U.S. Distributor: TriStar Pictures
     Travis Bickle (TAXI DRIVER).  Rupert Pupkin (THE KING OF COMEDY). 
Max Cady (CAPE FEAR).  Dwight Hansen (THIS BOY'S LIFE).  These are a few 
of the names from the gallery of psychos essayed by celebrated actor 
Robert De Niro during his thirty-year career.  And, though each of these 
characters is unique, there exists at least one common element amongst 
them (other than the obvious) -- they are all three-dimensional 
creations, individuals who attain a terrifyingly believable life.  The 
credit for this goes to both De Niro and to the writers and directors 
who sketched the outlines that he so ably filled in.
     Therefore, given De Niro's track record, it was reasonable to 
expect good things from him in THE FAN, director Tony Scott's followup 
to last year's blockbuster, CRIMSON TIDE.  In fact, with De Niro playing 
a sociopathic baseball nut, one might be forgiven mistakenly believing 
that this movie had potential.  Unfortunately, whatever promise the idea 
held was lost early in the film making process.  The version of THE FAN 
to reach movie screens is as unwatchable a thriller as has come to 
theaters this  year.
     De Niro, in fact, is part of THE FAN's problem.  Mugging it up for 
the camera, he gives a tasteless, uninteresting, caricature-like 
portrayal.  The actor, who's usually a delight to watch, turns in one of 
his worst performances as the troubled Gil Renard, a recently fired 
hunting-knife salesman with an unhealthy passion for Giants baseball.  
Gil latches onto the Giants' latest free-agent acquisition, superstar 
centerfielder Bobby Rayburn (Wesley Snipes, doing a credible Barry Bonds 
impersonation), who signed a multiyear, $40 million contract to play 
with the San Francisco team.  Gil, whose personal life is a mess (he's 
divorced and his ex-wife has taken out a restraining order on him), 
becomes fixated on Bobby, and it doesn't take him long to cross the line 
from obsessive fan to stalker.
     After the 1994 strike, one could make the case that baseball no 
longer deserves anyone's respect, but it's hard to argue that it merits 
the ghastly treatment handed out by Tony Scott.  THE FAN treats everyone 
associated with the game -- fans, announcers, and players -- with 
contempt.  Not only is the script superficially nasty, but the game 
sequences are poorly-filmed, with quick edits used to disguise the fact 
that hardly anyone involved (with the possible exception of ex-Major 
Leaguer John Kruk) can actually swing the bat.  Baseball credibility is 
thrown out the window, especially during the impossible-to-swallow 
climactic struggle, which (believe it or not) echoes a similar scene 
from THE NAKED GUN.
     Actually, I might have been able to forgive THE FAN its liberties 
if it had been remotely enjoyable.  But it's not -- the film replaces 
tension and excitement with reel after reel of tedium.  The script 
spends too much time with cardboard characters like Bobby and Gil, while 
introducing others like sports radio host Jewel Stern (Ellen Barkin) who 
serve no purpose whatsoever.  The entire first hour is devoted to 
showing what is immediately obvious:  that Gil is a borderline nutcase 
with a volatile temper and a love of knives.
     Something must have gotten lost in the translation from book to 
movie.  Phoef Sutton's script is based on a novel by Peter Abrahams, and 
it has all the characteristics of a hatchet job.  THE FAN is disjointed, 
poorly paced, and, at times, completely incoherent.  While Sutton has to 
bear some of the blame, the lion's share goes to Tony Scott, who has 
badly mishandled every aspect of this film.  The director appears to 
have backslided into his unpromising BEVERLY HILLS COP II phase.
     Aside from Snipes' well-tuned performance and a few clever scenes 
detailing superstar marketing, this picture is a veritable wasteland.  
Even watching the horror show that the real Giants have become during 
the 1996 season is more fun than this.  The advertising slogan may be 
"fear strikes soon", but, when it comes to THE FAN, fear, like the 
movie, strikes out.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Chuck Dowling
(1996) **** - C:Robert De Niro, Wesley Snipes, Ellen Barkin, John
Leguizamo, Benicio del Toro, Chris Mulkey.
I have the feeling that this film will not do well. However, "The Fan" has
many things going for it to draw in the crowds. It has the greatest actor
working today, Robert De Niro. It has Wesley Snipes, who can be a box office
draw. It's a suspense film, in the tradition of "Cape Fear". And it's about
baseball, which appeals to sports fans. It might open strong, but afterwards
bad word of mouth is sure to spread quickly.
De Niro plays Gil Renard, a knife salesman and baseball fan who is just
slightly starting to lose touch with reality. The film starts near
baseball's opening day and Gil's hometown team, the San Francisco Giants,
have high hopes for their newly acquired hitting sensation Bobby Rayburn
(Snipes). Gil, unfortunately, also has huge expectations for the new player.
We find out that Gil is slipping at his salesman job, and unless he lands a
big account, he is going to be fired. The only chance he has to secure the
account would mean that he would miss the opportunity for him and his son to
see the opening game of the season. He tries to do both however, and neither
situation works out.
The events which occur at the ballpark enrage Gil's ex-wife, who gets a
restraining order preventing Gil from seeing his son. Also, as a result of
him missing his sales appointment, he loses his job. These two events push a
man who was already on the edge of sanity, completely over the line. So Gil
grasps hold of the only thing he has left: baseball. And more specifically,
Bobby Rayburn.
Bobby, on the other hand, is having problems of his own. A mild injury he
received in the opening game is hampering his game play and he enters a
slump. To make matters worse, the Giants' player that he replaced (del Toro)
is starting to play very well, making Rayburn look even worse. As a result,
the fans immediately turn on Rayburn. Everyone that is except for Gil. In
his new, demented state of mind he will do whatever it takes to insure that
his favorite player Rayburn has every opportunity to lead his team to
victory.
Overall, I think that in terms of story and screenplay, the film is not well
crafted. First, the previews are wildly misleading. The previews make you
think that the movie is about psycho De Niro stalking Snipes for the whole
film, when actually that's only the last 30 minutes or so. Second, there
really isn't that much going on in the film. I mean, the opening game of the
season eats up about 20-25 minutes of the movie, and the events of the game
really aren't that crucial. Also, there's absolutely no character to like
here. You've got psycho De Niro on one side, and cold, unsympathetic Snipes
on the other. So you've got a conflict between two characters that no one
will care if either of them comes out on top. Normally, all of these things
add up to a bad movie by my standards. But there is one specific thing about
the film which I enjoyed tremendously. So much, in fact, that it was enough
to give the film such a high rating.
De Niro gives such a fun performance that I was entertained to the point
that I could overlook all of the negative things about the film. His
performance calls to mind, naturally, other roles he's played in the past,
probably most specifically Rupert Pupkin from Scorsese's "The King of
Comedy". De Niro is given a great deal to do in the film and he make the
most out of every scene he's in. One particular scene in which he chases
after a foul ball is one of the funniest moments I've seen on film in a long
time. But, only because it's Robert De Niro. I don't think any other actor
could have made me enjoy this character like De Niro did. Sure he's just
playing a variation on countless other roles he's done in the past. But it's
what he does best and it's enough for me. There are a couple of other good
things about the film. Tony Scott's direction is excellent, as always. The
soundtrack which consists of many Rolling Stones songs and score music from
Hans Zimmer helps to move the film along nicely. Also, there's a great
"surprise" during the final scene which I really enjoyed. So overall, most
people probably will dislike the film, but De Niro made it worth my time.
Have A Question Or Comment? Email Me At chuckd21@southeast.net
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,500 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office
reports, film related links, and reader's polls and reviews.

Author
Steve Kong
Tony Scott is a gifted director at one thing: making a dull lack luster
film look glossy and attractive.  Sometimes he does more than just this, an
example would be his previous Crimson Tide.  With The Fan he has returned
to being the director who makes a lack luster film look glossy and attractive.
In The Fan Robert DeNiro is an obsessive baseball fan.  He is a troubled
man with all sorts of problems in his life, he can't see his son, he's on
the verge of losing his job, and, well, he's just a little wacky.  Wesley
Snipes gives a decent Barry Bonds impersonation in The Fan.  Snipes is a
recently acquired $40 million free agent for the San Francisco Giants from
the Atlanta Braves.
The Fan moves at a snail's pace for the first hour, and really does not
improve after that.  The first hour does only one thing, it shows how
DeNiro's Gil Renard is a crazed troubled man.  After that, the movie picks
up pace, following DeNiro and his "support" for Snipes' Bobby Rayburn.
But, this pick up of pace is not much of a help for the movie.
Scott does a wonderful job of filming and making this film look good.  But,
this is a complete loss because of the putrid script that he is shooting
with.  All of the characters are presented as cardboard cutouts.  And there
are even characters that I can't figure to why they are given such a big
role, one of those would be Ellen Barkin's Jewel Stern.  The baseball
scenes are, surprisingly, few.  This is good because the baseball scenes do
not feel all that authentic, especially the end climatic baseball sequence.
Tony Scott needs to be more selective when picking scripts to work with.
The Fan is obviously a skeleton worth of a script that needed a whole lot
of work before it was shot.  Scott needs to find more scripts like Crimson
Tide.  When he is given a good script to work with, Tony Scott can put out
a wonderful film.  But, when he is given a bad script to work with, his
talents for looks are wasted.  Skip The Fan, though Tony Scott has made
this lack luster film look glossy and attractive, it's only looks, there's
nothing of substance here.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        I'm sure this seemed like a good movie somewhere along 
the line. But then sh*t hit THE FAN, turning a surefire success into 
cliche-ridden thriller crap. Robert DeNiro has played some good 
crazies in his time, from TAXI DRIVER and the 1991 remake of 
CAPE FEAR to his star-stalking fan in THE KING OF COMEDY. 
Now he's the baseball player-stalking fan out to make sure Wesley 
Snipes gives credit where credit is due. This is all retread territory, 
from DeNiro as the stalker to Snipes as the baseball player. Or 
have we forgotten a lame 80's comedy called MAJOR LEAGUE?
        Watch the commercials for THE FAN and you'll know 
where it's headed in thirty seconds. But it takes over an hour for 
the actual movie to go anywhere. No, we have to watch DeNiro 
DeGenerate from a knife salesman to an unemployed lunatic, and 
we have to watch Snipes suffer through a severe slump after being 
signed to a $40 million contract with the San Francisco Giants. 
There are more unnecessary expository scenes than you can 
count and we even have to sit through Aaron Neville's rendition 
of the national anthem on opening day. I wondered for a few 
minutes why they chose Neville before realizing DeNiro probably 
demanded they put someone with a bigger mole than him in the 
movie.
        Meanwhile, the supporting players worm their way into 
the movie. John Leguizamo, el mexicano tokeno, plays Snipes' agent 
and best friend. Ellen Barkin plays the "ball-busting" radio reporter 
who serves no other purpose than to display her new Aniston 
haircut. She runs the call-in show that DeNiro frequently runs his 
mouth on.
        You see, DeNiro is completely obsessed with the game 
and has a Shrine-O-Snipes in his house. So it's only natural that, 
after another player (Benicio Del Toro) gets on a winning streak 
that Snipes attributes to his wearing the number 11 on his uniform, 
DeNiro sneak into the steam room and stab Del Toro in the leg with 
one of his company's knives, as a free demonstration of their quality, 
of course. Up to that point, there's no action whatsoever in THE 
FAN.
        And after that point, the movie still doesn't get any better. 
That's when Snipes starts hitting again but tells DeNiro it's because 
he stopped caring, the cardinal sin for DeNiro. Not only do you 
care about the game, you also thank the psychos who kill off your 
competition, something Snipes apparently never learned in the 
minors. Now he's got a crazed ex-pitcher on his hands, an ex-pitcher 
who knows the one thing in the world Snipes cares about is his 
son. So guess what DeNiro does to the son? Imagine a kid taking 
a nap and the answer will come to you.
        There's not a single move in THE FAN that isn't apparent 
several scenes before it happens. The whole time I was waiting for 
the movie to catch up to me, but it never did. I was on third base 
by the time the movie was on first. Not only was it unoriginal and 
predictable but the cutting-edge tilted camera angles got on my 
nerves before the first reel was up. That stuff can benefit a movie 
aesthetically only if it's used sparingly. Film every scene that way 
and it becomes annoying.
        Normally you can count on DeNiro and Snipes both to 
appear in high-quality movies but not even the best all-stars hit 
home runs all the time. With an average like theirs, though, you 
can forgive the occasional strike-out, which is exactly what THE 
FAN is.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50 of a Century!

Author
Christopher Null
     My my my, what a mess to wade through in writing a review about THE
FAN, Robert De Niro and Wesley Snipes' hotly awaited new thriller set in
the obsession-filled world of baseball.
     The film is essentially one long study of dysfunction.  Knife
salesman(!) Gil (De Niro) is divorced, is on the verge of losing his
job, doesn't know how to relate to his kid, shouts obscenities at his
clients -- your every day run-of-the-mill psycho -- and is *obsessed*
with the San Francisco Giants.
     Bobby Rayburn (Snipes) is a $40 million golden boy outfielder,
newly traded to the Giants, and is not earning his keep.  He's batting
in the .100's, is being upstaged by rival Juan Primo (Benicio Del Toro),
can't get his traditional number 11 jersey, and has his own family
problems.  Nonetheless, he's still an egocentric jerk driven by greed,
groupies, and fame.
     When these two cross paths, it can only be trouble -- sure to make
you reevaluate the phrase, "I want you to hit a home run for me."
     There's plenty good and plenty bad in THE FAN, and as I've said,
trying to figure out where to start is a problem.  Directed with Tony
Scott's (CRIMSON TIDE) well-crafted style, THE FAN is often a fun and
thrilling ride.  The most fun to watch are De Niro and Snipes, who turn
in very believable performances en route to the film's big finish.
     But there's this problem that gnaws at the viewer the whole film --
that none of the characters are remotely likable.  At all.  Not even the
supporting characters (Del Toro, John Leguizamo as Snipes's personal
manager, Ellen Barkin as a sportscaster) are warm and fuzzy.  Instead,
everyone falls into the me-first trap that plagues the leads.  The
result alienates the audience into not really caring who wins this
battle of nerves, much to the film's detriment.
     Combined with sketchily-developed characters, some annoying
dialogue, horrible editing that is used to intentionally trick the
viewer, some glaring technical gaffes associated with the game of
baseball, and a wholly inappropriate soundtrack (which somehow features
almost every Rolling Stones song ever recorded), THE FAN is a jumbled
mess of good and bad.  Thank God it has some fun.
     Near the climax of THE FAN, Wesley Snipes's character hits a deep
fly ball.  Everyone in the stadium waits in anticipation to see it clear
the fence.  The outfielder goes back back *back* -- no soup for you! 
That pretty much sums up the whole film.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(TriStar)
Directed by     Tony Scott
Written by      Phoef Sutton, based on the novel by Peter Abrahams
Cast            Robert De Niro, Wesley Snipes, John Leguizamo, Ellen
                Barkin, Benicio Del Toro
MPAA Rating     "R" (presumably for language and violence)
Running Time    115 minutes
Reviewed at     Mission Valley Cinemas, Raleigh, NC (13AUG96)
     The first hour is exciting.  Before his character ever draws blood,
Robert De Niro cuts a chilling figure as an edgy knife salesman (!)
whose life is increasingly in shambles.  He can't make the numbers at
work, his ex-wife is threatening him with a restraining order, and, now,
his favorite baseball team's expensive new addition (Wesley Snipes) is
hitting his first slump.  What's a psychotic fan to do?  In these
expertly shot early scenes, director Tony Scott (CRIMSON TIDE, TOP GUN)
generates tension in the most unlikely of places.  Who else would film a
car-phone conversation like a high- speed chase?  About the time that De
Niro's character gets down to business, though, the suspense starts
seeping away.  Major dramatic events happen, but they don't register.
Plausibility wanes, tension fades, and, finally, we're left holding the
umbrella during one howler of a rain-soaked night game.  The finale is
so bad-- so jaw-dropping awful-- that even Marge Schott might be at a
loss for words.  Other umpires might call it differently, but I say THE
FAN is *out*!
--
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(TriStar)
Directed by     Tony Scott
Written by      Phoef Sutton, based on the novel by Peter Abrahams
Cast            Robert De Niro, Wesley Snipes, John Leguizamo, Ellen
                Barkin, Benicio Del Toro
MPAA Rating     "R" (presumably for language and violence)
Running Time    115 minutes
Reviewed at     Mission Valley Cinemas, Raleigh, NC (13AUG96)
     The first hour is exciting.  Before his character ever draws blood,
Robert De Niro cuts a chilling figure as an edgy knife salesman (!)
whose life is increasingly in shambles.  He can't make the numbers at
work, his ex-wife is threatening him with a restraining order, and, now,
his favorite baseball team's expensive new addition (Wesley Snipes) is
hitting his first slump.  What's a psychotic fan to do?  In these
expertly shot early scenes, director Tony Scott (CRIMSON TIDE, TOP GUN)
generates tension in the most unlikely of places.  Who else would film a
car-phone conversation like a high- speed chase?  About the time that De
Niro's character gets down to business, though, the suspense starts
seeping away.  Major dramatic events happen, but they don't register.
Plausibility wanes, tension fades, and, finally, we're left holding the
umbrella during one howler of a rain-soaked night game.  The finale is
so bad-- so jaw-dropping awful-- that even Marge Schott might be at a
loss for words.  Other umpires might call it differently, but I say THE
FAN is *out*!
--
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Quick, match the psychotic Robert DeNiro character to the film in
which he appears:  1) Travis Bickle...all right, that was a gimme.  How
about Max Cady?  Or Rupert Pupkin?  It seems that DeNiro has played an
inordinate number of nut cases, but each one has been a distinct creation.
It also seems less than coincidental that all of the aforementioned roles
-- in TAXI DRIVER, CAPE FEAR and THE KING OF COMEDY, respectively -- were
directed by Martin Scorsese.  Scorsese knows DeNiro well enough, and has
enough talent, to refuse to let him lapse into self-parody.  Tony Scott,
on both counts, does not.  THE FAN is an piece of hack work in which
everyone involved flounders in a pointless story made even more
intolerable by Scott's oppressive atmospheric theatrics.
     DeNiro plays Gil Renard, a divorced hunting supplies salesman and
life-long San Francisco Giants fan.  Gil is particularly excited about the
upcoming season, because the Giants have signed reigning league MVP Bobby
Rayburn (Wesley Snipes) as a free agent to join established team star Juan
Primo (Benicio Del Toro).  Unfortunately, Gil is a bit _too_ devoted to
baseball; in fact, he is an unhinged obsessive, and when he loses both his
job and visitation rights with his son, he buries himself even deeper in
the game.  When Rayburn goes into a prolonged slump, Gil begins to feel
that there is a connection between them, and decides to take action to
help him.  That action does end up connecting the two men, a connection
which doesn't make Rayburn too thrilled about getting up close and
personal with his fans.
     It saddens me to announce the return of the Tony Scott responsible
for DAYS OF THUNDER and BEVERLY HILLS COP II after a brief hiatus during
which he channeled brother Ridley to produce the tense and claustrophobic
CRIMSON TIDE.  This is the Tony Scott who has ingested the
Simpson/Bruckheimer visual motif to such an extent that he seems medically
dependent on the kind of lighting which makes everyone in the film look
like George Hamilton; this is the Tony Scott whom one suspects might never
have been able to set up a shot he liked if blinds had not been invented.
Scott is a director who generally takes a script, actors and solid
production values and grinds them into hamburger to be smothered in slow
motion and a spirit-crushing soundtrack.  Whatever substance their might
have been in the story of THE FAN is rendered toxic by contact with
Scott's "vision."  This is an ugly, ugly film.
     There is no great challenge involved in figuring out what the
psychological underpinnings of this story were supposed to be, and that
they might actually have made a decent film in some alternate reality.  We
are meant to see Gil as a beaten-down Everyman whose desire for a life
where he is noticed drives him to an ultimately violent fascination with
the celebrity he idolizes, sort of a hybrid of Willie Lohman and Charles
Manson.  But the sympathetic side of Gil never comes through -- he is
frightening and crazy when we meet him, and it is obvious that he has been
frightening and crazy for some time from the reactions of his boss and
ex-wife.  Bobby Rayburn is sane, but screenwriter Phoef Sutton fumbles any
development in his character.  The arrogant but superstitious superstar
has a life which parallels Gil's in ways so obvious that you can feel the
elbow in your ribs -- a divorce, a young son, a perfectionist streak
driven by their fathers, etc. -- but beyond those bits of trivia there is
nothing to him.  Wesley Snipes looks leaden most of the time, trying to
find some kind of emotional core which just isn't there, and Scott's
direction steadfastly refuses to allow him the faintest hope of doing so.
     Snipes is in trouble from the start with a character who makes no
sense, but at least you might hope for some creative lunacy from DeNiro.
Sadly, what emerges instead is a performance which slaps together pieces
of his superior work for Scorsese.  Like Travis Bickle, he is a loner
lacking social skills living a kind of double life; like Rupert Pupkin,
he uses his idol to get his shot at fame; like Max Cady, he is violent and
uses the child of his nemesis to get even.  In the twenty years since TAXI
DRIVER, everyone who fancies himself an impressionist has done a lazy
DeNiro impression by squinting and rasping, "You talkin' to _me_?"  It's
depressing to see DeNiro doing his own impression of himself.
     THE FAN is the kind of film which makes me angry enough to point out
idiotic inconsistencies like overhead shots of Candlestick (now 3-Com)
Park which obviously were taken at 49er games, but the fact is that I
don't need to.  It is a film lacking a single character with whom to
identify, without a single shot which doesn't remind you that its director
cares more about the filter he has chosen than he does about his
characters.  That's right, Tony Scott...I'm talkin' to _you_.

Author
Michael Dequina
As shown in Taxi Driver, The King of Comedy, and Cape Fear, Robert
DeNiro has nailed down the psycho stalker bit cold.  As if he needed to
prove it again, DeNiro plays--rather well, I might add--the titular stalker
in the new thriller The Fan.  While not quite as inspired as the work of its
lead, Tony Scott's film is an entertaining piece of work, if not the most
original.
Gil Renard's (DeNiro) life is in ruins--he's about to be let go from
the sporting knife company is father created, and his wife (Patti
D'Arbanville Quinn) won't let him see his son.  While everything crashes
around him, Gil holds on even more tightly to the one thing that's kept him
relatively sane--San Francisco Giants baseball.  Ironically, it is also what
drives him over the edge, for he becomes obsessed with helping his favorite
Giant, highly-paid outfielder Bobby Rayburn (Wesley Snipes), come out of a
slump.
Despite fine work from the always-great Snipes, Ellen Barkin (as a
tough sports radio host), and, surprisingly, John Leguizamo (appropriately
oily as Bobby's agent), this is DeNiro's movie all the way.  The territory
is quite familiar for him, and as such his work can't help but feel somewhat
derivative--the geeky, deluded Gil is a variation of The King of Comedy's
Rupert Pupkin.  But to make him Pupkineque is a wise choice; Gil, while
always somewhat on the edge, comes off as a regular guy--passionate about
his likes and dislikes, somewhat overconfident at times, but not nearly as
cool as he thinks he is.  When Gil does finally lose it, DeNiro doesn't chew
the scenery; he remains rather calm, an appropriate acting choice that
conveys Gil's feeling of justification for his actions--and, in the process,
appears more menacing and more human.
However, the human angle in the latter part of the film comes
exclusively from DeNiro, for Phoef Sutton's script doesn't follow the same
line.  Sutton effectively humanizes Gil in the film's first half, showing
how a borderline personality is finally driven to insanity by the turmoil of
outside events.  But when he crosses that line, all of that goes out the
window.  There's no more empathizing with Gil, only fear of what he's
become--a murderous psycho.  It is to DeNiro's credit, and director Scott's,
that Gil manages to come off as more.  Sutton does manage to work in a great
bit near the end of the film where Bobby asks Gil what he wants from him,
and, after a moment of  pondering, Gil can't come up with an answer.  In
that brief moment, Sutton vividly shows the absurdity of the stalker mentality.
The biggest problem of The Fan isn't the writing--it's the
theatrical trailer, which gives pretty much the whole film away.  Director
Scott must be commended for making a brisk, stylish film that still manages
to create some suspense, even if a number of the plot points were divulged
in the trailer.  It's not especially scary, but it does entertain, and
that's the bottom line.
