Title
Review for Knight Moves (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian L. Johnson
100 min., R, Suspense/Mystery, 1993
Director: Carl Schenkel
Cast: Christopher Lambert, Diane Lane, Tom Skerritt, Daniel Baldwin,
      Charles Bailey-Gates, Alex Diakun
     Christopher Lambert is a Grandmaster chess competitor.  While the
competition is going on, a serial killer starts killing females, and
Lambert is the only suspect that Tom Skerritt, the police chief, has.
The killer starts playing a game with Lambert to see if Lambert can
catch the killer before the game is over.  Skerritt and his partner
Daniel Baldwin have psychiatrist Diane Lane called in to investigate
Lambert to see if he is doing the killings.
     KNIGHT MOVES is an excellent suspense film that I suggest that you
see soon, because I don't think that it will be in the theaters for
long, even though it was released this weekend.  I think that KNIGHT
MOVES is worth full admission price and is a must see.  On a scale of
zero to five, I give KNIGHT MOVES a five.  KNIGHT MOVES is rated R for
explicit language, female nudity, adult situations, and graphic
violence.
     The cast for this film is excellent.  Christopher Lambert
(HIGHLANDER, GREYSTOKE: THE LEGEND OF TARZAN LORD OF THE APES) is very
good.  Diane Lane (CHAPLIN, NATIONAL LAMPOON GOES TO THE MOVIES) is the
reason that I went to see this film.  I am a fan of her work, and I am
pleased to say that she is excellent.  Tom Skerritt (POISON IVY [1992
version], WILD ORCHID 2: TWO SHADES OF BLUE) is the other reason to see
this film.  He is usually a great actor and this film is no exception.
Daniel Baldwin gives a good performance.
     KNIGHT MOVES is very well written and quite suspenseful.  This film
is not very gory, so those of you with weak stomachs won't be bothered
if you see this film.  The director, Carl Schenkel does a wonderful job
of creating a suspenseful atmosphere in this film.
     I especially enjoyed how the beginning credits of the film were
done.  They created an air of mystery, right from the beginning.  I also
thought that doing them in black and white probably enhanced the effect.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Christopher Lambert, Daniel Baldwin, Tom Skerritt, Diane Lane
Director:  Carl Schenkel
Producers:  Ziad el-Khoury and Jean Luc Defait
Screenplay:  Brad Mirman
Music:  Anne Dudley 
Released by Interstar
     Peter Sanderson (Christopher Lambert) is one the world's most
accomplished grandmasters of chess.  During the course of his latest
match, a victory at which would make him eligible to play for the
international title, someone decides to take the game one step further
and play it for real--with young female bodies representing the pieces.
Captain Frank Sedman (Tom Skerritt) and Detective Andy Wagner (Daniel
Baldwin) begin investigating the serial killings, and the trail leads
them to Sanderson.  Psychiatrist Kathy Sheppard (Diane Lane) is called
in to evaluate his sanity.  As the killings continue, the police must
decide whether Sanderson is the killer, or merely a pawn in someone
else's game.  
     KNIGHT MOVES is a walking cliche.  Plot elements have been borrowed
from almost every mystery and thriller since the genre was invented.
Red herrings, stupid characters, and false endings abound.  In all
one-hundred and eleven minutes, there is not a single original idea.
This complete bankruptcy of innovation leads to a movie-going
experience that is not only uninvolving, but somewhat tedious.
     One of the most annoying things that can happen in a
mystery/thriller is for the audience to be able to figure out puzzles
before the characters do.  This happens regularly in KNIGHT MOVES.
Each of the four main characters is given ample opportunity to commit a
number of inexplicably stupid mistakes.  With a police force headed by
idiots like Sedman and Wagner, it's no wonder so many people get killed
in their town.  They never even put a tail on their chief suspect.
     I don't enjoy movies that feature foolish people, and I like them
even less when those characters are one-dimensional.  Lambert's
Sanderson is cold and impassive.  He's supposed to be the protagonist,
but he inspires nothing more than apathy.  Baldwin's Wagner is so
belligerent that it's impossible not to find him offensive, and
Skerritt's Sedman isn't much better.  The only one who's remotely
likable is Diane Lane's Sheppard, and she's too often relegated to the
role of the impotent victim.  
     Another problem with KNIGHT MOVES is the atrocious dialogue.  It's
really bad--so bad, in fact, that it makes some of Madonna's lines in
BODY OF EVIDENCE sound believable, and that's difficult to do.  Someone
should clue writer Brad Mirman into how people really talk.  One scene
in particular, with Lane and Lambert on a beach, made me feel an acute
sense of embarrassment for the involved parties.  It was difficult to
keep from chuckling, and humor was definitely not the intention.
     The cinematography, which is credited to Dietrich Lohmann, is dark
and dreary.  Almost every scene, whether inside or out, is shot in dim
lighting, frequently making it difficult to identify characters or
their actions.  Lohmann was probably trying to establish a mood, but
for that to work, he needed a script worth making the attempt for.
     Did I guess the ending?  No, but a more apropos question might be
whether I cared.  The answer is the same.  By the time the tired climax
rolled around, I was more interested in which route to take on the
drive home than in how KNIGHT MOVES was going to be resolved.
     This film has not received national release, and such selective
distribution is usually indicative of a poor product.  Several large
metropolitan areas are being spared the indignity of having KNIGHT
MOVES use up theater screens.  If you're in one of those places,
consider yourself lucky.  If not, pretend that you are.  As far as this
film is concerned--to borrow a phrase from another game--the production
team has struck out.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
