Title
Review for Body and Soul (1925)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Body and Soul" is a silent film independently produced
by Oscar Micheaux, who also directed, wrote the screenplay
and the novel that the film was based upon.
One actor in the film is white.  The remaining cast is
African-American, and the film was distributed only in
segregated black communities.  The crew was largely
black as well, except for white cameramen who could
be hired cheaply as they were unable to get into the
cinematographer's union.  One of the film's supporting
characters is white, played by a black in "whiteface".
The only white actor is a character selling rancid
meat, perhaps implying white exploitation.
Although "Body and Soul" is a marginally good film,
it is significant for marking the film debut of
Paul Robeson.  Robeson was already a successful
stage performer, and his screen charisma and strong
bass voice would eventually make him a film star
as well.  His signature performance was "Old Man River"
in "Showboat" from 1936.
Robeson has a dual role.  He plays an escaped convict and
con man who imposters as a Reverend.  He also plays the
Reverend's brother, who is as moral as the Reverend is
immoral.  (The roles of good and evil twins apparently is
as old as the craft of film-making.)  Both Robesons have an
interest in blank-faced young Mercedes Gilbert, whose
mother Julia Theresa Russell unwisely trusts the Reverend and
prefers him as a suitor.
The film's conclusion is a mess.  There is a murder,
or is there, which quickly becomes meaningless when the
last half of the film is revealed to be just a dream.
The dream ending was a desperate measure for Micheaux,
who had run out of money and was having trouble getting
the film past the National Board of Review.  The board
objected to the miserably unhappy ending and the depiction
of a Reverend as a complete scoundrel.
If "Body and Soul" was a Hollywood production, it
would be considered racist.  The dialogue is an
offensive dialect, and many of the supporting characters
are foolish and even stereotypical.  Perhaps the
comparison of black characters to white characters
is in itself racist.  I have no solution to this
dilemma.
The film's editing is amateurish and jarring at times.
The technique of narrowing the picture to a small circle
to highlight a facial expression (with the rest of the
screen darkened) was also used in "Birth of a Nation",
but soon went with the silents.
Despite the film's technical, budgetary and censorship
problems, "Body and Soul" is still an interesting film.
Robeson is an impressive screen presence, and Micheaux
clearly put everything he could into the film.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
