Title
Review for Flintstones, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Dragan Antulov
These days, we are witnessing the deluge of films based on
old, cult TV shows. Most of the times, the fans of these
shows shudder thinking what could Hollywood hacks of the
present do with the memories of their past. But, some five
or six years ago, there weren't that many movies and the
trend didn't look that depressing. So, the people who, like
the author of this review, grew up watching FLINTSTONES,
popular 1960s animated series about "modern Stone Age"
family, weren't particularly worried when the word came
about live action remake. After all, the producer behind the
project was Steven Spielberg and, if anything else, at least
the special effects would be good.
The plot revolves about Flintstones, family set in fictious
Stone Age "town" of Bedrock, whose members enjoy the
lifestyle of 1950s middle class America. Fred Flinstone
(John Goodman) works in the quarry, and one day he helps his
best friend and neighbour Barney Rubble (Rick Moranis) and
his wife Betty (Rosie O'Donnell) to adopt a baby. To return
the favour, Barney switches his results of aptitude test
with Fred, and, based on that, Fred gets well-paid job in
management. But, of course, this is just a sham - corrupt
official Cliff Vandercave (Kyle MacLachlan) and his sultry
secretary Sharon Stone (Halle Berry) need a scapegoat for
their embezzlement scheme. In the meantime, Fred's wife
Wilma (Elizabeth Perkins) must face her mother (Elizabeth
Taylor) who can't stand Fred.
On the superficial level, THE FLINTSTONES did the excellent
job in bringing the animated series to life. Computer
effects are flawless, and the costumes, settings and other
details are authentic for all the fans of the show.
Unfortunately, problems with this film start with inadequate
casting - Rick Moranis is too thin for the role of Barney,
while the cartoon Betty used to be much skinnier than Rosie
O'Donnell. But the greatest problem of all is plot, or to be
precise, the lack of plot. Some thirty six screenwriters
made sure that the plot of the film is lame, original
characters one-dimensional, and many elements of the story,
like embezzlement and inter-office politics, totally
incomprehensible for the little children, the main targeted
audience of this film. Result is almost unwatchable mess,
occasionally saved mostly by excellent acting (Elizabeth
Perkins was right on mark as Wilma) and one of the classic
example of mortal Hollywood disease known as "high concept".
After great hype, movie quickly sank into oblivion and the
fans of the show returned to the animated version. All in
all, film isn't that bad, but only the hard core fans and
nostalgics can find more than guilty pleasure in it.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  John Goodman, Rick Moranis, Elizabeth Perkins,
           Rosie O'Donnell, Kyle MacLachlan, Halle Berry,
           Elizabeth Taylor.
Screenplay:  Tom S. Parker & Jim Jennewein and Steven E. de Souza.
Director:  Brian Levant.
     I decided to try something different for THE FLINTSTONES.  I put
aside my critical notebook and tried to clear my mind of all
preconceptions: the thirty-two writers who worked on the script; the
mind-numbing marketing blitz; the dread at the appearance of yet
another TV retread.  And I resolved to let it be what it would be, to
tell myself, Norman Vincent Peale-like, "I will enjoy this film on its
own level."  Do you know what?  It almost worked.  As silly, clunky and
repetitive as THE FLINTSTONES may be, it's still something of a guilty
pleasure, at least on a visual level.  While it's no film for the ages,
neither is it a modern stone-age travesty.
     THE FLINTSTONES gathers the familiar cast of Bedrock denizens from
the 1960's animated series:  Fred (John Goodman) and Wilma (Elizabeth
Perkins) and Barney (Rick Moranis) and Betty (Rosie O'Donnell).  As the
film opens, the Rubbles are just adopting Bam-Bam, thanks to a generous
loan from Fred which improves their credit standing.  As a gesture of
gratitude, Barney secretly switches his results with Fred's on a
management training test at the quarry, knowing Fred did poorly.
Suddenly, Fred finds himself out of the quarry and into the front
office, unbeknownst to him to serve as a yabba-dabba-dupe in an
embezzlement scheme concocted by vice-president Cliff Vandercave (Kyle
MacLachlan) and sexy secretary Sharon Stone (Halle Berry).  Will
success spoil Fred Flintstone?
     It's tempting to call THE FLINTSTONES imaginative, but there
really wouldn't seem to be all that much imagination involved in
directly transferring the animated series to live action.  Every house,
every costume, even every sound effect is instantly recognizable to
anyone who grew up with "The Flintstones" either in first run or
syndication.  Of course, that is the logic behind the glut of TV-based
films:  bring in that elusive older audience with the
nostalgia/recognition factor.  If my audience was any indication, it's
working with THE FLINTSTONES.  While the kids screeched with delight at
the slapstick, the biggest laugh from the adults was reserved for Rosie
O'Donnell's pitch-perfect duplication of Betty's trademark giggle.  The
dinosaur appliances, courtesy of Jim Henson's Creature Shop, are
expertly realized, and the Bedrock town life scenes are well-staged by
director Brian Levant.  I generally found myself entertained while I
took in the production design and admired its whimsical authenticity.
     There is, however, one major problem with the casting, and it
comes as quite a surprise.  While it would seem that John Goodman was
born to play Fred Flintstone, he never looks quite comfortable.
Physically, he pulls his punches more often than not, as though he
didn't understand just how far overboard he should go in a live action
cartoon; in his delivery, he struggles with the blustering voice
originated by Alan Reed, and appears to be re-routing it through Jackie
Gleason (whose "Honeymooners" character Ralph Kramden was the model for
Fred Flintstone).  Goodman's relatively weak Fred unfortunately
overshadows his solid castmates.  Rick Moranis is an appealingly
amiable Barney, and Rosie O'Donnell, while not ideal physically as
Betty, had the mannerisms down pat.  Elizabeth Perkins has the
low-impact role as Wilma, but she too is on target.  And it may be
worth the price of admission just to see Elizabeth Taylor, as Wilma's
mother, tied up and gagged and lying on the ground.
     One interesting by-product came out of seeing THE FLINTSTONES:  I
realized that I had under-appreciated the ADDAMS FAMILY films.  Like
those films, THE FLINTSTONES primarily offers as its humor variations
on a single theme.  But the ADDAMS outings at least seemed occasionally
inspired; THE FLINTSTONES is content just to show up and toss off the
expected "rock" and "stone" puns.  This is especially disconcerting
when a FLINTSTONES franchise may be as close to a sure thing as there
is in Hollywood.  The first time around, THE FLINTSTONES' visuals are a
light-hearted kick, but there's nothing more to do.  I could write that
sequel given a day and a half ... and a $40 million budget.

Author
Jon A Webb
     THE FLINTSTONES is Spielberg's trompe l'oeil production of the
Hanna-Barbara cartoon series, and it is much better than the original.
The artistic trick here is to combine the technical wizardry of
JURASSIC PARK with a serious attempt to match the style of the cartoon
series as much as possible.  Thus we have John Goodman looking
remarkably like Fred, Rosie O'Donnell giggling just like Betty, and
live-action versions of all the familiar opening and closing scenes
from the cartoon.  You're probably aware of this if you've watched any
media in the last few weeks, because of all the commercial tie-ins.
     Comparing this film with, say, THE ADDAMS FAMILY, the latter is
much the superior work.  It had a core point (acceptance of weirdness)
that just isn't present here. Arguable, the Addams family film had more
to work with, but a lot of what was in the film was an elaboration of
the core philosophy from the television series.  The difference is,
here only the style of the series has been elaborated, and the core
meaning of the work is still empty and shallow.  In the Addams family
films, particularly the sequel, the ideas take off in the more rich
environment of film, and say something new.
     I think that I must be getting a little tired of Spielberg's
production values, since they seem to be so perfectly respected here,
with every possible joke about the mixture of modern and prehistoric
times made, and made well, and I still found the film a little dull.
The film just never seems to take off.  Of course, neither did the
cartoon series--it was definitely second-rate stuff--but here you
also have the certain knowledge that every possible commercial angle of
this artistic work will be explored.
     The style of the film, as I implied above, is very consistent, and
a great elaboration of the cartoon series. The art direction and script
are great, and full of all sorts of jokes about prehistoric suburban
life.  The direction is great in reconstructing the style and feeling
of the original as much as possible.
     Goodman is great as Fred, and Rosie O'Donnell is a standout as
Betty.  She brings a kind of nervous, luscious sensuality to the role.
I thought Rick Moranis delivered a little less than he should have as
Barney, and Elizabeth Perkins just disappeared into her roles as Wilma:
she wasn't asked to do much, but she didn't do anything extra either.
I found Kyle MacLachlan's performance as the evil Yuppie a
disappointment; I'd like to see him really connect with a role as he
did with Lynch, but this isn't it.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Directed by     Brian Levant
Written by      Tom S. Parker, Jim Jennewein, and Steven E. deSouza
Cast John Goodman, Eliabeth Perkins, Rick Moranis, Rosie O'Donnell,
     Kyle MacLachlan, Halle Berry, and Eliabeth Taylor
MPAA Rating     PG
Running Time    92 minutes
     If the very first scene--a dusty quarry filled with giant boulders
and earthmoving dinosaurs--doesn't fill you with a giddy gross of riant
recognition, then you're probably in the wrong film.  THE FLINTSTONES
is an immensely enjoyable all-ages attraction that's the first true
treat of the summer.
     Remember Fred (Goodman)?  He's that hearty, blue-collar bloke who
spends his days in a quarry and his nights in an (bowling) alley.  As
the film opens, his day is nearly done and, astride his 'sauris, he's
ready and waiting for the 5 o'clock bird.  Watching from afar is Cliff
Vandercave (MacLachlan), a young exec who's scheming with his secretary
(Berry) to steal funds from the firm.  All Cliff needs to get rich
quick is to find the perfect patsy....
     John Goodman is probably the closest we'll come to a man called
Flintstone.  His enthusiasm is bigger than his shirt size (no small
feat there!) and, though he never gets the accent quite right, he's the
obvious anchor of the film.  But he's not the focus.  THE FLINTSTONES
is an ensemble effort with a barefoot cast that works overtime to be as
obviously appealing as Goodman.
     Elizabeth Perkins is the best of the rest.  She nails her role of
Wilma square on the red-head, right down to her priceless delivery of
the word "Frad!" Less effective are the Rubbles.  Rick Moranis plays
Barney dumber than his cartoon counterpart, but he's still more
believable than Rosie O'Donnell, passable but all wrong as Betty.  Hee
hee hee hee.
     Remaining roles include Elizabeth Taylor, looking good and
sounding great as Fred's mother-in-law, Halle Berry as the seductive
secretary Sharon Stone, and Harvey Korman as the voice of a persnickety
"dict-a-bird."  Living cartoons Jay Leno, Richard Moll, and Jonathan
Winters also make appearances.  And watch for cameos from William Hanna
and Joseph Barbera.
     THE FLINTSTONES isn't as manic as one might expect and you can
blame director Brian Levant for that.  The happy helmer never tries too
many of those Barry Sonnefieldish tricks that made RAISING ARIZONA and
ADDAMS FAMILY VALUES such perfect cartoons.  His camera stays still,
but, with so many gags *already* in the film, any lack of tricky
technique goes by almost unnoticed.
     The writing, done ala "round table" despite three "official"
credits, is great.  Steven Spielrock and Company have unearthed every
stone-age pun possible and then some.  Sample dialogue from Fred:
"There's 4,000 people in the world!  Who needs the Rubbles?"
     The production design is equally rich and boasts more background
gags than a Zucker/Abrahams/Zucker film.  A newspaper reads "All the
news fit to chip."  A drive-in theater shows George Lucas' "Tar Wars."
And, best of all, a stone-age Warhol hangs on the wall at Slate and
Co.
     With so much obvious effort both before and behind the camera, THE
FLINTSTONES is surprisingly clunky.  The climax is rickety and many
other scenes seem shortened.  Were the producers afraid to take a good
thing too far?  Running a mere 92 minutes, THE FLINTSTONES should be
more seamless than it is.
     Since the entire film is a special-effect, some things look better
than others.  The props are all foam, of course, but the dinosaurs are
real--and I mean *real*--and that's what counts in Bedrock.
     The music, by David Newman, incorporates both songs and cues from
the TV show.  "The Twitch," performed by the renamed BC-52's, adds a
Sixties-flavor that isn't needed. (Male-dominated households
notwithstanding.)  How about Jurssaic grunge from Seattlerock?  (Sorry.)

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  John Goodman, Elizabeth Perkins, Rick Moranis,
           Rosie O'Donnell, Kyle MacLachlan, Halle Berry,
           Elizabeth Taylor 
Director:  Brian Levant 
Producer:  Bruce Cohen 
Screenplay:  Tom S. Parker, Jim Jennewein, and Steven E. de Souza  
          based on the Hanna/Barbera TV series 
Music:  David Newman 
Released by Universal Pictures 
Excerpts from an interview with Fred Flintstone: 
JB:  Fred, let's begin by talking a little about your reaction to  
     Universal Pictures' big-screen version of THE FLINTSTONES. 
JB:  That doesn't sound very enthusiastic.   
FF:  Frankly, I hoped for more.  I mean, the special effects are pretty  
     good, and the costumes and set design are impressive, but somehow  
     those guys on the screen don't always seem like me and Barney. 
FF:  The actor who plays Barney--Rick Moranis--isn't physically right  
     for the part.  Barney is short and stocky, but Rick is thin.   
     Similar problem with Rosie O'Donnell as Betty, except in reverse.   
     Betty is skinny; Rosie is ... not as skinny. 
JB:  How about John Goodman's performance as you?  Some have said he's  
     the perfect choice. 
FF:  Yup.  You know, when we heard there was going to be a major studio  
     production of THE FLINTSTONES, both Barney and I auditioned. 
JB:  How about Elizabeth Perkins as your wife? 
FF:  Her, I could believe.  She has Wilma down to a "T."  As for  
     Elizabeth Taylor as her mother ... (shudders).  The best line in the  
     whole picture comes from her, though:  "Wilma could have married  
     Elliot Firestone, the man who invented the wheel.  Instead, she  
     married Fred Flintstone, the man who invented the excuse." 
JB:  Script-wise, how do you think the movie fares? 
FF:  You've heard the stories that there were thirty-two writers, right? 
JB:  How about the plot?  Something about a middle manager at Slate  
     Construction, played by Kyle MacLachlan, and his secretary, played  
     by Halle Berry, making you their dupe so they can get rich while you  
     take the fall. 
JB:  Strictly from an entertainment perspective, how would you rate THE  
     FLINTSTONES?  Various critics have called it everything from "Yabba  
     Dabba Don't" to "Yabba Dabba Doo-Doo." 
JB:  Thank you for your time, Fred.  This has been an interesting  
     conversation.  If THE FLINTSTONES makes more than $100 million,  
     we'll talk to you again when the inevitable sequel comes out. 
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
