Title
Review for Ju Dou (1990)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Pedro Sena
I suppose that China is only at this day in time, been able to finally
discuss some of the problems which they have had for several centuries, and
the forms which are readier than most to show it, happen to be that of the
motion pictures.  And one of the first themes which I have seen, have dealt
mostly with the advent of women as second class citizens, servants to the
male superior, to whom she is basically a slave, a  mistress who has to bear
a boy, or they are dumped, or killed.
Zhang Yimou's first film ( to my knowledge ) is about a young lady that gets
bought out by a new master.  But he is rough, and unkind, and the new
mistress ends up receiving some solace in the friendship of one of the son's
in the clan.  But this fateful union proves to be terribly destructive.  The
affair produces a boy, who is brought up along, until one day, the couple's
affair is finally coming to a head.  The master of the house has become
disabled, and now is at the mercy of the mistress and her boyfriend.
However, as the child grows, he befriends the old man, though he
accidentally kills him.  And the old man has convinced the youngster that he
is the father, not the lover.  The young man grows angrier as time goes by,
and in the end kills the lover.  At that point
the mother sets the silk ( fabric dyeing ) factory on fire and puts an end
to the whole tragic affair, from the tainted marriage to the tragic love
affair.
It is interesting to notice that very much like the film which Zhang Yimou
would eventually do ( RAISE THE RED LANTERN ), the focus is strictly on the
event of the woman's involvement with her lover, which, has no choice but to
fall into a tragedy
since they are the ones violating the norm.  And it is convenient to notice
that by concentrating on the character's individual desires, the film pretty
much absolves the social atmosphere from its culpability in creating a
system where women are expendable depending on the desires of the master of
the house.  I suppose, that by doing this, the government can blame the
state of affairs on a system long gone, which
was corrupt, and which Mao Tse Tung tried to end.  And the film can find
funds, and avoid criticism.
In a more subtle manner, the film also decries the lack of modernization,
not only in the actual factory, but also in the way of thinking.  In the
beginning a buyer asks the
master why he does not upgrade his factory and modernize it, and the owner
dismisses it as not wishing to have too many people in there.  In other
words rugged individuality is the main reason why such a large country has
to be ruled with an iron fist...only to pay for it later.
The very attractive Gong Li, plays the role of Judou, and is actually very
good, though it appears that here she has the capacity of really becoming
very emotional, in contrast
to her role in LANTERN, which is so subdued.  The difference might just be
that in JuDou, the characters are commoners, where in LANTERN they are upper
class.
The film is nice, though very sad and tragic.  And it is well filmed, though
the symbolic edges during the film tend to appear a bit old for us, who have
seen so many films, but
very effective for a society that has not seen that many films.  And the
turn of events is actually very unexpected, which is really the product of a
well told story, something
which Zhang Yimou has definitely displayed in his work.

Author
Brian Koller
Director Zhang Yimou continued the success of
his earlier film "Red Sorghum" with "Ju Dou".
Both films starred actress Gong Li, and eventually
they would make seven films together.  Gong Li
became China's most well-known actress in the
west, while Yimou became the best-known director
from China.  Probably their best collaboration
was 1994's "To Live".
"Ju Dou" is named for Gong Li's character, a
beautiful peasant woman who is purchased by
textile mill owner Yang (Li Wei).  Yang is a
middle-aged man obsessed with having a son, so
as to continue the family dynasty.  But he is
impotent, and takes his frustrations out on
Ju Dou, as he has done with previous wives.
The film is set in China during the 1920s.
Yang has only one worker at his mill.  He is
Tianqing (Li Baotian), a distant nephew of Yang.
Lonely, lifelong bachelor Tianqing quickly falls
for Ju Dou, who turns to him as a protector from
her viciously abusive husband.  Taianqing gives
Ju Dou a child, which Yang believes to be his.
Yang soon becomes crippled, however, allowing
Tianqing and Ju Dou their chance at revenge.
The child, Tianbai (Zheng Jian), grows up believing
Yang to be his father, and lacks the director's
sympathy towards Tianqing's intimacy with
Ju Dou.
The script is sparse, with the story largely told
by cinematography.  The silk tapestries produced
by the mill have bright red and yellow colors, and
are the subject of endless close-ups, more so than
are the actors themselves.
What is the moral of "Ju Dou"?  It is a tragedy
of Shakespearean proportions.  It seems to condemn
the conservative, patrician morality of pre-revolutionary
China.  It suggests that defying that moral code
is not a good idea.  Also, don't beat your wife,
and don't judge your parents.  There may be other
messages as well: certainly "Ju Dou" has something
to say.
There is a death scene in this film that reminds
me of "The Godfather".  Remember Don Corleone having
a heart attack in the vineyards, with his grandson
standing over him and laughing?  The similar scene
here is revisited again, when Tianbai dumps a
passed-out Tianquin into the dye vat.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
In 1920s China, an old man, the owner of a dye factory, buys a beautiful
young wife.  He beats her every night because she has not produced 
children, an heir.  Meanwhile, his young wife and his (adopted) son have
an affair, which results in the birth of a child.  A tale of adultery,
revenge, and murder.  Even though it has superb photography and
excellent acting, the story falls flat and the film is primarily a
mediocre melodrama.
China (English subtitles), color, 1990, 94 minutes.
Director:  Zhang Yi-mou
     This film has received considerable publicity recently because the
Chinese government has repressed the film in China (the film is banned
there).  Also, the film has been nominated for a (U.S.) Academy Award
in the "Best Foreign Language Film" category.  The Chinese government
asked that the film be withdrawn from Academy Award consideration on the
grounds that it has not been screened in its country of origin, a point
of considerable controversy.
     The film is set in a dye factory in 1920s China.  The factory is
owned by a cruel old man, whose only laborer is his adopted son.  The
old man buys a beautiful young bride, Ju Dou, his third wife (he beat to
death the first two wives).  The old man is apparently impotent; every
night he savagely beats Ju Dou because she is not yet pregnant.  In one
scene, Ju Dou is tied up while the old man is beating her; he tells her
"when I buy an animal, I treat it as I wish, and you're no better than
an animal".
     Ju Dou and Tian-qing, the adopted son of the mill owner, are
attracted to each other.  One day when the old man is away, the pair
become lovers, with Ju Dou actively seducing Tian-qing.  Soon she is
pregnant with Tian-qing's child.  Shortly thereafter the old-man is 
crippled in an accident, and confined to a crude wheelchair.  The story
continues with the birth of the child, and the two lovers confronting
the social limits on their relationship (adultery being punishable by
death).
     The film is excellent in many respects.  The photography is
beautiful, the set design is very colorful, with shards of dyed cloth
hanging from the rafters of the dye factory.  The acting is generally
excellent, with a superb performance by Li Wei as the cruel, sadistic
factory owner who thinks he can make his wives pregnant by beating them.
The film Direction is good also (Director Zhang Yi-mou's earlier works
include RED SORGHUM).  Some of the writing is very good also.
     However, despite having so much going for it, the film quickly
turns into a predictable melodrama.  Because the story weakens so much
in the second half, the film is not as good as, for example, A GIRL FROM
HUNAN, or the soap-opera-ish THE REINCARNATION OF GOLDEN LOTUS.
     Although it is not as good as some other Chinese films (whether
from China, Taiwan, Hong Kong), the film suggests that the stagnation in
the film industry of China may be ending.  (The events in Tienamen
Square, and the crackdown afterward, seriously disrupted the film 
industry in China.)  I recommend the film to fans of melodrama, and to
anyone that appreciates Chinese films.
Distribution.  In its first U.S. release; currently (3/15) showing in
the San Francisco area (San Francisco: Gateway Cinema).  May be 
available in other areas also, showing primarily in "arthouse" type
theaters.  The U.S. distributor for the film is Miramax Films.
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU
