Title
Review for Harry, un ami qui vous veut du bien (2000)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
WITH A FRIEND LIKE HARRY (2000) / ***
   aka HARRY, UN AMI QUI VOUS VEUT DU BIEN [French; English subtitles]
Directed by Dominik Moll. Screenplay by Gilles Marchand and Moll. Starring
Laurent Lucas, Sergi López, Mathilde Seigner. Running time: 117 minutes.
Rated AA for mature subject matter by the MFCB. Reviewed on September 
23rd, 2001.
Synopsis: Michel (Lucas) and his wife Claire (Seigner) are en route to 
their rustic summer cabin with their three unruly daughters. In a rest 
stop bathroom, Michel chances to meet Harry Ballestero (López), a 
childhood acquaintance. Harry and his girlfriend (Sophie Guillemin) 
finagle an invite to the cabin, and soon Harry has enmeshed himself in 
Michel's personal life. Are Harry's deeds truly as philanthropic as he 
claims, or are his true intentions far darker?
Review: "With A Friend Like Harry" is reminiscent of "Suspicion", amongst 
other Hitchcock films. In both, the plot builds slowly; although we know 
straight away that something not quite right is going on, it remains 
subtle, unpronounced and reveals itself bit by bit. The result is a 
splendid character drama, a guest-that-wouldn't-leave story that begins as 
merely creepy and becomes gradually more disturbing. The film's success 
hinges on the performances of its leads, and López in particular is up to 
the task. He lends a sinister edge to Harry: he smiles a little too much, 
lingers a little too long. But López is careful not to take this too far; 
it is not clear, at first, whether Harry is malevolent or just socially 
inept. Lucas, meanwhile, is very good in the everyman role; we can easily 
put ourselves in his place and wonder just how we would handle someone 
like Harry. Moll's direction is assured, and despite its sometimes mundane 
aspects (especially early on), "Harry" never lags. Like Hitchcock, if 
there are no thrills at hand, Moll fills the silence with humour -- but 
never so much that the atmosphere is ruined. Only the movie's rather 
abrupt ending disappoints, preventing what could be the intriguing 
fruition of the relationship between Harry and Michel. But then, Hitch's 
endings -- "Suspicion" included -- weren't always the greatest, either.
Copyright Š 2001 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html
  |     Shannon Patrick Sullivan    |         shannon@mun.ca          |       
  +---------------------------------+---------------------------------+
/  Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)   go.to/drwho-history  \
\__ We are all in the gutter but some of us are looking at the stars __/

Author
Steve Rhodes
Dominik Moll's WITH A FRIEND LIKE HARRY (HARRY, UN AMI QUI VOUS VEUT DU 
BIEN), a quirky and eventually dark comedy, raises intriguing questions.  
Can one have too good of a friend?  And what does it take to remove a 
20-year writer's block, especially if the writer isn't aware that he has 
it in the first place?
When we first meet Michel (Laurent Lucas) and his wife, Claire (Mathilde 
Seigner, VENUS BEAUTY INSTITUTE), they aren't happy campers.  Driving an 
old jalopy without air-conditioning, they have to endure the heat-flamed 
temper tantrums of their three young girls screaming in the backseat.  
It's a frustratingly familiar scene to which most parents can easily 
relate.
As Michel tries to beat the heat by splashing water on his face in a 
public restroom, an old classmate of his, Harry (Sergi López, AN AFFAIR 
OF LOVE), comes up and shakes his hand.  Looking like he's thinking, 
"Who is this clown?", Michel has no idea who this man with the frozen, 
silly grin on his face is.  Only after Harry reveals enough shared 
school trivia does Michel realize that maybe, just maybe, he may have 
known him a couple of decades ago.
The persistent Harry finagles a dinner invitation from Michel for 
himself and his voluptuous girlfriend, Plum (Sophie Guillemin), whom the 
credits list as Prune -- go figure.  Harry, who is rolling in the dough, 
turns out to be a big fan of Michel's school writings, including his 
poem ("The Danger in the Skin of Night") and his unfinished science 
fiction novel ("The Flying Monkeys," about gibbons with propeller hats).  
Harry is such an enormous admirer of Michel's work that he can recite 
Michel's poem by heart, which surprises Claire who didn't know that 
Michel ever wrote anything.
The ever-perturbed but resilient Michel has more problems than growing 
girls.  He calls his parents "modest pains," which is an understatement.  
Always butting in where they're not wanted, their most recent and 
unappreciated gift is a new, bright pink -- they insist it's fuchsia -- 
bathroom in the country farmhouse that Michel has been working on 
restoring every summer.  
But not to worry since Harry, whose motto is "Excess is the only way to 
fulfillment," is there to help Michel.  The story's dark second half, 
full of morbid humor, concerns Harry's unsolicited help with every 
aspect of Michel's life.
Only the story's predictability and the plot's long setup detract from 
its enjoyment.  The wickedly funny film leaves you with lots to talk 
about when you leave.
WITH A FRIEND LIKE HARRY runs a little too long at 1:57.  The film is in 
French with English subtitles.  It is rated R for language, some 
violence and a scene of nudity and would be acceptable for most 
teenagers.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Laura Clifford
WITH A FRIEND LIKE HARRY (HARRY, UN AMI QUI VOUS VEUT DU BIEN)
Michel (Laurent Lucas, "Pola X") doesn't realize that he's slowly sinking 
under the weight of his responsibilities.  On the road to a vacation home,
which itself is a major renovation burden, with his stressed wife and three
small girls, Michel pulls into a rest stop for some relief from the heat.
In the washroom, Michel is approached by Harry, (Sergi Lopez, "An Affair of
Love") an old schoolmate he hasn't seen in twenty years and barely
remembers.  The next thing Michel knows, Harry and his girlfriend Plum
(Sophie Guillemin, "L'Ennui") are joining his vacation in Writer/Director
Dominik Moll's "With a Friend Like Harry."
While Michel is struggling, Harry lives the enviable good life of a man
of inheritted wealth, yet Harry immediately exhibits an almost
obsessive regard for Michel.  Harry shocks Michel by reciting a long poem,
"The Dagger in the Skin of Night," which Michel had published in the 
school paper two decades earlier.  Plum even pipes in that Harry has often
recited it to her.  Michel's wife Claire (Mathilde Seigner, 
"Venus Beauty Institute") is both wary of Harry and intrigued by this 
unknown aspect of her mate while we, the audience, begin to wonder just
how random Harry's appearance in that rest stop really was.
As if Harry's invasion weren't enough, Michel is annoyed to discover that his
meddling parents have taken it upon themselves to remodel the old farmhouse's
bathroom in a garish, womblike pink.  Harry observes this, then the breakdown
of the old family car, and begins to help.  His first gesture is shocking
enough - he buys a new 4 wheel drive SUV for Michel.  Then his actions begin
to get a lot more personal.
Moll seems to be going for claustrophobic Hitchcockian suspense, even choosing
the only male name ever to appear in a Hitchcock film for his own, yet "With
a Friend Like Harry" feels a lot like George Sluizer's 1988 Spoorloos ("The 
Vanishing), another film that features a fateful rest stop, an old farmhouse 
and earthy excavations.  Moll knows how to build tension, apparent at the onset
with that nightmarish family car trip, yet ultimately is unable to sustain it.
The ambiguity surrounding Harry's persona and motivations lets the air out of
the film's climax.
Still, the film has more going for it than not.  Art Director Michel Barthelemy
gets just the right level of fixer-upperness for the beautifully set vacation
home to see the fanciful possibilities before reality sets in.  Director of 
Photography Matthieu Poirot-Delpech is able to capture that house, the roads
to it, and even Michel himself in lights both flattering and sinister.
Sound Engineer Francois Maurel has done an expert job capturing ominous
rumblings, nightmarish whirrings and staccato shrieks while original music by
David Sinclair Whittaker provides effective (if a bit obvious) flourishes to
the visuals.
"With a Friend Like Harry" (the original English title was "Harry, He's Here
to Help") was nominated for 9 Cesars (the French Oscar), winning Best Director
and Best Actor.  While I appreciate Lopez' performance, I found Lucas to have
the more difficult job - one which he navigates adroitly.  Seigner fleshes
out complexities for Claire while Guillemin makes a simple character positively
endearing.  Moll has proved he can create mood and work with actors, yet his
storytelling, while psychologically detailed on many levels, doesn't fully
satisfy yet, with this, his second film.  I for one am looking forward to his
third.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
SSG Syndicate
    Harry's like a subversively black comedy version of "The Man Who Came to Dinner" as interpreted by German-born, France-based director Dominik Moll via Alfred Hitchcock with nods to French film-makers Henri-George Clouzot and Claude Chabrol. Let me explain. On a hot summer day, bickering Michel (Laurent Lucas) and Claire (Mathilde Seigner) and their three cranky, squalling daughters, all under the age of five, are driving in a car with no air-conditioning when they pause at a rest stop. In the men's room, Michel, who's enmeshed in domestic chaos and strapped for cash, meets Harry (Sergi Lopez), who's now a wealthy businessman and remembers him from school. Perhaps they were classmates 20 years ago; Michel can't recall. But Harry obviously idolizes him and invites himself and his fiancee, Plum (Sophie Guillemin), to Michel's half-finished vacation home in the French countryside. Soon Claire's suspicious of their bizarre, lingering guests, who are overtly charming (de!
termined to "solve every problem") and seductively generous (giving them a new SUV) but also hedonistic and overbearing. And Harry's downright creepy in his homoeroticism. By the time misguided Michel realizes what's happening, they're all in mortal danger. Charismatic Sergi Lopez treads that subtle line between charmingly pleasant and obsessively psychotic, while Laurent Lucas rings true as the stressed-out husband. While Dominik Moll evokes memories of "Strangers on a Train" and "Apartment Zero," he still can't elude the sinister cliches of the genre and fails to sufficiently delineate Michel's gullible psychological discontent. Plus, there's a weak conclusion. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "With a Friend Like Harry" is a droll, deceptive, insidious 8. It's a wicked psychological thriller.

Author
Robin Clifford
Every so often, a filmmaker, usually European, takes on the task of making 
a "Hitchcockian thriller." Paul Verhoeven was successful with his lurid and 
sexy 1983 flick, "The Fourth Man." George Sluizer gave the master an even 
better turn in the Dutch/French produced "The Vanishing." Now, West German 
born Dominik Moll takes a shot at Hitch with his own psychological 
thriller, "With a Friend Like Harry...." 
Alfred Hitchcock still holds the mantle of master of the chilling thriller, 
but it is nice to see a film that ably pays homage to the late, great 
filmmaker. Helmer Moll, working with a script co-written with Gilles 
Marchand, begins his film on a discordant note as we watch a young couple 
and their three restless kids drive off to the French countryside for 
vacation. The kids are cranky, it's hot and the drive is taking on 
interminable proportions for dad, Michel (Laurent Lucas). 
When the family takes a break at a rest stop, Michel meets a man who claims 
to know him. Harry (Sergi Lopez) tells him that they knew each other in 
school, years before, but Michel can't recall the man at all. This doesn't 
stop Harry from insinuating himself and his buxom fiancée, Plum (Sophie 
Guillemin), on Michel and his wife, Claire (Mathilde Seigner), and their 
vacation plans. The couple has an old farmhouse, which they are struggling 
to restore, in the countryside and the newcomers promptly plunk themselves 
down to stay, changing their own plans to go see the Materhorn. 
Everything starts off seemingly innocent, but the odd-acting Harry 
definitely has his share of enigmatic quirks. Late one night, while Michel 
is taking care of the baby, he announces that he needs to eat a raw egg 
after each orgasm to improve his virility. On a shopping expedition with 
Claire, Harry decides to buy the family an expensive SUV, against Michel's 
protest. The old school chum appears just to be helping his friend to take 
care of "life's problems," but how he takes care of them is the crux of 
"With a Friend Like Harry...." 
In the best tradition of Hitch, Dominik Moll uses many of the old master's 
tricks to depict violence and convey real tension to his audience. Mayhem 
takes place all through the film, but it is done almost exclusively off 
screen, cleverly making the viewer build the horror of the scene in his/her 
mind. Additionally, the score, by David Sinclair Whittaker, has the same 
tense quality that the great Bernard Herrmann gave to many of Hitchcock's 
films ? who can ever forget the screeching violins in "Psycho?" 
The cast, with one exception, maintains a low-key presence throughout the 
film. Sergi Lopez, as the enigmatic and dangerous Harry, gives a psycho 
edge to his performance that conveys volumes with a wicked gleam of the eye 
or an overconfident smirk on his lips. Right from the start, his outward 
affability carries an edge to it as Harry goes about his business of 
insinuating himself into Michel's life. Harry carries a lot of baggage from 
his past, including a long-standing but hidden obsession for Michel. No 
explanation is offered for Harry's bizarre, deadly behavior, keeping us in 
the dark about his motives. This is a problem as the enigma about Harry is 
carried too long and answers to our questions are left dangling in the end. 
The production, oftentimes shot with a dark, sinister quality by Matthieu 
Poirot-Delpech, maintains the edgy nature that Moll needs to convey to keep 
the chills in his thriller. Actor Lopez isn't going to replace Anthony 
Perkins's Norman Bates as the quintessential movie monster, but with a 
friend like Harry.... 
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com 

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Have you ever been out in public and encountered somebody who knows you, yet
you don't have a clue who the heck they are?  You know, you just play along
until, hopefully, they go away?  That's the basic gist of the new French
thriller, Harry, He's Here to Help.  It's creepy and unnerving when
contrasted with Hannibal's campy gore,
Harry begins with a scene that could be a flashback to every awful family
car trip you've ever been on, meaning it's hot, cramped and there's a whole
lot of yelling and bickering.  In a rest stop men's room, Michel (Laurent
Lucas) notices a man grinning at him as he enjoys a few moments of relief
from the long, sweaty trip to his family's rundown vacation home.  The man
introduces himself as Harry Balestrero (Sergi López, An Affair of Love), a
former grade-school classmate that Michel just can't remember.  After
rattling off the names of a few of their mutual classmates, Michel becomes
convinced he knows Harry, and the two men shake hands and head for their
cars.
In the parking lot, Harry and his curvy girlfriend Prune (Sophie Guillemin)
offer to take Michel and his wife Claire (Mathilde Seigner, Venus Beauty
Institute) out for drinks.  Michel and Claire decline, as their three young
daughters are just too worn out, but since their well-to-do counterparts
seem to be aimlessly wandering around Europe with no time constraints, the
two couples decide to meet at Michel's fixer-upper.
After they've had a few drinks, Harry brings up the topic of poetry and
astonishes his hosts by reciting, word for word, a poem called "The Dagger
in the Skin of Night" that Michel wrote as a child.  As if that weren't
enough, he begins to narrate passages from the first chapter of a novel
(called "Flying Monkeys") that Michel abandoned as an elementary school
writer.  Michel and Claire are taken aback, but since Harry seems to be a
nice, honest man, they seem to brush the incident aside.
Long story short, Harry begins to act more and more strangely, buying Michel
and Claire a brand-new SUV and partaking in some bizarre post-coital eating
rituals as he slowly worms his way into their lives.  He's a cross between a
slightly more bent Tom Ripley (as in The Talented Mr.) and a much more
intelligent Buck (as in Chuck and).  Harry is a film that could be set
anywhere and feature any kind of protagonist, but it works so much better
when you introduce a malevolent character into the life of a young, married
couple (kids optional) at just the right time, and watch the sparks fly (a
la Pacific Heights).  López is great as Harry, exuding the same silent type
of lunacy that Bob Hoskins perfected in Felicia's Journey.  Lucas and
Seigner are both very likeable, thereby doing their jobs in creating
characters that viewers can root for.
To say Harry is Hitchcockian might be the understatement of the year.
Harry's character gets its name from two of Hitch's '50s flicks - The
Trouble With Harry and The Wrong Man, where Henry Fonda played Manny
Balestrero. The story brings to mind another '50s classic from Hitchcock -
Strangers on a Train, which was based on a novel written by Patricia
Highsmith.  She also penned Ripley, so it comes as no surprise that Harry,
Ripley and Strangers' Bruno Antony are all smooth, charming sociopaths that
immediately rub you the wrong way despite not doing anything to warrant such
feelings (and their names all end in the letter "y," so you know the Puffy
jury really blew it).
Writer/director Dominik Moll, who, together with Criminal Lovers' François
Ozon, has made France the new creepy capital of the world (well, second to
that rest stop I just visited in Lodi, Ohio), has fashioned an outstanding
second feature after working as an assistant director on Laurent Cantet's
Human Resources.  The brightly photographed Harry also shares a
cinematographer (Matthieu Poirot-Delpech) and co-writer (Gilles Marchand)
with the drab but entertaining Resources.  López, Moll and the film's
editing (by The Dreamlife of Angels' Yannick Kergoat) and sound all won
César Awards (the film was nominated in just about every other category, as
well).
1:55 - R for language, some violence and a scene of nudity

Author
Dennis Schwartz
WITH A FRIEND LIKE HARRY (Harry, un ami qui vous veut du bien) (director/writer:
Dominik Moll; screenwriter: Gilles Marchand; cinematographer: Matthieu
Poirot-Delpech; editor: Yannick  Kergoat; cast: Laurent Lucas (Michel), Sergi
López (Harry), Mathilde Seigner (Claire), Sophie Guillemin (Plum), Liliane
Rovčre (Mother),  Dominique Rozan (Father), Michel Fau (Eric),  Laurie Caminata
(Sarah), Victoire de Koster (Jeanne), Lorena Caminata (Iris); Runtime: 117;
Miramax Zoë/Diaphana Films; 2001-France) 
German-born director Dominik Moll's second feature, a comic thriller in French,
is more like a Chabrol than a Hitchcock film, though a comparison to Hitch's
"Strangers on a Train" is a reasonable one. Its theme could be that a
comfortable, air-conditioned car, can help solve a lot of domestic problems. Or
more mysteriously,  it's a look at how an urban man who is stuck in the rat-race
of modern life has awakened his dark side. 
Michel (Laurent Lucas), who teaches Japanese businessmen French for a living in
Paris, and his sometimes sarcastic but always pretty wife, Claire (Mathilde
Seigner), are a typical nuclear couple in their thirties who are on a stressful
family summer vacation in their fix-it-up stone farmhouse. They have decided to
take a two hour ride to visit his parents in the middle of a heatwave, as the
first we see of them is in the car ride. With no air conditioning and three
whining young daughters in the back seat, the couple can't take the trip without
having a splitting headache and stopping off at a rest area. 
At the public bathroom, Michel meets an old school acquaintance Harry (Sergi
Lopez). He does not recognize or even remember who Harry is, but Harry recalls
everything about him including a poem he wrote in the school magazine and a
sci-fi story he started but never completed entitled "Flying Monkeys," and that
his father (Rozan) is a retired dentist who gave him a bridge when he was a
youngster. The usually beaming Harry's travelling companion is the voluptuous
Plum (Guillemin), someone he enjoys having sex with and is nice but not overly
endowed with brains. They are off to vacation in the Matterhorn, but because of
this accidental meeting with Michel he changes his plans and inveigles his way
into going to Michel's house as a guest. Michel has called the trip off to his
dad's place because one of the girl's has an earache. 
Harry greatly admires Michel's writing ability and has memorized that high
school poem of his, reciting it from memory to the surprised Claire. She never
even realized her husband wrote. Harry's new agenda is to get Michel to begin
writing again, as he tries to be helpful to him by offering him financial
assistance. Nice-guy Michel turns it down and doesn't know what to make of
Harry's friendship, and is startled to learn that when his old car breaks down
Harry buys him a brand new fully-equipped, air-conditioned SUV. This is
something that Michel doesn't want but Harry, who drives a new Mercedes, is
someone who believes every problem could be solved. 
Michel and Claire also have another unwanted gift bestowed upon them, as his
overbearing parents surprise him by fixing up his bathroom. The only problem is
they pick a garish fuchsia color, which goes against the grain of their quiet
country lifestyle and stands out against the rest of the house in a vulgar way.
Harry sets it upon himself to help Michel solve his domestic problems so he can
write again, and soon dead family bodies are turning up all over the place. Even
though the boyish looking Harry is an affable guy and Plum gets along great with
the kids, the couple feel uncomfortable with Harry. There's something strange
about him that they can't put their finger on. 
The film's virtues are: the great acting job by Lopez, it is accomplished by
slowly allowing us to see how really deranged his character is; the twists in
the story that make it hard to guess what comes next, which gives us a bit of a
shock at what is taking place as the story carefully builds toward its ironic
ending; plus, there's the attempt to explain why Harry's so obsessed with
Michel, which gives us an intellectual reason to enjoy the film. The film is
done with wit and a sense of justifiable psychological chills. It is a
frightening tale, but it is done in such a humorous manner that you might not
realize how twisted it is until you start making a body count. It's most glaring
fault is that it just seems to be too clever for its own good, as we never learn
just what Harry's motivations are. It seems Harry thinks that the ordinary
Michel is similar to him in spirit and that he is a projection of Michel's
repressed impulses, and that Michel is someone who needs his help. With his
help, Michel could be a great writer and wouldn't be weighed down by a
bothersome family and forced to appease everyone... . Sometimes a reader reads
more into a poem than what was really there! 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ 

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
     A chance meeting during a trip brings together two men, a 
gregarious extrovert and a cautious introvert, in a bizarre relationship 
that could have deadly repercussions.  It's the armature for Alfred 
Hitchcock's classic Strangers on a Train, and here it's taken up by 
German-French writer-director Dominik Moll, and given a fascinating and 
wholly original treatment with a vaguely paranormal twist.
Michel (Laurent Lucas) is a man caught in the web of middle-class 
struggle.  He has a wife (Mathilde Seigner) and three little girls, a 
job with a modest income, a tumbledown fixer-upper of a vacation home, 
and meddlesome elderly parents.  En route to his country house, with the 
car sweltering and the kids whining, he runs into an old school friend 
(Sergi Lopez) in the bathroom of a highway rest stop. 
Or at least the guys says he's an old friend.  "Harry - class of 
'79," he says, thrusting out a glad hand.  Michel shrugs helplessly.  
"I'm sorry.." 
But Harry is not offended, and soon with his sloe-eyed and ripely 
sensuous fiancE9e Plum (Sophie Guillemin) he has insinuated himself as =
a houseguest into Michel's life.  At dinner he regales his bemused hosts 
with a reverential recitation of a poem Michel published in their high 
school magazine 20 years earlier.  "Are you still writing?" Harry asks.  
Michel shakes his head.  He no longer has time for that sort of thing...
Who the devil is this Harry?  He's wealthy beyond the point of 
caring, he's free as a bird, he has an adoring girlfriend who, he 
explains, isn't the brightest bulb in the lamp but has "an animal 
intelligence" and is a perfect bedmate.  And he only wants to help (the 
French title translates more closely as "Harry, A Friend Who Wishes You 
Well.")  Money is no object.  Nor, it gradually appears, is morality. 
"His motto is 'For every problem there's a solution,'" Plum tells 
Michel and his wife.  They might not be the solutions you or I, or 
Michel, would fix upon, but they have a certain pragmatic directness.  
He seems to have a residual hero-worship of Michel from their high 
school days, when he dated Michel's leftover girlfriend and memorized 
everything he wrote.  That Michel was a sort of ideal for him; and now, 
when he sees cares and responsibilities weighing his old friend down and 
keeping him from pursuing his youthful talents, it makes Harry mad.
With a Friend Like Harry is a gem of a psychological thriller, with 
a terrific cast.  Lopez won France's Best Actor Cesar for his creepily 
ingratiating Harry.  Moll's story, with its humor and its ominous 
suspense (an empty well in the back yard just begs for a body) never 
lets up.
But the greatest fun of the movie is trying to figure out Harry.  
Who is he?  Is he a real person at all?  Is he the dark side of Michel's 
nature?  Is he Satan (one of whose traditional nicknames is Harry)?  Is 
he just a well-meaning psychopath?  We can't make him out - that's the 
trouble with Harry..
But then that's a different Hitchcock movie.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   When someone I know comes back from a vacation, I feel
duty-bound to ask the obvious question: "How was it?"  Don't
you?  How many times did you get the reply, "Just awful...I
can't wait to get back to work."  I don't think I ever did.  More
likely: "Great...fabulous...it was beautiful...coulda stayed
another month."  We all know, though, that holidays away
from home can be hell one earth.  Enforced togetherness. 
Screaming kids.  Hot cars.  Delayed flights.  "I don't have
your reservation and we're full up, sir."  Rain every day.  In
Dominik Moll's scary Hitchcockian thriller "With a friend like
Harry..." we meet a couple who didn't need any help from
Harry to have a perfectly miserable time.  The picture opens
on Michel Laurent Lucas), on his way by car with wife and
kids to visit his parents and to fix up his summer home.  The
smallest of the three daughters is crying all the way because
of the heat, the middle kid had a lollipop that fell on the floor
and she screams for another, and a third demands loudly to
take a ride on a swing.  Michel's wife Claire (Mathilde
Seigner) is overly warm and frustrated while Michel, faced by
the taunts and shrieks of four women, is probably thinking
he'd rather be back in Paris at his job teaching French to
Japanese residents.
   Just when things seem unable to worsen, Michel meets
Harry (Sergi Lopez) in the men's room of a service station. 
He doesn't recognize the man as having been in Michel's
high-school class, but the 34-year-old Harry, who is travleing
with his bimbo girl friend Plum (Sophie Guillemin), not only
recalls Michel but can even recite his classmate's poem
which was printed in the school literary magazine.  Harry's a
charmer, all right, but Michel--like us in the audience- senses
something's not quite right about him.  From the earliest
moment, just before Harry re-introduces himself to Michel as
both are washing their hands, he stands silently before him
for half a minute or so with a sinister grin on his face.  
   In Dominik Moll's two-hour long  thriller, one
which almost veers into the territory of slasher movies but
wisely remains rooted in some malevolent reality, Michel and
his wife Claire at first welcome the new company, particularly
when Harry offers to drive them to their dilapidated summer
place in his new air-conditioned Mercedes.  But when the
super-rich, carefree title character--who is single, no kids, and
no need to work--buys Michel and Claire a new sports utility
vehicle--they are both astounded and becoming mighty
suspicious.
   They say that serial killer Ted Bundy got his many female
victims to trust him by being as charming as a fairy-tale
prince--not exactly a psycho of the Hannibal Lecter variety
but rather one who had his feet seemingly planted on the
earth but his infirm mind in some hellish place known only to
him.  If you want to know about Bundy, you can read the
newspaper articles about him, but if you want to get
emotionally in touch with the type of sicko he was, see "With
a Friend Like Harry."  Moll has given us a black comedy with
superior performances from the entire ensemble, which
features Sophie Guillemin as the pleasure-loving girl friend
who is at first admired by all but later considered a pea-
brained cow by the host.  Sergi Lopez, known to cineastes for
his role in the sometimes puzzling "An Affair of Love," plays
the role like a fairly normal, albeit incredibly generous, guest,
until gradually he goes off the deep end--the logical extension
of his philosophy that "if you don't like something [a car, a
parent, a girl friend, a screaming kid], simply get rid of it."
   Not that the eerie, suspenseful movie really requires it, but
David Sinclair Whitaker's music takes us appropriately from
the nicely-nicely portion of Harry's behavior into a steadily
more sinister beat, with the picture several times invoking the
voice of Dolores del Rio in her authentic version of
"Ramona."  Matthieu Poirot-Delpech's camera raises the
excitement ante regularly as Harry's Mercedes and later his
SUV speed along a dark, backwater road while Dominik
Moll's direction puts us into the mind of the burned out
parents with no moment to themselves and the psycho
millionaire who has all too much time on his hands.
Not Rated.  Running time: 117 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Julia Levin
Filled with a tantalizing air of suspense, With a Friend Like Harry is
an unusual yet well-balanced mix of dark comedy, French thriller, and
surreal drama.  As I was watching the film, I found myself groping for
its message at each turn of the plot.  Its ultimate effect is comparable
to Claude Chabrol's La Cérémonie, which, with all its violence and
commentary on class delineation.
In With a Friend Like Harry, two former schoolmates accidentally meet in
a roadside bathroom.  Michel (Laurent Lucas) is on vacation with his
wife Claire (Mathilde Seigner) and their three little daughters.  He is
harried and haggard, far from enjoying this so-called vacation: an
endless ride with whining and screaming kids in an un-air conditioned
car.  Harry (Sergi López) is everything Michel is not: Sleek and
self-contained, he doesn't seem to be burdened by anything except good
memories and a load of money.  Within minutes, Harry invites himself and
his girlfriend, a corpulent, springy bun named Plum (Sophie Guillemin),
to Michel's house -- to reminisce about the good old school days Michel
himself can barely remember.
The success of Harry is held in its odd combination of very real,
down-to-earth elements combined with surreal devices, creating suspense,
disbelief, and intrigue.  The film plays skillfully with a common
knowledge that there is always a potential danger in bringing an
intruder into the family, no matter how stable this family is.  At the
table, Harry recites Michel's adolescent school poem with the
unattractive title The Dagger in the Skin of Plight, as well as an
excerpt from a sci-fi novel called Flying Monkeys.  Leading a life of
constant gratification, Harry is convinced that all Michel's problems --
lack of money and the desire to please other people -- have obscured
Michel's path toward fulfillment as a writer.  Quick and decisive, Harry
is a man of action, and his solutions are very concrete.
It is nearly impossible to fathom the nature of Harry's obsession with
Michel's early poem, which he remembers by heart.  But, as the film
progresses, it becomes obvious that Harry expresses his obsession
through crime.  By the film's end, he is comparable to Ripley from Rene
Clement's Purple Noon (and the American The Talented Mr. Ripley), a
sociopath with an insidious mind learning that he could get away with
just about anything.  However, Harry is a hedonist and a misanthrope,
but his enigma is never as refined as Ripley's is.  The film even treats
him with a slight contempt: There is always something distasteful in
Harry's brisk arrogant walk, in his narrow unexpressive eyes.
The music, with sinister ominous overtones, often diverts our attention
by accentuating superfluous elements, such as the eggs Harry likes to
eat after having an orgasm or the vulgar pink wall pattern in the
bathroom of Michel's house.  It creates a creepy and eerie effect, but,
after a while, these devices become as predictable as Harry's long list
of solutions.  The movie is not a weighty one, yet there is something in
its tension and the way it feeds you its story that attracts you to it. 
The film seduces you into thinking that, at certain moments, you know
where it's headed, and then you realize that you don't.
Acting is crucial to this film's success, and it is impeccable.  Michel
and Claire never get hysterical or grotesquely quarrelsome during their
daily rituals.  The core of their disorganized and turbulent family unit
is established early in the film, and it's clear that no matter what
sacrifices Michel has had to make for his girls, he loves them without
regret or resentment.  There is an interesting comment, however, in the
closing sequence of the film.  Just like at the beginning of the film,
Michel drives his family in the car, only now the car is a present from
the magnanimous Harry.  In a splendid 4x4 sport utility vehicle, with
air-conditioning full blast, the kids are content; no more screaming,
howling, or demands.  Michel smiles -- whatever price he has had to pay
for getting rid of Harry was well worth it.  Does the film suggest we
all have a little of Harry in us?  I think it does.  Whether it is a
point worth making is another question altogether.
Aka Harry, un ami qui vous veut du bien.
Director: Dominik Moll
Producers: Michel Saint-Jean
Writer: Dominik Moll, Gilles Marchand
Starring: Laurent Lucas, Sergi López, Mathilde Seigner, Sophie
Guillemin, Dominique Rozan, Liliane Rovčre, Michel Fau
http://www.miramax.com/mm_front/owa/mp.entryPoint?action=0&midStr=1462
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
