Title
Review for Mépris, Le (1963)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Louis Proyect
Carlo Ponti and Joseph E. Levine, the producers of Jean-Luc Godard's
"Contempt", were eager to make a commercial film that would appeal to
a broad audience, while simultaneously exploiting their "edgy" young
director's notoriety. They were interested in a "product" that would
sell both in art-houses and in shopping malls. Godard resisted them
every step of the way and turned the film itself into a brilliant
satire on Hollywood stupidity and greed, including the bottom-line
mentality of his producers.
"Contempt" is about the making of a new version of Homer's Odyssey. A
crude and venal American producer named Jerry Prokosch (Jack Palance)
has arrived in Rome to assemble a crew that can realize his new vision
of the epic. While the director Fritz Lang--played brilliantly by
himself--wants to film ancient Greek sculptures of the gods to
accompany the action, Prokosch dictates that there should be nude
mermaids instead. Joseph E. Levine himself had achieved some success
in Hollywood making trashy versions of Greek and Roman myths. These
inevitably featured body-builders playing gods and heroes, scantily
dressed actresses and the most ridiculous sorts of plots. The analogy
between Prokosch's vision of the Odyssey and the producer's prior
efforts could not have been lost on Levine. Tensions ran high on the
set of "Contempt", according to press reports of the time.
Prokosch hires a young novelist and Communist Party member Paul Javel
(Michel Piccoli) to crank out a screenplay that would cater to popular
tastes. Javel is only too happy to please the Hollywood producer who
can pay him the money he needs to finish the work on his new
apartment. In the opening scenes of the film we observe Paul making
love to his wife Camille played by Bridgette Bardot in their bedroom.
She asks him "Do you think my feet are beautiful?" and the camera pans
in on her feet. As she repeats the question about her thighs, breasts
and buttocks, the camera dutifully and clinically pans in on each body
part. The scene is studiously anti-erotic.
Just as Prokosch instructed Lang to include plenty of nude mermaids,
Levine and Ponti had urged Godard to show the sex-goddess Bardot
unclothed. It was good for the box-office they told him. Godard, ever
the rebel, gave them the nudity they wanted but made it so antiseptic
as to subvert their intentions.
In a long scene that constitutes the entire middle section of the
film, Paul and Camille have a marital squabble that leads to their
separation. Paul believes that sexual jealousy has sparked the fight.
In the preceding scene, Prokosch has made a play for Camille while she
has caught him in the act of fondling Prokosch's beautiful young
assistant. But it is not sexual jealousy that is the cause of their
estrangement. It is rather her loss of respect for him as an artist.
The film gives Godard plenty of opportunity to take knocks at the
Carlo Pontis and Joseph E. Levines of the world. Prokosch tells his
screen-writer Paul and his director Fritz Lang that "Whenever I hear
the word 'culture,', I reach for my checkbook." This is an allusion to
Nazi culture minister Joseph Goebbels' famous remark about hearing the
word "culture" and reaching for his gun. The background to this is
interesting since Joseph Goebbels offered Lang the job of supervising
German film production in 1933. He responded by fleeing into exile--a
choice (and true story) that Godard relates in the film.
For Godard, the comparison between Hollywood and Nazi Germany is of
real significance. In 1963, when the film was made, the United States
had not only achieved global economic and military dominance, it also
had begun to enforce its cultural standards on the rest of the world
as well. Godard had become disillusioned by the crisis facing both the
American and European film industries. The American studio system was
collapsing and could no longer support the creative vision of
"auteurs" like John Ford or Howard Hawks who had strongly influenced
French "nouvelle vague" criticism and film-making.
Godard's had a love-hate relationship for American popular culture.
Although he clearly despised the sort of commercialism that Joseph E.
Levine represented, there were continual reminders of his affection
for its icons. Paul Javel wears a fedora and smokes cigarettes during
the entire film, even while bathing, because as he tells his wife, he
wants to look like Dean Martin in "Some Came Running". Godard even
considered casting Frank Sinatra and Kim Novak in the roles of Paul
and Camille at one point. His hatred was toward the moguls in
Hollywood, not working professionals like himself.
"Contempt", above all, is a film about irony. The irony of a Communist
screen-writer turning out commercial schlock. The irony of his sex
kitten wife Camille rejecting him for his failure as an artist rather
than as a lover. Perhaps the least ironic figure in the film is Fritz
Lang himself who Godard had a deep respect for. The fact that Lang's
heroic period as a director was of the 1920s and 1930s did not
diminish his stature in Godard's eyes. But Godard could not completely
block out what had happened to Lang, even in his own film: "It's
always a bit sad when I see Lang in the film. He was touched that the
young filmmakers admired him, but it was mostly because he needed
money that he accepted."
This sense of disillusionment, of betrayed hopes, of contempt for
oneself for being part of the capitalist nexus is distinctly modern.
Godard, more than any film-maker, introduced this mood into the
culture of the 1960s. He influenced a wide range of artists, from the
sublime (Martin Scorsese comes to mind--he is responsible for the
release of this film to the public for the first time in 30 years) to
the ridiculous (Quentin Tarentino). The optimistic and socially-minded
films of the 1930 and 40s were no longer possible since there was no
historical agency capable of being the protagonist. The "Grapes of
Wrath" could no longer be made. By the same token, the bitter "noir"
films of the 1950s had run their course as well. Their
anti-heroes--gangsters, drifters, cheats--were no longer relevant
since the urban setting that provided their milieu had begun to
disappear. Gone were the lonely hotel rooms looking out at blinking
neon lights. They were replaced by sun-drenched suburban tracts and
swimming-pools.
Godard's film is a masterpiece. Currently it is being shown at the
Film Forum in New York City, but there is every likelihood that it
will appear on the art theater circuit. It is not to be missed.

Author
David N. Butterworth
Jean-Luc Godard's 1963 film "Contempt" ("Le Mépris") has been hailed by
many as one of the greatest films ever made.  Others have referred to it as
one of the greatest films ever made about the actual process of filmmaking.
Few if any have called it the best film to illustrate that the Trojan War
was "just a good excuse for Odysseus to get away from his wife."
Most of Godard's films are experimental in nature, but with "Contempt," his
experimentation is on a different level from that which defined his film
school texts, the iconoclastic delights of "Alphaville," "Pierrot le Fou,"
or "Weekend."  "Contempt" sees Godard experimenting with another
medium--big stars, a big budget, and big expectations.  The result might
have satisfied the critics but it didn't satisfy the filmmaker, and he
returned to making seminal, evocative anti-films, from the sublime (1983's
"First Name: Carmen," for example) to the ridiculous ("Hail Mary" two years
later).
The re-released "Contempt" follows the trials and tribulations of Paul
Jamel, an aspiring screenwriter (Michel Piccoli) who is hired by a vulgar
producer, Jerry Prokosch (played, on the edge, by Jack Palance) to
resurrect the script of an adaptation of "The Odyssey."  The film is
currently being shot by famed director Fritz Lang (played with gusto by the
German filmmaker himself), who wants to remain faithful to Homer's vision.
Jerry, a yes/no man who quotes from a little red book ("the wise man does
not oppress others with his superiority"), likes Greek gods and claims to
know *exactly* how they feel.  He wants to spice up the production with
"not just sex, but more!" but you get the feeling he means "more sex."
Further conflicts arise when Paul suspects that his wife Camille (a
dazzling Brigitte Bardot) has designs on the producer, which leads to a
marital argument that unleashes the contempt of the title.
Greeks and Trojans apart, this central struggle is clearly the most
interesting aspect of the film.  Godard frames Paul and Camille's discord
in their apartment like a documentarian, panning from room to room as their
pathetic dialogue unfolds.  (This is just one reason why you should see
this CinemaScope version; who knows how this sequence would look on video.)
Paul and Camille interact wrapped in towels like nervous new lovers, not
comfortable old friends.  It's totally involving: pitiable, sad, and true.
Visually the film is a treat.  Run down, rust-colored storefronts splashed
with posters for "Hatari" and "Psycho" form an art deco backdrop.  Jerry's
villa on Capri is an outrageous wedge-shaped residence set high atop a
cliff overlooking the cool blue Mediterranean.  The little we see of the
film-in-progress is reduced to rotating alabaster statues with their
features colored in.  It's Godard the stylist in top form.
An early comment in the movie is that cinema represents a world that
conforms to our desires.  While Godard's motives might have differed from
those of his producers, "Contempt" is still a fine film about the pressures
of filmmaking.  And it's an even finer film about the tragedy of marital
dissolution.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Director Jean-Luc Godard's CONTEMPT (LE MEPRIS) has been hailed by
some critics as one of the best films ever made.  A handsome new print
of the 1963 film is being shown now in New York City and is scheduled
to be making its way to other cities.
     As the film opens, two lovers are having an intimate conversation.
The nude woman is lying face down on the bed as she queries her husband
about various parts of her anatomy.  She wants to know if he loves her
feet, her ankles, and so forth.  The dialog remains more romantic than
sexual although with Brigitte Bardot playing the part of the wife,
Camille Javal, the audiences at the time of the picture's release may
have had trouble concentrating on the lines spoken.  (The modicum of
female rear nudity may have been a bit shocking at the time, but the
movie is quite tame by today's standards.)  Godard's film wants to
challenge your mind and not titillate your senses, hence the few nude
scenes are there more for realism than exploitation.
     Brigitte Bardot gives an incredible performance as the 28-year-old
typist who does not have a clue about what she wants in life.  She is
an intelligent woman, no airhead, but her life is aimless.  The film
works precisely because she convinces us of her disdain for most
aspects of her life, especially her marriage.  After an idyllic
beginning she informs her husband that she despises him and feels
contempt for him.  Her husband Paul, played beautifully by Michel
Piccoli, becomes perplexed.  What could he have said or done that made
her feel thus?  After all, it was only hours ago that they were making
romantic small talk in bed.
     Her husband is an aspiring but unsuccessful playwright who has
agreed to help American producer Jerry Prokosch with a movie that he is
making of Homer's Odyssey.  When Odyssey's director Fritz Lang, played
by the great director himself, starts talking about how cultured the
performance will be, Jerry will have none of it.  "Every time I hear
the word culture, I bring out my checkbook," he declares as he writes a
check on the spot to Paul to rewrite the script.
     Lacking the smooth refinements of the rest of the characters,
Jerry, played by Jack Palance, is crude but believes himself more
refined than any of them.  "Gods, I like Gods," he says about his
movie.  "I know exactly how they feel."  Jerry carries a tiny book with
him everywhere and loves to quote homilies from it.
     Godard has a great sense for the visual, and his films are feasts
for the eyes.  In CONTEMPT several scenes are memorable.  One of the
best has an ancient Greek statue slowly turning.  In another, the blond
and tanned Bardot is framed by the rocky coast and deep blue waters of
Capri.  And then, who could forget the opening scene of her lying on
the sheets with her toes twirling in the air.
     My personal favorite aspect of the production is the music by
Georges Delerue.  It has a timelessness and a sweeping grandeur that
starts off romantic but becomes increasingly morose as the tragedy
unfolds.
     The film is about many things.  Certainly Godard's love of the
cinema comes across in ways explicit and subtle.  The film, which is
more a dramatic tone poem than a traditional movie, ultimately is about
the impact of the death of love.  When Paul learns that his wife holds
him in contempt, he does not know how to deal with it.  Similarly,
Camille is confused and just as lost when she realizes she no longer
loves Paul.  Both are depressed in their own way.
     Effusive Jerry couldn't care less about any of this.  He loves to
sit in his fancy sports car and rev the engine before blasting off.
His life can only be lived in the fast lane where love and
relationships have no relevance.
     CONTEMPT is an entrancing and moving film that leaves its
audiences thinking and somewhat devastated.  One may forget many of the
story's details, but its impact will remain.
     CONTEMPT runs 1:45 but feels much shorter perhaps because the
story takes place in less than 24 hours.  The film is partially in
French with English subtitles and partially in English.  It is not
rated but would be a mild R for some female rear nudity, a little
profanity, and a little violence.  The film would be fine for
teenagers.  I strongly recommend you see or rent this marvelous film,
and I give it *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
