Title
Review for Bonfire of the Vanities, The (1990)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  DePalma echoes some things worth
     saying, amplifies some things that are not, twists the tone
     of the Wolfe book, and makes the audience seasick in the
     process.  With over-rated boxoffice stars such as Hanks,
     Griffith, and Willis, he stacked the deck against himself.
     Rating: low 0 (-4 to +4).
     THE BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES is an occasionally audacious comedy with a
large number of grievous faults.  Many of those faults would either
disappear or would be outweighed by the film's virtues if this had been an
original screenplay and there had not already been a novel with a similar
plot and identical title written by Tom Wolfe.  As an adaptation of a novel,
Brian DePalma's film and Michael Cristofer's screenplay are a total botch.
As a film that stands by itself, it has some very nice touches and is only a
partial botch.  Any film that sets out to point out social ills and has
something to offend nearly everybody cannot be all bad, but a comedy that
ends with some dignified character summing up the film and making a sermon
for more "decency" at the end has a hard time being all good either.  In the
1950s and 1960s a Spencer Tracy or perhaps a Henry Fonda could sermonize and
it would work.  Here it is like getting to the bottom of an ice cream sundae
and finding a chunk of prime rib.
     The story of THE BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES has much the same world-view
as Billy Wilder's excellent ACE IN THE HOLE (known on television as THE BIG
CARNIVAL).  Each is a story of a human mishap and a large number of people
professing only the best of intent swarming to it like sharks to serve their
own self-seeking ends.  In this case, the mishap occurs when Wall Street
wizard Sherman McCoy (played by Tom Hanks) is driving his mistress home from
the airport, misses an exit, and must drive through an unfriendly part of
the Bronx.  They are trapped in a probable mugging attempt.  They try to
escape with mistress Maria Ruskin unknowingly backing McCoy's car into one
of the muggers.  An alcoholic reporter, Peter Fallow (played by Bruce
Willis), desperately needing a big story blows this one into big headlines.
Also, a black minister, the Reverend Bacon (played by John Hancock), whose
resemblance to the Reverend  Al Sharpton is "purely coincidental," decides
to use the incident for political grist.  Soon a whole circus of vultures is
preying on the incident from all angles, blowing it into a major racial
incident.
     And from all angles is exactly how DePalma chose to film BONFIRE.
DePalma has often used interesting camera angles to add atmosphere to a
scene.  Here he does it by far too often and for often inexplicable reasons.
The audience watches a phone conference from the ceiling of a room looking
straight down.  There is no explanation to the viewer of what he or she is
doing on the ceiling.
     The film actually has a cast which includes some very fine actors such
as Morgan Freeman, F. Murray Abraham, Donald Moffat, Robert Stephens, and
Andre Gregory.  Medium-weight notables include Saul Rubinek, a clever comic
actor misused here.  Then there are some dead-weight actors apparently on
hand for boxoffice value.  These include Tom Hanks, Bruce Willis, and
Melanie Griffith.  Perhaps a good director could squeeze a good performance
if they were perfectly cast.  Here they are not, and DePalma is not that
good a director.  Hanks is wooden and evokes little emotion from the role.
Griffith is once again quite good at taking off her clothes, but her ability
to do a Southern sexpot named Maria is beyond her ability.  She does not
look like a Maria and her Southern accent is forced.  The accent also
probably changed in the course of filming and in her first scene in the film
her voice sounded crudely overdubbed.  Then there is Bruce Willis.  His flat
acting did not get in the way of the "Die Hard" films.  About the only film
he would be well-cast in would be THE BRUCE WILLIS STORY, and even there it
is questionable if he could really get into the character.
     With more smoke than fire, THE BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES never ignites.
I give it a low 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
