Title
Review for Goofy Movie, A (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Jeffrey Graebner
     Last night, I attended a sneak preview of WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING
(a terrific film) and after the movie the theater manager announced
that the audience was welcome to stick around for the 9:20 showing of A
GOOFY MOVIE (of course, they did this after the credits so there were
only 3 or 4 of us that actually heard the announcement... )
     The movie is kind of cute and I suspect young kids might like it
quite a bit, but I wasn't exceptionally impressed by it.  Goofy has
always been one of my favorite Disney characters.  His cheerful
ineptitude has a very definite charm and appeal.  My biggest
disappointment was the fact that Goofy was reduced to a supporting role
in a film that includes his name in the title.  Did Disney think that
kids today are unable to relate to and enjoy the film unless it is
centered around a kid?  When I was a kid, I never had any problems
enjoying Goofy on his own.
     I seem to recall that Disney had an afternoon TV series featuring
Goofy a few years ago, but I don't think I ever saw it.  Perhaps the
characters in this movie based on that series.  The movie seemed to be
lacking in a back story (the explanation of how Goofy became a single
parent seemed an obvious omission).  If the back story came from the TV
series, I suppose that might explain it.
     The film was made by Disney's animation studio in France.  Until
recently, that was their TV animation department, but they are now
simply known as "Disney Animation France" (meaning that they also do
features).  The animation doesn't have the same depth or detail of
Disney's major animated features, but it still is a generally good
looking film.  It is easily several cuts above most TV animation and
seemed to be on a par with most non- Disney animated features.  There
are a lot of bright colors and the characters are very expressive.  The
backgrounds generally tended to be flat and non-descript, though.
     I guess Disney has now decided that every animated film they do
has to be a musical, but many of the songs seemed to be shoehorned in
here. A few of them were kind of catchy, but they never quite seemed to
fit in extremely well.  The movie might have worked a bit better
without them.
     The movie is pleasant enough and it does have a number of amusing
sequences (my favorites were the parody of Disney's "Country Bear
Jamboree" attraction and the disco-dancing Bigfoot), but my overall
reaction was that I would have rather seen a movie strictly about the
Goofy of the old Disney short subjects.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     The final part in our trilogy about the intellectually challenged
is A GOOFY MOVIE.  Parts I (FORREST GUMP) and Parts II (DUMB AND
DUMBER) were live action films.  The concluding piece is advertised as
"Walt Disney Presents: A GOOFY MOVIE--It's hard to be cool when your
Dad is Goofy".
     A GOOFY MOVIE stars the classic cartoon character of Goofy.
Normally, Goofy is given silly things to do.  He then acts just as
silly as his material, and it all works for some simple and harmless
laughs.  This time the producer (Dan Rounds) decided to cast Goofy in a
realistic role and test the bounds of the character while keeping his
IQ in double digits.
     In A GOOFY MOVIE we find Goofy as an apparently single Dad.  His
son, Max, is in big trouble at school.  Max tried a big stunt in front
of all of the school body to impress a girl he is dying to date.  The
principal makes Goofy think Max is turning into a juvenile delinquent
so Goofy decides a long fishing vacation all over the United States
will straighten Max out.  He just needs some good old quality Father
and Son time.
     Max, on the other hand, is portrayed as the cliched teenager who
thinks his Dad is totally uncool and does not want to be seen with him.
Moreover, Max wants to go on a date with his girlfriend to watch a
concert by that famous rock star, Powerline rather than go on a
vacation with his Dad.
     I got very tired very fast of watching the stereotyping.  As one
who has a good relationship with his son and who understands that it is
both quantity and quality of time that matter, I found the cliches a
bit hard to take after a while.  My 6 year old and I went together to
see the movie.  He spent a lot of time staring at Max trying to figure
out what his problem was.  He liked a few of the laughs but overall did
not care for the movie that much.  He got scared several times of
something he could or would not identify--my guess is that it was the
way the son treated the Dad and the way the Dad was shown as such a
dunce.
     If they wanted to make a movie about Goofy, then they should have
found a better script for him.  If they felt they wanted to talk about
father and son relationships in a cartoon, then make the Dad at least a
little bit smarter and the teenager just a bit more caring.
     There was some parts of the show that were outstanding.  I thought
the colors were delightful; the rose and purple pastels were especially
lovely and soothing.  The sets were imaginative as well so that
watching the visuals were a delight--too bad I could not have turned
off the sound.
     The character of the girlfriend was unusual and perfect.  She was
extremely cute without being suggestive.  They drew her with large
thighs and dressed her only in shorts.  She had a radiant loveliness
that made you understand why Max was smitten with her.  I think drawing
realistic and attractive women or girls is hard to do in cartoons.
Artists who try usually end up with cute animals ala Minnie Mouse or
sleazy women ala the one in Roger Rabbit.
     Finally, there was one great minor character--the girlfriend's
dad.  Ever gone to a new girlfriend's house being a little bit scared
of what her Dad might be like and how he might treat you?  Well,
welcome to your worst nightmare.
     A GOOFY MOVIE is correctly rated G.  There is nothing of the
classic categories (sex, drugs, violence, or bad words) to offend.  On
the other hand, I was personally offended by the stereotyped Father and
Son relationship.  The movie runs a bearably short 1:17.  I do not
recommend it to anyone nor does my son.  I am not sure who the audience
for this movie is.  It is too juvenile for teenagers, but only
teenagers could really understand Max.  I award the movie * 1/2 for
making a beautiful film and for the character of the girlfriend.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Sherline Lee
I. Audience - Best for Families and Middle Age Kids
II. Character Twists - No Peg, Kellie Martin as Roxanne
III. Animation - Polished ... *four* studios!
IV.  General thoughts (no major spoilers) and other random comments
     inserted randomly (oh yeah. songs?!?)
----------------------------------
     Yesterday morning, I saw the soon to be released A GOOFY MOVIE at
a local theater.  Overall, I was pleasantly surprised to find a
polished and an interesting, character-driven movie.
     Forgive me if in the course of these next few lines or so, if I
accidentally let small spoilers slip.  (I don't mean to, don't kill
me!)
I. The Audience
     The audience consisted mostly of Disney employed persons and their
families.  The children that did show, were mostly in the 5-7 range.
     However, after seeing the movie, I would think it more appropriate
for kids who were a little older--preferably in the early adolescent
or "my parents are *so* embarrassing I think I'm going to die stage."  :)
     Thankfully, the GOOFY MOVIE is just that.  It centers largely
around Max and his tense relationship with Goof.
     Kellie Martin provides the love interest for the adolescent Max
(as Roxanne).
     Pete and PJ appear several times throughout the film, mostly to
serve as a contrast to Goof's and Max's relationship.  Besides Pete and
PJ, no other members of his family from Goof Troop appear. (Oh, Pete
and Goofy are both photographers for a living. heh. together. heehee)
     Max and Peej have acquired another sidekick in their little group
of friends.  (One who has really weird taste in food).  Roxanne (who is
a very attractive dog er goof) has one nerdy sidekick of her own.
     Let's see, one brief cameo by Mickey and Donald.  Interesting
scene with a Goof version of Bigfoot.  (Everything in this film is a
goof version. It's a little disconcerting.  I kept thinking WHERE ARE
THE DUCKS? *shakes head)
     And for you Ed, there are  *two* "not-so-hidden" Ariel's.  The
second one will just make you laugh ... it's so tacky :)
     I think I was impressed.  I had admired the DuckTales movie for
its backgrounds and its good bordering on very good animation.
However, coming into this movie, I really didn't expect much better.
Boy, I was majorly wrong.
     Although there were several rough spots in the Goofy movie, there
were many opportunities for my jaw to drop.  Let's see: digital
coloring, moving backgrounds, dramatic effects, and wow they even used
live action reference models (!).  (And yes, lots of computer rendered
stuff)
     Four major studios were used: France, Toronto, Burbank and
Australia ... frankly, I really couldn't tell. (Though some of the
gorgeous backgrounds do point to probably France or Australia).  I
would really love to know which studios did which scenes.
     Some of the scenes, involving water and lighting were great ...
realistic and yet exaggerated enough.  And the characters' expressions
were humanlike.
     Look especially for things like buildings and signs in the
background.  These are great computer effects.
     Sheesh, I think I could even be convinced to go back and actually
pay to just watch the animation this time.
     General note, though ... the animation is very good, but differs
in feel from Disney animated features.  I'm not sure if it's just
because we're dealing with 2D characters on 3D backgrounds, or if
because a lot of modern objects are used. hmm.
     I was surprised by what the plot centered on, but pleased.  Some
have criticized the Goof Troop series as being too heavily centered on
Pete.  Thankfully, this movie doesn't do that.
     I was though, a little surprised by the strength of Max's
feelings/paranoia about becoming his father.
     You know, there some strange sketches in this story line.  That's
all I'll say ... except that one particular part of the movie kept
reminding of all those Chuck E. Cheese/Showbiz places that I went to.
(I still have nightmares)
     As far as the songs, well they followed the first cardinal rule
pretty well.  They did serve to "express the feelings of a character,
move plot forward, and provide opportunities for visual gags."  But
they were a mish mosh of various styles of music.  (Definitely though
*not* Broadway).
     The score was fairly good, rather lush and large for what I would
have normally expected.
     Okay, this message went way longer than I wanted, but here's the
general rating.
