Title
Review for Boyz N the Hood (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z rating: ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1991, R, 112 minutes [1 hour, 52 minutes]
starring: Cuba Gooding Jr. (Tre Styles), Ice Cube (Doughboy Baker), Morris
Chestnut (Ricky Baker), Laurence Fishburne (Mr. Furious Styles), produced by
Steve Nicolaides, written and directed by John Singleton.
There have been many movies about life in black ghettos, but most of them
were made by white, mainstream directors using Hollywood money. But with
"Boyz N The Hood," director John Singleton approaches his canvas in an
expressionist manner. He doesn't concentrate so much on story and plot as he
does character development and atmosphere. The result is an insightful,
thematic film, even if the themes are blatantly plugged in.
The films opens with a 20-minute flashback to 1984. We meet our main
characters as children growing up in South Central Los Angeles. The immediate
atmosphere is bleak and disturbing from the dialogue and background alone.
The children are only 10 or 11 years old, yet they find themselves looking at
dead bodies, fighting with each other, and talking and acting like Mafia
hitmen. It's a shame they would be so apathetic at such young ages, although
the importance of their friendship is inspiring.
Flashforward seven years to the present as the main characters are now
seniors in high school but each have different plans for after graduation.
Tre Styles (Gooding Jr.), the film's main character, plans to go to college
and be someone. His father, Mr. Furious Styles (Fishburne), raised him well.
He taught Tre morals and values, how to be a winner in life, to respect his
fellow man and woman, and to stay off drugs and out of trouble. 
Too bad some of that advice didn't rub off on Doughboy Baker (Ice Cube),
Tre's friend who has been in and out of jail since he was a kid. He doesn't
do much in film other than sit on the porch of his house with his friends,
cuss, and drink 40 ounces of beer. His half-brother Ricky (Chestnut) doesn't
have the bad attitude Doughboy has. He admires Tre, but his
born-out-of-wedlock son proves he isn't always responsible.
Most of the events in the film do not create nor follow a plot other than
Tre, Doughboy, and Ricky's efforts to get by and survive. Although they talk
like hoodlums, none of them actually belong to an organized gang. They simply
stay close to their extensive crew for support and protection. The "hanging
out" atmosphere makes for good camaraderie and interesting dialogue. Their
diction is vulgar, but it's realistic and often leads to philosophical
discussions such as the existence of God, why they have to use the words
"bitch" and "nigga," and what their purpose in life is.
Surprisingly, the atmosphere is not as pessimistic as you'd think it would
be. Fishburne's character allows Singleton to make some important points
about the people and society in the film. One such incident has Mr. Styles
telling Tre and Ricky about how "The man" is trying to exterminate blacks by
using the ghetto as a voluntary prison. This scene takes place in the
dangerous section of Compton. As Styles preaches, hoodlums, kids, and an old
man gather and listen. Although I doubt this would happen in reality, it is
uplifting at the time to think violent, ignorant gangsters would even listen
at all. 
Styles' speech symbolizes the entire film because when he is finished,
everyone has an opinion but they eventually go back to what they were doing.
The same thing happens when you see the film - you know something should be
done because no one deserves to live like this, but what can you do?
The last act pretty much follows the film's logical conclusion. What makes
it sad is not the fact it's a case of classic irony and vengeance, but
because it involves a tragedy with characters we've just started to get to
know and sympathize with.
It's hard to think of "Boyz N The Hood" as a movie, but more like a
collection of images. In fact, this is probably what Singleton intends the
film to be. Still, those images are unlike anything I've ever seen before and
they made me think, thus the film is a success.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 150
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and quick
capsules. Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
John Locke (John Locke)
     I'm baffled by the acclaim shoveled upon BOYZ N THE HOOD.  It
wasn't even film school quality.  It's more like a B+ in Sociology 1.
Each scene makes its blunt, bludgeoning point about life in the ghetto
(we know it's a ghetto because there are artfully placed heaps of
garbage here and there).
     Many of these points are the utterances of the characters.  There
are a number of "characters," but most of them are the same person, the
director, John Singleton, who uses his characters as mouthpieces for his
own ideas.  When young Tre points to the map of Africa and says that's
where the first man came from, it's Singleton talking.  When the
football recruiter makes a speech on the improbability of making the
NFL, it's Singleton talking.  In one of history's worst lines of
dialogue, Tre's father asks Tre how the SAT went, then casually notes,
"of course those tests are culturally biased, except for the math
parts."  Yep, it's Singleton talking.  We don't get to actually hear one
of the "culturally biased" questions.  We're supposed to take
Singleton's word for it, I suppose.  (Didn't Singleton see STAND AND
DELIVER?  "Those people" pass "those tests" when they study for them.
Oops, I forgot--"those tests" were all math parts.)  When that line is
dropped with a dull thud, I realized that the whole minor thread about
taking the test was a set-up for that one lousy line.  The piece de
resistance of pontification occurs under a billboard in a vacant lot.
Tre's father's lecture on gentrification attracts a variety of
neighborhood regulars, from dope dealers to the perpetually unemployed.
But their discussion sounds like a MacNeil/Lehrer roundtable on urban
issues.  Where's the m*th*rf*ck*n' verisimilitude?
     This last is representative of the pervasive illogic of the film.
There's a barbecue, the host says the food is ready, and 50 people stand
up in unison, like so many robots, and crowd the table.  There's no
guile to the direction.  You can picture Singleton instructing the
ensemble: "on 'ready,' rush the table."  At times, the amateurishness is
laughable, like when young Tre is delivered to his father to undergo
"manhood training."  Dad is so glad to see him he immediately puts him
to work raking up a thick deposit of Autumn leaves from the front yard.
But here's the kicker: there are no trees in front of the house!  Where
did all those mysterious leaves come from?  Not only that, the raking
appears to take Tre hours (can't learn manhood in twenty minutes).
Someone glued those damn leaves to the lawn.  Add to that the
sociological illogic: Tre learns manhood by performing the work his
putative post-manhood father neglects.
     The whole film ends up with a staged, faked feel.  I never felt I
was watching real characters acting spontaneously.  We get a football
player who never plays football, or even talks about it; we get drug
dealers who never deal drugs.  BOYZ N THE HOOD is like an updated
version of those right-way-and-wrong-way-to-ask-a-girl-for-a-date films
they occasionally showed us in high school.  Now they show us films
illustrating sexual harassment in the workplace.  Snore...non-actors
making obvious points.  Somehow these films always end up
unintentionally funny, and so does BOYZ N THE HOOD.  In the
heart-assaulting finish, the football player is victim to a drive-by and
his homeboys take his blood-drenched corpse home and dump it on the
sofa.  I know I'm supposed to be sad during this scene but instead I'm
yelling, "so that's why they"--er, "they"--"cover the upholstery with
plastic."
     BOYZ N THE HOOD is well-intentioned, like the behavior training
films, but that doesn't redeem it as film art.  The first obligation of
a director is to tell a story; intellectual statements can only flow
from the story as an indirect effect.  I couldn't mourn the murder of
the football player because he'd never been given human dimensions.  The
power of film as a salve for our prejudices is that it can show the
common human links between people of different cultures.  BOYZ N THE
HOOD fails on this very basic level by not developing its characters and
making them or their world realistic.  The characters rarely breath as
real people because they're too busy demonstrating the director's
sociological agenda.  I didn't see any special insight into the
characters or their situations by the director.  Nothing rang true
because there was no originality to offset the predictableness.
Ironically, this film could just as easily have been made by a white
director or anyone else as unacquainted with the ghetto as John
Singleton.
