Title
Review for Dogme 1 - Festen (1998)
Number of Reviews
14

Author
David N. Butterworth
        In the spring of 1995, the 'Dogme 95,' a collective of Danish
filmmakers, among them Lars von Trier ("Breaking the Waves") and Thomas
Vinterberg, entered into a radical agreement that would henceforth dictate
their style of filmmaking.  This pledge, which they named "The Vow of
Chastity," decreed "all shooting to be done on location with available
props, stories to be contemporary, sound to be ambient, cameras hand-held,
film in color, no artificial light," and that "the director must not be
credited."
        The inaugural product of this unusual contract is a brilliant piece
of work by the 29-year-old Vinterberg entitled "The Celebration" ("Festen")
and it is in large part successful due to the pact under which it was
produced.
        Shot in grainy, unsettling hand-held "video verité," "The
Celebration" centers on the family reunion to end all family reunions.  The
action takes place at a lavish ancestral estate, where aunts, uncles,
cousins, grandparents, and grandchildren gather to commemorate the 60th
birthday of Helge (Henning Moritzen), the family patriarch.
        Among those present are Helge, his wife Else (Birthe Neumann), and
their three grown children.  Children who, in the eyes of their affluent
parents, have never amounted to much.
        There's Christian (played by Ulrich Thomsen with a permanent frown
on his face): clean-cut, furtive, with a history of emotional problems.
There's Michael (Thomas Bo Larsen), the youngest: a failed restaurateur
with a fiery temper and an emotionally-abused wife, Mette (Helle Dolleris).
And there's Helene (Paprika Steen), who was given up for lost when she
joined the Young Socialists and pursued a career as a singer.
        Not present is Linda, Christian's recently-deceased twin sister,
about whom Christian is asked to say a few words by his father during
dinner.
        Christian's few words prove to be the first of several bombshells
that turn the otherwise upbeat festivities into a boiling pot of
parent-child emotions.  As deep, dark family secrets go, the revelation is
not entirely original, but the set-up, the delivery, and the slow
unraveling of the truth are masterful.
        Vinterberg's cinematic vision is beautifully realized by
cinematographer Anthony Dod Mantle, whose jumpy, colorful, fuzzy-focused
style gives "The Celebration" a documentary look and feel.  Combined with
top notch performances by the entire cast, the result is an uneasy feeling
that we are eavesdropping on a real family gathering rather than a
fictionalized account of one.  This pushes the emotional content through
the roof.
        Although contrary to the tenets of the 'Dogme 95,' Thomas
Vinterberg should be applauded for bringing this film to the screen.
Powerful and emotionally disturbing while at the same time funny, fresh and
moving, "The Celebration" has the uncanny ability to make you laugh out
loud while tears still linger in your eyes.  It left me shaken long after
the end credits had rolled.

Author
Matt Prigge
Director: Thomas Vinterberg
Writers: Thomas Vinterberg and Mogens Rukov (from an idea by Thomas
Vinterberg)
Starring: Ulrich Thomsen, Henning Mortizen, Thomas Bo Larsen, Paprika
Steen, Birthe Neumann, Trine Dyrholm, Helle Dolleris, Therese Glahn,
Klaus Bondam, Bjarne Henriksen, Gbatokai Dakinah
"The Celebration" is one of an elite kind of films that is completely
absorbant.  You know, where you sit down to watch it, and no matter what
you've heard about it before, you just can't help but be totally drawn
into its story and shocked by every single turn that occurs.  I prefer
films like these because these are what the best kind of films are
like.  I don't really feel there are to be any real "rules" for cinema;
a film can do anything, as long as it makes it work.  But I do ask that
all films have one thing in common: they create experiences.  When I
watch a film, no matter what kind of film it is, I want to be able to
take certain memories along with me.  "The Celebration" is great because
it's chock full of those.  It creates a world so completely realistic
that everything that occurs is as memorable as the little instances of
life that catch your attention and stay with you for the rest of your
life.  And then it makes things just a tad bit farscial, just to make
sure you're paying attention, which you are because what transpires is
just so goddam interesting that if you were to ever feel bored, then
you're of your attention span needs a bit of a tuning-up.
The story takes place at the extravagant home of an aging patriarch
(Henning Mortizen), who has just turned 60 and is having a party thrown
for him.  All his friends and family turn up, and for the first half
hour, we get introduced to everyone, simplistically and realistically
(no aggravatingly condescending posing for the camera deals here).  The
eldest son, Christian (Ulrich Thomsen, looking a bit like a young
Malcolm McDowell), is the first to be seen in the film, walking to his
father's home.  His brother, Michael (Thomas Bo Larsen), drives by,
pulls over, greets him, then kicks his family out of the car, forcing
them to walk to the estate, just so Christian can be comfortable.  We
then meet Helene (Paprika Steen), their sister, a woman who always seems
to be stressed-out, who invites the driver of her car (Gbatokai
Dakinah), an American, to to come join her at the party she's going to.
Once they're all there and settled in, the party begins, and as custom,
the eldest son has to make a speech to his dad, so Christian stands up,
at the head of the table, and reveals the film's punchline: his father
raped all his children at a young age.  But since this is a
family/friends affair, his confession becomes more detested than the
supposed truth, and is simply brushed off despite his efforts, and what
transpires is sorta like Jerry Springer crossed with Jean Renoir, and
it's all terribly interesting to watch.  Twists occur, and soon the film
has taken on a nearly-farsical nature, but still seems realistic because
the people involved really feel like they could reach such ends.
The most notorious thing about this film, which has been getting the
most notice, though, is that the director, Thomas Vinterberg has shot it
in a completely awkward fashion.  As a member of the Danish filmmakers
clan, Dogme 95, a group that has vowed to oppose "the auteur concept,
make-up, illusions, and dramaturgical predictability" so that they may
"purge film so that once again the inner lives of the characters justify
the plot."  I have not seen "Breaking the Waves," the other notable film
by a member of this group (Lars Von Trier, to be exact), but "The
Celebration" works exquisitely in this department.  It feels like
reality, like you're actually watching real people and not actors, and
as a major pointer, has been shot on video.  As a result, it looks more
like the home movies you never dare shot of your family than an actual
film, but always wanted to.  We see key moments in people's lives that
they wouldn't dare show to the world, and it captures the farscial
comedy of life so accurately and acutely that this style, as
ironically-showmanship as it really is, works perfectly for the nature
of the film.
The key, though, to this film, and the reason it's not just a cool
Danish import, is because this film is not about revealing the truth as
much as it is about the way people react to such an explosive truth.
Throughout the film, we see a completely realized debate over the truth
and the effects it has on the lives of those who have learned to live
with lies, a debate so three-dimensional that it could easily blow
Oliver Stone and his the-truth-at-all-costs reasoning out of the water.
Of course it was not right for the father to rape his children, and of
course, they couldn't have fought back then, and of course this has
created scarring suppression inside them.  And yes, it's thearapeutic
for one to release the truth years later, when they know it could easily
destroy the one who emotionally destroyed them earlier.  But then again,
the father, after all, is not a totally bad guy, and we can see the
emotional complications that arise thanks to a performance by Mortizen
which is just so great and touching that while we do believe that he
could have raped his children years earlier, we also see a man who has
also learned to live with what he's done, and deep down, feels true
guilt that is only now beginning to surface.  The final scene, involving
Mortizen and everyone else, is utterly devastating, thanks to him and
Thomsen, whose performance is utterly flawless and equally emotionally
complex.
Everyone else is flawless as well - the actors never seem to be stepping
into the shoes of their characters as much as they do walking
comfortably in them.  The actors or writers have not made the mistake to
judge these characters in the slightest: there are no whites or blacks
but instead all grays, exactly like life.  As such, "The Celebration"
may be the one truly bizarro film of the year: a work of art so eerily
close to reality that it's utterly disturbing and utterly fascinating.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Allan Jenoff
This is the perfect film to see before a family gathering.  Whether it's
Christmas, an anniversary, a birthday party, whatever; see this movie
first.  Your dysfuntional family will look perfectly happy and
functional in comparison to the folks who make up this movie clan.
Michael, Christian, and Helene have returned home for their father's
60th birthday party.  Also at the party, held in a hotel owned by the
father and closed for this occasion, are assorted grandparents, uncles,
aunts, cousins, children, spouses, and significant others.  Christian,
the eldest, is asked to say a few words at dinner about his twin
sister, who committed suicide earlier that year.  Michael is at first
not wanted, because he failed to come to his sister's funeral, but his
father later offers to put him up for membership in the Freemasons.
Also at the party is a German associate of the father who is to be
toastmaster.
What follows are a series of revelations that would keep Jerry Springer
in business for years.  Everything from affairs to abortions to
pedophilia to insanity to lesbians.  Christian kicks things off by
accusing his father of abusing himself and his sister.  But that's just
the tip of this family iceberg.  The partygoers are uncertain how to
react.  Some think he is drunk, some think he is joking, some want to
leave.  But they can't because the cook has stolen all their car keys.
They are stuck there and they try to make the best of it.
Michael, the youngest of the surviving children, desperately wants to
impress his father.  He tries to keep the party going.  He gets violent
with Christian and he drinks far too much, losing what little self
control he has.  Helene, meanwhile, is staying in her dead sister's room
and hiding a big secret.
Things just get worse when Helene's boyfriend finally shows up.  He is
black and Michael reveals his racist side.  First he tries to get rid of
the boyfriend, later he gets everyone singing a racist song.  Through
all this, the poor German toastmaster tries to keep things going.
And that's just touching the surface.  I haven't even touched on the
strange marriage and stranger sex of Michael and Mette.  Or of the
mother's bizarre and spiteful speech.  Or the maid who seems to have
slept with every available male and possibly one female.
Just in case I've misled you, this isn't a comedy.  But, while it deals
with some pretty heavy stuff, it isn't nearly as bleak as you'd expect.
And while it does read like a Springer wish list (I think they even
throw chairs), it's a lot more insightful than anything you'll see on
tv. It's closer to Ibsen meets Babette's Feast.  Well worth paying full
price for.
This is the Danish entry for foreign language Oscar and I give it a good
chance of making the short list.

Author
Michael Dequina
_The_Celebration_(Festen)_ (R) **** (out of ****)
The title of this Danish import couldn't be more ironic.  First, there's
the literal level, in the plot: the sixtieth birthday bash of a wealthy
patriarch Helge (Hennig Moritzen) becomes something decidedly less festive
when his successful eldest son Christian (Ulrich Thomsen) disrupts the
event with some shocking allegations about him and Christian's dead twin
sister.  On a deeper level, there's the irony of tone: while the charges
being made by Christian are as serious as they can get, the situation is
played for some gleefully venomous laughs--making the overall mood sort of
a "celebration" of everyone's misery.
It's a fine line to walk, that between comedy and misery, but
director/co-writer (with Mogens Rukov) Thomas Vinterberg handle the
balancing act magnificently.   While one is often laughing at and with
Christian's shamelessly disruptive antics, one can feel the pain that
compels him to do so.  The real balancing act, though, is how Vinterberg
keeps the truth largely ambiguous through his characters; they are
portrayed equal parts bad and good, so it's often up to question whether or
not Christian is telling the truth or merely spiting his father.  It's that
heightened sense of reality--in accordance with the Danish film movement
called "Dogme 95," which sets standards for realism and "purity"--that
lends _Festen_ an uncommon power, even if some "realist" techniques become
somewhat irksome (i.e. shaky, cinema-verite hand-held camera work).
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 October Films
 Director: Thomas Vinterberg
 Writer:  Thomas Vinterberg, Morens Rubkov
 Cast: John Boas, Klaus Bondam, Lars Brygmann, Gbatokai
Dakinah, Helle Dolleris, Trine Dyrholm, Therese Glahn,
Gjarne Henriksen, Thomas Bo Larsen, Linda Laursen, Lasse
Lunderskov, Henning Moritzen, Birthe Neumann, Lene Laub
Oksen, Birgitte Simonsen, Paprika Steen, Ulrich Thomsen
   During the last world war, when their country was occupied
by the Nazis, the Danes did a dauntless job of saving their
country's Jews from deportation to the death camps, putting
them in the front ranks on the Continent for such empathy,
compassion adn good will.  There's nothing like a Dane. 
Unfortunately, however, within the four walls of family life,
they're no different from the rest of us, or at least that's so in
the mind of writer-director Thomas Vinterberg whose "The
Celebration" is produced by Lars von Trier ("The Kingdom,"
parts 1 & 2).  With pederastry the trendy subject tackled this
year by the film industry--"Lolita" is hitting the screens on
Sept. 25 and "Happiness" following soon thereafter--this
Danish study of family dysfunction pushes the envelope
further.  Involuntary incest, not mere pedophilia, is the theme--
not a new one if you've read or seen "Oedipus"--but in the
hands of von Trier and Vinterberg the subjects gets a darkly
comic touch.  Most of the action takes place within the home
of a wealthy man celebrating his sixtieth birthday, so that the
story does bear the imprint of the stage and, in fact, some of
the leading performers are quite renowned players in the
Danish theater scene.
   A powerful drama of guilt, revelation and cleansing which in
Danish is called "Festen," this production exhibits the
perverse manners of the birthday party from hell.  Its
celebrants including a large contingent of racists, a child
molester, a wife abuser, a couple of psychotics and an
assemblage of neurotics and, as has been fashionable in
stories about incest since the time of Sophocles, a juicy
suicide.
   In one of the few outdoor scenes, a caravan of cars make
their way across the Danish countryside to the chateau which
is the country home of the fabulously wealthy patriarch, Helge
(Henning Moritzen).  At least two of the guests are off-the-wall
from the very beginning.  Michael (Thomas Bo Larsen), the
eldest son, is so volatile he has to crash the banquet as his
dad refused to invite him.  He shrieks and is shrieked at by
his wife, Mette (Helle Dolleris), throws her out of the car to
allow his brother Christian (Ulrich Thomsen) to join him, slaps
her around, and even engages in a bout of malevolent sex,
graphically shown, as the guests are in their rooms awaiting
the call to dinner.  We learn that their sister, Linda (Lene
Laub Oksen, who shows up in a flashback) had committed
suicide by drowning herself in the bathtub a short while back,
and soon enough find out the motive behind the tragedy.
   As the dinner progresses with the toastmaster (Klaus
Bondam) emceeing the banal speeches of the guests,
Christian shocks the company by announcing "Dad raped us,"
adding as if to mollify the poor man that Helge had always
been a clean person, addicted to baths in all seasons.  He is
later to present another toast to his old man, one even more
shocking, but even then, the guests are prepared not to
believe him until further evidence is brought forth.
   Between these bouts of speechmaking, Vinterberg treats us
to some comic business and hanky panky, particularly
involving Christian's relationship to one of the house maids,
Pia (Trine Dyrholm), a woman to whom he had not been able
to commit presumably because of his childhood violations.  In
one scene Vinterberg indicts virtually the entire society of
wealthy and successful guests as racists.  When Helene
(Paprika Steen) shows up with a black boyfriend, (Gbatokai
Dakinah), the assemblage all burst forth in a racist song about
"black Sambos" and "red Indians."  In the movie's most comic
moment, Michael, spotting Gbatokai in the parking and
assuming that he is a musician rather than an invited guest,
assures him that no trumpeter would be needed for this party.
   Thomas Bo Larsen gets the opportunity to turn on the
emotions with an array of wildly melodramatic acting.  The
real talents of the picture, though, are Ulrich Thomsen, who
must portray an obsessed son who seems at first like the
most stable man of the group but turns into the catalyst for
disastrous revelation; and renowed stage actor Henning
Moritzen, who, like Oedipus, reflects a disbelief in the
disclosures at first but turns into a sunken shell when the final
bombshell is delivered.  
   Like producer Lars von Trier, director Vinterberg shows a
preference for the hand-held camera as though to portray the
party from the point of view of a guest who is snapping
photos of the macabre celebration.  The shaky hand may be
troubling at first, but effectively conveys the chaos and clutter
of the moment.
   Some theorists believe that dramatic conflict works best
when the skirmishing people are essentially locked together in
a closed space and cannot leave until they work out their
tensions.  What gives the picture this touch of theatricality is
that much of the action would not have taken place had the
company of guests been able to escape to their cars.  Since
the wait staff hid the keys to enjoy the fun, we are reminded
of Luis Bunuel's 1962 masterpie;ce, "The Exterminating
Angel," in which guests at an elegant dinner party cannot
bring themselves to leave and begin to starve and die after
several days.  Vinterberg's characters do eventually get to
retreat, sadder and wiser for the experience.  For some the
ritual has been a cleansing experience bringing about the
closure that will allow them to go on with their lives in a
healthier manner.  We, too, feel a sense of relief when
Vinterberg brings closure to the picture, a work which quite
effectually takes us behind closely guarded walls to explore
the nature of the rich and successful.

Author
Ross Anthony
Gritty, grainy, shot with available light and a video camera -- so it looks
like your family videos. Although, I do hope this isn't your family.
And no doubt, directed a heck of a lot better than your videos. Vinterberg
(director) whips his little vid cam around like it's taped to the remote
control toy car from a "Home Alone" film.
The story follows Christian, a full grown man with childhood issues yet to
resolve, as he changes the tone of this family celebration.
"The Celebration" showcases excellent acting, a great screenplay, and new
innovative cinematography that is exciting and exhausting at the same time.
Directed and co-written by: Thomas Vinterberg (Vinterberg is a member of a
collective of film directors (Dogme 95) who oppose the auteur concept,
make-up, illusions and dramaturgical predictability; letting 'the inner
lives of the characters justify the plot.')
In Danish with English subtitles.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Mark O'Hara
A Film Review by Mark O'Hara
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org
One thing can be said about Christian Klingenfeldt - he's his own man.  
At the start of Thomas Vinterberg's 'Festen' ('The Celebration'), 
Christian (Ulrich Thomsen) is walking by himself, a country road 
stretching before him.  He has left France, where he now lives, and his 
destination is his family's estate in Denmark, the occasion his father's 
sixtieth birthday party.
Thomas Wolfe's wisdom comes to mind at some time during the narrative: 
You can't go home again.  The message Vinterberg makes clear is that 
many people would not want to go home.  In fact, Christian belongs to 
one of the more dysfunctional families in contemporary film, and the 
realism with which director and co-writer (with Mogens Rukov) Vinterberg 
portrays the ugliness is remarkable because it is engaging.
Early on we also meet Michael (Thomas Bo Larsen), Christian's peculiar 
brother.  Michael thinks nothing of kicking his wife and kids out of the 
car so that he might drive Christian the rest of the way to the estate.  
Later we see Michael's shabby treatment of his wife in more detail, 
followed by mutually abusive sexual rough-housing.  This scene in 
particular demonstrates love mixed with hate, a clearly identified motif 
in the work.  Michael and Christian are not the only troubled offspring 
of the patriarch Helge Klingenfeldt.  There is their sister Helene 
(Paprika Steeen), also grown, also affected by what we discover must 
have been an unpleasant, even traumatic, childhood.  
To complicate the familial tension, Christian's twin sister has died, a 
suicide, just weeks before this reunion.  When the sister is discussed, 
we can almost feel her presence at the country house, as Christian takes 
on the role of a 'doppelganger.'  The twin has left a note for each of 
the immediate family, and after a series of secret convolutions that 
result in Christian reading the note penned for him, we witness an 
amazing display of blind determination.  Christian's mission leads him 
to make mind-numbing accusations of his wealthy and respected father.  
What's unusual is that the words come in the form of several toasts, 
delivered in a casual tone before the huge extended family.  As 
Christian's condemnation of his father is continually interrupted - once 
by Michael's beating him and tying him to a tree in the nearby forest - 
Vinterberg sketches in masterful dark comedy.
In 1995 Vinterberg allied himself with a group of directors in 
Copenhagen, starting a movement named 'Dogme 95,' the tenets of which 
promote a pure 'cinema of the moment.'  Accordingly, 'The Celebration' 
is shot on location, with no makeup, no dubbed sound, no fixed cameras, 
and virtually no 'brought in' props.  (Vinterberg published a 
'confession' in which he admits covering one window with a black drape 
to alter the light in one scene;  he also approved the construction of a 
hotel reception desk, though the materials were found on site.)  The 
product of Vinterberg's vision is shot through with a fascinating, 
naturalistic nervousness.  Yes, the film could be more cleanly edited 
and smoothly shot, but the jerkiness actually compliments the flavors of 
claustrophobia, bitterness, anger and closeness.  It's ironic that 
Vinterberg and his cohorts have preoccupied themselves with such 
standards, when the uniqueness of the photography and sets draws 
probably more attention than would any artifice.
As Christian, Ulrich Thomsen depicts a contained obsession with exposing 
his father's misdeeds.  Thomsen's strength as an actor is visible in the 
insouciance with which Christian delivers the words that damn his flesh 
and blood.  Conversely, he shows a wonderful, almost boyish relish when 
he asks one of the serving girls - Pia, a friend since childhood - to 
return to France to live with him.  It is heartening that Christian has 
survived the damaging history so coldly described by his father.  And it 
is only fitting that Christian must accuse publicly, as one-on-one he is 
incapable of confronting his father's perfect duplicity.  Henning 
Moritzen is quite good as Helge, the rich and manipulative stoic.  
Another stunning performance is turned in by Thomas Bo Larsen.  We 
despise his Michael, but cannot stop watching him as his loyalty turns 
sour and finally strong.  
Vinterberg opens another of the Klingenfeldt family's veins when 
Helene's boyfriend pulls up to the party in a taxi.  Another conflict 
arises:  he is black.  Gbatokai (played by Gbatokai Dakinah) is 
apparently an American (who understands much more Danish than he 
speaks).  The theme of brutality quickly surfaces when Michael 's 
bigotry nearly starts a fight, and later when he incites a racist song 
inside the parlor, a ditty joined in gleefully by many members of the 
family.  But Vinterberg knows that balance is often key to the worth of 
a story.  When four of the characters let down their guards during a 
wild dance, we see the possibility of redemption and love, and we hope 
the characters see it too.
Vinterberg juggles big themes here, themes with overtones of Bergman and 
even of the great Norwegian Henrik Ibsen, whose play 'Ghosts' echoes 
with the statement, 'The sins of the father are visited upon the son.'  
What we see are some ultramodern spins womped up by a combination of 
witty risks - the tour-de-force of the repeated toasts - blended with 
virtuoso cinematography.  'The Celebration' has been nominated for an 
Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film.  I was surprised that so 
many English expressions turn up in the speech of the Danish characters.  
I think that Americans, at least the ones that get past the subtitles, 
will find several more reasons to like the film.  It is so refreshing to 
see a non-American point of view.  Although 'The Celebration' is as 
heavy and dark as stories get, I would recommend it as an affirmation 
both of life and of fresh approaches to filmmaking. 


Author
Christopher Null
     Does anything come out of Denmark that's not disturbing?
     A grand experiment that is a smashing success, THE CELEBRATION
adheres to the principles of "Dogme 95," a collective of filmmakers who
swear to adhere to certain rules in filmmaking: no studio shooting,
location sound only, no music, hand-held camera only, natural light
only, etc.  The full manifesto has ten rules, *none* of which are
commonly adhered to in Hollywood.  It's a real surprise to see how
magnificent these rules can be when put into the context of a good
script and good acting.
     But enough about the method.  The story is one of a family
unraveling during the celebration of the father's 60th birthday.  As it
turns out, dear old dad's done some pretty unspeakable things, and today
is payback.
     I won't spoil the rest for you, but THE CELEBRATION remains the
best (okay, the only) foreign film I've seen this year.  If you're a fan
of cinema that keeps you up late and doesn't have a bunch of teen
screamers... this one's for you.
Director: Thomas Vinterberg
Producer: Birgitte Hald
Writer: Thomas Vinterberg
Starring: Ulrich Thomsen, Henning Moritzen, Thomas Bo Larsen, Paprika
Steen, Birthe Neumann, Trine Dyrholm
-Christopher Null  /  null@sirius.com  /  Writer-Producer  / 
http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE CELEBRATION (FESTEN)
(October)
Starring:  Ulrich Thomsen, Henning Moritzen, Thomas Bo Larsen, Paprika
Steen, Birthe Neumann, Trine Dyrholm, Helle Dolleris, Gbatokai Dakinah.
Screenplay:  Thomas Vinterberg and Mogens Rukov.
Producer:  Birgitte Hald.
Director:  Thomas Vinterberg.
MPAA Rating:  Unrated (could be R for adult themes, nudity and profanity)
Running Time:  101 minutes.
In English and Danish with English subtitles.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     THE CELEBRATION's Klingenfeldt clan is one of those families that
proves Tolstoy's assertion about unhappy families being unhappy in their
own unique ways.  More to the point, it's a family that makes you feel
better about your own unhappy family.  Eldest son Christian (Ulrich
Thomsen) wallows in depression over his twin sister's recent death;
brother Michael (Thomas Bo Larsen) is still in hot water over his
alcohol-fueled scene at the last family gathering; sister Helene (Paprika
Steen) creates a stir by bringing black boyfriend Gbatokai (Gbatokai
Dakinah) to meet her less-than-politically correct relatives.  Throwing
these people together for a weekend on a country estate celebrating father
Helge's (Henning Moritzen) 60th birthday would be enough to insure plenty
of recrimination to go around.
     That's the kind of character truth "Dogma '95" -- a manifesto for a
return to bare bones filmmaking created by several leading Danish
directors -- was supposed to engender.  Yet at times THE CELEBRATION feels
forced and artificial, merely in a different way than the forced and
artifical genre films implicitly criticized by Dogma '95.  The gathering 
in the story eventually comes to focus on the removal of a jurassic-sized
skeleton from the family closet, and the reactions of all the family
members to what has been revealed.  Some of those reactions ring jarringly
true, like Michael's attempt to return himself to his father's good graces
by removing the cause of the trouble.  Others feel silly, like the
machinations of the family cook to help air the dirty laundry.  But good
or bad, all the reactions spring from a bombshell rather than the typical
exchanges of small artillery that make for most family tension.
     It all seems terribly unnecessary considering how perceptively
Vinterberg and co-scripter Mogens Rukov capture the more mundane animosity
and foolishness of family gatherings.  When grandfather rises to tell the
same slightly risque joke for the second time in the evening, all and
sundry indulge him, chuckling and applauding just as merrily as the first.
Michael treats his wife Mette (Helle Dolleris) with such a basic contempt
that he leaves to walk a mile with the children when he picks up Christian
in their small car.  Helene's mother (Birthe Neumann) "mistakes" Gbatokai
for Helene's previous boyfriend, a Latino, with a casual and oblivious
racism.  Vinterberg and his exceptional cast -- Thomas Bo Larsen is
particularly good as the younger son overflowing with toxic anger -- find
moments of greatness in these simple conflicts.  They're the sort of
things all families contend with, the things that make people want to take
blood relations and make them bloody relations.
     Indeed, Vinterberg's point may have been that the more extreme
example of family crisis that supercedes the others is more common than
we'd like to believe.  If so, it still feels like an authenticity that
draws too much attention to itself.  Curiously, the same could be said for
the rigid film-making prescriptions of the Dogma '95.  The hand-held
camerawork, washed-out video-to-film cinematography, location shooting and
absence of underscore music were intended to subsume "auteurism" in favor
of story, but they simply become an auteurism of a different sort.  As
effectively as the location serves to intensify the claustrophobia of a
family forced to confront its demons, the look and sound of THE
CELEBRATION -- or lack thereof -- just make you aware of how different
this film looks and sounds than other films, exactly when the familiarity
of the situations should come into focus.
     Some might argue the same was true of the most notable previous Dogma
'95 effort, Lars Von Trier's BREAKING THE WAVES.  Yet in that film, the
style supported the instability of the main character's world;
thematically, the look was of a piece with the story.  In THE CELEBRATION,
that same look works far less effectively, because it feels like an
exercise rather than a choice.  When Vinterberg nails the truth of basic
family interaction, it's easy to overlook that exercise.  Later, when a
dramatic plot point takes over, it starts to seem that too much has been
imposed on these characters from without -- a bad dogma starts to run over
all its great karma.

Author
Bryant Frazer
       CELEBRATION trots out that old chestnut, the "dark family
       secret," to enliven a birthday party for the 60-year-old
       patriarch of a large Danish clan. Director Thomas Vinterberg
       has signed onto the Copenhagen-based Dogme 95 collective of
       filmmakers, agreeing to a "vow of chastity" that precludes
       the use of props and constructed sets as well as any optical
       effects, special lighting, post-synchronized sound, or
       anything but handheld camerawork. The result is an edgy
       picture that's all the more impressive for what it does
       within its rigid aesthetic, but ultimately delivers less than
       it promises.
       Ulrich Thomsen is Christian, one of three adult siblings
       arriving at the party. Sister Helene and brother Michael are
       regarded by the family as somewhat less successful than
       Christian. The fourth, absent sibling is Diane, Christian's
       twin, who drowned herself in one of the house's bathtubs just
       two months previous to the gathering. Christian remains
       shattered by the loss, not least because he was the only
       family member not to receive a final telephone call or letter
       from his beloved sister. When Christian stands to make a
       speech, it's not to celebrate the family but rather to
       excoriate it, bringing some troublesome demons out of the
       past and into the harsh light of the present.
       Despite the nature of Christian's revelations -- he claims
       that, as children, both he and his sister were the unwilling
       objects of dad Helge's incestuous sexual desires -- the
       unflappable gathering is not scandalized, but merely taken
       down a notch for a moment or two. Dad denies the allegations,
       and Mom makes a point of Christian's active imagination and
       his difficulty separating fantasy from reality. Sullen and
       increasingly intoxicated, Christian plans to intensify his
       attack on the facade of normalcy that the family hides
       behind. In denial, Michael eventually responds to the
       allegations by dragging Christian out of the house
       altogether.
       Also effective is the sense that the house is haunted, not
       literally but figuratively, by the ghost of a suicide. And
       more upsetting than any of the talk about incest and suicide
       is the scene where, after Helene's black boyfriend arrives at
       the party, Michael leads the revelers in an effortless
       rendition of an old racist drinking song about a "black
       Sambo." For a few moments, Vinterberg extrapolates the
       blissful ignorance of this family to some larger
       cross-section of Scandinavian culture, and that's where the
       movie sinks its teeth in.
       Finally, I've got to say that this tactic of shooting on
       video and then transferring to film is starting to wear me
       out. Popularized by fellow Dogme signatory Lars von Trier,
       who used it to good, semi-documentary effect in BREAKING THE
       WAVES, I'm sorry to see it exalted in the supposedly
       truth-finding work of Dogme 95 filmmakers. While the effect
       can be striking, it's also distracting to see video artifacts
       blown up and exhibited on a big movie theater screen in a way
       that should be anathema to filmmakers seeking truth at 24
       frames per second. In other words: "Congratulations, Mr.
       Vinterberg. You have succeeded in making your film look more
       like television."
       --------------------------------------------------------------
       Directed by Thomas Vinterberg
       Written by Vinterberg and Mogens Rukov
       Cinematography by Anthony Dod Mantle
       Edited by Valdis Oskarsdóttir
       Starring Ulrich Thomsen, Thomas Bo Larsen, and Paprika Steen
       Theatrical aspect ratio: 1.37:1, per Dogme 95 specs
       Denmark, 1998
       --------------------------------------------------------------

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The audience tittered when before the film a certificate was shown
saying the film followed Dogma 95. Indeed, even the filmmakers who
subscribe to Dogma 95 do not know if it is serious.  Dogma 95 is a
Danish movement in filmmaking that is a reaction to over-polished,
unrealistic Hollywood films.  Films made with Dogma 95 conventions are
shot generally with a hand-held camera with natural sound.  Shooting is
done on location rather than at a studio.  The effect of the unsteadied
hand-held camera give THE CELEBRATION the feel of a sound home movie,
but the lack of music gives it also some of the immediacy of a stage
play. My wife claimed that BREAKING THE WAVES made her seasick and this
film did much the same.  It clearly has a very positive effect by
fighting burgeoning film budgets.  The crudeness of the production adds
a certain credibility to the story.  Like monochrome it contributes to
the mood.  And oddly an unfinished photographic style gives a film more
credibility in the same way that saturated Technicolor makes it less
credible.
     THE CELEBRATION is made with Dogma 95 conventions and like Dogma
95 it is a mixed bag of positive and negative touches.  The film is 105
minutes, but seems longer because it takes almost an hour to get to the
serious content.  By the time one gets to the serious content, one has
almost forgotten the blur of people in the first hour.  Lost is
characterization that would be interesting once one could place the
characters in the main story line.  In the spirit of Dogma 95 parsimony
the film has a minimum of music--the first music in THE CELEBRATION is
a music box heard over the end-titles.
     It is Helge's 60th birthday and the entire extended family is
gathering to attend a gala party at a hotel Helge (Henning Moritzen)
manages.  Arriving are older son Christian (Ulrich Thomsen), younger
son Michael (Thomas Bo Larsen), and middle daughter Helene (Paprika
Steen).  The fourth child, Christian's twin sister had committed
suicide some time earlier.  We see some family tensions, but at first
they do not amount to much.  Finally the banquet begins and the
children start toasting their father.  Christian's toast starts fulsome
and typical of what one would expect, but in the middle he throws in an
accusation that Helge had sexually molested him and Linda.  People do
not know what to make of this little piece of unpleasantness.  If
Christian will only apologize the party can continue, but each time
Christian makes a speech he broadens on the accusation.  What is there
to do so that the party can go on?
     Once the story gets going the drama is powerful and has overtones
of American scandal politics making it much more topical than director
and co-writer Thomas Vinterberg could have expected.  Though the story
loses some of its potential impact by resolving whether the accusations
are true, there is a very good play in the second half of this film.
If Vinterberg had started with the banquet and elaborated on people's
reactions this could have been a very powerful piece of social
commentary.  As it is it wastes too much of the viewer's time getting
where it needed to go and then never sufficiently develops characters
like Helge's wife.
     This is an okay film that missed its opportunities to be a really
powerful experience.  While Dogma 95 will turn off some users, the
film's taking too long to get to its real story is its biggest flaw. I
rate it a 6 on the 0 to 10 scale and a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Steve Rhodes
As is the custom in Denmark, the eldest son in THE CELEBRATION (FESTEN)
is first to read his congratulatory speech at his father's birthday
party.  The 60 year old father, Helge, played with confident assurance
by Henning Moritzen, beams at his grown son as he waits for his son's
praises, as do the others staying overnight at the family's hotel.
The handsome and smiling son, Christian, played in a highly nuanced and
masterful performance by Ulrich Thomsen, has no intention of delivering
the speech the guests expect.  Several dozen guests, including his
younger brother and sister, are flabbergasted by what they hear.  He
accuses his father of repeatedly molesting him and his now dead twin
sister when they were kids.  Like the boy who said the emperor has no
clothes, he has made an incredible accusation.
How shocked are the assembled listeners?  After a short pause to catch
their breaths, they continue with the festivities as if the speech had
never occurred.  Laughter soon fills the dinning room again.
THE CELEBRATION is a marvelously inventive piece of filmmaking by
director Thomas Vinterberg, a signer of the "Dogme 95," whose seal
solemnly graces the opening like a huge Good Housekeeping Seal of
Approval.  In 1995, 4 Danish directors, including Lar von Trier
(BREAKING THE WAVES), took a "Vow of Chastity" regarding their cinematic
techniques.  Among the list of proscribed techniques are the use of
artificial sounds, sets, locations and lighting.  Most notably, all
cameras must be handheld.  And the director must remain uncredited.
It gets even more ludicrous in that the press kit contains the
director's "Confession" to every time his broke his vows.  He confesses,
for example, to once covering a window to block out the sunlight.  He
also brought in a desk not originally at the hotel.  Shocking.
Shocking.  As silly as all of this sounds, it works beautifully, and I
am not making any of it up.
Since Christian later recants his claims of abuse, the story is not only
a character study of a dysfunctional family but also a mystery as well.
The living sister discovers a hidden note from her dead sister, which
she reads and quickly conceals.  This further enhances the mystery.
In a theater of the absurd, the guests sing happy songs and do line
dances, while the fury builds within the family.  In an explosive
performance Thomas Bo Larsen plays the younger son, and Paprika Steen
plays the troubled, living sister.  Every member of the family seems in
constant danger of violent eruption although fewer outbursts occur than
one might expect. Even the staff get involved in the family squabbles by
launching a rebellion in favor of one side.
The richly textured story twists and turns until it seems to have
painted itself into a corner where only a cliched ending is possible.
Then, viola, pulling a rabbit out of the celluloid hat, it comes up with
a completely fresh and satisfying resolution.
THE CELEBRATION runs 1:45.  The film is in Danish with English
subtitles.  It is rated R for sex, nudity, profanity, mild violence and
brief dope smoking and would be acceptable for older and mature teens.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz
CELEBRATION, THE (FESTEN)(director/writer:Thomas Vinterberg;
screenwriter: Mogens Rukov; cinematographer:Anthony Dod Mantle; cast:
Ulrich Thomsen (Christian), Henning Moritzen (Helge),Thomas Bo Larsen
(Michael), Paprika Steen (Helene), Birthe Neumann (Elsie ), Helle
Dolleris (Mette),Trine Dyrholm (Pia ),Therese Glahn (Michelle), Bjarne
Henriksen (Chef), Gbatokai Dakinah (Gbatokai), Klaus Bondam
(Toastmaster), Lene Laub Oksen (Linda), 1998-Denmark)
This is a Dogma 95 styled film, where the Danish filmmaker's group
manifesto determines the rules for how the film is to be made. The idea
is to give their films a fresh look and for them to provide the
unexpected, and to catch on film the complete truth from its characters
and their situations. This film was shot with a small video camera (a
Sony PC7) that fits in the palm of your hand, then it is transferred to
the prescribed Dogma 35-millimeter format. I suppose it is fair to
assume that one of the reasons that this manifesto was drawn up in 1995
by four Danish filmmakers--Christian Levring, Soren Kragh-Jacobsen,
Thomas Vinterberg, and Lars von Trier-- was to give them publicity and
challenge the film community to create innovative films. So far the only
two films I saw from this group, von Trier's The Idiots & BREAKING THE
WAVES, have been  challenging and impressive films.
For those interested in what their Dogma document actually states, I
give you the following example:
Rules like that rub me the wrong way. What I ask from a film, is for it
to be imaginative and well-made, and I don't particularly care how the
filmmaker accomplishes that.
Henning Moritzen is Helge (played with a restraint and a certain
brilliance, not allowing himself to become a stereotypical villain).
Helge, a prosperous patriarch, is celebrating his sixtieth birthday by
having his family and friends come to his country-estate hotel for his
bourgeois birthday party, complete with a hired toastmaster (Bondam) to
keep things looking well-organized and professional. The celebration
will turn into a feast of dark family secrets revealed "bombshell style"
in front of all the guests and hotel staff, while everyone tries to
catch their breath and figure out how to act.
It would be impossible to go into the minute details of the film without
immeasurably spoiling it for the viewer who hasn't seen the film. My
pleasure in seeing it was that I was caught completely unaware of what
was to occur and that shock kept me absorbed in the story, not quite
knowing what to expect next. This might be the secret reason why the
film worked so well, as I was made to feel like one of the guests in
this theatrical film.
The psychically crippled children and their estranged relationship with
their father is the key to the story. Christian (Ulrich Thomsen) is the
eldest son, brooding that his twin sister, Linda, has within the year
taken her life in her bathtub. He missed her funeral, which was the last
family gathering and hasn't seen anyone in the family for quite a while,
living in Paris, even owning a few restaurants there. But Christian's
mission for coming to this party has a definite purpose, it is to let
his father know what has been on his mind ever since childhood. He will
be able to accomplish this mission with the help of the hotel staff who
keep the guests from leaving by stealing their car keys, and with the
needed personal aid of the chef (Bjarne), his childhood friend, who will
see to it that he gets a chance to get his message across. He will also
get solace from the pretty waitress Pia (Trine), who is in love with
this troubled soul. Then there is the youngest in the family, Michael
(Thomas Bo Larsen), Christian's volatile brother whom the family is
ashamed of because of his crudeness and instability, who is married to a
vulgar woman (Helle Dolleris), whom he treats like a dog. But, at least,
he is the only one of the children to provide his father with three
grandchildren. Helene (Paprika Steen) is the flighty sister who studied
anthropology and now wants to be a singer, suffering from depression,
who brings an American black man (Gbatokai) to the celebration, which
will culminate in the families' racist feelings coming out in the open.
All the children are disappointments to the incestuous father. Their
mother (Birthe) acts as the father's voice of reason in all the family
matters, trying to soothe out the wrinkles in their life by turning a
blind eye to what she sees, until even she can't look away any more.
The result of the film was exhilerating, Dogma or not, it is a work that
is scathing, penetrating layers of deceit and festering wounds that
cannot be healed. The guests were  left confused by all the startling
revelations they were privy to, some wanting to just leave but couldn't,
some trying to decide if what they were hearing was true or not but
amazingly taking it all in stride, as if they were shock-proof. But the
cruel truth and tenseness rule the weekend, even when all the
disturbances are deftly handled by the  toastmaster who tried to keep
the traditional birthday party afloat with good cheer and dance and
games. But it was to no avail.
To point out how the guests weren't quite sure of anything that was
happening there, they are shown eating lobster, or salmon, or tomato
soup, each one unsure of what they were served.
The Celebration is indeed a celebration not to be forgotten soon. It
drains the emotions, somehow satisfies the intellect, and challenges the
conventions of the usual fare of sophisticated family drama. I felt like
I was serving as a witness for this dysfunctional family, asked to judge
the family head as he is forced into finding out who he really is.
Vinterberg declares how the impact of Helge's revelation affected
everyone in the immediate family, and how that acted as a cleansing for
the tribe, something that was essential for their psyches. At least,
they now have some kind of a shot of pulling themselves together, even
though the film does not show any of them changing internally. They are
still their old selves (good and bad) after the revelations come out,
but only this time they are all on the right side and are more armed
with information about what went on as they were growing up. And how the
film accomplished this, was through good storytelling, where one doesn't
need any false constraints, something that is reminiscent of Greek
tragedy or Shakespearean drama.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Thomas Vinterberg.
Cast: Ulrich Thomsen, Henning Moritzen, Thomas Bo Larsen, Paprika Steen, 
Birthe Neumann, Trine Dyrholm, Helle Dolleris, Gbatokai Dakinah, Therese 
Glahn, Klaus Bondam, John Boas, Erna Boas.
1998 - 101 minutes - Danish with English subtitles.
Rated R (for violence, profanity, sex, and nudity).
Reviewed December 10, 1998.
By Dustin Putman 
Dustin Putman's Film Reviews ">Http://members.aol.com/filmfan16/index.html>
The characters in the Danish director Thomas Vinterberg's remarkable 
film, "The Celebration," are so full of hate, resentment, and 
unhappiness, that it sometimes grew nearly unbearable to watch them 
anymore. And yet, the film is such an emotional powerhouse without going 
for cheap dramatics that I couldn't turn my back on it.
"The Celebration," is set during a 24-hour period, in which an extended 
family has gathered at a country estate to celebrate the 60th-birthday 
of the family patriarch, Helge (Henning Moritzen). Right from the very 
first scene, in which, on his way to the party, Michael (Thomas Bo 
Larsen) spots his older brother, Christian (Ulrich Thomsen), travelling 
by foot, and subsequently throws his own wife and three children out of 
the car, we get a taste of how dysfunctional this family is. Early on, 
we also meet Helene (Paprika Steen), Michael and Christian's sister, and 
Pia (Trine Dyrholm), who has loved Christian ever since chilhood, but 
has not been able to connect with him since his twin sister committed 
suicide two months ago. All of these characters and story threads 
finally come together at the actual birthday celebration that night, in 
which everything begins to unravel and fall apart when Christian, giving 
a speech at dinner, unexpectedly reveals some brutal hidden secrets that 
he has kept bottled up for years about his father, Helge.
"The Celebration," is the first film to be released under Dogme 95, a 
Danish film agreement established in Copenhagen, which requires the 
director to make the film with a hand-held camera using natural light, 
and without any sort of special-effects or music score. The purpose is 
to give the Dogme 95 films a realism and aspect of spontaneity that 
could not be captured otherwise. Considering this, "The Celebration," is 
an interesting first experiment, but also an, overall, exceptional 
motion picture that, truth be told, gives off an air of instinctivity 
and nauralism that has never been caught in a fictional film before.
Aside from this truly unique aspect, "The Celebration," is a brutal, 
unbelievably stark motion picture about family wounds and secrets. It 
would be criminal to spoil the surprises within, but once Christian 
reveals his past to the whole family, I was in a state of shock and 
dread throughout the rest of the film. Prior to this fateful moment, I 
had pretty much decided what I thought of all of the characters---I 
liked Christian and Helge, but found Michael to be a despicable, abusive 
human being---but once that turning point came, the film forced me to 
question and judge the family again, as individuals and as a whole. And 
even as more and more striking plot developments occurred, I had a 
difficult time deciphering the good from the bad, and the truth from 
what could very well be dirty, unforgivable lies. 
The actors, most of which appeared in Vinterberg's first, and lesser 
known film, "The Greatest Heroes," are all meticulous and unforgettable, 
from Ulrich Thomsen, as Christian, who feels it is time to get his 
miserable childhood out in the open, to Thomas Bo Larsen as the edgy 
Michael, to Paprika Steen, as Helene, who turns out to be hiding secrets 
of her own. Henning Moritzen was perfect as the father, Helge, who 
drifts throughout the film as being both touching and helpless, even 
though we sense he is capable of some very terrible things. Also making 
an impact is Gbatokai Dakinah, as Helene's black boyfriend who shows up 
unnanouced at the party, much to the disgrace of the rest of the family.
The camerawork and cinematography by Birgitte Hald, as in the Dogme 
rules, was done with a hand-held camera, which was a smart choice, since 
the shaky, unsettling movements reflect the family's gradually crumbling 
relationship in the film. The picture was also filmed in drab, 
yellow-brownish colors which also telegraphed the idea of a family 
off-balance. 
Watching the picture, it felt more like a cerebral experience, than a 
normal film. In a decidedly weak year for movies, "The Celebration," is 
certainly one of the year's very best. It made me feel things deep 
inside myself, which caught me by an even greater surprise, when 
compared to the trivialities of most of the films being made in today's 
times. There was never a false moment to be had; not with the 
characters, or the writing, which is superb, or with the deep truths of 
the story. When, "The Celebration," ended, it left me with conflicting 
emotions about what had gone on between the family. On the one hand, I 
had the suspicion that maybe the family would be able to work things 
out, but that was only my own ideal thoughts. In actuality, I knew that 
when one person simply told the other, "you can go now," that was the 
definitive end to the family, and yet, the start of happiness and relief 
from some of the characters. Funny, how a harmless get-together between 
loved-ones can start out as a rejoicing of togetherness, and end as a 
rejoicing of separation between those who now hate each other. 
