Title
Review for Mixed Nuts (1994)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Ben Hoffman
     It is Christmas when many are so saddened by their lot in life
that they would like to end it all by suicide but that will not happen,
of course, if the screenplay is written by Nora and Delia Ephron and a
cast of stars who go all out to be their zaniest.   So, relax. There is
lots in this lightweight film that will make you laugh.
     Philip (Steve Martin) runs his own suicide prevention hotline
service in Venice, California, a hip little town near the beach just
south of Santa Monica.   Everything is going wrong tonight for him and
his dedicated bunch of volunteers who answer the phones.  For starters,
the landlord (Garry Shandling), is is about to evict them.  Catherine
O'Shaughnessey (Rita Wilson), has a secret love for Philip; she is also
afraid of ending up an old maid.
     Running away with the movie in one of her funniest roles is
Madeline Kahn playing Blanche Mutchnik, who picks on everyone, the
callers and the volunteers.  Everything happens to her, too, including
getting stuck in an elevator in a most hilarious scene only Kahn could
pull off.
     Also in the cast are Chris (Liev Schreiber), a lonely transvestite
who does a great dance with Philip; Gracie (Juliette Lewis in as far
away as one can get from her Natural Born Killers killer role); Felix
(Anthony Paglia), with whom she has an argument on Christmas Eve; Rob
Klein as a miserable tenant and his three dogs: Dr. Kinsky (Rob
Reiner) a veterinarian ... and more.
     While the film does have one funny scene after another, it just
quite misses out on being a "must see," but go see it anyway if only
for Kahn and Martin.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Steve Martin, Rita Wilson, Madeline Kahn, Juliette Lewis, 
          Anthony LaPaglia, Liev Schreiber, Adam Sandler, Robert Klein 
Director: Nora Ephron 
Producers: Paul Younger Witt, Tony Thomas, and Joseph Hartwick 
Screenplay: Delia Ephron and Nora Ephron 
Cinematography: Sven Nykvist 
Music: George Fenton 
Released by TriStar Pictures 
     There must be something about the combination of Steve Martin and
Nora Ephron that doesn't work.  Anyone remember MY BLUE HEAVEN? (For
that matter, does anyone want to remember MY BLUE HEAVEN?)  Regardless
of how dreadfully unfunny that Martin/Ephron collaboration was (she
wrote it; he starred in it), it was only a precursor to MIXED NUTS, as
unwatchable a motion picture as you're likely to find this Christmas
season.  (For a really memorable night, see it back-to-back with
TRAPPED IN PARADISE.)
     The movie can boast one rather impressive first, however.  Even
though she has a fairly hefty part, Juliette Lewis somehow manages not
to be the most annoying person on screen.  At least three others have a
more legitimate claim to that title.  There's Adam Sandler (AIRHEADS),
who whines and whimpers his way through the role of the
ukulele-strumming Louie; Liev Schreiber, who overacts as the
angst-riddled crossdresser Chris; and Madeline Kahn, whose Mrs.
Munchnik (sounds like the wife of the florist from LITTLE SHOP OF
HORRORS) sings off-key rap songs in stuck elevators.
     How Steve Martin got involved in this mess is something of a
mystery, although his choice of movies has been slipping recently
(MIXED NUTS follows in the wake of this year's A SIMPLE TWIST OF FATE
and 1992's LEAP OF FAITH).  Here, as Philip, the proprietor of a Los
Angeles crisis phone line, the comedian appears lost.  His jokes fall
flat and his attempts at manic physical humor come across as forced and
unnatural.
     As for Ephron, it's hard to believe that this film is the work of
the same woman who wove the magic and romance of WHEN HARRY MET SALLY
(which she wrote) and SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE (which she wrote and
directed).  There's certainly nothing here to remind an audience of her
previous efforts.
     MIXED NUTS revolves around the lives of a group of inert
caricatures brought together for an incredibly tedious Christmas Eve.
In addition to the aforementioned people, there's the timid, mousy
Catherine (Rita Wilson, aka Mrs. Tom Hanks), who's secretly in love
with Philip, and her best friend Gracie (Lewis), a pregnant woman who
can't make up her mind whether or not she wants to spend the rest of
her life with her unborn baby's father (Anthony LaPaglia).  Also
dropping in for a scene or two are the likes of Rob Reiner (as a
veterinarian who stitches up people), Robert Klein (as a dog-loving
mechanic), and Garry Shandling (as Mr. Tannenbaum--the name is a clue
to his eventual fate).
     It boggles the mind that someone actually allowed this choppy,
unpolished script to reach the production stage.  There's nothing even
remotely funny here.  Lines like "I didn't want to tell you this over
the phone--I really wanted to fax you" are representative of the
quality--or lack thereof--of the so-called humor.  And there's a
version of "Deck the Halls" that may make you wish you never hear the
song again.
     MIXED NUTS makes a point of stating that there's magic at
Christmas.  After seeing this movie, I'm a believer.  After all, it's
virtually impossible to come up with an alternate explanation of how
something this awful could make it to theaters across the nation.
The above represents the opinions of the author, and not necessarily those of
Bellcore or any organization within Bellcore.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com) 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     MIXED NUTS, which originally had the title of LIFE SAVERS until
that title tested poorly, is the latest Steve Martin movie.  In MIXED
NUTS he runs a crisis prevention center called Life Savers.  People who
are about to shoot themselves call the center as do terminally ill
patients, men in drag, lonely people and, of course, ha ha, people who
just want to talk dirty.
     Oops, I forgot to tell you a key fact; theoretically, this is a
comedy.  Their brand of humor is created by shouting at each other, by
providing loud music that tries to put you in a laughing mood, and by
having numerous sight gags.  A typical sight gag is people
rollerbladding down the street carrying a Christmas tree between them.
An irritated boyfriend then runs into them and knocks the tree over.
Boy, that one sure put me in stitches.
     In order to give you a proper grasp of the scale of the quality of
the script (written by the director Nora Ephron), let me provide you
with the very best piece of writing in the whole movie.  Steve Martin
calls his girl friend, and she tells him she is breaking up with him
since she has been dating someone else for 4 months.  She then
complains that she wanted to tell him, but "I did not want to do it
over the phone like this.  I wanted to fax you, but you don't even have
a fax!"  As soon as your uncontrollable laughter has subsided after
reading that last sentence, you can continue reading this review.
     There are other people in the show, and in fact, the movie is
filled with quirky characters.  I will not embarrass them by mentioning
any of their names other than Juliette Lewis who was so bad that she
deserves a special mention.
     The movie is set in Santa Barbara but the camerawork is so cutesy
that it manages to make one of the loveliest towns in California just
look silly and dreary.
     The director should be shot.  Surely when she watched the dailies
she realized that all of the so called jokes were falling flat.  Then
again, perhaps she did and that is why she had them start shouting at
each other and why she added the zippy soundtrack to makes us forget
the "plot".  The producer should have gotten a different writer and
probably another director or better yet, he should have just given up
on the whole project.
     I think Steve Martin is the best comedic actor that there is.
Nevertheless, he was pathetic in this movie.  I am such a big fan of
his that I lay most of the blame on the character he was given.  If
Ephron had just let Martin cut lose and ad lib some it would have made
for a much better time at the movies.
     MIXED NUTS takes forever to finish but actually runs only 1:37.
It is rated PG-13 which I agree with.  I recommend you avoid this show
at all cost, and I give it 1/2 of a star because, although the movie
was a disaster from start to finish, at least it was more stupid than
offensive.  [Finally, since you are all dying to know, the title MIXED
NUTS comes from the fact that the lead character's Dad was killed by a
truck of mixed nuts - another memorable line.]
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: December 22, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
