Title
Review for Siddhartha (1973)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
This adaptation of Herman Hesse's novel was obviously a personal project 
for producer-director-screenwriter Conrad Rook.  Those who have embraced 
the book should be relieved that it was placed in good hands.  Simple 
tale recounts the life of young Brahmin Siddhartha who leaves his 
village to become a sadhu (a wandering holy man who lives on the charity 
of others) in order to achieve enlightenment.  Story appeals because it 
brings large philosophical ideas down to a basic human level that we are 
able to relate to.  Siddharta's journey takes him from Brahmin to 
ascetic to lover to laborer to father.  He undergoes a spiritual rebirth 
with each new step, until he becomes his own teacher.  What is most 
interesting about this film is that we never feel in any position to 
judge Siddhartha as he shifts from one lifestyle to another - we simply 
accept it as part of a learning curve he must put himself through.  
This, of course, is what Hesse is propounding all along.  But there is 
certainly no cause for us to feel smug: Siddhartha voices his thoughts 
and revelations so eloquently that we are always respectful of him (I 
particularly like his speech at the end of the film about the stone).  
Even though the characters sum up enlightenment in a few words 
("Everything returns"; "I can think, I can wait, I can fast"), it 
doesn't come across as axiomatic or trite: these simple expressions 
reassure us that such discoveries are not exclusive to holy men. 
Rook uses images (gorgeously photographed by Sven Nykvist in Northern 
India) and music to bring the book to life without sacrificing any of 
its gentleness.  The dialogue, as spoken by Shashi Kapoor (as Siddharta) 
and his companions, has a gentle rhythm of its own.  Even the name 
'Siddharta' alone is pronounced with a relaxing, peaceful lilt.  It's 
almost as if Rook knows just how far to go before making his audience 
nod off into sleep. Hesse's slim novel translates to the screen more 
comfortably than his other voyage-of-discovery story STEPPENWOLF.

