Title
Review for Belly (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "BELLY" (Artisan Entertainment)
      Hype Williams' rambling, confused gangsta rap story revolves
around lifelong pals turned drug dealers. Tommy Brown (Earl Simmons,
known as the rapper DMX) and Sincere (Nasir Jones, known as Nas) grew
up in the projects in Queens; now they're living in luxury on Long
Island. Each one decides to take a different path. Sincere's into
family life, perhaps a movie to Africa, trying to distance himself
from the chaos of illegal drug trafficking, while greedy Tommy's
getting in deeper and deeper with a superpowered heroin manufactured
in Omaha, Nebraska. Predictably, conflicts occur - and the
heavy-handed finale, set on New Year's Eve, 1999, revolves around an
interminable diatribe about ending mindless violence and saving
mankind, punctuated by a hallelujah chorus in the background. Hype
Williams' murky directing style stems from MTV, combining slow-motion,
rapid cuts, strobe effects, and a multitude of fish-eye shots and,
presumably, the actors are better at rapping than they are at
emoting. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Belly" is a stoned
2. It's hard to stomach.

Author
Michael Dequina
The feature debut of hot hip-hop music video director Hype Williams serves
up what one would expect from that fact: music stars in the cast (rappers
DMX, Nas, and Method Man; singers Tionne "T-Boz" Watkins of TLC, and Taral
Hicks) and, most of all, highly stylized, video-ready visuals.  Williams
pulls out all the stops, employing everything from freeze frames and
frenetic editing to having different scenes and shots ghosted over others.
Williams's tricks are given an added sheen by the rich colors of Malik
Sayeed's stunning cinematography.
But all of Williams's glitz, delicious eye candy as it is, eventually
overshadows his own script.  It's a by-the-numbers story about the fall and
possible redemption of two longtime friends and drug dealers, Tommy (DMX,
showing genuine big screen presence and charisma) and Sincere (Nas), one a
badass (Tommy), one more mellow (the aptly named Sincere) and looking for a
stable life for his wife Tionne (Watkins) and their child.  As
straightforward as that sounds, all the visual style unnecessarily drains
the coherence from the story, which bounces from one image and place to
another with only a voiceover serving as the thin thread tying together the
pieces.  Williams is a name to watch; _Belly_ leaves no doubt as to his
remarkable talent as a visual stylist, and he coaxes convincing work from
his mostly novice cast.  But until his storytelling ability catches up,
he'll remain just that--a name to watch.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
