Title
Review for Silent Partner (2001)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
SILENT PARTNER is a two-person play adapted to the screen with 
virtually no dialog from anyone but John and Bill (played David 
Field and Syd Brisbane).  They are two lowlifes with dreams who 
live mostly on borrowed money and spend it on beer and the 
occasional bet at the dog track.  Through thick accents and 
drunken talk we follow them as they have a shot at the big time.  
A shady kingpin, Alex Silver, sees them at the racetrack and 
decides to use them in a scheme involving dog racing.  Silver 
wants John and Bill to buy a greyhound, care for her, and race her 
locally.  He will give them the money to tend the dog in return 
for 70% of the dog's winnings.  The drunken pair name the dog 
"Silent Partner" after Silver's role in the deal.  Bill develops a 
genuine affection for the dog.  Bill's outings training the dog 
are some of the few scenes where we see him sober and we see John 
sober in even fewer, yet Bill lets John run the show and allows 
himself to become almost a silent partner.  John never doubts he 
has what it takes to swim with the sharks.  Through the alcohol 
haze John thinks he is smart and worldly, though frequently his 
skill seems limited to knowing whom he can hit up for one of the 
ever decreasing loans.  The two have little social life without 
each other and it rarely is at anyplace but bars, the track, the 
squalid filthy house, and the occasional peep show.  People like 
John and Bill are unusual subjects for film, thank goodness. 
The timing of the dialog is a little too perfect to be believed as 
the two talk with nearly perfect timing.  The Daniel Keene's 
dialog, based on his own play, is unnaturally perfect, much as 
David Mamet might craft it.  Mamet might also approve of the 
underbelly society and grimy settings.  Director Alkinos 
Tsilimidos filmed SILENT PARTNER almost linearly to create more 
natural emotions from his actors, but he kept crew ignorant of the 
script to aid in spontaneity.  The film was shot for an amazing 
$7000 US. 
Technically, the film is probably a comedy but it is not the kind 
of comedy that generates laughter.  More frequently it is just an 
exercise in bitter irony.  The songs by Paul Kelly are, like the 
dialog, a little too perfect.  In some cases the songs give away 
plot that is coming.  Americans will likely have some problems 
picking up the entire dialog.  That can be a problem since 
Silver's plan is never clearly explained. 
SILENT PARTNER is a bitter black comedy delivered in a thick 
inebriated Australian accent.  I rate it a 6 on the 0 to 10 scale 
and a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale. 
