Title
Review for Romance (1999)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Dennis Schwartz

ROMANCE (director/writer: Catherine Breillat; cinematographer: Yorgos
Arvanitis; editor: Agnes Guillemot; cast: Caroline Ducey (Marie),
Sagamore Stevenin (Paul), Francois Berleand (Robert), Rocco Siffredi
(Paolo), 1999)
Catherine Breillat (36 Fillette/Perfect Love!) has made a sexually
graphic French film showing a woman's needs in a relationship. Her
seventh feature film has become her only European box office success,
though it has not received the same response in America. It is told from
the point of view of the slender, well-dressed, and attractive
elementary-school teacher, Marie (Ducey), who is married to the handsome
male model, Paul (Stevenin), in what has become a self-destructive
relationship for her. She loves him very much and early on in their
relationship there was much passion, but there is one major problem for
Marie now: Paul hasn't made love to her for months. We watch them in bed
in their modern but sterile all-white apartment and see that he has lost
interest in her even though she is dying to be made love to.
The film wavers between being a philosophical treatise on women and
being about a woman's passions without resolving what any contemporary
woman's magazine currently does (this unresolvement can be seen in both
a positive and a negative sense). The effort here is to push the film
along shock value lines, of pushing it more into the lines of what a
porno film does as routine. What the film does very well, even if it
kills any dramatic spirit there might have been in the film, is that it
voices the private sexual fantasy thoughts of Marie and peeks into her
head as she thinks to herself what she wants a guy to do to her sexually
and what attracts her about a man. Some of her revelations might
surprise the opposite sex, as this film is helpful like a self-help book
is meant to be.
After a distasteful night of sexual frustration, Marie leaves Paul in
bed and heads for the nearest bar, where she meets an actual Italian
porno star Rocco Siffredi. He is Paolo in the movie, whose girlfriend
died in an auto accident and is more than willing to f*ck Marie any way
she wants to. Because of the enormous size of his penis, he pleases one
part of her greatly. She makes no bones about it that she loves the
carnal act. She confides that kissing is intimate and means more to her
than the sex act, since she doesn't care who "stuffs her below." She
only ends this one-night stand when she begins to feel that she is
starting to like Paolo as a person.
At work, she strikes up a relationship with an older, obese, ugly man,
Robert (Berleand). He is the principal of her school and when he takes
her to his bachelor pad designed to attract a wide-assortment of women,
as it is fit with a Jacuzzi as well as bondage equipment, and the
apartment is sensually colored in dark bordello hues of reds. He tells
her he is a great lover, having made love to over 10,000 women, despite
not being rich, handsome, well-built, young, or a celebrity. He tells
her that what he has going for him, is that he knows how to please a
woman sexually and how to listen to her. He tells her that even though
women want to be respected, they want to be taken by a man who desires
them and a stranger usually gets to her first, as a friend is too polite
to act on his impulses. Marie's best comment to this is, "Why do men who
disgust us, understand us best." A sadomasochistic relationship
develops, with limits being established, as she gets off while he ties
her up and gags her. She seems to enjoy this perverse relationship, of
being degraded, better than all her others, as we see her with Robert in
this situation twice.
There are some more sexual fantasies for her: of masturbating with her
legs closed to prove that she doesn't need a man to enjoy herself, and
of meeting with a vulgar stranger who wants to give her $20 just to
taste her vagina, who when she accepts the offer then takes her by force
from behind. A group of gynecologists "invade" her vagina, which allows
her to freely fantasize about this experience. She goes to them after
getting pregnant by Paul, who realizes that she is slipping away from
him and thereby awkwardly makes love to her while she sits atop of him.
She considers it ironical that she makes love to him when she is
cheating on him and that when she was faithful to him he ignored her.
She also has a weird dream of a guillotine-like contraption without
blades dangling over some women's legs. The film ends on a reassuring
note for those who take a more traditional view on what a woman is, as
Ducey says, "They say a woman isn't a woman until she's a mother; it's
true."
Despite the film's coldness, lack of humor, bleak conceptions about
relationships, unappetizing sexual scenes, lack of dramatic tension, and
pretentious philosophizing by Caroline Ducey, it still had something
disturbing to say about relationships that was worth listening to. For
the director, sex is shown to be what fantasies are made of: that it is
all in one's head. To show this, Breillat her heroine be nude for many
scenes and therefore symbolically stripped her of all the illusions she
has about sex, as we watch her act out these fantasies. Though the film
might not always be appealing, it is still not a work of trash; it does
have something to say of what goes on in the marital bedroom. How much
you like what it says might depend on what you thought it was digging at
and if its romantic notions rang a bell in your head. My thoughts are
that the film's presentation didn't particularly excite me, but
afterwards it left me thinking about what it had to say about
relationships, which are still just as great a mystery as God is, and I
began to warm to the film more than while I was watching it. It,
somehow, made me think more about the dark side of a relationship and
for that reason alone, I wouldn't entirely dismiss this film, though I
wonder at what it really was trying to get at.
The body of the film's works is quite different than its ending, which
shows Ducey giving birth to a son and her womanhood supposedly being
fulfilled. Robert is at her bedside as her drunken husband remains in
the apartment, where she opened all the gas jets in the kitchen to cause
an explosion, which kills him.
Breillat is trying to provoke the male viewer to think further about
what a woman craves for in a relationship and calling out for a woman to
seriously think about what she wants in a man and what she is capable of
doing in a relationship. I think this is a film women might be more
appreciative than men.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Trimark Pictures
 Director: Catherine Breillat
 Writer:   Catherine Breillat
 Cast: Caroline Trousselard, Sagamore Stevenin, Francois
Berland, Rocco Siffredi, Reza Habouhossein, Fabien de
Jomaron, Emma Colberti, Ashley Wanninger
 SCREENED AT THE BAM ROSE CINEMAS, 30
LAFAYETTE AVE. BROOKLYN NY 11217  (718) 623-2770.
   I'd like a dollar for every time I've heard a woman
defensively say, "I'm not a feminist, but..." or a couple of
bucks for every man who intones, "I'm all for equal pay for
equal work, but..."  Look around.  It's hard to find people who
will come right and say that they're militant feminists.  What is
feminism anyway?  To try to pigeonhole the theory is like
trying to define "democrat," or "freedom," or "liberal" or
"conservative."  There's a broad range embraced by each of
these terms and perhaps no two conservatives and no two
liberals are exactly alike in their political convictions.  Nor are
any two feminists.
   With the startling, innovative movie "Romance," professed
feminist Catharine Breillat has given us a film quite a bit more
mature and developed than her innocuous "36 Fillette" eleven
years ago (about a 14-year-old who may or not give up her
virginity while on vacation with her parents).  One could
almost say that each time someone in the audience walks out
on it, the more effective the movie is.  Breillat's own take on
feminism is not so much the opposite of the views professed
by Andrew Dworkin in her book "Intercourse" as its converse. 
While Dworkin suggests that the sexual act is yet another
weapon of the male in his history of subjugating women,
Breillat is determined to show that women become
vanquished only when they put up with men who do NOT
give them what they want and need in the erotic arena.  Only
when a woman frees herself from dependence on timid,
restrained, traditional--in a word uncaring--men to satisfy
them can she find her sexual identity and become
transfigured.
   Whether the graphic portrayals of sexual organs in various
modes is essential to bringing out the film-maker's point or
whether the explicit displays or genitalia infuse the movie
primarily to increase profits is anybody's guess.  Breillat might
insist that scenes skirting the borders of hard-core porn are
indispensable to her view that the heroine's discovery of
sexuality must be confronted head-on.  Breillat's opening
scene of Marie (Caroline Ducey) in the virginal-white bedroom
of her lover Paul (Sagamore Stevenin), vividly conveys to us
the extent of her frustration.  Paul, a vain male model with no
small amount of hostility toward his long-term girl friend,
announces that he has lost his sexual desire for her and
refuses to give himself over to her sexual embrace.  Marie--
who will ultimately show the fury of Lorca's Yerma and the
wrath of Euripides' Medea--clings to Paul out of what she
considers her overreaching love for him, but one day
determines to experience sex in all of its sacred and profane
ramifications.  After a brief affair with the Italian Paolo (Rocco
Siffredi) in a bar and later with a bum on an apartment
stairwell, she becomes meaningfully involved with Robert
(Francois Berleand), the principal of a school in which she
teaches second grade.  Robert, who considers himself an
unattractive person of little wealth (despite his spacious
apartment and Jacuzzi), explains matter-of-factly that he's
had 10,000 women.  In his monologue he becomes the film-
makers mouthpiece, venturing subversive ideas: that women
are not at all afraid of the obscene, and that they would
easily yield to a stranger's advances while playing hard-to-get
with men who love them.
   "Romance," which appears to bear an ironic title
considering its detachment, nonetheless may embrace Ms.
Breillat's view that sex IS romance, not the chocolate and
flowers so conventionally associated with the feeling.  The
most verbally amusing scene occurs in Marie's classroom in
which the teacher metaphorically expresses her sexual views
to an obviously uncomprehending group of lovely 7-year-olds. 
Exhibiting less interest in conjugating verbs than in a more
physical type of conjugation, she announces in the lesson on
the term "to have" and on the copulative verb "to be" that
"you can be without having; you can have without being." 
Nor do I recall any other movie that so lovingly and patiently
shows an aroused woman being tied, handcuffed and gagged
by her man, the two becoming excited to a fever pitch without
a dollop of conventional sex.
   The image that sticks most to the mind is of a dream
sequence.  Marie envisions a scene in which women are
lying across bladeless guillotines, their upper bodies
separated from their lowers.  Kind men cater to the former
areas, while the luckier guys on the other end engage them
in raw sex.  A woman needs both.  Breillat appears to believe
that gentle, considerable men are a two francs a dozen. 
What women really lack are the other kind, and her movie will
probably inspire even more post-viewing discussion about its
ideas than about the quality of its story-telling.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Marie (Caroline Trousselard), a grade-school teacher with average looks,
has a host of problems, most of them sexual, in ROMANCE.  Her boyfriend,
Paul (Sagamore Stévenin), who refuses to have sex with her, tells her
frankly that he'd rather be alone reading a book or hanging out with his
male buddies at the local bar.  "I need to cling to him like a leech
because I'm madly in love with him," she explains to us in her constant
and insufferable narration.  She has a proclivity to carry on didactic
philosophical discussions of sexual issues while having sex, a definite
turn off to her partners.
She compensates for her boyfriend's not giving her the sex and the baby
that she wants by having kinky sex with friends and strangers.
ROMANCE by writer/director Catherine Breillat is described in the press
notes as "a daring exploration of female sexuality from a female point
of view."  Featuring an order of magnitude more explicit sex than any
movie this side of a porn film, the graphic depictions are as joyless
and unerotic as a medical textbook.  Even if Breillat has her actors
performing actual, not simulated, oral sex, she does it with such a
clinical detachment that the only reason to applaud the film is for the
risks it is willing to take.  Making it especially hard to endure,
ROMANCE's energy level is as low as its depressed heroine's.
Certainly we have had a large number of movies than explore violence
with graphic realism, so why can't similar ones be made with sexual
realism?  After all, we as a society are much more threatened by
violence than sex.  Whereas there is a case that can be made for making
something this sexually explicit, this movie fails spectacularly.  The
heroine is one notch above an automaton, thanks to the remoteness of the
director's approach.
Marie doesn't respect the men she picks up.  She'll do absolutely
anything with them (the camera makes sure that nothing is hidden), but
she looks away during the act and will use her lips for anything but
kissing the men on the lips.
A typical episode has her being seduced by a middle-age man, Robert
(François Berléand), who likes to tie his women up.  In an excessively
serious picture that is never intentionally funny, these scenes of ropes
and chains and Marie's contorted positions may have some laughing out
loud, since they are so ludicrous.  Robert, who admits that he isn't
handsome, wealthy, or attractive, claims to have made love to over
10,000 women.  His secret?  He's a good listener.  He has other boasts
too, all equally bizarre.
If you're inclined to check this movie out only because of the
titillation factor, don't.  There isn't an exciting moment to be found
in it.  On the contrary, monasteries might be advised to hold recruiting
drives in the lobbies.  If sex is this miserable, abstinence may be an
attractive alternative.
ROMANCE runs 1:35.  The film is in French with English subtitles.  The
movie, which was not submitted to the MPAA for rating, is filled with
actual sex scenes and frequent nudity and would not be appropriate for
anyone other than an adult.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Athan Bezaitis
[filmcritic.com presents a review from guest writer Athan Bezaitis.  You
can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/568a258d1888948788256824000a654a?OpenDocument
It's not every day that you can see a well known porn star acting in
serious cinema.  Of course, ROMANCE is not really worthy of being called
a serious film. While its theme of one woman's struggle to overcome
sexual oppression is innovative, it lacks tact and fails miserably due
to the crudity of its approach.  I refuse to believe that this film is
some sort of groundbreaking phenomenon that French audiences will
appreciate because it's a brilliant "character study" -- and, as such,
that American's will scoff at it.  I saw the movie with two French grad
students who both walked out of the film disappointed and visibly
queasy.
Marie (Caroline Trousselard) is a depressed nymphomaniac school teacher
stuck in a relationship in which she cannot arouse her lover.  The whole
story involves her searching throughout Paris for the fufillment that
her asinine boyfriend denies her.  She defiles her body in the process
as she encounters different men who satisfy her deprived erotic needs.
She is willing to take on everything and everybody: from a vile stranger
on the her apartment stairway who prosteletyzes her for oral sex, to a
dominating masochistic school principal, to porn star Rocco Siffredi
(whose character admits he hasn't had sex in four months).  Can you
imagine what happens there?
The biggest problem with the film is not only its graphic (just about
dragged-out with nothing substantial occurring.  Case in point: the four
sexual encounters take about fifteen minutes each, and any adult can be
spared the explicit details, which fail to add any critical meaning.  If
we didn't want a plot we could have rented one of Rocco's other films.
Even Rocco's biggest fans will be disappointed, because the blue movie
titan fails to satisfy.
Then again, I have to know whether or not that scene was real.  If not,
there were some pretty amazing special effects...
1 star (lowest rating)
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Check out the G-Rex Personal Shopper at http://www.g-rex.com
