Title
Review for In Love and War (1997)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Phil Curtolo
Sandra Bullock may seem to be a good  actress in a role like Annie in
Speed or Lucy in While You Were Sleeping, but when it comes down to
solid performances in strong dramas, she just doesn't cut it.
Fortunately, Richard Attenborough's new film In Love and War didn't call
for Bullock to carry the film. Instead, it based the movie on Chris
O'Donnell's brilliant performance as Ernest Hemingway. 
Set in Italy in World War I (just like the Golden Globe award-winning
The English Patient),  the story is centered on Hemingway's epic war
adventures, especially how he attempted to carry a wounded Italian
soldier through a bombardment. He is seriously injured and is sent to
the local American Red Cross hospital. It is there where he meets the
love of his life, Agnus (Bullock).
Things don't exactly fall into place as Ernie wanted them to. Agnus
feels that he is just an adorable child and that their relationship is
nothing more than a fling. She eventually turns him down for a wealthy
Italian doctor, leaving her war-torn love in pain. The end of the film
leaves a teary Hemingway alone at his father's cabin in Michigan.
The cinematography in the film was twice as beautiful as that in The
English Patient. Background shots ranged from a beautiful mansion on a
river bed to a gorgeous, blooming forest.
In Love and War also features the great young actor Mackenzie Austin
(Iron Will) as Ernie's best friend Harry. He played some what of a
middle man, at first caught in a bitter love triangle and later, as
their messenger.
Attenborough's attempts to recreate the drama behind World War I were
definitely successful. Although most of the film took place in the
hospital, the few battle scenes were one of the best of their kind, much
like Oscar-winner's Glory and Braveheart.
Although the trailer looks to be similar to the disastrous "love-story"
The English Patient, In Love and War shines way above it, in more ways
than one. The cinematography, the acting (of O'Donnell, not Bullock),
and the directing were all much better. 
If you want to see a real love story, don't waste your money on Patient,
instead, see an interesting, romantic drama like In Love and War.
Grade: B, *** out of *****

Author
Edwin Jahiel
IN LOVE AND WAR (1996) **. Directed by Richard Attenborough. Written by
Allan Scott, Clancy Sigal and Anna Hamilton Phelan, based on a screen story
by Scott and Dimitri Villard and the book "Hemingway in Love and War" by
Henry S. Villard and James Nagel.  Photography, Roger Pratt. Editing,Lesley
Walker.Production design, Stuart Craig. Music, George Fenton. Cast:  Sandra
Bullock (Agnes von Kurowsky),  Chris O'Donnell (Ernest Hemingway),
Mackenzie Astin (Harry  Villard),Emilio Bonucci  (Domenico Caracciolo)
Ingrid Lacey ( Elsie ``Mac'' MacDonald), et al. A New Line Cinema release.
115 minutes. PG-13.
"In Love and War" is a movie on tranquilizers.
When the U.S. entered World War I, Ernest  Hemingway, then a cub reporter,
wanted to join the fight in Europe but was rejected because of a bad eye.
He succeeded however  to be sent to Italy as an American Red Cross
ambulance driver. Soon after his arrival at the front where Austrians and
Italians were fighting, on July 18, 1918, just three days short of  his
19th birthday, he was seriously wounded in the leg. At the hospital he fell
in love with 26-year old nurse Agnes von Kurowsky. When he proposed to her,
first he was accepted, then Agnes changed her mind. They met just once in
Michigan and parted forever. Later Hemingway claimed that the two had made
love, while Agnes denied it.
Those adventures were later transformed into the classic Hemingway novel "A
Farewell to Arms." The book was touchingly filmed in 1932 with Gary Cooper
and Helen Hayes. The 1957 remake with Rock Hudson and Jennifer Jones is not
a particularly good movie but it does get partly redeemed by the supporting
cast, including talented Italian performers like  including Vittorio De
Sica and Alberto Sordi. In retrospect, it also gets redeemed by the
comparison with "In Love and War" which is based on  published research on
the actual Ernest-Agnes relationship.
After war's end, in the film  Agnes and her former patient Harry, meet in
New York. Says he: "It feels like one hundred years, not the eight months
since we left Italy."  The film too feels longer than its running time,
though the start is promising.
There are excellent war-scenes drawings behind the opening titles. The
arrival of American nurses in a small town has some humor. A marching band
delivers a raucous "Beer Barrel Polka," which most people think is a World
War II British song, whereas it was a Czech composition.  Apparently it
already existed in the Great War. That's one of this film's  contributions
to knowledge.
Soon matters go flat. As young Hemingway eagerly walks to the front lines
we hear the music of "The caissons keep rolling along." Yes,we get the
message: gung ho Ernest is earnest. Some hospital scenes are rather good,
even though certain points could have used greater stress --like the fact
that in wartime it was simpler to amputate a leg rather than painstakingly
try to avoid gangrene.
The Ernest-Agnes affair proceeds sluggishly. The the entire cast is low in
the personality department. Sandra Bullock can be a charmer, but  here her
appeal is below that of her other roles, and her acting is minimalistic.
Ditto, in spades, for  Chris O'Donnell. He is painfully young, an
end-of-century kid rather than a 1918 youth. He never hints at the
writer-to-be, at the macho figure that will become the Lost Generation
novelist, or at the older Papa Hemingway.  During what Mrs. Bucket would
call  "a riparian entertainment," -- a picnic by a river -- Ernest's
callowness causes Agnes to slap his face. You know that love-making cannot
be far behind.
Some episodes have the beauty of Italy as a pleasant distraction, but this
does not add anything to the story. Most scenes, too,are burdened by
persistent, characterless background music. Often praised composer George
Fenton must have been following misguided specifications.
First kiss--the music swells romantically. Ernest reads a letter--to
plaintive, unseen  strings. Ernest revisits the front --and more caissons
roll along. The couple's one and only sexual encounter just before Ernest
leaves for home, takes place in a bordello's rented room. It  comes with a
sentimental accordion melody ( a cliche usually reserved for shots of
Paris), before reverting to more strings. Finally, the sounds, now from
woodwinds and piano, become downright intrusive when Agnes visits Ernest in
Michigan.
Among the bits that may have been true but feel false, we have Agnes,
invited by an Italian surgeon and suitor to his house in Venice,
predictably finding out that it is a luxurious palazzo. Back in the USA,
Ernest reads Agnes's Dear John letter, has a fit, breaks everything in
sight. It's unconvincing, especially after Orson Welles had done so
smashingly better in his "Citizen Kane" bust-it-all scene.
Earlier, a letter from Ernest  to Agnes described future bliss: "You'll be
keeping the place spic and span while I write." The audience I saw it with
must not  have included feminists. No one giggled, gasped or howled.

Author
Walter Frith
Director Richard Attenborough is a master of detailed story telling.
The Academy Award winning producer and director of 'Gandhi' (1982)
tells the story of famed American writer Ernest Hemingway (Chris
O'Donnell) and his romantic encounters during World War I with a Red
Cross nurse (Sandra Bullock).  Based on the book 'Hemingway In Love and
War' by Henry S. Villard, James Nagel and Mackenzie Astin, this movie
develops its characters very well as we come to know their
personalities and overall human qualities.  O'Donnell is bravely
spirited as Hemingway and Bullock has a keen sense of duty and maturity
in her role as the caring nurse as she is several years older than
Hemingway and this movie is based on a true story.  Unfortunately, this
picture has some very big flaws such as neglecting the presence of its
supporting players which has plagued Attenborough throughout his
directorial career.  His 1992 film 'Chaplin' was a very entertaining
and deep biography about the life of Charles (Charlie) Chaplin played
by Robert Downey Jr. but Attenborough failed to develop the supporting
players such as Douglas Fairbanks (Kevin Kline) and Mary Pickford
(Maria Pitillo) both of whom helped Chaplin establish United Artists
along with the pioneering film director D.W.  Griffith in 1919.  Even
the character of legendary FBI director J. Edgar Hoover (Kevin Dunn)
could have been played better with coaching and script changes
influenced by Attenborough.  'In Love and War' is basically a two
character story when it should really have involved its supporting
players better.  It also suffers from a tedious pace and a lackluster
use of music score which enhances most romantic sagas.  It is an
exceptional visual experience as the landscapes of Italy and Canada
serve as the film's location points and are very well photographed.
This film is suited to audiences of extreme literary taste and
dedicated lovers of film romance.  Others beware!

Author
Scott Renshaw
(New Line)
Starring:  Sandra Bullock, Chris O'Donnell, Mackenzie Astin, Emilio
Bonucci.
Screenplay:  Allan Scott & Clancy Sigal and Anna Hamilton Phelan, based on
"Hemingway in Love and War" by Henry S. Villard and James Nagel.
Producers:  Dmitri Villard, Richard Attenborough.
Director:  Richard Attenborough.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (violence, adult situations)
Running Time:  110 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     IN LOVE AND WAR, a thoroughly mediocre attempt at an intimate epic,
suffers the added disadvantage of extraordinarily bad timing.  There has
already been a better film in the last couple of months about a tragic
war-time romance involving a wounded man and his care-taker (THE ENGLISH
PATIENT); there has already been a better film in the last couple of weeks
about the ill-fated real-life true love of a suicidal author (THE WHOLE
WIDE WORLD).  That is not to say that IN LOVE AND WAR would have been a
better film if it had been released a year ago.  It does mean, however,
that the points of comparison between this film and its two predecessors
make its weaknesses all the more evident.
     The setting is 1918 Italy, where morale is low in the wake of a
German/Austrian onslaught in the final months of World War I but American
troops are unable to assist due to commitment in France.  Instead, the
U.S. sends assistance to hospitals in the form of Red Cross nurses, among
them 26-year-old Agnes von Kurowsky (Sandra Bullock).  One of Agnes'
patients is a gung-ho teenager from Kansas City named Ernest Hemingway
(Chris O'Donnell), eager to see action despite a vision impairment which
has rendered him unfit for front line duty.  His journalistic trip to the
Italian trenches earns Ernie a severe leg wound, but he heals under
Agnes' care.  The cocky young Ernie falls for his nurse, and is convinced
that she loves him too in spite of competition from an Italian doctor
(Emilio Bonucci) and Ernie's own friend Harry Villard (Mackenzie Astin).
Even when they seem to be coming together, Agnes and Ernie find the war
separating them, leading to a difficult choice for Agnes.
     The first image in IN LOVE AND WAR is a weathered hand-drawn map, but
it might as well be a big neon sign announcing that director Richard
Attenborough (GANDHI, CHAPLIN) is now about to bring you an Epic with a
capital "E."  And he never lets you forget it for a moment, either,
trotting out spectacular locations, battlefield footage and a grandiose
score by George Fenton.  Unfortunately, the locations are shot flatly by
Roger Pratt, a couple of the battlefield scenes are dropped in like
sympathy-seeking mortars without a moment of set-up, and Fenton's score is
as loud and relentless as any theater's sub-woofers could withstand.
Attenborough seems so concerned with making IN LOVE AND WAR sweeping that
he ends up sweeping his characters into the background.
     Sweeping characters like this aside doesn't take a particular strong 
broom, as it turns out.  After failing to provide the grandeur of THE
ENGLISH PATIENT, IN LOVE AND WAR then can't muster the kind of convincing
characterizations which at least made THE WHOLE WIDE WORLD watchable.  
Sandra Bullock is capable of making Agnes somewhat appealing, and of 
lending a modicum of plausibility to the script's portrayal of her as the
most fought-over female creature since Helen of Troy.  Bullock pulls out
every All-American girl stop, and her kindly nurse could easily win over
frightened patient and stoic doctor alike.  As for Chris O'Donnell...well,
don't you just want to pat him on the head and send him to bed with a
glass of milk?  It is one thing that O'Donnell is trying to play Hemingway
with a youthful naivete; it is another to be playing an Ernest so earnest
that he comes off like the guy who would get wedgies in grade school.  The
age difference between Agnes and Ernie becomes the focus of the rift
between them, but it plays out even ickier than writers Allan Scott,
Clancy Sigal and Anna Hamilton Phelan intend.  You half expect "Mrs.
Robinson" to start playing on the soundtrack.
     O'Donnell is even worse trying to play the disillusioned sot
Hemingway becomes, when his raging outbursts seem more like petulant hissy
fits, but by that point no one in the audience will care much about him
anyway.  As an indication of how inconsequential the central romance 
between Agnes and Ernie is, IN LOVE AND WAR actually gains momentum
during the half an hour of screen time when the focus turns to Agnes'
relationship with Dr. Caraciolo.  The Venice locations create a glowing
romantic setting, and Bonucci turns in a nice performance as the stiffly
chivalric suitor.  Agnes and Caraciolo seem perfect for each other, and
Agnes' decision to turn him down makes sense only if we buy that the lusty
Ernie, whose mere touch of her stocking reduces her to incoherence, is the
passionate man of her dreams.  O'Donnell's Ernie is about as lusty as cub
reporter Jimmy Olsen, and IN LOVE AND WAR is reduced to its familiarity --
an epic drama with no drama, and a personal story with no personality.

Author
Brian Takeshita
I love war movies.  I also love Sandra Bullock.  My girlfriend once
said that my favorite movie in the world would be a war movie WITH
Sandra Bullock.  A couple of months later, IN LOVE AND WAR was
released and I thought that I had perhaps found this favorite film.
However, after seeing some previews and commercials, the movie didn't
seem to be all that interesting, and I never even made it to the
theater.  Since it was recently released on video, I decided to check
it out and see what I missed.  As it turns out, I didn't miss much.
Richard Attenborough's IN LOVE AND WAR is about the love affair
between a young Ernest Hemingway (Chris O'Donnell) and Agnes von
Kurowsky (Sandra Bullock), a nurse with the Red Cross, and is set in
Italy during the last year of World War I.  I learned in high school
that Hemingway was an ambulance driver, but I didn't see him driving
any ambulances.  Instead, he seemed more like a male Doughnut Dolly
whose job it was to hand out candy bars and cigarettes.  In the movie,
Hemingway is overly eager to see some action on the front line, so he
sneaks out one night and visits with some Italian soldiers.  Not long
after he arrives, an artillery shell strikes the trench where he and
his new friends are sitting.  He carries a wounded young Italian from
the trench to safety, getting hit in the leg by a machine gun on the
way.  Hemingway is taken to a hospital staffed by American nurses, and
is tended to by von Kurowsky, of whom he is immediately enamored.
Although he makes it a priority to have his love requited, her
affections are divided between Hemingway and an Italian doctor
(Domenico Caracciolo) who is also courting her.
Sandra Bullock puts in a decent performance, but there is not much
that's attractive about her character.  We really don't get a good
idea of why two men (three if you count Hemingway's war buddy Henry
Villard, played by MacKenzie Astin) are so desperately in love with
her.  There's really nothing special from a personality point of view,
and in this movie, Bullock looks relatively plain.  Her character
could be summed up by the word "bland".
Chris O'Donnell, however, does a good job of playing the young, brash,
but sometimes thoughtful Hemingway.  O'Donnell takes the character
through a wide variety of emotions but never over-does it.
Attenborough takes his time in developing the relationship between
Hemingway and von Kurowsky.  It's nice to see a film in which sparks
do not fly fifteen minutes after the credits.  Unfortunately, the
sparks, when they do happen, seem faked.  This is partly due to the
seeming inability of the von Kurowsky character to make up her mind.
Which of the two men does she really love?  Her relationship with the
doctor seems cold, but her relationship with Hemingway is consistently
interrupted because of it.  Her scenes with Hemingway are therefore
more like vignettes than a progression of a well cultivated love.
I expected more from Attenborough, who brought us such great movies as
A BRIDGE TOO FAR and GHANDI.  Although he made pretty good use of the
Italian scenery, and even threw in a sweeping battle scene quite
reminiscent of Lewis Milestone's ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT, it
did not save the film from looking just like any other movie filmed in
a scenic location.  Perhaps the source material, which was mainly
taken from von Kurowskys diaries, simply did not lend itself to such
a film, and perhaps Attenborough did not want to stray too far from
the truth.  Whatever the case, the film ended up relatively
pedestrian, with a disappointing ending.
One note:  With the exception of A TIME TO KILL, Sandra Bullock's
films since WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING have not had much acclaim,
critically or at the box office.  In case you're counting, that's four
out of five films in the past two years.  When I say I love Sandra
Bullock, I'm forgiving several of her roles and a few of her
performances.  Unlike a lot of fanatics out there, I don't believe
she's ready to win any non-popularity-based awards just yet, but I do
think she has a certain infectious charm which is evident in
interviews and which comes through in light-hearted roles.  While I
laud her for stretching her acting skills by attempting a variety of
parts, I hope she does not stray too far from playing the kinds of
characters which caused to many people to fall in love with her in the
first place.  At any rate, I suppose I'll have to keep waiting for
that favorite film.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Can a film be saved by its music?  This is the question that I was
pondering during the press screening for the plodding adaptation of the
non-fiction book "Hemingway in Love and War: The Lost Diary of Agnes
Von Kurowsky."  Directed by the great Richard Attenborough (GANDHI, CRY
FREEDOM and SHADOWLANDS), the film is called IN LOVE AND WAR and stars
heartthrobs Sandra Bullock as nurse Agnes von Kurowsky and Chris
O'Donnell as Ernest Hemingway, who was one of her wartime lovers.
     The music by four-time Academy Award nominee George Fenton (THE
FISHER KING, DANGEROUS LIAISONS, CRY FREEDOM, and GANDHI) is on a grand
scale.  Outdoor scenes have majestic sounds full of horns and worthy of
a vast symphony.  In interior scenes we are treated to intimate violin
serenades.  Every scene is filled with intense musical emotion.  Ah,
but then there are those actors.  Maybe they should have heard the
score during the shooting.
     Perhaps the most charitable thing that can be said of the two
leads is that they were miscast.  Certainly the performances they
deliver are so insubstantial that they almost vanish upon closer
examination.  The love story between them is convincing in spurts, but,
for the most part, the chemistry does not work.  Even less effective,
and never believable is Agnes's romance with the Italian Doctor
Domenico Caracciolo (Emilio Bonucci).
     The story is set in Italy in 1918.  The American Red Cross has
come to help with the Italian wounded as Italy is overrun by the
Austrian army.  Since Hemingway is too young and has a bad eye, he is
rejected by our military.  He signs on to help the Red Cross and, of
course, asks for duty near the front and for a rifle.  He gets the
former but not the latter.  Within hours he is wounded, and he spends
most of the movie convalescing in the hospital.  It is there that he
meets Agnes.  Much is made of their age difference, he being 19 and she
being all of 26, but they look about the same age in the movie so that
is one of many aspects of the picture that were never believable.  The
show talks a lot about age differences, but the actions ignore them.
     "You know what I've been told?"  remarks Agnes in one of the first
scenes.  "Italian men respect their wives.  They spoil their
mistresses.  But the only women they love are their mothers."  This is
a prelude to the time when the "old" Italian doctor will make a play
for her.  "It won't work," Hemingway argues.  "Take a look.  He's
ancient.  He must be close to 40."
     The cinematography by Roger Pratt is handsome and warm, but the
picture is content to be little more than pleasant.  It is never
involving.  Since I did not care about the characters, I resented some
of the manipulative parts of the story.  For example, as they play
poker in the hospital, the sickest of them, Jimmy McBride (Ian Kelly),
gets a bad hand, but taking no cards declares, "I always play the hand
I'm dealt."  Agnes and Ernest then rig it so that Jimmy wins.
     The love story between Agnes and Ernest is more hinted at than
shown.  The two best scenes in the movie are when she slaps him and
when he fondles her ankle because these are some of the few occasions
when the actors come out of their shells.  I like love affairs that are
believable and not ethereal.  They do not have to be at all explicit to
be great, see, for example, THE AGE OF INNOCENCE, but they must have
enough emotional involvement to be convincing.
     The script is by Allan Scott, Clancy Sigal, Hamilton Phelan, and
Henry S. Villard and is based on the story by Allan Scott and Dimitri
Villard, which in turn is based on the book by Henry S. Villard and
James Nagel.  Any time you get this many people involved it is a recipe
for disaster.  Perhaps this is the reason the story skims the surface
and never invites you to go deeper.  Next to the miscasting of the
leads, the script is the second biggest problem with the film.
     Then there are the endings.  There are at least four natural
ending points, in each of which the story would then pick back us and
show what happens next in their lives.  For a while I thought the film
was never going to end and that it was a special test version to see
how long a dozen film critics would sit there in a dark room watching
ending after ending before they gave up and left.  We all stayed
through the four, but a couple more and I might have been tempted to
leave.
     At least toward the end, we do have a cheery note.  Ernest's
friend Henry Villard (MacKenzie Astin) tells us that, "Older people
start aging backwards at some point."  I'll keep an eye on my watch
waiting for that blessed event.
     "I love you," says Agnes to Ernest.  "I'll love you as long as I
live."  I wanted and expected to feel that way about this film, but I
could not.  To answer the question I asked in the beginning, perhaps
some films can be saved by the music, but not this one.
     IN LOVE AND WAR runs 1:55.  It is rated PG-13 for war wounds and
for sexual situations, but no sex or nudity.  I do not remember any
profanity, but there probably was a little.  The film would be fine for
kids say ten and up.  It is a close call, but I find the film too
mediocre to recommend.  I give it **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Sandra Bullock, Chris O'Donnell, MacKenzie Astin, Emilio Bonucci,
Ingrid Lacey, Ian Kelly, Margot Steinberg, Tara Hugo Director: Richard
Attenborough Screenplay: Allan Scott, Clancy Sigal, and Anna Hamilton Phelan
based on the book HEMINGWAY IN LOVE AND WAR: THE LOST DIARY OF AGNES VON
KUROWSKY by Henry S. Villard and James Nagel Cinematography: Roger Pratt
Well she sure ain't no 'Florence Nightingale', but does carry with her a
pretty smile and a good sense of humour; and he sure ain't no 'Ernest
Hemingway', but he does carry with him a certain amiable, boyish charm
highlighted by his kiddy manner; and this definitely ain't no Leo Tolstoy's
'War and Peace', which is why this movie is called 'In Love and War'.
If Attenbourough was hoping to make a film with classy actors, he sure did
miss the boat and landed in a muddy puddle. Hey, isn't this the same bus
driving, boat saving, while you were sleeping down town lass (Bulllock)? And
isn't that the green tomato eating, friend circling, bat loving, boy wonder
fomp, of an up town lad (O'Donnell)?
Are we meant to stretch our imaginations to believe that they are meant to
be Ernest Hemingway and his war time love interest, nurse Agnes Von
Kurowsky? Really Mr Attenborough, it is very unfair of you to ask this lad
and lass to stretch their acting skills beyond limits which are considered
humanely safe.
Nevertheless, what we do have is a concoction of melodramatic, heart rending
mush which goes nicely with lemonade. 'In Love and War' we can draw
conclusions that the reason why Hemingway was so brilliant and yet so
miserable, was probably because he was dumped by a pretty nurse post-1st
World War; and he never had the heart to forgive her. Please spare us the
violins.
I'm trying not to be overly nasty with my comments. I enjoyed 'Shadowlands'
and I even liked 'Chaplin'; but this movie is just screaming out to be
teased. On a positive note, I can freely say that Attenborough's movies are
always easy on the eye, and one can sit through them with the same relaxed
feel of a Sunday picnic.
Comment: 'In Love and War' we don't find 'An American in Paris', but we
do find two juvenile Yankees making hay in Italy.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996 
U.S. Release Date: 1/24/97 (wide) 
Running Length: 1:54 
MPAA Classification:  PG-13 (Violence, mature themes, sex, brief nudity) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1 
Cast: Sandra Bullock, Chris O'Donnell, MacKenzie Astin, Emilio Bonucci, 
      Ingrid Lacey, Ian Kelly, Margot Steinberg, Tara Hugo 
Director: Richard Attenborough 
Producers: Dmitri Villard and Richard Attenborough  
Screenplay: Allan Scott, Clancy Sigal, and Anna Hamilton Phelan based on 
      the book HEMINGWAY IN LOVE AND WAR: THE LOST DIARY OF AGNES VON 
      KUROWSKY by Henry S. Villard and James Nagel 
Cinematography: Roger Pratt 
Music: George Fenton 
U.S. Distributor: New Line Cinema 
     The pairing of an Oscar-winning director with two of today's 
hottest stars creates expectations for something more impressive than a 
somnambulant, meandering romantic melodrama.  IN LOVE AND WAR, Richard 
Attenborough's first directorial effort since 1993's SHADOWLANDS, is 
dead-on-arrival.  The problem isn't so much that both leads, Sandra 
Bullock and Chris O'Donnell, are miscast (although they are), but that 
the film is devoid of passion.  IN LOVE AND WAR is a frustrating motion 
picture -- frustrating because you want to feel more for the characters 
than you ever do. 
     In a story that's based on real people and true events, Chris 
O'Donnell plays a 18-year old Ernest Hemingway who is shipped overseas 
to help with the war effort in 1918 Italy.  Hemingway, anxious to get 
into the thick of things, volunteers to ship supplies to the men on the 
front lines.  Once there, he is caught in an Austrian attack, and, while 
attempting to carry an injured soldier to safety, he is shot in the leg.  
He soon finds himself in a hospital, being tended to by Agnes von 
Kurowsky (Sandra Bullock), a 26-year old volunteer Red Cross nurse.  
When gangrene sets in, the doctor advises amputation, but, through 
tireless ministering to the wound, Agnes manages to stop the 
putrefaction's spread, and Hemingway is allowed to keep his leg.  As he 
convalesces, he and Agnes spend a great deal of time together, and, 
predictably, fall in love. 
     Supposedly, Hemingway's experiences with Agnes in Italy formed the 
basis for A FAREWELL TO ARMS, but it would be difficult to make that 
connection from this film, an uninspired motion picture populated by 
one- and two-dimensional characters.  IN LOVE AND WAR is devoid of the 
passion that's so necessary for the effective enactment of a compelling 
love story.  The emotion has been sucked out, leaving behind a 
beautiful-looking shell.  The costumes and sets are wonderful, and the 
battle scenes are expertly staged, but, in the end, who cares?  Consider 
the sweep of THE ENGLISH PATIENT and you'll recognize just how flat IN 
LOVE  AND WAR is. 
     Both Bullock and O'Donnell, presumably chosen because of their box-
office appeal, are out of their depth.  And, while they don't do 
terrible jobs, neither is capable of effectively exposing their 
character's emotional core.  Of course, the script doesn't give them a 
lot to work with -- it's an unremarkable story peppered with stilted 
dialogue -- but there's no discernible chemistry.  Not only do we have 
trouble accepting the fresh-faced O'Donnell as one of the twentieth 
century's greatest authors, but, despite her obvious star quality, 
Bullock's Agnes hardly seems to be the kind of woman to inspire great 
literature.  At least the supporting players -- MacKenzie Astin as Henry 
Villard, Hemingway's pal; Emilio Bonucci as a doctor smitten by Agnes; 
and Ingrid Lacey as Mac, Agnes' friend -- turn in solid performances. 
     Structurally, there are also serious problems.  The love affair 
comprises only half of the movie's running length.  A lengthy prologue 
is needed to set up the situation in Italy, so the film is nearly a 
half-hour old before Agnes and Hemingway meet.   The final act, a 
thirty-minute denouement, is poorly-paced and tedious.  IN LOVE AND WAR 
limps to a lame, dissatisfying conclusion. 
     Not since Demi Moore's ill-advised version of THE SCARLET LETTER 
has a period piece with such impeccable technical credentials betrayed 
so many glaring flaws.  Four years ago, Attenborough released the 
disappointing biopic, CHAPLIN.  Twelve months later, he rebounded with 
what is arguably his most emotionally moving film to date, SHADOWLANDS.  
One can only hope that history will be repeated and that the director's 
next effort will enable us to forget this one.  Not that anyone is 
likely to remember something as singularly unremarkable as IN LOVE AND 
WAR. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
