Title
Review for Dayereh (2000)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Steve Rhodes
THE CIRCLE (DAYEREH) opens with bad news.  Awful news under the 
circumstances.  When a grandmother is told that her daughter has given 
birth to a beautiful baby girl, she demands a recount.  She's quite 
serious about the midwife needing to look again since, if the baby is a 
girl, the in-laws will be furious and insist on a divorce for their son.
Welcome to a day in the life of the oppressed -- the women of Iran, at 
least those bold enough to want freedom independent of men.  Daring to 
attempt to walk around the city solo, these fugitives share a common 
bond of having spent time in prison, and, given their actions, they will 
undoubtedly be sent there again.  
Women in this country where men alone rule dare not go outside without 
the proper clothing.  Even buying a bus ticket without a man or the 
proper papers is almost impossible.
The gripping tale, directed with great compassion by Jafar Panahi and 
written with touching subtlety by Kambuzia Partovi, is mesmerizing from 
the first scene to the last.  Told with little dialog, the movie 
masterfully uses handheld cameras to transform us into another one of 
the women running along the streets in constant fear of the police.  I'm 
not a fan of handheld cameras since too often the filmmakers who use 
them create something akin to a shaky, bad home video.  Here, 
cinematographer Bahram Badakshani holds his camera steady but uses it to 
peer over the shoulders of the women and to focus it on their faces.  
And, oh, those faces.  So tragic.  Don't be surprised if you find 
yourself jumpy after you leave the theater.  It's a movie filled with 
palpable terror as the women in their chadors fly through the alleyways 
and corridors with their robes making them look black ghosts on the lam.  
These images will be forever indelibly marked in your memory.
Among many chilling stories, all told with the simplicity for which 
Iranian filmmakers are so well known, the most unforgettable involves a 
three-year-old girl.  This adorable and precious child with a bright red 
and white dress looks like an Iranian Shirley Temple.  Being under 9 she 
is not yet covered by the stern dress code.  For complicated and not 
fully explained reasons, her mother abandons her on the street so that 
the girl will be placed in a foster home.  This episode will break your 
heart.
Most Iranian films relegate the political messages to the sometimes 
barely decipherable subtext, but Panahi doesn't pull any punches in his 
denunciation of the repression by the Iranian regime.  Don't be 
surprised if watching it makes you want to join a protest group against 
such inhumane treatment.  You can try to tell yourself that your 
indignation is just because we Westerners don't understand their 
culture.  But it's a stretch.
THE CIRCLE runs a fast 1:29.  The film is in Farsi with English 
subtitles.  It is not rated but might be PG-13 for mature themes.  It 
would be acceptable for any kid old enough to be concerned with serious, 
intense issues.
Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Banned in its home country, Jafar Panahi's latest film focuses on the
harrowing plight of women in post-Shah Iran.  The Circle, which won the top
prize (as well as four others) at last year's Venice Film Festival, tells
three different yet painfully similar stories, and all feature performances
from non-professional actresses whose faces can exude more pain and anguish
that the top 10 U.S. box office stars would be able to muster if you pooled
their meager talents.  Julia Schmulia - these young women are the ultimate
Method actors, having grown up not knowing anything but their country's
injustice and prejudice toward women.  Some of the actresses' parents
protested Panahi because they felt his rabble-rousing subject matter could
permanently damage the reputation of their daughters.
Shooting every scene with a handheld camera, Panahi ups the stakes by
omitting the background of each of The Circle's characters.  The first
chapter shows three women trying to turn their temporary freedom from prison
into a more permanent independence.  We don't know what any of them have
done to deserve a prison sentence - we assume it couldn't have been much -
nor do we know how they got out.  The trio is a little like The Powerpuff
Girls in that one is a quick-thinking leader, one beats up boys who harass
them for traveling without a man (a big no-no for Iranian women) and one is
a cute lil' fraidycat.
Of course, the real Powerpuffs wouldn't have gotten nabbed trying to sell a
gold chain on the street to get money for a bus ticket out of town, which is
what happens here.  The cops grab one girl, but Arezou (Maryiam Palvin
Almani) and Nargess (Nargess Mamizadeh) are able to elude capture.  Yet even
after Arezou mysteriously obtains a wad of cash to make the journey to
Nargess' home, the story becomes painfully tragic before Panahi neatly moves
us on to the next episode.
The next two stories involve motherhood in one way or another.  Pari
(Fereshteh Sadr Orfani, the mother from Panahi's The White Balloon and his
assistant director here) is pregnant and desperately wants an abortion.  She
has just been kicked out of her house and is on the lam, but hopes a former
prison-mate-turned-nurse can help her out.  Pari is flabbergasted when she
sees a mother named Nayereh abandon her young child on the street.  The film
ends with a haunting shot - in a sweeping circle, no less - that shows the
outcome of each of the three stories, in addition to the heartbreaking
epilogue to a brief and almost forgotten story that preceded The Circle's
opening credits.
If this was an American film, the women would defy their oppressors in a way
that would make you want to stand up, pump your fist and shout, "You go,
girl!"  But it's not, so don't plan on feeling too chipper on the way out of
the theatre.

Author
Robin Clifford
In a nation where a woman cannot even buy a bus ticket without her
husband's permission or smoke a cigarette in public, much less obtain an
abortion, director Jafar Panahi delves into the lives of women on the wrong
side of the law in Iran in "The Circle."
>From the very start of "The Circle" we are thrust into the alien,
male-dominated society of Iran that treats its women as possessions, not
people. An old woman stands outside the small door to a hospital maternity
ward. The door slides opens and a nurse tells her that her daughter has had
a beautiful baby girl. The door slides shut. Obviously agitated, the woman
knocks at the door and asks another nurse about the baby's sex. Again,
"it's an adorable girl," she is told. "They'll want a divorce!" she moans
about her in-laws as she dejectedly leaves the hospital.
This extended scene of despair summarizes the film's theme of the harsh
life for women, especially an ex-convict, in Iran. The old woman's misery
is just the lead into one of the most powerful, thought-provoking and
eye-opening films to come to the screen this year. Iran's Islamic society
stridently keeps women in a second-class, subservient role where the men
running the country define a woman's "rights". Conditions, from a western
viewpoint, are severe, at best, for the average Iranian woman.  Panahi's
"circle" of women is an even more harshly treated subgroup - the sisterhood
of women who served time in Iranian prison.
As the old woman leaves the hospital, she crosses paths with three younger
women, dressed head to toe in the black robes and the ever-ready chadir
required by Islamic law. There is something wrong as they try to make a
phone call to a friend who can help get tickets for the three to flee the
city, hopefully to a place where the air is not so oppressive. But, no one
answers the phone. Desperate for money, one of them takes their one
valuable possession, a slender gold necklace, and tries to sell it on the
street. A scuffle ensues and she (though not the men she tries to sell the
trinket to) is arrested, as her friends look on helpless to intervene.
Arezou (Maryiam Parvin Almani) and Nargess (Nargess Mamizadeh) now must
fend for themselves. The older Arezou takes the little money they have and
gets Nargess onto a bus that she hopes will bring her young friend back to
the wonderful world of her childhood. It doesn't and Nargess must seek out
another convict, Pari (Fereshteh Sadr Orafai), for help. The story shifts
to Pari, who has her own set of problems. She's a prison escapee, single
and pregnant, not a safe combination for a woman and Pari goes to another
prison sister for assistance. The story then weaves in a heart rendering
tale about a pretty little girl, dressed in her best clothes, abandoned by
her unwed mother (Fatemah Naghavi) in hopes that she'll be taken by good
and kind people.
The end of the film bookends the beginning with another small door sliding
shut. The finality of this action closes out a story that leaves you
pondering just how it would feel to live under such repression, always
fearful and always vulnerable. It's a story about a man's world shown from
the woman's view and it's not an appealing picture of life in Iran. But, it
is a beautifully made film by the maker of the wonderful childhood story,
"The White Balloon," showing Panahi's deft versatility as a world-class
filmmaker.
The cinema verite-style camerawork helps carry forward the tension these
women live with, day to day, as they strive to survive and stay out of
prison - and it doesn't take much to get sent to prison. The look of the
film, coupled with the natural efforts by the actresses, makes it feel
real, almost documentary-like, and brings us to see a very different social
order. "The Circle" is a powerhouse of a film and I give it an A.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Joan Baez sang a mournful song during the 1960s that
went like this: "Hard is the fortune of all womankind/ She's
always controlled, she's always confined/ Controlled by her
parents until she's a wife/ A slave to her husband all the rest
of her life."  Was she talking about the typical American
woman?  Could be, but if so that's her interpretation.  Joan
should see what a woman's life is like in Iran today.  Since
1979 when the Ayatollah took the reins of power forcibly
away from the Shah, Iran became a man's world.  Women
were restricted not only by the lifeless clothing they had to
wear including the chador which covered them over garments
that already needed to hide every hair on their head but more
by a full range of allegedly Koranic restrictions that forbade
them to smoke in public, to travel from city to city unless
accompanied by their husbands or male relatives or unless
they were in possession of the proper student or other id's.  
   But forget about mere words.  No-one has done a better
job than Jafar Panahi, utilizing a screenplay based on his
own ideas from the pen of  Kambozia Partovi, in portraying a
narrow world that women face in Tehran nowadays, where
religious police patrol the streets looking for violations of
medieval rules, even entrapping people into violating laws 
against prostitution.  
   Panahi's "The Circle," which gets its name from
 the circuitous path traveled by women who simply 
cannot break loose, cannot make progress, but
go round and round in much the way that the Greek figure
Sisyphus kept rolling a stone up a hill only to have the marker
come tumbling down once again.  Unlike American movies
like Jonathan Kaplan's "Brokedown Palace" (depicting the
absurd harshness of the police in Thailand who entrap Alice
and Darlene on a trumped-up drug charge), "The Circle," or
"Dayereh" as Panahi's film is called in Farsi, uses no score
and makes frequent takes with a handheld camera as though
following the Dogme 95 style. In other words, "The Circle" comes
across without Hollywood histrionics but rather as would a
docudrama in its description of the plight of a handful of
unfortunate females in Iran's benighted capital.
   Panahi frames the film by showing a section of a door
opening and closing on a woman who beseeches an official
for information, and to carry the metaphor of the title further
even portrays much of the architecture of the city in circular
form.  The story opens on a woman screaming from the pain
of childbirth (Solmaz Gholami) whose elderly mother displays
a distraught expression.  An ultrasound test had predicted
that the newborn would be a boy but when a girl turns up,
Solmaz fears that her in-laws would insist on a divorce.  (One
could scarcely accept the idea that this extreme reaction is
typical throughout the country, or every woman giving birth to
a little girl would be a single mother!)  The most frantic scene
of the film focusses on three young women who had just
been granted temporary leave from prison.  When one is
arrested, the other two, Arezou (Maryiam Parvin Almani) and
her buddy Nargess (Nargess Mamizadeh) plan to flee by bus
to a rural area of the state where they believe they can find
safety from the police.  The most poignant vista involves Pari
(Fereshteh Sadr Orfani), who had escaped from jail after her
husband was executed, and now, four months pregnant, she
begs a friend who works in the local hospital to get her an
abortion.  No such luck.  To get such a procedure requires
the husband's permission and, if no husband is available, the
father and father-in-law must consent.  (To be honest, I was
surprised that abortion is even legal in Iran, requiring merely
the acquiescence of the husband!)
   Because Panahi does not coddle us with a commercial,
American-style of filmmaking, "The Circle" will depend for
success on an arthouse audience with the patience to endure
and even thrive on Panahi's extended looks at each of the
women.  He can hold his camera on a face for a solid minute,
giving the viewer the chance to absorb the inner torment of
these ill-fated people.  The one person who might be most
accepting of her jail sentence would be Mojgan (Mojgan
Faramarzi), who could pass for a hooker anywhere. She does
not try to hide her profession and at one point justifies her
choice of profession: "How else do I pay my bills, honey?"
   Though critical of the Iranian political system, "The Circle"
might conceivably have passed the censorship boards in that
country if only because the apparatchiks there might see
nothing wrong with the way these women are treated.  The
reality, though, is that Panahi succeeded in getting a permit to make the
picture only when his country's directors' guild interceded
with the government for him.  The authorities were even
willing to show the movie in Iran if the director would cut the
final eighteen minutes (which he did not).  What happened
then was that after 400 students in his country saw the film at
a private screening, it was shipped to Venice where it wowed
the folks at a festival there and wound up in last year's New
York Film Festival as well.  Except for the poignancy shared
by Panahi's other works, his third film is most unlike his naive
but effective "The White Balloon," a story about a little girl
who runs into an assortment of people while buying a
goldfish.  When you realize that women in Afghanistan have it
even worse than the fair sex in Iran, you get to wonder about
the rationality of the civilized mind.
Not Rated.  Running time: 91 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Laura Clifford
As credits roll over a black screen, we hear the sounds of childbirth.
A white room appears where a white window is slid open on a white door by
a white garbed nurse.  A black clad grandmother inquires about her daughter's
baby.  'It's a girl,' she's told.  Hoping for better news, the grandmother
tells another member of the hospital staff she hasn't been told the sex of
her grandchild.  When she receives the news a second time, she despairs that
the in-laws will be furious.  Director Jafar Panahi ("The White Balloon")
continues to make his point about the lives of Iranian women by crossing
over multiple storylines in "The Circle."
As another female family member rushes down the hospital's spiral staircase
to 
the street, she crosses paths with Nargess (Nargess Mamizadeh), Arezou
(Maryiam Palvin Almani) and a third woman attempting to make a public phone 
call.  When a man asks 'You two alone?' as he passes, the third friend demands
an apology, creating a street incident which results in her arrest.  Arezou
and Nargess watch from a hiding place as they are already on the run.  We
learn that they've been released from prison, although never their crime.
Arezou is afraid that her son couldn't handle seeing her after two years,
while
Nargess, only eighteen, just dreams of reaching Sarab, an edenic part of Iran
where she'll reunite with her brother.  They're also trying to reach a
friend, 
Pari, for help.
Arezou insists Nargess take their money for the journey and vanishes.  After
dealing with all sorts of problems obtaining a ticket as a woman alone,
Nargess
takes five minutes to buy her brother a gift, but must flee when she sees
police checking passengers getting on the bus.  She finally finds Pari's
house,
but is told off by a male family member.  As Nargess runs down the alley and
out of the film, Pari (Fereshteh Sadr Orfani) sneaks out of her front door 
while her brother and father argue over her fate.
Pari visits a female friend (Monir Arab) selling tickets at a movie theater
and we soon discover that these two also have been imprisoned.  Pari's
friend's
husband obtained a second wife while she was jailed, yet she's comfortable
with the idea and the second wife arrives and drives Pari to meet with 
another friend, an emergency room nurse (Elham Saboktakin).  Pari is in
dire straits as she's pregnant, but her friend, married to a doctor at the
hospital, is too fearful of his reaction to help.
Pari walks the streets and sees a mother with a well dressed little girl as
she enters a hotel lobby.  When she exits, the little girl is crying,
abandoned.  Pari finds the mother (Fatemeh Naghavi) distraught, watching
the scene from behind a car (reminding us of Arezou and Nargess earlier).  
She's trying to make a better life for her daughter, but always fails to 
really leave.  This time she succeeds and cinematographer Bahram Badakshani's 
camera follows her as she says farewell to Pari and accepts a ride from a
male 
stranger, a move that causes her to be pulled over at a roadblock where
another 
woman (Mojgan Faramarzi), clearly a prostitute, is already being held.  As
this 
last woman is processed into prison, Panahi ironically suggests she may be
the 
only free woman in his story.
Director/editor Jafar Panahi's Venice 2000 Golden Lion winner is a powerful 
statement about the oppression of women in Iran (banned within its own
country), yet also celebrates their sisterhood.  Panahi and writer Kambuzia 
Partovi suggest strong themes with such simple devices as unlit cigarettes.
Their failure to tell us what these women have been jailed for strengthens
the story because as we witness the difficulty being a woman in Iran brings
to 
such simple tasks as buying a bus ticket, we realize that whatever their 
transgressions are, they would be viewed as trivial in Western society.
Cinematographer Bahram Badakshani employs a very fluid camera style as he
tails his subjects through city streets.  He and director Panahi visually
reinforce the circular nature of the film with spiral staircases and 
round balconies.  Badakshani captures many striking images, such as Nargess
running through a terminal, billowing black and clutching a shirt box or
an old balloon seller holding the hand of a tearful little girl as a wedding
party streams by.
The women of "The Circle" will break your heart while opening your eyes
to their plight.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz
 CIRCLE, THE (Dayereh) (director/editor/writer: Jafar Panahi;
 screenwriter: Kambozia Partovi, based on a story by Mr. Panahi;
 cinematographer: Bahram Badakhshani; cast: Maryam Parvin Almani
 (Arezou), Nargess Mamizadeh (Nargess), Fatemeh Naghavi (The Mother),
 Fereshteh Sadr Orafai (Pari), Mojgan Faramarzi (Mojgan, Prostitute),
 Elham Saboktakin (Elham); Runtime: 90; Winstar Cinema; 2000)
How do you escape from totalitarian Iran if you are a woman prisoner and
have just escaped from jail or have a temporary pass from jail? The
film's theme is about how women are made to suffer in Iran because of
its harsh Islamic laws against them, which makes all of their lives
placed in the same never ending circle of repression. Which is why the
film has no main protagonist; the cast, except for Fereshteh Sadr Orafai
and Fatemeh Naghavi, are all nonprofessionals. Jafar Panahi (White
Balloon/The Mirror), a disciple of Abbas Kiarostami, has created a
devastatingly restrained powerhouse of a political film. A winner of the
Golden Lion at the Venice Film Festival, even though it has been banned
in Iran except for a one-time screening to a small student audience. It
got an international release, and has been well-received in all the
countries it has so far played in.
It is a gut-wrenching, neorealism film, filled with an ominous tenseness
that begins with the opening dark scene at a hospital maternity ward
when a grandmother is told that her daughter's child is not a boy but a
girl and she reacts with horror, saying that her daughter's in-laws will
never accept the child and will seek a divorce. She wonders how the
ultrasound could be wrong in saying the expectant child was to be a boy!
A woman's life is shown to be not as worthy as a man's in modern Iran,
as the story of one woman is carried on as the story of another woman's.
So we never follow one protagonist, but a myriad of disenfranchised
women; and, we are never sure what they are up to or where they are
going, but they are all troubled because they are unescorted and have no
man in their life.
Outside the hospital we leave the ruffled granny and follow three edgy
women clad in chadors, who just came out of prison on temporary passes
and plan not to return; they are on the street phone trying to get money
for transportation to some place far from Tehran. When one tries selling
a gold chain to a man who tries to steal it from her, she's taken into
custody by the police while the man is released. The other two flee the
area immediately; they are very nervous types who keep changing their
plans leaving us unsure of where they are going and what they are up to:
Nargess (Mamizadeh), an 18-year-old with an unexplained purplish bruise
under her eye, who is capitivated by an imitation of a van Gogh picture
she sees on the busy street. She thinks it's a picture of her country
neighborhood, but that the artist forgot to put flowers in certain
spots. The older woman, the pock-faced and always gazing hawk-like
Arezou (Almani), might have secured the money by turning a trick. But
when it comes time to get on the bus, she for some reason can't and
sends the reluctant teenager on alone to her hometown. Nargess can't
purchase a bus ticket because she's a woman without an ID card and
without an escort, but she talks the reluctant ticket seller into
believing she's a student who left her ID card home. But for some
unexplained reason she goes to a buy a man's shirt and misses the bus to
her paradise location. This comes after she tries unsuccessfully to
contact a pregnant woman, Pari (Orafai), who escaped from jail but is
kicked out of her parent's house because they are disgraced by her being
unmarried and pregnant. She escaped from prison to get an illegal
abortion, as Iran doesn't allow for abortions without the approval of
the husband. Her pregnancy is explained as occurring when her husband
was executed 4 months ago and she was allowed one last visit.
We follow Pari as she makes contact with her ex-prison friend, who now
works as a ticket seller in a movie theater and who accepts that her
husband took another wife while she was in prison by proudly saying
she's still the Number 1 wife. From her she finds out the address of her
other ex-prison friend, Elham (Saboktakin), who works as a nurse in a
hospital. She hopes through her contacts that she'll secure an abortion
for her. But her friend refuses to help, telling her she married a
Pakistani doctor and he knows nothing of her past. She does not want to
ruin her current marriage by disclosing anything else about herself, but
this news is crushing to Pari who has nowhere else to turn to. On the
street she feels pity for a girl who is being abandoned by her mother
(Naghavi), but when she talks with the mother she sees how torn she is
about what she's doing and only tries to talk her into getting her child
back. Everything about this Iranian regime smacks of an unfeeling
attitude towards women, leaving them with little hope. The only hope is
shown by a wedding party, as the filmmaker comically cuts into different
scenes of them throughout the film; the wedding for the woman, at least,
starts out as a joyous experience.
The most powerful scene in the film is the arrest of a young prostitute,
Mojgan (Faramarzi), who is wearing makeup and got into the car of a
male. Her arrest comes at the same time as the mother who abandoned her
child gets into the car of an unmarked police car and is arrested, but
who escapes when the police get involved with the arrest of the
prostitute. When the prostitute is put into the paddy wagon and carted
off to jail, she tries to smoke a cigarette. But the police guards tell
her there is no smoking, this is a running gag throughout the film, as
women are not allowed to smoke in public but are always trying to sneak
in a smoke. When the male prisoner offers the guards a free cigarette
he's allowed to smoke, which encourages the prostitute to freely puff
away and she feels a release of frustration as the smoke comes rapidly
out of her mouth. It is these small acts of rebellion that give these
women some hope, and what they share with the audience is a camaraderie
against their repressors. The enemy obviously isn't the Iranian people,
but an intolerant government that cannot bend and forces its stupid
rules down a subjected peoples' throats. This film conveys these dark
feelings through a story without much of a plot or dialogue, yet
brilliantly establishes the yearnings for freedom that these women have.
It's much like those Warner Brother films of the 1930s with Jimmy Cagney
thumbing his nose at the high brows. Panafi has taken us into the psyche
of the oppressive regime and without saying what's right or wrong,
allows us instead to see for ourselves the everyday street life of
modern Iran. It's a country far from freedom, yet its filmmakers can
still make a film that is unpredictable and forthright. This is
something that's rarely accomplished in uncensored Hollywood whose
commercial ventures are mostly formulaic crowd pleaser films.
The women featured in this tale remain mysterious to us: we are never
told what crimes they are charged with. All we see are the repressions
they are faced with: no smoking in public, no abortions, they can't
enter certain places without a chador wrapped around them, they can't
get hotel accomodations without IDs, take rides when alone with men, and
they can't even buy a bus ticket when alone. These are amazing
restrictions placed on them and ones that Panafi allows us to see in an
exciting and unforgettable way. It's a moody, realistic tale about Iran
that the news media can't seem to cover with a reasonable verisimilitude
as well as this very daring effort does. It succeeds in showing us as
much as one can in today's Iran about its long laundry list of
injustices. There's little room to see The Circle as anything but a way
all Iranian women are kept as prisoners and how their stories of
repression continue on from one woman to another. When we lose sight of
one woman, the next woman's story could be just as horrendous. This is
one film that cannot easily be forgotten, even as we lose sight of the
different women we have seen. All the performances were natural and
easily fit into the story. The facial expressions of both Orfani and
Mamizade caught my attention: Orfani's had that caring, intense look of
the Italian actress Anna Magnani; while Mamizade's expression changed
from curiosity to vulnerability. She seemed to have a radiance that lit
up the screen and best caught the desperation of their situation.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
