Title
Review for Daniel (1983)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Karl Rackwitz
Directed by Sidney Lumet; Written by E.L. Doctorow, based on his own
novel "The Book of Daniel"; With Timothy Hutton, Mandy Patinkin, Lindsay
Crouse, Amanda Plummer, Edward Asner, Ilan M. Mitchell-Smith, Ellen
Barkin, John Rubinstein, Maria Tucci, Jena Greco, Joseph Leon, Tovah
Feldshuh, Lee Richardson, David Margulies, Carmen Mathews, Julie
Bovasso, Norman Parker, Colin Stinton
Sidney Lumet's film "DANIEL" and E.L. Doctorow's novel "The Book of
Daniel", which it is based upon, are inspired by the controversial
Rosenberg case.
At first some words about the complex story. Paul and Rochelle Isaacson
(Mandy Patinkin, Lindsay Crouse) were executed in the early 1950s for
alleged espionage. Their children Daniel and Susan can't get over this.
In the late 1960s, after an attempted suicide of his politically more
active sister Susan (Amanda Plummer), the rather unpolitical Daniel
(Timothy Hutton) tries to find out what exactly happened in the past,
tries to understand his parents' lives, tries to help his sister and to
get along with his own life ...
"DANIEL" shows how children can be affected by the lives of their
parents. And it is about the search of one's place in life. Lumet
treated these themes again later in his masterful "RUNNING ON EMPTY",
starring River Phoenix, Christine Lahti and Judd Hirsch. Another theme
of "DANIEL" is the wish of human beings to understand their parents.
Lumet described the film in a Village Voice interview in the following
way: "To me, 'DANIEL' is the story of a boy who buries himself with his
parents, and spends the rest of his life trying to climb out of the
grave." The movie uses a complex flashback structure to tell its story.
"DANIEL" illuminates from Daniel's view the history of the American left
from the 1930s to the late 1960s, including the different left
movements. In its criticism of death penalty and McCarthyism, the film
is also a political statement.
Sidney Lumet is one of the masters of the American cinema. He has given
us the masterpieces "12 ANGRY MEN", "LONG DAY'S JOURNEY INTO NIGHT",
"THE PAWNBROKER", "THE HILL", "SERPICO", "DOG DAY AFTERNOON", "NETWORK",
"PRINCE OF THE CITY", "THE VERDICT" and "RUNNING ON EMPTY". He also
directed other very good movies like "FAIL-SAFE", "THE DEADLY AFFAIR",
"THE OFFENCE", "MURDER ON THE ORIENT EXPRESS" and "Q & A". Lumet himself
is politically left-leaning, and "DANIEL" is probably one of his most
personal works. It was about seven years before he got the chance to
realize this project. Many people worked on "DANIEL" for the minimum
salary set by the union. Timothy Hutton turned down a million-dollar
offer on a film and worked on "DANIEL" instead for about 25000 dollars.
And Lumet is right when he writes in his very informative book "Making
Movies": "Despite its critical and financial failure, I think it's one
of the best pictures I've ever done." The film proves again Lumet's
ability to tell complex, emotionally absorbing, unsentimental stories.
Everything works in this uncompromising picture. A few of Lumet's films
were marred by their scripts ("THE APPOINTMENT", "POWER", "FAMILY
BUSINESS", "A STRANGER AMONG US"). But Doctorow's screenplay for
"DANIEL" is excellent and extraordinarily multi-layered. And Lumet's
direction is sensitive and fascinating. Timothy Hutton (who later
starred with Nick Nolte and Armand Assante in Lumet's cop thriller "Q &
A"), Edward Asner (who plays the Isaacson's attorney), Lindsay Crouse
(who also appeared in "PRINCE OF THE CITY" and "THE VERDICT"), Mandy
Patinkin, Amanda Plummer and Ilan M. Mitchell-Smith (who plays the young
Daniel in the early 1950s) stand out in a fine cast. Andrzej
Bartkowiak's impressive cinematography supports the flashback structure
by a careful use of color filters. The rich soundtrack, mainly
consisting of songs interpreted by Paul Robeson, perfectly fits and
illustrates the film's themes. The editing is excellent as well (a good
example is the brilliantly filmed end sequence).
There are many great moments in this movie. For instance, there is a
powerful rally scene in which you can feel that the Isaacson's children
are afraid of the world around them. Another moving scene is a sequence
in which young Daniel and young Susan (played by Ilan M. Mitchell-Smith
and Jena Greco) walk through New York in search of their home. This
scene, also showing Lumet's typically great use of the city of New York,
reminded me of Antonioni's "LA NOTTE".
I'm an admirer of Sidney Lumet's cinema. "DANIEL" is one of his most
underestimated motion pictures, really a must-see. Of course, don't
expect standard Hollywood entertainment, but a serious work.
(C) Karl Rackwitz (Klein Köris, Germany, 1999)

Author
Karl Rackwitz
Directed by Sidney Lumet; Written by E.L. Doctorow, based on his own
novel "The Book of Daniel"; With Timothy Hutton, Mandy Patinkin, Lindsay
Crouse, Amanda Plummer, Edward Asner, Ilan M. Mitchell-Smith, Ellen
Barkin, John Rubinstein, Maria Tucci, Joseph Leon, Tovah Feldshuh, Lee
Richardson, David Margulies, Carmen Matthews, Julie Bovasso, Jena Greco
Sidney Lumet's film "DANIEL" and E.L. Doctorow's novel "The Book of
Daniel", which it is based upon, are inspired by the controversial
historical case of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg.
At first some words about the complex story. Paul and Rochelle Isaacson
(Mandy Patinkin, Lindsay Crouse) were executed in the early 1950s for
alleged espionage. Their children Daniel and Susan can't get over this.
In the late 1960s, after an attempted suicide of his politically more
active sister Susan (played by Amanda Plummer), the rather unpolitical
Daniel (Timothy Hutton) tries to find out what exactly happened in the
past, tries to understand his parents' lives, tries to help his sister
and to get along with his own live ...
In the first place "DANIEL" is about the effects of parents' lives on
the lives of their children and about the wish of human beings to
understand their parents. Lumet said in a Village Voice interview: "To
me, 'DANIEL' is the story of a boy who buries himself with his parents,
and spends the rest of his life trying to climb out of the grave." But
the multi-layered film deals with other problems as well. Through a
complex flashback structure it illuminates from Daniel's view the
history of the American left from the 1930s to the late 1960s, including
the different left movements. In its criticism of death penalty and
McCarthyism, the film is also a political statement.
Sidney Lumet is one of the masters of the American cinema. He has given
us the masterpieces "12 ANGRY MEN", "LONG DAY'S JOURNEY INTO NIGHT",
"THE PAWNBROKER", "THE HILL", "SERPICO", "DOG DAY AFTERNOON", "NETWORK",
"PRINCE OF THE CITY", "THE VERDICT" and "RUNNING ON EMPTY". Lumet
himself is politically left-leaning, and "DANIEL" is probably one of his
most personal works. It was about seven years before he got the chance
to realize this project. Many people who worked on "DANIEL" helped him
by taking only the minimum salary set by the union. Timothy Hutton, for
instance, turned down a million-dollar offer on a film and worked on
"DANIEL" instead for about 25000 dollars.
And Lumet is right when he writes in his book "Making Movies": "Despite
its critical and financial failure, I think it's one of the best
pictures I've ever done." The film proves again Lumet's ability to tell
complex, emotionally absorbing, unsentimental stories. Everything works
in this uncompromising film. Doctorow provided an extraordinarily
multi-layered screenplay. Timothy Hutton (who later starred with Nick
Nolte and Armand Assante in Lumet's very good cop thriller "Q & A"),
Edward Asner, Lindsay Crouse, Mandy Patinkin, Ilan M. Mitchell-Smith
(who plays the young Daniel in the early 1950s) and Amanda Plummer stand
out in a good cast. The fine cinematography supports the flashback
structure by a careful use of color filters. The rich soundtrack, mainly
consisting of songs interpreted by Paul Robeson, perfectly fits and
illustrates the film's themes. The editing is excellent as well (a good
example is the brilliantly filmed end sequence).
An especially moving scene of the film, also showing Lumet's typically
great use of the city of New York, is a sequence in which young Daniel
and young Susan (played by Ilan M. Mitchell-Smith and Jena Greco) walk
through New York in search of their home.
"DANIEL" is a must-see. Of course, don't expect standard Hollywood
entertainment, but a serious work. See also Sidney Lumet's later drama
"RUNNING ON EMPTY" (starring River Phoenix, Christine Lahti and Judd
Hirsch), another masterful movie about similar themes.
(C) Karl Rackwitz (Klein Köris, Germany, 1999)
