Title
Review for Gigi (1958)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Gigi" dominated the 1959 Academy Awards.
It won nine Oscars, sweeping all the non-acting
categories.  Best Picture, Best Director
(Vincente Minnelli), Best Adapted Screenplay
(Alan Jay Lerner), Best Color Cinematography
(Joseph Ruttenberg).  Also best sets, best
costumes, best song, best score, and best
editing.
Like "My Fair Lady", "Gigi" is a musical adaptation
of a novel about a young woman who rises from
poverty to riches.  Elaborately staged, heavily
orchestrated, with clever but carefully inoffensive
lyrics, both films dubbed the voice of the female
lead, as a pretty face must have a pretty voice.
Gigi, although played by 27-year-old Leslie Caron
(the ingenue from "An American in Paris"), is a
young teenager who has lived a sheltered life
despite coming from a family of mistresses.  Her
mother is an unseen minor opera singer; while she
often rehearses offscreen in another room, she
doesn't make an appearance even as Gigi is repeatedly
visited by famous wealthy playboy Gaston (Louis
Jourdan).  Gigi is raised by Hermione Gingold,
and trained to be a lady by imperious Isabel Jeans.
Gaston receives training of his own, from his mentor
and relative Honore (Maurice Chevalier).  Chevalier
is most famous in America for his first number,
"Thank Heaven for Little Girls" (when Broadway next
revives the play, expect 'Pretty' to be substituted
for 'Little').  However, the best production number
is "The Night They Invented Champagne".  Here, the
choreography is excellent, although it is difficult
to believe that Gigi would be able to make the wordly,
clever comments that the lyrics gives her.
The Gaston-Gigi romance provides the context for
the musical's lampooning the elaborate Victorian-era
ritual built around men obtaining sex, and women
obtaining security.  They have to work so hard at
attaining their differing ends that they can't long
savor their fleeting victories.  Gaston's intensity
at courtship is contrasted with affable Honore,
who pursues woman without emotional involvement or
any intentions of marriage.  "Gigi" seems to
side with Honore, despite the inevitable happy
ending for Gigi and Gaston.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
