Title
Review for Red Dirt (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Frankie Paiva
Despite careful consideration I have still not decided whether Karen Black is 
more eccentric as her character in this movie, or in person. The mentally ill 
woman she portrays is certainly unique. She has her quirks, but most of them 
are strangely charming, or don't seem to matter. Later discussion led me to 
believe Ms. Black got a large amount of sugar to consume during the movie. 
Regardless, her Aunt Summer is the only thing that keeps this movie going. 
Without her, this movie would be a dreary mess with no purpose whatsoever. 
Scenes sans Aunt Summer made me want to fall asleep, the phrase, "wake me 
when it's over" comes to mind. Red Dirt is way too slow to be much of 
anything, and I saw no real point in it being made. While director and writer 
Tag Purvis is homosexual, the movie isn't autobiographical, so what was its 
purpose? Before I continue, let me tell you the dismal world these people 
live in. 
Griffith (Dan Montgomery) and Emily (Aleksa Palladino) are two teenage 
cousins living in Pine Apple, Mississippi. The fact that they are cousins 
doesn't stop them from leisurely completing daily activities nude or 
discourages them from taking frequent tumbles in the hay. Their mothers might 
be their sisters, and their sisters might be their mothers. The whole concept 
doesn't bother them a bit. Living with the two is crazy Aunt Summer (the 
aforementioned Karen Black) who paces the house daily and knits while 
listening to old music on her record player. Griffith is responsible for 
Summer while Emily shows little interest in her or in Lynn Thomas (Peg 
O'Keef) the woman who is supposedly their real mother. Handsome wayfarer Lee 
Todd (Walton Goggins) comes into town and rents out a nearby cottage, 
Griffith and Lee soon become friends. As the film progresses, it gradually 
becomes clear that Griffith and Lee are forming a romantic relationship. This 
sets off Emily who begins to spend more time with Aunt Summer. All characters 
must face the horrors of their way of life and the town they live in. The 
question becomes whether Griffith and Lee will live (as best put by an 
audience member) gayily ever after.
The subject matter of repressed homosexuality and teenage confusion are 
anything but light. However, the film only features them when it wants to. 
Scenes that show up to extend the running time happen often. It's obvious 
that Griffith and Lee like each other from the beginning. Near the middle of 
the film I was mentally goading the two on, wishing they would just kiss and 
get it over with. Aunt Summer is the only person confused for a reason. 
Perhaps this isn't fair to the characters. It's scientifically proven that we 
accept the world we are born into, and I can see why Griffith gets so 
distressed by, and later rejects his sexual preference. While more apparent 
in novels like To Kill A Mockingbird, the idea that the American south is an 
entirely different world within a vastly different country doesn't get 
presented well. Lackluster performances are all around. Aleksa Palladino (who 
played a somewhat similar role in The Adventures of Sebastian Cole), and 
Karen Black are only slightly better than their castmates. Dan Montgomery's 
mediocre Griffith becomes annoying and nude scene after nude scene I couldn't 
help wondering if the actor got chosen for his body rather than his acting 
skills.
Red Dirt does manage to be quite a beautiful movie. Purvis's writing chops 
aren’t perfect, but the man does have a keen visual eye. There are some 
gorgeous shots that are simply stunning. Purvis would most likely do wonders 
with the right material, but this is just too depressing and boring to be 
anything worth recommending. 
I think the answer to my question about Karen Black just popped up. If I had 
to work on such a somber movie for a few months, I'd be taking some sugar too.
