Title
Review for Sgt. Bilko (1996)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Steve Rhodes
     SGT. BILKO is a highly forgettable, but quite funny remake of the
classic Phil Silvers TV show from the mid 50s known variously as "The
Phil Silvers Show", "You'll Never Get Rich", and simply "Sergeant
Bilko."  I was a nine year old when the series started and was a fan of
it.  Only Steve Martin and possibly Robin Williams have the comedic
strength to revive the show.  Here it is Steve Martin playing the role
that is both a homage to Phil Silvers and yet is a fresh rendition as
well.  In short, this is not Martin at his best and the movie has a lot
of gags, especially sight gags, that don't work, but the movie does has
a lot of belly laughs in it.  A sure fire audience pleaser even if not
exactly blockbuster material.
     I think this movie has some of the worst trailers for it that I
have seen in quite a while, but I saw them so often that this slapstick
comedy began to grow on me a bit before I ever walked into the theater.
The movie has exactly three things going for it and no more.  The
acting by Martin, that of straight man Dan Aykroyd playing Sgt. Bilko's
Col. Hall, and the script by Andy Breckman.  The rest of the acting is
fairly pedestrian but Phil Hartman as Major Thorn as well as his two
accountant sidekicks are awful.  Most of the technical aspects of the
show like the cinematography, music, and sets are acceptable, but
nothing special.  The directing by Jonathan Lynn is minimal.
     Sgt. Bilko runs the motor pool at Fort Baxter, but spends most of
his time gambling and conning soldiers out of their money.  His
philosophy about gambling is, "I like a sporting event in which I know
the outcome ahead of time.  It's more organized."  He does not run a
very tight ship.  His troops ignore bugle call, and do not get up until
he announces, "Let's go campers.  It's 10am.  Time to start the day."
In the funniest part of the show, Sgt. Bilko tells his group a story
about how he once fixed a fight, but the wrong fighter was paid off
before the fight started.  The outcome is hilarious.
     Major Thorn, cute name that, has an old grudge against Sgt. Bilko,
and the plot of most of the show is that Major Thorn tries to prove a
case against Bilko.  The major allows as how "catching Bilko is hard as
nailing Jell-O to the wall."  Bilko is a conniver, but also a whiner.
He tells soldiers that, "I'm paralyzed from the hair down.  Make the
bad man stop."
     Glenne Headly (MR. HOLLAND'S OPUS and DIRTY ROTTEN SCOUNDRELS)
plays Bilko's girlfriend Rita Robbins.  Rita is constantly getting
conned by Bilko as well and sees it as an education saying, "I have a
masters in manipulation from the University of Bilko."  Bilko himself
claims he has always had modest needs.  He tells Col. Hall that "All
I've ever wanted was an honest week's pay for an honest day's work."
Everything that Martin does is cute right down to the way he carries
himself and his funny little quasi-mocking salute.
     SGT. BILKO runs a quick 1:32 thanks to fast paced editing by Tony
Lombardo.  I was amazed to find the show was a correctly rated PG one.
I expected something much raunchier.  There is no sex, nudity, or
violence.  If they said any bad words, I can not remember them.  We
should have brought our son Jeffrey (almost 7) as their was a five year
old behind us who was laughing a lot and gave the show a thumbs up.
SGT. BILKO is not great art, but I laughed a lot as did the rest of the
audience, and I think you will too so I recommend the film and give the
picture ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        I have to admit that, despite all the endless hours I've spent 
watching sitcom reruns on cable, I've never seen an episode of "Sgt. 
Bilko." It's probably better that I haven't, though, because I'm sure this 
movie pales in comparison. Still, I've seen every episode of "Saturday 
Night Live" and enjoy the work of the three "SNL" stars who carry the 
SGT. BILKO movie -- Steve Martin, Dan Aykroyd and Phil Hartman. 
It's still no guarantee that the name of those three on a movie marquee 
means an entertaining film experience. I need only cite the titles A 
SIMPLE TWIST OF FATE, DOCTOR DETROIT and HOW I GOT 
INTO COLLEGE for evidence of that.
        Martin plays the one-note Bilko character, a money-obsessed 
finagler who secretly runs gambling and laundering operations on the 
barracks. Aykroyd plays the one-note general character, who manages 
to overlook the rampant corruption due to Bilko's profuse ass-kissing. 
Hartman plays the one-note bastard character who is out for revenge 
against Bilko. The plot basically has Hartman trying to trip up Bilko, 
with Bilko continually outwitting him.
        That includes having Bilko's platoon audited by two 
accountant dorks (including fellow "SNL" alum Chris Rock), Hartman 
and Aykroyd popping in for a surprise inspection at the worst possible 
time, Hartman trying to romance Bilko's longsuffering fiance (Glenn 
Headly) and a bunch of crap involving the $70 million hovertank the 
Bilko platoon was supposed to be building. The lone voice of dissent 
amidst the Bilko platoon amid all this criminal activity is a new recruit 
who is actually serious about defending American liberty. Rest assured 
by the end of the movie he too will abandon that antiquated notion and 
begin living off government money like the rest of the platoon. Yeah, a 
real happy ending.
        SGT. BILKO isn't a decent comeback vehicle for Martin or 
Aykroyd, who both give mediocre, walk-through performances, but at 
least Hartman shows talent amid the ninety minutes of mindless 
entertainment, most of which is contrived and unoriginal. The movie 
does have its share of laughs, though, and is fun to watch most of the 
time. Even so, I'm about ready for the Army Comedy genre to die out. 
In this day and age, it comes off as lame and unnecessary, kind of like 
the real Army. (No flame mail on that one, please, militarists.)
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Another TV sitcom ("The Phil Silvers Show") mined for the movies,
SGT. BILKO stars Steve Martin as the famous fast-talking master sergeant
who will do anything for a buck.  He runs the base casino-- that is,
motor pool-- under the unsuspecting eye of his commanding officer (Dan
Aykroyd).  He also has a gambling-addicted fiancee (Glenn Headly), who
doesn't seem to mind being repeatedly left at the altar.  (He wins her
back, each time, with a card game.) Only with the return of an old
nemesis (Phil Hartman), is Bilko forced to adjust, adapt, and, of
course, come out smelling like a rose.
     As contemporary combat comedies go, STRIPES is still the one to
beat.  SGT. BILKO lacks a strong story, ensemble, or lead.  The script
is an abomination that recycles the decades-old material with nary an
original twist.  (The plot involves some nonsense about a "hovertank.")
The laughs are there, in spots, but nothing in the movie builds upon
itself.  A wealth of comic opportunity is wasted, along with good actors
Hartman and Headly.  (The smaller players score minor hits, as does Dan
Aykroyd's underplayed base boss.)
     The biggest misfire is Martin, who belongs here but doesn't.  He
lacks the steely shiftiness to make the role his own.  (A better choice
would be someone like, say, Rip Torn.  Of course, *he's* not a box-
office draw.) Martin doesn't *command* SGT. BILKO, but he does *carry*
it.  His limitless energy and precision timing single- handedly keeps
the film in step, and that's a performance worth watching even if the
movie isn't.  And, yes, that's Phil's daughter Catherine playing one of
the auditors called in to check Bilko's financial records.  Directed by
Jonathan Lynn (MY COUSIN VINNY). 
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Edwin Jahiel
SGT. BILKO *** 1/4  first half,  ** second half. Directed by 
Jonathan Lynn. Written by Andy Breckman. Photography, Peter 
Sova. Editing, Tony Lombardo. Production design, Lawrence G. 
Paull. Music, Alan Silvestri. Producer, Brian Grazer. Cast: 
Steve Martin (Sgt. Bilko), Dan Aykroyd (Col. Hall), Phil 
Hartman (Major Thorn), Glenne Headly (Rita Robbins), Daryl 
Mitchell (Wally Holbrook), Eric Edwards (Doberman), Travis 
Tritt as himself, Austin Pendleton (Major Ebersole), Chris 
Rock (Lt. Oster). A Universal release. 92 min. Rated PG.  
Whenever a new movie is made from TV shows, I take stock of my 
pop fiction background and find that my familiarity with 
television oldies is most limited.
Coming rather late to TV ownership, I made up for this with a 
big appetite for movies and more movies, programs -- mostly 
British, mostly funny (from Monty Python to Blackadder to Mr. 
Bean, Yes, Minister, Keeping Up Appearances, Waiting for God), 
Poirot, Inspector Morse, and so on. Even higher on the list 
are documentaries and cultural programs, especially those 
dealing with history, politics, society--what could be called 
The Way We Were.  
I marvel at the millions who remember shows with Groucho Marx, 
Jack Benny, Burns and Allen. Or All in the Family, Route 66, 
the Twilight Zone, Charlie's Angels, Dragnet, Bewitched... the 
list is huge. I suppose that those viewers sacrificed 
movie-movies for TV, and that more millions, younger folk with 
a vast knowledge of things well before their time, have a 
thing for reruns.  
My knowledge of  TV's Sergeant Bilko is zilch. With some 
sympathy, I remember Phil Silvers from  films, even though 
these were rarely top drawer. So, I cannot argue with persons 
who call the Phil Silvers Show a classic--though "classic" 
seems to apply to most anything that was on TV years ago, just 
as "antique" is used for many objects just a couple of decades 
old.
The upshot of all this is that I came to the movie "Sgt. 
Bilko" without prejudices or the ability to compare. The only 
comparison I can make is of Steve Martin with himself, in 
other movies. The answer is that once again, Martin is a major 
talent that almost never wears thin.
The movie's Bilko is a magna cum laude operator of tricks, 
scams, gambling, con-games, loaded dice set-ups, all issuing 
in and from the Ft. Baxter motor pool that the Sergeant runs. 
"Pool" takes on new meanings as men and women live it up in 
fun and games.
Martin, silver-haired and silver-tongued, thinks, improvises 
and acts on his feet so lightning fast that you just got to 
respect him. He lines with silver the pockets of his crew. 
They admire, love and follow him blindly, even as he lines his 
own pockets with gold. His bigger share is only fair, given 
his leadership, imagination and abilities.
Steve Martin is a great performer who here plays a great 
performer, a man of (metaphorically) a thousand faces. He 
issues brisk orders one moment, plays humble the next. When 
facing officers he has a visible factor of independence from 
authority, shows defiance, superiority or familiarity. The 
brass are putty in his hands. Bilko can cajole, flatter, play 
dumb or smarter-than-thou, and always comes out on top.
A juicy contrast is established when an outsider, young, 
straight-arrow, honest Pfc.Wally Holbrook joins the pool. 
Without missing a beat, Bilko, talking a mile a minute, puts 
the stupefied kid in the picture. Then, pointing to one of his 
people he adds: "He'll take your bag. Don't worry. He's 
bonded." If that's not a four-star line, what is? 
The performances, all of them, from big to tiny roles, are 
excellent. Dan Aykroyd plays beautifully second banana as 
Bilko's bozoid, gullible yet complicitous Colonel. Phil 
Hartman as Major Thorn does slow burns, all the better since 
they are acted with minimalism instead of the classic way made 
famous long ago by Edgar Kennedy.  
Thorn, now on inspection, might have been Colonel or General 
by now, except for a mishap, years ago, unwittingly caused by 
the Sergeant. In a hilarious flashback we see how Bilko had 
bribed an Army boxer to take a dive. Mistakenly, his assistant 
gave the money to the opponent pugilist, so that both fighters 
threw the match.
Without my getting into developments or details, the gags 
cascade and are most comical. Not subtle, not witty, but broad 
as befits farce. 
There's a wild switching of barracks signs and soldiers' 
identitities during a Thorn inspection. Then comes an 
investigation by military nerds who must break the codes of 
Bilko's computers. 
There is also a subplot about Bilko and his girl (Glenne 
Headley, reunited with Martin after the excellent "Dirty 
Rotten Scoundrels") whom he stands up at their wedding time 
after time, but who, in an appealing (and feminist) way, has a 
mind and will of her own. All this is wrapped up in fine 
production values and Alan Silvestri's clever, humorous score. 
Now for the not-so-good news. As a great 19th Century actor 
lay on his deathbed, he turned to his sad-faced company: 
"Don't feel sorry for me. Dying is easy. Comedy is hard." 
Farce is even harder. 
It's a rare movie that can sustain its brio past a certain 
point. At exactly the halfway mark "Sgt. Bilko" starts to 
slide and get rather tedious, at least in comparison to what 
came before. 
I noticed that, in the public, loud peals of laughter subsided 
after the first part. Even so, the wonderfully imaginative, 
enjoyable, well timed initial 45 minutes are reason enough to 
see the film.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Steve Martin, Dan Aykroyd, Phil Hartman, Gleanne Headley, 
      Daryl Mitchell, Austin Pendleton, Pamela Segall, Chris Rock, 
      Catherine Silvers, Eric Edwards
Director: Jonathan Lynn
Producer: Brian Grazer
Screenplay: Andy Breckman
Cinematography: Peter Sova
Music: Alan Silvestri
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures
     Watch an old episode of THE PHIL SILVERS SHOW, and you'll recognize 
just how bad this new version of SGT. BILKO is.  But, regardless of 
whether you're a fan of the 1950s series or not, it's doubtful you'll 
get more than a few halfhearted chuckles out of this lifeless retread.  
As envisioned for the nineties by writer Andy Breckman and director 
Jonathan Lynn (MY COUSIN VINNY), this SGT. BILKO should be court-
martialed.
     For some reason, Steve Martin, the comic force behind such 
delightful films as LA STORY and ROXANNE, has descended into an abyss of 
unfunny, unoriginal, and unappetizing motion pictures.  His latest 
releases -- A SIMPLE TWIST OF FATE, MIXED NUTS, FATHER OF THE BRIDE PART 
2, and SGT. BILKO -- have varied in quality from mediocre to downright 
awful.  It's been a long time since Martin has done something worth 
watching, and, with every outing like this, it makes me wonder whether 
he's lost the flair he once possessed.
     Even though Colonel Hall (Dan Aykroyd) is the commanding officer of 
Fort Baxter, the place is really run by Sgt. Bilko (Martin).  If there's 
a scam afoot, Bilko's inevitably behind it, whether it involves a poker 
game, an illegal lottery, or an attempt to worm a free trip to Vegas out 
of the army.  But Bilko's comfortable position is jeopardized by the 
arrival of Major Thorn (Phil Hartman), who has come to evaluate Fort 
Baxter's prize technological development:  the $70 million hover tank.  
When the weapon fails miserably in a public demonstration, Thorn has an 
excuse to close down the base as well as stick it to his old nemesis, 
Bilko, whose actions once got him posted to Greenland.
     Martin's Bilko can boast some of the mannerisms of the Silvers 
version, but that's about all the two incarnations have in common.  
Silvers was funny; Martin isn't.  Silvers drew viewers back week after 
week; Martin is likely to make anyone in the audience wish they had 
stayed home to watch a rerun on Nickelodeon.  Actually, Martin probably 
isn't a bad choice for Bilko; it's just that the comic doesn't invest 
much genuine energy into his portrayal.  Whatever happened to SATURDAY 
NIGHT LIVE's "Wild and Crazy Guy"?
     Of course, it's unfair to put all the blame for this failure on 
Martin's shoulders.  The screenplay is an absolute embarrassment.  Any 
of the worst original TV scripts contained more innovation and humor 
than this ninety-minute mixture of bad jokes and regurgitated formulas.  
The most clever bit in the whole movie comes as part of the end credits, 
when this message appears:  "The filmmakers gratefully acknowledge the 
total lack of cooperation from the United States Army."  That's as good 
as it gets.
     This movie could be viewed as something of a SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE 
alumni show, with Martin, Dan Aykroyd, and Phil Hartman topping the 
bill.  Both Aykroyd and Hartman play straight men to Martin's clown, 
and, as a result, all three are wasted.  
     Recent movie revivals have done great injustices to old TV shows.  
We've had DRAGNET, THE BEVERLY HILLBILLIES, THE FLINTSTONES, and now 
SGT. BILKO.  The unfortunate thing is that these are just the tip of the 
iceberg; many more are envisioned, starting with MCHALE'S NAVY and I 
DREAM OF JEANNIE.  If SGT. BILKO is any indication of their quality, we 
might as well stay home and vegetate in front of the television set.  
The experience will be far less disheartening than seeing Hollywood 
trash yet another fond memory like it has done here.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
web: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin (or) http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Michael Redman
Steve Martin is one of the funniest men alive. If you can take that as a true
statement, then your disappointment at this film will equal mine. Martin can
be hilarious, creating some of the best laugh-out-loud experiences that have
ever taken place in movie theaters. You won't find any of them here.
The old television series that this is based on has its moments of humor and
wit. Bilko (and the name isn't an accident) is the head of an army motor pool
group, but his passion is his schemes. Every episode involves the sergeant and
his men in one or another hair-brained plan to get rich quick while outwitting
the officers of the base. "McHale's Navy"'s granddaddy.
That's the idea behind this movie too, but the difference is that, as
far-fetched and usually goofy as the television series was, it was funny.
There is not one laugh in the film. The re-make retains the goofiness, but not
the entertainment.
Everything is just too clean. It was obviously made on a Hollywood back lot
and looks every bit like it. It all looks brand new, even the old beat-up
stuff. Martin is remarkably small in what should have been a bigger than life
role. In the original, Phil Silvers played the huckster with a heart of gold
and more than a touch of sleaziness. Martin's Bilko is a pale imitation.
The only semi-bright spot is Phil Hartman as Bilko's arch-enemy. It's not
saying much, considering Martin's lackluster character, but Hartman leaves him
in the dust.
[This appeared in the 4/4/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Chew Joo Siang
STEVE MARTIN SHINES BUT SGT.BILKO FAILS TO IMPRESS
Based on the popular 50's sitcom, SGT. BILKO follows the string of 
old-sitcoms-to-movie conversion fever. Remember THE BRADY BUNCH MOVIE or 
THE BEVERLY HILLBILLIES released sometime back? (BRADY BUNCH was a 
moderate hit in in the US while HILLBILLIES flopped). I do not really 
know whether the Hollywood minds are running out of good ideas or just 
being plain lazy, but the TV-conversion-movies are hitting our screens 
like wildfire, sad to say, with mixed success. Such movies are mostly 
targeted at US viewers since they are usually followings of such series 
over there and the larger the following, the more likely the sitcom will 
be made into a movie. SGT. BILKO (frankly, I have not seen any its 
original TV version), even with the charm and wild antics of funnymen 
STEVE MARTIN and DAN AKROYD; failed to entertain.   
Sgt. Ernest Bilko is the man behind the motor pool (place of vehicle 
storage and repair) of Fort Baxter. Though totally unskilled in the field 
of work that he is supposed to be in charge of, he has an almost 
superhuman ability and zeal to sniff out money-making opportunities; 
from running a gambling den in the military garage to 4-D pools. Though 
materialistic in mind, Bilko's methods has thoughtfully `enriched' the 
lives of the men of Fort Baxter, providing them with some form of real 
recreation within the camp and the people love him for that. Colonel Hall 
runs the entire fort and thanks to his inborn `blissfully-confused' 
state, Bilko has managed to hide his operation, though nearly every 
living person in the fort knows about it. Bilko's state of ascent is 
suddenly under-fire when the Pentagon sends Major Thorn, a tough cookie 
on army regulations, to check on the progress on the $70 million 
Hovertank project, a new weapon under development within the fort's grounds. 
To add to his problems, Thorn is determined to bring Bilko down in 
retalliation of a major `sabo' done on him by Bilko during their younger 
army days. 
Director Jonathan Lynn, who directed MY COUSIN VINNY (In which Marisa 
Tomei won an oscar for best-supporting actress) managed to pull SGT. 
BILKO through with suitable pacing and some exceptional moments of 
laughter, but that is about it. There are really not enough 
laughter-packed-moments in SGT. BILKO to fully entertain the average 
movie-goer. Still, Steve Martin's Sgt. Bilko is played with finesse and 
full-force by the renowned comedian. Without him, SGT. BILKO would have 
just fell flat on its face. SGT. BILKO did moderately well in the US box 
office early this year but I doubt it will earn much elsewhere around the 
world.   
The current trend in mixed successes in such tv-conversions may be a 
blessing in disguise, really; at least it will force Hollywood to re-think 
any of its initial intentions to turn another tv-idea into a movie or at 
the very least approach those ideas with more creativity.
Unless you are a fan of the TV-series or love to watch Steve Martin in 
action, you can skip this one when deciding which movie to catch in the 
local theatres. I'm sure there are better ones around.
