Title
Review for Seppuku (1962)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Joon H. Bae
        This film, based on a novel by  Yauhiko Takiguchi, starts with a 
striking visual: the ancestoral shrine of the Iyi Clan is shown in a 
close shot. The camera pulls slowly backwards and the narration begins in 
a dead voice, "Date, 13th of May, 1630. Weather, fair. The heat of the 
day rises hourly... No incident of note." Of course, we find out this is 
not the case. The movie starts in the earlier part of the Tokugawa Era 
where peace reigned and the samurai class has disposed mainly of its 
martial status. The sword is used no more in battle, and many of its rituals 
are made light. Hara-kiri, or seppuku, is not an exception. It has turned 
into a farce where one does not even touch one's self with a dagger; one 
can just reach for the weapon and the honorable second would swiftly 
be-head the dishonored. It is in this social atmosphere we find our 
protagonist, Hanshiro Tsugumo. He enters the screen with a heavy 
presence, dressed in black. He requests to the chamberlain of the Iyi 
family to let him use their ground to commit seppuku, for he cannot bear 
living as a destitute ronin (literally meaning, "wave-rider" - a former 
samurai without a master). The chamberlain listens to his request, and 
proceeds to tell a story of a different ronin with the same request, with 
a gruesome outcome. The chamberlain tests Tsugumo's resolve and honor again 
and again, for he does not want the same situation to repeat itself in 
his clan grounds. Tsugumo gives a simple answer, telling him that he has 
nothing in life to hold on to and he is resolved to commit seppuku.
        This movie was Kobayashi's first, yet I feel this movie is one of 
his strongest. He worked with screenplay writer Shinobu Hashimoto, who 
also wrote 'Seven Samurai', and other famous 'chambara'(or sword play) 
films. It is directed with a firm hand. Every shot is well crafted and 
his grasp of mise en scene is well represented in many scenes, 
especially, the confrontations between the protagonist and the chamberlain. 
The cinematography is incredibly detailed and clear in black and white. 
The contrasts of the linear elements to human movement in frame are 
incredible (note: the same cinematographer worked with Kobayashi in 
"Kwaidan" also). In every way, the technical aspects of this film 
reinforce the story in a quiet yet powerful way. This film shows 
Kobayashi's full understanding of the medium and how to incorporate his 
techniques without it becoming burdensome. 
        Not only is the technical outstanding, but the acting is superb 
also. If it sounds like I am gushing about this film, well, I am! Tatsuya 
Nakadai is, perhaps, the most well recognized tragic hero in japanese 
film. While Toshiro Mifune is the Hero in Japanese film, one can state 
that Tatsuya Nakadai is the Anti-Hero. His gaunt, hollow face is easily 
recognized in films such as "Goyo-Kin", "Sword of Doom", and others. 
His acting ability is quite good and he is exceptionally good in this 
film. Tetsuro Tamba also gives a very good performance as the best 
swordsman of the Iyi clan.
        This film, although is incredible, does have some flaws. Although 
quite well executed and comprised, it is a bit long. Some of the dialogue 
seem out of place and could have used a bit more editing. May be it is my 
American short attention span, but I can think of at least 10 minutes 
that could have been left out. Other than that, the film ranks with or 
surpasses the best of Akira Kurosawa. 
        The movie overall is not an action movie. If you are a fan of 
"Lone Wolf and Cub" and expect hundreds of people dying and spurting 
blood, rent something else. This movie, rather, is a social commentary on 
what is considered important in Japanese culture. Is human life more 
worthwhile than an intangible thing called honor? It is a question that 
will haunt you by the end of the film and leave you with a sense of 
devastation. You will not be able to agree that "no incident of note" has 
occured.
