Title
Review for Stargate (1994)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Jonathan Pringle
I know this is posted late, but I had to give my opinion on the movie
"Stargate."
I just finished watching the movie for the seventh time, and I must say,
that this is one of the most excellent movies I have ever seen!  I will
give a breakdown on all the individual aspects of the movie:
It comes right out of a child's imagination.  Travelling through a
stargate to a planet at the other end of the universe.  Just seeing it
come alive relives many childhood deep thoughts.  Since it was a science
fiction movie, I can understand that most of it is unbelievable, but
that's where we can just lose ourselves in the movie!  Many dramatic
moments and edge of the seat moments all put together in a nice
package.  The egyptian element to the movie was very interesting and
made me want to learn more.
Where did they film this?  I was awestruck with the beautiful sets and
props in this film.  Most of the budget on this film must have been used
in the sets!  I actually felt like I was in Egypt with the pyramids!  It
really did do the job by making me feel like I was in a totally
different world while watching the movie.  While the first half hour's
sets are mildly interesting, the rest of the movie's sets are
astonishing!
The acting was very well done.  I especially liked seeing foreign movie
actors playing the parts of the civilians.  Especially the actress who
played Sha'uari.  She was great considering she could have been talking
about laying bricks for all we know!  The english-speaking cast did a
great job as well.  Especially David Spader as Daniel Jackson.  Kudos to
Kurt Russel as well.  But It keeps coming back to the foreign actors.
They blew me away!  One actor I would have liked to have seen more was
Jaye Davidson as Ra.  I thought he had the most interesting part.  
Once again, a soundtrack has inspired me so much as to buy it.  This is
one of the most incredible soundtracks that I own.  I have even placed
it higher the "Jurassic Park" and "The Lost World:  Jurassic Park."  The
music had a very ancient egyptian feel to it, and it made me want to
hear more of it.  I even stayed tuned for the ending credits because the
music just had to be heard again.  Good job, David Arnold.  
The ending was very appropriate and It made me hope for a sequal, but
then Jaye Davidson's character couldn't be in it!  Oh well, it was nice
that Daniel stayed with Sha'uri and the rest of the civilians in the
desert on the other end of the known universe. . .  
This movie is a definite rental or even purchase.  It should be the
"Jurassic Park" of movie collections.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     The idea that ancient civilizations were visited by Beings from
another planet has long been a source of mystery and wonderment for us
on Earth.  Could they have made the pyramids?  Could they be
responsible for the tremendously heavy statues on Easter Island?
Director Roland Emmerich and co-writer Dean Devlin, have made an
entertaining film that approaches the subject of inter-planetary
visitors not from the standpoint of "could they have " but rather "what
if they really did come here?"
     "StarGate" refers to the entrance-way from one world or galaxy
into another.  When an ancient artifact is discovered near the Great
Pyramids of Giza in Egypt that could lead to our learning the origin of
our civilization, both the military and civilian authorities show great
interest.
     Representing the military is Colonel Jack O'Neil (Kurt Russell),
the hard-nosed investigator of the artifact.  Representing a different
viewpoint (openness rather than secrecy) is Daniel Jackson (James
Spader), a brilliant Egyptologist.   Along with a small group of men
they embark on the journey to the "other side" of the Universe.  It
seems that going through the StarGate scrambles the molecules of their
being and are re-assembled when they reach their destination.
     What they find when they arrive and what they learn of the people
and their origin is a fascinating story. Their fight for life against
the ruler, Ra (Jaye Davidson), and even a love interest in the "other"
world, the beautiful Sha'uri (Mili Avital) makes for exciting science
fiction; if that is a genre that turns you on, go for it.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Roland Emmerich
Writer: Dean Devlin and Roland Emmerich
Starring: James Spader, Kurt Russel, Jaye Davidon, French Stewart
To put it bluntly, Ed Wood would have been proud of this.  A totally 
ridiculous plot is encompassed with bad humor, hokey drama, zero logic 
and a crap screenplay.  Also, a beautifully anti-climactic ending.  Not 
to say it didn't look intriguing when I saw the previews. So much for 
truth in advertising.
Roland Emmerich, who's later "Independence Day" would look like "The 400 
Blows" compared to this, co-writed and directed this inane sci-fi film 
which uses the cliche of there being some connection between Eqypt and 
aliens.  In a useless opening sequence, men find a stone in 1914 with 
hieroglyphics on it.  It wouldn't be till present day ('94) till they 
would actually figure it out.  They're decipherer?  A slightly-neurotic 
scientist (nice twist), Dr. Dan Jackson (James Spader, doing his best 
outside of erotic thrillers and some indy fare) who's life sucks so much 
that people walk out of his lectures after the third word.  Why do they 
use him to decipher what no one else could?  So there is a hokey ending! 
Duh!
He figures it out in about a minute.  Yea.  And then they get a suicidal 
colonel or something, "Jack" O'Neill (Kurt Russel, with his Wyat Earp 
locks in the beginning then a flat-top that would make Howie Long snap 
into a fetal position).  Why a suicidal colonel?  For the ending!  
You'll get the hang of this.  They open the stargate, a bunch of them go 
through it with a bomb to blow it up if they find anything bad.  After 
an overdone special effects thing, they're...inside a goddam pyramid.  
So they went to Egypt, right?  Wrong.  They're on another planet that 
was filmed in Egypt.
They discover a cilvilization ruled by Ra, the sun god (the androginous 
Jaye Davidson, with a voice modifier to make him sound like Barry White 
with asthma), and there are fights, explosions and a kiss between two 
people.  Yea.  Also melodrama, stupidity, hokey scenes and a bizarre 
language.  An anti-climactic ending ends with stupid lines ("Say hello 
to King Tut, asswhole!" - the quintessential line, lemme tell ya) and 
some convenient pesudo-pseudo-pseudo-character development.  By the end, 
you just wanna go home and watch, I don't know, the "Outer Limits" or 
something.  
The script's terrible.  The special effects are okay, but nothing great. 
The story's so weak that it's almost opaque.  The whole experience just 
isn't worth it unless you're so bored that you'd consider watching a 
"Full House" marathon...or this.  I'd pick this, obviously, but still, 
it's just not fun at all.  And I can't wait for it to premier on MST3K.

Author
Pedro Sena
Not being a science fiction fan, I was taken along to go see this film, even
though reviews around me had panned this as overweight
garbage.
Well, it isn't garbage, and it has a nice premise, and thought it suffers
from the goddamned military over tones ( will anyone ever
get rid of this crap.? ), it is a nice film, that is fun to watch and for a
few brief moments exciting to be a part of.
Being a person that indulges in the arts of meditation and time travelling,
it is easy to see why I like certain parts of this
film.  The time travelling, hits you so fast that your sucked into it before
you know what hits you.  Nothing like it is expected,
or can you possibly envision, and like the several minutes in the older
2001, A SPACE ODYSSEY, leaves you wanting to try it some more, because of
its exciting possibilities.
STARGATE is the story of an Egyptian artifact, that seems to have several
symbols of the magical kind that connect into something else that most
anyone can not figure out.  The army has been able to steal the thing and
kept it under wraps, and tested the hell out of it, until if finally, comes
around to connect with a down and out scientist and explorer, whose name
amidst his peers is best known as a comedy of errors and ridicule.
The scientist ( James Spader ), amidst his grief and lack of  attention to
his theories, is invited to check something out
by the government, something that they have enjoyed, but have not  able to
crack, though they already know what it does.  Their
experiments have already displayed that there is more to this artifact that
it appears, but the symbols in it, are not clear
enough for them to try something with it.  There are suggestions that some
people have died in trying to figure out this thing.
And they all agree that this thing is most likely, some sort of gateway to
another time.  The question is where is the key, and
which symbols match, in what order, to create the situation.
In comes our man, to whom the symbols appear to be a minor part of the real
exploration, and a suggestion that there is much more to work with.  And as
soon as it is discovered how it functions the inevitable military expedition
is created, to destroy it
if it appears that it is not friendly, or helpful.  Kurt Russell is the
military leader chosen to lead the expedition, and the group enters the
space.  Our scientist is the last to go in, and naturally he is curious, but
cautious. And as soon as he enters the film takes off on its own moment of
shining glory, the part that is just absorbing everyone without them knowing
it.  And there are more symbols in that minute than the film could possibly
ever show, but the trip is worth the price of admission, and at least an
amusement ride.
As the group arrives in another time and place, they eventually find a place
that is in a desert atmosphere, and is ruled by
a demonic being, who has designs on doing some more conquering, which
includes the earth, and other places to which it can time  travel through
the magical properties of the gate itself.
And our heroes take on the roles of leaders and help break down the evil,
and free the land from the oppressing rulers ( oh, wow !! )
and then the real story has to come into play.  It seems that the military
expedition was to destroy this other place, because it
was thought to be a potential problem.  And with the ruler now destroyed,
the mission is over and it is time to leave.  But the
scientist, whose efforts on the earth were laughed at has met a girl he
likes, and decides to stay.  End of story, but one more
trip before it ends.
James Spader is nice to watch, and so easy going amidst people that are so
uptight with their knowledge, that it makes for a
nice set of exchanges through out the film.  He doesn't panic, and is ever
the curious scholar in search of his knowledge, where
everyone else is basically worried about their ideas and plans. The
scientist has no plan.
Jaye Davidson plays the evil ruler that is intent on taking advantage of the
Stargate for his own needs and greedy desires.  And very
good he is, with the help of some magnificent design effects of the
electronic kind that shine in the movie.  The guards are
an electronic version of the real person, and have a power that most people
do not.  And a mask that is right out of the comic
book variety of heroes that we do not often find, in film.
Well designed, pretty to watch, and enjoyable, even if this is not a
masterpiece, it does have moments that are just too nice
to pass up.  The best of them is the trip.  Now, if we could get rid of the
military exclusions ..... will anyone ever write
a Heyerdhal in space.???

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
I must be on a roll. In one week I've seen two flabbergastingly, tragically
stupid SF movies: SPECIES, and now, STARGATE. Too bad GODZILLA hasn't come
out yet.
The plot is worthy of at least a pat on the back. A geeky Egyptologist
(James Spader) is tapped to crack the code on an ancient machine which
appears to be some kind of gateway to other worlds. Sure enough, they get
the gate working. But instead of actually THINKING about the situation, the
filmmakers just dove right in and threw every cliche they could remember at
the story: a military man (Kurt Russell) is assigned to head up the
expedition to whatever's on the other side.
What's on the other side? You sitting down? Turns out the sun god Ra has
established his dominion there, and commands giant power (which we all know
as technology of course, but tell that to his zillions of
worshippers/slaves). It's like a grotesque Hollywood version of Church of
the SubGenius dogma ("JEHOVAH IS AN ALIEN, AND IS STILL THREATENING THIS
PLANET!"), only with no sense of humor. Ra is played by Jaye Davidson and
actually fits the part physically, although he's saddled with having his
voice digitally mangled in post. It's only a matter of time before we get
guns, mayhem, uprisings, and a giant LED timer on an atomic bomb. Sheesh.
It amazes me -- really amazes me beyond language -- how much energy went
into a movie this vapid. The effects are seamless. The crowds and sets are
convincingly put together and filmed. But somehow, all that energy managed
to not be directed into writing and assembling a compelling, *interesting*
story about all this stuff. It wouldn't even have to be Oscar-level material
-- just something smarter, more knowing and maye even more curious about
what's out there than something which has the body of a STAR WARS remake and
the mind of a direct-to-video throwaway.
STARGATE is almost certainly written in homage to all those '50s pulp SF
movies where the Scientist and the Military Man lock horns over the Alien
Menace. "We need to understand them!" and "Blow them out of the sky!" are
usually the lines of dialog that get stuffewd into the character's mouths in
a movie like this, but we're not even allowed that luxury in STARGATE. The
movie plays less like homage (think of STRANGE INVADERS or the 1981 FLASH
GORDON for a better example of that) and more like, well, a clone. It's not
a send-up of bad movies -- it IS just a bad movie. Albeit louder and more
expensive.syegul@ix.netcom.com                                       EFNet IRC: GinRei
[new email address coming soon]                                  ICQ: 934998
http://www.io.com/~syegul                          another worldly device...
NEW WEB SITE: http://cablehouse.dyn.ml.org      ...and the mandate of heaven
you can crush me as I speak/write on rocks what you feel/now feel this truth

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Hilarious, ultra-low budget comedy from film school dropout Kevin
Smith chronicles a day in the life of two convenience store slackers
(Brian O'Halloran and Jeff Anderson).  They spend most of their day
ignoring customers while discussing everything from fellatio to
self-fulfillment.  The premise is strictly sitcom and the photography
is grainy as all get-out, but you could spend ten times the film's
budget (a reported $27,000) and still not get dialogue half as good as
this.
     Originally rated NC-17 for language.  Not recommended for viewers
with sensitive ears.
     Remake RESERVOIR DOGS as a French art film and you're halfway to
KILLING ZOE, writer/director Roger Avary's slow-moving story of a
failed Bastille Day bank robbery.  Eric Stoltz stars as an American in
Paris who gets in *way* over his head when hooks up with a band of
nihilistic bank robbers.  He's the safecracker who's blissful unaware
that the bank job is a botch job from the word go.
     Though intriguing on all fronts, the film is paced at half the
speed of PULP FICTION, which Avary co-wrote with Quentin Tarantino.  In
English and French.
     Based on the novel by T. Coraghessan Boyle, THE ROAD TO WELLVILLE
doesn't go very far.  Bowels, bowels, and more bowels are explored by
Dr. John Harvey Kellogg (a buck-toothed and bespectacled Anthony
Hopkins), who, in the early 1900's, advocated abstinence,
vegetarianism, and frequent defecation.  He also invented the
cornflake.  Really.
     Checking-in to Kellogg's Battle Creek Sanitarium are Matthew
Broderick and Bridget Fonda, just two of the many well-known faces in
this failed comedy.  Leave your laughter at the door and you can marvel
at the unfunny antics of John Cusack, Michael Lerner, Lara Flynn Boyle,
John Neville, and Dana Carvey.
     The art direction is impeccable and some of the early sequences
are amusing, but the novelty quickly wears off as writer/director Alan
Parkers tries his darnedness to turn doo-doo into drama.  What he ends
up with is something that I can't print here.  Phew!
     LAWRENCE OF ARABIA meets STAR WARS.  This epic sci-fi film is more
sheer spectacle than anything else.  Director Roland Emmerich
(UNIVERSAL SOLIDER) shamelessly rips off Lucas and Spielberg and just
about any other cosmic cliche that he can lay his hands on.  The film
is overlong, the characters are cardboard, and the script is filled
with some of the most laughable details in modern sci-fi history.
     That said, there's still plenty to watch here.  Sci-fi fans should
enjoy the sculpted sands, the morphing headdresses, and a surprisingly
spunky James Spader.  He plays the Egyptologist who gets to prove his
theory that that "somebody else" built the pyramids.  Less interesting
are co-stars Kurt Russell and Jaye Davidson of CRYING GAME fame.
     Trek fans may be more forgiving, but, for the rest of us, the
sluggish STAR TREK GENERATIONS is a mixed bag at best.  The story is
interesting, but each scene goes too long.  The cast is earnest, but
the direction lacks punch.  And so on.  (The best example of the latter
is a Klingon comeuppance that delivers none of the impact of a similar
scene in STAR TREK II.)
     Original Enterprise captain James T. Kirk appears on both ends of
the story, though they cut the scene where Shatner turns to the screen
to plead "get a life."  Remarkably unremarkable.
     In a season of THE SPECIALIST and PULP FICTION et al, maybe a
remake of MIRACLE ON 34th STREET *is* necessary.  John Hughes certainly
believes in Santa Claus and his Les Mayfield-directed production does
nothing to tarnish the memory of the 1947 original.  The romance
between costars Dylan McDermott and Elizabeth Perkins doesn't work too
well, but the film makes a strong case that Richard Attenborough is the
definitive Kriss Kringle.  His chemistry with children can moisten any
eye.
     Arnold Schwarzenegger pregnant?  Sure, Billy Crystal did it before
in RABBIT TEST, but the sight of Schwarz with a bulging belly is a
casting coup comparable to Dustin Hoffman in TOOTSIE.  What should be
nothing more than a one-joke premise actually gets better as it goes
along.  Director Ivan Reitman (DAVE, TWINS) wisely keeps the farce to a
minimum, so the first hour moves slower than you might expect.  Don't
expect too many yuks from Danny DeVito, but you can't beat those early
romantic scenes between Emma and Arnie.  How's *that* for a collision
of acting styles?

Author
Craig Good
     Like many others, I ate up the trailers for "Stargate" in
anticipation if its release.  As soon as it opened, I saw it at one of
the biggest theatres in town.  The good news is that the movie
delivered everything it promised to me in the trailers.  It's big, art
directed to the hilt, has some stunning effects, and crowd scenes like
we haven't seen since, well, DUNE.  The bad news is--that's all it
delivered.
     The story is pretty basic and mindless.  That makes it just a
little better than most "Star Trek" movies and TV episodes.  But that's
damning with faint praise.  Remember, though, that the trailer never
promised a Merchant/Ivory film.
     On some levels the movie works quite well.  It does a pretty good
job at the hand-waving technobabble that is seemingly so necessary in
science fiction, and resists the temptation to over-explain the
technology.  That, coupled with the stunning look, would be enough to
convey the impression of a relatively intelligent film were it not for
a few glaring stupidities.
     The first thing is the "military" mission--led by Kurt
Russell--which is accompanied by rogue Egyptologist James Spader
on the journey through the stargate.  This has to be the most
*un*-military bunch of guys I've seen since "F-Troop."  Except for
packing along some nice guns and remembering to say "over" at the end
of most of their radio transmissions, this little pack acts nothing
like any group who ever donned a uniform for real, much less the crack
Special Forces one would expect to find on this mission.
     And, very minor spoiler here, you know things aren't going well in
the script department when, because of the medallion he's wearing,
Spader is mistaken for a diety by the natives.  My, I certainly didn't
see *that* one coming.
     Also along for the slow, ponderous ride is Jaye Davidson who wears
some simply fabulous outfits in his role as Ra, the sun god.
Ironically, he looks more feminine in his kingly garb than he ever did
in drag in THE CRYING GAME.  He doesn't get to do much more than pose,
though, and his voice is replaced with a heavily processed growl that
is at times hard to understand.
     There's an audience for STARGATE: people who, like me, catch it
on a matinee and with low expectations, or kids who are still enjoying
the "gee whiz" stage of life.  That audience is likely too small for it
to recoup the rumored $55 million budget, and I'm only sorry that they
didn't pare it down to $54 million to have some more money to spend on
the script.

Author
Kevin Patterson
Let's start with the good news: I was fascinated for the first half of
"Stargate." The story, involving a mysterious portal discovered among the
ruins of ancient Egypt that turns out to lead to another planet halfway across
the galaxy, unfolds against a backdrop of outstanding visual design that led
me to believe that we were headed for a mystical sci-fi trip a la "2001: A
Space Odyssey" or "Contact." The eccentric but brilliant Dr. Daniel Jackson
(James Spader), seemed to possess just the right mix of childlike enthusiasm
and raw intelligence to lead the way. When Jackson and a military unit led by
Col. Jack O'Neil (Kurt Russell) cross through the stargate and arrive on the
alien world, they discover exact replicas of the Egyptian pyramids as well as
a race of humanoids who, according to Jackson, seem to be practicing ancient
Egyptian culture.
Unfortunately, after building up this atmosphere of mystery and awe for the
first half of the film, the screenwriters then give us a solution to the
mystery that is only mildly clever at best and lacking in any greater insight
beyond its immediate effect on the plot. What's even worse is that its
immediate effect on the plot is to turn the movie into Indiana Jones On
Another Planet; director Roland Emmerich pretty much abandons the tone of
mystery and intrigue, opting instead for a run-of-the-mill "fight the bad
alien" scenario. The last half hour of the movie, while entertaining at a
basic level, is really nothing more than standard action sequences and
explosions. "Stargate" also makes use of quite a few cliches towards the end
which, although of relatively minor significance plot-wise, are still
noticeable enough to be annoying.
"Stargate" does not quite deserve to be panned (as it has been by many
critics): at its best, it is an enthralling science-fiction mystery, and at
its worst it is still an average action movie. Some movies set their sights
too high and come off looking ridiculous. "Stargate" has the opposite problem:
with this premise, it should have set its sights higher. As it is, I find
myself assigning a two and a half stars to a movie that probably could have
had three and a half.
Visit my Film Reviews page at:
http://members.aol.com/KTPattersn/reviews.html

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Kurt Russell, James Spader, Jaye Davidson.
Screenplay:  Dean Devlin and Roland Emmerich.
Director:  Roland Emmerich.
     STARGATE is a movie from out of a time warp, and I'm not just
talking about the plot.  The late 70s and early 80s were the heyday of
grand scale science fiction/fantasy epics, both on the big screen and
the small screen, produced to cash in on the success of the STAR WARS
trilogy.  STARGATE feels a lot like many of those films:  overblown,
underwritten, yet still moderately entertaining.  Perhaps it was the
sense of nostalgia it inspired in me, but STARGATE offered just enough
to keep me interested, despite all of its bombast and unfulfilled
promise.
     STARGATE opens in Egypt in 1928, where an archaeological team
discovers a massive artifact.  Flash forward to the present, where the
military is studying the object, and brings in radical young
Egyptologist Dr. Daniel Jackson (James Spader) to help decipher its
hieroglyphs.  He is successful, and discovers that the artifact is a
gateway to a distant star system.  An advance team of soldiers is sent
to find out what's on the other side of the stargate, let by Col. Jack
O'Neil (Kurt Russell) and including Dr. Jackson.  There they discover a
thriving civilization of what appear to be humans, living much as they
would have lived in the Egypt of the pharaohs.  They also discover that
the world is ruled by a being called Ra (Jaye Davidson), who appears to
be anything but benevolent.
     For the first half hour, STARGATE seems to be pretty comfortably
on the right track, with a solid premise.  Spader in particular is
quite appealing, playing the perfect slightly dazed academic; the early
scenes in which he shows up the military scientists are low-key and
quite a lot of fun.  In fact, for all its $50 million scale, Spader may
be the best thing STARGATE has going for it.  Unfortunately, he makes
Kurt Russell look like a large piece of plywood by comparison.  Playing
a man shattered by the death of his young son, Russell is supposed to
be taciturn and all business; instead, he's just a huge dullard without
a scrap of personality, and it's impossible to care anything about
him.  As such he fits right in with the rest of the advance team, an
interchangeable collection of macho grunts.
     Once we get to the other side of the stargate, things are still
wildly uneven, and we're not even talking about those plausibility
questions that plague most science fiction fare.  The real issue is
that as good as STARGATE looks, it's awfully slow-moving.  The sets and
costume design are impressive, and even the desert sandscapes have a
certain beauty to them.  But STARGATE falls victim to its attempts at
creating a fully-realized alternative civilization.  It's a nice touch
that they don't speak the "miracle English" common to alien
civilizations, but it makes the soldiers' interactions with them
extremely tedious.  The fascination of some of the younger ones with
the human aliens is believable, but a scene involving one of them
reacting to Kurt Russell's lighter as magic is as old as the hills.
It's as though director and co-scripter Roland Emmerich paid so much
attention to cultural detail that he missed the big picture--providing
a truly engaging story.
     The climax of STARGATE is a major improvement, full of energy and
creativity.  It's a shame that Jaye Davidson's Ra is such a boring
villain, gliding along through the ship making imperious pronouncements
in a voice bearing a frightening similarity to that of Jabba the Hut.
There is really very little in Ra's role except ordering guards around,
so the threat isn't nearly as threatening as it might be.  The bottom
line, though, is that even as I was thinking about how ridiculous some
of the resolutions were (including final decisions made by both
Russell's and Spader's characters), I realized that I had enjoyed
myself.  And for a matinee price, I generally don't ask for much more.

Author
Chad Polenz
Stargate
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair)
1995, PG-13, 119 minutes [1 hour, 59 minutes]
[science fiction]
starring: James Spader (Dr. Daniel Jackson), Kurt Russell (Colonel O'Neil),
Jaye Davidson (Ra), produced by Joel B. Michaels, Oliver Eberle, Dean Devlin,
written by Dean Devlin, Roland Emmerich, directed by Roland Emmerich.
        It's hard to find a good sci-fi movie these days. Even with all the
technology capable for special effects, you hardly ever see wholly original
concepts. "Stargate" is somewhat original in its most basic form, but the
actual script itself is formulated, cliche, and boring. It's just another
case of unused potential.
        The story revolves around Dr. Daniel Jackson (Spader), a geeky archaeologist
whose expertise is needed by the military because it will help lead them to
inter-dimensional travel (ooookay!). The problem is nothing is explained
clearly, especially why the military chose Jackson, and why they think they
can (or would want to) travel to another dimension. 
        Kurt Russell co-stars as Colonel O'Neil who, along with Jackson, leads a
typical military bratpack through an ancient Egyptian artifact known as the
"Stargate." But once they make it through they realize they can't get back!
The group splits up, some go exploring and some stay behind. Soon they meet a
group of primates who and are being oppressed by some higher power in a
pyramid. Does this sound wacky enough for you? Stuff like this works fine in
a Marvel comic, but not in a movie.
        The film does have an interesting theory about Egyptian mythology. It goes
so far to justify it by making it "real" in this other dimension. Apparently
Ra (Davidson), the sun god, came to Earth but was outcasted and now rules
this dimension. O'Neil says something to the effect that Ra still poses a
threat to Earth and that is why they are there - to kill him.
        Most of the film is a bad rip-off of the "Indiana Jones" films and just
about every sci-fi movie and comic book ever. We get a lot of rhetoric that
seems to justify all the unnecessary violence and bizarre storyline and
mythology, but just considering the basic elements, it's too stupid to take
seriously. The attempts at humanism and characterization? Forget about it. 
        The entire third act seems a hell of a lot like "Return Of The Jedi," with
the little people revolting against the evil oppressive government, the crude
leader single-handedly defeating enemies twice his size, and of course the
"super suspenseful" countdown ending.
        Emmerich and Devlin probably grew up on sci-fi and adventure and wanted to
make those kinds of films. The problem is "Stargate" is just that - more of
the same. All they need to do is just not try so hard. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page - http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz
E-mail: ChadPolenz@aol.com
(C)1997 Chad Polenz

Author
Jeffrey Graebner
     For virtually everyone, there are a few films that fit into the
"guilty pleasure" category.  These are movies that are clearly not very
good, but which you still enjoy against your own better judgement.
STARGATE is just such a film.
     The storyline of this film is completely ludicrous.  The film
opens in the 1920s with the discovery of an unusual artifact in the
Egyptian desert.  It then jumps to the present day where the military
is involved in a scientific analysis of this artifact (the movie never
bothers to explain where the artifact had been for the last 70 years).
They bring in controversial but brilliant Egyptologist Dr. Jackson
(James Spader) who quickly figures out that the artifact is a
"stargate" allowing for instantaneous interstellar travel.  Soon,
Dr. Jackson is going along on a mission led by suicidal Col. O'Neil
(Kurt Russell) to the "other side of the known universe".  On the other
side, they discover a race of enslaved humans being ruled by an alien
posing as the sun god Ra (Jaye Davidson).  In the process, we learn the
"true" origins of the Great Pyramids.
     Obviously, this story sounds pretty ridiculous in print.  It
doesn't make much more sense in the film itself.  In fact, a large part
of the film's entertainment value comes from watching to see how much
more ludicrous the plot can become.  Just when you think the film has
reached a new height of silliness, it manages to come up with some new
ridiculous idea.  As silly as it all is, everyone involved in the film
seems to be taking it completely seriously.  The result probably works
much better than it would have if the filmmakers had acknowledged the
silliness of the plot and tried to play it for laughs.  Some of the fun
here comes from the fact that you will likely be laughing at things
that weren't really meant to be funny.
     Even with an extremely badly written role like he has here, James
Spader still manages to come out of the film with some dignity intact.
In order to indicate that he is an intellectual, but a bit of a dweeb,
Spader is made up to have an almost frightening resemblance to John
Denver.  He is one of those ultra-brilliant movie scientists who can
come in and immediately solve puzzles that other scientists have been
struggling with for years.  He also has outlandish theories that can
clear a conference room in a moment but which, of course, must turn out
to be completely true.  Spader is asked to give bizarre speeches
containing all kinds of technological buzzwords, do lots of bumbling
stunts (including being dragged across the desert by a strange alien
pack animal), translate and occasionally speak extinct Egyptian
dialects, participate in one of the most awkward love stories of recent
memory, and to frequently act indignant at the soldiers' behavior
(thankfully, he is never required to start singing "Rocky Mountain
High").  Despite all this, Spader still remains likable and even comes
close to creating a believable character.
     Russell, on the other hand, is given an incredibly cliched role
and does virtually nothing with it.  Early in the film, we are told
that Russell's character had a son who was accidentally shot. When we get
our first look at Russell, he has a gun to his head preparing to commit
suicide.  With those two little bits of information, you can probably
correctly guess >everything

     Most of the publicity about Jaye Davidson's role in THE CRYING
GAME seemed to revolve around his character's secret, but that largely
ignored the fact that he gave a genuinely powerful and moving
performance in that film.  Unfortunately, his role here indicates that
he may be doomed to stunt casting from now on.  Despite the fact that
he is prominently featured in much of the promotional material for the
film, Davidson doesn't even appear until about ninety minutes into the
movie (which runs just under two hours).  All of his dialogue is
electronically enhanced and is in the film's version of ancient
Egyptian.  The majority of his "performance" is really just posing for
the camera instead of acting.  Hopefully, somebody will eventually find
Davidson another role with some depth, but this movie certainly isn't
it.
     Obviously, the storyline here does not live up to any kind of
close scrutiny.  If you try to look for logic here, you will likely
never find it. At the top of the list of implausibilities is Spader's
incredible ability to instantly read, speak, and understand ancient
Egyptian dialects, even if he has never encountered them before.  I
guess that it is somewhat courageous of the filmmakers not to have all
the aliens speak English, but they still take the easy way out by
allowing Spader to become a human "universal translator".  Another
major implausibility is the fact that the civilization on the other
planet seems to be technically way ahead of Earth, but that the humans
on the other side of the stargate do not seem to have evolved one bit
in thousands of years.
     Another major problem with this film is the unfortunate cliches
involved in the portrayal of the military.  Screenwriters Roland
Emmerich (who also directed) and Dean Devlin seem to have based the
soldiers on those from other paranoid science fiction movies.
Particularly during the early scenes, the soldiers seem rather cruel
and heartless, showing virtually no wonderment about their journey.  Of
course, the film eventually ends up turning into a massive shoot-em-up,
but it sure would have been nice if it had taken a more surprising
direction.
     Emmerich's direction of the film is a bit better than his
screen-writing.  The film moves at a very brisk pace and is certainly
never dull.  The whole movie is infused with a misguided but infectious
energy.  It is as if Emmerich realized how ridiculous the story was and
thus felt that it would help to have everyone >really

     The production values of the film are generally quite good.  There
are some really neat looking CGI special effects (particularly the
sequences where the characters travel through the stargate) which are
generally quite convincing.  Karl Walter Lindenlaub's Panavision
photography is also good with some really nice desert vistas.  David
Arnold's music score is not particularly original (it seems to borrow
from a number of other science fiction scores), but it is sufficiently
rousing and effective.  The soundtrack has a lot of bass and makes
extensive use of surround sound, so it is probably best to see the film
in a theater with the best possible sound system.
     STARGATE certainly is not a very good film, but it is generally an
enjoyable one.  Much of the enjoyment comes from laughing at the film's
ineptitude, a fact that likely would not please the filmmakers, but
that doesn't change the fact that the movie will provide a generally
good time.

Author
Dragan Antulov
According to many critics and movie aficionados, Dean Devlin
and Roland Emmerich are the worst thing that happened to
science fiction cinema in 1990s. This widespread animosity
towards Devlin-Emmerich duo can be partially explained with
the quality of their work in the past decade. However, the
real reason for such animosity lies less in the quality of
their movies and more in the massive hype that preceded them
and ensured huge disappointments among their future
audience. Taken by their own merit and without hype, those
films can be seen not only as passable, but also sometimes a
very good entertainment. One of such examples is STARGATE,
1994 science fiction spectacle by Roland Emmerich, often
heralded "the best science fiction film since STAR WARS".
The plot of this film begins in Egypt 1928 when the group of
Norwegian archaeologists digs out huge stone artefact with
strange, indecipherable hieroglyphs. Many decades later, the
artefact is in possession of US Air Force. Dr. Daniel
Jackson (played by James Spader), young and unconventional
Egyptologist, is called to decipher those hieroglyphs. To
the utter surprise of everybody, he manages to decipher
those symbols and finds that the artefact represents
Stargate - trandimensional portal that leads to distant
planet millions of light years away. US Air Force quickly
assembles expedition led by Colonel Jonathan "Jack" O'Neill
(played by Kurt Russell). This expedition enters Stargate
and finds itself on the desert world, populated by primitive
people that resemble ancient Egyptians and are ruled by god-
likes aliens led by evil Ra (played by Jaye Davidson).
All those who succumbed to hype in 1994 and expected another
masterpiece like 2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY have all the reasons
to feel disappointed. STARGATE could hardly be seen as an
example of creative geniuses at work. Director Emmerich and
Dean Devlin (who co-wrote the script) had wonderful idea, as
well as huge budget and numerous talents at their disposal.
Despite all of that the best they could do was space opera
filled with every possible cliche (including alien world
modelled on Earth's deserts, something which is more
expected in SF films with much lower budget) and numerous
plot holes. However, all those flaws can be forgiven for one
reason - unlike almost all the other SF films in 1990s,
STARGATE can induce the sense of wonder among the audience.
First part of the film manages to arouse viewers' curiosity
with the promises of strange new worlds on the Other Side.
Unlike most of the other science fiction films that use
genre only as an excuse to make standard horrors, dramas or
action films, STARGATE returns to the roots of science
fiction - pure adventure and tales of wondrous lost cities,
civilisations and continents. Resurrection of this more
innocent, almost infantile yet purer approach to the science
fiction is probably the most important legacy of STARGATE.
Lack of Devlin's and Emmerich's script-writing talents was
fortunately compensated with the talents among cast and
crew. James Spader is great as Lennon-like scientist, while
Russell makes represents great contrast to him as
no-nonsense military professional. Jaye Davidson, on the
other hand, wasn't very convincing as evil alien, although
he tried very hard to avoid typecasting after his memorable
CRYING GAME role. Production design, costumes and special
effects are superb and they all make the alien world very
convincing. Musical soundtrack by David Arnold is very good
and it features one of the rare 1990s film themes that
managed to stick in popular memory.
Finally, STARGATE had flaws yet it managed to overcome them
by being reincarnated in another medium. Being the basis for
awarded television series is just another reason why this
film shouldn't have the same reputation as its unjustifiably
criticised creators.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Mark Shapiro
All ratings are on a scale of 1 (bad) to 10 (good)
     Though this movie took bits and pieces from other movies/shows, it
put a unique twist into the plot.  The design, in terms of continuity
and plot, was somewhat lacking, but I give it an 8 because I can't
quite say what should have been changed.  Effects and authenticity both
get a 10.  Effects because of the costume design and "scientific"
phenomena.  Authenticity because of how well it stuck to ancient
Egyptian culture and beliefs.  One key contributing aspect giving it a
score of 10 was the languages.  In many movies, (STAR TREK rings a bell
or twelve) everyone speaks the same language.  Even cultures that are
newly found speak English.  When the characters met the other culture
in this far away world, they did not know how to communicate.  It was
not until the geek professor realized they were speaking a language
similar to an ancient Egyptian dialect (Which was realistic considering
the background of the culture), he was able to communicate.  Until
then, not only were they unable to communicate, but we the viewers were
not able to know what they were saying--no subtitles!  For the greater
part of the movie, we were only given what the Earthmen were given.
Language, sights, etc. were limited to what the characters could hear,
see, etc.  Overall, an *excellent* movie, well worth the ticket price,
and one I intend to get as soon as it's available on videotape or in
.MPG format.  

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Kurt Russell, James Spader, Jaye Davidson, Viveca Lindfors,
           Alexis Cruz, Mili Avatal 
Director: Roland Emmerich 
Producers:  Joel B. Michaels, Oliver Eberle, and Dean Devlin 
Screenplay: Deal Devlin and Roland Emmerich 
Cinematography: Karl Walter Lindenlaub 
Music: David Arnold 
Released by MGM 
     There's a fine line between giving homage to something and
stealing from it--and the division is usually defined by how creative
and enjoyable the final product is.  Using that distinction, STARGATE
is on uncertain ground.  This new big-budget science fiction/fantasy
offering can claim barely an original moment, taking from such diverse
sources as STAR WARS, STAR TREK, CLOSE ENCOUNTERS, DUNE, RAIDERS OF THE
LOST ARK, DOCTOR WHO, and even DANCES WITH WOLVES and KING KONG.
     The story combines traditional popular science fiction themes with
a heavy dose of Egyptological mumbo-jumbo.  Occasional,
mostly-halfhearted attempts at character development are ignored
whenever they don't impact directly on the plot.  As has frequently
become the case with movies of this genre, the visual effects and
breathtaking cinematography far outstrip everything else offered by
STARGATE.
     James Spader plays nerdish Egyptologist Daniel Jackson, whose
linguistic expertise is called upon for decoding inscriptions on tiles
discovered in an Egyptian archeological site.  These turn out to be the
key that turns the lock in something called the "stargate", an
intergalactic portal (that looks like a giant donut) to some Earth-like
world on the "far side of the known universe."
     Kurt Russell is Colonel Jack O'Neil, the borderline-suicidal
military commander of a mission to the other side of the stargate.
Accompanied by his crack troops and Jackson, O'Neil enters the gate and
emerges in what looks suspiciously like Egypt.  It's not, however, as
the three moons in the sky soon prove.  This is the land of the
Egyptian Sun God Ra (Jaye Davidson) and his people.
     Ra, it seems, created human society on Earth and on this world as
well as the stargates, and was displeased when the ancient Egyptians
closed their side of the space/time corridor, confining him to one
planet.  Now that the way is again open, Ra has decided to prepare a
little surprise for those waiting at the far end.
     What begins as an enjoyable romp degenerates into a tired retread
of the age-old good-versus evil battle pitting a group of overachieving
mortals against a ruthless god-like being.  It's Luke against the
Emperor from RETURN OF THE JEDI without the malevolent, charismatic
presence of Darth Vader.  Ultimately, the final battle, aside from
being inexplicably rushed, is dull and lacking in genuine suspense.
     The first half of the film, which includes the setup, Jackson's
intense struggle to break the stargate's code, the expedition to Ra's
world, and humankind's first contact with an alien culture, is handled
reasonably well.  Things only start to fall apart with Ra's
appearance.  Then it's all shoot-outs and fight scenes, with action
taking precedence over intelligence.
     The cast members do their best with sketchy roles.  Kurt Russell
makes an effective no-nonsense military man who doesn't overplay his
grief at a recent personal tragedy.  Not for the first time, James
Spader is believable as a dweeb forced into a heroic act or two.  And
Jaye Davidson, despite never speaking a word of English, has a
commanding presence as the androgynous Ra.
     STARGATE is peppered with numerous minor faults, some of
which--although not all--are easily forgiven.  It's the bigger
plot problems and lackluster climax which are more difficult to
excuse.  Director Roland Emmerich, who previously made UNIVERSAL
SOLDIER, appears infatuated with his film's look without caring if
anything moderately substantial lies beneath the glitz.  STARGATE is
all flashes and bangs--a cinematic fireworks show without the grand
finale.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Back in the last century and the early parts of this one there
were still many unexplored regions on earth.  A kind of fantasy
flourished then that has since nearly died out.  This was the "lost
race" story, in which in some unexplored place, some last outpost of
the ancient civilization still thrives unaware that they are an
anachronism.  It may be Egyptian or Roman, or perhaps it still has the
civilization of the ancient Incas or Atlantis, and is being discovered
by modern explorers.  The greatest practitioner of these stories was H.
Rider Haggard, author of SHE.  But other names that come to mind are
Edgar Rice Burroughs, A. Merritt, and Ian Cameron, who wrote THE LOST
ONES (a.k.a THE ISLAND AT THE TOP OF THE WORLD) as late as 1961.  But
in the 1990s the real estate that could host such a lost civilization
is now almost non-existent and so is the genre.  Roland Emerich, who
last directed the terrible UNIVERSAL SOLDIER, has resurrected the lost
race story with a bit of sci-fi (as opposed to science fiction) hand-
waving.  Instead of a potsherd pointing the way to a civilization
somewhere beyond the Mountains of the Moon in Africa, it is a twenty-
foot ring that provides a gateway across the known universe.  The ring
was a passageway for aliens at the time Ancient Egypt was building
pyramids.  When they were done with it the Egyptians just sort of
packed it away much like the U.S. Government did with the Ark of the
Covenant.
     As our story opens, it is 1928 and the Stargate is found by one
bunch of understandably very confused archaeologists.  Sixty-six years
later government archaeologists are still trying to figure out what to
do with this mysterious object (so they can move on to the Ark of the
Covenant, I suppose).  Invited to join the team is Dr. Daniel Jackson
(played by James Spader), a renegade Egyptologist who wants to prove
that Egyptians could not have built the Great Pyramid.  He is laughed
at as Great Men of Truth have always been laughed at, going back to the
Frederic March DR. JEKYLL AND MR. HYDE.  His chance to prove his
theories comes from Catherine (Viveca Lindfors--and it is great to see
her still acting), a government scientist working on decoding the 1928
artifact.  Meanwhile, the project has been given over to the military
and is now headed by Col. Jack O'Neal (Kurt Russell).  Jackson decodes
the last pieces of the puzzle and that is all that is needed to
activate a passageway.  On the other side is a lot of desert and a lost
civilization of Egyptians, slaves to the living god Ra (played by Jaye
Davidson of THE CRYING GAME).
     STARGATE is yet another beautiful but rather empty film.
Production designer Holger Gross and art director Peter Murton have
gone a long way to recreate the grandeur of Ancient Egypt.  The brassy
score by David Arnold is exciting.  But the adventure itself is on a
juvenile level and certainly not of the caliber of an H. Rider Haggard
adventure.  Some of what we see seems very poorly thought out.  A
shaggy desert animal (actually a Clydesdale horse in a fake fur coat)
seems altogether unsuited for the desert climate.  There is a ludicrous
product placement with a chocolate-covered candy bar.  Who would want
to eat a candy bar that can take riding around in somebody's pocket for
hours in a hot desert and still shows no sign of melting?  And one
wonders if some desert slave who has never seen chocolate--or candy at
all--would be so anxious to put in his mouth something that looks so
much like a bar of excrement.  The recreation of a desert civilization
in some ways is very detailed and almost overcomes the atmosphere-
breaking sci-fi opening while giving some of the feel of an H. Rider
Haggard story.  Unfortunately, things build to a special effects
extravaganza of a battle and it is just what this film did not need.
The innocent feel of the old-fashioned adventures is lost when spears
turn out to be missile launchers.
     Some of the ideas of this film are really specious.  The idea that
the Egyptians had to be introduced to the concept of the pyramid at the
time of the Great Pyramid does not account for the fact that there were
older pyramids in Egypt.  The pyramid was invented by Im-ho-tep
somewhere around 2650 B.C. in the Third Dynasty.  He stacked mastabas
of diminishing size for the King Zoser.  That step pyramid still stands
at Saqqara.  Im-ho-tep was one of history's great geniuses,
incidentally, a physician and a statesman as well as an architect.  The
Great Pyramid of Khufu was built at Giza in the Fourth Dynasty,
probably more than a hundred years later and many hundreds of years
after the mastabas were invented.  While pinning down dates is in large
part a matter of guesswork, there were pyramids at least a hundred
years before Khufu's Great Pyramid and perhaps considerably more.
     And as for this idea that it takes six points to pinpoint a
location in space, that's another load of duck tires.  How many points
does it take to determine a location in space?  You need only one.  Now
if you are talking instead about coordinates, it takes three.  But then
you need three real numbers.  Sectors on a wheel won't give you enough.
The geometry made no sense.
     Somewhere deep inside this techno-SHE is a good adventure film.
The problem is that they are not sure if they really want to be a
high-tech science fiction film or a more traditional lost civilization
film.  I would vote for the latter.  I rate it a +1 on the -4 to +4
scale.
