Title
Review for Near Dark (1987)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Shane Burridge
     On the face of it, there seems little that is exceptional,
storywise,with this reworking of the vampire myth.  A young farmhand
(Adrian Pasdar) meets up and falls in love with a young woman (Jenny
Wright) who happens to belong to a clan of vampires.  Once smitten (not
to mention bitten), he finds himself dependent on their wiles to
survive.  Naturally, he resists.  If this sounds like THE LOST BOYS,
also released in 1987, then you'll probably realize why NEAR DARK
became a victim of bad timing and lost attention at the box office.
     NEAR DARK is, however, a treat for horror fans.  The vampires are
genuinely scary--not so much by dint of their supernatural powers as by
their contemporary, thuggish attitudes towards violence (There's a
bratty kid who, as in Anne Rice's INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, is bitter
with the knowledge that he is doomed to eternal life and will never be
able to "grow up"--he's like a social worker's worst nightmare).  Other
films in the vampire boom of the late eighties (e.g.  FRIGHT NIGHT,
VAMP, INNOCENT BLOOD) revitalized the myth by using urban American
settings and putting a quirky spin on their stories.  NEAR DARK is
different in that it doesn't play for laughs, and has the notable
distinction of avoiding nearly every image associated with vampires.
There are no wielded crucifixes, bats, wooden stakes, bloodstained
fangs--in fact, the word "vampire" isn't even mentioned--we are just
expected from our knowledge of popular folklore to assume they are so.
That they are creatures of the night is emphasized by their one true
fear:  daylight.  The title of the film points out how their lives are
dictated by the sunset-sunrise cycle.  This is, for all intensive
purposes, the only enemy these vampires have.  They are too savvy to
worry about stakes and crucifixes because they know that modern society
has no time or belief invested in their legend.  This group, roaring
across-country  in their blacked-out van, are successful survivors
because they have transcended the old-world thinking (and portrayal) of
traditional vampires and become the serial killer equivalent more
befitting  the psyche of the late 20th century. The arid desert setting
and menace of the sun help us empathize with the vampires' thirst.
Kathryn Bigelow's direction is broody and assured--the scene in which
the vampires take their time dispatching of their victims in a diner
will definitely be cut for television!  Tangerine Dream contribute
their customary one-size-fits-all score.

Author
David Nusair
Starring Lance Henrikson, Bill Paxton, Adrian Pasdar
In "Near Dark", director Kathryn Bigelow takes the vampire myth and does
something completely different with it.  She makes them likeable.  It's 
not too often that we find ourselves rooting for people who kill
indiscriminitely.
This family of vampires is lead by Jessie (Lance Henrikson) and early
on in the film, he explains to the newcomer (Adrian Pasdar) that they
don't kill for fun, rather to survive.  One wonders why they couldn't 
just feast on criminals instead of innocent civilians, but that issue
is never addressed.  Bill Paxton is also on hand playing the fun-loving,
"rebel" vampire who has a penchant for finding creative ways of 
dispatching his victims.
"Near Dark" is a fun movie.  I don't think it was intended to be taken
too seriously.  And as with Bigelow's other films, it has a real sense
of style.  There's a rumour that she didn't even direct this, rather
her husband-at-the-time Jim Cameron did.  I don't think this is so, 
however.  Cameron prefers a more clinical style, where he shoots
more from a distance, so that the audience never really connects with
the characters.  Bigelow, on the other hand, takes us right in there,
so that we are face-to-face with these people, which pretty much forces
us to associate with her characters to some degree.
Also, as with "Blue Steel" and "Strange Days", "Near Dark" features very
strong female characters.  The character of Mae, for example, is
initially thought to be rather timid and meek.  But, as the movie
progresses, we see that there's more to her than meets the eye.  Sure,
she's not as "out there" as Bill Paxton's character (as with most of
Paxton's early roles, he steals every scene he's in), but she is as 
strong as any of the other "family" members, both physically and 
mentally.
Of course, none of this would matter if the film wasn't any good.
Fortunately, this isn't the case.  "Near Dark" is about as fast-paced
as movies come, and even when it does slow down for scenes of 
exposition, we're always interested in finding out more about this
bizarre family of vampires.
"Near Dark" may not be as accomplished on a techinical level as 
something like "Blue Steel", but it certainly displays Bigelows flair
for visceral thrills.  And fans of Bill Paxton should certainly check
this one out, since he's pretty much playing Hicks from "Aliens", 
except as a vampire.  
"Near Dark" isn't anything terribly deep or thought-provoking, but it's
a good way to spend an hour and a half.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     What is the nicest thing I can think of to say about NEAR DARK?  Well,
they didn't bend too much the traditional rules for vampires and within
those rules they showed something of how dangerous a gang of really mean-
spirited (bloody-minded?) vampires might be.  Beyond that, NEAR DARK is over
three hours in a film so bad, every minute of watching it counts as two
minutes off your sentence.
     A guy picks up a girl who turns out to be a vampire.  She bites him
after what seems like and interminable period of time.  This opening
sequence turns out to be the high point of the film.  Our friend is forced
to join the gang of vampires to learn the trade of vampirism.  Mostly he
sees how the vampires bully and terrorize humans with their powers.  The
scenes of the bullying are long and violent and bloody and boring.  There
are a couple of ideas borrowed from Anne Rice's INTERVIEW WITH A VAMPIRE.
