Title
Review for Afterglow (1997)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Alan Rudolph has such an uncanny ability to establish mood that it
often doesn't seem to matter just how excessively stylized his sets are,
how overwritten his dialogue is, or how inconsistently his actors perform.
His latest film, "Afterglow," has some problems in each of these
departments yet there's something about the film--and Rudolph's body of
work in general--that affects you emotionally, leaving how much you might
actually enjoy the experience a secondary consideration.
        "Afterglow" focuses on two couples who are on the outs.  Marianne
and Jeffrey Byron (played by Lara Flynn Boyle and Jonny Lee Miller) are in
conflict over the decision to have a child.  Phyllis and Lucky Mann (Julie
Christie and Nick Nolte) share a mutual dissatisfaction because of
complications surrounding having *had* one.
        Lucky is a handyman whose job often finds him flat on his back
checking out some frustrated housewife's plumbing (pun intended).  He's
recommended to Marianne, who wants a room remodeled for the kid she hasn't
quite conceived yet.  Marianne's coquetteishness in Lucky's presence is
understandable; what woman watching Nick Nolte ripping down drywall
wouldn't want to bear his child?
        Jeffrey, a successful executive, still seems interested in
women--he's always telling his middle-aged, French-speaking secretary how
attractive she looks--just not in the diaphanous Marianne.
        When Jeffrey suspects Marianne of infidelity (it's pretty obvious;
she scrawls details of an illicit rendezvous with Lucky on her calendar) he
heads to the hotel bar to confront her, only to stumble upon Phyllis--there
to spy on her philandering husband for purely masochistic reasons--and
their brief, mismatched flirtation begins.  The foursome eventually wind up
at the Byron's beyond-mod Montreal apartment in a finale that would make
Mike Leigh proud.
        Nolte and Christie sparkle in "Afterglow," the latter in that very
dry, British way.  A faded star of B-movies, Phyllis lounges on the sofa
all day watching her awful films on television with a large gin at the
ready.  Weary, pathetic, and depressed, Phyllis seeks solace for a pain she
can't erase.  This is a plumb role for Christie; her recent screen
performances have been few and far between but when she does accept a part,
it's usually worth seeing (she received an Academy Award nomination for
this one).  Nolte has hardly made a bad movie (well, let's say that he's
hardly turned in a bad *performance*) and he and Christie easily overshadow
Boyle and Miller, who seem out of their depth compared to the two veterans.
        Boyle displays the same kind of mousy petulance she demonstrated in
Rudolph's "Equinox" and TV's "Twin Peaks."  Perhaps Rudolph simply asked
for "more of the same."  He got it; Marianne is more annoying than
alluring.  Miller's role seems to call for two modes of operation--awkward
and stiff--which limit the actor's emotional range.  He looks the part, and
downs scotch with all the elegance of a youthful corporate climber, but
when it comes to his Big Scene, awkward and stiff just don't cut it.  No
wonder Phyllis trots off to bed.  Alone.
        Uneven in the acting department, "Afterglow" is nevertheless worth
recommending.  It's not as well written as "Welcome to L.A." or "Choose
Me," and it's not as atmospheric as "Trouble In Mind" or "The Moderns"
(Rudolph pictures all).  But as a showcase for Nolte and
Christie--especially Christie--it's splendid, and carries an emotional
punch right to the bitter end.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
        Afterglow is about a group of people who remain in tangled, destructive
marriages, but the film doesn't quite explain why.  The characters are
all interesting and well-acted, and the film is moody and atmospheric;
but, at the end, I didn't know where the characters were emotionally. 
This lack of closure doesn't help the fact that the characters commonly
engage in situations that don't feel realistic, and say things that I
wouldn't expect people to say.  
        The film centers around two marriages.  One consists of Jeffrey and
Marianne Byron (Jonny Lee Miller and Lara Flynn Boyle).  He is a smart,
cold, and cocky business man, while she is a quiet, needy housewife who
just wants a baby.  The other marriage has Lucky and Phyllis Mann (Nick
Nolte and Julie Christie).  Lucky is a plumber who sleeps with all of
his clients; Phyllis is a depressed, alcoholic ex-actress who allows him
to sleep around.
        The story develops as it becomes clear that Jeffrey has no intention of
supplying Marianne with a child.  When Marianne hears about Lucky from a
woman who has him fix her pipes frequently, she calls him up, and they
begin an affair.  Then, through a series of unlikely events, Jeffrey and
Phyllis become attached, unknowing that their spouses are off doing the
same thing.
        The first problem I found is that the film relies far too much on
improbable coincidences.  What were the chances of Jeffrey and Phyllis
going to the same bar to watch their spouses cheat, and then end up
spending a weekend together based on one meeting?  It doesn't even seem
all that necessary to have this be an element of chance--one of the
characters could have sought out the other, and the effect would have
been the same.  This kind of material feels almost giddy in nature, and
the thought of the situation is goofy outside of the dark vision of
writer/director Alan Rudolph.
        In fact, the film is almost too dark.  Some of this is downright
depressing, and it never lets up--not even in the end.  Jeffrey, for
instance, is a character of little heart:  he actually tells his wife,
point blank, that he doesn't care one bit that she wants a baby, and
yet, we are expected to believe that he loves her.  The dynamics between
the couples feel inexplicably strange, so strange that I can't tell if
it's unrealistic, or just unusual.  Lucky and Phyllis have an equally
odd relationship, for I can't imagine any wife consenting to her
husband's infidelity.  Rudolph does attempt to explain her mentality on
the issue, but I couldn't by it.    
        The acting partially makes up for all of these disturbingly unique
character interactions.  Christie nailed a Best Actress nomination for
this performance, and she deserves it.  Phyllis is a woman who
constantly undergoes pure, emotional torture, and the often-subtle ways
that Christie emits these feelings is truly effective.  Nolte, whom I
normally detest as an actor, is actually good here (he's toned down that
macho image he always seems to be brandishing).  Boyle is quiet and
appealing, and takes her character through realistic developments.  And
Miller, who I still remember from Hackers, turns in another fine
performance while managing a near-perfect American accent (although he
pronounced "mountains" as "moontains").  
        In the end, the film left me feeling down, though I'm not sure this is
what Rudolph intended.  A subplot that involves the Mann's absent
daughter is potent, but extremely saddening, and ends with an unsure
conclusion.  And what we're led to believe happens to the Byrons doesn't
really feel good.  I don't know if it's proper to hold these elements
against Afterglow, because it's entirely possible that Rudolph intended
the audience to feel this way at the end.  And, if this is the case, I'm
not sure why.  I don't like leaving the theater wondering what I was
supposed to get out of the film.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Although the buzz about writer and director Alan Rudolph's new
film AFTERGLOW surrounds the astonishing performance by Julie Christie,
the film offers many other delights.  Besides her Oscar-caliber work,
other stars shine in Rudolph's wonderfully complex and intentionally
ambiguous film.  Certain to invoke conversations afterwards, the film
exercises viewers' minds and emotions.
     Equal parts romance, tragedy and comedy, it starts slowly but soon
finds its legs.  By the end, you will be wrapped up in this four-person
drama and feel like you are wishing your quirky, old friends good-bye.
     As 57-year-old, B-movie actress Phyllis Mann, Julie Christie
delivers her best performance in several decades.  Married for 24
years, Phyllis wiles away her time drinking heavily and watching her
old, and admittedly awful, pictures on television.  Looking like she
gave up on life years ago, eight year ago as it turns out, she suffers
from depression.  Off to see a doctor since her "soul needs a
overhaul," she searches for some meaning or purpose to her life.
     Mark Isham's jazz music has a soulful trumpet playing as Phyllis
discusses her predicaments.  And Toyomichi Kurita's radiantly lovely
cinematography sets the scenes in rich and hazy colors.
     A lovable, shaggy-haired Nick Nolte plays Lucky Mann, a ruggedly
handsome repairman who calls himself "The Fix-It Man."  Lucky's
specialty is fixing more than just the broken faucets of his female
customers.  His wife calls him an alley cat, which he doesn't deny.
Lucky is careful in his affairs.  "I trust the ones who never sleep
around but feel like getting lucky," he explains.  (His name takes on
many meanings and is a constant source of puns in the show's
deliciously funny script, full of biting wit.)
     We meet the rich and sexy young Marianne Byron as she is
ovulating.  She's off to purchase a revealing gown to entice her
husband into some hot sex.  But as with Lucky and his wife, her spouse
isn't interested in having sex with her.  Playing an airhead, Lara
Flynn Boyle has Marianne down to a tee.  When she puts on clothes, she
fidgets constantly -- if I pull this part down a bit maybe I'll be
sexier, or maybe adjusting this would be better.
     Her pompous husband, Jeffrey Byron III, is played by Jonny Lee
Miller as the proverbial cold fish.  ("I'm Jeffrey Byron III," he
introduces himself.  "There won't be a IV.  We Byrons quit when we get
it right.")  The only character you may find yourself despising, he's
bored with his successful business, his gorgeous wife, and everything
in his easy life.  His favorite diversion is balancing precariously on
the outside ledge in his office in a skyscraper.  Fear seems to be one
of the few things that turn him on.
     Jeffrey constantly infuriates his wife.  "You're too stuck on
yourself to be jealous," she tells him when he finds out about her new
contractor.  She's hired Lucky, who else, to build a nursery for their
non-existent baby.
     Their coldly modernistic apartment, designed by Francois Seguin,
serves as the perfect metaphor for their lifeless marriage.  Everything
from the audio to the lights are controlled with a single remote, which
never seems to work right.
     At the same time that Lucky and Marianne are having an affair,
Jeffrey starts making eyes at Phyllis with neither realizing the
connection with their spouses.  The overconfident Jeffrey is way out of
his league when he tries to sweep Phyllis off her feet.
     "I live up to the very edge of my charm," he tells her in what he
deludes himself into thinking is a good come-on line.  "You're the most
fascinating woman I've met in my entire life," he tells her.  "Yes, I
know," she fires back with complete confidence.  She has him wrapped
around her finger, but he's not smart enough to know it.
     The body of the story can't be described without giving away some
dramatic and relatively unexpected twists in the plot.  Suffice it to
say that it builds with a furious pace.
     The deliberately ambiguous ending beautifully wraps up four
complicated lives as well can be expected.  The upbeat conclusion has a
carefully constructed symmetry that does not suffer from the usual
bastardization caused by too many test screening.  Alan Rudolph knows
where he want his pictures to go, and he takes them there.
     AFTERGLOW runs 1:54.  It is rated R for profanity, sex and brief
nudity and would be fine for mature teenagers.

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Alan Rudolph
Starring: Julie Christie, Nick Nolte, Lara Flynn Boyle, Jonny Lee Miller,
Jay Underwood, Domini Blythe, Yves Corbeil, Alan Fawcett
Watching "Afterglow" is like watching a soap opera, only with depth and
some real emotional stimulation.  The entire time, you know what's going to
happen to these characters, but you can never tell what you're going to
feel like when it's about to hit you.  And when it does, you're not even
sure what to feel like afterwards.
The structure of "Afterglow" is something like a Robert Altman film (he's
the producer of this, by chance), following a group of characters around as
they run into eachother by chance, then examining them as a group or
groups, and as individuals.  We first meet Jeffrey Bryon (Jonny Lee
Miller), a high-level business man living in Montreal, but has lost all
passion for his life, most notably in his job and his marriage to his wife,
Marianne (Lara Flynn Boyle), a lonely but occasionally ecstatic woman who
yearns for a baby, but will find not such help with it from Jeffrey.
We also meet another couple: Lucky and Phyllis Mann (Nick Nolte and Julie
Christie, respectively), a much older couple, probably old enough to be
Jeffrey and Marianne's parents.  Lucky runs a fix-it man business, and also
is a bit of a Cassanova on the side, sleeping with several of his female
customers merely because he enjoys pleasing them and also helping his
wounded libido, since Phyllis refuses to sleep with him.  Meanwhile,
Phyllis lies around all day watching her old movies, and thinking about
life and death, as one of her fellow actors has recently died.
Wouldn't you know it: Lucky gets a call from Marianne to help build a
nursery for her yet un-conceived baby, and the two hit it off.  Lucky not
only helps her do this, but also gives some emotional support for her, and
eventually begins sleeping with her.  As their relationship becomes more
and more serious, Phyllis discovers them, and while spying on them at a
bar, she runs into Jeffrey, who's spying on Marianne.  The more they talk,
the more they become interested in eachother, and without even knowing who
the other is, they begin a relationship that is in direct opposition of
Lucky and Marianne.
This film has been getting some reception most notably because of the
performance by Julie Christie, who is a lot like her character.  Christie
was a big star in the 60s and 70s, appearing in such cinema classics as
"Darling," "Doctor Zhivago," and "Shampoo," but then disappearing from
cinema and the public's eye for a long time, claiming to be happy in her
loneliness.  Of course, last year she played Queen Gertrude in Branagh's
"Hamlet," and has now found her career to be blooming once more.  In fact,
Christie received a very well-deserved Oscar nomination for the role in
question.
What she brings to the screen is a persona that is sad and mysterious,
which is what she does best anyway.  Phyllis is portrayed as a woman who
keeps most of her emotions bottled up behind a false facade, and who talks
with a distanced and somewhat pretentious overtone.  When she finally does
break down at the end, it's almost as powerful as Ian Holm's breakdown in
"The Sweet Hereafter" (another great performance).  But in the meantime,
watching Christie navigate through her role is a pleasure that brings a
smile to anyone's face, and seeing her once again marvel an audience is
pretty astounding.
But she's not the chief reason to see this, as the media has been claiming.
 "Afterglow" is a film which is very multi-textured: it's a black comedy, a
drama, a character study, an exercise in how to be Altman-esque, and a
beautifully cynical film dealing with couples who aren't right for one
another.  The title of the film is cynically ironic, as it is the focus of
the film that the afterglow of these two marriages is anything but sweet. 
The two couples in this film are hanging on by a thread that should be cut,
but unfortuantely they're trying to help themselves through relationships
instead of working at it like they should be doing.  Sure, it may seem like
a soap opera, but it sure has some intelligent depth.
The film can also be looked at as a tale of a couple being told by
examining two paralell couples at different stages (this isn't a totally
thought-out theory, so just follow me on this one).  The Jeffrey/Marianne
couple may in fact be the younger version of the Lucky/Phyllis couple, as
we know very little about their younger life.  And instances happen that
directly parallel that of the other couple, and the ending of the
Jeffrey/Marianne couple seems like it may be headed for the ending of the
Lucky/Phyllis couple.  "Afterglow" unfolds in a way that the details of the
film are given to you as the film goes on, so we can piece the film
together afterwards.
Julie Christie may be the stand-out performance for an Oscar Nomination (or
an Oscar), but she's not the only one who gives a great performance.  The
four leads all give phenomenol performances.  Nick Nolte, who does big
budget films to finance his more subtlely budgeted films (like this),
presents a man who is not really a sex machine, but a man who is up for
trying to please everyone as well as himself.  He's not an asswhole; he's a
very lovable man, and Nolte's performance is more human than anything else.
 Lara Flynn Boyle gives us a performance which is full of energy, even
while her character is also suffering some truly deep emotional pain.  And
Jonny Lee Miller (Sick Boy from "Trainspotting") not only deftly controls a
Canadian accent (I loved his "aboot"), but presents a man who seems like an
asswhole on the surface, but is really incredibly disenchanted with his
life.  Watching him fawn over Julie Christie is another great thing about
this movie.
A side not to anyone who grew up in the 80s: look for 80s semi-semi-icon
Jay Underwood in a supporting role.  Remember him from the kinda classics
"The Boy Who Could Fly" and the Disney movies of "Not Quite Human?"  God,
it's a weird feeling to see him in a movie again, eh?
The ending of "Afterglow" (or the afterglow of "Afterglow") is just like
the rest of the film: slightly confusing as to how the audience should feel
about it.  We know we should feel happy or sad for each of the couples, but
instead we're searching for feelings.  One of the most remarkable and
pleasing things about this film is seeing Julie Christie once again wow us
with an amazing performance.  My god, it's been awhile since we've felt
that way, hasn't it?
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Vincent Merlaud
Written and directed by Alan Rudolph, produced by Robert Altman ,music by
Mark Isham
with Nick Nolte, Julie Christie, Lara Flynn Boyle and Johnny Lee Miller
110 minutes, 1:1.85
seen on the 9/18/1997 at the Astor, Berlin
        Afterglow is Alan Rudolph's first film since the ambitious Mrs Parker
and the Vicious Circle unfairly flopped in 1994. The American writer and 
director moves back to small-sized character-study, the genre he best
knows and which brought him wide recognition with Choose Me (1984) and
Trouble in Mind (1985).
        Marianne (Flynn Boyle), the estranged wife of Montreal yuppie
Jeffey Byron (Lee Miller), hires Lucky Fix-it Mann (Nolte) to make a 
baby's room - symbol! - in their modern but awful vast appartment. "Why a
baby's room? We don't need a baby" says the selfish Jeffrey. "I'm having
one, with or without you" argues Marianne. Oddly enough, this is where
Lucky appears, and he offers pretty much everything she needs.
        Lucky's wife, Phyllis (Christie), is an aging former Hollywoodian
actress, who keeps herself busy watching her own B-movies on TV, with her
glasses on and a glass at reach, blaming herself for the departure of
their twenty year old daughter. Guess what happens? While Lucky and   
Marianne are having good time, Jeffrey finds in Phyllis the motherly 
presence he ever waited for - the two of them meet at the Ritz hotel,  
which may or may not be owned by Mohammad Al-Fayed. They safely drive a  
Cadillac coupe, though I didn't see anyone wearing seatbelts.
        It's such an inane script that even the great Max Ophuls wouldn't
have saved it. A great disappointment, though Rudolph's style is still   
there and recognizable. Actors get the attention they deserve, but their 
parts are so thin that such first-class competitors can't produce
sparkles. Only Lara Flynn Boyle seems to have enjoyed herself playing such
a superficial person. I'm bully for Christie, but her return to the screen
in her second major performance this year since her portrayal of Gertrude
in Hamlet (1996) has this natural born actress in a freewheeling overdrive
a la Dunaway.
        As for Nolte, his physical appearance reminded me of the late Lee
Marvin - for the nose - and of Kriss Kritofferson, who was so impressing  
in Trouble in Mind. Nolte did not have the carreer we thought he might   
have deserved after seeing him in Who'll Stop the Rain (1974) and
Underfire (1983). Fifty years ago he would have matched with Howard Hawks'
characters. Now he's just wandering through Walter Hill's actioners and
Barbra Streisand's disastrous directorial efforts. Too bad. Jeffrey is
played by the talented British actor Johnny Lee Miller, and I'm sure all 
Trainspotting fans will witness that gaving up dying his hair in blond is 
not a great idea.
        I'll give Rudolph another chance, but since Altman's own films are
now taken away from him, I'm afraid he'll have to direct more Demi Moore     
vehicles.

Author
James Berardinelli
     After a stylistic detour with MRS. PARKER AND THE VICIOUS CIRCLE 
(which, despite its uncomfortable tone, was close to being a 
conventional movie), director Alan Rudolph has returned to his unique 
brand of film making with AFTERGLOW, a romantic black comedy about love, 
betrayal, and self-absorption.  While these may not be the most unusual 
themes to fashion into a motion picture, Rudolph's atypical approach to 
the characters and their situations makes for an intriguing, if not 
always pleasant, movie.
     It is said that Rudolph is a polarizing director – meaning that 
most viewers either love his work or hate it.  Until MRS. PARKER, I had 
not been overly impressed by his movies. I found EQUINOX, his last pre-
MRS. PARKER effort, to be irritating and frustrating.  I was somewhat 
surprised, therefore, to discover that I liked AFTERGLOW.  There are 
several reasons for this, but the paramount one is that Rudolph seems to 
have muted some of the most strident, mannered aspects of his approach.  
The characters here are more like real people with genuine problems, the 
story is absorbing, and the acting is top-notch.  In short, Rudolph has 
created a world that it's worth spending two hours in.
     AFTERGLOW introduces us to two unhappily married couples.  Jeffrey 
Byron (Jonny Lee Miller) is a cold, seemingly-heartless businessman who 
is sexually indifferent to his young wife, Marianne (Lara Flynn Boyle).  
For her part, Marianne is so obsessed with having a baby that she never 
attempts to interact with her husband on a human level.  All she's 
interested in is seducing him during those few days when she's 
ovulating.  After he refuses to make love, she decides to find someone 
else to play the role of sperm donor.
     The other couple, Lucky (Nick Nolte) and Phyllis Mann (Julie 
Christie), are an older pair, but they're no more content than Jeffrey 
and Marianne.  A mysterious fracture in their past relationship has 
driven them apart.  They remain married as a matter of convenience, but, 
since Phyllis won't allow Lucky to touch her, they have an unspoken 
agreement whereby he can fool around as much as he wants provided that 
no lasting bond is established as a result of these affairs.  The 
landscape of emotional pain between them is palpable.
     The four characters begin interacting when Marianne hires Lucky as 
a handyman to fix up the inside of the apartment she shares with 
Jeffrey.  The two of them are immediately attracted to one another, and 
it doesn't take long before they're lounging together, naked, in her 
pool.  Meanwhile, Jeffrey, who is captivated by older women, runs into 
Phyllis in a hotel bar, is smitten, and invites her to accompany him on 
a weekend retreat to the mountains.
     The romantic couplings of the characters are interesting in that 
they illustrate the multiple faces of love.  Sex means something 
different to everyone – to Jeffrey, it's an unpleasant chore, a loss of 
control; to Marianne, it's a means to a maternal end; to Lucky, it's an 
enjoyable distraction that blocks out his marital troubles; and to 
Phyllis, it's a method of establishing or denying emotional closeness.  
Ultimately, none of these characters appears to love anyone else as much 
as they love themselves.  
     The greatest strength of the film lies not in the script, but in 
the performances.  Jonny Lee Miller is perfect as the selfish, callous, 
suit-and-tie businessman.  Those who recall him as Sickboy in 
TRAINSPOTTING will find that he is almost unrecognizable here as the 
image of conformity.  Lara Flynn Boyle, who wasn't impressive in 
Rudolph's EQUINOX, is greatly improved, making Marianne a jumble of 
sexiness and vulnerability.  Nick Nolte is delightful as the uninhibited 
Lucky, and he manages to deliver some of Rudolph's most pregnant lines 
with practiced ease.  The clear standout, however, is Julie Christie, 
who is nothing short of delicious as the world-weary Phyllis.  Her often 
wry, occasionally cutting asides are the source of much of the film's 
humor, and there's hardly ever a moment when she doesn't steal the 
spotlight from her co-stars.
     I don't know if AFTERGLOW is the film to convert Rudolph-
detractors, but it seems that this movie is a little more accessible 
than some of the director's earlier productions.  Enough of his 
trademark style remains, however, to reassure his supporters.  AFTERGLOW 
is basically a four-pronged character study.  The plot is not especially 
compelling, but the character interaction is, and that's the real reason 
to see this motion picture.  Rudolph has painted an able picture of the 
non-romantic side of love -- the one that has more to do with tolerance 
and familiarity than with affection and attraction.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"
