Title
Review for Kissed (1996)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Goldwyn)
Starring:  Molly Parker, Peter Outerbridge, Jay Brazeau.
Screenplay:  Lynne Stopkewich and Angus Fraser, based on the short story
by Barbara Gowdy.
Producers:  Dean English and Lynne Stopkewich.
Director:  Lynne Stopkewich.
MPAA Rating:  Unrated (sexual situations, nudity, profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  78 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     What is it about Canada which gets film-makers thinking about sex,
death and car washes?  Canada's David Cronenberg has already delivered one
exploration of the bond between carnality and mortality in 1997, the
much-talked-about CRASH, and now countrywoman Lynne Stopkewich has
presented us with KISSED.  Molly Parker stars in KISSED as Sandra Larson,
a young woman who knows from an early age that she has a profound need to
connect with the moment when life turns to death.  She acts on that
obsession by becoming an apprentice at a funeral home, where she has sex
with the dead bodies in a ritual which brings her closer to the power of
the hereafter.  The problems begin when a medical student named Matt
(Peter Outerbridge) falls hard for Sandra, and finds it difficult to
compete with her other lovers.
     It's difficult at first to get past the unpleasantness of the subject
matter in KISSED, especially when we are treated to scenes of the young
Sandra (Natasha Morley) rubbing a dead sparrow all over herself.
Cronenberg faced the same intellectual road block with CRASH, but the
difference is that Stopkewich actually seems interested in helping the
audience to understand her protagonist's obsession.  Her narration is
surprisingly effective at explaining the reasons for and the impact of
Sandra's actions, and Molly Parker plays Sandra as a decent, focused young
woman who understands how her necrophilia is viewed by others.  Stopkewich
doesn't want us to stare at Sandra like a car wreck; she wants to put us
inside the car with her (including, like CRASH, in a car wash, which
must be the Canadian equivalent of Lover's Lane), as well as inside her
head.
     One of the more intriguing ironies of KISSED involves Matt, who has a
difficult time dealing with the other men in Sandra's life.  Stopkewich
gives Matt an enigmatic history -- he's a medical student who is taking
time off for an unexplained reason -- and Outerbridge gives a painful
conviction to his growing frustration with his inability to satisfy
Sandra.  It is Matt whose obsession becomes dangerous, whose relatively
common desire for a woman he can't fully have is played as the real 
instability in the film.  Sandra has come to terms with her unique needs,
and it is to Stopkewich's credit that Sandra is portrayed as someone with
compassion rather than as a twisted fiend.  The arc of the story may be
fairly predictable, but that story is skillfully constructed to make the
fate of the characters matter.  There is an unexpected warmth to KISSED.
Being Canadian doesn't mean you have to turn sex -- even sex with a corpse
-- into something cold and emotionless.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
KISSED (director/writer/editor: Lynne Stopkewich; screenwriter: based on the
story "We So Seldom Look on Love" by Barbara Gowdy/Angus Fraser;
cinematographer: Gregory Middleton; editors: John Pozer/Peter Roeck; cast: Molly
Parker (Sandra Larson), Peter Outerbridge (Matt), Jay Brazeau (Mr. Wallis,
Funeral Director), Natasha Morley (Young Sandra), Jessie Winter Mudie (Carol),
Joe Maffei (Biology Teacher), James Timmons (Jan); Runtime: 78; Goldwyn
Entertainment Company; 1996-Can.) 
This is a film where the heroine could say with deep conviction that "I've seen
bodies shining like stars," and we believe her without laughing at her. It's an
unusual and fascinatingly compelling fairy tale type of drama, steeped in
feeling and intellect and romance. "Kissed" is based on the original story by
Barbara Gowdy "We So Seldom Look on Love," and directed with economy in her
first feature by Canadian Lynne Stopkewich. She has captured the nuances of a
young girl's life obsession, her ambitions, and her romantic life, in a most
tender and imaginative way. What makes this film standout, is that the subject
matter is necrophilia. It tells about a young girl, Sandra Larson (Molly
Parker), who grew up in isolation showing an abnormal interest in dead animals,
where she feels compelled to hold them in death and bury them properly. She
breaks this isolation when she meets one other friend, Carol (Jessie Winter
Mudie), who understands her secret life. But when her mother learns of how Carol
sees ghosts and has her daughter do a strange dance at the burial of the
animals, she breaks up the relationship for good. 
As a college student Sandra decides to study embalming, and in the meantime she
quits her job for a florist and secures a job at Wallis' funeral parlor. From
Mr. Wallis (Brazeau) she learns the trade, as he methodically shows her how to
apply the techniques that go into preparing the dead and making them look serene
for the family members who will view their reposed remains. For him the dead
have no feelings, he's just someone with an unusual occupation who is good at
his job. But the janitor Jan tells Sandra that he has a secret, he was once
caught fondling a young boy corpse. This is never followed up. 
But for Sandra the dead bodies are a means of transcendence ... it's about
'crossing over,' as she tells how she feels compelled to make love to the dead
young corpses. With a spiritual light in her eyes, Sandra expounds in a delicate
voice how every corpse is different, how each has its own innocence, grief, and
wisdom. She tells how she can feel everything from the dead body, "It's like
looking into the sun and going blind." 
This sincere and believable young lady's life becomes even more complex when she
meets a medical student on a leave of absence, Matt (Outerbridge), and makes
love with a live person for the first time. She feels comfortable enough with
him, that she blurts out her secret: "I make love to the dead bodies." Instead
of turning her off, this driven man becomes more curious about her and her
romances with the corpses. 
But Matt feels that he can't compete with the corpses for her undying love and
offers to pretend to be a corpse, wearing makeup and lying still, if she would
make love to him the same way she does the corpses. When she tries to tell him
that what she does is not an act and refuses to indulge his fantasy the film
turns away from her story, to its detriment, and follows Matt's needs to be
loved. It culminates in a tragic event. The reason it's a detriment, is because
her story is more dynamic and compelling than his. We have seen troubled
students like him in other films, but she's unique and mysterious and worth
pursuing in further depth. 
One of the really amazing things about ths film is that it's all believable.
It's handled in a romantic and even comical way, allowing us to see the
characters for what they are instead of sensationalizing their fetishes. There
were three very good performances: Jay Brazeau sets a sobering tone for the
story to be grounded in reality, no matter how far-fetched it may seem. Peter
Outerbridge brings a sensitivity and restlessness to his role, as someone whose
curiosity is so great that he's willing to try something that is ghoulish. But
the film belongs to Molly Parker's absorbing translation of her role, as an
ordinary person who is compelled to do what she feels most pressing inside her.
The film comes with voice-overs from Molly, in her quiet, gentle voice, and the
photography at times becomes glowing in a heavenly whiteness or darkly pressing
in a sobering blue shade. The film always felt dreamlike, like it was a fairy
tale without a moral lesson to it. 
The film's only fault is in how slight the story is and how it failed to go
beyond the shocking taboo point of its "crossing over" theme and really explore
that untested subject matter in more depth. But the film is still a special one
because of the freshness of its ideas, the originality of the film's theme, and
the way it was so artfully filmed. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ 

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Molly Parker, Peter Outerbridge, Jay Brazeau, Natasha Morley
Director: Lynne Stopkewich
Producers: Dean English and Lynne Stopkewich
Screenplay: Angus Fraser and Lynne Stopkewich based on a story by 
      Barbara Gowdy
Cinematography: Greg Middleton
Music: Don MacDonald
U.S. Distributor: The Samuel Goldwyn Company
     Sexual taboos come in all shapes and forms -- bestiality, 
pedophilia, incest -- but none creates a more vivid image than that of 
necrophilia.  So, when I say that KISSED is the character study of a 
necrophiliac, recognize that this film is intended for a very select 
audience.  Anyone who feels incapable of watching a movie that deals 
frankly with this subject (even though it is, relatively speaking, 
tastefully approached) should steer clear of KISSED.  Director Lynne 
Stopkewich's feature is for adventurous movie-goers only.
     Of course, this isn't the first motion picture to broach this 
"forbidden" subject, but it approaches the material in a far more 
serious and compassionate fashion than anything I can remember.  And, as 
fundamentally unappealing as the concept of having sex with a corpse may 
be, KISSED manages the considerably difficult task of humanizing a 
character involved in this practice.  As a result, KISSED isn't nearly 
as difficult or disturbing a film as one might suppose from a plot 
description.
     The central figure in this movie is Sandra Larson (Molly Parker), a 
young woman who, by her own admission, has "always been fascinated by 
death -- the smell of it, the feel of it, and the stillness of it."  
When we first meet Sandra, she's a lonely adolescent (played by Natasha 
Morley) living her pre-teen years in an unnamed part of Canada during 
the early 1960s.  Sandra isn't like other girls, though.  While they 
play Spin the Bottle, she goes outside and holds ritual funerals for the 
small, dead animals she finds.  Part of her private burial ceremony 
includes rubbing the tiny corpse all over her own flesh.
     By the time she reaches college, Sandra has obtained a job working 
at a funeral home.  She takes classes in embalming, even though she 
believes that cadavers can still feel what's being done to them.  Her 
fascination with death leads her to engage in covert sexual activities 
with some of the more attractive corpses in her care.  When she meets a 
(living) man, Matt (Peter Outerbridge), who is fascinated by her fetish, 
she tries unsuccessfully to explain what it's like to him, calling it a 
transforming spiritual experience that's "glorious... overwhelming... 
and addictive."  Even though Matt doesn't fully understand Sandra's 
reasons, curiosity drives him to do what he can to insinuate himself 
into her private world.
     Playing a role in a movie of this nature is a risky proposition for 
an actor, so, for that reason alone, one has to admire the courage of 
both Molly Parker and Peter Outerbridge.  It helps, of course, that both 
present entirely believable performances and that they develop an 
effective rapport.  Parker, who bears a passing resemblance to American 
actress Moira Kelly, gives a slightly deeper reading than her co-star.  
She portrays Sandra as a loner whose unique perspective about life and 
death sets her apart from everyone else, except, perhaps, Matt.
     The hallmark of KISSED is its daring.  At its heart, however, this 
movie isn't really trying to shock or revolt its audiences.  It's 
telling a tender love story that just happens to include some 
exceptionally unconventional and controversial elements.  What 
Stopkewich does best here is to consistently avoid making the 
necrophilia gratuitous or exploitative.  Where he doesn't fully succeed 
is in conveying the spiritual rapture of Sandra's secret experiences -- 
the use of white light, for example, comes across as corny and 
unconvincing.  Sandra may have been transported to another plane, but 
the director didn't get me to share the trip.
     A great deal more could be written about this film, since, even at 
only eighty minutes in length, it never fails to challenge viewers.  For 
those who have trouble getting into, or dealing with, the primary 
subject matter, there are some interesting side issues.  I certainly 
learned a great deal about what goes on behind the scenes at a funeral 
parlor.  Nevertheless, for anyone capable of keeping an open mind, 
KISSED offers an unflinching perspective of a sweet, troubled love 
affair and the two warped individuals trapped in it.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Alex Fung
Starring Molly Parker, Peter Outerbridge, Jay Brazeau, Natasha Morley
Screenplay by Angus Fraser and Lynne Stopkewich, based on the short
   story by Barbara Gowdy
Produced by Dean English and Lynne Stopkewich
Directed by Lynne Stopkewich
Running time: 78 minutes
It's tough to make a thoughtful and tasteful film about a taboo
subject like necrophilia, rather than simply taking the easy way
out via an exploitation film or going for shock value.  Eschewing
a brazenly outrageous or exploitive tact on the film's decidedly
taboo subject matter, Lynne Stopkewich's first feature film
KISSED is a magnificent, beautiful piece of work, wonderfully
written, acted, and shot.
Even as a child, Sandra Larson (played by Natasha Morley as a child;
Molly Parker portrays the adult Sandra) is fascinated by the beauty
and stillness of death, collecting dead rodents and other small
animals from the woods in order to perform intricate rituals.
Sandra strips, dances, and lovingly caresses the dead animals
against herself in order to claim their essence before carefully
burying them.
Years pass, but Sandra's interest remains.  Quitting her job at a
flower shop, she gets a job at a funeral parlour and studies embalming.
She gets a boyfriend too, Matt (played by Peter Outerbridge), a
young medical student taking some time off.  When Sandra reveals
her secret to him, Matt's reaction is not that of disgust or horror,
but curiousity.  His passion for Sandra eventually spins out of
control, leading to an inevitable conclusion which is poetic and
poignant.
Molly Parker gives a sensational performance as Sandra.  With her
photogenic freckled features and natural screen presence, she makes
a compelling, engaging lead, and her take on her character is intriguing.
Sandra is, for all intents and purposes, the girl next door (albeit
a little quiet and withdrawn) with a striking little character quirk.
Parker's dreamy narration throughout KISSED perfectly suits the tone
of the film, and her timid mannerisms are wonderfully executed.  She's
a real revelation.
The screenplay for KISSED is wonderfully written - sparse, well-paced,
classy, and very clever.  There are well-timed moments of dry humour,
such as many of the scenes with Sandra's funeral parlour boss, and
in an argument Sandra has with Matt, where she blurts out "I don't
fuck everything that's dead!"  It's particularly impressive that
the screenwriters didn't succumb to the temptation to get overly
clever with the plot, and allowed the film to flow to its natural
conclusion.
Stopkewich's poised direction of the film is first-rate and demonstrates
remarkable proficiency for a debut feature. The film was clearly
lovingly crafted, with virtually every shot well laid out; it's a
stunningly beautiful film to watch.  There's an incredibly surreal
feel to the film, aided in part by the cool lighting as shot by
cinematographer Gregory Middleton, and the music for KISSED, as
handled by Don MacDonald, is orchestrated perfectly.
KISSED simply will not be to everyone's taste.  Despite being a
completely tasteful film, there will be those who simply will not
accept a film whose lead character is a necrophiliac, and will have
the preconceived notion of a groteseque, disturbing film.  My
condolesences go to them, as they're missing a great movie.  I'm
keeping my eyes out for Lynne Stopkewich's next project.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     If your lover comes to you smelling of formaldehyde and with blood
under her fingernails, be suspicious.  The Canadian film KISSED by
first-time director Lynne Stopkewich tackles one of the few subjects
I have never seen considered before in the movies: necrophilia.
     Before you either stop reading my review or start flaming me for
liking this film, let me assure you that you have to see the movie to
fully understand it.  It handles its subject matter with delicacy.
Although it is frequently shocking, it is never exploitive.  On the
other hand, if you were to see this film without knowing what it is
about, there is a good chance you might walk out or be sickened by some
of the scenes.  This is a movie that pulls no punches.  If it were a
Hollywood film, the studio would have demanded a major rewrite after
the first test screening.  (Or they might have tried to shelve it as
Ted Turner did last year with David Cronenberg's CRASH.)
     When I saw KISSED at an advanced screening, the audience was fully
engaged and many were enraged by the story.  Albeit only for the
adventuresome filmgoer, this is a movie designed to make you think.
The intelligent script by Angus Fraser and director Lynne Stopkewich is
based on Barbara Gowdy's short story, "We So Seldom Look on Love."  In
the press kit the director says she found the story in a book of
erotica by women authors.
     In a film that appears on the surface to be unique, there are
numerous parallels to other pictures.  First, the show is about
obsession as is FATAL ATTRACTION.  Second, the film's early scenes show
two young teenager girls dancing in their underwear around a dead bird
much like the opening scene of the nude, "pagan" dance in THE CRUCIBLE.
Finally, the film is actually the HAROLD AND MAUDE for the 90s --
compulsively preoccupied with death.
     "I've always been fascinated by death," explains the protagonist,
Sandra Larson.  "The feel of it, the smell of it, the quietness of it."
(Natasha Morley briefly plays the young teenage Sandra, and Molly
Parker is the college age Sandra.)  Sandra's young friend Carol
abandons their spiritualistic dances around the dead animals when
Sandra starts rubbing a dead chipmunk on her body until the blood
begins to ooze out all over her.
     Soon we cut to the grownup Sandra who figures the way to be close
to death is to obtain a position in a funeral parlor.  Mr. Wallis (Jay
Brazeau), the funeral director, in her job interview asks her simply,
"What do you know about funerals?"  Not much it turns out, but she is
an eager pupil.  She has an insatiable desire to learn everything about
preparations for burial -- especially embalming.  He gives her the job
and a single piece of advice, "Don't wear black -- it's too
depressing."
     Sandra approaches her work with a loving, sincere manner.  Except
for, and this is a very big except, the fact that she has sex with the
corpses, she is the model of the type of employee that you would want
to work in a funeral home.
     In a science lesson unlike any I've ever seen before, we learn the
details of embalming.  I'll not repeat them lest you get ill.  This
scene, and not the sex, is the most difficult one to watch.  The gross
parts happen just off screen, but they tell you precisely what they are
doing to the body.
     Molly Parker gives us a Sandra who is gentle and kind.  Sandra
does a religious dance around the bodies before having sex with them.
All of this is so beautifully done that you have to keep reminding
yourself that this is a very disturbed young woman, and the guy she is
violating is, afterall, dead.  Sandra believes that his spirit lives on
and that she is giving him pleasure as well.
     Parker's performance was haunting but a bit aloof.  If she could
have revealed more about her motivation it would have helped
enormously.  The best we have is some of the dialog.  "Crossing over
was glorious," she tells us after her first love tryst with a corpse.
"It's like looking into the sun without going blind," she describes her
necrophilia later in the film.  "I'm consumed."
     Into Sandra's life comes a live male who makes a friendly pass at
her.  When Matt (Peter Outerbridge) comes on to her in a coffee shop,
she is frightened by it.  The immediate reaction after they become
lovers is to wonder where the film is headed.  As I've told my readers
before, I rarely try to guess the ending of the film, but in this one
I was intrigued by the possibilities.  Among my numerous alternative
endings, one of them did come to pass, but I was just as surprised that
some of the others did not.
     "You didn't faint," says the funeral director after Sandra's
embalming lesson.  "That's always a good sign."  Well, if you don't
faint, you may like this most bizarre of films.  Then again, maybe not.
"I never met anyone like you before," says Matt to Sandra.  "You're
totally different.  You're compelling."  So is the picture.
     KISSED runs just 1:20, but seems longer due to the subject
matter's intensity.  The film is not yet rated, but is certainly a
candidate for an NC-17 rating for its sex, full frontal nudity, and,
most of all, taboo theme.  This is not a film for teenagers.  I give
it thumbs up as did my wife.  Would I recommend it?  Well, if you can
read this review and still be interested, you'd probably like the film.
I give it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
