Title
Review for Mommie Dearest (1981)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mike Merrin
You may remember the vogue in the sixties for casting ageing Hollywood
stars in horror-thrillers; "Whatever Happened to Baby Jane" is the
best, but also worthy of note are "Hush Hush Sweet Charlotte", "What's
the Matter With Helen" and "Frantic AKA Die Die My Darling". Some call
this the worst sort of exploitation, while others note that Bette
Davis revived her career by playing a shrieking hag, when no other
offers of work were forthcoming. Shelley Winters featured in a couple
of the films, while even Debbie Reynolds popped up as a murderess.
But the saddest story has to be that of Joan Crawford, whose
appearance in "Whatever Happened to Baby Jane", should have
resurrected her career, especially since she gives a much better
performance than Ms. Davis. For reasons that I can't explain, she
ended up in yet more, and much worse, horror films, going increasingly
down market until she ended up in the travesty of "Trog", giving, in
the circumstances, a wastefully committed performance.
It's therefore oddly appropriate that the film of her life, "Mommie
Dearest", should be a camp horror story about an old witch, hiding
behind the guise of a respectable biopic. Based on the first, and
best, revenge book, by her daughter, Christina, it is one of the
trashiest films ever made, and also a lot of not-so-innocent fun.
Faye Dunaway, whose career seems to have gone into even more of a
tailspin than Crawford's, gives a stunning performance in the title
role, but it's clearly not a realistic interpretation of the
woman. No, this is a truly nasty villainess, making Cruella DeVille
seem a model of calm responsibility in contrast. The story concerns a
beautiful little girl called Christina, all blonde hair and perfect
teeth, who is adopted by a nasty old witch called Joan Crawford, who
proceeds to make her life a misery. On her birthdays, Christina is
only allowed to keep one present, while the rest go to the
orphanages. This is the first sign that all is not well in the
Crawford household, and the hysteria that ensues when Christina puts
on her mother's make-up and pretends to be accepting an award, only
confirms the fact that Joan might not be making the running for the
mother of the year award.
Two scenes are etched in the memory of anyone who has ever seen this
film. The first takes place after Joan loses her contract at MGM. That
night, she starts pulling up her famous rose-bushes, and she calls the
children out of their beds to come and help clear up. Surely, we
think, Joan isn't mad enough to go any further. But her sights are set
on her daughter's beloved little rose tree. In one of the great
moments of gothic-camp, she intones to her daughter, "Christina, fetch
me.. the axe !!!". She then attempts to hack the tree to pieces, while
her crying children can only watch, helpless to stop this maniac.
The second occurs when Joan, clearly off her rocker, finds a ... gasp
... wire hanger in her daughter's closet. To say she throws a fit
would be understating. She screams at her sleeping eight year old
daughter, "NO WIRE HANGERS", and proceeds to beat the poor child with
the hanger. All of Christina's clothes are then strewn across the
floor, after which Joan orders her to clear up the mess. But, she
isn't finished. Going into the bathroom, Joan decides that the floor
isn't clean enough. She announces to her daughter that "We will clean
this together", throws soap on the floor, and then beats her daughter
with the soap box. If this scene isn't a classic of camp, I don't know
what is. The thing is, you see, it's played dead-straight. Joan, made
up in white cream, looks like a monster from a child's fairy tale,
while Christina is every inch the innocent victim of this creature's
wrath.
The irony is that the audience aren't on the side of Christina, who is
irritatingly idealised. No, we're on the side of Wicked Queen Joan,
and we can't wait for the next explosion to come and liven up the
film. Later, as Christina turns into the very lovely Diana Scarwid,
Joan tries to strangle her, after Christina has accused her of trying
to ruin her life. Luckily, a showbiz journalist is on hand to stop
anything too serious happening - the said journo is played by Marlon
Brando's sister, who looks very much like him, but only in latter day
porker mode, sadly.
This really is a very, very silly film, and Faye Dunaway's superb
performance is much better than the movie deserves. However, it is
consistently watchable, not least for a number of excellent
one-liners. Upon assuming control of Pepsi-Cola in the sixties, Joan
runs rings around the board, yelling "Don't fuck with me fellas, this
ain't my first time at the rodeo".
However, for horror fans, it assumes interest as, perhaps, the last of
the "Great Lady" horror movies, and it certainly can't be accused of
being boring. The film's version of Crawford is a sort of cross
between Baby Jane and Countess Dracula, which does nothing for
verisimilitude, but does make it very watchable.  I gather the film
became something of a cult in America at the time, with audiences
wearing clothes-hanger earrings, and shouting along with the more
quotable lines.
"Tchaikovsky - was he the tortured soul who poured out
 his immortal longings into dignified passages of stately 
 music, or was he just an old pouf who wrote tunes ?"

Author
Mike Watson
"Tina!!!  Fetch me the axe!!!"  A favourite book of mine called THE
GOLDEN TURKEY AWARDS relates the story that when MOMMIE DEAREST was
unleashed upon unsuspecting audiences back in 1981, Paramount soon
realised they had a problem on their hands.  It wasn't just the film's
disappointing box office performance.  Indeed, in the coming years
some people would be going back to see it two, three, even six times.
No, the main problem was that what was intended as a serious biopic of
screen queen Joan Crawford was turning into the laugh riot of the
year.
In a desperate attempt to capitalise on this unexpected turn of
events, some publicity hacks dreamed up outrageous print
advertisements screaming: "Mommie Dearest: The Biggest Mommie Of Them
All!".  Executives at Paramount were appalled and soon had the ads
withdrawn, but it was all too late.  MOMMIE DEAREST was already
cementing its place in camp cinema history.
Unfortunately, Faye Dunaway's energetic, at times ridiculously
over-the-top performance is about the film's only redeeming feature.
Based on daughter Christina Crawford's trashy biography, MOMMIE
DEAREST chronicles a series of mainly private events in the life of
her moviestar mother.  If you believe this movie, it was a life was
racked by obsession, lonliness, child abuse and rampant egomania.
The film begins with Crawford adopting two children, and concludes in
the office of her lawyer where her now grown-up daughter and son find
out they have been left out of their mother's will.  Joan always
wanted her kids to be able to fend for themselves, you see.  But
that's about the only thread in the narrative that manages to survive
to the film's end.  The script - laboured over by four writers, a bad
sign in itself  - is a poorly connected series of episodes that builds
little dramatic momentum.  Frank Perry's direction is no more than
competent, and Dunaway's bitchy lines aside, the dialogue is flat and
uninvolving.
In fairness, the film's second half ditches some of the cartoon
hysterics and does develop a degree empathy for its characters.  When
the adult Christina moves out of home into her own modest dwelling,
Joan visits and keeps in touch, not helping her financially but
encouraging Christina's own acting and career ambitions.  Crawford
does seem to care about her daughter, but you can sense the emotional
distance and feel some of their pain.  You also get glimpses of what
the film could have been in the hands of better writers.
Ah, but there IS Dunaway's performance.  And what a delicious piece of
campery it often is.  Having just been sacked by her studio after a
run of box office duds, Crawford storms home late at night and
proceeds to go ballistic in the garden.  She has the maid drag the
kids out of bed to come down and clean up the mess she's making.
Spotting a young tree she doesn't like the look of, she turns to the
trembling Christina and utters the immortal line "Tina!!  Fetch me the
axe!!" with which she proceeds to enthusiastically dismember the poor
sapling.
In the film's most outrageous scene, Joan realises that some of her
daughter's clothes are hanging on wire coat hangers.  Oh dear!  Sounds
like the perfect excuse for another temper tantrum, doesn't it?   This
time she gives her daughter a horrible beating while delivering
another classic outburst: "No...wire...hangers....EVER!!!!".  And
later, when the Board of her late husband's company Pepsi Cola tries
to divest her of her directorship, she displays a superb grasp of
business etiquette by jumping to her feet and roaring: "Don't fuck
with me, fellas!!".  Oh joy!
Something of a camp classic, then, but if that's not you're cup of tea
then MOMMIE DEAREST doesn't have too much to recommend it.  Better you
see the real Crawford in THE WOMEN (1939), MILDRED PIERCE (1945) or
WHATEVER HAPPENED TO BABY JANE (1962).  Great films distinguished by
great performances, and a far more eloquent testament to this great
woman than Frank Perry's shrieking piece of tabloid froth.
