Title
Review for Homeward Bound: The Incredible Journey (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     I was twelve years old when I read Sheila Burnford's INCREDIBLE
JOURNEY.  It must have been a year or so later that I saw the Walt Disney
adaptation.  I do not actually remember if that film was narrated or not.  I
suspect it must have been narrated to keep the story understandable.  (I
think THE BEAR was about the first case I saw of a feature film that shows
animal characters completely non-verbally.)  In any case, now the film has
been remade almost thirty years later and the approach to conveying animal
action has taken a step backwards from realism.  In Duwayne Dunham's remake
the animals talk and even wise-crack to each other.  That certainly makes
the animals easier to understand, and it opens the way for a lot of humor--a
la LOOK WHO'S TALKING--but it regrettably pushes the story into fantasy.
     Shadow (played by Ben with Don Ameche's voice), Chance (Rattler/Michael
J. Fox), and(Tiki/Sally Field) love their human family, but are left
temporarily with a family friend.  Through a mix-up, they decide they have
been abandoned and determine to strike out on their own to make their way
home.  Between them and home are some unspecified hundreds of miles (250
miles in the original) of beautiful but treacherous wilderness.
     The screenplay is by Linda Wooverton (who worked on BEAUTY AND THE
BEAST) and Caroline Thompson (who wrote EDWARD SCISSORHANDS).  Often the
wise-cracking animals get off a good one, but it is somewhat hit or miss.
Lines like the referring to a porcupine as having a "bad hair day" just
don't work.  In spite of that misplaced humor, HOMEWARD BOUND does hit a
responsive chord and will have many members of the audience openly crying at
the loyalty of these pets for their humans.  Not a perfect film, but
generally one that should please adults and children.  I give the film a +1
on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Robert Hays, Kim Greist, and the voices of Don Ameche, 
           Michael J. Fox, and Sally Field
Director:  Duwayne Dunham
Producers:  Franklin R. Levy and Jeffrey Chernov
Screenplay:  Caroline Thompson and Linda Woolverton
Music Direction:  Bruce Broughton
Released by Walt Disney Pictures
     Two dogs, Chance (voice of Michael J. Fox) and Shadow (voice of
Don Ameche, sounding oddly like the late John Huston), and one cat,
Sassy (voice of Sally Field) make a long trek across the Sierra Nevadas
in an attempt to find their way home.  On the way, they encounter a
number of dangers, including bears, mountain lions, and a violent
waterfall.  Meanwhile, their owners (Robert Hays and Kim Greist) find
out about their disappearance and begin a frantic campaign to locate
the missing pets.
     Obviously written for children, HOMEWARD BOUND is filled with 
trite cliches, unbelievable coincidences, and poor acting (on the part
of the humans).  At least it's never boring.  In a way that's too bad,
because a movie of this dubious quality probably doesn't deserve the
kinds of family crowds it's already drawing (is it the name of Disney
that's the attraction, the G rating, or the general dearth of family
films?).  
     This movie is another inferior remake, except in this case it's the
studio redoing its own property.  In 1963, Disney came out with a
relatively enjoyable film called THE INCREDIBLE JOURNEY.  The original
had two major advantages over its 1993 counterpart: it didn't use
human voices for the animals (there was a narrator instead) and it
didn't jump back and forth between the pets and their badly-acted
owners.
     This would have been a much better movie had the dogs and cat not
been given voices.  The wisecracking of Michael J. Fox and Sally
Field, coupled with the sagely wisdom of Don Ameche, dilutes the
adventure.  Instead of "humanizing" the animals, it lessens the
grandeur of the film.  Sure, there are three or four good jokes that
wouldn't have been there had the voices been taken away, but a number
of the danger sequences would have been greatly enhanced.  The struggle
of the animals is gone, replaced by something lighter and more
crowd-pleasing.
     Too much attention is paid to the owners of the pets.  Robert Hayes
does a pitiful acting job, and the writing for the scenes with the
humans is so embarrassing that at times I found them difficult to
watch.  Perhaps the movie was short on running time, so material better
left on the cutting room floor was included.  If that's the case, it
was an ill-advised move.  Even had the quality of these scenes been
better, their placing in many cases breaks up the pacing established by
the pets' odyssey.
     I have one additional small complaint.  HOMEWARD BOUND contains a 
scene where a little girl is encouraged to approach Shadow, a dog she
has never seen before.  Because he looks so harmless, she moves forward
and throws her arms around him.  This is not a good lesson to be
teaching children.  Contact with strange animals should be avoided, not
encouraged.
     As family fare, the movie is relatively inoffensive.  The scenery
is pretty and some of the wilderness scenes are enjoyable, if only for
the skill shown by the handlers in getting the animals to do some of
the things they do (although this film is nowhere as remarkable as THE
BEAR).  Overall, however, HOMEWARD BOUND is not a good example of film
making or entertainment.  As an episode of THE WONDERFUL WORLD OF
DISNEY, it would be fine, but as a major motion picture, it's
less-than-marvelous.  
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
