Title
Review for Giant Spider Invasion, The (1975)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1975. Director - Bill Rebane, Screenplay - Robert Easton & Richard 
L. Huff, Story - Huff, Producers - Huff & Rebane, Photography - Jack 
Willoughby, Music - Ito Rebane, Special Effects - Richard Albain & 
Robert Millay. Production Company - Cinema Group 75/Transcentury 
Pictures.
Robert Easton (Dan Kester), Leslie Parrish (Ev Kester), Steve Brodie (Dr 
J.R. Vance), Barbara Hale (Dr Jenny Langer), Alan Hale Jr (Sheriff 
Jones), Kevin Brodie (Davy Perkins), Dianne Lee Hart (Terri), Christiane 
Schmidtmer (Helga), Paul Bentzen (Billy Kester), William W. Gillett Jr 
(Paul Rider), Tain Bodkin (Preacher)
Plot: A miniature black hole comes crashing to Earth on a farm in 
Northern Wisconsin. A host of spiders hatch out of crystal geodes which 
quickly overrun everything and then produce a spider the size of an 
entire house which rampages through town.
This has a reputation as one of the genre's truly terrible films. 
Although one finds upon viewing it it isn't really as bad as is claimed. 
Far be it from one wanting to defend it, but rather than truly terrible 
it is no more than a routine giant bug movie. Its greatest crime is 
really having been made twenty years too late, of being a 1950s giant 
bug movie in an era where the subgenre had moved to `Birds'-styled 
eco-revenge and killer shark ripoffs.
There are two aspects of the film that every writer who derides it 
points to as clear evidence of its Golden Turkey status - one being that 
the giant spider is played by a Volkswagen, the second being the 
scientifically preposterous notion that the giant spider was created by 
a black hole that crashed to Earth. But in both cases these are pieces 
of evidence that have been distorted out of proportion to make the case. 
The black hole explanation probably comes from the fascination with 
black holes that was just starting to enter the public paradigm at the 
time the film was made and gives the appearance of having been 
appropriated as a handy grab-all explanation. To its credit the film 
gives a lecture on what black holes are where it appears to have 
actually gone and looked the material up in an encyclopedia, even if it 
is thrown in a boiler-plate info-dump. And, while it never ties the idea 
of black holes and doorways to alternate dimensions as an explanation 
for giant spiders in any way that could be remotely regarded as 
scientific, one should at least place the notion in perspective - in the 
real world some have tried to seriously argue that a black hole falling 
to Earth was the cause of the Tunguska explosion, so the notion is not 
as entirely laughable as it might seem.
The same with the Volkswagen spider. One suspects that what it is 
everybody laughs about is simply the __notion__ of the spider being 
played by a Volkswagen. One looked closely throughout and failed to find 
any occasions upon which you could see wheels or car bodies showing 
beneath the spider. Certainly the effect is not as terrible as say the 
carpet monster with visible feet underneath in `The Creeping Terror', 
and the giant spider effects are at least comparable to those in the 
highly regarded giant ant film `Them!'.
All in all it is distinctly average, rather than a terrible, film. The 
pace is slow - not much happens at the start of the film - but director 
Bill Rebane does creates one or two occasional frissons, mostly in the 
scenes with the small actual-size spiders crawling over and pursuing 
people. The acting is at least up to a professionally competent standard 
and there is the odd amusing line: "I'm not eleven anymore - I'm 
35-23-35," says the strumpet of the show.
Screening at the Christchurch 1998 Incredibly Strange Film Festival
Reviewed by Richard Scheib

