Title
Review for Chase, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Ah, the Seventies.  The era of truck chases (CONVOY), car races
(THE GUMBALL RALLY), and even truck/car chases (SMOKEY AND THE
BANDIT).  Remember those fast, funny, throwaway movies?  They were
perfect popcorn entertainment in a way-too-serious time.  But after
John Landis filmed the definitive everything-but-the-kitchen-sink
car-chase in THE BLUES BROTHERS, the genre died a quiet death.
Stuntman cum director Hal Needham filmed THE CANNONBALL RUN II in 1984
and that was that.
     Now, ten years too late, comes THE CHASE.  This roadkill of a
picture is truly awful entertainment--especially in comparison of what
came before.  In their heyday, even the *worst* chase films had a few
things going for them.  Burt Reynolds and Dom DeLuise were usually
close.  And, sometimes, so were Dean Martin and Sammy Davis Jr.  There
were some buxom babes, some decent stunts, and a ton of bad jokes.
     THE CHASE *also* has a ton of bad jokes.  But instead of Burt
Reynolds and his hairpiece, there's Charlie Sheen and his
what-I-am-I-doing-here stare.  He's a man on the lam, wrongly convicted
for a robbery he didn't do.  He's kidnapped a daddy's rich daughter
(Swanson) and her red BMW.
     Hot on his heels are the cops as comic relief.  But don't look for
ol' Pink Eyes here.  Pop stars have given way to rock stars and Dean
Martin has been replaced by Henry Rollins.  Who sucks.  For added
"enjoyment," a couple Red Hot Chili Peppers wander through as a pair of
"Beavis and Butthead" types trying to capture Charlie.
     Writer/director Adam Rifkin doesn't have a clue on how to stage a
car chase.  His MTV-style quick-cuts make the action virtually
impossible to follow.  But does the director compensate with anything
even *resembling* snappy dialogue?
     With no decent dialogue *or* action to speak of, the film's saving
grace are a few good slams on media mentality.  Every so often, Rifkin
cuts to a tabloid-news program promoting something along the lines of
"Kidnapped at 100 MPH."  These are good bits that are boosted by a nifty
cameo that I won't reveal here.
     Most of this race is a drag.  Ray Wise and Claudia Christian are
scene-killers as the pompous parents.  Plot-holes are the size of
pot-holes, from exploding helicopters to disappearing vomit.  Or, my
favorite, a day that turns to night in under eight minutes.
     There's even a thrash-metal soundtrack to help accentuate the
negative.
     THE CHASE may be *someone's* idea of hip wit.  But it bears little
resemblance to those great chases of not-so-long-ago when a road film
was not highway robbery.

Author
James Berardinelli
     As an example of modern cinematic art, THE CHASE is an utter
failure.  As a character study, it can't get past the comic book
stage.  As a tightly plotted thriller, it's missing about half the
storyline.  But as a piece of unfettered, unpretentious entertainment,
it hits the bullseye.  In the past few weeks, I've seen a number of
movies that are unquestionably better, but few that I've enjoyed as
much.
     Wrongfully accused, arrested, and convicted of a bank robbery,
Jack Hammond (Charlie Sheen) has decided that he'll never get justice
from the legal system, and stages a jail break.  Luck isn't with him,
however, because his stolen VW gets ID'd by two cops when he stops for
gas and a pack of cigarettes, and he's forced to take the nearest
hostage.  This happens to be Natalie Voss (Kristy Swanson), the
daughter of billionaire Dalton Voss (Ray Wise), the "Donald Trump of
California."  Together in Natalie's red BMW, the two race south towards
Mexico, their relationship changing with every passing mile as an
ever-growing fleet of black-and- whites stays on their tail.
     THE CHASE is bursting with energy, almost to the point of an
overload.  Films that move at such a blindingly fast pace often exhaust
the audience long before the final credits roll.  Give writer/director
Adam Rifkin credit for recognizing when to let up a little to allow his
viewers an opportunity to catch their collective breaths.  THE CHASE is
one wild ride, but it won't leave you gasping.
     In addition to the impressively choreographed crash sequences,
Mr. Rifkin's major contribution is a script laden with wit and
satire.  His repeated jabs at action films, hostage dramas, and
especially the television news industry, are far more perceptive than
one might expect from a piece of cartoon fluff like this.  THE CHASE is
rarely serious about anything, and the humor ranges from amusing to
hilarious.
     One of the most incisive elements of this film is its presentation
of the one-upsmanship of the various news crews following the
fugitives.  One station sends their traffic helicopter in pursuit.
Another reporter stands by the side of the road to get the first
ground-level view of the chase.  A third cameraman straps himself to
the side of a speeding news van that pulls alongside the BMW, trying to
get a peek inside.  Then there is the usual assortment of vacuous
announcers, including a wonderfully droll cameo of Cary Elwes (as
anchorman Steve Horsegroovy) staring blankly into the camera.
     In the leading police car are officers Dobbs (Henry Rollins) and
Figus (Josh Mostel), along with a pair shooting footage for a COPS-like
"real drama" television program.  The interaction between the policemen
and their passengers lampoons this richly-deserving target.
     Charlie Sheen who, like Leslie Nielsen, seems to have found a
recent niche in comedy, works well in this role, and develops a
surprisingly effective chemistry with co-star Kristy Swanson.  One
might think that being confined to the front seat of a car would limit
their interaction, but as they move along the predictable route from
fear to empathy to love, it's surprising how few constraints there turn
out to be.
     Analyzing THE CHASE is a fruitless endeavor.  The movie never
pretends to be something that it isn't.  Whether your preference is to
focus on the caustic humor, the nonstop action, or both, the point is
the same.  Sit back, suspend all unnecessary brain activity, and start
munching on popcorn.  These ninety minutes will fly by.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Adam Rifkin is back in the driver seat for his third film.  Rifkin
directed the film NEVER ON TUESDAY (which I'm sorry I haven't seen) and the
surrealist comedy THE DARK BACKWARD (which I'm sorry I did see).  He is back
with THE CHASE.  Rifkin's talent is improving at high speed--faster, in
fact, then the chase in THE CHASE.  His latest does not have an incredibly
greasy-looking Judd Nelson with a third arm growing out of his back and does
not leave the audience with something akin to flu symptoms.  So Rifkin is
showing real signs of improvement.  Just not enough.
     The plot of THE CHASE is little more than the title might suggest.
Charlie Sheen plays Jack Hammond, a man running from the police but spotted
by them at a convenience store.  To escape he takes as hostage Natalie Voss
(played by Kristy Swanson) and flees only to be chased by the law and
several live-tv-news teams all the way to the Mexican border.  Along the way
he gets to know his hostage who turns out to be the daughter of the
"Californian Donald Trump," Dalton Voss (Ray Wise).  Some of the film's
satirical edge, in fact most of what works, is aimed at the news team and
the absurd risks they take for ratings, chasing along with--and often ahead
of--the police anxious to beat the competition to a story.
     This film is appears to want to be a madcap satire of a particular type
of film, much as AIRPLANE was for a different sub-genre, but in this case
neither the humor nor the action carries film.  The humor is all on a fairly
lukewarm level that is sometimes helped but more often hindered by Sheen's
deadpan serious delivery.  There are chuckles, but they are often miles
apart.  The action scenes are often mechanical and punctuated with overly
familiar-looking stunt crashes.  The premise seems to be that we are
watching a high-speed chase, but we never get much of a sense of speed.  We
see the two leads talking with the rear-projection showing the police cars
following them, but you rarely have the feel that the speed gets over the
speed limit.  Sheen is just not attentive enough to the road and the scenery
does not seem to go by all that fast.  That may seem like a picayune point,
but it gets in the way of the storytelling.  We do see some of the requisite
explosions and carnage--both fairly mechanical--but it doesn't seem clear
exactly why for the speeds shown.
     Sheen's acting is flat and dry throughout in a film in which there was
little real acting required.  Kristy Swanson, who played the title roles in
DEADLY FRIEND and BUFFY THE VAMPIRE SLAYER competes with Sheen to see who
can more underplay a role.  Trying his hand at acting is rock musician Henry
Rollins as one of the pursuing policemen who seems more interested in
impressing an interviewer riding along with him than in actually capturing
Hammond.
     This is a comedy whose engine seems unwilling to turn over and which
never manages to get all its sparkplugs to fire.  I give it a low 0 on the
-4 to +4 scale.

Author
Dragan Antulov
When I first saw THE CHASE, 1994 comedy written and directed
by Adam Rifkin, I was convinced that it was definitely
inspired by the chase on Los Angeles street - most
spectacular episode in the O.J. Simpson case. However, some
time ago I found, to my great surprise, that THE CHASE had
been released in March 1994, some three months before those
events. Thus, this rather insignificant film has the honour
of being one of the most sinister examples of life imitating
art.
Protagonist of this film is Jack Hammond (played by Charlie
Sheen), young man who was sentenced to twenty years of
prison for the crime he didn't commit. He escapes from
prison but he needs quick getaway car in order to cross
Mexican border. So he kidnaps Natalie Voss (played by Kristy
Swanson), steals her car and begins drive to the border,
followed by police. Since Natalie happens to be the daughter
of rich Dalton Voss (played by Ray Wise), media joins the
chase with TV crews boarding cars and helicopters and all
other suitable means of transportation. In the meantime,
Jack and Natalie, oblivious to the media circus around them,
are becoming friends and more than that.
Perhaps Adam Rifkin envisioned this film as bitter satire on
modern media, but in reality THE CHASE turned into typical
one-joke movie which went downhill as soon as protagonists
began their drive. From that point on, film is full of bad
and uninspired jokes (some involving bodily fluids or frozen
corpses), and capable actors like Ray Wise, Kristy Swanson
and Charlie Sheen must fight with lame dialogue (especially
in scenes featuring Henry Rollins in the role of policeman)
and their characters being one- dimensional caricatures.
Before the end credits (which, according to many, feature
the most hillarious scene of the film) the audience must
endure usually predictable plot and some obligatory, but in
the context of this film laughably implausible romantic
scenes. When the end comes after 94 minutes, THE CHASE
nevertheless looks like a complete waste of time.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
