Title
Review for Mortal Kombat: Annihilation (1997)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Afterburner
Rating (out of 10):  2 (or 5).  See review for further details.
        A movie like MORTAL KOMBAT: ANNIHILATION works (and must be
reviewed on) multiple levels.  First, there's the rampant usage of
Randian subtext that pervades the entire movie.  But occasionaly,
almost as if making an ironic, self-depreciating remark, the movie
tosses in clearly Marxist imagery.
        In all seriousness however, and to be fair to the movie, it
*is* necessary to provide two viewpoints: that of a movie watcher
unfamiliar (or only marginally familiar) with the whole Mortal Kombat
phenomenon, and that of a fan of the first movie and/or a fan of the
games.
        The first movie (MORTAL KOMBAT (1995)) concerned itself with a
martial arts tournament that would decide the fate of Earth (and it's
5 billion inhabitants).  The mortals won, and in theory this should
have prevented the Emperor Shao Khan from taking over the Earth.
Unfortunately, Shao Khan was a poor loser, and the very final scene in
MORTAL KOMBAT showed him arriving anyway, ready to take over the
planet, as our heroes assumed a fighting stance.
        The first movie was extraordinarily entertaining for those
(like myself) who are fans of the game.  I'd even go so far as to say
that many folks who didn't know about the game probably enjoyed the
movie.  The writers and directors knew the limitations of both their
cast and of the basic story itself, and they didn't try to
overachieve.  There were a lot of really cool fight scenes (with
really cool accompanying music), intersperesed with some distracting
(but ultimately non-intrusive) bits of fluff passing itself off as a
plot.  And, as we know, the movie was a smashing success at the box
office.
        MORTAL KOMBAT: ANNIHILATION picks up precisely where that
movie left off, with some introductory exposition to clue in those who
may not have seen the first movie.  Shao Khan has decided that he's
going to take over the Earth *anyways*, and to Hell with some silly
rule about mortals winning the tournament.  Thereafter follows
approximately 85 minutes of film that alternates between being
confused, being trite, being silly, and being just plain stupid.  One
gets the general impression that the producers of the movie thought
"Hey, that last movie was such a success that we can get more money
and make a *real* movie now."  Too bad they didn't simply stick with
the formula from the first movie.
        I could write volumes about the things that are wrong with
this picture, but here are the high points:
        *  The acting is truly bad.  Sandra Hess (playing the Sonya
Blade character) is particularly execrable, especially in scenes where
she tries to convince us that she loved  Johnny Cage (a character from
the first movie who gets greased at the beginning of this movie).
        *  In one of the worst pieces of mis-casting I think I've
*ever* seen, James Remar plays Raiden, the God of Thunder.  In the
first movie, Christopher Lambert played Raiden and played his
character as though he was in on the joke:  A French actor playing a
Japanese thunder god being revered by Chinese mystics.  
        I generally like it when actors are cast against type (Tim
"Tiny" Lister, Jr. being cast as the President of the U.S. in THE
FIFTH ELEMENT, for example), and Remar has always been one of my
favorite "utility" actors  But he's so totally wrong for this part
that he doesn't even have the luxury of amused self-awareness.
        *  There are too many characters that are introduced as being
potentially important, but then never seen again.
        *  There are a number of completely meaningless story
sidetracks, including a muddled scene where Liu Kang (Robin Shou)
seeks out Nightwolf (Litefoot), has a mystical hallucination, and then
wanders off with Jade (Irina Pantaeva).
        ...unless you're a huge fan of the games and/or the first
movie.  In that case, the following critiques also apply:
        *  Sandra Hess, while being an even worse actress than
Bridgette Wilson (who played Sonya Blade in the first movie), is much
more convincing as a fighter.  Wilson looked like she was simply
mimicing some movements taught to her by the fight choreographer.
Hess looks like she actually knows some martial arts, and puts
together a much more believable fight scene.
        *  In the fights, each of the characters does at least *one*
thing they do in the game (and often more).  Sonya does her "Kiss of
Death," Jax does his "Earthquake," Liu Kang does his "Animality," and
so on.  A big bonus for those of us who were looking for similar moves
in the first movie and found them only rarely.
        *  There aren't as many fight scenes in this movie as there
were in the first, because the folks making the movie mistakenly try
to hang a more robust plot in between.  Silly, silly folks.  And the
lamest fight involved two of the women in what turns into a
mud-wrestling match.  Lame and so obviously sexist even I (politically
incorrect, for the most part) noticed and remarked upon it.
        *  The special effects are generally better, except for the
final fight scene between the Emporer and Liu Kang in which both
perform their "Animalities."  Motaro and Sheeva are both more
convincing and lifelike than Goro was in the first movie.
        For folks like myself who loved the first movie and enjoy the
games, I give this a 5.  You'll probably like it, but not nearly as
much as you liked the first one.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Robin Shou, Talisa Soto, James Remar, Brian Thompson, Sandra Hess,
Lynn Red Williams, Irina Panteva
Director: John R. Leonetti
Screenplay: Brent V. Friedman and Bryce Zabel
Anyone who is a MORTAL KOMBAT fan will probably testify to the fact that
it is more enjoyable to play the game, than to actually watch the movie.
One doesn't get the same adrenaline rush when watching butts get kicked,
than if actively kicking butt themselves. Perhaps this is where the
future of cinema lies, with active participation from the viewer. Plus
the fact that computer game\kid's TV, never seem to transfer well from
small screen to big screen i.e. Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, Street
Fighter, Care Bears, The Power Rangers, whose popularity is as fleeting
as the change of seasons.
Much hasn't changed since the original MORTAL KOMBAT. Both movies have
plenty of well choreographed fight sequences, but when this is all it
has going for it, then MK2 becomes more than a tad tedious. The plot is
not surprisingly lost in the commotion of kicks and punches. Making this
an ill-balanced movie that comes to an abrupt end when the ideas
suddenly run dry. MORTAL KOMBAT was about saving the earth by winning a
fantastic tournament between out worlds. In MK2, all the rules are
broken and the reason it is called ANNIHLATION is because there are no
rules, feel free to kill anyone you wish.
Liu Kang (Robin Shou) the hero is back. I cannot understand why he
doesn't shoot fireballs like in the MK game. His love interest is
Princess Kitana (Talisa Soto), who only gets to use those deadly fans
once before spending most of her time locked in a cage. Rayden (James
Remar originally Christopher Lambert), does very little except say
sickly, chirpy things like ‘I love humans', ‘You must believe in
yourself' and ‘We are family.' Sonya Blade (Sandra Hess) has her moment
of distinction mud fighting with Mileena (Dana Hee), whilst Jax (Lyn
Williams), who is White American in the game takes a genetic turn and
becomes Black American in the movie. Shao Kahn (Brian Thompson) is as
frightening as a big bully and is too easily defeated in the end.
If you want to relive your MORTAL KOMBAT fantasies, then my suggestion
is to miss the movie and just play the game again.
Timothy Voon
e-mail: stirling@netlink.com.au
Movie Archives http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Tim+Voon
Hugues Bouclier's Movies in Melbourne
http://www.labyrinth.net.au/~bouclier/week/movies.html

Author
Matt Petras
The world is saved in the Mortal Kombat tournament, but sore
losers will always be sore losers. So upon loosing the Outer world
decides to invade the mortal realm and invade earth. Our hero's from
the previous movie have to defend the realm. 
OK, the concept is simple, and I stated it above that is about
as simple as a plot can be. This plot even fails at that. I think that
this whole script was written in about 20 min. Nothing in the plot
seems to fit, all the scenes seem to lurch forward at an unsightly
gaint. A lot of the movie will be obviously be based on fighting, but
that does not mean that there can't be anything resembling a plot.
There seems to be a lot of rather random fight scenes that simply
occur out of thin air. Also as the simple fact that the forces of
darkness have ARMIES running around after the hero's and the all they
do is bump into the generals... *YAWN* Too much of this movie was
lumped together bits and pieces that would have suited other movies.
There is a fight scene where Sonya, and some female(unnamed rather
major character) have something of a mud wrestling match.. well at the
very least mud kickboxing. I'm sorry but its pretty bad when you have
to throw something like that into the movie to maintain attention.
There is no lead in into the movie what so ever, you are essentially
left off where the previous one ends. this is poor style because you
cant expect everyone to have seen the first movie.  The plot in this
movie doesn't seem to have much direction and it affects the rest of
the movie because of that.  
This movie is essentially a breeding ground for special
effects, well at least it has the potential to be that. This movie had
special effects, albeit quite bad ones. Most of the effects here are
vain attempts, the opening sequence and a few other isolated spots
have well placed well choreographed special effects. Most of the
effects in this movie are either over done and terribly misplaced or
underdone and again misplaced, this is due to the lack of a plot or
any semblance of one. Also the underground passageway, was not only
misplaced, in the wrong movie and badly done, I think it was a more
than vain attempt to throw something into the movie that totally
didn't belong there. Next time you see a mortal person turn into a
dragon in a movie and it looks bad... run, it might be another
installment of Mortal Kombat. Most of the fight scenes are also badly
choreographed, most people can't take a beating like that and then get
up, let alone take on more people. I know this is a movie based on a
video game. But seriously give the audience some credit. 
I won't comment on the acting, because there simply was none
in this movie. At least they had the foresight to cast attractive
females, that at least should keep some men in the theater.
(Personally I would have left it I wouldn't have had to wait for my
ride.) I wouldn't go see this movie if I were anyone. I think that the
video game upon which this whole movie is based is more exciting.
Please save your money, throw it out if you must spend it. But do not
see this movie under and circumstances. Go see Aliens if you want
action. The only good thins in the movie were the music(suited my
tastes) and the end... you know when the movie stops. I will not even
rate this movie, that is how bad I think it is. I personally have
never seen a movie this bad. I'm sure that most people could make a
better one. 

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Robin Shou, Talisa Soto, James Remar, Brian Thompson, Sandra Hess, 
      Lynn Red Williams, Irina Panteva
Director: John R. Leonetti
Producer: Lawrence Kassanoff
Screenplay: Brent V. Friedman and Bryce Zabel
Cinematography: Matthew F. Leonetti
Music: George S. Clinton
U.S. Distributor: New Line Cinema
     I have said it before (SUPER MARIO BROTHERS) and I'll say it again:  
making a movie based on a video game is a very, very bad idea.  Making a 
sequel to a movie based on a video game is an even worse concept, so it 
comes as no surprise that MORTAL KOMBAT: ANNIHILATION is easily one of 
the poorest entries of the year.  This film has no story, no characters, 
and no coherence.  It's just an excuse for a series of tedious, 
repetitious fight scenes that have been staged with no hint whatsoever 
of originality.  Where's Jackie Chan when you need him?
     Since the first MORTAL KOMBAT made around $70 million, I suppose a 
second was inevitable.  But, as bankrupt of intelligence and 
sophistication as the original was, it was a classic compared to this 
followup.  The two MORTAL KOMBAT movies have a key characteristic in 
common:  both were made for viewers with the attention span of a gnat.  
The intended audience isn't video game fans, or even those who play an 
occasional game of MORTAL KOMBAT -- these films are going for the die-
hards who spend hours each week upping their high scores.  Presumably, 
that means primarily pre-teen and teenage boys (hence the gratuitous 
shot down the front of Sandra Hess' tee-shirt).  
     The plot of MORTAL KOMBAT: ANNIHILATION is so basic that it can be 
described in two lines.  The evil sorcerer Shau-Kahn (Brian Thompson) 
has used his powers to open the portholes between his dimension and that 
of Earth.  In six days, the world will be destroyed if our group of five 
intrepid heroes -- Liu Kang (Robin Shou), Katrina (Talisa Soto), Jax 
(Lynn Red Williams), Sonya Blade (Sandra Hess), and Rayden (James Remar) 
-- can't stop his scheme by following him to his fortress and engaging 
him and his generals in Mortal Kombat.  This "story" is all the excuse 
that's needed for about 12 battle sequences which come one after another 
with only an occasional break in the action.
     If the fights were presented with any degree of flair or 
originality, this could be a fun movie.  Unfortunately, they're dull and 
monotonous.  Once you've seen one, you've seen them all.  To make 
matters worse, ANNIHILATION's special effects are so bad that they're 
laughable.  Then there's George S. Clinton's grating techno-rock score 
which blares full blast during each of the fight sequences, making them 
even more difficult to sit through.
     Many of the actors from the first MORTAL KOMBAT opted out of the 
sequel.  The only returning faces belong to Robin Shou (last seen 
opposite Chris Farley in BEVERLY HILLS NINJA) and former Bond girl 
Talisa Soto.  You know a movie is scraping the bottom of the barrel when 
even a wooden star like Christopher Lambert stays away.  His role is 
filled with little enthusiasm by James Remar.  The only other performer 
of any note is Brian Thompson, who has a long resume of decidedly 
unimpressive titles.  For him, this will be just another in a long line 
of forgettable films.
     One of the great paradoxes of modern day movies is how so many 
action films can be deadly dull.  MORTAL KOMBAT: ANNIHILATION is an 
example of this situation.  The reason?  It's necessary to care about 
the characters for their battles to have any meaning, but everyone in 
this picture is a lifeless figure representing a group of pixels on a 
video screen.  MORTAL KOMBAT should have been left as a video game.  As 
a movie, this particular edition is close to unwatchable.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: A step down from the earlier movie: not as enjoyable, not as
well-done, but a pleasant enough timekiller.
Readers with 85 minutes just burning a hole in their pockets will probably
do a lot worse than to catch MORTAL KOMBAT ANNIHILATION, but on the other
hand, they could do a lot better -- like watch the first movie in the
series. MKA is a brave attempt to follow up the surprisingly fun original,
but it doesn't quite work.
MKA picks up *exactly* where the previous movie left off, with denizens of
the outer dimensions breaking the cosmic laws of Mortal Kombat (the better
to invade earth). Two of the first movie's characters -- Liu Kang and Sonya
-- are back, as well as Raiden, but both Raiden and Sonya are played by
different actors. The original Sonya was Bridgette Wilson; the new one is
the less engaging Sandra Hess. Even worse is the cycling-out of Christopher
Lambert as Raiden (a big loss), and the substitution of the more stolid
James Remar -- a good actor, but not quite what's needed here.
However, the movie does try to make up for what it loses in personality by
stirring some new characters into the mix. The best of the bunch is Lynn
Williams (a former American Gladiator regular) as Jax, who steals every
scene he's in with his glib comebacks and his cybernetic arms.
There's also more liberal use of effects -- especially Hong Kong-style
wire-fighting moves, which give the movie's fighting scenes a different
flavor than the original. In the original, the fights were more
straightforward and looked more like they sprung from credible efforts on
the part of the fighters. Here, it's completely over the top and hence less
directly compelling.
The movie does manage to hum along nicely without getting boring; there's
always something neat to look at. But it doesn't pack quite the same level
of genial joy that the first one did. Looks like pulling off this sort of
thing is a lot harder than people admit.

Author
Josh Hammonds
Mortal Kombat: Annihilation
A rather lengthy movie review by Josh Hammonds
Capsule: Not as bad a sequel as Crow 2 or Batman & Robin, but still horribly
putrid, cheesy and ill-conceived.  This one belongs in Saturday morning
cartoons...
Extended Review:
You know, about halfway through this movie, I realized that if you hacked out
everything except the fight scenes, you'd have a damn fine 35 minutes or so of
flashy, Hong Kong style martial arts.  Beautifully choreographed by Robin
Shou, who also plays Liu Kang, the fight scenes are both mind-blowing and
graceful, acrobatic enough to make Olympic gymnasts weep.  This is what made
the original so fun, but unfortunately for the sequel, we are without the
frenetic directorial style of Paul Anderson.  Instead, they got John R.
Leonetti, the cinematographer for the original Mortal Kombat.  Not a good
choice.  While the fight scenes are brutal and eye-popping, the rest of the
movie looks like standard made for TV fare.  The acting is sub-par, which I
could endure if it were not for A.) the director's style, B.) the special
effects, & C.) the treatment of the story and characters.
A.) Mr. Leonetti should go back to lighting, in my opinion.  I could say
dozens of bad things about him: he way overuses slow-motion, he has no eye for
action, he can't get even mediocre performances out of actors, and so on.  But
by far his worst move was the way he treated jumping.  Apparantly, everybody
can now fly.  Hell, I'm all for the occaisional gravity defying flip kick and
whatnot, but not when it happens every few minutes, and is done so poorly.
Better jumping and acrobatics has been seen in Xena: Warrior Princess.  In
short, they should have gotten Paul Anderson back.  Or at least let Robin Shou
direct...
B.) Unlike the first one, whose SFX were vibrant and somewhat realistic,
MK:A's special effects are bland, fake looking, and overall just plain bad.  I
counted at least half a dozen times that blue-screening was painfully obvious.
Had this movie been made in the 80's, it would have been ground-breaking.  But
in today's industry, it doesn't even look finished.  
C.) Now for the _REALLY_ bad parts.  I admit, I'm an avid fan of the Mortal
Kombat series.  The games are amusing diversions, an easy way to work off
stress and anger.  The first movie was a mindlessly fun thrillride.  This
could have been a really cool movie.  It isn't.  The writers apparantly deemed
it necessary to lower the target audience from teens to preschoolers.  Some of
the plot elements are just plain stupid.  How stupid?  Take, for instance, how
our heroes move around.  They use giants spheres the roll around underground,
supposedly at thousands of miles per hour...oh boy...
Even worse is the treatment of secondary characters.  Blink and you'll miss
'em.  Most characters had more depth in the video games.  If you thought
Batman & Robin was bad about this, you ain't seen nothin' yet.  A good 75% of
the characters are introduced, kick somebody around a bit, then either die or
are forgotten about.  There's no explanation at all for this.  And for the
final blasphemy, the fight that all the fans were waiting rabidly for, the
fight hyped to be the most intricate of the movie, lasted about 3 minutes and
then just sort of...ended.  It almost made me weep.  
To sum it all up, rent it on video, and fast-forward through everything except
the fight scenes.

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1997. Director - John R. Leonetti, Screenplay - Brent V. Friedman & 
Bryce Zabel, Story - Lawrence Kasanoff, John Tobias & Joshua Wexler, 
Based on the Game Created by Tobias & Ed Boon, Producer - Kasanoff, 
Photography - Matthew F. Leonetti, Music - George S. Clinton, Visual 
Effects Supervisors - Chuck Comisky & Alison Savitch, Visual Effects - 
The Digital Magic Co, Flat Earth Productions (Supervisor - Kevin 
Kutchaver), Kleiser-Walczak Construction Co, Murod Digital Images 
(Supervisor - Evan Richs), Optical Illusions & Vision Crew Ltd 
(Supervisor - Evan Jacob), Costume Effects Supervisor - Philip 
Goldsworthy, Special Effects Supervisors - Ron Troti & Joss Williams, 
Prosthetic Makeup Design - Gary Pollard, Makeup Consultant - Nick 
Dudman, Production Design - Charles Wood. Production Company - Threshold 
Entertainment/New Line Cinema.
Robin Shou (Liu Kang), Sandra Hess (Lieutenant Sonya Blade), Talisa Soto 
(Princess Kitana), James Remar (Lord Rayden), Lynn Red Williams 
(Lieutenant Jackson `Jax' Briggs), Brian Thompson (Shao Khan), Irina 
Pantaevna (Jade), Musetta Vander (Queen Sindel), Raynor Scheine 
(Shinnok), Deron McBee (Motaro), Marjean Holden (Sheeva), Litefoot 
(Nightwolf), Keith Cooke (Sub Zero)
Plot: The Mortal Kombat has been won, meaning that Earth is safe for 
this generation, but the rules are suddenly broken by the warlord Shao 
Khan who invades the Earth with an army from Outworld, intending to 
destroy the world in six days time and merge the two realms into one. 
The Earth's fate lies in the hands of Liu Kang, Sonya Blade, Kitana and 
Rayden who must discover new fighting skills and new allies if they are 
to defeat Shao Khan.
Before 1995's `Mortal Kombat', the selection of films based on video and 
computer games had been an extremely deplorable one, with only the 
woeful likes of `Super Mario Bros.' (1993), `Street Fighter' (1994) and 
`Double Dragon' (1994) on offer. But `Mortal Kombat' succeeded in 
contradicting the trend to become an unabashedly, unpretentiously 
enjoyable all-out action vehicle. And it did so by dint of the single 
blindingly obvious thing that these other videogame adaptions somehow 
neglected - it approximated the very style of the videogame itself by 
offering up wall-to-wall action, all run over by a pounding techno 
soundtrack. Now comes this slightly lesser but no less enjoyable sequel. 
Anything that remotely resembles plot has been stripped to a bare 
minimum to provide the film with a series of fantastic martial arts 
set-pieces that are slung together in the most directly linear 
connection possible. The downside of this is that the film tends to all 
blur into one single shapeless action sequence. Nevertheless it is the 
sheer fantastique bravado of the fight sequences where the kombatants 
battle centaurs, four-armed opponents, use razor-tipped hair-braids, 
unleash ice and sonic voice blasts and launch missiles built into their 
chests that gives it a uniquely watchable edge.


Author
Doug Skiles
MORTAL KOMBAT: ANNIHILATION Starring: Robin Shou (Liu Kang), Tailsa Soto
(Princess Kitana) Directed by: John R. Leonetti, Written by: Brent V.
Friedman and Bryce Zabel from a story by Lawrence Kasanoff, John Tobias,
and Joshua Wexler.  Rated PG-13 by the MPAA for some strong language
and  plenty of violence, mostly of the martial arts variety.
*Bah-buh-bah-bah-buhbuh, bah-buh-bah-bah-bahbuh, bah-bah-bah-buh-bahbuh,
bah-bah-buhbahbuhbuhbah*
Okay, so chances are you've heard that now-famous outcry and the techno
music that follows it, either on commercials for the movies, or the
video games, or on the soundtracks for the games or movies, or in the
movies themselves.  
In this, the sequel to the original MORTAL KOMBAT film, titled MORTAL
KOMBAT: ANNIHILATION, that theme music is still intact, and, just like
the last time, bolts into our ears right from the New Line Cinema logo. 
However, it's almost the only thing that's still around from the first
film.
In order to review MORTAL KOMBAT: ANNIHILATION, one must have an opinion
of the original, since this essentially just tries to be more of the
same.
Okay.  I truly liked MORTAL KOMBAT.  Yes, I really did.  Maybe the plot
was sort of basic, but it was *fun*.  It was one of the most *fun*
movies of the summer of 1995.  It had some funny dialouge, some
appealing actors (and some not-so-much), some nice effects, plenty of
extremely well-choreographed martial arts battles, and a cool, pumping
soundtrack.  And, of course, it was directed very well by the talented
Paul Anderson, who could have a great career as long as he avoids crap
like EVENT HORIZON from now on.
Now the sequel is upon us.  The martial arts battles aren't as well
choreographed, but they're still pretty good.  Unfortunately, the
directing is nowhere near as good as in the original, and it dilutes the
quality of the fights.  The villian isn't nearly as imposing, many of
the original actors have been replaced for the worse, the effects might
have been impressive in 1992, it's filled with extraneous subplots and
characters, and, well, basically this movie just plain sucks.
Robin Shou is honestly trying here.  You can tell.  He wants this to
really not suck.  Sandra Hess wants to have an acting career, that's
obvious... so it's good news for her that she's better than the original
actress behind Sonya Blade (Bridgette Wilson).  In fact, she's not bad
at all.  I wouldn't mind horribly if I saw her again... in some other
film, of course.  
Talisa Soto seems sort of bored with this.  She obviously beefed up her
martial arts training, but when she's acting, she's rather stiff, just
like in the original.  Of course, that's Kitana's character for you, I
guess.  As a side note, her sudden romance with Liu Kang is utterly
ludicrous, and has no place here - it's just another piece of excess
baggage for the plot to carry.  The only person putting forth anything
resembeling effort is Litefoot, who plays Nightwolf, at least for the
whopping two minutes that he's on the screen.  This guy deserves
better.  James Remar replaces Christopher Lambert as Rayden, and does a
shoddy job.  Lambert was perfect for this role.  However, Remar isn't
given much to work with here, anyway.
Our villian, Shao Kahn (Brian Thompson) shouts a lot, but that doesn't
mean he's threatening.  Kahn's father is more interesting, but doesn't
do much.
Johnny Cage, the most fun of the characters in the original, is played
by another actor as well (Linden Ashby is having fun doing "Melrose
Place" by now), and is killed in the first five minutes.  This is pure
idiocy at work, people.  There's no reason for his death.  It just opens
up for another comic relief character to appear, Jax, played by Lynn
"Red" Williams, previously known as "Sabre" on American Gladiators.  He
gets a few funny lines, but is no where near as amusing as Johnny Cage
was.  Williams just tries too hard to be Will Smith.  He seems to have
some talent buried in him that briefly shines through here and there,
but overall, it's not really on display here.
Tons of characters show up for no reason, and bring up sub-plots that
have no point.  One example is when Sub-Zero (Keith Cooke) appears.  He
states that the Sub-Zero that Liu Kang killed in the original was his
brother, and that a robot, Smoke, has been reprogrammed to go after
Kang, instead of original target, Sub-Zero himself.  Why was the robot
going after Subbie?  Why was it reprogrammed?  Why did Sub-Zero bother
to save Kang?  Why did he take up the mantle of his brother?  How does
he do those cool ice manuvers?  Why do none of the writers of this movie
care to tell us any of this?  Sub-Zero is off the screen about three
minutes after he appears, and never comes back.  What was the point? 
Other characters, like Rain (Tyrone Wiggins) and Mileena (Dana Hee), pop
up in gaudy costumes and don't even last the three minutes that Sub-Zero
does.  And who honestly cares about the woman that shows up calling
herself Jade (Irina Pantaeva)?  This is worse than the "Street Fighter"
movie's overflow of characters.  What were they thinking?
Considering the advancements in effects since the original KOMBAT, it's
also distressing that the effects in this sequel are rather shoddy.  In
fact, we had some movies that had better CGI effects back in 1992, such
as TERMINATOR 2 and ALIEN 3.  Oh well.  Some things in this movie seemed
to be tossed in just because they allowed the chance for cheesy
effects.  C'mon, did we really need that lame "animality" sub-plot?
At least the soundtrack succeeds in doing what the original's did: it
makes hard rock and techno sound good and fun by setting it to martial
arts battles, and making those genres of music sound good is not a
horribly easy feat.  But still, the original's is better.
Overall, this is just another bad sequel.  It's about on the level of
this year's BATMAN & ROBIN, and that's really a shame.  The whole plot
is a jumble - it's tough to care much about what's going on.  The first
one was fun, but this is just a big mess.  It looks like 1995's MORTAL
KOMBAT remains the only truly *good* video game-based film so far.  The
mistakes here are so obvious.  This should've been better. 
Feel free to send comments or questions to rskiles@mail.win.org

Author
Brian Takeshita
When you've run out of old TV shows to turn into movies, I guess you
try video games.  Why did I go to see MORTAL KOMBAT:  ANNIHILATION?
The quest to seek an answer to this query may prove a better movie
that the one I just saw.  This film was a bunch of fighting, yelling,
special effects, and bad acting set to an oppressive techno music
soundtrack.
The plot is fairly simple:  A portal has opened between our world and
the "Outworld", allowing evil forces commanded by Shao Kahn (Brian
Thompson) to wreak havoc and attempt to destroy humanity.  The good
guys, led by sorcerer Rayden (James Remar) and human mortal Liu Kang
(Robin Shou), must take the fight to Outworld, where the fate of both
worlds will be determined.  Here's the catch:  They must reunite
Princess Katana (Talia Soto), who's on the good side, with her
resurrected mother Queen Sindel (Musetta Vander), who's on the bad
side, for their love for each other will close the portal and ensure
humanity's safety for another generation.  How this is supposed to
work, I still have no idea, but I liked Katana's line, "I knew love
would keep us together," since that Captain and Tennille song ran
through my head and I got a good laugh.
There are some seriously stupid things in this movie.  Take, for
example, a transportation system which utilizes the "inner winds",
generated by Earth's magma flows.  You get in this metal ball which
transports you through underground tunnels really fast.  How fast? As
Katana says, "You will be moving so fast, it will be as if you are not
moving at all."  What?  Later, Sonya Blade (Sandra Hess) goes to find
Jax (Lynn "Red" Williams, otherwise known as "Saber" on TV's American
Gladiators) at a medical research facility on the island of Oahu.  How
do we know this is where she went?  There's a sign on the facility's
perimeter fence that reads:  Medical Research Facility - Oahu, Hawaii.
Remember, this is not a caption, but an actual sign.  I guess the
location is on there for all those medical researchers who keep
forgetting where they are.
There's a lot of major flipping action, too.  The first encounter
between good and evil shows Kahn and Rayden swiftly arching though the
air toward one another.  Do they land and immediately get into the
fighting?  Does one of them land first and catch the other off guard?
Do they collide in mid-air?  No, apparently they flip toward each
other so they can talk without having to yell from far away.  Why did
they need those metal balls to travel?  Everyone could have just
flipped from Point A to Point B.
I have to admit, the fight scenes are pretty good, although you can
tell they are heavily enhanced by digital effects and fly wires,
allowing the characters to surpass the limits of the human body and
the laws of physics.  The movie's thrills are derived from these
scenes and most of the audience responses are on the visceral level
when someone gets trashed really badly.  "Ouch" was the most common
expletive heard when I screened this one.  You could tell that the
filmmakers knew in advance that fights, not plot, would be the main
draw, since dialog is apparently in the film just to get from one
fight to the next.  It seems that's all there is in this movie.  Maybe
it is.
As I had mentioned, the acting is bad.  There's not one solid
performance in the film, although Williams as Jax was pretty funny.
After a fight between Sonya and one of the bad guys degenerates into
female mud wrestling, Jax says, "You look good in mud.  No, really,
you do."  Remar plays Rayden with an inconsistency which makes it hard
to take his character seriously, and Shou is relatively emotionless as
Liu Kang.  Brian Thompson, who has played good guys, bad guys, and
even an alien on TV's The X-Files, but always some muscle-bound
behemoth, is your average evil demi-god, but it's more the script's
fault than his own that he doesn't have anything original to say.
The one really impressive thing about this movie is that there is not
one swear word in the whole hour and a half.  Another thing which
should be noted is that for all its punching and kicking, blood only
appears in one scene.  All in all, MORTAL KOMBAT:  ANNIHILATION is
loud, violent, shallow, and marketed toward kids.  Hey, just like the
video game!

Author
Steve Kong
My mom taught me that if I haven't got anything good to say about
something, then I should keep quiet. It'll be hard to find something good
to say about Mortal Kombat: Annihilation, so I'll have to break that rule
for just one review.
I enjoyed the original Mortal Kombat movie, it was a fun movie. When it
made a bucket-load of money, I figure the studio heads also began loving
the movie, and what do studio heads do when they see a movie that grosses
so high? Produce a sequel of course!
What got me worried about Mortal Kombat: Annihilation was that there was no
press showing before the movie was released, meaning that the all the local
papers were not able to review the movie. This usually means only one
thing: the studio heads want this movie to make lots of money based on
namesake but they themselves have found that the movie was so bad that they
though it would harbor lots of bad reviews -- which might spoil opening
weekend grosses.
My fears were, unfortunately, proven correct. Mortal Kombat: Annihilation
is a horrible movie in which the plot plays out like a teen-ager with a
pocket full of quarters. The story is paper thin -- the gateways to some
evil world is opened up again and bad guys come to Earth to try to steal
the planet for reasons unknown, a group of fighters must fight the bad guys
to win back Earth. The movie moves from one fight scene to another taking
no breaks. At the length that the movie runs, after the first few fights I
was numb to the uniqueness of the heavily choreographed fighting. The
fighting scenes are hampered by some pretty bad special effects. Blue
screen effects standout like a sore thumb.
For the price of admission a Mortal Kombat fan could play a few games of
Mortal Kombat and have more fun than this painful piece of film. This film
should be skipped both on the big screen and on video. This is a horrible
attempt at trying to milk a pretty good original movie. Stay far away from
this one.

Author
Homer Yen
Movies based on video games, such as Street Fighter or Mario Bros.,
have never generated much interest at the box office.  But when the
first Mortal Kombat movie came out in 1995, it did surprisingly well.
With a simple story, a pulsating soundtrack, and lots of awesomely
choreographed fight scenes, the movie moved quickly and displayed lots
of energy.  It got my vote for 'the movie where I expected the least
and got the most'.  And, if you haven't had the opportunity, I would
definitely recommend that you see it on video.
In the world of Mortal Kombat, based on the popular arcade game, dark
forces from Outworld try to infiltrate Earth's realm with the ulimate
goal of total conquest and the destruction of humanity.  The Mortal
Kombat refers to a competition, fought by human mortals against
Outworld's minions, which if won, will guarantee Earth's safety for
another generation.  MK2 picks up almost immediately after the humans
return victoriously from competition.  Despite their victory, however,
a gateway has somehow opened, and Outworld continues in its quest to
conquer Earth.  Outworld's warriors  include an impressive collection
of fighters, including Shao Kahn, Mintoro (a centaur), Sheeva (a
four-armed ogre), and Sindel.  Earth's mortal warriors, under the
leadership of the benevolent God, Lord Rayden, includes Liu Kang,
Princess Kitana, Sonya Blade and Jax, who must fight against
Outworld's forces.
It's an easy enough premise, but unfortunately (very unfortunately),
the writers try to do too much with the movie.  It is only a video
game, after all, but the on-screen version tries to go beyond it's
comic book boundaries by adding depth, a conceptualization of
self-worth, and worst of all, a love story.  This becomes very
awkward, because all of the players are fighters and nothing more.
They are likable and impressive when they are showcasing their martial
arts and fighting skills, but look extremely awkward and uncomfortable
when they are required to actually act.  This becomes embarrassingly
apparent, for example, as the movie tries to develop a romantic bond
between Liu Kang and Princess Kitana.  
The original MK was smart in letting the players do what they do best.
They spoke little, but fought a lot.  Thus, the movie was easy to
digest.  However, MK2 tries to give these players a certain amount of
depth, an element that was lacking in the first movie, but the attempt
here fails miserably.  This uneasy feeling is readily apparent, for
example, whenever you hear Lord Rayden speak.  Not only does he talk
in riddles and offer enigmatic (e.g. useless) advice, but he speaks so
slowly as if to simulate infinite wisdom.  Try reading this half as
fast, and you'll hear what I mean.
But the movie is not a complete fatality.  Fight scenes are
well-choreographed, highlighted by terrific acrobatics and agility.
And players of the game will be rewarded with the inclusion of
practically every character from the video game, although their screen
time amounts to nothing more than a cameo.  Even if you're not
familiar with the video game, each fighter has their own costume and
unique weaponry to easily differentiate themselves.  But it's just too
little of what movie-goers and especially fans of the game will
expect.
Oddly, the inclusion of the human element actually pollutes the purity
of the Mortal Kombat essence.  And the poor acting results in a
muddled movie that offers the viewing audience little chance for
survival.  (I am now talking very slowly as if to simulate infinite
wisdom).  Rent the first one, but the sequel is for Kombat fans only.

Author
David Sunga
Screenplay written by: Brent Friedman and Bryce Zabel (original story
written by Lawrence Kasanoff, Joshua Wexler, and John Tobias).
Starring: Robin Shou, Taliso Soto, James Remar, Sandra Hess, Lynn "Red"
Williams
Synopsis:
This is not a sentimental movie, a 'date' movie, or a thriller. It's the
sequel to ‘Mortal Kombat,' a 1995 movie based on a popular video game.
In the original ‘Mortal Kombat' an immortal named Lord Rayden chose
three heroes - -  nice Hong Kong guy Liu Kang, SWAT team leader Sonya
Blade, and movie star Johnny Cage - - to represent the planet earth in a
high stakes interdimensional martial arts tournament called Mortal
Kombat. Talisa Soto played Kitana, the princess from another dimension
who helped the heroes succeed. In this sequel, ‘Mortal Kombat:
Annihilation,' no sooner do the victorious heroes return to earth with
their friend Princess Kitana than another crisis presents itself. 
Shao-Kahn, the evil emperor of Outworld, has hatched a plot to kill Lord
Rayden and the heroes, and take over the earth by merging it with
another dimension.  Shao-Kahn kills Johnny, captures Kitana to set a
death trap for the heroes, and then sets about destroying the earth with
rocket-launching techno-ninjas, a zombified queen, a centaur creature,
scorpion monsters, martial arts armies, and evil siblings. Meanwhile the
heroes enlist the aid of Sonya Blade's old SWAT team pal Jax, and start
kicking booty. Will good triumph over evil?
Opinion: 
This is the kind of movie that adolescent guys will love. If you liked
the first ‘Mortal Kombat,' with it's hyperactive high-kicking male and
female leads, you'll like this movie, which emphasizes state-of-the-art
special effects, great fight photography, and martial arts choreography,
and de-emphasizes a confusing mythic plot. The visual "oomph" emphasis
is probably due to that fact that director John Leonetti is best known
for photography - - he was the director of photography on ‘The Mask' and
on ‘Mortal Kombat,' while his brother Matthew shot ‘Star Trek: First
Contact.' ‘Mortal Kombat: Annihilation' uses an eclectic blend of fresh
fight choreography from a number of different fighting arts involving
plenty of aerial kicks and trampoline-style spinning jumps. The CG
(computer generated) characters manage to do decent fight scenes as
well. In other words, this movie puts American fight choreography up
there with Hong Kong wu shu. For Asian-Americans and for Hollywood,
‘Mortal Kombat: Annihilation' will be a test of how willing the American
public is to pay money to view an Asian movie protagonist. Producer
Larry Kasanoff, who also produced  ‘Terminator 2' is producing this
film.
Stars: 
Robin Shou, the leading man in ‘Mortal Kombat' and ‘Mortal Kombat:
Annihiliation' was born in Hong Kong but moved to Los Angeles at age
eleven and obtained a degree in civil engineering from CSU Los Angeles.
He worked for a year and half as a soil engineer, but eventually moved
to Hong Kong, became a movie stuntman, and finally worked his way into
playing villains. After nine years of Hong Kong movies, he went to a
friend's barbecue in California and met an agent, who suggested that
Robin audition for ‘Mortal Kombat.' Robin's martial arts style is wu
shu, a cinematic mixture of martial arts forms and dramatic
presentation. As a college he became so excited about wushu that he sold
his car and skipped a quarter of school to fly to China and study it.
Model-turned-actress Talisa Soto is best known for playing James Bond
Girl Lupe Lamora in ‘License to Kill.' To my knowledge she is the first
Hispanic Bond Girl.
