Title
Review for Spanking the Monkey (1994)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Ben Hoffman
     From the opening scenes between the son, Raymond  Aibelli
(Jeremy Davies), and his father, Tom  (Benjamin Hendrickson), we feel
an immediate empathy for Raymond and a strong distaste for Tom.
Raymond, a college freshman, is met at the airport by his father who
immediately (and all through the film) lays a guilt trip on his son.
Raymond is expecting to do an internship during the summer as a start
toward his ambition to be a doctor but his father tells him that the
mother, Susan (Alberta Watson), has broken her leg in a fall and that
as Tom has to go out of town on business, Raymond will have to take
care of his mother.  Forget about the internship.
     Hendrickson is excellent.  His manner and speech are so earnestly
reasonable and whining that Raymond would have to be an ingrate to say
"No."
     Raymond caters to his mother as she lies helpless in bed.  His
every moment, almost, is at her beck and call.  You can see he is
trapped.  Even when he goes to the bathroom to masturbate (spank the
monkey), he has no peace, the dog sniffing and whining on the other
side of the closed door. When he takes the dog for a walk he meets Toni
(Carla Gallo), a high school senior who starts the ball rolling between
them, only to later report him to her father, a psychiatrist, for his
having been too rough.
     Nothing goes well for Raymond.  He does not take drugs, he is
studious, yet everything seems to conspire against him ... including
his youngish mother who has been neglected by her husband for too
long.  Things begin to happen as the intimacy of carrying her to the
bathroom, helping her shower, massaging her toes and limbs, start to
take on new meaning.
Superbly acted by all, with excellent dialogue by
Writer/Director, David O Russell in his first feature film, make this
a "must see" film.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Jeremy Davies, Alberta Watson, Benjamin Hendrickson,
Carla Gallo.
Screenplay/Director:  David O. Russell.
     SPANKING THE MONKEY is as difficult to watch as any film this
year.  Let me clarify that--that is not because it is terrible.  On
the contrary, SPANKING THE MONKEY is one of the best films of 1994 to
date.  But it is not a pleasant experience.  It's a blacker- than-pitch
comedy about a particularly dysfunctional family, one in which we are
witnesses to the implosion of the main character's psyche.  What makes
it impossible to look away is a pair of stunning lead performances in a
story as horifically comic as anything concocted by David Lynch.
     Jeremy Davies stars as Raymond Aibelli, a young man looking
forward to a prestigious medical fellowship in Washington following the
completion of his freshman year at M.I.T.  However, there is a detour
along the road to Washington.  His mother (Alberta Watson) has suffered
a compound fracture in her leg, and his father (Benjamin Hendrickson)
is heading off on a long business trip.  This leaves an extremely
reluctant Raymond as the only one available to care for his mother.
It's not an easy task.  Mrs. Aibelli is demanding and depressive, and
takes more than a passing interest in Raymond's sex life.  The tensions
between them build, and the result forces Raymond to drastic action.
     At the center of SPANKING THE MONKEY is the convoluted
relationship between Raymond and his mother, established in intricate
detail by writer/director David O. Russell.  We learn that Mrs. Aibelli
gave up her own dreams of a medical career in a bargain with her
husband, a bargain which allowed Raymond to be born at all.  With her
husband on the road almost constantly, her entire identity has been
connected to Raymond, and with the empty nest has come a profound and
complicated depression.  Alberta Watson navigates this character with
astonishing grace, making her simultaneously pathetic and sympathetic,
a still-beautiful woman facing a mid-life crisis which she can only
seem to resolve in destructive ways.  It is only because Watson allows
us to see Mrs.  Aibelli's deep pain that actions which instinctively
cause the audience to cringe also seem to make a kind of twisted
sense.  To use the comparison which has frequently been made between
SPANKING THE MONKEY and THE GRADUATE, this is Mrs. Robinson the way she
should have been played.
     Jeremy Davies' performance as Raymond is more restrained, but just
as poignant.  There is a lack of back story written in to Russell's
script, but Davies fills in all the blanks with a reading that tells us
that while what we see are extremes, this kind of dysfunction is
nothing new to this family.  From the moment his father tells him that
he is going to have to stay with his mother, it is clear that the
internship is not the main reason he is resistant; there is nowhere he
would less like to be than home.  Davies carries himself in a state of
perpetual tension, a tension which is denied simpler release at every
opportunity, and finally boils over with results that prompt very
nervous laughter.  Davies and Watson deliver two of the best
performances of the year, and give the unpleasant subject matter a
surprising appeal.
     It does at times seem that Russell has expended all his energy on
the complexities of Raymond and his mother.  Mr. Aibelli is something
of a cartoon figure of a traveling salesman, bombastic and
philandering, but a scene in the woods with Raymond cuts through much
of the stereotype.  Raymond's psychobabbling girlfriend Toni (Carla
Gallo) is nicely underplayed, but is too much of a prop; the same is
true of Raymond's busybody aunt.  However there are so many piercingly
insightful moments that these sketchy characters are easier to
tolerate.  One extremely effective scene shows Raymond hanging out with
some old high school acquaintances, guys he clearly didn't like then
and likes even less now.  It's a scene comic in its painful
familiarity, and one more of the many things Russell does right to
highlight how trapped Raymond feels.  SPANKING THE MONKEY deals with
difficult subjects in a brutally honest manner, and will have an
inherently limited audience, but it so daring and well-acted that it is
worth risking the unpleasant taste it may leave in your mouth.

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: David O. Russel
Starring: Jeremey Davies, Alberta Watson, Benjamin Hendrickson, 
Now, first off, the title doesn't really do the film a lot of justice. 
It's more of like that joke about writing the word SEX in big capitols,
and then saying in little writing below, "Well, now that I have your
attention..."  This film does deal with the topic of masturbation, but
it also deals with such non-conformist topics like incest, rape (not the
real kind, the legal kind), and insanity.  It's not just one of the
members in a long line of films that are in some way trying to be the
90s answer to "The Graduate" (an impossible task, in my opinion), but
also an ingenius black comedy and intense character study.
Jeremey Davies is an MIT student, coming home for a week or two in the
summer to take care of his bedridden mother (Alberta Watson)who has just
broken her leg.  His father (Benjamin Hendrickson) is a travelling
salesman and can't afford to stay home for a summer and take care of his
wife, especially since they both don't share any kinds of feelings other
than belonging anymore.  So he shocks his son, who was supposed to
attend a summer program dealing with his major, by telling him he'll be
spending the entire summer at home with his mother, who is totally
depressed.
The film starts off funny in that kind of off-beat way.  You giggle at
some of the little things that happen, and laugh out loud at some of the
funnier parts.  But then your jaw begins to drop at some of the weirder
and more outrageous plot twists, like when he has to hold his naked
mother up while she takes a shower, and he begins looking at her...
He also begins a little relationship with a soon-to-be junior in high
school who wants to go to MIT, and watches as they begin to have sexual
feelings for eachother.  But of course, he has his mother to not only
take care of, but there's that bond between the two that cannot be
broken, and that will gradually drive him into a bit of insanity.
What's great about this film is how well the characterization is.  The
bond between the mother and son is a very intense one.  Through talking,
we find out that she wanted to do the same thing he is studying, but she
made a deal with his father to give it up and have him.  So he's the
price she paid for her loneliness and manic depression, and she seems
hell-beant on keeping him, even if it causes him some emotional
depravation.  By the films climax, we are shocked and deeply moved, but
not in that crap sentimental way.
Also great in this film is the great acting from all involved,
especially the two leads.  Davies shows promise as a young actor, while
Watson gives an Oscar worthy performance on par with that of Anne
Bancroft in "The Graduate."  While this may not be as great as "The
Graduate," it's at least as close as we're gonna get to recreating it,
even if it's the more liberal "Graduate."
It's hard for me to reccomend this film.  Afterwards, I felt horrible. 
Of course, that is precisely what David O. Russel had in mind, so I can
say that this is a great example of fine cinematic craftsmanship.  The
film is utterly depressing in every way, in such a way that I would have
to wait a long time to see it again.  Yes, it's funny, but it's such a
miserable-inducing film that I'd only reccomend it to those who are very
mature.  Any horny sophomoric from junior high who wants to view it as a
prerequisite for entering the Beavis and Butthead club should just skip
out and go for that porno with the same name.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335

Author
James Berardinelli
     "People ask if this film is autobiographical, and many of the 
circumstances in it are but I've pushed them farther than they really 
went.  It's personal, but not completely autobiographical.  It was common 
in my home and my friends' homes to see no fathers around--and even when 
they were around they weren't really around.  It wasn't just that they 
were so busy working hard for the family to afford living there, but they 
became estranged from the family and it was too hard for them to come 
back into the fold, I think.  There were lots of lonely mothers who got 
over-invested in their sons' lives .... The weird thing about this very 
common situation is that nobody much talks about it." 
     - David O. Russell, writer/director of SPANKING THE MONKEY 
     My college days aren't so far behind me that I can't recognize a
nightmare summer vacation when I see one.  And that, amongst weightier
issues, is exactly what SPANKING THE MONKEY is about.  If poor Ray
(Jeremy Davies) ever had any illusions about life being fair, they
don't last beyond the first five minutes of David O. Russell's debut
feature.
     Ray's freshman year at MIT has gone very well.  So well, in fact,
that he has been awarded a rare summer internship working at the
Surgeon General's office in Washington D.C.  It's the opportunity of a
lifetime--but not Ray's, apparently.  His father Tom (Benjamin
Hendrickson) has other plans for him:  stay home, mow the lawn, take
the dog on long walks, and--while he's there--play nurse to his
mother Susan (Alberta Watson).  She's suffering from a low self-image,
acute depression, and a badly fractured left leg.  So much for Ray's
perfect summer.
     SPANKING THE MONKEY is a diabolically dark comedy complete with an
insight or two into human nature keen enough to cause a little
discomfort.  Director David O. Russell has set up his world as a
"normal" suburban community, then caused all sorts of bizarre things to
happen.  While circumstances aren't taken to David Lynch extremes, one
has a sense that the director of BLUE VELVET would appreciate what
Russell has done with his canvas here.
     Much of the conflict in SPANKING THE MONKEY centers around Ray's
resentment at being forced to sacrifice his life to care for his
mother.  He tries all sorts of alternatives, but is unable to come up
with a way to escape the trap.  Susan, feeling neglected by her
philandering husband (who cares more about his dog and car than her),
is only too happy to have Ray around.
     The relationships are fascinating to observe and dissect.  This is
true even considering that all of the characters are too self-absorbed
to be especially likeable.  The most obvious interaction to watch is
that between Ray and Susan, two people whose feelings for one another
have become warped and twisted by their individual imprisonments.  On
the other hand, the emotional interchange between Ray and his father
rarely reaches beyond the most superficial level--but Tom never wanted
any children in the first place.  Then there's Toni (Carla Galio),
Ray's girlfriend for the summer, whose views on sex leave our
protagonist confused and frustrated.
     SPANKING THE MONKEY is often funny--and sometimes
hilarious--because of its acute perceptiveness.  This is not a
     "nice" movie--it deals with some pretty intense issues (like
incest and suicide)--but it is both bold and inventive, and works
because of an unforced approach.  Daring us to laugh at some of the
blackest foibles of mankind, SPANKING THE MONKEY ventures into realms
that more conservative viewers might label as "taboo", and emerges
triumphant.  Add Russell's name to the growing list of young directors
who know what they're doing and how to get it done.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Brian Koller
When is a black comedy not a comedy?  When the humor is
occasional and ironic, and when expressions of frustration
are incorrectly interpreted.  "Spanking the Monkey" is
a family drama and not a comedy, and its themes (which,
yes, include incest) are nothing to wink at.
Raymond (Jeremy Davies) has finished his first year of
pre-med at MIT, and has landed a desirable summer internship.
Unluckily, his attractive young mother (Alberta Watson)
has broken her leg and is bedridden.  Raymond's father
(Benjamin Hendrickson) is a struggling travelling
salesman.  Raymond is forced to forsake the internship and
play nurse to his mother, a duty which soon includes
giving her showers and massages, which lead to... well,
'nuff said.  Further complicating Raymond's life is a
forward but inexperienced neighbor girl (Carla Gallo).
Raymond's joyless family is in trouble.  The problems are so
deep as to be unsolvable.  Mom is bored, lonely, isolated and
sexually frustrated.  Dad is interested only in the family
dog, exercising control, and philandering.  Raymond wants to
escape the unhappy family for his internship, and lacks
sympathy for his parents' plight.  With Raymond at college,
Dad out on the road and Mom left home, the family
members seem driven apart from each other.
"Spanking the Monkey" was the debut feature for director
David Russell, who also wrote the script.  One source
says the budget was all of $80,000, but it couldn't
have been that low!  While the film has the feel of an
indy release, the cinematography is on a par with a major
studio release, and the casting is excellent.  "Spanking"
provides proof that all that is required of an excellent
film is good writing, direction and casting.  My favorite
supporting character is Aunt Helen (Judette Jones), whose
maternal eccentricities make her the film's only true
comic character.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     SPANKING THE MONKEY is a tragedy about a frighteningly
dysfunctional family.  It is not an exploitive movie, but it does
manage to work in just about every taboo or controversial subject you
can think of from incest to drugs to physical self-love.  Why in the
world would I give this movie a good rating?  Have I lost my mind?
Well, I rated it such because it is an excellent study of the evils of
what horrifically awful parents can do to a child.
     In the movie the 21-year-old boy (Jeremy Davies) is repressed,
angry, and withdrawn.  He is a brilliant scholar - valedictorian of his
high school class and MIT premed student.  He is just about to go to
Washington for a prestigious internship for the summer when he gets
roped by his father (Benjamin Hendrickson) into caring for his mother
(Alberta Watson) who has broken her ankle, is in a cast, and has to
stay in bed.  His father on the other hand, is too busy as a traveling
salesman to do anything other than bark obtuse and impossible to follow
orders to his son.  The father has a girlfriend on the side and could
care less about his family.  He views them mainly as getting in the way
of him having a good time.
     For purely marketing reasons I suppose, this movie is being billed
as a biting comedy.  As directed by David O. Russell, it is absolutely
no such thing.  It is a depressing tragedy from the start.  It starts
on a low note and rapidly descends into the hell of a family gone
tragically wrong.  The way the father treats the son is pathetic yet
realistic.  You can feel the pain of the boy.  Davies's acting is
excellent.  YOU get depressed because he is so depressed.
     The parental blame for what they have done to their son is shared
by the mother.  Although she treats her son differently from the way
the father does, she is very manipulative as well.
     The son tries to have a normal life.  The only almost sweet part
of the show is his attempt at a romance with a local girl.  Here too,
the horrors of his family intrude.  He has no role model for a normal
relationship so his attempt at one with his putative girlfriend ends in
an abysmal failure.  The movie certainly lets you know that good grades
are not enough and success can not be measured strictly by the college
your child can get in.
     This is a movie that I will remember for quiet a while.  It is so
controversial, I will make no recommend to see it or not.  I will give
it a thumbs up and award it ***.  It has no MPAA rating.  My guess,
given that there is very little nudity in the show, it would have
gotten an R; nevertheless, I think it deserves an NC-17, and I do not
think it is appropriate for kids period.  The movie runs 1:39.
ADDENDUM
     You may have seen this movie on CNN or read about it in the Wall
Street Journal.  Many people are up in arms over it.  The reason is
that it was funded by you and I, i.e., the funding came from the
National Endowment for the Arts (and from a similar organization in NY
State).  There is a concern that the government has no business funding
movies about incest.  Frankly, although I am glad I saw the movie, I do
not believe the government has any business spending our money making
movies at all and so I agree with them.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: September 8, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
