Title
Review for Spy Smasher Returns (1966) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
Originally released as a serial in 1942, this film presents the adventures of
Spy Smasher, a hero who runs around wearing a cape and goggles, fighting enemy
villains and spies.  Loaded with action, but very short on plot, it is both
ridiculous and funny.  Good for its time, but not up to modern standards for
action/thriller films.
U.S.A., black-and-white, 1942, re-released 1966, 100 minutes.
Director:  William Witney
     This film was originally released as a 12-part serial in 1942, by Republic
Pictures.  It was directed by William Witney, who directed a number of other
serials, including "Dick Tracy," "The Lone Ranger," and "Daredevils of the Red
Circle."  In 1966, the "Spy Smasher" serials were re-edited to produce this 100
minute movie.  (Similarly, the 15-part "Dick Tracy" serial was re-edited to
produce the movie DICK TRACY'S G-MEN).
     The Spy Smasher character came from a comic book, "Whiz Comics," issued in
the period 1940-42.  An interesting thing about the serial is that it was
already in production at the time the U.S. entered World War II in December,
1941.  Production was completed in February, 1942, making this the first of the
patriotic (propagandistic?) serials released during the war.
     This film has lots of action but very little plot.  The story revolves
around a man referred to as Spy Smasher, who runs around wearing a cape, boots,
and motorcycle goggles.  He works for the U.S., though he is not an official
government employee, fighting enemies and spies.  The enemy he is fighting
against is some guy called "The Mask," who wears a sheet over his face.  (At
times, the Mask reminded me of the "unknown comic" from the old "Gong Show,"
who used to wear a bag over his head!)
     Anyway, the Mask is a German agent who leads a ring of spies in the U.S.
He operates from a submarine somewhere in the ocean (which ocean is not made
clear).  He communicates with his agents via live television link-up (rather
fancy for 1942).  He and his agents are involved in various sabotage plans.
Among the things they attempt are to shoot down bombers with an electric ray
gun, steal bombsights, hijack a gold shipment, attack a refinery, and so on.
Spy Smasher is after them (or ahead of them) the whole time.  The result is a
movie that consists mostly of chases and fights.
     This film should be of interest to film buffs, as it represents a genre --
serials -- that no longer exist in this form.  Today's serials are usually
television programs, or feature length movies.  As I was watching this film, I
was impressed with the similarity in style to RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK, the
first Indiana Jones film.  Both films were full of fights and chases, both had
Nazis as villains, there were submarines in both films, etc.  Of course, SPY
SMASHER was done in 1942, so the stunts, special effects, and production
values cannot compare with RAIDERS.  However, I suspect that this serial (or
ones like it) may have been part of the inspiration for George Lucas when he
developed RAIDERS.
     Because of the low production values and thin plot, I would not recommend
it to general audiences.  However, I strongly recommend it to film buffs and
those with an interest in "old time" serials.
Distribution.  Print source was the collection of Willam K. Everson (New York
University).  Serials are occasionally shown at repertory theaters, and on
television.  However, I have no information on whether prints of this film are
available for screening.
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU
