Title
Review for Beaumarchais, l'insolent (1996)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
     It was a crazy time in France, what with the French revolution
right around the corner.  King Louis XV would soon die, and his son
would become King Louis XVI.  Such is the setting for BEAUMARCHAIS: THE
SCOUNDREL about the controversial playwright, spy and playboy
Pierre-Augustin Caron de Beaumarchais.
     Beaumarchais was the author of the plays, "The Barber of Seville"
and "The Marriage of Figaro."  Today people think of them as quaint and
harmless operas, but, back in 1773 when the movie takes place, they
were so scandalous that Beaumarchais was thrown into prison more than
once.
     The movie BEAUMARCHAIS: THE SCOUNDREL takes a light-hearted
approach to its subject, resulting in an inviting motion picture.  One
of France's most expensive productions ever, the movie was a huge hit
when it opened there last year.  Now in theatrical release in the
United States, it eschews the seriousness of most art house films with
a romping good story.
     The secret of the film's success, other than the lavishness of
Sylvie De Segonzac's costumes, has to be the performance by Fabrice
Luchini as Beaumarchais.  With his glistening eyes and his infectious
smile, he mesmerizes the camera and the audience.  His wry little lips
seem always to hint at some unspoken deviousness he is planning.  In a
land where court intrigue determines one's destiny, constant scheming
was a way of life for the aristocracy.
     As our story starts, we learn that Beaumarchais has bought himself
a judgeship.  Into his court comes a member of the nobility demanding
an immediate sword fight.  Beaumarchais, who has been having an affair
with the man's wife, makes him wait until the current case on the
docket is decided.  That over with, the fight is on.
     With Luchini's charisma, it is hard to root for anyone other than
him.   Audiences may remember him from the marvelous COLONEL CHABERT,
in which he played the attorney.  Although he does not have half of the
good looks of his assistant Gudin, played by Manuel Blanc, he dazzles
the women and the viewers with his grace and style.
     Michael Epp's warm and intimate cinematography provides a nice
accompaniment to Jean-Marc Kerdelhue's lush but realistic looking sets.
Jean-Claude Petit's music, especially the hauntingly lovely flute
solos, make for an enchanting time at the movies.
     Director Jean-Claude Brisville, who wrote the script along with
Edouard Molinaro, fleshed out a play by Sacha Guitry which, according
to the press notes, was just a series of historic vignettes.  The
disorganization of the play still comes through at some points in the
movie, but the actors smooth it over with their good-hearted style.
Typical of the scenes that come out of nowhere is the one in which a
rotund Benjamin Franklin appears in a large pot of hot water, taking
his bath.
     One episode has Beaumarchais working with a renegade spy who may
or may not be a man.  Another has Beaumarchais using his personal
fortune to aid the American revolution.  All of this may sound like a
dull historical drama, but it is anything but.  The story plays more
like theater of the absurd than a movie based on historical facts.
     The radiantly lovely Sandrine Kiberlain plays Marie-Therese, the
real love of Beaumarchais's life.  But he is so likable that members of
the audience may want to compete with her for him.  Still, with his
beguiling smile, one can never quite be sure if you should trust him.
The movie, on the other hand, can be trusted to deliver a high old
time.
     BEAUMARCHAIS: THE SCOUNDREL runs 1:41.  It is in French with
English subtitles.  The film is not rated but would be an R for some
nudity and sex, and should be fine for most teenagers.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Fabrice Luchini, Manuel Blanc, Sandrine Kiberlain
Director: Edouard Molinaro
Producers: Charles Gassot
Screenplay: Edouard Molinaro and Jean-Claude Brisville
Cinematography: Michael Epp
Music: Jean-Claude Petit
U.S. Distributor: New Yorker Films
In French with subtitles
     While it would be unfair to pigeonhole the entire French film 
industry with one sweeping statement, it is true that when the American 
public thinks of a French film, something like BEAUMARCHAIS, THE 
SCOUNDREL frequently comes to mind.  An impeccably-acted costume drama, 
this film transports us back in time more than two centuries to a France 
where growing social unrest is soon to doom the Bourbon monarchy.  The 
movie essays approximately ten years in the life of playwright Pierre-
Augustin Caron de Beaumarchais (Fabrice Luchini), the celebrated author 
of "The Barber of Seville" and "The Marriage of Figaro".  The film is, 
by turns, an adventure, a dissection of the creative process, and a 
social commentary.  Through it all, one thing remains constant:  the 
script, by director Edouard Molinaro and Jean-Claude Brisville, refuses 
to relinquish its grasp on a tongue-in-cheek approach.
     Molinaro is no stranger to films with a humorous edge – his LA CAGE 
AUX FOLLES took a serious theme and cleverly concealed it in a 
screenplay that was rich in comedy.  BEAUMARCHAIS isn't as openly funny, 
but a constant sense of wit and satire underlies the production.  One 
prominent reason for this is Fabrice Luchini's breezy performance, which 
depicts the title character as a likable rogue who, despite spending a 
lot of time in prison and suffering several significant lifestyle blows, 
never takes things too seriously.  Beaumarchais may be a scoundrel, but 
he's the sort that it's easy to sympathize with.
     BEAUMARCHAIS opens with a rehearsal of "The Barber of Seville" (in 
1773) and closes with a performance of "The Marriage of Figaro."  In 
between, Beaumarchais undergoes a series of adventures, including a trip 
to England as a secret agent and an association with America as an arms 
dealer.  The latter earns him the praise of Benjamin Franklin and a 
letter of heartfelt thanks from the Congress of the United States, but 
not the financial riches Beaumarchais had hoped for.  He has dealings 
with both Louis XV and his successor, Louis XVI, yet remains a popular 
figure with the masses because of his incessant attacks on the Court of 
Lords.  Though he travels in the circles of the pampered and privileged, 
and enjoys the patronage of a prince, Beaumarchais' sympathies are 
clearly with the common man.  At one point, he presages what is to come 
with a simple statement:  "Paris is dangerous.  Too much poverty.  Too 
many taxes."
     Two other, lesser characters wend their way throughout the entire 
narrative.  The first is Beaumarchais' devoted protégé and would-be 
biographer, Gudin (Manuel Blanc), a handsome young man who comes to 
Paris to work as an aide to the man he views as the world's greatest 
writer.  He learns, to his disappointment, that while Beaumarchais has a 
talent for writing, his energy is often expended elsewhere.  Then 
there's Marie-Therese (Sandrine Kiberlain, of A SELF-MADE HERO), 
Beaumarchais' devoted third wife, who remains by his side even while 
aware of his many sexual indiscretions.  Many of the smaller, supporting 
roles are played by well-known actors.  Michael Serrault is Louis XV, 
Jean-Claude Brialy is a priest, and Michel Piccoli is the Prince de 
Conti.
     What BEAUMARCHAIS, THE SCOUNDREL does best is to convey a sense of 
the era in which it transpires without drowning the audience in the 
ponderousness that often accompanies period pieces.  BEAUMARCHAIS is 
very much a light film, like last year's RIDICULE or the as-yet-
undistributed MARQUISE, yet it is not without substance.  Beaumarchais' 
exchanges with Gudin explore the process of synthesis and compromise by 
which great art comes into being (there is a fascinating scene in which 
Beaumarchais nervously reads through "The Marriage of Figaro" before a 
group of censors).  And, overshadowing all, is the growing feeling of 
political unrest.  In viewing BEAUMARCHAIS, we are looking at the 
twilight of France's monarchy, which would fall five years after the 
film's end.
     Unlike many American period pieces, French films tend to stick 
close to the facts. Beaumarchais' adventures, while fleshed out by 
Molinaro, are contained in the historical record.  As a result, 
BEAUMARCHAIS, THE SCOUNDREL functions as an episodic biography of ten 
critical years in the writer's life, as well as a superficial overview 
of a segment of European history.  This isn't a great film – it is 
occasionally disjointed and lacks an ambitious scope – but it is 
entertaining, especially for those who have an appreciation for one of 
the best-known products of French film makers:  the costume drama.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."

Author
Harvey S. Karten
BEAUMARCHAIS, THE SCOUNDREL
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 New Yorker Films/Telema/Le Studio Canal +
 Director:  Edouard Molinaro
 Writer:  Edouard Molinaro, Jean-Claude Brisville
 Cast: Fabrice Luchini, Michel Piccoli, Michel Serrault, Manuel
Blanc, Sandrine Kiberlain
   Quick!  What human being comes to mind when you think
of "The Marriage of Figaro"?  Mozart, but of course.  If you're
an opera buff your next name might be Lorenzo da Ponte,
who wrote the libretto.  People who love the theater will join
those who esteem opera in mentioning Pierre de
Beaumarchais, from whose play the story of "Figaro" is taken. 
While Mozart's music provides the sensitivity of workmanship
and the common touch which makes "The Marriage of Figaro"
one of the three most popular operas--along with "Carmen"
and "Aida"--Beaumarchais' wit gives it the edge.  That great
French writer, who lived from 1732-1799, was both hated by
members of the aristocracy whose positions he challenged
with his quill pen, and loved by the very same class, which
applauded his plays despite the criticisms that hit them from
the stage.  
   Beaumarchais would scarcely be a fitting subject for a
biopic were he simply the man who coined such democratic
ideas as "You went to some trouble to be born, and that's all,"
his principal barb against the aristocracy.  Even modern
American upstarts would recognize themselves in lines like "If
you are mediocre and you grovel, you shall succeed."  But
the writer was no effete intellectual who buried himself in his
room composing ideas about a world he did not personally
experience.  Beaumarchais is a fitting subject for a movie
because he was a notorious womanizer, a swordsman, a gun-
runner for the American side in the War for Independence, an
envoy sent to England by to steal battle plans for France's
ancient enemy.  While he repeatedly lashed out at the
corruption of the French court, he was by reputation an
unscrupulous businessman.  The movie is based on an
unproduced and unpublished play by Sacha Guitry who used
the title character to vent his anger against the French
authorities who, after World War II had him arrested and
charged with collaboration.
   Despite the considerable expense that went into this
costume drama, it seems strangely disconnected, a product of
choppy editing which transforms the story into a the very flaw
which burdens Guitry's play: a series of historical vignettes
rather than an effectively linked narrative of romantic and
political intrigue.  While there is no mandate that director
Edouard Molinaro trace Beaumarchais' passage to England to
meet with a transvestite spy, we get no sense that a voyage
was made at all.  First the writer is here, then he's there, as
though he simply moved from one room in a mansion to
another.  
   While the author's life has been theatricalized for legitimate
dramatic purpose, it comes across as generally unsurprising
and stilted.  Some of the fault lies with the principal performer,
Fabrice Luchini, who seems scarcely like the charismatic sort
of person that would bring the ladies to swoon.  Another
weakness is the translation, which does not communicate
what may to a French audience be a film brimming with wit,
levity, and charm.  
   "Beaumarchais, the Scoundrel" shows the man to be almost
simultaneously a judge and a defendant, first handing down a
decision favoring an ordinary person, then charged and
judged guilty of denouncing the Court of Lords whose
hypocrisy and privileges he disparages.  He meets and
marries the freckled and admiring Marie-Therese (Sandrine
Kiberlain)--though she suspects he had something to do with
the sudden death of his previous two wives--and is sent to
England to retrieve an attack plan.  Thrown into a British jail
after the death of his protector, French King Louis XV, he is
released, arranges for the shipment of guns to the American
colonists fighting the English, and, penniless because the
American government cannot pay him, he returns in triumph
to playwriting.
   For an idea of what this movie could have become, you
need only rent the video of "Amadeus"--a lavish, effectively
put together, and highly stylized rendition of the life of the
great composer.  In directing "Beaumarchais," Molinaro puts
so many details into a brief 100 minutes that he skips from
one predictable event to another, and fails to give such
legendary French actors as Michel Piccoli and Michel Serrault
room to strut their stuff.  Not Rated.  Running Time 100
minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey Karten        
