Title
Review for Mississippi Burning (1988)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Randy Parker
        Alan Parker's controversial civil rights drama, MISSISSIPPI
BURNING, is an exciting and gripping drama, but one--alas--marred by
several flaws.
        At the heart of the film is an outstanding performance by Gene
Hackman as Anderson, a former sheriff turned FBI agent.  In his home state
of Mississippi, Anderson finds himself to be both an insider and an
outsider.  He hails from the South and knows its values, attitudes, and
mentality, but personally he has rejected them.  At the same time, however,
he is too much a free spirit and an individual to completely fit within the
FBI.  Hackman's character in MISSISSIPPI BURNING is fascinating and the
most intriguing aspect of the film.
        Under Parker's sensationalistic direction, MISSISSIPPI BURNING is
intense and disturbing.  However, several aspects of the film are
troubling.  MISSISSIPPI BURNING evokes immense hatred towards its villains.
Parker manipulates your emotions such that you want nothing more than the
FBI to kick some butt--in other words, to nail the bad guys.  Although the
FBI's vendetta is extremely rousing, I had to ask myself: isn't this the
function of a Rambo or Charles Bronson movie?
        MISSISSIPPI BURNING is not really about the civil rights movement
at all.  Rather, the film depicts a struggle of wills between two stubborn
FBI men: Hackman and his superior, played by Willem Dafoe.  Dafoe is a
strict, by the books agent who follows FBI procedure to the bone.  Hackman,
who is more familiar with the South, likes to do things his own way, even
if he must bend or break the rules.  MISSISSIPPI BURNING is more concerned
with the conflict between Hackman and Dafoe than it is with the racial
unrest between the blacks and the whites in Mississippi.  Underneath
Hackman and Dafoe's clash and underneath the film's Rambo mentality, the
important issues get lost: those pertaining to the civil rights movement.
        My main problem, then, with MISSISSIPPI BURNING is its historical
setting.  Why did Parker have to set this story of two FBI men in the civil
rights era?  And more importantly, why did he have to base the film on a
true incident?  MISSISSIPPI BURNING's fictionalized historical basis
distracted me.  I constantly wondered which parts were true and which were
fictional.
        MISSISSIPPI BURNING is troubling and thought-provoking.  To be
honest, at the end, I wasn't sure exactly how I felt about it.  Ultimately,
I think it is a worthwhile but challenging and perturbing film.  I applaud
its dramatic intensity, but I have to question the film's light dismissal
of important underlying racial issues.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
[MISSISSIPPI BURNING got its general release on Martin Luther King's birthday
weekend.  This review is posted on Martin Luther King's birthday.  Neither was
accidental. -Moderator]
          Capsule review:  Alan Parker (director of MIDNIGHT
     EXPRESS, THE WALL, and ANGEL HEART) creates a well-detailed,
     though allegedly very fictionalized, account of the FBI
     investigation into the disappearance of three civil rights
     workers from Jessup, Mississippi in 1964.  Gene Hackman's
     performance is complex in a film that is violent but
     rewarding.  Rating: +3.
     Two waterfountains, side-by-side.  One has a sign saying it is for
whites; one says it is for colored.  "Separate but equal."  Except the
whites' fountain is a big, electrically cooled fountain; the blacks'
fountain is a little white porcelain one like you would see in a grade
school.  With the very first shot of MISSISSIPPI BURNING Alan Parker sets
the tone for what is to come and creates a feel for the South in 1964.  And
what is to come is the story of an FBI investigation into the deaths of
three civil rights workers that turned into an all-out war between the FBI
and the Ku Klux Klan.
     Into Jessup, Mississippi come two FBI agents: Anderson (played by Gene
Hackman) and Ward (played by Willem Dafoe).  Ward is in command.  Anderson
knows the territory and how to get things done.  As such they are roughly
similar to the Sean Connery and Kevin Kostner characters in THE
UNTOUCHABLES, but in this case neither is really fully right in his
approach.  The result is a (usually) quiet conflict between Anderson and
Ward as they both fight the Klan and its sympathizers.
     The script gives the greater acting opportunity to Hackman.  His
character seems at first to be jovial and friendly, almost a "good old boy,"
where Dafoe's character is flat and officious.  Hackman's character and his
performance operate at several levels at once.  He has plans within plans
and can be reckless and bloodthirsty in his attempts to get a job done.
Brad Dourif, whose early career had him play mostly innocents in films like
ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST and RAGTIME, these days usually plays
vicious heavies in films like CHILD'S PLAY and MISSISSIPPI BURNING.
     Stylistically MISSISSIPPI BURNING may well have been inspired by John
Sayles' 1987 film MATEWAN.  Like Sayles, Parker has created the feel of an
epic inexpensively by careful choice of locale in which to shoot.  As in
MATEWAN, the story is a little too neat to be believed.  Both stories have
the feel of an anecdotal style for mood rather than that of a docu-drama--a
style that undermines the realism.  Even then the mood  itself is damaged at
the end by a small speech by Dafoe followed by the singing of a spiritual.
     The photography, while at times atmospheric, in general is realistic
and includes liberal (if that is the word) doses of violence realistic
enough to bother some viewers.  Parker (or screenwriter Chris Gerolmo) seems
intentionally to put in disorienting scenes that do not immediately make
sense, but which will fit into the puzzle in a few minutes.
     In general MISSISSIPPI BURNING is a skillfully crafted piece of
historical fiction just a little stronger in style than in credibility.
Rate it a +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Jeff Meyer
     It was only a matter of time before the Civil Rights movement became a
background for a Hollywood production.  Periods of history where great evils
are most apparent have always been tableaus for drama, and the ignorances and
atrocities and courage which dotted the South during this period are fertile
ground for this.
     MISSISSIPPI BURNING not only uses Mississippi in the early 1960s as it's
setting, but it uses the events surrounding the murder of three civil rights
activists as the basis of the story.  Unfortunately, what director Alan Parker
leaves behind are the facts of the case.  He shows the FBI as being the force
behind bringing the murderers of the three young men, spearheaded by a younger
Justice Dept.  administrator (Willem Dafoe) and an older, Southern-raised agent
(Gene Hackman).  He tosses in a romantic interest for Hackman, whose assault
rankles him to try to find the murderers even if he has to break the law to do
it.  And Parker basically sets the audience up to cheer on the FBI as they sink
down to their opposition's level.  It's history throttled, minced and served up
in ROCKY IV style, pandering to the Friday night crowds.
     In truth, the FBI (dominated by J. Edgar Hoover, who felt that much of
the civil rights movement were sponsored by Communists) put nowhere near the
force into the field to investigate the murders (the killings did take on
national attention, as two of the activists were white).  The murderers were
finally convicted by a bribe to one of their members, not investigations done
by the FBI.  Apparently, history didn't give Parker the happy ending he was
looking for, so he decided to change it, along with many of the events that
surrounded the case, to "make a better movie."  Throughout this film, I kept
wondering why Parker hadn't made his film a fictionalized story set during this
period, but without alleged roots in the events of this case.  My only
assumption is that to Alan Parker, an Alan Parker film is more important than a
misrepresentation of one of the more important events of the 1960s.
     And this *is* an Alan Parker film.  Hollywood cliches are stuck in left
and right, particularly the old hand/young reformer saw represented by Hackman
and DaFoe.  Almost everyone is a stereotype, which leads one to wonder whether
the stupidity and bullying and violent ignorance displayed by the Klan and
their ilk are due to bad breeding or bad writing.  If you've seen TV footage of
this period, you'll know it's not bad writing, but the level of the rest of the
film brings that into doubt -- everything is so over-played that the brutality
of these people fades in comparison.  Even the carnage is stamped with Parker's
particular visual amplification; when the Klan bomb a Negro household with a
can of gasoline, not only does the house explode, but the fence and the mailbox
outside the house explode.  I think we get the picture, Alan.
     There are a few good points in the film.  Both Hackman and Dafoe valiantly
attempt to make their characters break out of their two-dimensional roles, and
Hackman succeeds at points due to sheer acting skill and stage presence.  But
all in all, it looks tailor-made to reap Oscar awards (as it already has Oscar
nominations); Hollywood likes nothing better than to applaud a film that pats
itself on the back.  The South advanced away from prejudice mostly through the
courage of black Southerners who risked their lives and their families
well-being to take a stand, with little support from government agencies until
the very end.  Watching DaFoe and Hackman ride off into the sunset, with black
and white children singing together, is sugar-coating what happened in the
worst way; it's almost as if Parker had never left advertising for feature
films.  Like, shouldn't they be holding cans of Diet Coke?
     If you'd like to see something that's twice as moving as this film and one
hell of a lot more accurate, I recommend renting EYES ON THE PRIZE, a six-hour
video documentary of the Civil Rights movement which shown on PBS last year,
and is available at local libraries and some video stores.  I guarantee you
that you won't be missing anything of interest that MISSISSIPPI BURNING has to
offer by watching this instead.  Unless you really enjoy exploding mailboxes.

Author
David Alba, Jr
     Imagine if you will; One night three men are driving in a car, and three
cars begin to follow them.  The men are worried, then they see a police light,
and they pull over wondering what they had done.  The   officer gets out, and
walks over to the stopped car.  The driver rolls down the window, then the
officer shoots him, point blank in the head.  The officers then proceed to kill
the other two men in the car.  Pretty gruesome story isn't it??
     Well, what you just read happens to be the opening scene for the film
MISSISSIPPI BURNING.  As horrifying as that story is, it  is only a small
fraction of all the racial fear and hatred that existed in the small town of
Jessup, Mississippi in 1964.  Those three men, it just so happens were civil
rights activists.
     Two FBI agents arrive in Jessup to investigate the disappearance of the
three activists.  After meeting the sheriff they inquire about the three men.
The sheriff tells them a story that they don't believe.  The two agents Ward
and Anderson (played superbly by Willem Dafoe and Gene Hackman respectively)
decide to follow bureau procedure and question some residents of Jessup.  The
agents are surprised to see that the town is so racially  segregated.  All the
residents that they question either choose to remain tight-lipped, or have no
information to give.  They get a break in the investigation when they find some
evidence that might lead to the whereabouts of the men.  Agent Ward orders over
200 agents to the small town to help conduct a search party.  While Ward is
searching, Anderson is trying to get any information out of the deputy's wife.
Agents Ward and Anderson are amazed when they learn that the head leader of the
local charter of the Ku KLux Klan has arrived for a meeting with the police
department and other local residents  of Jessup.  The constant prying that the
FBI agents are doing, infuriates some of the members of the police department
and some other residents.  They  decide to take out their rage on the colored
residents of the town.  We see the angry townspeople burn down other persons
homes, kidnap them and beat some of them up and we also see them hang a man.
Meanwhile, the deputy's  wife just cannot take any more of this cruelty, and
tells some important information to agent Anderson.  It is when they beat up
the deputy's wife that agent Anderson wants to go after them his own way.
After a scuffle between the two agents, Anderson gets Ward's authority to try
to do it his way.  Agent Anderson then proceeds to use iron-fisted methods to
get some of the residents to give them the answers that they are searching for.
These methods work brilliantly and bring the film to a great conclusion.
     This is a very powerful movie, there were some scenes in the movie that
were so terrible that you could not help but feel somewhat sick inside.  I
believe that MISSISSIPPI BURNING has to be the favorite for this year's Academy
Award for Best Picture.  I cannot remember a more stronger or emotional movie
this year.  I guarantee those film fans who make the effort to see this movie
will not regret it.  It is a captivating bit of filmmaking, expertly capturing
a feeling of strong racial prejudice that should not be lost.  This movie shows
not only how far this country has come in the past 25 years, but  how far race
relations have yet to progress.  Rating: +4
