Title
Review for Flashback (1990)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Bernard Dy
     Flashback stars Dennis Hopper and Kiefer Sutherland in a story which
mirrors the current "male-bonding cop stories" but gives the viewer just a
little more to think about.
     Hopper is Hewey Walker, a stalwart rebel of the 1960's who was put in jail
for political crimes.  Sutherland is John Buckner, an unshakeable FBI agent
who is assigned to escort Walker to another site.  For the first part of the
film, these two characters work very well, Hopper using style and body language
to give the viewer a good picture of the loose and somewhat crazed Walker.  He
constantly hazes and teases Buckner as he tries to get under his skin.  These
scenes are enjoyable, but are terribly reminiscent of another film called
MIDNIGHT RUN.  
     As the story progresses, Walker succeeds in breaking down Buckner's hard
shell, and in a quick sweep (I'll leave the details out), switches places with
Buckner.  Walker now wears the conservative suit and tie, and is clean shaven,
while Buckner is stuck with the old jeans and jacket.  It is part of Walker's
great escape plan.  However, before Walker can get away clean, he and Buckner
both get caught up in a corrupt county sheriff's plans, and basically end up on
his death list.  
     In fleeing from the sheriff, the two characters learn to work together,
and each shares his secrets, and learns of the other's.  In the end, Walker
finds himself catching up with the times, and actually breaking the rules of
the counter-culture community by catering to the pursuit of money, while
Buckner discovers a latent love for his past involvement with the
counter-culture.  
     What makes this film work is the message which it develops throughout its
run.  In Walker's own words: "The 90's will make the 80's look like the 50's of
the 60's."  The difference between this movie and its similar counterparts,
MIDNIGHT RUN and TRADING PLACES (amongst others), is the background material
and historical validity which come with it.  Like most of Hopper's work, it
requires the audience to think with their brain, and not just with their eyes,
about what is being said.  Hopper himself is the key to making this picture
better than its predecessors, not only as an actor, but as a creator as well.  
     On the down side, while I found the movie and its messages entertaining, I
didn't find them particularly valuable (versus PLATOON, BORN ON THE FOURTH OF
JULY, BREAKING AWAY, THE BIG EASY, or other Hopper films: RIDERS OF THE STORM
and HOOSIERS).  This is definitely lighter Hopper fare, and it's a fun film 
which is probably what it was intended to be in the first place.  The ending
was just too pat and sweet for me.  
     You get the idea in the first 20 minutes that Hopper is really having  fun
playing Walker.  Not a top ten film, by any means, but worth the price of 
admission especially if you're a Hopper fan.  Of course, it is loads better
than the standard Hollywood garbage.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

FLASHBACK (director: Franco Amurri; screenwriter: David Loughery;
cinematographer: Stefan Czapsky; editor: C. Timothy O'Meara; cast:
Dennis Hopper (Huey Walker), Kiefer Sutherland (John Buckner), Carol
Kane (Maggie), Cliff De Young (Sheriff Hightower), Paul Dooley (Donald
R. Stark, FBI Director), Tom O'Brien (Phil Prager), Kathleen York
(Sparkle), Richard Masur (Barry), Michael McKean (Hal); Runtime: 110;
Paramount; 1990)
A comedy flavored by hippie nostalgia for the '60s. It has its moments
of reliving the past before it turns into a silly and unimportant film,
which could only say things that are clichés. The film is enjoyable for
Dennis Hopper's comic performance as Huey Walker, a nonstop talker and
once famous protest movement jester, who 20 years ago pulled a prank on
Vice President Spiro Agnew, of disconnecting his train car while he was
on a political whistle-stop speaking tour in the Northwest, stopping off
at Spokane, Washington. This earned the publicity seeking protester a
picture of himself on the cover of Life dressed as a clown, but as the
years rolled by, he became a forgotten figure by the public. He is now
being held as an escaped felon, as an anonymous call tells the FBI where
to arrest him in San Francisco. John Buckner is the twenty-six-year-old
uptight, duty-bound, yuppie, reactionary FBI agent who is asked by the
his boss, Mr. Stark (Dooley), to bring him by train to Spokane for a
court date.
Before the film looses its grip on its subject matter and becomes too
contrived and lightweight, as the opposing parties wind up on the same
side -- it had some sparkling scenes with the hippie conversing with the
stone-faced FBI man. When Huey asks John what's so good about President
Reagan's administration, he is told that he straightened out the
economy, to which Huey replies: "Yeah, he created two classes, the truly
greedy and the truly needy."
While cuffed on the train and playing chess with John, Huey tells him
that he slipped LSD into his mineral water. John becomes panic stricken
and asks the conductor to get him a doctor. He comes back with nurse
Sparkle (York), but she's really a hooker, whom Huey gives money to have
sex with the agent, who is now drunk from drinking tequila as a cure-all
Huey recommends for coming down from a trip. Huey shaves his beard, cuts
his long hair, dons the agent's dark blue suit, flashes his badge at the
train stop in Marsden, Oregon, where he meets Sheriff (Hightower),
posing with his disheveled and incapacitated prisoner. This is a
scheduled stop arranged by the FBI in order to place the prisoner in the
local jail while the agent grabs two hours sleep before getting back on
the train.
Sheriff Hightower proceeds to beat the prisoner while he is in his
custody, angered that this weirdo shows him no respect, while Huey still
dressed as an FBI agent, goes into a local bar and meets two middle-aged
men who tell him they were once hippies and admired Huey Walker. This
briefly encourages Huey, because he is feeling down that no one
remembers him anymore, disgusted that the hippies are a forgotten
culture in the 1980s. He also called his book agent to see if he could
get his book published, since it was Huey himself who called the FBI,
arranging for the arrest as a publicity stunt for the book he wrote
while on the run. Huey is told by the agent that there is still not
enough publicity, he'll have to die before a book gets published.
The sympathetic men to Huey at the bar are now members of the
Establishment, Barry (Masur) and Hal (McKean). They get irritated that
Huey, still posing as the FBI agent, is bragging he got Huey in his
custody. To show they still have some rebel in their makeup, they kidnap
the FBI agent, calling the sheriff to tell him they want to exchange the
FBI man for Huey. At this point the film breaks down into the absurd and
the comedy comes in dribbles instead of gushes, as the running gag over
mistaken identity comes to a brutal end.
The corrupt sheriff, who is running to be a congressman, is told by the
boiling mad John Buckner, at the bridge, where Huey is unwittingly
returned to him, that he is going to bring him up on charges of police
brutality. The sheriff decides he better frame the FBI agent for
abetting the prisoner in the escape, or else he is a doomed candidate.
Buckner recognizes how capable of even murder the sheriff is and escapes
with Huey into the woods.
The story keeps getting sillier and sillier by the minute, as it turns
out John Buckner is not his real name (his real name is Free) and that
his parents were hippies living in a nearby commune, where the agent
takes Huey (If he grew up in a commune, how could he have been faked out
to think that Huey dropped acid into his drink???). They are met there
by the last remaining hippie at the commune, Maggie (Kane), a friend of
Free's parents. The film turns into a nostalgia museum piece of how the
hippies lived back then and Buckner explains how he wanted to grow up
drinking Coca-Cola instead of carrot juice, that he wanted to be the
opposite of his parents, so he fabricated a middle-class upbringing and
joined the FBI.
By this time I was forgetting how much I enjoyed Hopper's manic but
egotistical performance and wanted the film to end before it lost all
its appeal for those who were hippies back then. There's lots of '60s
music in the background to remember the past, such as, Dylan songs,
Hendrix and Grace Slick singing, and there is enough hippie memorabilia
crammed into the story to give an aging hippie a temporary high. But the
film itself, it was irrelevant.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
