Title
Review for Easter Parade (1948)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mattias Thuresson
Cast: Fred Astaire [Don Hewes], Judy Garland [Hannah Brown],
Peter Lawford [Johnny Harrow], Ann Miller [Nadine Hale]
An MGM musical doesn't come much nicer and
sweeter than Easter Parade. Someone who found
anything in it upsetting should reconsider
what is valuable in life. I think it's
obvious that the production didn't start with
a screenplay, it began with someone thinking:
"Hey, let's do a musical filled with the songs
of Irving Berlin!". The plot between the
singing and dancing is the standard musical
plot: Boy meets girl, boy and girl fall in
love, boy and girl gets seperated, boy and girl
meets again. This time it's Fred Astaire and
Judy Garland as the couple in love.
Don Hewes and Nadine Hale is a dancing team on
various theatres. But Nadine wants to build a
career on her own and leaves him. He picks up
the next dancing girl he meet, Hannah Brown, as his
new dancing partner. Although he falls in love
with her, he keeps their relationship strictly
a business arrangement. Hannah falls in love
with Don but believes incorrectly that he loves
Nadine and that he only keeps her as a temporary
stand-in until Nadine comes back to him.
Gene Kelly was first cast as dancer Don Hewes.
After breaking his ankle he suggested that
he was replaced with Fred Astaire, at the time
in semi-retirement. Production couldn't be delayed,
since Garland was in a good mood and the
producer's was afraid that her mood should change
for the worse. No one seem to have remembered that
Astaire was old enough to be Garland's father.
Fred Astaire was a wonderful dancer and he shows
it in several sequences, most impressively in
"Steppin' Out With my Baby", where an Astaire
in slow motion proves his talent to the audience.
Although Garland got first billing, Astaire is
the one who makes the movie memorable.
Ann Miller plays Astaire's ex-partner Nadine.
Is it a coincidence or did she always play self-
centered unsympathetic roles? Anyway, she
replaced Cyd Charisse who had a broken tendon.
Rumour has it that she (Miller) was dating MGM boss
Louis B. Mayer at the time.
