Title
Review for Do the Right Thing (1989)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Spike Lee made an incredible movie here, but it's also one of 
the most uncomfortable viewing experiences I've ever had--and that 
includes the episode of "Golden Girls" where Estelle Getty gets a pap 
smear. DO THE RIGHT THING is a shocking commentary on race 
relations, a movie you can't watch without a strong opinion on one 
side or the other. Luckily, Spike didn't take sides in his presentation of 
the story, even if all the characters are stereotyped. The blacks are 
angry troublemakes who hate people of every other race and use the 
f-word in every sentence. The whites are angry troublemakers who 
hate people of every other race and use the f-word in every sentence. 
The Hispanics... You get the picture, I'm sure.
        Lee assumes that beneath a thin veneer of courtesy, every 
American harbors hate for other races that will break out with the 
slightest provocation. Black characters make fun of the way Orientals 
talk but are made fun of by whites for their addiction to the word 
"motherf---er" and the substitution of the word "fiddy" for its more 
Caucasian counterpart "fifty." The cops in the movie are hateful 
bastards who use unnecessary brutality, taking the Rodney King 
treatment to its worst extreme right in front of the neighborhood 
blacks.
        There are only a few well-thought-out characters in the 
movie, like Danny Aiello, an Italian who owns a pizza parlor that was 
there before the neighborhood was colorized. Now he's one of two 
non-black families in the neighborhood, but unlike the Korean 
convenience store owner across the street, is accepted by everyone. 
Spike Lee, one of the other decent characters, is his delivery boy, who 
manages to remain friends with his people and Aiello's.
        The movie takes awhile to reach its shocking climax. The 
first hour moves at a leisurely pace, focusing on a day in the life of the 
Brooklyn neighborhood, the hottest day of the year in fact. During that 
time we meet the neighborhood's residents--Aiello and his two sons, 
one racist and one non (luckily, the pizza parlor has seating for both 
types), Lee and his siblings, Lee's hyper Hispanic girlfriend (played 
by--take a wild guess--Rosie Perez), the racist black who organizes a 
protest of Aiello's pizza parlor because the people on his "Wall of 
Fame" are exclusively Italian guys, no blacks in the lot, the big guy 
who walks around with a tacky boombox, three old guys who sit 
outside and gossip the day away, another old guy who drinks the day 
away and a retarded guy who bugs Lee by trying to sell them pictures 
of Martin Luther King and Malcolm X. (Lee would be so inspired by 
the picture he bought that he would go on to make a really long movie 
about it.)
        Most of the characters are interesting but, for one reason or 
another, seemed abrasive and obnoxious to me. They're the kind of 
people you want to slap some sense into... and considering the movie's 
outcome, they'd take well to violence. If you've seen the movie, you 
realize the irony of the title, because hardly any of the characters ever 
say or do the right thing and are too one-note to sympathize with. The 
only exceptions are Lee, Aiello and the old drunk.
        The climax almost arises out of nowhere. You can tell while 
watching the movie that the racial tension, personified well by the 
depictions of intense heat (although I could have done without the 
scene where Spike rubs an ice cube on Rosie's nipples), would result in 
some manifestation of violence. Still, once it finally happens, you wish 
it didn't. You wish you could sit the characters down and tell them 
they don't have to act like idiots, always saying and doing the wrong 
thing. There's another way to deal with life's problems, through 
intelligence and negotiation. And that, ladies and gentlemen, is doing 
the right thing.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Jeff Meyer
     After having watched SHE'S GOTTA HAVE IT and SCHOOL DAZE, getting me to go
see a Spike Lee movie isn't particularly difficult.  Any writer and/or director
who can spin characters such as his during the length of a film gets attention,
because, gang, there ain't many out there who can.  What Lee has done with DO
THE RIGHT THING is to jump yet another notch up in my estimation: he's using
his abilities at characterization to examine the personalities and emotions in
a neighborhood which lead to a violent incident -- the kind of complex event
that is so often explained away with a simplistic rationalization or off-hand
prejudice.  By spending a day with each person, and detailing each of their
personalities (and their relations with one another) in such detail, we come to
understand why and how they get to the state their in by the end of the film;
and, in turn, to be caught up in the intensity of the conflagration that
engulfs them.
     It's not a new concept in film, to be sure, but it rarely done this well;
trying to center on these many people, and build complete characters out of
them by the end of the film, is a monumental task for a writer or a director,
because by the end of DO THE RIGHT THING, it's absolutely necessary to
understand where these people are coming from, or the whole film doesn't work.
Lee make it work.  Some characters are more in focus than others, but no one is
a stereotype or a cardboard reactionary, with the exception of the local police
officers.  However, the film is about the people in the neighborhood, not the
police; the police's purpose is a plot device, a catalyst to the community's
feelings -- their individual feelings, and their individual actions.
     This is also one of those films where script and direction are so
on-target that it's difficult to gauge the quality of the actors; suffice it to
say that no one gives their role less than it's due.  I imagine I'd give credit
to Lee and Danny Aiello as Mookie and Sal in particular, as they have two of
the most complex roles to deal with; but several of the other actors score deep
marks by the end of the film, in particular the actor who plays Radio Raheem.
As striking (if not more so) than any individual performance is the photography
and editing in DO THE RIGHT THING; often the way a person is photographed tells
us as much about their thoughts as their expression or their dialogue.  It
becomes very difficult towards the end to remember that there's a screen
between the audience and the characters; that familiar, comfortable barrier is
broken down by Spike Lee by the end of this film.  This is not a film where
you'll walk out and switch back to what you were doing before you entered the
theater; it required a cooling-down period and a good deal of reflection (and
conversation) in my case.
     A brief side note: from some of the net traffic, it appears that a number
of people see the film as "promoting racism", or excusing racial violence, or
something of that nature.  I can't see it.  Lee presents a number of
points-of-view, and allows us to understand why each individual feels the way
they do during the length of the film.  As for justifying any particular
viewpoint, I must have missed it (other than "racism is bad").  The only thing
that confused me were the quotes by Martin Luther King and Malcolm X at the
end.  The person I went to see it with suggested something that appeals to me,
however: that these two differing views of the use of violence in regards to
racism, simple in the axiomatic nature, are contrasted with the complex
situation and feelings that confront the members of the block in
Bedford-Stuyvesant.  The only person who clings to these viewpoints through the
film is Smiley, who appears to be simple; the Mayor, arguably the most
sympathetic character in the film (to me, anyway) has a hazy, less clear-cut
philosophy that provides no easy instruction: Do the Right Thing.  Humans
follow ideals, but they live with what they run into in life.  The Mayor, and
the title of the film, deal with this type of situation: no easy situations or
answers, but the necessity of Doing the Right Thing is underlined.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Spike Lee, who charmed the critics and audiences with the low-budget
SHE'S GOTTA HAVE IT, then disappointed people--at least me--with SCHOOL
DAZE, has made his third film and this time his work is both entertaining
and important.  Lee clearly did the right thing when he made DO THE RIGHT
THING.  This film is really the anatomy of a race riot.  And it is a film in
three dimensions.  When it was over the kids from a black family sitting in
front of me were disagreeing whether the blacks were at fault or the whites.
I found myself thinking how wonderful to have a film with conflict and
without having the good guys and bad guys spelled out for me.  In fact,
nobody is entirely right and nobody entirely wrong.  That is what life is
like.  Lee is a good enough director that he makes some blacks and some
whites likable, and some of each not likable.
     DO THE RIGHT THING follows about 26 hours in the life of a neighborhood
in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn.  Most of the action centers
around Sal's Famous Pizzeria.  Sal himself (played by Danny Aiello) does not
seem at all like the sort of person who would be the center of a race riot.
He has a genuine affection for the people in the nearly all-black
neighborhood.  He takes pride that the local kids grew up on his pizza.  Yet
in the space of a few short hours on a hot summer day, small irritations
would boil over into violence.  Tantalizingly slowly, Lee shows us how that
happens.  We get to know the neighborhood and particularly an old drunkard
nicknamed Da Mayor (beautifully played by Ossie Davis).  But this film has
many major characters and several stories being told at one time.  Lee has
given himself a major role as a black man working out his problems and
frustrations.  He has resisted the temptation to make himself either a good
guy or a bad guy.  He plays just one more person in the neighborhood.
     One of the more interesting subplots concerns the mini-grocery run a
Korean couple.  The locals wonder why this little grocery has proved so
profitable when black businesses so often fail in the same neighborhood.
Some of the locals are unsure just what their attitude is toward the
Koreans.  Do they resent them, admire them, or what?  And the question will
become even more pointed when the night brings violence.
     Issues of attitude come up through the day as groups in the
neighborhood come in contact with each other in numerous permutations.  The
issues are not just black versus white, but also whether violence is ever
right.  The film even concludes with contradictory quotes from Martin Luther
King and Malcolm X on the justification of violence.  This may not be the
best film of the summer, but it is the most ambitious.  It is this year's
MATEWAN, low-budget but satisfying like few high-budget films.  This is an
R-rated, perhaps a little strong for the children in the audience, but they
seemed to have gotten a lot out of it and the adults even more.  I rate it a
high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Ben Hoffman
        Written, directed and produced by Spike Lee, this story of a
few days in the Bedford-Stuyvesant area of Brooklyn is riveting.
There's no question that Lee is very talented and knows how to make
films.  The cast, in addition to Lee, includes Danny Aiello as the
owner of a pizza parlor in a black neighborhood.  He is terrific in
that role.
        There's Ossie Davis, who does a masterful job as the neighborhood
souse.  There's Ruby Dee.  There's the character who walks around with
his "ghettoblaster" radio, the three men who just sit on chairs and
argue and philosophize, wondering how the Korean across the way, who
has been in the U.S. only one year, owns a grocery store while they
own nothing. . . each with his own explanation.   And there's Lee as the
pizza delivery man, and there are the pizza parlor owner's 2 sons.
Every character is delineated perfectly.
        Something, however, was missing.  Despite everything in the
film ringing true, what was omitted (perhaps because no answer is
possible) was that Lee attempted no solutions to the story, to the
riot, to the killing, to despite many humorous moments, the utter
monotony of most of the lives.
        An epilog contains a quotation from a Martin Luther King, Jr
speech in which he condemns violence, followed by an excerpt from
one by Malcolm X in which he says he is against violence, except in
self defense, and the only way to overcome the oppression is in self
defense.

Author
Long Che Chan
Do the Right Thing
Directed by Spike Lee
Starring Danny Aiello, Ossie Davis, Ruby Dee, Richard Edson, Giancarlo
Esposito, Spike Lee, Bill Nunn, John Turturro, John Savage, Rosie Perez
USA, 1989
Rated R (profanity, some violence, brief nudity)
Do the Right Thing, Spike Lee's directorial breakthrough, is not a film
about taking sides but about taking a stand.  The film was very
controversial when it was released a decade ago, in 1989, but it rings
so true in a world that claims it is free of racism, but, actually, is
still sick with it.  Two opposing quotations, one by Martin Luther King,
Jr. and one by Malcolm X, close the film they discuss the morality of
racial violence, leaving us neither north nor south, but in a state of
thought, hopefully.  The film takes place in Brooklyn, in the
Bedford-Stuyvesant neighborhood.  Sal's (Danny Aiello) Pizzeria has been
here for years, the people of this neighborhood grew up on his pizza.
Sal is one of the few Caucasian people who live in this neighborhood.
His sons have lived here all their lives and help him run the place:
Vito (Richard Edson) is the little brother, meek and friendly with the
predominantly black neighborhood; Pino (John Turturro) is full of hatred
(in private) for the blacks, even though, as employee Mookie (Spike Lee)
points out, his favorite basketball player, actor, and singer are all
black.  To this observation, Pino responds, "Well, they're not really
black.  I mean, they're more than black to me."
This is the world Spike Lee plunges us into- the streets of this little
neighborhood on the very hottest day of the year.  Temperatures have
risen to 98°, and everyone is being scorched by the sun.  Lee, who
wrote, produced, starred, and directed this film so exceptionally,
revolves the story around Sal's Pizzeria and peppers it with memorable,
interesting characters.  Da Mayor (Ossie Davis) is an elderly man, the
neighborhood bum and drunk.  On this hellishly-hot day, he tries to
reach out to Mother Sister (Ruby Dee, Davis' real-life wife), a woman
who is always cold toward him.
Buggin' Out (Giancarlo Esposito) is a friend of Mookie's who questions
Sal as to why only Italian celebrities are on his restaurant wall and
there are no blacks.  There's Frank Sinatra, Sophia Loren, Al Pacino-
but no Martin Luther King, Malcolm X, Rosa Parks, Aretha Franklin.  He
demands that Sal put some black people's pictures on the wall; after
all, this is a black neighborhood and majority of the people who eat at
the pizzeria are not Italian, but are black.  When Sal refuses, he plans
to boycott the pizzeria and goes on a quest to find those who will join
him.
Radio Raheem (Bill Nunn) is a stoic young man whose only valued
possession seems to be his radio, which he carries with him everywhere
so that it seems to be a part of his body.  He plays Public Enemy's
"Fight the Power" anthem of racial liberation continually, which drives
Sal insane.
Clifton (John Savage) is a character who only appears briefly in the
film, but is the target of neighborhood jeers because he is a white man
living on this street.  Rosie Perez made her debut here as Mookie's
enraged girlfriend, and Samuel L. Jackson is the DJ at a local radio
station WE-LOVE.
The entire film is filled with racial tension.  There is Buggin' Out and
Radio Raheem's anger and avoidance of Sal's Pizzeria, and there is also
the prejudice that is aimed at the owners of a Korean grocery store.
The blacks aren't very happy about the Koreans; they make fun of how
they speak and badger them constantly.  At the huge, climactic end, fury
breaks loose at Sal and his Italian family.  Mookie, one of the main
characters, is a passive guy for most of the movie, and struggles to
keep his girlfriend and baby son happy.  He doesn't care much about
racial violence or issues, he just goes about his pizza delivering job
and, basically, doesn't really care.
In this neighborhood, racial bigotry is present and evident, but not
realized.  Throughout the duration of this scorching day, racial
tensions mount and pile up, until, in the much-discussed conclusion, all
racial hell breaks loose.  Spike Lee doesn't tell you that acting
against racism violently is wrong, but he doesn't tell you it's right
either.  He doesn't tell you the blacks are right and the Caucasians are
wrong, or vise versa.  He doesn't even tell you to figure out who's
right and who's wrong, but hopefully what people will take away from
this film is that figuring things like that out and coming to
conclusions and putting the blame on a race is wrong to begin with and
just plants more seeds for wrath to grow.
Do the Right Thing is one of the most visually beautiful and colorful
movies I've seen in a long time.  The neighborhood is like a wonderful
work of graffiti art; so radiant with bright colors- of walls, houses,
clothes (costumes by the wonderful Ruth Myers), and skin.  Ernest
Dickerson does one of the most breathtaking cinematography jobs I've
seen.  Not only is the lighting perfect, many of the angles are slanted,
showing a one-sided, racially confused world.  Throughout the film, the
sweat and the heat are all filmed so masterfully and flawlessly.
In the film, an abrupt change of pace, from positive to negative, from
pleasant to melancholy, brings about the now famous sequence of racial
violence.  It is so unexpected, so unthinkable, yet, it fits.  Spike Lee
doesn't tell us, he shows us, and we see.  We see many ethnic worlds
colliding- the world of the Hispanics, the world of the Koreans, the
world of the whites, and the world of the blacks.  It's a shocking
sequence.
I haven't seen a film so powerful in its tackling of this ever- relevant
racial subject, and I doubt I will ever see one like it in a long time.
The movie doesn't fool around with the topic at hand, it lays down the
facts.  The ending isn't some hand-in-hand ring-around-the-roses between
the blacks and whites, because that isn't where America is at at this
point.  The movie is sharp and provocative, but funny, witty, and
wonderfully entertaining.  There are movies that are simply for
entertainment, and then there are movies that are simply made to tell a
message.  Then there's Do the Right Thing.

Author
Justin Siegel
The 1980s, for me anyway, were a surprisingly 
splendid time in the world of film. The competition 
for the best film of the decade is an especially 
heated one: BLUE VELVET, David Lynch's searing, 
gut-wrenching "comedy" about the depravity that 
lurks in the house next door was one choice. 
Scorsese's RAGING BULL was another. BULL's power is 
somewhat muddied by the incredible critical 
response it recieved (I mean come on, is there one 
critic in America that _didn't_ call it the best 
film of the decade?). An "offbeat" choice that I 
could hardly disagree with is LESS THAN ZERO, a 
bleak, nihilistic portait of rich drug-addicts, 
that includes the best performance of the decade, 
by Robert Downey JR. Spike Lee's 
ultra-controversial DO THE RIGHT THING has my vote 
as best film. It seemed to capture a hot-ass 
Bed-Stuy day better than any movie could've, and 
its portrait of racial tensions between blacks and 
Italians was one of cultured thoughtfulness (the 
illiteracy of Pino, for example, which was never 
actually discussed, but easy to pick up by a 
careful watcher).
But the film was the work of a middle-class 
filmmaker (Lee) playing at being poor. While the 
film still has undeniably power, it never fully 
made me believe in Lee's comprehension of the 
lifestyle he was covering. Would a working-class 
twentysomething Brooklynite _really_ start a riot 
over "brothers on the wall"? Would another 
working-class twentysomething Brooklynite nearly 
kill an old man for breaking his radio?
Which brings me to another point. Mookie threw a 
trashcan though Sal's window because the police 
killed Radio Raheem. SAL lost his entire business 
-- his life -- because two asshole police officers 
killed a man in red hot rage. Lee has said that he 
pulled the film away from Paramount (to MCA) 
becasue the studio wanted it to end with "Mookie 
and Sal huging and singing 'We Are the World.'" 
That statement made me think: I felt angered by the 
ending of DO THE RIGHT THING, no only at the black 
rioters, but with the racist store-owners, Pino 
especially. Had the film ended as Paramount 
suggested, though, I would've felt gypped. The mark 
of a good film is that it can leave a bad taste in 
your mouth, but you'll watch it again in a second. 
DO THE RIGHT THING is one of those films.
While not a perfect film, it is as close as 
American film has come in the past 10 years. Spike 
Lee has yet to make a film better than DTRT, and I 
highly doubt he ever will.

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Spike Lee
Starring: Spike Lee, Danny Aiello, Ossie Davis, Ruby Dee, John Turturro,
Richard Edson, Giancarlo Esposito, Rosie Perez, Bill Nunn, Samuel L.
Jackson, Frank Vincent, Miguel Sandoval, Rick Aiello, John Savage,
Martin Lawrence
It's kind of weird watching 1989's "Do the Right Thing" in 1997, cheifly
because it still holds up today.  Racism and bigotry seem to rule this
country, and this is what the film seems to say.  But what's amazing
about this film, other than the fact that it does it so well, is that it
is not preachy for a single second.
"Do the Right Thing" takes place in Brooklyn on the hottest day of the
year.  We are presented to a tiny microcosm of life, featuring all sorts
of different races and cultures.  Most are black, like the protagonist
Mookie (writer/director Spike Lee), the militant hothead Buggin' Out
(Giancarlo Esposito), the Goliath-like Radio Raheem (Bill Nunn), the
slightly senile old "Da Mayor" (Ossie Davis), and the witch-like Mother
Sister (Ruby Dee).
But into this giant melting pot, we also get some korean store owners, a
couple whites here and there, the white racist cops (Miguel Sandoval and
Rick Aiello), some hispanics (like Mookie's girlfriend Tina, played by
none other than Rosie Perez, in her film debut), and of course, the
italian pizzeria owners.
The whole center of the place seems to be the pizzeria, "Sal's Famous,"
headed by, well, Sal (Danny Aiello), and also by his two sons, Pino and
Vito (John Turturro and Richard Edson, respectively), the former being a
racist who is constantly bitching about moving to the italiant
neighborhoods, and explaining that black people like Eddie Murphy are
"more than black."  Also working there as a delivery boy is Mookie.
Observing the whole film is the 12-hour radio guy, Mister Senor Love
Daddy (Samuel L. Jackson, cast as "Sam Jackson), who is constantly
making comments, including a long speech on thanking basically every
single black celebrity (although I don't remember hearing Rick James'
name being mentioned).
The film plays like a pot of boiling water, eventually bursting and
spilling over for a shocking and brilliant climax, and only being
cleaned up a bit in the ending.  For the first hour or so, we get the
daily lives kind of thing, which is nothing short of fascinating and
completely entertaining.  It seems that in one way or another, everyone
is a bit of a bigot or racist.  Even the innocent white guy who
accidentally makes bike skid marks on Buggin' Out's new Jordans ruins
his innocence by saying that they shouldn't beat him up because he was
born in Brooklyn.
The ending, as I said is brilliant, but also seems to be a precursor for
the whole Rodney King riots.  Not that it incited it in anyway, but just
seemed to prophesize what would happen since America has never really
been comfortable with its giant melting pot of cultures.  What's
remarkable is that it doesn't take sides at this event, where a lesser
film would have.
"Do the Right Thing" acts as an observer of life, and presents it in the
most responsible way.  There's almost no way to remedy this huge
problem, and the film presents no real way of curing it, other than that
"we should all just get along" (they don't say it in this film, by the
way).  Even in 1997, it's the most accurate display of racism in
America.
This was the first Spike Lee film I saw (I know, I know...), and it was
absolutely amazing.  Lee has an amazing knack for dialogue, and has the
same kind of giddy use with the camera that people like Quentin
Tarantino and Martin Scorsese have.  He wonderfully balances a huge
ensemble cast, with some standout performances from himself, Danny
Aiello, Ossie Davis, John Turturro, and Giancarlo Esposito (as well as
cameos from John Savage and Frank Vincent), and presents a world that is
never boring.
Also, look for Martin Lawrence in an early role as one of the many
inhabitants of the little mircrocosm.
"Do the Right Thing" is a wonderfully engaging film, filled with
brilliant satire, and a strong observation about a tumor in America
which has been here since it was created.  It's one of the best films of
the 80s, as well as one of the most important.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
