Title
Review for Head Over Heels (2001)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
If you think turning one of Hitchcock's greatest thrillers into a romantic
comedy is a silly idea, just wait until you see how it shakes out on the
screen. Not only is the amateurish Head Over Heels based on a lame premise,
but its co-stars are supermodels, too. Have you ever seen a supermodel act?
There's a reason Cindy Crawford has been banned from appearing in feature
films.
Heels' voiceover opening introduces us to Amanda Pierce (Monica Potter,
Patch Adams), who moved from Podunk, Iowa to Manhattan, where she restores
Renaissance paintings for the Metropolitan Museum of Art with her lesbian
best friend (China Chow) and three elderly women who warn her of the dangers
of not having a personal life. Amanda has, like, the worst judgment in men
and stuff, catching her latest beau (Timothy Olyphant, Gone in 60 Seconds)
in bed with a lingerie model.
Even though she's completely written off the idea of finding the right guy,
Amanda falls for a handsome neighbor named Jim Winston (Freddie Prinze Jr.,
Boys and Girls), whose apartment is visible from her window. Amanda becomes
obsessed with Jim, trying to convince herself that he is flawed in one way
or another. When she witnesses an apparent murder in Jim's flat, nobody
believes her, and she starts her own investigation into Jim's surprising
life. Could it all be a big misunderstanding? What're you, retarded?
Instead of being laid up with a broken leg like Jimmy Stewart in Rear
Window, Amanda's handicap is her roommates. There are four of them, and
they're all super-tall, super-thin supermodels. In typical Hollywood
fashion, they're a predictable cross-section of what us normal folk assume
prowl the catwalk - a WASP (Shalom Harlow), an Aussie bumpkin (Sarah
O'Hare), a husky-voiced Russian (Ivana Milicevic) and an African-American
(Tomiko Fraser). They teach Amanda how to take advantage of men and give her
the obligatory makeover, even though she's better (and more healthy) looking
than any of them are.
Potter's Amanda is tongue-tied, clumsy and comes off as a less talented
Julia Roberts (with a bad blonde wig), or a more talented Christina
Applegate, depending on if she's whored up or not. There are worse people to
be compared to, I guess, but Potter looks so much like Roberts, it's almost
distracting. Prinze is too young and too goofy to be taking on roles like
this, but it is interesting to point out that, like Traffic's Javier
Rodriguez, his character has a hard-on for kids and baseball.  There's a
scene where Prinze punches someone in the face, but his wrist is as limp as
Ricky Martin's.
Most of the jokes in Heels' script (penned by a hodgepodge of four writers)
revolve around the fact that supermodels are shallow, which is hardly a
revelation. Director Mark S. Waters, who displayed a talent for successfully
handling dark comedy with The House of Yes, adds nothing to the weak script.
The Go-Go's song which shares the same name as the title seemed to be added
as an afterthought.
1:40 - PG-13 for sexual content, crude humor and language

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A down-and-out girl moves in with some over-the-top models and falls in love
with a goofy-but-loveable guy from across the street. Aaaaaaaaah! Then one
day, she sees him knock a woman upside the head with a baseball bat.
Ooooooooh! She must then join together with her model-friends to find out
whether or not this guy is really goofy-but-loveable, or a psycho killer.
Aaaaaaaaah!
CRITIQUE:
Completely idiotic. Okay, so maybe I'm being a little too nice. This movie
starts off dumb, moves into the ridiculous and eventually graduates to
idiocy. There...that's more like it! And how, you may ask? Well, it's simple
really. Four of the dumbest stereotypical models in the world (oh my God, I
just found out that the actresses playing the parts are models in real
life...yipes!) join Monica Potter (in a role which can only be described as
an obvious cry for help) and Freddie Prinze Jr. (not the actor, but the
character better known as Freddie Prinze Jr.), in a plot so stupid and
far-fetched, that you have to wonder once more, how crap like this gets by
the Hollywood bigwigs. This thing stinks to high-heaven. It's just plain
embarrassing for everyone involved. I even felt my IQ dip below its usual
low as toilet humor somehow worked its way into this so-called
romantic-comedy-action movie? Ugh. What a pile of dung. Hey, I'm actually
starting to sound a little like Harry Knowles here, but I guess I could see
where his frustration comes from time to time. It's sad really. A movie
which actually had quite a few people in my audience laughing at its idiocy,
including the over-used "folks hiding in the bathroom while someone else
comes in to take a crap and fart" gag . And how about
that dumb blonde model who keeps running into things. Pure hilarity! Or
maybe I'm just too jaded, too much of a critic, not relaxed enough to enjoy
this fluff-piece...uuuhhmmm...naaaaah!! This movie sucks the big one.
It's chockfull of stupid characters delivering inane dialogue fitting
snuggly into a preposterous plot. This is the kind of movie that has one
character inserting another character into a car headfirst to the floor only
because...well, it's supposed to be funny, see? You see, that person then
has their legs swinging in the other person's face as they drive and that
distracts the driver, see, and well, that's kinda funny, no? Harumph...yeah,
well...you get the picture! Anyhoo, Freddie Prinze Jr....nuff said. Monica
Potter, a bad career move, but we might forgive you if you keep up the Julia
Roberts bit. The rest of the model girls...well, thanks for being there so I
had something to look at, but please apologize to the entire modeling
community as a whole, for making them all out to be complete imbeciles!! So
why the three points out of ten, you may ask? Well, it's simple really. One
point goes to the Russian model girl and that cool accent (don't ask me why,
but it actually turned me on). One point goes out to all of the model girls
for being in the movie (nice window decoration...natch!). And one last point
goes out to the makers of this film, who spared us any long sorted story,
and made sure to give us the opportunity of leaving the theatre after only
90 minutes of manufactured garbage, so that we could run out as fast as we
can, grab the next person that we see walking down the street and warn them
of the devil that is...Freddie Prinze Jr...I mean, HEAD OVER HEELS. You've
been warned, good people.
PS: Didja notice how I didn't even mention REAR WINDOW once in my entire
review? I didn't want to taint the memory of the classic flick by having it
uttered alongside this thing, but then again, I just did mention it, but I
guess it doesn't count in the PS section...or does it? Ooooh, whatever...I
have a headache! (I think my brain is coming back to life)
Where's JoBlo coming from?
10 Things I Hate about You (7/10) - Coyote Ugly (6.5/10) - Down to You
(6.5/10) - Save the Last Dance (7/10) - She's All That (6.5/10) - The
Wedding Planner (4/10) - You've Got Mail (5.5/10)

Author
Edwin Jahiel

HEAD OVER HEELS (2001) Zero *. Directed by Mark S. Waters. Written by 
a half-dozen males. Executive produced by four or five. Photography, 
Mark Plummer. Editing, Cara Silverman, Production design, Pery 
Andelin Blake. Music, Steve Pararo, Cast:  Monica Pierce (Amanda), 
Freddie Prinze (Jim), Sarah O'Hare, Shalom Harlow, Tomiko Frazer , 
Ivana Milicevic (the four models),  et al. About 100 minutes. PG-13.
April may be the cruelest month, but from January on the cruelty of 
bad movies dominates the screen. Summertime is overwhelmingly for 
schoolchildren of all ages, from 10 to 50 -- with inane action, 
pallid romances, and flat comedies. The "good" season,  from fall 
through December, shows the best of a bad lot plus the better stuff 
of potential Oscar candidates. Year-round small salvations may come 
from some foreign movies as well  as from American rookie (or 
not-too-commercial) filmmakers.
The non-story of Head Over Heels comes from about six writers whose 
right hands did not know what the left ones were doing.  If those 
fellows ever got together it must have been by e-mail only.
In this flick, Amanda is a talented paintings restorer in New York's 
Metropolitan Museum. She's devoted to her work, but her boyfriends 
are not devoted to her. Catching the latest one in bed with a new 
girl, she moves to the upscale apartment shared with four 
super-(almost) models. The rent is a dirt-cheap $500, but then her 
room turns out to be a closet. However, there's the adjoining huge, 
luxurious space with shelves and amenities for clothes, shoes, hats, 
perfumes and other tools of the trade.
So far so good. But past the opening sequences the film plunges as if 
attempting suicide. In that building Amanda meets tenant Jim as he 
takes for a walk a huge Great Dane. (It belongs to someone 
immobilized in bed.) An elevator door opens, out come Jim and Hamlet 
(the hound) who breaks away and throws himself amorously on the girl, 
if you get my drift. The gag, linguistically and physically, is very 
broad. Perhaps one of the writers was thinking that Great Danes go 
for great dames.
Jim is in the fashion trade but nothing is specified about this  --or 
anything else-- in this vaguer and vaguer picture. His apartment 
faces the five women's, its windows are never curtained or draped. A 
veritable fishbow for the ladies' eyes.  Amanda, egged on by her four 
matchmaking housemates, quickly falls for Jim. He  who responds, but 
so awkwardly, lamely, unclearly that the movie keeps losing its 
interest exponentially.
All that is supposed to be funny and humorous. It is not. It's not 
even cute. The writers sleepwalk through the non-plot. Unable to 
invent anything, they opt for a bad clone of Hitchcock's "Rear 
Window." As the he five Peeping Tomasinas (Amanda & Co.) spy on Jim, 
they see something vague which makes them think that Jim has murdered 
a woman. The girls now sleuth  in a series of stupid,  disconnected 
scenes and events. I'll stop here.
Of course you've guessed already that the girls are wrong, that 
Amanda and Jim are fated to kiss -- and tell. In his telling there's 
a major twist which is  unbelievable and terribly handled.
What holds a smidgen of interest in the caricature (or is it a 
faithful rendition?) of the four models. They are airheads, 
uncultured, even idiotic. Their life revolves around fashion, sex 
with the improper stranger, ornaments, plastic surgery, money.and 
such. It's La Dolce Vita, Gotham-style. Their language is salty but 
not colorful, their vocabulary, basic. The gags and jokes are 
repetitiously recycled. They range from inane to tired, from 
feeble-inded  to scatological.
When the girls are all hiding together in a lavatory 's cubicle 
(don't ask) to the tune of disgusting body noises the toilet erupts 
like a volcano and covers the ladies from head to toe with an 
accumulation of thick, stinking, brown... let's call it lava.
You get the clear feeling that, at five-minute intervals the 
flickmakers are wondering  "where do we go next?"
Amanda (Monica Pierce) is a pallid presence, though occasionally a 
pleasant one. The housemates are characterless yet irritating. In 
real life,  sane persons of any sexual preference would put them in 
an address-book under the rubric "Avoid at any cost."
Jim (Freddie Prinze) is so bland that it ought to be forbidden by law.
Movie reviews by Edwin Jahiel are at : http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel 

Author
Robin Clifford
Pretty young art restorer Amanda Pierce (Monica Potter) has a great job at
the Metropolitan Museum of Art, but you can't say the same about her luck
with men. When she catches her latest beau in the, shall we say, arms of
another woman, a model, she rushes away and gets an apartment with, guess
what? A bunch of models in "Head Over Heels."
In a word, "Head Over Heels" is a mess. It starts off as offbeat romantic
comedy with Amanda, a fish out of water, thrown into a pool of sharks - her
four super-model roomies, Jade (Shalom Harlow), Roxana (Ivana Milicevic),
Candi (Sarah O'Hare) and Holly (Tomiko Fraser). Their goal is to get Amanda
a man and things progress along this path, inanely, for a while. Then,
suddenly, the flick morphs into a rip-off (the filmmakers probably call it
an homage) to Alfred Hitchcock's "Rear Window" and a totally silly murder
mystery
When Amanda agrees to pay her roommates $500 a month for what is
essentially a closet, she enters a world where men constantly hang around
the front door of the gorgeous models in hopes of getting the privilege to
lavish money upon one or all of the beautiful girls. As the five become
friends, the models take on the quest to find Amanda the man of her dreams.
This turns into a Peeping Tomasina tale when Amanda and her new buddies spy
on a handsome neighbor, Jim Winston (Freddie Prinz, Jr.), a fashion
executive.
Amanda gets weak in the knees when she finally meets Jim, a condition that
only used to happen when she saw a great painting, and true love appears
imminent. At this point, about 45 minutes into "Head Over Heels," things
twist and Amanda believes she has witnessed murder of a woman, by her new
amour, in his shade-drawn apartment. The police, of course, find nothing
and treat Amanda and her girlfriends as a bunch of bubbleheads.
The girls decide to forego the police and begin their own investigation of
events. But, this becomes muddled and confused as we lose sight of "the
murder." Is Amanda looking to solve the supposed killing or is she looking
for Mr. Right? It becomes apparent that it's the latter she wants as she
romances and beds Jim, even though she's remains uncertain about his
possible murderous streak. Everything is tied up, sloppily, by the film's
end.
The story for this mess is attributed to a committee of writers - John J.
Strauss, Ed Decter, David Kidd and Ron Burch - and it shows in its
scattershot approach to the disjointed material. Two of the hacks
responsible for "Head Over Heals." Strauss and Decter, hale from "There's
Something About Mary," and bathroom humor pervades the whole tale, mostly
in poor taste. Wee-wee and toilet jokes, number two gags, (unfulfilled) T&A
humor and other childish whimsy are used to replace a real story with what
amounts to 90 minutes of unfunny vignettes.
The press material for "Head Over Heals" touts Freddie Prinz, Jr., as the
Cary Grant of the new millennium. He's not. In fact, this extraordinarily
bland actor never seems to change from one film to the next. His
expressions vary between blank and uncomfortable and he gives no life to
his dual character here. Oh, yeah, you find out in the second half that Jim
Winston is really Bob Smoots, an FBI agent working under cover on some case
or another. But, who really cares?
Top-billed Monica Potter is pretty enough as Amanda, but her good looks
can't help her get around the horrible script. The camera loves to look at
her in close up and she suffers the least, of the two leads, from the bad
writing. The four women playing Amanda's roommates are a quartet of
good-looking ladies, providing ample eye candy. Sarah O'Hare comes across
best, in a slapstick way, as Aussie model Candi. Her ongoing cosmetic
surgeries and comic pratfalls rep some of the few laugh throughout the
film. The rest of the cast should have stayed home.
Director Mark Walters shoulders the burden of responsibility for "Head Over
Heals" and should do what he can to place blame elsewhere. There is little,
if any, chemistry from the behind the camera crew to help lift the leaden
script from its doldrums.
Mein Gott in Himmel! What were these people thinking?! If a friend suggests
going to see "Head Over Heels," run away as fast as you can and get
yourself a new friend. The fact that it's in focus is one of the few
reasons this doesn't get the absolute lowest grade. Still, I give it a D-
and that's pretty bad.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Bob Bloom

Head Over Heels (2001) 1/2 star out of 4. Starring Freddie Prinze Jr.,
Monica Potter,  Sarah O'Hare, Shalom Harlow, Ivana Milicevic, Tomiko
Fraser, China Chow and Jay Brazeau. Story by John J. Strauss & Ed Decter
& David Kidd & Ron Burch. Screenplay by Ron Burch & David Kidd. Directed
by Mark Waters.
  It is only the charm of Freddie Prinze Jr. that keeps Head Over Heels
from being a total disaster.
 As it is this so-called comedy is ó even at just about 90 minutes ó
long, lame and lamentable.
 Yet Prinzeís winning personality, his shy smile, his light approach,
raises Head Over Heels from abominable to merely mediocre.
 Head Over Heels is so pathetic it raises The Wedding Planner to the
level of an American Beauty.
 It's difficult to believe that four writers worked on this story,
luckily only two of them get screen credit, but all their names and
faces should be posted in Americaís post offices under the crime of
impersonating a screenwriter. The screenplay, a kindly description for
what supposedly passes as one, is credited to Ron Burch and David Kidd.
The story is credited to Bruch, Kidd, John J. Strauss and Ed Decter.
 Oh yes, ěthe story.î Letís see, single woman in New York canít find Mr.
Right. Gee, how original. How many times have we walked this path? Too
many to count or even bother.
 Suffice it to say that Monica Potter plays Amanda Pierce, an art
restorer, who likes art better than real life. It seems the men she
always picks eventually hurt her.
 The latest one is in bed with a model one day when she comes home early
from work.
 Amanda, seeking new digs, moves in with four models, all portrayed as
self-centered, shallow airheads, only interested in the gifts they can
wheedle from panting men.
 Then Amanda meets Jim (Prinze) and sparks fly. And how do we know that
heís the one? Simple, earlier one of the models told Amanda that when
she meets the right man her knees would buckle. So guess what happens
when she meets Jim?
 From there everything goes downhill, with Jim suspected of being a
killer, and then the story taking a sharp left turn involving Russian
mobsters and diamond smuggling.
 The movie goes off in as many directions as a politician trying to
please all his constituents.
 Even the music is terrible, sounding like rejected tracks from episodes
of The Brady Bunch.
 Head Over Heels is a stinker, a dud. Itís a corny B-programmer; its
sole purpose to fill empty screens until something better comes along.
 This is a movie that is totally forgettable. As a matter of fact, Iíve
forgotten about it already.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net Other reviews by Bloom can be found at
www.jconline.com by clicking on golafayette.
 Bloom's reviews also can be found on the Web at the Internet Movie
Database: http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
Edwin Jahiel

HEAD OVER HEELS (2001) Zero *. Directed by Mark S. Waters. Written by 
a half-dozen males. Executive produced by four or five. Photography, 
Mark Plummer. Editing, Cara Silverman, Production design, Pery 
Andelin Blake. Music, Steve Pararo, Cast:  Monica Pierce (Amanda), 
Freddie Prinze (Jim), Sarah O'Hare, Shalom Harlow, Tomiko Frazer , 
Ivana Milicevic (the four models),  et al. About 100 minutes. PG-13.
April may be the cruelest month, but from January on the cruelty of 
bad movies dominates the screen. Summertime is overwhelmingly for 
schoolchildren of all ages, from 10 to 50 -- with inane action, 
pallid romances, and flat comedies. The "good" season,  from fall 
through December, shows the best of a bad lot plus the better stuff 
of potential Oscar candidates. Year-round small salvations may come 
from some foreign movies as well  as from American rookie (or 
not-too-commercial) filmmakers.
The non-story of Head Over Heels comes from about six writers whose 
right hands did not know what the left ones were doing.  If those 
fellows ever got together it must have been by e-mail only.
In this flick, Amanda is a talented paintings restorer in New York's 
Metropolitan Museum. She's devoted to her work, but her boyfriends 
are not devoted to her. Catching the latest one in bed with a new 
girl, she moves to the upscale apartment shared with four 
super-(almost) models. The rent is a dirt-cheap $500, but then her 
room turns out to be a closet. However, there's the adjoining huge, 
luxurious space with shelves and amenities for clothes, shoes, hats, 
perfumes and other tools of the trade.
So far so good. But past the opening sequences the film plunges as if 
attempting suicide. In that building Amanda meets tenant Jim as he 
takes for a walk a huge Great Dane. (It belongs to someone 
immobilized in bed.) An elevator door opens, out come Jim and Hamlet 
(the hound) who breaks away and throws himself amorously on the girl, 
if you get my drift. The gag, linguistically and physically, is very 
broad. Perhaps one of the writers was thinking that Great Danes go 
for great dames.
Jim is in the fashion trade but nothing is specified about this  --or 
anything else-- in this vaguer and vaguer picture. His apartment 
faces the five women's, its windows are never curtained or draped. A 
veritable fishbow for the ladies' eyes.  Amanda, egged on by her four 
matchmaking housemates, quickly falls for Jim. He  who responds, but 
so awkwardly, lamely, unclearly that the movie keeps losing its 
interest exponentially.
All that is supposed to be funny and humorous. It is not. It's not 
even cute. The writers sleepwalk through the non-plot. Unable to 
invent anything, they opt for a bad clone of Hitchcock's "Rear 
Window." As the he five Peeping Tomasinas (Amanda & Co.) spy on Jim, 
they see something vague which makes them think that Jim has murdered 
a woman. The girls now sleuth  in a series of stupid,  disconnected 
scenes and events. I'll stop here.
Of course you've guessed already that the girls are wrong, that 
Amanda and Jim are fated to kiss -- and tell. In his telling there's 
a major twist which is  unbelievable and terribly handled.
What holds a smidgen of interest in the caricature (or is it a 
faithful rendition?) of the four models. They are airheads, 
uncultured, even idiotic. Their life revolves around fashion, sex 
with the improper stranger, ornaments, plastic surgery, money.and 
such. It's La Dolce Vita, Gotham-style. Their language is salty but 
not colorful, their vocabulary, basic. The gags and jokes are 
repetitiously recycled. They range from inane to tired, from 
feeble-inded  to scatological.
When the girls are all hiding together in a lavatory 's cubicle 
(don't ask) to the tune of disgusting body noises the toilet erupts 
like a volcano and covers the ladies from head to toe with an 
accumulation of thick, stinking, brown... let's call it lava.
You get the clear feeling that, at five-minute intervals the 
flickmakers are wondering  "where do we go next?"
Amanda (Monica Pierce) is a pallid presence, though occasionally a 
pleasant one. The housemates are characterless yet irritating. In 
real life,  sane persons of any sexual preference would put them in 
an address-book under the rubric "Avoid at any cost."
Jim (Freddie Prinze) is so bland that it ought to be forbidden by law.
Movie reviews by Edwin Jahiel are at : http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel 

Author
Annette Cardwell
With Freddie Prinze Jr., a perky Julia Roberts-wannabe girl next door,
four models, and a comic-relief dog, Head Over Heels has something for
everyone.  That is if "everyone" is under the age of 18.  The rest of us
will likely wonder what happened to the need for a decent story or a
well-written script, but then again, this movie is not made for the rest
of us.
In line with the recent and unbelievably profitable string of lame teen
films like Save the Last Dance and Dude, Where's My Car?, Head Over
Heels is a train wreck of bad lines and predictable plot twists. 
Fortunately, all the passengers involved are pretty damn attractive,
plus it's occasionally funny (even if the laughs come mostly during the
movie's most dramatic, heartfelt moments).
The story begins with good-hearted art restorer Amanda (Monica Potter)
breaking up with yet another bad boyfriend and moving into a new
apartment with a klatch of supermodels.  In the apartment across the
way, she spies hunky fashion exec Jim Winston (Prinze) who makes her as
weak in the knees as paintings by Titian (yes, that is a good thing). 
And Jim truly is Mr. Perfect: successful, washboard abs, loves babies,
coaches Little League, and even has a hint of vulnerability (he's
asthmatic -- awww).
Unfortunately, unlucky Amanda -- in her nightly spate of voyeurism --
spies Jim beating a woman to death.  Is her dream man a psycho-killer? 
Monica and her runway crew do some detective work to find out.  Of
course, this naturally involves some major, slapstick hijinks. 
According to the film's Web site, the filmmakers were going for a
"Hitchcock-style thriller" played "for laughs."  [Hitchcock tried this
himself with The Trouble with Harry and that was a pretty miserable
film, too. -Ed.]
Obviously, the result is nowhere near the first, and only occasionally
does it hit the second goal.  But, you're more likely to be eliciting
groans instead of chuckles, especially with lines like the one Prinze
delivers after his first sexual encounter with Amanda that goes
something like, "After tonight, I think I'm moving to a new town:
Amandaville."  Yep, that Prinze must be a master thespian to keep a
straight face while delivering that tripe.
On a positive note, you'll be treated to a decent performance from China
Chow as Amanda's sharp-tongued lesbian co-worker, though we don't see
nearly enough of her in the film.  There are also some shocking
non-sequiters thrown into the mix to keep you on your toes.  Overall,
most of Heels makes Dawson's Creek look like Masterpiece Theater. 
Judging from the coos and sighs coming from the crowd at this screening
(which also screamed and applauded for free Backstreet Boys tickets),
that's not likely to matter.
Director: Mark Waters
Producer: Robert Simonds
Writer: Ron Burch, David Kidd
Starring: Freddie Prinze, Jr., Monica Potter, Shalom Harlow, Ivana
Milicevic, Sarah O'Hare, Tomiko Fraser
Web site: http://www.headoverheels.net
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Laura Clifford
When naive art restorer Amanda (Monica Potter, "Patch Adams") finds her
new boyfriend in bed with a model, she starts looking for a new apartment
in the Big Apple and, after a brief stay with friend Lisa (China Chow,
"The Big Hit"), finds a fabulous one.  The hitch?  She must share it with four 
models.  Amanda, still smarting from her bad relationship, also falls "Head 
Over Heels" for Jim (Freddie Prinze Jr.), a guy she 'meets cute' in her
new building's lobby (she's sexually attacked by his Great Dane, Hamlet).
Amanda's four new roomies claim to have banded together because they're the
only four non-smoking models in NYC, but they're really a cliched United 
Nations of hair color.  Holly (Tomiko Fraser) represents the African American, 
Candi (Sarah O'Hare) is a ditzy blond Aussie, Jade (Shalom Harlow, "In 
and Out") is the brunette and Roxanna (Ivana Milicevic, "Enemy of the State"), 
a flame haired Russian.  They immediately make it their cause to make over the
already stunning Amanda and get her connected with Jim, the fashion executive 
whose apartment can be spied on from their living room.  Meanwhile, Amanda's
coworkers (the flip side of her roomies comprised of three batty old women and
her lesbian friend Lisa) also push her towards romance.
As soon as attraction between the two stars is established, the film takes an
absurd twist into "Rear Window" territory when Amanda (and none of her
roommates) believes she sees Jim murder a model.  The police (wisely) blow
off the girls as bubbleheads, so they begin to tail Jim.  Disgustingly unfunny
bathroom humor, in a desperate attempt to connect with the successful gross
out humor of "There's Something About Mary" and "Meet the Parents," ensues.
This script - (Screenplay and Story By Ron Burch & David Kidd; Story By
Ed Decter and John Strauss, "There's Something About Mary") is the sorriest 
piece of work that's been greenlit in over a year of weak Hollywood product.
The smallest details are ripped off from Amanda's profession to an aquarium 
scene that recalls "Manhattan" to a climatic Amanda utterance that originated 
in "Sid and Nancy!"  Director Mark Waters ("The House of Yes") keeps focus on 
his relatively small cast in what must be the deadest Fashion Week in NYC 
history.
I have a rule that no film receives an F rating if it has anything at all going
for it.  While the cast is bland with a capital 'B,' O'Hare and Milicevic bring
some personality to the lame proceedings.  Technically the film is adequate.
"Head Over Heels" has its head firmly planted someplace other than over its 
heels.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
HEAD OVER HEELS, a romantic comedy twist on REAR WINDOW, stars Monica 
Potter as amateur sleuth Amanda Pierce and Freddie Prinze Jr. as Jim 
Winston, a fashion exec who may or may not have murdered a woman in his 
apartment.  Amanda, a Renaissance painting restorer by trade, thinks she 
saw the murder through the window of her Manhattan apartment.  If you 
can't figure out whether Jim is actually a murderer, consider your 
inability as prima facie evidence that you need a break, since you are 
clearly below your minimum movie quota.
"There are four million men in New York," Amanda complains soon after we 
meet her.  "Why can't I find just one.  Just one!"  Well, when she lays 
eyes on the poster-boy-handsome Jim, it is love at first sight, at least 
for her.  They meet inauspiciously when the monster-sized dog he is 
walking knocks her down and starts trying to hump her.  Like much of the 
movie, it sounds funnier that it is.
Soon, Amanda goes from being weak-kneed over her art to swooning at the 
sight of a flesh-and-blood man.  Breaking off their conversation on the 
street, she tells Jim, "I've got the runs.  I mean I've got to run."  
The script by Ron Burch and David Kidd sporadically comes up with such 
cute dialog, but, too often, it falls back on the old clichés of 
everyone literally falling head over heels.  Falling as a 
laughter-inducing stunt gets old after about the second fall. Okay, 
maybe the third.  Given that director Mark S. Waters's first and only 
other film is the wonderfully edgy, black comedy, THE HOUSE OF YES, also 
featuring Prinze, one might reasonably assume that HEAD OVER HEELS would 
take risks.  Instead, it plays it as safe as a TV movie remake of a 
Doris Day comedy.  
Amanda rents a closet in an apartment owned by four models, Jade (Shalom 
Harlow), Roxana (Ivana Milicevic), Candi (Sarah O'Hare) and Holly 
(Tomiko Fraser), whose weights and IQs hover around 100.  Amanda's room 
is literally a closet, since they have turned the closet's bedroom into 
a storage area large enough to hold their bulging wardrobe.  Every night 
outside the models' door, a horde of hunks assembles, wanting to be the 
models' salivating slaves for the evening.  The models treat the men 
like dirt while squandering their money.
The movie never gets the proper comedic payoff from the models because 
it never ratchets up the sleaze factor enough.  Still, some easy jabs at 
their desire to destroy their bodies for the sake of their profession do 
come across as funny.  One model, for example, is in the process of 
having her earlobes fixed so that they will be perfectly symmetric.
As Amanda tries to find out if Jim is a dreamboat or a killer, she falls 
hopelessly in love with him.  The movie's fatal flaw is that theirs is a 
one-way romance.  We believe that Amanda loves Jim.  We never believe 
that the feeling is genuinely reciprocated, and their chemistry together 
has as many sparks as a California blackout.  A romantic comedy requires 
not only laugher, but love.  And love has to be a two-way street.
HEAD OVER HEELS runs 1:31.  It is rated PG-13 for sexual content, crude 
humor and language and would be acceptable for kids around 11 or 12 and 
up.
My son Jeffrey, age 11, gave the movie ** 1/2.  Although he thought the 
movie was funny in parts, especially those involving the models, he 
thought the plot was flat and needed improvement.  
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Ross Anthony
"I'm the woman with the worst judgment in men," admits Amanda (Monica 
Potter). Having been cheated once too many times, she leaves her latest 
disloyal boyfriend and rents a closet (err... room) in an extravagant 
apartment occupied by four goofy models and overlooking the residence of 
Jim Winsten (Freddie Prinze Jr.). Having sworn off men forever, she 
buries herself in her work (fine art restoration) and then, of course, 
gets weak in the knees for Freddie upon first meeting. But will he fall 
head over heels too, or will he be just like all the other men in this 
movie, or will he turn out to be a phony, liar, Vespa rider? 
Early on choppy editing left the production awkwardly timed. At Monica's 
workplace, the group of three senior ladies felt horribly filmed and 
added later. After a sticky first 20 minutes, the editing found a decent 
groove and the rough-edged acting also improved to adequate. 
The first meeting of Monica and Jim balances the sweet charming beats 
with ouch wince-able beats. Much of the humor lies in stuttery, got the 
words wrong because I'm in love, type dialogue, "I got the runs ... I 
ah, mean, I gotta run." 
Monica Potter shows some promise, gracing the screen with a reminiscence 
of Julia Roberts gone blonde and unrefined. "He must have some huge flaw 
... because I'm attracted to him." 
Freddie Prinze, Jr. simply smiled and giggled his way through the 
picture. 
4 models + 1 cop = a very bad scene. However, the two fish tank scenes 
brought a maturity and class to a production sorely unaware that those 
qualities were lacking. Though neither classy nor mature, by far the 
funniest two scenes required a toilet. (But they really were funny!) 
But hey, what do I know? I'm not a fourteen year old girl. 
Head Over Heels. Copyright Š 2001. Rated R. 
*  Starring Monica Potter, Freddie Prinze, Jr., Sarah O'Hare, Shalom 
Harlow, Ivana Milicevic, Tomiko Fraser, China Chow, Jay Brazeau. 
*  Directed by Mark Waters. 
*  Written by Ron Burch, David Kidd. 
*  Produced by Robert Simonds at Universal. 
Grade..........................B-
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 
