Title
Review for Bittersweet Motel (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
You don't have to worry about focus, lighting or subject material; you 
just point your camcorder and shoot.  Editing is basically unnecessary, 
and you can just play the tape wherever you left off last.  After all, 
your only intended audience is your friends, who are already predisposed 
to like it anyway.
So it is with Todd Phillips's BITTERSWEET MOTEL, a documentary about the 
rock group called Phish.  I had never heard of Phish before this movie, 
which may reveal something about my age.  Not having previous interest 
in a subject, however, should be no hindrance.  I had never thought much 
about electric chair construction or about the grunge rock movement, but 
the documentaries about them, Errol Morris's MR. DEATH and Doug Pray's 
HYPE!, were absolutely engrossing.
In contrast, BITTERSWEET MOTEL is so formless that I began to wonder if 
the projectionist might have scrambled the reels.  The documentary is as 
generic as the band it follows.  Their bland music reminds me of the 
sort of things that I hear playing from the ceiling while lying in the 
dentist's chair.  It is relaxing but completely forgettable.
But, just because the band isn't the next Rolling Stones, it does not 
follow that a documentary about them has to be so lifeless.  We clearly 
see that this good-spirited group, described as dorks by some of their 
loyal fans, does enjoy their work.  They pride themselves on their 
improvisational playing, with the result that every concert of theirs is 
different.  
The members of Phish certainly don't take themselves too seriously.  
Their guitarist, Trey Anastasio, remarks after one of their 
self-described best concerts that they were "almost as good as James 
Brown on his worst day."  Earlier Trey explains why he could never be 
the next Jimi Hendrix.   Jimi grew up listening to the blues, whereas 
Trey spent his formative years, hanging out in New Jersey shopping 
malls.  This is about as insightful as this movie ever gets.
In summary, BITTERSWEET MOTEL is for Phish fans only.
BITTERSWEET MOTEL runs what feels like a very long 1:20.  It is not 
rated but would be an R for brief instances of language, drug usage and 
mass nudity.  Absent these brief sections, the movie is pure G.  It 
would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Christopher Null
Much as all the cheerleaders wrote to tell me how horrible I was for not
liking Bring It On, I am prepared for the onslaught of Phish fans
telling me how naďve I am for not falling in love with Bittersweet
Motel, a documentary about Phish's music and, presumably, its soul.
A spare 82-minute flick about the unimaginably popular band, this
folkumentary is long on concert footage and short on any real insight
into the group.  There are plenty of songs about pumpkins, circuses, and
big black furry creatures from Mars, but the offstage footage is
typically composed of de rigueur diatribes about critics, heartfelt
discussions about "the energy, man" and the typical shenanigans expected
of any touring musical group (that is: late nights fueled by drugs).
Is there any insight into Phish provided?  Not really.  The fans can't
explain their love for the "higher level of musical appreciation" Phish
exudes, and the band can't explain why it was chosen to follow in the
footsteps of the Grateful Dead.  In candid moments, the band even comes
off as rude and juvenile, so flippant toward the fans that made it the
huge success it is that the roadies conspire to cut off their heads
whenever someone is gauche enough to ask for a photo of themselves with
the group.  It's just plain rude, and it makes you like the band (and
the movie) less and less.
The film is capably made, with fluid concert footage and three audio
differently-mastered tracks to choose from on the DVD.  Phish fans (and
let's face it: if you're watching this movie, you're a Phish fan) will
also enjoy the 35 minutes of outtakes provided on the disk as bonus
material.
Light up and drop out, folks.  But you'll be hungry in about an hour.
Director: Todd Phillips
Producer: Todd Phillips
Starring: Trey Anastasio, Jon Fishman, Mike Gordon, Page McConnell
http://www.bittersweetmotel.com/bittersweetmotel/index.html
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
