Title
Review for Caveman's Valentine, The (2001)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Universal Focus/ Franchise Pictures
 Director: Kasi Lemmons
 Writer:  George Dawes Green based on his novel
 Cast: Samuel L. Jackson, Colm Feore, Ann Magnuson,
Annjanne Ellis, Tamara Tunie, Jay Rodan, Anthony Michael
Hall
   We who live in big cities know people who are not all
there--not just neurotics (that's all of us) but neighbors,
perhaps, certainly some of the homeless who are downright
psychotic.  We don't know what they see that we don't, but
they appear to have rich fantasy lives, whether yelling at
unknown enemies or huddled against a building talking to
themselves.  What some people don't realize is that most of
these deranged people have perfectly lucid moments and
some are even geniuses.  (Excellent movie about the latter
would be, of course, Philip Kaufman's "Quills" about the
tormented Marquis de Sade who smuggles literary works
from his asylum. and Scott Hicks's "Shine," about a brilliant
pianist who has turned into a babbling idiot.)  Geoffrey Rush,
extraordinary in both roles, has nothing on our own Samuel L.
Jackson, who in "The Caveman's Valentine" performs in the
role of a luminous pianist-composer, formerly associated with
the Juilliard school, who has become unhinged in the mind
when he begins to hear voices from the fanciful Cornelius
Gould Stuyvesant from atop the Chrysler building.  Even
more fascinating, he has sexual visions of dancers swirling
about (captured wonderfully by Amelia Vincent's lens), seen
either before or after his world turns sickly green--which
signals the audience that he's about to go over the top, to do
something unpredictable and mesmerizing.
   Mesmerizing is the word to describe Samuel L. Jackson's
performance in a film made by Kasi Lemmons, whose "Eve's
Bayou" was named by Roger Ebert the best movie is its year. 
While the Kasi Lemmons touch is on display in this second
effort, given the superstitions and voodoo that contributed to
the gothic atmosphere of "Eve's Bayou," this movie most
resembles Terry Gilliam's "The Fisher King," about a self-
absorbed radio personality whose deep depression is lifted by
a street person who needs rescue himself.
  What drove this man, one Romulus Ledbetter (Samuel L.
Jackson), off the deep end?  Who knows?  What turns a well-
adjusted person into a paranoid schizophrenic is too complex
a subject to tackle in a film or normal length.  Instead,
George Dawes Green, whose 1994 novle is the basis of his
screenplay, appears even more interested in the rational
motivations of the man than in his oddity.  When Ledbetter--
whose lives in a cave and is ridiculed by the local yahoos--
discovers the inert body of a young man seemingly living in a
tree, he rejects the police determination that the victim simply
froze to death and is determined to investigate the case to
win back the favor of his police officer daughter, Lulu
(Aunjanue Ellis).
   Believing at first that the victim was murdered by
Ledbetter's archenemy Stuyvesant, he later comes to
consider a high-profile artist to be the culprit.  He suspects
David Leppenraub (Colm Feore) of torturing the young man
to death in order to evoke the needed emotions for his
images.  After penetrating  the affluent world of a bankruptcy
laywer, Bob (Anthony Michael Hall), who lends him a suit, he
uses a contact to enter the domain of the artist and in the
process has a sexual liaison with the artist's free-living sister
Moira (Ann Magnuson).  For a while Ledbetter's lucid
moments enable him to deliver a sparkling rendition of a
piano work by Terence Blanchard, allowing him time snoop
around to discover clues that would implicate the arrogant
artist in the murder.
   "The Caveman's Valentine," then, is both a neo-gothic
murder mystery and an exploration of the disturbed mind of a
genius, each allowing the audience to thrill to the remarkable
acting talents of Sam Jackson.  Director Lemmons has
covered the bearded Jackson in dreads down to his waist,
eyes expressively bulging while he rants to strangers on the
sidewalk yet talks softly to his daughter and to his imagined
wife Sheila (Tamara Tunie).  As though his frightening visions
of dementia were not enough, Lemmons introduces quickly-
edited black-and-white frames from Ledbetter's earlier and
more down-to-earth life which are contrasted with the striking
but undeveloped imagery from his unhealthy mind.  
   Though "The Caveman's Valentine" calls for quite a
suspension of disbelief--positing that a rich lawyer and well-
known artist would without hesitation invite such a disheveled
man in their homes and that the sister of the artist would
have no problem bedding the homeless man--the film rivets
by Mr. Jackson's raw ability to convey the dimensions of
paranoid schizophrenia, by the contrasting personality of the
artist played with appropriate restraint by the talented Colm
Feore, and by the regard that the imaginative Lemmons
shows for movies as a visual medium.
Rated R.  Running time: 103 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Ross Anthony
Living in a cave of rocks in a New York park, Rom (Jackson) believes a 
devil-like being emits powerful rays of evil over the city from atop the 
Chrysler building. Rom's demons (good and bad) also dance a game of 
"give and take" from just about any corner of his brain. When the 
tension comes to a boil, multiple superimposed images of orange 
ballerinas bring the demons/muses to life in an effectively splintered 
display surfacing in his mind like bubbles. Will they rule him with fear 
or will he become the choreographer of their intention? 
Jackson is as comfortable in this role as dreadlocks on a Rastafarian. 
He looks and plays great. Kudos to the make-up coordinator. 
Into Jackson's primitive, delusional existence comes a single homicide 
setting Rom on a one-man mission to avenge the victim's death. 
Disregarded by his police officer daughter as schizophrenic, Rom 
persistently amasses evidence, uncovering clues with his direct, brutal 
honesty. Hindered by episodes of dementia, Rom walks the slippery tight 
rope of sanity. Appearing only to him as if from the dead, his estranged 
wife speaks like his conscious, sometimes encouraging, sometimes 
critical, always direct. Rom's primal presence contrasts splendidly 
against the suit-wearing civilized. 
The artistic direction on this film rocks. A photographer's basement 
work area sharply detailed with implements and props fills the screen 
like a painting - perfectly lit and exposed on a rich stock of film. 
Further, I love the choice of music meant to be Rom's composition. His 
passionate moments at the piano are an audio/visual/emotional treat for 
the eyes, ears and heart. Rom's dreadlocks resonating like piano 
strings. 
The dialogue, though occasionally sticky, often hosts tasty bites:
Moira, "Arnold tells me you're a genius."
Rom, "Genius at what?"
Moira, "Music."
Rom, "He misrepresents my talent, I can put a match in my mouth and 
light up my smile like a jack-o'-lantern." 
(Btw, he actually performs that trick - a wonderfully haunting image 
that glows appropriately in this hearty production.) 
Though there are many, many excellent scenes (report read on subway 
train, self-pep talk prior to up-scale party, "balloon" reminiscing 
scene w/daughter in car, the demon moth images over credits, the music, 
etc.), there are also more than just a few sticky moments either poorly 
acted or edited or scripted. While those rough edges don't dominate nor 
are they potent enough to deter the robust and passionate swell created 
by the abundant masterfully crafted scenes, they do succeed in denying 
the production overall greatness. 
Still, a very strong B+, "The Caveman's Valentine" simply stirred me. 
The Caveman's Valentine. Copyright Š 2001. Rated R. 
*  Starring Samuel L. Jackson, Colm Feore, Ann Magnuson, Damir Andrei, 
Aunjanue Ellis, Tamara Tunie, Peter McNeill, Jay Rodan, Rodney Eastman, 
Anthony Michael Hall, Kate McNeil. 
*  Directed by Kasi Lemmons. 
*  Written by George Dawes Green (based on his novel of same name) 
*  Produced by Danny Devito, Michael Shamberg, Stacey Sher, Elie Samaha, 
Andrew Stevens at Jersey Shore/Franchise/Universal focus. 
Grade..........................B+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Author
Robin Clifford
Romulus Ledbetter was a Julliard-trained classical musician and a devoted
family man who lost his mind. He now lives in a cave on the edge of
Manhattan and is haunted by a delusional enemy, Cornelius Gould Stuyvesant,
who manipulates Rom's life from atop the Chrysler building. But, when
Ledbetter finds a frozen corpse outside his home, he must put aside his
dementia and solve the murder in "The Caveman's Valentine."
Kasi Lemmons, an accomplished actress and screenwriter, made quite a splash
with her debut-directing job, "Eve's Bayou," which was the highest grossing
independent film of 1997. With "The Caveman's Valentine," she uses George
Dawes Green's adaptation of his own novel to unfold a murder mystery with
Romulus as a very unlikely homicide detective.
The murder story enveloping Romulus involves a handsome young drifter,
Scotty Gates (Sean MacMahon), found dead atop a tree outside of the old
schizophrenic's cave. When the police, including Rom's cop daughter Lulu
(Aunjanue Ellis), dismiss the transient's death, the former music master
must piece the clues together alone. He becomes convinced that a prominent
Manhattan art photographer, David Leppenraub (Colm Feore), is the murderer.
But, who is going to believe the ranting of a crazy man living in a cave?
The brightest point of "The Caveman's Valentine" is the terrific character
depiction of Romulus Ledbetter by Samuel L. Jackson. In his last three
outings he has played a bad ass private dick in "Shaft," a physically
handicapped mass murderer in search of a hero in "Unbreakable," and, in
"The Caveman's Valentine" a mentally broken artiste who must put aside his
dementia to solve a murder. The actor puts a completely different spin on
each of his characters and Romulus Ledbetter is no exception. Topped with a
head full of dreadlocks and attired in layers of dirty clothing, Ledbetter
is a raving, hallucinating nutcase who is brought back to the sane world,
at least for a little while, to solve the murder placed on his doorstep.
Jackson, as usual, creates a real, three-dimensional person in Romulus.
After Jackson, though, things get a bit sparse as the rest of the cast has
to play off the master actor. This is a fault of the story, not the actors,
as the characters are universally overshadowed by the star. False leads and
fake outs make up the bulk of the tale as Romulus must strip away the lies
and misleading information to finally solve the crime. I don't want to give
the story away, but too much slight of hand is used to lead the viewer down
false paths in the investigation. Colm Feore does put a slick arrogance
into his perf as David Leppenraub and Ann Magnuson, as David's sister and
Rom's love interest, comes across as a really nice lady. Anthony Michael
Hall has a bit of fun as a yuppie lawyer who, through circumstance, becomes
Rom's patron. The rest are there to support Jackson.
Romulus's mental state and delusions are reminiscent of Terry Gilliam's
"The Fisher King," especially his ranting against the invisible Stuyvesant.
One ongoing hallucination is particularly effective as Ledbetter's ex-wife
Sheila (Tamara Tunie), in her younger form, keeps appearing before him as
his muse, dispensing advice and criticism as necessary. The focus upon
Romulus and his mental illness affords Jackson the opportunity to delve
into the character, giving us a terrific study by the actor.
Kasi Lemmons has a tough job topping her debut feature and, without the
incredible talent of Samuel L. Jackson, would not have come close. With
Jackson in the saddle as Romulus Ledbetter, she has the chance, at least,
to successfully get past the sophomore slump. I give "The Caveman's
Valentine" a C+.

Author
Rachel Gordon
After working as an actor for some time, Kasi Lemmons (The Silence of
the Lambs) wrote and directed her first feature, Eve's Bayou, in 1997. 
She has since spent the past 4 years putting together The Caveman's
Valentine, which took 10-plus producers to come to fruition.  Instead of
directing original material, Lemmons directs from the book by Georges
Dawes Green, who adapted it for the screen.
Samuel L. Jackson (Unbreakable, Shaft) teams up with Lemmons again (he
played the philandering husband in Eve's Bayou) to star as the disturbed
and homeless Romulus.  Thankfully, no easy explanation is ever uttered
as to the nature of his psychosis.  He lives partially obsessed with a
fantasy world in which exotic dancers inspire his hands on the piano,
and his ultimate nemesis resides in the Chrysler building.
His daughter, Lulu (Aunjanue Ellis, Men of Honor) is a New York City
cop.  She cares about her father but has difficulties getting through to
him as he insists on living in a Central Park cave and allows the voices
in his head to control his actions.  One of those voices is ex-wife
Sheila (Tamara Tunie, The Devil's Advocate, also the narrator from Eve's
Bayou), which leads him in his internal struggle.
Romulus becomes even more obsessed with his archenemy after a young man
is found frozen to death in a tree outside his cave.  He learns from a
local street urchin that the deceased kid was a model for a famous,
popular, and abusive photographer (Colm Feore, Titus) and begins to hunt
the mystery.  He tries to enlist his daughter's help, but this appears a
simple case to the department, so he is on his own.
What follows is an intricately woven tale of sorting reality from the
surrealism that lay siege to one another in the mind of Romulus.  Even
when he doesn't follow rules of common sense, it's difficult to argue
with his actions or his need for justice.  Because he is mentally
innocent, it would be unthinkable to blame him for stupid remarks or
walking into danger.
The question of whether or not he will succeed in taking down a
murderer, or simply making more a fool of himself to his daughter, is
kept grippingly open throughout.  Because Romulus' mind can be struck
with otherworldly ideas at any moment, the audience is kept in just as
much ignorance as he is.
The only tiresome moments in the film are Romulus' interchanges with
upper crust businessman Bob (Anthony Michael Hall, Pirates of Silicon
Valley).  Bob and his wife are the stereotypically ignorant white folk
who find Romulus such an intriguing revelation to their otherwise boring
world.  Luckily these scenes are kept brief and are solely used for plot
purposes, like cleaning Romulus up for his investigation of the
photographer.
Lemmons' vision is once again brought to focus through the talented
cinematography of Amy Vincent.  Vincent shot Eve's Bayou as well, and
again with The Caveman's Valentine shows a beautifully artistic eye in
blending fantasy with reality.  The distinction between the two is overt
enough to be noticeable and yet never overwhelming because the fantasy
is shot as crisply as the reality.  It's easy to become captivated by
scenery that's so visually compelling and adds weight to the mixture of
internal and external worlds the audience is forced to live in for 105
minutes.
Lemmons is one of a meager handful of black female directors.  One can
only hope that successful adventures such as The Caveman's Valentine and
Julie Dash's Daughters of the Dust have far reaching effects on the
Hollywood machine.  With help from peers such as Samuel L. Jackson, who
helped produce both of Lemmons' films, perhaps other filmmakers will get
their chance.
Director: Kasi Lemmons
Producer: Danny DeVito, Scott Frank, Elie Samaha, Michael Shamberg,
Stacey Sher, Andrew Stevens
Writer: George Dawes Green
Starring: Samuel L. Jackson, Aunjanue Ellis, Ann Magnuson, Tamara Tunie,
Anthony Michael Hall, Colm Feore
Web: http://www.cavemansvalentine.com
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
To unsubscribe from this group, send an email to:
critic-unsubscribe@yahoogroups.com
Your use of Yahoo! Groups is subject to http://docs.yahoo.com/info/terms/ 

Author
Laura Clifford
Romulus Ledbetter (Samuel L. Jackson) is a homeless man who lives in a cave
in Central Park.  The former Julliard-trained pianist/composer's descent into 
madness cost him his home, wife and (now adult) child.  Now he spends his
days trying to thwart his nemesis, Cornelius Gould Stuyvesant, whom he 
believes tracks him from atop the Chrysler Building.  When Romulus finds a
frozen body in the tree outside his cave, he summons his police officer 
daughter and tries to convince her superior that the victim was murdered by
Stuyvesant in "The Caveman's Valentine."
Adapted from his own Edgar winning novel by George Dawes Green, "The Caveman's
Valentine" is a most unusual murder mystery.  Because the audience receives 
its point of view from Romulus, the perspective is always off kilter.  We
see Romulus' delusions, such as his estranged wife (Tamara Tunie) acting as a 
sounding board, which other characters in the film do not see.
Romulus has seen a message for help on a large ad for the work of David
Leppenraub (Colm Feore, "Titus"), a Mapplethorpe-like photographer who has some 
nasty rumors circulating involving torture, drugs and death.  As the victim 
was Leppenraub's last model, Rommulus switches his suspicions from Stuyvesant 
to Leppenraub, arranging to reenter society to get close to the man.
Director Kasi Lemmons ("Eve's Bayou") was smart to choose to work once again
with Jackson, as his acting is the most compelling aspect of the film.  He
lumbers about like a Rastafarian bear in Central Park.  Ledbetter is fearless
except when he perceives Stuyvesant's rays eminating from the Chrysler,
confident in his convictions except when he attempts to pass himself off as
the man he used to be.
Anthony Michael Hall ("Sixteen Candles") is the New York financier who supplies
Romulus with the trappings of his former life in exchange for party tricks.
Ann Magnuson ("Love and Sex") is Moira, Leppenraub's spiritted but dependent
sister who takes Romulus as a lover while he's investigating her brother.
Feore gives his character an appropriately enigmatic threatening quality.
While the actors, music, locations and art direction all feel right, the story 
is too muddled to make the film a total success.  We're never given enough 
backstory on Romulus' family to understand his wife and daughter's extremely
negative reactions.  The film's conclusion wraps everything up too hurriedly,
with the protagonist suddenly dispensing numerous facts which the audience
hasn't been privy to.  The whole Stuyvesant concept never really goes anywhere.
While Lemmon's film is uneven, it's still a unique piece of work by an
inventive filmmaker willing to take risks.  That coupled with Jackson's 
masterful lead performance make "The Caveman's Valentine" more worthwhile
than most of the Hollywood mainstream product in theaters now.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
In an acting tour de force in THE CAVEMAN'S VALENTINE, Samuel L. Jackson 
plays Romulus Ledbetter, a paranoid schizophrenic with dirty dreadlocks 
and standard homeless attire.  Romulus, however, is careful to correct 
people.  He isn't a homeless person but a cave dweller.  In his cave in 
a public park, he watches TV without having to plug in any wires.  
Wherever he walks, there are evil signals coming his way from the top of 
the nefarious, art deco Chrysler Building in New York.  The 
yellow-colored Y rays are tolerable, but the new green-colored Z rays 
are pretty sinister.
So what is the story about?  It's a murder mystery with Romulus as a 
blend of the lead characters of SHINE, "Columbo," and THE FISHER KING.  
A Julliard-trained, classical pianist, Romulus is a highly intelligent 
and gifted man who has lost his sanity but not his mind.  Jackson avoids 
all of the pitfalls of such a role, delivering a performance that makes 
Romulus a complex character who deserves our sympathy and our 
understanding.
Being, well, nuts, no one will pay attention to Romulus when he claims 
that the guy found frozen in a tree near his cave was murdered.  He 
suspects controversial artist David Leppenraub (Colm Feore) since the 
murdered young man was one of Leppenraub's models.  Leppenraub is fond 
of making inflammatory remarks about his art.  ("All great art is born 
of suffering." and "If the price of rapture is a mountain of suffering, 
shouldn't the fee be paid?")
Director Kasi Lemmons, whose only other film was the acclaimed EVE'S 
BAYOU, has an acute sense of the visual.  Romulus's many surrealist 
dream sequences are particularly compelling, giving us an enhanced 
awareness of his pain.
My favorite subtheme in the story involves a bankruptcy lawyer named 
Bob, played with a boyish innocence by Anthony Michael Hall, who 
provides Romulus with a suit and a shower.  Bob's apartment is furnished 
completely in 1930s decor since that was the "golden era" for his 
profession.
THE CAVEMAN'S VALENTINE doesn't quite fit into any category.  It's a 
fairly thin mystery but a heck of a character study.  Whatever it is, it 
keeps your eyes glued to the screen from beginning to end.  Without 
Jackson to play the central role, the production would have been 
hopeless.  But he did agree to play it and made it, thereby, a handsome 
addition to the Jackson collection.
THE CAVEMAN'S VALENTINE runs 1:43.  It is rated R for language, some 
violence and sexuality and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Rachel Gordon
After working as an actor for some time, Kasi Lemmons (The Silence of
the Lambs) wrote and directed her first feature, Eve's Bayou, in 1997. 
She has since spent the past 4 years putting together The Caveman's
Valentine, which took 10-plus producers to come to fruition.  Instead of
directing original material, Lemmons directs from the book by Georges
Dawes Green, who adapted it for the screen.
Samuel L. Jackson (Unbreakable, Shaft) teams up with Lemmons again (he
played the philandering husband in Eve's Bayou) to star as the disturbed
and homeless Romulus.  Thankfully, no easy explanation is ever uttered
as to the nature of his psychosis.  He lives partially obsessed with a
fantasy world in which exotic dancers inspire his hands on the piano,
and his ultimate nemesis resides in the Chrysler building.
His daughter, Lulu (Aunjanue Ellis, Men of Honor) is a New York City
cop.  She cares about her father but has difficulties getting through to
him as he insists on living in a Central Park cave and allows the voices
in his head to control his actions.  One of those voices is ex-wife
Sheila (Tamara Tunie, The Devil's Advocate, also the narrator from Eve's
Bayou), which leads him in his internal struggle.
Romulus becomes even more obsessed with his archenemy after a young man
is found frozen to death in a tree outside his cave.  He learns from a
local street urchin that the deceased kid was a model for a famous,
popular, and abusive photographer (Colm Feore, Titus) and begins to hunt
the mystery.  He tries to enlist his daughter's help, but this appears a
simple case to the department, so he is on his own.
What follows is an intricately woven tale of sorting reality from the
surrealism that lay siege to one another in the mind of Romulus.  Even
when he doesn't follow rules of common sense, it's difficult to argue
with his actions or his need for justice.  Because he is mentally
innocent, it would be unthinkable to blame him for stupid remarks or
walking into danger.
The question of whether or not he will succeed in taking down a
murderer, or simply making more a fool of himself to his daughter, is
kept grippingly open throughout.  Because Romulus' mind can be struck
with otherworldly ideas at any moment, the audience is kept in just as
much ignorance as he is.
The only tiresome moments in the film are Romulus' interchanges with
upper crust businessman Bob (Anthony Michael Hall, Pirates of Silicon
Valley).  Bob and his wife are the stereotypically ignorant white folk
who find Romulus such an intriguing revelation to their otherwise boring
world.  Luckily these scenes are kept brief and are solely used for plot
purposes, like cleaning Romulus up for his investigation of the
photographer.
Lemmons' vision is once again brought to focus through the talented
cinematography of Amy Vincent.  Vincent shot Eve's Bayou as well, and
again with The Caveman's Valentine shows a beautifully artistic eye in
blending fantasy with reality.  The distinction between the two is overt
enough to be noticeable and yet never overwhelming because the fantasy
is shot as crisply as the reality.  It's easy to become captivated by
scenery that's so visually compelling and adds weight to the mixture of
internal and external worlds the audience is forced to live in for 105
minutes.
Lemmons is one of a meager handful of black female directors.  One can
only hope that successful adventures such as The Caveman's Valentine and
Julie Dash's Daughters of the Dust have far reaching effects on the
Hollywood machine.  With help from peers such as Samuel L. Jackson, who
helped produce both of Lemmons' films, perhaps other filmmakers will get
their chance.
Director: Kasi Lemmons
Producer: Danny DeVito, Scott Frank, Elie Samaha, Michael Shamberg,
Stacey Sher, Andrew Stevens
Writer: George Dawes Green
Starring: Samuel L. Jackson, Aunjanue Ellis, Ann Magnuson, Tamara Tunie,
Anthony Michael Hall, Colm Feore
Web: http://www.cavemansvalentine.com
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Walter Chaw
THE CAVEMAN'S VALENTINE
***1/2 (out of four)
starring Samuel L. Jackson, Ann Magnuson, Aunjanue Ellis, Tamara Tunie
screenplay by George Dawes Green, based on his novel
directed by Kasi Lemmons
-a review by Walter Chaw | walter@filmfreakcentral.net
***For more film, DVD and books about movie reviews, plus annual coverage 
of The Toronto International Film Festival, visit _Film Freak Central_ - 
http://filmfreakcentral.net  | Now with search engine***
A strange mixture of _Shine_, _Basquiat_, _Angel Heart_, and Grant Morrison 
& Dave McKean's graphic novel "Arkham Asylum", _The Caveman's Valentine_ is 
a feverish tale of a homeless madman-cum-detective who, on the morning of 
February 14th, discovers a "valentine" just outside his New York cave: one 
of Ella Fitzgerald's strange fruit, stuck in the crotch of a tree--a young 
male model murdered and frozen to a branch. Believing at first that his 
imagined nemesis Stuyvesant, shooting evil rays into his mind from atop the 
Chrysler Building, is responsible for the murder, Romulus (Samuel L. 
Jackson) is put on the trail of an avant-garde photographer in the 
Mapplethorpe mould, David Leppenraub (Colm Feore). His minor sleuthing 
interrupted by the occasional delusional fit and bouts with an ecstasy of 
creation (Romulus was a brilliant Julliard-trained pianist prior to his 
psychosis), Romulus uncovers clues and harasses suspects on his way to 
convincing his police-woman daughter (Aunjanue Ellis) that even though he's 
a nut, that doesn't mean that he can't solve a high-profile society murder.
Every moment an exhausting workshop of ideas, and every character the same, 
_The Caveman's Valentine_ is a concept so "high concept" that it suddenly 
became clear to me that the film fits into the comic book genre of 
entertainment, with Romulus's "Caveman" a slightly more mundane version of 
Todd McFarlane's urban noir hero, Spawn. With a long-vanished wife (Tamara 
Tunie) acting as a spiritual guide, the occasional social caste commentary, 
the secret base in a cave, a divergent genius personality with a network of 
informants and supporters, and a wickedly colourful arch-enemy, the film 
piles on the lurid comic book details and dizzying slapdash colours to such 
a lavish extent that I was vaguely surprised that the blue police cars 
weren't inscribed with "Gotham PD."
That being said, _The Caveman's Valentine_ can only really succeed as a 
heroic fantasy, a Frank Miller graphic novel that has the audacity to 
portray the blood staining a field of virgin snow expanding to form the 
shape of a heart. The difficulties with the film spring from the 
misunderstanding that it somehow adheres to the conventions of a thriller 
or a police procedural when, in fact, _The Caveman's Valentine_ is a 
superhero fable that takes on the cause of the homeless (again like 
McFarlane's Spawn) while attacking the entrenched ruling classes in 
government and the arts. It is no small detail that our hero, Romulus, is 
not only named for a member of the ruling class who lived his life (in 
legend) without knowledge of his royal birth, but also that our Romulus has 
turned his back on the comforts of the literati in favour of a mystical 
existence living in a cave in a park. In the Romulus mythology, signs of 
Romulus' royal blood is brought by twelve vultures, while in the film, the 
call to action for our hero comes in the form of not the carrion birds, but 
of the carrion itself.
Whether or not Romulus of _The Caveman's Valentine_ will found a nation, 
or, in the case of novelist George Dawes Green, upon whose novel his own 
screenplay is based, a franchise, the fact remains that _The Caveman's 
Valentine_ is easily the most misunderstood film of 2001 thus far. It, 
along with M. Night Shyamalan's _Unbreakable_, is a mature cinematic 
extrapolation of the graphic novel format which has, since Miller's seminal 
"The Dark Knight Returns", redefined the comic medium as one suitable for 
mature ruminations on psychologically sticky topics. Readers of Sam Keith's 
brilliant "The Maxx" comic series (or of MTV's short-lived animated 
adaptation of the same) are already familiar with the idea of a homeless 
man placed in the position of knight errant and king of his own twisted 
demesne. The failure of both "The Maxx" TV show and of _The Caveman's 
Valentine_ (not forgetting the initial backlash against _Unbreakable_) 
suggests that the public may not be ready for America's surprising 
contributions to dark fantasy.
Luxuriantly lit, brashly saturated, and comic-panel framed with a virtuoso 
grace by cinematographer Amy Vincent (_Death in Venice, CA_), while 
inhabiting Robin Standefer's (_Practical Magic_) mesmerizing sets, _The 
Caveman's Valentine_ is an unremittingly gorgeous film. Kasi Lemmons, 
following up her brilliant 1997 debut, _Eve's Bayou_, which played on 
similar themes of manufactured realities and mysticism, fulfills much of 
her immense promise with a tale of seraphs and lost boys, artists and 
suffering. _The Caveman's Valentine_ is an elegant and piquant expression 
of hope for justice in a tilted landscape. Clearly not for every taste, 
when approached with the correct paradigm, it is one of the most stunning 
and intensely fascinating films of the year: a redefinition of the hero 
archetype for a post-modern audience with urine-stained wool trench coats 
in place of blue tights and red capes. _The Caveman's Valentine_ is a fine 
and a courageous film, crazy enough to suggest that the delirious yammering 
of an idiot savant is the best and truest paladin of order in the chaos of 
Eliot's rat's alley wasteland.
Š Film Freak Central (http://filmfreakcentral.net/). This review may not be 
reprinted, in whole or in part, without the express consent of its author.
