Title
Review for Hudson Hawk (1991)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Jamey Hughton
I suppose it's unfair to criticize a movie like Hudson Hawk, which has
been panned by reviewers and moviegoers alike since it's 1991 release.
Michael Lehmann's action-comedy was quick to win the title `biggest box
office flop of all time', or close thereof.
The movie stars Bruce Willis as renowned cat burglar Hudson Hawk, who's
just been released from Sing Sing prison after many years in isolation
(`Let me put it this way,' he explains, `I never saw ET'). Greeting him
is his old friend and partner in crime (played by Danny Aiello), who
becomes the subject of many amusing fat jokes. These are rather welcome
in a movie filled with so many completely unfunny sight gags, cartoonish
villains and unbelievable coincidences. It appears as if director
Lehmann didn't know when to stop all the absurd silliness, and he piles
on layer after layer of utter ridiculousness as the movie propels itself
toward the finish line. If at some point during Hudson Hawk you make the
assumption that things couldn't get goofier, you'll soon be eating your
words.
But, I'm inclined to say that this film is not quite as terrible as it's
box office numbers suggest. It's fast-paced and entertaining, if you've
got incredible patience and a warped sense of humor. For the first
portion of this review, I'm going to try and center on the positive
aspects of Hudson Hawk. Wish me luck.
First and foremost: Bruce Willis is a good sport. While I'm not entirely
sure what he was smoking when he co-wrote this script, Willis is quite
aware that the entire project is a big, fat, ugly joke. He constantly
gives deadpan reactions to things that are very silly and out-of-place,
which means he has more than his share of deadpan reactions.
Another plus is the appearance of Andie MacDowell as a schizophrenic nun
and love interest for the title character. They meet when Hudson goes on
a mission to steal a priceless book from the Vatican, and their
relationship escalates in interest from there. It's unfortunate that
McDowell's one-note character is used just as an excuse for there to be
a predictable plot-twist, and she offers absolutely no encouraging
chemistry with Willis. But now I'm rambling on again about the negative
things, aren't I?
Enough of the charade - for the most part, Hudson Hawk is an
excruciating experience. It's stupid, pointless and repetitive. I can
only wonder what Bruce Willis fans thought after exiting the theater,
because this film really doesn't have the potential to please anyone.
Action fans should take note that Hudson Hawk is composed of 90% comedy,
and even the action sequences are skittery, rushed and poorly edited.
And those expecting a hearty laugh or two will find it difficult even to
smirk during all of the headache-inducing hi-jinks. Don't get me wrong,
this film is not devoid of laughs. It's too bad most of them are
unintentional, or just plain forced.
The impressive cast looks suitably embarrassed. It's understandable to
see Willis and Aiello in a movie of this caliber, but as for the
presence of future Academy Award winner James Coburn I'm not entirely
sure. Coburn plays a former nemesis of the Hawk who again comes into
play, and he looks unsure of his place the entire movie. Especially when
he resorts to martial arts during the final showdown, and has a fight
with Willis that would look right at home in a Jackie Chan film. Things
get more bizarre when we're introduced to his team of rejects named
after chocolate bars, including future NYPD Blue star David Caruso as
the speechless, card-flipping Kit-Kat. If that's not enough for you,
there's Richard E. Grant and Sandra Bernhard hamming it up as a deranged
couple on the brink of a convoluted economic takeover. Their
crotch-biting pooch provides a couple of the big laughs here. Wait,
maybe the only big laughs...
I'm not sure what kind of movie everyone had in mind when filming Hudson
Hawk. I can't even begin to start about the film's absurd plot; but
let's not get into that. I suppose there's some amusement viewers could
derive from the ridiculous premise, if they were that desperate. But
Hudson Hawk never even has a clue of where it's going from minute one,
and from there it's 90 minutes of pure cinematic muck.
 Contact Jamey at:  movieviews@hotmail.com

Author
David N. Butterworth
     The marketers of HUDSON HAWK obviously have a lot more talent than
the filmmakers.
     Misguided and miscalculated on every conceivable level, HUDSON HAWK
is the most lame-brained, stupefyingly awful movie to have come around
in a long time.  Director Michael Lehmann (HEATHERS) has taken a
promising idea and turned it into a mind-boggling misfire, a sorry
spectacle of a film that even the most die hard Bruce Willis fans will
abhor.
     The movie's wooden and empty-headed plot revolves around master cat
burglar Eddie "Hudson Hawk," played by Willis.  He's hired to steal
three priceless da Vinci artifacts by a variety of odious villains --
the Mario brothers, George Kaplan and the Candy Bars, and a pair of
kinky and colorful miscreants, Darwin and Minerva Mayflower (played to
the hilt by Richard E. Grant and Sandra Bernhard).
     The plan is to unlock the secrets of Leonardo's puzzle, three
Rubik's Cube-like crystals which, when put together correctly, are said
to provide instant wealth and gratification.  Pity the same couldn't be
said of the film.
     The Hawk is aided and abetted by long time partner-in-crime and
confidante Tommy Five-Tone (Danny Aiello of DO THE RIGHT THING).  They
get to perform a couple of gratuitously surreal musical numbers
together, which shows you just how low this film will sink in order to
get a laugh.
     Andie MacDowell (SEX, LIES AND VIDEOTAPE) plays Willis' love
interest, Anna Baragli.  Lovely, yes, but interesting?  Not in this
movie.
     You know where the film's heading when it manages to poke fun at
Asians, the handicapped and overweight people all within the first five
minutes.  By its long overdue conclusion, everyone else in between --
including the audience -- has been insulted.
     The best thing in the film are the Mayflowers, who resemble
characters in a John Waters movie.  Bernhard has a field day in her role
as Minerva, a garishly outfitted, rubber-faced dominatrix who gets off
on psychologically ridiculing the mawkish Hawk.  Her performance is
hideously over the top, but that's what makes it all the more fun to
watch.
     And Grant's despotic Darwin delivers what few funny lines there are
in the film.  Waters, the director of such sleazoid epics as PINK
FLAMINGOS and POLYESTER, has said that bad taste is what entertainment
is all about.  But in HUDSON HAWK, Lehmann abuses the privilege.
     Apparently the film had more than its fair share of production
problems, discernible from the opening credits.  Willis -- who must take
a large part of the blame for this embarrassment -- co-wrote the story
with Executive Producer Robert Kraft.  Kraft, in turn, shares screen
credit with composer Michael Kamen (DIE HARD and the "Lethal Weapon"
series).  Kamen was supposedly still working on the score days before
the film was released.  And it shows.
     The sound, too, is so bad you can't often hear what the characters
are saying.  And the film is poorly edited -- some snatches of footage
are so short you're not quite sure what you are supposed to have seen.
All this in a movie reputed to have cost upwards of $75 million!
     If it's supposed to be a slapstick farce, then how come nobody has
anything funny to say or do?  One wonders if dialogue like "If da Vinci
were here today, he'd be eating sushi, naked, in the back of a Cadillac
with both of us" is meant to raise a chuckle or two.  And after the
second or third pratfall, the film's heavy-handed and juvenile attempts
at physical comedy grow increasingly tiresome.
     If it's supposed to be a caper film, then how come the camera
spends more time pandering to Willis' trademark muggings than it does
detailing the planning and execution of the robberies themselves?
Whatever happened to those dapper jewel thieves of the '30s and '40s,
the Ronald Colmans and the David Nivens with all their wit, charm and
sophistication?  Smug is definitely one thing Cary Grant was not.
     If you're in the mood for a sparkling heist movie, check out RIFIFI
or the splendid TOPKAPI.  Or if you're simply looking for a Bruce Willis
vehicle, then you can do no better than DIE HARD or its sequel.  But
don't -- as the ads would have you -- "Catch the Hawk."  For when you
actually do nab the bird, this "Hawk" turns out to be a turkey.

Author
Robert Workman
The Happy Bastard's Quick Movie Review
What could easily be the biggest blemish in Bruce Willis' movie career
(next to The Bonfire of the Vanities and, well, most of his flicks in
general), Hudson Hawk is a loopy little flick that, taken in the wrong
context, is one of the worst movies ever made.  If you rent Hudson Hawk
and expect a serious, dynamo action flick in the sense of Die Hard, you
will be extremely let down.  However, if you watch it with a
happy-go-lucky, could-give-a-damn-less attitude, like I usually do with
movies (they're made for fun anyway), you might actually have a goofy
old time.
Willis plays the Hawk, a slick burglar just getting out of jail after
serving some time for a botched job.  Immediately following his release,
he and his partner Tommy Two Tone (Danny Aiello) land back in trouble
with a mob led by the Mario brothers (Nintendo players may have figured
that one out already).  But the theft has unfolded a bigger conspiracy
involving a power-hungry couple and several henchmen named after candy
bars- not to mention a former CIA man leading them (played hilariously
by James Coburn).  It turns out a greater power awaits if Hawk can steal
the right parts- the ability to create gold ala an old machine created
by Leonardo Da Vinci.
Somewhere in this story, there's also a love interest for Hawk- a nun
(played by Andie McDowell) who actually works for a sort of Vatican
secret service (please don't ask).  This leads up to a rather romantic
request by Hawk later in the movie: "Will you play Nintendo with me?"
(Yes, I'm kidding).
The movie is by no means a classic, as the story is so botched and
filled with in-jokes that it couldn't even be considered seriously for a
second.  But it almost plays out like a Zucker-Abrahams-Zucker film,
with plenty of intended (and somewhat unintended) laughs galore.  Willis
is pretty good as the smarmy Hawk, even if he is glorifying just a tad.
Aiello and McDowell turn in decent performances, and Sandra Bernhard is
a hoot as the power-hungry wife, complete with shifting attitude and
face gesturing.
And some of the action is pretty likable as well.  Take, for instance,
the scene in the hotel with the botched firing of a bomb launcher.  Or,
perhaps, Hawk's battle with a butler who carefully unsheathes knives
from his sleeves like a pro.  Like I said, though, take it pretty much
with a grain of salt or you'll be sorry.
Again, not classic material, and not up to everybody's taste in terms
of, well, everything, but Hudson Hawk is a lot of fun if you simply
allow it to be.  If it's real gusto you're looking for, turn to Die
Hard.  If it's all-out goofiness you want, Hudson Hawk will suit you for
a one-evening rental.

Author
Craig Good
     I went to see HUDSON HAWK tonight in a generally good mood and with
what I thought were reasonably low expectations.  Instead of an escapist
romp a la DIE HARD, I got a confused, needlessly bloody, overblown
episode of THE PINK PANTHER MEETS THE THREE STOOGES.  At several points
during the movie I felt genuine embarrassment for the cast: not a good
sign.  I guess seeing names like Bruce Willis, Danny Aielo and Andie
MacDowell got my hopes up too far.
     The director competes with the script for title of Least Aware of
Where We're Going.  On one level, the film wants to be a witty,
hard-edged caper film about a cat burglar forced out of retirement by
agents of the government, the mob and what was supposed to pass for some
kind of goofy corporation.  But the foul language and blood clash badly
with the tongue-in-cheek, cartoony level of reality it tries to set up.
     The overall impression is of a movie made by some marketing droid
using a color by numbers set.  Some of the individual characters in
individual scenes are, or are potentially, funny.  And the first half of
the movie almost sets up an air of mystery capable of maintaining our
attention.  But as soon as you find out who Everybody is, it runs down
hill -- and it started on just a little knoll.  We wind up with a
mish-mash of cloying dialogue, weak repartee and broadly-drawn
characters.  The film film wanders aimlessly through a world where the
Pope watches "Mr. Ed" in dubbed Italian, and a decapitation is just a
setup for a one-liner, and one that feels forced at that.
     The whole movie feels forced, and events are driven entirely at the
convenience of the plot rather than by any sense of an internal logic.
If you're really curious about it, or a die hard Bruce Willis fan, wait
for video.  It'll be a short wait, I promise.
