Title
Review for Blizhnij krug (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Frank Maloney
     THE INNER CIRCLE is a film by Andrei Konchalovsky, based on a true
story.  The film stars Tom Hulce and Lolita Davidovich.  Rated PG-13,
due to violence, subject matter.  Filmed in the Kremlin.
     THE INNER CIRCLE is the story of Ivan Sanshin (Tom Hulce), who
almost randomly becomes Stalin's personal projectionist, and his wife,
Anastasia (Lolita Davidovich).  Both are naive peasants transported to
Thirties' Moscow, where they share a basement apartment with seven other
people.  Ivan worships the Minister of Defense, "the first Red soldier,"
and Anastasia worships Ivan, her new husband.  Gradually, he moves into
the Inner Circle around Stalin (played by Russian actor Alexandre Zbruev
in letter-perfect makeup).  He begins to accrue the benefits of the
elite, but must keep his employment a secret even from Anastasia.
     Privilege comes at an enormous cost to both ideals and personal
lives.  Anastasia wants to adopt the orphaned daughter of "Enemies of
the State," who are Jewish to boot; such an association could mean his
own death, and at a minimum exposes him to sinister KGB influences.
Other, worse conflicts and disaster await the hapless Sanshins.
     At one point Anastasia asks Ivan, "Who do you love more, me or
Comrade Stalin?"  Without missing a beat or a thought, Ivan replies,
"Comrade Stalin, of course."  The film has occasion to return to this
dialog with no small amount of irony later on, as the Sanshins explore
together and separately the real meaning of Ivan's answer.
     The story follows Ivan until 1953, the day of Stalin's funeral.
Fifteen hundred mourners died that day in the crush and Ivan finds
something else to believe in beside his Master.
     Andre Konchalovsky is a Russian director who came to the United
States in the Seventies.  In this country, he's had his ups and downs
(RUNAWAY TRAIN and TANGO & CASH), but it was in Russia that he did his
best work, such as the 1979 epic SIBERIADE.  THE INNER CIRCLE must rank
with his best work in either country.  The movie was filmed mostly last
summer before the coup d'etat became the coup de grace for the Soviet
state.  Konchalovsky was given access to the Kremlin and the KGB
headquarters.  He recreates the flavor of the Stalinist years partly by
the unceasing contrast between the shoddy lives of the people with
tsaristic splendors of the lives of the elite; he also makes us feel the
terror and underlying fear that pervaded the lives of almost all,
including elites.
     One who seems above it all was the KGB chief Beria, played by Bob
Hoskins.  Hoskins uses his natural cuteness, which as spoiled some other
recent appearances, to great advantage here to suggest the charming
ruthlessness of the little man with owlish glasses who nearly replaced
his Master (Beria was executed for treason by the other members of the
top rung a few months after Stalin's death to forestall Beria's
ambitions and his enormous power).  Beria seems to spend most of his
time grinning at a secret and watching the others condemn themselves.
     The first acting honors inevitably must go to Tom Hulce, who uses
of little of his AMADEUS zaniness to make Ivan sweet, naive, tragic,
cruel without meaning to be, forgiving, loving, torn, a complex peasant
who loves to watch the cows being herded past his bedroom window on
their way to the slaughterhouse.  The early where Ivan demonstrates his
mastery of the film projector is a stand-alone masterpiece of the charm
of showing off.
     But one ought also to recognize the impressive job of work turned
in by Lolita Davidovich, who impressed me enormously in BLAZE, a film
made interesting by her presence.  In an odd way, Anastasia is a little
like the young Blaze Starr, a country girl who never entirely leaves her
country roots behind and whose life is dependent on how well she can
manipulate the men who manipulate her; Blaze succeeds to some extent,
Anastasia fails tragically.
     One thing I have a problem with is the actors' Slavic accents.  If
we are to pretend that they are speaking Russian, why do they have
Russian accents?  Would they sound as accent-free as native speakers
sound to each other?  And if they must speak English with heavy Russian
accents, why can't they do it consistently?  Hulce and Davidovich both
suffer from occasional lapses, and make this particular movie convention
all the more obviously dubious.
     I should also mention the work of Bess Meyer as the grown up Katya,
the little girl that Anastasia wanted to adopt.  Katya grew up in a
state orphanage and is completely inculcated in the cult of her parents'
murderer.  She faces a dubious future as the child of Enemies of the
People, as a Jew, and a frail young woman with a suspicious and
persistent cough.  She appears at the end of the film and makes a most
memorable job of her relatively small part.
     The final irony is the real Ivan, Alexander Ganshin, is a vigorous
man in his eighties, still living in Moscow, and still utterly devoted
to his long-dead, long-discredited Master.
     THE INNER CIRCLE is an important film, which I can urge you to seek
out and see whatever you have to pay.  I don't know how widely it is
being distributed (in the Seattle area, it is showing exclusively at the
Harvard Exit), but I suspect that initially, at least, you will need to
hunt it up.  Do so.
     (THE INNER CIRCLE was selected to be the opening film of the Berlin
Film Festival, by the way.)

Author
Asya Kamsky
     THE INNER CIRCLE is a brilliant, beautiful work of art, shot
entirely in the Soviet Union with three Western actors, a formerly
Soviet director and a depiction of the bigger-than-life effect that
Joseph Stalin had on an entire nation.
     The film starts in 1939, when Ivan Sanchin becomes Stalin's
personal projectionist, and his communal apartment-mates, the Gubermanns
become a statistic in Stalin's infamous purges.  The film follows
Sanchin's devotion to Stalin as paralleled by that of almost every
Soviet.
     Tom Hulce as Sanchin is brilliant.  Lolita Davidovich as his wife
Nastya is heart-breakingly believable.  Bob Hoskins as Beria is
down-right chilling.  The cast of Russian actors is equally impressive,
especially the actress who plays Katya Gubermann as a teenager.
     Several notes about the accuracy of the film.  The actors
portraying the big names of Soviet politics are phenomenal in their
resemblance to their subjects.  Since the film is shot in Russia, the
atmosphere is perfect, especially in the Kremlin scenes, as well as in
the run-down apartment that Sanchin and his wife live in.  The time-line
is off by a couple of years -- the arrests such as the Gubermanns took
place in 1937 not 1939.  And while the film is loosely based on memoirs
of the man that Sanchin's character is based on, that man himself,
living in Moscow, still thinks that Stalin was a god.  
     This film has been playing in New York City for a while, and just
opened in San Francisco.  I don't know how wide a release it will get,
but I would recommend this film to anyone within twenty miles of where
it's playing, at full prices.
