Title
Review for Final Analysis (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
sunil ramchandani
Starring Richard Gere, Kim Basinger, Uma Thurman, Eric Roberts,
         and Keith David
     Take two of the hottest stars in Hollywood today, throw in some
steamy moments between them, add a dash of deception, some wry humor,
some violence, all to a base which is distinctly Hitchcockian in flavor,
and you have Final Analysis.  No, no it isn't all that simple as it
sounds.  What starts of as a very pretentious and seemingly over
sophisticated film shifts into just the right gear midway and doesn't
stop till the finish.
     Richard Gere plays a Bay Area psychiatrist who while treating one
of his patients (played by Uma Thurman) falls in love with her sister
(played by Kim Basinger).  As Gere plays hooky for the first time in a
couple years,  and courts Basinger around the scenic Bay and in a
deserted, crumbling  lighthouse, things seem picture perfect, save for
the fact that Basinger  is married to an insanely jealous Eric Roberts,
a role played very adroitly.  In this cameo as Jim Evans, Roberts
displays a great flair for panache, and comes across as a very ruthless
and chilling character -- just right.
     Some scenic shots of the Bay were craftfully done, good
cinematography.  The background score was excellent, especially towards
the end.  Of the performances, Richard Gere sleepwalks through most of
his role (I still feel that his *best* performances to date were in the
films BREATHLESS, INTERNAL AFFAIRS, and AN OFFICER AND A GENTLEMAN -- in
that order).  Uma Thurman as the mentally disturbed patient is
appealing, very vulnerable at most times, quite impulsive and morose
during others, and extremely pretty.  Basinger is a brilliant surprise,
and Keith David as the detective is excellent.  Unfortunately though,
the screenplay has some holes and lacks spirit and creativity, very
uninspiring.
     Overall, the movie makes for an entertaining evening.  See it, if a
suspense thriller is your cup of tea.  

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Psychiatrist finds himself involved
     with the sister of a patient and her gangster husband.  Too
     much of the script follows well-traveled paths for the turns
     to be much of a surprise.  Gere is acceptable as a
     psychiatrist, though the best acting comes from two smaller
     roles--a gangster and a detective.  Rating: low +1 (-4 to
     +4).
     There is a crime committed about a third of the way into this film.  I
turned to Evelyn and said, "Now tell me the plot of the rest of the film."
To the credit of FINAL ANALYSIS, it was only the plot of the next third of
the film, but it was extremely predictable.  By the final third of the film
interesting things are happening right up to but not including the again
predictable climax.  Not that FINAL ANALYSIS is not a classy thriller, but
far too much of the plot is like that of too many other films with very
similar plot twists.  Fans of classic thrillers, be warned.
     Isaac Barr (played by Richard Gere) is a successful San Francisco
psychiatrist often called upon to be an expert witness in legal proceedings.
He makes what, having seen THE PRINCE OF TIDES, we might call "the
Lowenstein mistake."  That is, he has the professional ethics not to get
emotionally or sexually involved with his patients, but he is not so careful
with their family members.  He is intrigued by the strange dreams of his
patient Diana Baylor (played by Uma Thurman), but is downright enchanted by
Baylor's sister, heather Evans (played by Kim Bassinger).  Heather is
married to Jimmy Evans, a sadistic and rabid Greek gangster (played by Eric
Roberts).  Barr would like to rescue Heather from Jimmy the Greek.  Then
things start moving.
     Contrary to some reviews, Gere is perfectly acceptable as a successful
psychiatrist.  He does not act like Judd Hirsch in ORDINARY PEOPLE, but his
manner is not so absurd for a psychiatrist either.  Bassinger, on the other
hand, us only a mediocrity as an actress--a dressed actress anyway.  Perhaps
the best acting is by Eric Roberts, whom one can easily believe is meaner
than a junkyard dog.  Keith David does a great job as an angry police
detective.
     Some comments should be made about the opening credits.  They are in
the Saul Bass tradition of setting the tone for the whole film, not just
throwing names on the screen.  Screen credit goes to Wayne Fitzgerald for
the credit sequence.  Director Phil Joanou does a competent job with the
flawed script.  I rate it a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
