Title
Review for Strapped (1993) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Chuck Dowling
(TV-1993) *1/2 - C:Bokeem Woodbine, Michael Biehn, Craig Wasson.
Yet another in a long line of "hood" movies, and this one is just as bad as
the rest. "Strapped" tells us the story of Diquan, a teenaged ex-con with a
heart made of gold and a mind made of cheese. Diquan has a pregnant
girlfriend and a steady job as a delivery boy. Then, his girlfriend is
arrested for selling crack (for the third time) and she's facing a long
stretch in jail. So, you know, he's got to do whatever it takes to get the
bail money for her. This means he's got to sell guns to ten year old kids.
Any sympathy I might have had for this character was gone after that. Then
there's "the man", a white police officer (Biehn) who wants to help Diquan
get his girl out of jail if he'll give him information as to who's selling
guns on the streets to ten year old kids. Of course "whitey" is the bad guy
here, wanting to get those guns off the streets and all, sheesh. So anyway,
by the end of the film Diquan is facing with his toughest decision, should
he save his crack dealing girl or should he save his gun selling buddy.
Instead he cops out and comes up with the most ridiculous solution, which
then renders the entire film as being completely pointless.
First-time director Forest Whitaker does an impressive job with the film.
It's a very well made movie, except that every ten minutes or so the action
is interrupted by a few seconds of the main character jumping up and down
while listening to rap music. The problem here is with the script. First,
you've got no one to like here. You keep trying to like Biehn's character
but the film keeps telling you not to, cause he's "whitey". And Diquan keeps
an attitude about him like "Yeah? So what if she was selling crack? She's
pregnant! Let her out!" Also, the whole entire movie is basically slang, and
it's very difficult to understand. For example, Diquan's heartfelt comments
to a friend of his that he sees shoot another kid: "Yo man you WHACKED!"
Touching. But, there is an appearance by the fat kid from "Lean on Me", so
you make up your own minds. "Strapped" was made for HBO.
Have A Question Or Comment? Email Me At chuckd21@southeast.net
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,500 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office
reports, film related links, and reader's polls and reviews.
