Title
Review for Red River (1948)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
When the American Film Institute released their
list of the 100 greatest American films, the most
glaring omission was "Red River".  "Red River"
is surely the greatest Western, and perhaps even
the greatest of all films.
If "Stagecoach" delivered John Wayne from "B"
Western obscurity, "Red River" was the film that
made him a top box office draw.  "Red River" defined
his on-screen persona: the great speaking voice,
his stubborness, and his preference of leadership to
romance.
"Red River" was also the first film for Montgomery Clift,
although his second film "The Heiress" beat it to the
theatres.  A lawsuit by Howard Hughes and lengthy
post-production delayed the release of "Red River" for
two years.  You would think that Clift would be miscast
in a Western, but he does just fine, playing Wayne's
gentler alter ego.
Perhaps "Red River" should have been titled "Mutiny
on the Plains" instead.  It takes the story of "Mutiny
on the Bounty" and places it in a Western setting.
Wayne is a big-time rancher going broke despite owning
thousands of cattle, which have no market in Texas.
He aims to drive them far North to Missouri, where
waiting railroads and slaughterhouses will pay top
dollar.  Clift is his adopted son, and Walter Brennan
is his sidekick.  During the big cattle drive, Wayne's
increasing tyranny leads to mutiny.  Joanne Dru shows
up late in the film as a love interest for Clift.
"Red River" is not a perfect film.  The preteen
version of Clift's character is misplayed by Mickey
Kuhn.  Many times the lead actors are superimposed
over a Western background.  None of Wayne's hired
gunmen have any speaking lines.  The stampede
results in a litter of dead cattle, but only
some 600 head are said to be lost in the entire
driver.  Dru breaks up the climatic fight between
Wayne and Clift.  During an indian battle, she
seems more interested in annoying Clift than in
shooting the indians that are an immediate threat
to her life.  The long suggested battle between
Clift and Ireland never arrives.  These faults are
all trivial, however, compared to the magnificence
of the script (Borden Chase), the cinematography
(Russell Harlan) and the direction (by Howard
Hawks, his first Western).
Dru's character has been the subject of some
criticism.  She seems to have been inserted to
provide a requisite love interest for Clift.
However, her presence does increase the tension
of the impending confrontation between Wayne
and Clift, and provides an excuse for a
peaceful resolution.  Her character has plenty
of motivation for obsessively pursuing Clift:
he is after all a land baron, and has saved her
life from marauding indians.
"Red River" cost three million to make, quite a
sum in those days.  However, it made five million
at the box office during its initial run.  Somehow
it only received two Oscar nominations, for
Film Editing (Christian Nyby) and Writing.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
