Title
Review for Forces of Nature (1999)
Number of Reviews
25

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   If your best friend is engaged and you think that marriage
is not right for him, there's no better gift you can give than
"Bartlett's Familiar Quotations."  This bible of famous sayings
is packed with extracts from the great literature about
matrimony, and to no one's surprise the better part of the
excerpts is against the institution.  In "Don Quixote"
Cervantes warns us that "marriage is a noose," while the 16th
century essayist, John Selden, counsels that "marriage is a
desperate thing."  Perhaps these celebrated writers from
centuries past know whereof they speak: fully fifty percent of
all marriages entered into by Americans end in divorce, and
who knows how many others are marred by separation,
uncivil warfare, and general misery?  "Forces of Nature," a
romantic comedy that frequently alerts us to the perils of
matrimony but later subverts this discouraging idea, enjoys 
dependable performances by a reliable cast and some
efficient editing that lends extra humor to many of its scenes,
but the best thing about the film is Marc Lawrence's
screenplay.  Loaded with one-liners that range from outright
chortles to agreeable chuckles, his script is generally on the
level of a first-rate sitcom (think "Cheers"), making the movie
a amiable way to spend some time in the company of people
who have loved and lost, who have yet to do either, and even
some who have retained their affection throughout decades of
joyful togetherness.
   The story opens on a bachelor party, purportedly the last
night of singles freedom for Ben (Ben Affleck), whose gala
blast is hosted by his best friend, Alan (Steve Zahn) and
given spice by a seductive stripper bedecked in balloons
begging to be burst.  Ben, armed with non-refundable tickets
for his anticipated honeymoon in Hawaii, boards a flight to
Savannah, Georgia, where he is to be wed to the wealthy
and charming Bridget (Maura Tierney), but when his aircraft
veers off the runaway, Ben heads back to the terminal with a
fellow passenger, Sarah (Sandra Bullock).  As Ben is a
conventional sort, he is taken under the wing by this
attractive and eccentric woman who is fun-loving where Ben
is prosaic, though we later discover that this bundle of joie de
vivre has a melancholy side.  After a series of adventures
together spanning two days, Ben must decide whether to
chuck his bride-to-be in favor of this new force of nature, to
forget about marriage as an institution for the time being, or
to go through with his plans to wed his Georgian debutante.
   At once a road movie and a buddy film, "Forces of Nature"
takes us through one episode after another, each adding to
Ben's exploration of romance.  Marc Lawrence is nothing if
not canny with one-liners about the nature of marriage.  Early
on, Ben's granddad--who suffers a heart attack during the
young man's bachelor party--confesses that "marriage is a
prison," while a male passenger on the flight from New York
to Savannah whines about the thirty pounds his wife put on
"since we stopped having sex" and bewails the lies he must
tell his spouse, such as how she looks so much better than
the eighteen-year-old knockout who delivers his paper.  When
Ben meets a loving elderly couple on a train ride he shares
with Sarah, his feelings about marriage become more
optimistic--until the duo inform him that "we're not married--
we're having an affair," and the matronly lady describes how
until she met this man she had never had an orgasm.
   Sitcom that this picture may be, it never fails to entertain
thanks to the fortuitous pairing of Ben Affleck, a master at
appearing goofy, and Sandra Bullock, a powerhouse of
womanly stamina.  The chemistry between these opposites is
potent, splitting the audience into two groups: those who want
Ben to chuck his long-term sweetheart and take up with this
fun-loving person, and those who feel he'd be more grounded
with the stable person to whom he has declared his love. 
Supporting actors add zest to the story, particularly Joe
(Richard Schiff), a tour guide in a bus to Miami.  We wonder
until the final minutes whether Ben will follow the advice he
comes across in a quote by Oscar Wilde: "One should always
be in love--that's why one should never marry."  Director
Bronwen Hughes, whose innocuous "Harriet the Spy" might
have ended her career, has come back with a pleasurable, if
TV-level comedy, about two forces of nature--the storm which
delays Ben's march to Georgia, and the power of love to
conquer all.

Author
David N. Butterworth
If you saw Ben Affleck and Sandra Bullock cavorting hysterically during 
a recent "Access Hollywood" interview, you have a fairly accurate 
picture of what they're like together in their latest film, a romantic 
comedy called "Forces of Nature."
Bullock is, of course, the sassier of the pair.  In fact, her character 
Sarah (why didn't they just go ahead and call her Sandra?) has a 
personality of about a six on the Richter scale.  All that Ben Holmes 
(Affleck) wants to do is to get to Savannah in one piece and marry the 
love of his life, Bridget.  Well, at first.  But everywhere he turns 
there's someone telling him that marriage is a mug's game.
Ben first bumps into Sarah at the airport.  When their plane crashes, 
not very badly, on takeoff (a seagull gets sucked into one of the 
engines), they're forced to hitch a ride with a guy named Vic, since all 
of the rental cars are spoken for (oh, there's a hurricane kicking up a 
bit of a fuss off the east coast, canceling virtually every flight out 
of the city).  Well, Vic doesn't exactly work out and before you know it 
Ben and Sarah are hopping on a train.  Not separately, but together.
The thankless role of Bridget goes to Maura Tierney (the wife in "Liar 
Liar"), who can't understand why it's taking her fiancé so long to get 
down there.  While she's waiting, she's hit on by her old flame Steve, 
which doesn't seem to bother her father (Ronny Cox, the fourth canoeist 
that no-one remembers from "Deliverance"), since Steve is a successful 
lawyer and Ben simply writes copy for dust jackets.  Bridget's Mom is 
played by Blythe Danner (real-life mother of Gwyneth Paltrow) with lots 
of hair and organization skills.
Scenes of the family dealing with escalating frustration give us a 
breather from the madcap adventures of Sarah and Ben, who are finally 
forced to pose as husband and wife.  This so that they can snag a free 
bus ride, having used up virtually every other mode of transportation 
imaginable.  It's at one of the tour's stopovers that Ben's best man 
(Steve Zahn, the stoner in "Out of Sight") and his girlfriend (Meredith 
Scott Lynn, the girl friend in "Billy's Hollywood Screen Kiss") show up, 
throwing about the eighteenth monkey wrench into the works.  Ben's a 
brain surgeon at this point.
Throughout all this, Ben and Sarah are thrust together constantly, and 
Ben finally cracks when Sarah storms out of their hotel bathroom, 
yelling up a storm in her lacy lilac undergear (which proves to be 
surprisingly unflattering--Ms. Bullock's agents take note).
Ironically, Sarah is probably Bullock's most annoying character yet 
she's at her least annoying playing her (that's always been my main 
problem with Bullock's earlier roles--cute but irritating).  I think 
that's because Bullock really seems to be having fun with this part.  If 
not, she's a remarkable actress.  Affleck is a terrific foil to 
Bullock's high energy, and has many moments of his own, including a 
crowd-pleasing sequence in a bar.  And I particularly liked his 
despairing line "I think I'll just sit here and wait for the locusts."
"Forces of Nature" is cute, cute, cute all the way.  The ending is not 
at all pat, and makes exquisite use of the Sarah McLachlan song, "Fear."  
If Bullock and Affleck had any more chemistry, we might have witnessed 
spontaneous combustion onscreen.


Author
Chase McCown
Material may not be copied or used without the written consent of the author.
CAST: Ben Affleck (Ben), Sandra Bullock (Sarah), Maura Tierney (Bridget).
Rated PG-13 for language and one instance of drug use.
Ben Holmes has a wedding in Savannah to get to...his own. Getting from New York
to Georgia has never been so difficult. To start things off, his flight is
cancelled when a bird flies into the planes's propeller. Then, as plot
development would have it, there are absolutely no rental cars available.
Naturally, he hitches a ride with a complete stranger named Vic, and ends up in
jail as a result. He gets on the wrong train, has no money for a bus, etc, etc.
He begins to wonder if he is supposed to be married, given the disasters that
have occured in such a short time. Are forces of nature really trying to show
him that marriage is not his destiny? Do destiny and luck even exist? And why
does it seem that every married couple is really unhappy?
During this voyage, Ben is accompanied by fellow sojourner Sarah Lewis, who
just so happens to be heading towards Savannah to visit her family. The two
meet when they are coincidentally next to each other in the airport. Ben is
uptight, anal retentive, matter-of-fact, and strictly by the book, whereas
Sarah is free-spirited, spontaneous, daring, and care free. How do such
opposites attract? Could it be forces of nature? 
On his way to the wedding, Ben feels that certain signs are telling him not to
marry his longtime girlfriend Bridget. While Bridget waits for Ben back home,
she is tempted by an ex-boyfriend and frustrated by her constantly-feuding
parents. Will Ben and Bridget get married? Will Bridget stay with her
ex-boyfriend? Will Ben and Sarah fall in love? 
While I will not give away the ending, I will say that this movie is very
entertaining and quick moving. I am usually not a fan of Sandra Bullock's work,
but this movie certainly does redeem her. And I am also impressed with the
usually serious Ben Affleck in a much more light-hearted role.
I would recommend this movie not just as a date movie. There is a certain
Trains, Planes, and Automobiles feel to the flick, which provides constant
comic relief. Romance usually takes a back seat to plot development and amusing
situations in Forces of Nature, which makes the movie more appealing.
Before your theatre is struck down by lightning or blown away in a tornado, run
and see Forces of Nature. As Sarah said, "We guarantee you a really good show."
My rating (scale of 1-10, 1=awful, 10=flawless):
Forces of Nature receives an 8

Author
Ross Anthony
Ben Affleck stares up at the camera as he's carried on the hands of his
bachelor-partying friends. It's an upbeat opening to a movie comprised of
one up-beat after another. DreamWorks takes a rather uninteresting plotline
and makes a movie that moves around it.
Punchy grooving funk rocks the unlikely coupling (or is it?) of Bullock and
Affleck as the latter contemplates his matrimonial promises. I loved the
music even though it was set on 11 compared to the relatively civilized
levels of the dialogue.
Seems Bullock on the set inspired the filmmakers to advance the picture
along at the pace of "Speed." They were also diligent in the editing room,
bringing humorous ironies to simple cuts.
Affleck and Bullock (who act up a storm) survive a plane wreck among other
disasters, hooking up with Vic, a marvelously deranged side character for
whom this fine exchange was written...
Steven Vahn shows off his finesse as a stand-up, crack-up, best man. While
DreamWorks shows off a few of it's not so natural-looking, but nonetheless
dazzling special effects. A few decibels short of a thunderous ending,
"Forces of Nature" will take you by storm anyway. You'll leave the theater
doing the funky chicken to a hippy-hoppy version of Crosby, Stills and Nash
"If you can't be with the one you love ... honey, love the one your with."
Starring Sandra Bullock, Ben Affleck and Maura Tierney.
Directed by Bronwen Hughes. Rated PG-13.
Grade.......................... A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Steve Kong
Forces of Nature is a film that I fell in love with from the very start.
This film has a sort of charm and style that immediately drew me in, and as
the film moved on, it showed that it doesn't just rely on charm and style
to keep me loving it.
Ben Holmes (Ben Affleck) is a guy who writes the blurbs on the inside of
book jackets. He and his fiancée Bridget (Maura Tierney) live in New York,
but have decided to have their wedding in Savannah. Bridget leaves early
for Savannah, while Ben stays behind in New York for a day because of some
family complications. Ben, who has a fear of flying, gets unwittingly onto
a plane that will take him to Savannah.  But, as the plane is about to
take-off, it crashes. Stuck with no way to get to Savannah, in comes Sarah
(Sandra Bullock) who has struck a deal with a guy named Vic to get to
Savannah in a small rented car. As you might have guessed, this is only the
beginning of Ben and Sarah's adventures.
Along the way to Savannah, Ben and Sarah find different modes of
transportation. And everything that could go wrong, does go wrong. They
encounter fires, rain, hail, and anything else that nature can throw at
them. During all of these happenings Ben starts to look at why he is
getting married to Bridget. He wonders if he truly loves Bridget or if he
is really in love with the free spirited Sarah. The story doesn't all
pertain to Ben though; there is a subplot with Bridget and an old
boyfriend. And Sarah is not as big of a free spirit as she initially leads
us to believe.
Though a movie can throw gobs of charm and style at an audience, it only
carries a film so far. And the director, Bronwen Hughes, and writer, Marc
Lawrence, know exactly this. So, although Forces of Nature is full of charm
and style, both Ben and Sarah are also fully fleshed out three-dimensional
characters that we can relate to and care about. It also helps that Affleck
and Bullock have a tangible onscreen chemistry. On top of that Affleck and
Tierney also have that same tangible onscreen chemistry. So, as the film
goes on we know that someone is going to get hurt, but we don't want anyone
to. And throughout the film we are wondering whom Ben will eventually end
up with.
Forces of Nature could have ended up as a mediocre film that is a lump of
different other films.  But, a smart script, strong performances, and a
wonderful sense of style keep the film from that. All through the film
there is a sense that the filmmakers know exactly what they want and how
they want it to turn out, and this helps the film immensely.
Affleck, who hasn't really had a lead role in his career, shows that he is
lead-role material. He also shows that he is not a one-hit-wonder.
Following his brilliant performance in Chasing Amy, his Academy Award for
Good Will Hunting, his small and hilarious role in Shakespeare in Love, and
his huge presence in last summer's Armageddon, Forces of Nature is a film
that shows that Affleck is here to stay. Kudos to Affleck for a wonderful
performance in Forces of Nature.
Bullock, who shot to stardom in Speed and then had a string of miserable
failures (Practical Magic and Hope Floats being the latest), comes back
with guns blazing. She is able to recapture that girl-next-door persona
that we all fell in love with in the film Speed. Kudos to Bullock for a
wonderful performance in Forces of Nature.
Though not something that I would have expected from a romantic-comedy, the
special effects in Forces of Nature are superb. They are subtle enough not
to completely take us out of the film, but stunning enough to make us
notice. There are two standout squences: The rain/hail sequence early on in
the film and the hurricane/party sequence towards the end of the film. I
especially loved the rain/hail sequence.
>From the get-go I knew Forces of Nature was a Don't Miss film. There's just
nothing to hate about this film and everything to love. Don't Miss Forces
of Nature on the big screen. This is a wonderful romantic comedy.
 recipe for a hard boiled review:  one egg, two cups water, a pot,
 a helluva attitude, and a guy who loves the cinema.
 i'm your hard boiled movie guide.

Author
Susan Granger
Subject: Review: Forces of Nature (1999)
Newsgroups: rec.arts.movies.reviews
Approved: graham@ee.washington.edu
X-Questions-to: movie-rev-mod@www.ee.washington.edu
X-Submissions-to: movie-reviews@www.ee.washington.edu
Followup-To: rec.arts.movies.current-films
Summary: r.a.m.r. #17369
Keywords: author=granger
Organization: None
Author: Ssg722@aol.com (Susan Granger)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "FORCES OF NATURE"
      Sandra Bullock shines in this frenetic road comedy/love story
about the shared adventures of two unlikely people thrown together on
a cross-country trip. She plays a goofy, mischievous, free-spirited
lady who finds herself seated on a plane next to Ben Affleck, a stolid
New York-based copy-writer. She's going from New York to Savannah,
Georgia, to sell a bagel shop and visit her 10 year-old son, while
he's nervously en route to his wedding there. But, on take-off, the
plane's engine inhales a seagull and they never get off the
ground. So, they have to find other means of transportation to their
shared destination. Think "Planes, Trains, and Automobiles" but add
buses and on foot. Patterned on the old Preston Sturges screwball
comedies, the premise works because the characters are genuine and
their emotional problems are identifiable. You empathize with their
dilemma and growing attraction to one another, even though the two
stars definitely lack chemistry together. Director Bronwen Hughes
("Harriet the Spy") captures the quirky charm of Marc Lawrence's
script, often using MTV-inspired visuals.  It's too bad that beautiful
Maura Tierney, playing Affleck's fiance, keeps losing her Southern
accent, and that the ending takes a detour that may cause some
disapproval.  On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Forces of
Nature" is an amusing, romantic 6. Unfortunately, however, many of the
best moments are in the coming-attractions trailer.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Take a few elements from the successful Meg Ryan flicks like SLEEPLESS IN
SEATTLE (6.5/10) and WHEN HARRY MET SALLY... (9/10), merge them into a
"can't seem to get home" type travelling disaster idea like PLANES, TRAINS &
AUTOMOBILES (8/10), and you've pretty much got the gist of this film
starring the good-looking faces of Ben Affleck and Sandra Bullock.
PLOT:
Man is about to get married to woman. Man meets "other woman" on a plane
accident. Man and other woman attempt to make it down to Georgia, where his
wedding is to take place and where she owns a business, but bad travel luck,
keeps slowing them down. Their time together brings them closer, and drips
small specks of doubt into the man's original idea of marrying the original
woman.
CRITIQUE:
Entertaining, magical, romantic comedy that doesn't pretend to break new
ground with its concepts, but does offer an always interesting story, two
charming leads, and a non-stop festive soundtrack. Its biggest strength lies
in its two main actors, without whom, the movie might've whimpered into
video-bottom shelf-hell. Sandra Bullock is cute, different and always fun to
watch in this movie, and Ben Affleck shows us that he can actually play
co-banana in a film (without Matt Damon) and come off as an amusing and
effective performer. This movie was also very well directed and offered
quite a few original shots and picturesque sequences. I'm not gonna pretend
that its story line revolutionizes the romantic comedy genre, but certainly,
it is one of the better ones to come along in a while.
It talks about fate, love, marriage and the endless amount of subjective
questions that we all have to ask ourselves at one point in our lives. Is
this the person with whom I want to spend the rest of my living days on this
planet? This question is pondered over by many a love critic in this film,
and offered very little in actual resolution. There is no real answer
anyway, the answer lies within all of us. I personally would've preferred an
alternate ending to the one that is tacked onto this one, but I suppose that
I might be able to appreciate it more over time. All in all, this movie is
fun to watch, fun to listen to and fun to discuss. If you're in love,
falling in love, hoping to fall in love, or still wishing over that falling
star, watch this fantastical movie and enjoy its easy blend of humor, tender
moments and general entertainment.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Actor David Strickland, who plays the ex-boyfriend of Ben Affleck's fiancé
in this movie, hung himself in a Las Vegas motel room, only three days after
this movie opened in the United States. He was 29 years of age at the time
of his death.
Ben Affleck has one directing gig to his credit. It was a short film he made
while studying at Occidental College in 1993. It was called I KILLED MY
LESBIAN WIFE, HUNG HER FROM A MEAT HOOK, AND I HAVE A THREE-PICTURE DEAL AT
DISNEY. He was one of the many future stars to act in Richard Linklater's
1993 film DAZED AND CONFUSED (7/10). Others included Matthew McConaughey,
Parker Posey, Renee Zelwegger, Adam Goldberg, Milla Jovovich and Joey Lauren
Adams. He reportedly pocketed about $7,000 for his starring role in CHASING
AMY (7/10), and $600,000 for his role in ARMAGEDDON (8/10). He stands 6'4".
Sandra Bullock's middle name is Annette. She is the daughter of a German
opera singer and an American voice coach, and is a huge fan of Dr. Seuss.
She made $500,000 her role in the original SPEED (7.5/10), and $12,500,000
for SPEED 2 (5/10). She stands 5'7".
Director Bronwen Hughes' directorial debut was 1996's HARRIET THE SPY. This
is her second feature.
Screenwriter Marc Lawrence also wrote the screenplay for the upcoming Goldie
Hawn/Steve Martin flick, THE OUT-OF-TOWNERS.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Forces of Nature (1999)
Sandra Bullock, Ben Affleck, Maura Tierney, Steve Zahn, Blythe Danner, 
Ronny Cox, Joe Don Baker, Jack Kehler, Meredith Scott Lynn, David 
Strickland. Written by Marc Lawrence. Directed by Bronwen Hughes. 104 
minutes.
Rated PG-13, 3.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com 
In 1996, while working on a story about the film "Going All The Way," I 
served as an extra for a couple of days, affording me the opportunity to 
chat with the cast on a relaxed basis. During one conversation with 
Jeremy Davies, he noted that while we had talked several times, I had yet 
to speak with co-star Ben Affleck. "You really should connect with Ben," 
said the amiable, self-effacing actor, "he's got a lot going on. He co-
wrote a movie that's coming out this Christmas and the screenplay is 
really terrific." I agreed to interview Affleck, but never got around to 
it. For a guy playing a charismatic jock, Affleck seemed flat, 
uninteresting and not worth the bother.
Even after the release of "Good Will Hunting," the wonderful film to 
which Davies referred, I didn't regret passing Affleck over. His growing 
status as a sex symbol left me mystified and, as an actor, he seemed 
merely serviceable. From "Armageddon" through "Shakespeare in Love," I 
simply didn't understand all the fuss about Ben Affleck, until about four 
hours ago, when I saw "Forces of Nature."
Affleck is sweet, disarming and utterly natural in the romantic road 
comedy. Working in turns with Sandra Bullock and Maura Tierney, he hits 
just the right notes to establish a winning chemistry with each. Thanks 
to fine performances from the uniformly strong cast, a surprisingly smart,
 unpredictable plot and some jazzy visuals, "Forces of Nature" overcomes 
pacing problems to emerge a winner.
Affleck plays Ben Holmes, a reserved copywriter about to marry the 
winsome Bridget ("NewsRadio's" Maura Tierney) at her parents' home in 
Savannah. Shortly after meeting fellow passenger Sarah (Sandra Bullock) 
at a New York airport, their plane blows an engine, skids off the runway 
and leaves a traumatized Ben determined to seek alternate transportation 
to the South. Sarah joins him and, faster than you can say "Planes, 
Trains and Automobiles," Ben's carefully arranged life is turned upside 
down. 
Their contrived misadventures are amusing, but the rewards of "Forces of 
Nature" come from the characterizations. Writer Marc Lawrence deserves a 
great deal of credit for integrity. Elderly people play a large part in 
the story, but Lawrence never mocks or trivializes them. Ben and Sarah 
squabble, but never become shrill. The delightful Maura Tierney's Bridget,
while playing a secondary role as the anxious bride-to-be in Savannah, 
is allowed to be a real person rather than just a plot device. And the 
ending, in open defiance of contemporary date-movie conventions, is both 
ethical and unexpected.
The film boasts some nice eye candy as well. A couple scampers through a 
tire graveyard while hail falls in gorgeous slow-motion. Later, the style 
is successfully revisited during a enchanting overhead shot of slo-mo 
raindrops. Perhaps the loveliest scene occurs late in the film, when two 
characters have a key exchange while a wind-storm surrounds them in a 
otherworldly swirl straight out of a fairy tale.  
In addition to Affleck's disarming performance, Bullock finally makes 
amends for the godawful "Speed 2: Cruise Control." As a damaged soul 
desperately clinging to a free-spirit persona, her work here could aptly 
be subtitled "How Sandra Got Her Groove Back." Beneath her sprightly 
characterization lies an air of melancholy that gives her a resonance 
lacking in most of her recent films. It's nice to see Bullock back on 
track again.
Affleck and Bullock are terrific together, particularly in a riotous 
strip scene in a gay bar that manages to be funny without pandering or 
reinforcing stereotypes. Almost as good is a segment where the cash-
strapped couple race to pick up some money wired to a telegraph office, 
only to find the building engulfed in flames. "I think I'll just sit here,
'' Ben chuckles, "and wait for the locusts to come."
The production has a few too many MTV moments, and the film bogs down in 
spots, crossing the line between leisurely and languid, but the lapses 
are forgivable due to the fine blend of humor and intelligence. Along 
with the laughs is a quiet examination of the nature of love and 
commitment, presented with welcome understatement. When the film reaches 
its climax, you may be surprised with the resolution, but you'll 
certainly respect it.
"Forces of Nature" combines the sensibility of vintage screwball comedies 
with a maturity rarely seen on screen these days. And it provides Ben 
Affleck with a whale of a showcase for his talents. In the unlikely event 
of my chatting with Jeremy Davies again, one thing's for sure: if he 
suggests that I talk with a talented unknown, I'll take his advice.

Author
Matt Williams
Part road movie, part romantic comedy, Forces of Nature takes several
overfamiliar plots and, well, repeats them.  It's certainly not
innovative, but it does have its moments.
Ben (Ben Affleck) is about to be married.  His fiancee, Bridget (Maura
Tierney) is waiting for him in Savannah, where the wedding is set to
take place in a few days.  All Ben has to do is travel from New York to
Savannah.  Easy, right?  Not so fast...
With a seemingly unstoppable streak of bad luck, Ben's path is thwarted
in some way each step of the way.  To further complicate things, he
meets the free-spirited Sarah (Sandra Bullock), also on her way to
Savannah.
The pair use nearly every method of transportation aside from pogo
sticks in their travels, but are always diverted in one way or another.
Will Ben reach Savannah in time  for his wedding?  Will he still want to
get married after his wild  adventures?  Will the audience's still care?
It is hard to watch Forces of Nature without thinking that the
filmmakers must have been heavily influenced by the Steve Martin-John
Candy comedy Planes, Trains and Automobiles.  In fact the plot feels
like a watered down version of that earlier comedy, with a little
romance mixed in.  The misadventures of Ben and Sarah are never truly
inspired, but do have the odd moments of humor.
The screenplay does little to ward off the strange feelings of deja vu.
The film is never subtle about its foreshadowing.  For example, the
film's opening scene focuses on a weather forecast showing a hurricane
heading straight for Savannah.  This warning is repeated multiple times
throughout the film.  The only thing that comes as a surprise is the
fact that none of the characters in the film seem to be aware of what's
coming.
Still, despite the odd feeling that you've been here before, the cast is
able to make the journey worthwhile.  Surprisingly, it isn't due to the
leads who, though likeable, spark little chemistry.  It's the supporting
cast that makes this one shine.  From Maura Tierney to Richard Schiff,
the little roles make the movie. Particular credit goes to Steve Zahn
for perking up the few scenes he's in as the wild and crazy best man.
To wrap things up, Forces of Nature contorts itself to deliver an ending
that is neither crowd-pleasing nor believable.  It's the final
puzzlement in a puzzlement of a movie.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
Michael Dequina
_Forces_of_Nature_ (PG-13) ** 1/2 (out of ****)
Sandra Bullock and Ben Affleck make one hell of a sickeningly attractive
couple.  I saw just how much at the premiere of their romantic comedy,
_Forces_of_Nature_, in Westwood last week.  In person, Bullock's
slow-simmering sexiness erupts to a mad boil; and Affleck perfectly
complements her by appearing more boyishly handsome (and I mean
_boyish_--he looks about five years younger) than he does in film.  Above even
their shared brunet beauty, the pair's innate charm shone through: the
perky Bullock waved and smiled especially at me, and the smooth Affleck
one-upped her by actually winking at me (though I, must say, I would have
rather they "traded" their respective greetings).
It is that charm that carries _Forces_.  Apart from Tom Hanks and Meg
Ryan, have two more effortlessly likable been paired onscreen?  When we
first meet Affleck's Ben Holmes, an uptight copywriter days away from his
wedding; and Bullock's Sarah, a veritable firecracker of a young woman he
meets on a plane from New York to Savannah, Georgia, we immediately want
them to get whatever they want.  For Sarah, it's to return to Savannah in
time to sell off a bagel shop she co-owns (long story); for Ben, it's
arriving in time for his wedding to one Bridget (Maura Tierney).
Come to think of it, though, the audience will probably not want Ben to
achieve his goal.  After a freak but fairly minor plane crash, Ben and
Sarah find themselves on the road, attempting to reach their destination by
train and automobile in addition to plane.  Along the way, the duo find
that they're not so mismatched after all, feeling, as Ben says, "a certain
chemistry."  And there's no disagreeing with him--Bullock and Affleck's
compatibility lookswise translates into an engaging rapport.
It must be said, though, that Bullock and Affleck click more than combust,
and that sort of makes the force drawing their characters together feel
more like one of script mechanics than that of nature.  Still, that's more
than can be said of Affleck's rapport with Tierney, but the weakness there
says more about Marc Lawrence's screenplay than the two actors.  He and
director Bronwen Hughes don't develop Ben and Bridget's relationship
satisfactorily enough to make make certain crucial turns of events
completely convincing.
As such, while Lawrence and Hughes do come up with some good comic scenes
(a strip club scene is a highlight) and coax good performances from their
Tierney, Steve Zahn (a zany delight as Ben's first man), and their two
wildly appealing leads, _Forces_of_Nature_ never quite generates enough
power to become sweep up the audience like the long-brewing hurricane that
hits at the film's climax.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
In FORCES OF NATURE, Bronwen Hughes' contrived, pointless attempt of a
romantic comedy, we, the audience are asked not to just suspend
disbelief, but to stretch our brain's capacity to digest the
impossible. The main problem with this film is that it doesn't know
whether it has its feet up in the air or planted firmly on the ground.
Ben Affleck plays Ben, a 20ish yuppie who writes blurbs for book
jackets.  The plane-shy Ben is off to Savannah to marry his fiancee
(Maura Tierney).  Everyone Ben meets on his way to the wedding seems
to be unabashedly cynical about marriage.  They all tell him their
triumphant stories of divorce and adultery, but Ben seems to be ready
and willing to face the challenge which awaits him on his big day.
That is, until he meets Sarah (Sandra Bullock), an outgoing and
somewhat crazy woman who happens to sit next to him on his
flight. That is, until the plane "crashes" before it even takes off
(don't ask). In the aftermath of it all, Ben and Sarah decide to drive
cross country with another traveler named Vic. That is, until Vic gets
them busted by smoking pot in his car. After that, Ben and Sarah are
on their own, both trying desperately to get to Savannah, in any form
of transportation imaginable. They even hitch a ride on a tour bus
full of elderly fun-seekers, and end up in the same hotel as the
wedding's best man (Steve Zahn). Ben and Sarah really hit it off, and
Ben begins to question his love for his fiance. That is, until he
finds out dark truths about Sarah. Meanwhile, back at home, an old
beau (the late David Strickland) is putting the moves on his fiance,
and her mother (Blythe Danner) is freaking out. And then a hurricane
strikes, hence the title.
FORCES OF NATURE wants to be a fantasy, and at the same time a
meditation on the storminess of love (why couldn't they just stop the
whole love/weather metaphor before it even began?), but director
Bronwen Hughes (HARRIET THE SPY) manages to convey neither. The lame
idea of FORCES OF NATURE was actually sketched out by the DreamWorks
studio, which then hired screenwriter Marc Lawrence to transfer their
idea into a screenplay. FORCES OF NATURE is sporadically entertaining,
and all in all, it isn't that bad of a film. But then again, it's just
a big studio's shot at making some profit early in the year. I would
have given it 2-and-a-half stars, but then i thought about how much I
had underrated Clint Eastwood's recent TRUE CRIME, which I gave 3
stars, and I thought of how this film does not compare with the
other. Also, condolences to the family of David Strickland, who
commited suicide in a Las Vegas motel on the opening weekend of FORCES
OF NATURE. A publicist says that he was mad about his role being
trimmed down as much as it was (he's only in a couple of scenes), but
it's Hollywood and that's what you've got to expect. Also, somebody
give America's best-loved supporting actor, Steve Zahn, a major role!
He's shown promise in too many films (SUBURBIA, OUT OF SIGHT) to be
ignored.
Review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://www.angelfire.com/mo/film
watch me on TBS' "Dinner And A Movie" May 21, 8:05pm EST 


Author
Dennis Putman
Directed by Bronwen Hughes.
Cast: Ben Affleck, Sandra Bullock, Maura Tierney, Steve Zahn, Blythe 
Danner, Ronny Cox, Meredith Scott Lynn, Michael Fairman, Anne Haney.
1999 - 102 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for profanity and sexual situations).
Reviewed March 20, 1999.
After viewing "Forces of Nature," it was apparent that the film had 
attempted to be a little more off-beat, and a little more 
unconventional, than your normal romantic comedy, and credit should go 
to screenwriter Marc Lawrence and director Bronwen Hughes for lifting 
this one slightly above mediocrity, but they didn't go far enough. What 
might have been an original romance ultimately turned out to more often 
than not just as cliched as the rest of the worn-out genre, sort of like 
1987's far superior "Planes, Trains, and Automobiles" if Steve Martin or 
John Candy had had a sex change.
Ben Holmes (Ben Affleck), a blurb writer for book jackets, is a New 
Yorker only days away from getting married to his fiancee, Bridget (Mara 
Tierney), down at her family's victorian home in Savannah, Georgia. 
After getting on the airplane to travel up there, he meets Sarah (Sandra 
Bullock), a slightly off-kilter but bewitching young woman, who happens 
to be seated next to him. Even before the plane is able to get off the 
ground, a pigeon accidentally flies into one of the engines, causing the 
plane to crash and knocking Sarah unconcious. Once Sarah comes to, she 
is overly grateful to Ben, whom she suddenly kisses and exclaims, "you 
saved my life," while he is on the phone with Bridget to let her know he 
is alright. Since Ben and Sarah are both headed for Savannah, they 
decide to make their way up there together, all the while constantly 
running into various transportation and weather hurdles. Strangely 
enough, Ben begins to hear a lot of negative stories about marriage 
during this journey, and begins to question his impending marriage, as 
well as his blossoming relationship with Sarah.
Although you may think you know where this story is headed, you're most 
likely wrong, since one of the strongest things about "Forces of Nature" 
are the chances it takes, particularly for a mainstream romantic comedy, 
so that everything cannot be as easily predicted as expected. When the 
climactic moment came, set at a hurricane-swept wedding, the outcome was 
satisfying and realistic, and I appreciated this approach that was 
taken. 
Unfortunately for all involved, what comes before the conclusion is 
basically well-traveled territory that wasn't exactly crying out to be 
reworked for the umpteenth time. The middle section, especially, as we 
follow Ben and Sarah in cars, on trains, and on a bus filled with 
elderly vacationers travelling to Miami, often came off as bland and 
uninteresting, as Ben and Sarah possibly begin to fall in love. All the 
obstacles in their way, of course, are nothing but plot contrivances to 
get the two people together, and it was this section of the film that 
was such a letdown, and nowhere near as entertaining or funny as some of 
the best road movies (1983's "National Lampoon's Vacation" and the 
aforementioned "Planes, Trains, and Automobiles," immediately come to 
mind).
On the upside of things, Sandra Bullock is finally in the right 
direction after some blaringly bad film choices (1997's "Speed 2," her 
most annoying performance to date, and 1998's goofy, wildly misguided 
"Practical Magic"), but something tells me she should try something a 
little different next time, rather than yet another tiresome romance. 
Ben Affleck here has also found his best role since probably 1997's 
"Chasing Amy," and it is a big, big step up from last year's 
embarrassment, "Armageddon," as he has a great comic flare and perfect 
chemistry with Bullock. Screenwriting Lawrence is ultimately not as kind 
in his treatment of the supporting characters in "Forces of Nature." 
Tierney, as Ben's fiancee, Bridget, is disappointingly looked upon as 
more of a caricature than a real person, which is something that really 
perturbs me in movies featuring main characters who are "big stars." 
Blythe Danner and Ronny Cox, as Bridget's parents, mostly disappear into 
the background, but there is a funny turn here by Meredith Scott Lynn, 
as the bride's maid who comes into contact with Ben and Sarah on their 
way to Savannah. Lynn, a standout in 1998's "Billy's Hollywood Screen 
Kiss," deserves wide screen acclaim, maybe not for this film since she 
has very little to do, but hopefully in the future.
One of the highlights in "Forces of Nature" is the beautiful, mystifying 
cinematography by Elliot Davis, which paints a fantasy-style portrait of 
the several different types of extreme weather in the film. In one 
magical sequence, Ben and Sarah get stuck outside in a hail storm, via 
slow-motion, and we are able to see the hail, looking like heavenly 
crystals, falling gracefully from the sky. Meanwhile, the hurricane that 
arrives in the climax at the wedding, causes the various colorful 
napkins and decorations to star flowing around the characters, as if 
they are in a tornado crossed with a bright rainbow.
"Forces of Nature" is a sometimes enjoyable film, and Affleck and 
Bullock worked wonderfully together, but aside from the ending, why did 
the premise have to follow such a strict pattern of the usual cliches 
and plot devices that we so often see in movies of this type? Are there 
some set of rules I don't know about that have to be abided, no matter 
what, by the filmmakers of romantic comedies? While far from a complete 
misfire, "Forces of Nature" remains simply too by-the-numbers to be 
particularly gratifying or worthwhile.

Author
James Brundage
Starring Ben Affleck, Sandra Bullock, and Maura Tierney
     Scratch the thesis set forth in the review of Never Been Kissed.
Hollywood, as the year goes on, becomes progressively worse.  Why?  Because
you don't expect it to be bad.  Through some constant naiveté that the movie
buff displays of believing that movies will somehow ever improve, they
forget that the movies are destined to fail.  In January, when we all expect
bad movies, they are not as much of a disappointment.  In February, as
things start to improve, they are mildly surprising.  In November and
December, they're downright shocking.  In April I was greeted by the
terrible movie Forces of Nature, after seeing a streak of fairly good
movies.
     Forces of Nature follows Ben Holmes (Ben Affleck) in his undying quest
to marry his undying love, Bridget (Maura Tierney).  Note the key word here
is undying.  No matter how much you want someone to croak, no one does.
     Ben, your basic neurotic blurb writer whose afraid of flying, goes down
to wed his bride in good old Savannah, George on a flight out of La Guardia
that doesn't make it off the ground due to birds flying in the engine.  This
is only the start of his troubles.  He saves the life and befriends the wild
and tediously uninteresting Sarah Lewis (Sandra Bullock), who manages to get
him a ride with pot smoking Vic, and basically manages to screw up every
single chance he would ever have of getting married.
     Ben, Sarah, and Bridget are your basic stock characters, pulled out of
the closet of Dreamworks' dying creative ability.  Ben you would find in the
dictionary under neurotic, stupid, and sappy.   Sarah you would find under
psychotic, can't hold a job, and new-age.   Of course, as always in the
cinema, opposites get over their initial revulsion to one another and
attract, ending up being a match made somewhere in hell.
     Of the many virtues that screenwriter Marc Lawrence declined to give
this film, comedy and drama reign supreme.   Although you can see that the
film is trying to be funny, is trying to touch your heart, it ends up about
as touching and funny as your standard action film.  If the guy really
wanted to turn out something enjoyable, he should have handed Uzi's to the
two main characters midway through the movie and had them shoot their way to
Savannah past drug dealers on their tail.  It would have at least been an
unexpected plot twist.
     The only thing the film actually succeeds in doing is being
predictable, which any old idiot with a pen can do.  I talked to a theatre
employee afterwards who had a much better ending to the movie than the one
put in front of me.  In its effort to make a twist, the film ends up taking
a turn for the worse (if such a thing is possible) at the ending.  For that,
I suppose you can say that it will come as a surprise to the majority of
moviegoers... but not to this one.
     I would like to claim that without the stupid and supposedly surprise
ending the film would be half-decent, but it wouldn't.  Who are we kidding,
anyway?  Forces of Nature not only was the terrible film of the day, it was
the terrible film of the year.  It was almost as bad as The Mod Squad, which
set a new low for the already low genre of action movies.  Forces of Nature,
too, bottoms out its genre.  Even The Wedding Singer, my previous pick for
worst romantic comedy ever, made me laugh at one point.  In Forces of Nature
the only time my mouth opened was to say, "I've been there" when the two
main characters arrive at a place called "South of the Border" which is
about an hour south of my old home.  Yeah, they don't get much worse than
Forces of Nature.
     But, hey, look on the bright side: if you're a masochist, it's just
what the doctor ordered.

Author
Steve Rhodes
In FORCES OF NATURE, Sandra Bullock's fans, who have had to watch her
talents wasted in mediocre films (PRACTICAL MAGIC and HOPE FLOATS) and
downright stinkers (TWO IF BY SEA), finally have a film of hers again to
cheer about.  Bullock, tapping her vast reservoir of charm and
confidence, gives her best performance since SPEED.  And with great
chemistry, Ben Affleck, from GOOD WILL HUNTING and CHASING AMY, plays
opposite her in an absolutely delightful romantic comedy.
In what is clearly a romantic takeoff on PLANES, TRAINS & AUTOMOBILES,
the movie's script by Marc Lawrence is as intelligently funny as it is
good-spirited, and it has just enough of a serious underbelly to move
your head as well your heart.  Second-time director Bronwen Hughes
(HARRIET THE SPY) has a perfect sense of comedic timing as well as the
ability to make the mundane seem magical.
The story opens in New York with Ben Holmes (Affleck) being suitably
embarrassed at his bachelor party.  Shortly afterward, he leaves to
catch a plane to marry his fiancée, Bridget (Maura Tierney), in
Savannah.  Before he leaves, his grandfather gives him a shocking piece
of advice in one of the first instances of the movie's recurring
anti-marriage joke.  "Even if you love a woman, don't tie yourself
down," his long-married grandfather advises him sternly.  "Marriage is a
prison."
In a plane accident on the runway, Ben aids his free-spirited fellow
passenger Sarah (Bullock), who is extremely grateful.  With him scared
of flying and with no cars available for rent, they hitch a ride with a
harmless looking middle-aged guy named Vic (Jack Kehler).  This will be
the first of many mistakes they make on their ill-fated journey to
Savannah.  (Meanwhile, down on the plantation, Bridget, surrounded by
more Southern Belles than Scarlet O'Hara at Tara, becomes increasing
bored and frustrated.  Her story makes a nice companion piece to the
larger one of Ben and Sarah.)
Ben, who has no trouble making silly baby-talk phone calls to his future
wife, loathes taking risks of any kind.  A "jacket copywriter," his work
product includes calling a book "a scintillating tale of erotic
mummification."
Sarah, who represents everything that Ben isn't but deep down wishes he
were, is a born rebel.  She has gone from job to job with a typical one
being a hostess at an auto show.  She's also been an airline stewardess
and a stripper, the latter skill will prove useful later in the story.
A "seize the moment" kind of gal, she takes it as her role in life to
break Ben out of his rigid mold.  "Do you want to be on your deathbed
saying 'I played by the rules' or 'I lived'?" she asks him bluntly.
Bullock, who has never been more likeable than in FORCES OF NATURE,
charms Ben as well as the audience, but, being a loyal kind of guy, Ben
resists the temptation as long as possible.  Affleck, with his boyish
grin, is a perfect match for Bullock, and their chemistry is simply
adorable.
Among the movie's sight gags is a chintzy honeymoon suite they end up
in.  Ben, infatuated with Sarah but loyal to his fiancée, plunks down on
the bed only to hear the water slosh and the radio play "Love the one
you're with."  Although he tries to look away, he can see the outline of
Sarah's naked body torturing him through the semi-translucent glass
separating the bathroom from the bedroom.  Even the bathroom door, which
should provide a safe barrier, will not close.
The viewers become as conflicted as poor Ben.  The reasons for Ben not
to choose Sarah mount as fast as her desirability increases.
The picture is gorgeous, thanks to Elliot Davis's stunning
cinematography and Lester Cohen's brightly colored sets, full of
dramatic shades of green accentuated by lavish, contrasting colors.
Among the many memorable scenes are those featuring the forces of
nature.  Never have hurricanes or hailstorms looked so mystical and
inviting.  The leading edge of the hurricane, for example, causes
colorful strips of paper to swirl around the cast like a multicolored
snowstorm.
In a story that revels in chaos and ambiguity, the final resolution
wraps things up way too neatly and quickly.  The story's freshness goes
out the window as the writer seems in a hurry to close off all the loose
ends and take a more typical Hollywood approach.
FORCES OF NATURE runs a fast 1:40.  It is rated PG-13 for sensuality,
some profanity and a brief dope smoking scene and would be fine for kids
around 11 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
FORCES OF NATURE
(DreamWorks)
Starring:  Sandra Bullock, Ben Affleck, Maura Tierney, Steve Zahn, Blythe
Danner, Ronny Cox, Stephen Schiff.
Screenplay:  Marc Lawrence.
Producers:  Susan Arnold, Donna Arkoff Roth and Ian Bryce.
Director:  Bronwen Hughes.
MPAA Rating:  PG-13 (profanity, adult themes, drug use)
Running Time:  105 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I relish those rare opportunities when a talented screenwriter can
make me feel like a fool.  I spent the first hour of FORCES OF NATURE
slowly stewing over its grim attitude towards marriage, grousing to myself
about its transparently PLANES, TRAINS AND AUTOMOBILES plot machinations,
and waiting for the inevitable Hollywood denouement.  This was a mass
market romantic comedy, after all, a genre which has been taken over by
teenagers and, even in its best days, worked hard to perpetuate the
romance = infatuation paradigm.  Then Marc Lawrence did something 
wonderful, something which made the entire film click into place:  he
showed me a comic love story about grown-ups.
     It certainly didn't look that way from the outset, which introduces
groom-to-be Ben Holmes (Ben Affleck) at his bachelor party, surrounded by
friends and family whooping over his "last night of freedom."  Ben loves
his fiancee Bridget (Maura Tierney), but the doom-and-gloom pronouncements
of everyone around him have him questioning the meaning of this 'till
death do you part business.  Then, on an ill-fated flight from New York to
his wedding in Savannah, Ben meets Sarah Lewis (Sandra Bullock), a
free-spirited woman with a string of failed careers and relationships
behind her.  As transportation troubles thwart them at every turn, Ben and
Sarah begin a three-day southward journey in which their connection grows
ever stronger, Ben seeing in Sarah the chances he's never taken and Sarah
seeing in Ben the stability she's never had.
     FORCES OF NATURE gets off to a solid enough start, setting up the
characters and the situations with plenty of witty dialogue.  Ben is an
ideal role for Affleck's easy-going charm, and he plays the straight-laced
straight man without forced exasperation.  Sandra Bullock, for her part,
is more loose and appealing than she has been in her last half-dozen films
combined, avoiding her recent habit of playing any semblance of character 
depth as moping.  The two performances -- part of a great top-to-bottom
cast -- are effective and connected from the start, yet the script's
apparent sympathy with the marital horror stories Ben hears makes it
difficult to enjoy the romance completely.  Lively and funny though it may
be on a consistent basis, FORCES OF NATURE leaves a bitter taste that
feels like self-justification.
     The kicker is that those acidic anecdotes serve exactly the opposite
purpose, leading to a surprisingly emotional resolution.  FORCES OF NATURE
isn't about a man developing a fear of commitment; it's about a man
learning what commitment means _to him_, learning that it's not what he
thought it was.  Lawrence's script feints and dodges before reaching its
happy ending, an ending which is happy because people make the choices
that make the most sense.  Earlier scenes that might have felt like
throwaways take on more resonance, and that bitter taste sweetens into
something fresh and genuine.  Though one too many plot contrivances keep
Ben and Sarah together through the film, and they do exchange the 
obligatory mutual character analysis of bickering screen couples, FORCES
OF NATURE wraps up so perfectly that you'll end up remembering the humor
and the simple wisdom.
     That is, provided you're not put off by the ridiculously busy
direction of Bronwen Hughes.  For a brisk romantic comedy, FORCES OF
NATURE comes loaded with some of the most over-directed scenes of the
year:  teetering hand-held shots, why-not low or high angles, sweeping
pans.  Occasionally the hyper-real approach works, with cinematographer
Elliot Davis creating a world of fantasy romance; far more often, Hughes
refuses to let a scene be what it is, covering it with flourishes so thick
you almost can't find what's underneath.  A script this smart and mature
deserved a more restrained director, but even Hughes' excesses can't spoil
this unique concoction.  FORCES OF NATURE may restore your faith in
romantic comedy as something with the power to enchant, something that
can make you happy to be proved wrong when you expect a tale for and
about adolescents.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY:   http://www.sick-boy.com
One of the surest signs that your impending wedding may not be the
wisest of life choices is when your grandpa keels over at your bachelor
party.  If that doesn't change your mind, try having Gramps telling you,
on his deathbed, that he never loved your grandmother.  Despite these
colossal warning signs, Ben (as in Affleck, Armageddon) decides to
proceed as planned with his nuptials to his bland but beautiful fiancée
(Maura Tierney, NewsRadio).
As if that wouldn't make things stressful enough, the two New Yorkers
decide to take separate flights to Savannah, Georgia - where the wedding
will take place - because Ben wants to spend time with his ailing
granddad.  His best man (Steve Zahn, You've Got Mail) stays behind with
Ben, but, as they're about to board their flight, bails out because he
forgot his shoes and the all-important rings.
Again Ben ignores this as an omen and hops on the plane, even though he
is deathly afraid of flying.  He is seated next to a woman named Sarah
(Sandra Bullock, Practical Magic), who looks like Ally Sheedy heading
back home for her 10-year Breakfast Club High School reunion.  As it
takes off, a seagull flies into the plane's engine, causing it to crash
into that lovely `Welcome to NY' sign that graces the end of the runway
at LaGuardia.  This forewarning also goes unnoticed by Ben.  Starting to
get the impression that he's no super genius, eh?
Long story short, Ben saves Sarah and hauls her body out of the
wreckage.  After she comes to, he finds out that she also needs to get
to Savannah tout suite in order to sell a failing bagel shop.  The two
decide to travel together and the following eighty or so minutes unfolds
just like Planes, Trains & Automobiles, with each mode of transportation
being less successful than the previous.  But their predicament only
seems to invigorate the dopey Ben except, of course, for that fact that
he (duh!) falls in love with Sarah.  Unfortunately, there is no `Where's
your hand?'  `Between two pillows.'  `Those aren't pillows!' scene.
Don't let the ads fool you  Forces is no chick-flick.  It's
surprisingly funny and has a terrific look, thanks to director Bronwen
Hughes (Harriet the Spy) and cinematographer Elliot Davis (Out of
Sight), and culminates in an amazing finale that merges a big outdoor
wedding and a powerful hurricane.  As far as acting, Affleck does his
best to make you forget about that abominable `animal cracker' scene
from Armageddon, while Bullock does okay with her less meaty role.  In
spite of the strange transformation that her character goes through
(from thick black eye makeup and crazy hair towell, to Sandra Bullock),
she gives her least annoying performance in years.
1:49  PG-13 for some adult language and adult situation

Author
Luke Buckmaster
FORCES OF NATURE
Cast: Sandra Bullock, Ben Affleck, Maura Tierney, Steve Zahn, Blythe
Danner, Ronnie Cox, Meredith Scott Lynn
Director: Bronwen Hughes
Screenplay: Marc Lawrence, Ian Bryce, Donna Roth
Australian theatrical release: May 6, 1999
Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
2 and a half stars
A considerable portion of Forces of Nature feels like a 90's remake of
Plains, Trains and Automobiles, with only a couple of notable
differences.  Whereas Steven Martin desperately tried to make it home
for thanksgiving in 1989, Ben Affleck is engaged to be married and is
battling against time (and a fear of flying) to attend his wedding
ceremony.  From trailers and posters, it's no secret that this is a boy
meets girl film, but again, there are couple of exceptions.  This is not
your average Hollywood romantic comedy since its two principal
characters carry weighty emotional baggage with them.  Whilst there is
nothing drastically wrong with Forces of Nature - a very likeable
piece - it ends up stabbing itself in the foot by trying to be too smart
too quick.  There will undoubtedly be many smiling faces walking out
from the movie; others, like me, will feel a little cheated.
Affleck plays Ben Holmes, a man who is about to get married and
everybody is telling him how marriage is a bad idea.  His best man is
demanding that he sleep around before committing himself, and his
agitated parents hardly provide a welcoming example of holy matrimony.
On his way home, Ben's plane skids off the runway and he quickly finds
himself forming a partnership with a sexy, mysterious lady named Sarah
(Sandra Bullock) as they fight traffic, police and, yes, forces of
nature to get to their destinations.  Sarah's gorgeous looks and
fearless spirit tempt Ben, but he soon realizes that there is more to
her than she would like him to believe.
Much of Sandra Bullock's character is purposely self-explanatory, but
it's hard to grasp where she is coming from and what she is after.
Sure, she works on more levels than just pleasing eye candy for the
guys, but this doesn't substitute the fact that she is not properly
digested by the film's screenplay.  Consequently, this slightly hinders
Bullocks appealing performance and the believability of Sarah and Ben's
relationship.  Affleck has a better grasp on his material, and he
delivers his lines with the kind of goofy sincerity that made Steve
Martin a star.
This is quite a funny, and definitely likeable film littered with many
cynical jokes about marriage and relationships.  Look out for some
impressive work by cinematographer Elliot Davis, who gives the film a
lively visual feel - he even succeeds in making a rain storm the basis
of one of the film's best choreographed sequences.  With so much
romantic fluff, it's a wonder why director Bronwen Hughes decided on a
rather cynical novelty ending that is poorly staged and written.  Love,
it seems, carries confusion with it, and this is quite a confusing
completion to an otherwise simplistic story.  Forces of Nature succeeds
in giving viewers plenty to talk about in the car ride home, but this is
one film in which an unexpected ending works to its disadvantage.  Not a
bad film, in fact it's quite a good one.  But Forces of Nature tries to
be too smart too quick, when it should have been dumb but enjoyable.


Author
DeWyNGaLe
FORCES OF NATURE by DeWyNGaLe    Rating: B+
In the new romantic comedy Forces of Nature, Ben Affleck stars as Ben Holmes, a
writer who is getting ready to be wed to Bridget, played by Maura Tierney.  On
the night of Ben's bachelor party, which he isn't having a lot of fun at, his
dad suffers from a heart attack, which is one of the first signs that the
wedding should either be delayed or canceled.  His dad pulls through, but Ben
is still emotionally upset.  On the way to Savannah, Georgia, the location of
his wedding, an accident occurs involving the plane he is flying, sending them
into danger.  Everyone is alright, but the girl who was sitting next to Ben on
the plane, Sarah, played by Sandra Bullock, was knocked out in the accident. 
Ben takes her to help, and when she awakes she thinks of him as a life saver.  
>From here on out, Sarah and Ben see a lot of each other during the film. 
Bullock is also on her way to Savannah, Georgia to visit her son who she hasn't
seen in years.  She wants to sell her bagel shop she owns with her husband for
$25,000 to help pay for her young song's college when he becomes older.  Many
problems arise while Ben is trying to get to Savannah to get married, such as
trees hitting cars, not having money, and many other events that may be showing
signs that he shouldn't marry Bridget.  He becomes closer and closer to Sarah
the longer they are together with each other.  Ben is now two days late, and
Bridget is starting to take interest in another man other than Ben.  They both
feel bad for the actions they are taking part in, and still are determined to
pull this wedding off.  More and more obstacles send Ben out of the way of the
wedding, landing many funny moments for Bullock and Affleck.
Affleck and Bullock are really good together, although their relationship
wasn't quite as believable as they wanted it to be.  It was difficult to think
that a man would fall in love with another woman other than his fiancee after
two short, long days.  During the middle of the film, it is a pretty
predictable time while Ben and Sarah are traveling at almost all times.  The
last 3/4 of the film was wonderful.  It was a lot different that other romantic
comedies, and it felt like it was almost a different genre.  The last 3/4 led
to a very unpredictable, but realistic, ending which I was happy that they put
into the movie.  It was a big risk to have the ending they did, but it was
pulled off very realistically.
The characters of Ben and Sarah are a lot of fun to watch.  They are both
likable characters who have a lot of depth towards them.  Ben seemed to change
personalities a lot, which I didn't like much.  Affleck was still good, but not
on the same level as Bullock.  In my opinion, Bullock was extraordinary, and
she is definitely headed in the right track after making a few flops.  As a
result of the characters being likable, the suspense between the two was great.
 Because the characters were so well told, you could get into the movie really
easily and shout out things that you want them to do to be together.
A few scenes in Forces of Nature that I thought were very different and new
were a few scenes were rain was coming down.  The raindrops looked like
crystals falling from the sky.  They looked very fake, but it was also a very
neat thing to watch.  The other cinematography highlights in the film are the
beautiful sites that Ben and Sarah encounter on their journey to Savannah,
Georgia.  The sound in the film is also good.  The background music is
generally fast and upbeat, which really sets the mood for the way the
characters behave.  The trailers for the film made it look like Forces of
Nature would be a hysterical comedy, but I got more of a human emotions
comedy/drama.  I liked the fact a lot that they could make you laugh and also
make you think about decisions you will make in your own life at the same time.
The Bottom Line- A variation on the romantic comedy genre has finally strolled
around, and it's a hit.  

Author
Walter Frith
Suppose you are about to tie the knot.  You are forced to travel on
the road after your plane ride goes awry on the way to your wedding
destination, a number of strangers you pass like a ship in the night
strike up a friendly and time consuming conversation with you where you
hear alleged horror stories about the padlock known as marriage where
conservative belief is that in most cases it's all supposed to work out
and things will remain rosy but the truth is that people, as different
as they all are, sometimes have a hard time staying with the same person
for their whole life.  That is the premise behind 'Forces of Nature'.
Ben Affleck stars as Ben Holmes, a New York City writer who is engaged
to a southern belle from Savannah, Georgia named Bridget (Maura
Tierney).  Her family is wealthy. Her father (Ronny Cox) is a straight
shooting conservative businessman and her mother (Blythe Danner) voted
twice for Clinton because as she puts it: "All the best presidents sleep
around".  Ben's mother and father are upper middle class and don't see
eye to eye with their southern in-laws.  As his coach flight is about to
take off, a freak accident occurs that prevents the plane from taking
off and Ben now has to find an alternative form of transportation.  He
travels with a woman who believes he saved her life named Sarah (Sandra
Bullock), a free spirited woman who won't be held down by anything and
travels in whatever direction the wind is blowing.  They experience all
the bad luck you can imagine such as the kind of fun (for the audience
only) that Steve Martin and John Candy experienced in 1987's 'Planes,
Trains & Automobiles'.
The film's entertainment value trickles down slowly like a pleasant
light rain.  It's constant and very relieving and even manages to remain
very witty along the way.  If you're going to tell a story about two
people who learn something about each other and apply it separately to
their own lives, it's a good idea to balance the amount of time each has
on screen and this is done perfectly.  And what really makes the film
work is that neither Ben Affleck or Sandra Bullock try to upstage one
another.  Their personalities enhance the film extremely well and they
have the perfect on screen chemistry needed to make any relationship
picture work.
Director Bronwen Hughes ('Harriet the Spy'), gives his film a good pace
but about half way through, it slows down considerably --- more than it
should actually, but picks itself up for a satisfying conclusion.
'Forces of Nature' works for another good reason.  The script by Marc
Lawrence, Ian Bryce, and Donna Roth has a tendency to look for acute
social observations on marriage, divorce, parenthood and relationships
without making it look obvious.  The film's dialogue flows so naturally
that personality is the movie's strongest trait.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Christopher Null
Any time you go to see a romantic comedy with big budget stars and a
promo tagline like, "He went from the eye of the storm into the arms of
a hurricane," you have to be a little scared.  After all, for every WHEN
HARRY MET SALLY, there are a dozen WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING's, and the
worst part is that the bad ones always seem to make more money.
Surprisingly, my fears about sitting through FORCES OF NATURE were
unfounded and alleviated pretty quickly.  FORCES OF NATURE is basically
PLANES, TRAINS, AND AUTOMOBILES, except that John Candy has been
replaced with Sandra Bullock, Steve Martin is now Ben Affleck on his way
to get married, and instead of hating his travelling companion, Ben is
falling in love with her.  With a set-up like this, you have to be
especially worried, because Hollywood thrives on taking totally
unrealistic premises and turning them into trite, sentimental, and naive
romantic comedies with unrealistic happy endings.  The reason this
romantic comedy is pulled off, despite such an unrealistic premise
though, is that the plot is actually somewhat darker an more honest than
that of you typical popcorn movie.  Additionally, the more unrealistic
moments are played for laughs and not tears.
Credit the director, relative newcomer Hughes, the writer, and the
entire cast, particularly Steve Zahn as the best man, for keeping FORCES
from careening into unabashed sentimentalism.  It's the best Hollywood
text-book romantic comedy I've seen in a while, but with that said, it
is still a Hollywood text-book romantic comedy, so while you can expect
a few laughs, and a sentimental moment or two, don't expect a life
altering experience.
And one more thing, because I know that there are those of you out there
that are already eager to send me hate-mail for saying WHILE YOU WERE
SLEEPING sucked or maybe you want to claim that FORCES OF NATURE is
life-altering.  Save your time.  I personally don't mind the hate-mail,
I think it is funny, but if you think you are going to make me change my
mind or feel bad for insulting a masterpiece, you are not.  What I write
here are my opinions, and if you don't think they have any merit, don't
read my reviews.  I'm not doing this whole film review thing to feel
self-important, I'm doing it as a service, so if you don't think what I
write is worth reading, then PLEASE don't read it.
Director: Bronwyn Hughes
Producer: Susan Arnold, Donna Arkoff Roth, Ian Bryce
Writer: Marc Lawrence
Starring: Ben Affleck, Sandra Bullock, Maura Tierney, and Steve Zahn
http://www.asylum.com/forcesofnature
-Christopher Null  /  null@sirius.com  /  Writer-Producer  / 
http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Greg King
Sandra Bullock seems intent on establishing herself as
Hollywood's queen of romantic comedies.  However, she is hampered by
the fact that most of her films seem to come from the scripts that Meg
Ryan rejects.  Such is the case with Forces Of Nature, an
unspectacular romantic comedy exploring the attraction between
opposites and the role that fate and destiny play in changing our
lives.  In many ways, it also seems like an unsatisfactory version of
Planes, Trains, And Automobiles.  Mild mannered and straight laced Ben
Holmes (Ben Affleck) is about to be married to Bridget (Maura Tierney,
from Liar Liar, etc).  Unfortunately, his plane crashes on take-off,
stranding Ben in New York, with only a couple of days left to get to
the wedding.  That's when he meets the free spirited and
unconventional Sarah (Bullock), whose life has been shaped by a lack
of commitment and responsibility.  She offers to get him to the church
on time if he will agree to perform one small favour in return.
This mismatched couple share a journey, fraught with tension
and strange encounters, which also redefines their unfulfilled lives.
Ben learns to lighten up and have some fun in his routine life, while
Sarah is brought to a realisation of what she has missed due to her
lack of commitment.  Meanwhile in Savannah, the wedding preparations
are further threatened by rising hurricane force winds and imminent
marital storms.  Bridget also learns that her parents' seemingly happy
marriage is a little more unsteady than she thought.
The forces of nature seem to be conspiring to tell Ben something. 
 If only he can take the hints and learn which way the wind is blowing
(metaphorically speaking) he may be able to make the right decision
that will shape his future.
Writer Marc Lawrence (Life With Mikey, the upcoming remake of
The Out Of Towners) throws in a number of mixed messages about the
institution of marriage.  However, Forces Of Nature offers little that
is new to the basic formula.  This is only a moderately entertaining
film that will leave many in the audience feeling vaguely unsatisfied,
especially with the rather conventional ending.  The film is patchy,
and ultimately fails to follow through with its interesting premise.
Director Bronwen Hughes (Harriet The Spy) brings little subtlety to
the material, and there are a number of scenes that misfire.
Affleck is rather good as the stiff and initially humourless
Ben who learns to unwind and treat life as an adventure.  Bullock
brings energy and enthusiasm to her role, and seems more comfortable
here than she has for some time.  The film relies heavily upon its
star power to succeed, but unfortunately that just isn't enough here!

Author
Bob Bloom
 Forces of Nature (1999) 2 stars out of 4. Starring Ben Affleck and Sandra
Bullock.
 Sometimes we film critics can be a bit too smart for our own good.
 We watch a few minutes of a movie, size up the characters and situations
and automatically assume we know what's going to transpire.
 But then something strange and frightening happens, something that makes
going to the movies worthwhile - the filmmaker surprises us. He pulls the
cinematic rug out from under our feet and sends us sprawling on our
collective behinds.
 Thus it is with "Forces of Nature," a comedy-road picture starring Ben
Affleck and Sandra Bullock.
 He's the straight-arrow guy with the dull job - writing blurbs for book
covers.
 She's the free spirit who has held every kind of job except rodeo clown.
 They meet cute - he rescues her after their plane skids off the runway
during takeoff.
 And they are forced to take a long journey together even though they are
incompatable opposites.
 With all that, you literally connect the dots to the conclusion.
Or can you?
 Screenwriter Marc Lawrence and director Bronwen Hughes lead you down that
garden path - with a few bumps - and then ...
 Well, no more. You're going to have to see "Forces of Nature" to find out
the rest.
 True, the characters are cliched and predictable, the situations familiar.
You know what is going to happen 10 minutes before it does.
 The acting is simply by-the-numbers, for-the-paycheck. They don't seem to
be putting any effort into trying to breathe any credibility into their
characters.
 Plus there's no chemistry. Affleck and Bullock merely seem to be spouting
lines at each other.  Both  have done better.
 So, do yourself a favor. See the first 10 minutes of "Forces of Nature,"
then hang around the lobby for about an hour and a few minutes. Return to
see the last 10 minutes, go home and be satisfied.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Eugene Novikov
Forces of Nature (1999)
Reviewed by Eugene Novikov
http://www.ultimate-movie.com/forcesofnature.html
Member: Online Film Critics Society
Pacing has proved very important in comedies; consistency is almost always a
virtue (unless of course the subject in question is consistently unfunny).
When a movie is consistently amusing, it will always be a good one, no
matter how reprehensibly pointless said movie might be. But when a film
resembles a roller coaster; constantly changing from lively to slow, from
funny to pathetic, it becomes almost unredeemable because viewers almost
have to brace themselves for the next change of pace. The eagerly awaited
romantic comedy Forces of Nature is so wildly inconsistent, it plays lke a
roller coaster. And as much as I love roller coasters, films that are roller
coasters often prove to be a bit too much -- or, sometimes, too little.
Sandra Bullock's talent has been universally underutilized. She's been an
action hero in Speed and The Net, she's been in kitschy love stories (does
While You Were Sleeping ring a bell), and now she's cast in this minefield
of a role; but she has been in nary a serious role, one where she could
really show off her acting chops. Why not? I have no clue, because as she
has demonstrated over the course of her career, and as she demonstrates in
Forces of Nature she is a much more versatile, capable and entertaining
actress than she's been given credit for.
Here, she is the shining star in an otherwise dull and bland sky. She plays
Sara Lewis, a seemingly happy-go-lucky chick who meets up with the film's
real protagonist when their plane crashes (without taking off). The point of
Forces of Nature is really to track the course of "jacket copyrighter" Ben
Holmes' journey from New York to Georgia for his wedding. After the
aforementioned plane crash, Holmes decides to play it safe with ground
transportation, and Sara drags along. What follows is a drug bust, a
hurricane, a mistaken identity caper and, of course, a shopping spree at
Kmart. Can Holmes get to his wedding in time? Do we care?
During the journey we find that Sara is not really as free and careless as
she seems. We discover that the deceptively assured Holmes is really quite
insecure about the marriage that he is about to enter. And of course
everything goes wrong down in Georgia where his impatient wife and her
impatient parents are going nuts over the fact that it's taking Holmes two
days to get from New York to Savannah for his wedding. But we never feel any
sense of urgency about Holmes' tardiness, nor do we experience any emotional
connection to Sara or much sympathy for her troubled life.
Forces of Nature is a feather-light comedy that aims low and achieves less.
Bullock is indeed excellent, and her portrayal of a free spirit is
momentarily uplifting. Ben Affleck on the other hand proves too likeable for
his own good, to the point where he is not a real person but a cloying
mechanism to suck up to the audience. Some of the movie's sequences shine,
such as the scene where Affleck is gently forced to strip at a gay bar, but
some are forced and catastrophically implausible -- would you believe that
two people could climb on top of a train full of passengers and start
screaming at the top of their lungs without anyone so much as noticing? Or
that any self-respecting human being would literally try to hitchhike from
New York to Georgia?
Director Bronwen Hughes (Harriet the Spy) stages some hilarious scenes but
also some that make you cringe and some that are all too predictable.
Consider, for example, the part where Holmes poses as a doctor on a bus full
of seniors. Can you guess what happens next?
There are moments when Forces of Nature seems truly alive and throbbing with
joy. But overwhelmingly the movie is ordinary and sub-par as a romantic
comedy. The only part of the film that hints at any substance is its
love-it-or-hate-it ending, which I will not go so far as reveal. Some
viewers will eat it up thinking it is the only segment of the film that has
any depth. More superficial moviegoers (not that there's anything wrong with
that) may feel cheated because the conclusion gives the viewer a feeling
that the past two hours were completely pointless. But of course, many will
feel that they were pointless anyway.

Author
James Sanford
Like some pseudo-exotic punch that mixes kiwi juice and strawberry
nectar, "Forces of Nature" combines the terrors of "Twister" and the
comic chaos of "Planes, Trains and Automobiles," tossing in a dash or
two of "It Happened One Night" for good measure.
But though Sandra Bullock and Ben Affleck generate a certain amount of
goodwill and director Bronwen Hughes proves she can conjure up a
colorful scene, the comedy - like the airplane its central characters
meet aboard - doesn't quite get off the ground.
What's frustrating about "Forces" is that all the right elements seem
to be in place. The supporting cast (Steve Zahn, Blythe Danner, Maura
Tierney, etc.) is full of familiar faces and the movie is awash in
eye-appealing pastels and impressive computer-animated effects,
including slow-motion rain for the stars to run through. The only
thing missing is a comic spark to set the picture off.
Instead, Marc Lawrence's screenplay follows a familiar path, bringing
seemingly jinxed travelers Ben (Affleck) and Sarah (Bullock) together
on the long, long road from New York City to Savannah, Ga. Ben is
going south for his wedding; Sarah's got personal business to
settle. He's a "blurbmeister" who writes copy for book jackets (he
touts a romance set in Egypt as "a scintillating tale of erotic
mummification"); she's a semi-nutty jill-of-all trades, who claims to
have worked as a salesperson, an exotic dancer and a flight attendant
at various points in her career.
Detours along the way to their destinies include a drug bust, trouble
on a train and a stay in a motel that's even scarier than the ones
Diane Keaton photographed in her classic book "Reservations."
Meanwhile, Ben's bride-to-be Bridget (Tierney) is trying to withstand
the temptations of a good-looking lawyer (David Strickland) who woos
her with off-key renditions of old Phil Collins' hits.
Bullock, with purple highlights in her hair and a clingy wardrobe, can
play these kinds of charmingly ditsy roles in her sleep by
now. Affleck has a slightly tougher row to hoe, since Lawrence's
script doesn't exactly flesh Ben out. There's a sweetness in the way
they bounce lines off each other, but the film doesn't fully explore
the possibilities of either the stars' chemistry or the combination of
genres in its storyline; ultimately, "Forces" is all thunder and no
lightning.

Author
Jamie Peck
Rating: **1/2 (out of ****)
DreamWorks SKG / 1:42 / 1999 / PG-13 (language, thematic material)
Cast: Sandra Bullock; Ben Affleck; Maura Tierney; Steve Zahn; Blythe
Danner; Ronny Cox; Meredith Scott Lynn; David Strickland
Director: Bronwen Hughes
Screenplay: Marc Lawrence; Ian Bryce; Donna Roth
Sandra Bullock's girl-next-door sunniness is appealing in the same way
that Ben Affleck's swarthy-but-affable ease is appealing, so it's
reasonable to presume that a movie featuring their respective appeals
will be, um, appealing as well. "Forces of Nature," one such romantic
comedy, lives up to that precursor despite saddling these actors with
roles that might seem to contradict their proven likability: She's a
wild child with hefty emotional baggage while he's a harried,
straightforward bundle of nerves. The casting goes completely against
type, but Bullock and Affleck's stars shine brightly even when the film
gets dangerously dim - which is also, unfortunately, how it ends up.
The story is basically composed of a string of natural and man-made
disasters that lead this nice-looking but evidently mismatched pair to
profess their mutual affection for each other. So far, so fun, as this
much of Forces delivers largely entertaining fluff. What happens in the
dire aftermath, however, is best described as forced. It's not fair for
a movie to be amusing within the confines of several standard cinematic
conventions - the Meet Cute, the Opposites Attract and the Road Movie
among them - and then bungle the moment of truth and subsequent climax
and finale. They suck the mirth right out of the air and might leave a
bad taste in your mouth.
Thank goodness for Bullock and Affleck, then, who click even in the most
contrived of circumstances. They first share screen time on a New
York-to-Georgia flight that, due to a nasty accident involving a seagull
and a wing engine, never gets off the ground. Affleck's Ben (no stretch
there) already has the jitters because he's en route to his opulent
wedding in Savannah, and said mishap doesn't exactly set his mind at
ease - especially after grandpa keeled over at the bachelor party only
to confide on his hospital bed that marriage is nothing but constricting
chaos.
Despite these two seemingly isolated incidents of ill will, Ben hooks up
with Bullock's fellow passenger and free spirit Sarah (what, they didn't
want to call her Sandra?) for alternate travel strategies - she's headed
his way, so he figures he'll share the joys of outrageous fortune. But
one bit of bad luck turns into another, and soon, Ben and Sarah have
gotten arrested, robbed and quite wet from the torrential downpour of
rain and hail that follows them almost about everywhere - shot as
beautiful visual compositions by "Out of Sight" cinematographer Elliot
Davis - and these are merely a few of the crises they endure while
trying to go south.
Such lively misadventures, which comprise a bulk of "Forces of Nature,"
take a cue from "Planes, Trains & Automobiles" in their growing
absurdity and vehicular setting - aside from the aforementioned airliner
tragedy, Ben and Sarah inadvertently run into railroad trouble and hitch
a ride from a friendly hophead, though not in that order. Meanwhile,
"Forces of Nature" cuts back and forth between their plight and Ben's
bride, waiting by the phone and expecting the worst. This fairly
thankless part is filled by Maura Tierney, who was also given the
thankless part of Jim Carrey's wife in "Liar Liar," and she's further
hampered by an equally thankless subplot in which a successful ex tempts
her.
Of course, that flummox would be forgivable had Affleck and Tierney's
guaranteed nuptial-day reunion and its aftermath rang true, but for
once, an unpredictable, anti-Hollywood send-off flops. A powerful
hurricane hits the area just in time for this conclusion, and tosses the
colorful decor about in its mighty winds like rainbow confetti. It's a
pretty sight, but it makes one wonder if anybody in front of the camera
pays attention to the Weather Channel, or if anybody behind it couldn't
think of a better way to cap off an otherwise enjoyable movie.
Š 1999 Jamie Peck
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit The Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/
"Remember that old college boy joke about how, after sex, the ideal
women turns into a pizza and a six-pack? In this movie, the ideal man
turns into a vibrator and Ted Koppel." -Roger Ebert on "Let's Talk About
Sex"
