Title
Review for Windhorse (1998)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dennis Schwartz
WINDHORSE (director/writer: Paul Wagner; screenwriter: Julia Elliot/
Thupten Tsering; cinematographer:Steven Schecter; cast: Dadon (Dolkar),
Tenzin Pema (Young Dolkar),
Pasang Dolma (Young Pema), Jampa Kelsang (Dorjee), Richard Chang
(Duan-ping), Taije Silverman (Amy), Deepak Tserin (Young Dorjee), 1998)
Windhorse takes us right into modern Tibet and tells how the Tibetans
survive in a country that is not really theirs anymore. It is a
well-done and necessary propaganda film (though even its propaganda is
nuanced and made lyrical to a large extent). Somehow or other the world
has to receive the message from the Tibetans, who are undergoing at the
hands of their suppressors, the Chinese Communists, a policy of genocide
that will probably continue unchecked unless something is done to stop
it. This film is one of the ways of getting out this message. Since
Tibet was invaded in 1950 by the Chinese, and in 1959 they forced the
Dalai Lama to go in exile, with the unbelievable explanation that they
were liberating the country, there have been over a million Tibetans
slaughtered, 6,000 temples ruined, and over 100,000 have fled the
country by walking over the dangerous Himalayan terrain. This
fictionalized drama has to be told and this serious film (probably
preaching to the choir) cannot be judged as other films are for its
entertainment value. If you are seeing this film to be entertained, you
are in the wrong movie house, though the exquisite natural beauty of the
country and the entrancing holy city of Lhasa- and its Potala (the
largest Buddhist structure in the world)- offer quite a lot of sights to
behold.
The brutality the Tibetans are under is clearly shown, as the film will
tell its story as humanly as it can, through the eyes of one family, and
it will show their hardships and disruptions to be symbolic for the
sufferings of all Tibetans.
The tragedy in this film starts one day in 1979 when the youngsters
Dorjee (Jampa Kelsang when a grownup) and his sister Dolkar
(Tibetan-American singer Dadon when a grownup) and their cousin Pema
(unnamed when a grownup-what a shame! She gave an emotionally great
performance) are skipping rope and Dolkar is singing a childhood ballad,
and the sibling's grandfather is suddenly taken from the house by the
Chinese soldiers and shot because he protested their rule by hanging a
poster that said "Chinese get out of Tibet."
The story will pick up 18 years later when the three are grown, each
choosing different paths. Pema becomes a Buddhist nun, Dolkar a sexy
karaoke singer, whose Chinese boyfriend is a broadcast official named
Duan-ping (Richard Chang), helping advance her singing career, as long
as she performs in Chinese and behaves like a lackey, singing songs
praising Chairman Mao; while, Dorjee remains sullen, unemployed, wasting
his time drinking beer, chain smoking, hanging out with his wise-guy
friends in a pool hall, and brooding how nothing can be done to save his
country, all-the-while cursing the Chinese. He is compelling as the
weary one, not knowing what to do until something tragic happens that
brings out his best instincts and transforms him to do what is right. He
steals the picture with this gut-wrenching performance.
What changes everything for the family, is when Pema is arrested for
spontaneously screaming "Free Tibet" in the streets of the Tibetan
capital, Lhasa, and is beaten to within an inch of her life and then
callously returned to the family where she dies, even though they tried
their best to nurse her back to life in their home. This travesty really
hits home and shames them into actively supporting the non-violent
Tibetan cause for freedom. They are abetted by an American tourist, Amy
(Taije Silverman), who speaks Tibetan and has a video camera, and is
evidently interested in the "real" Tibetan people.
What is simply amazing throughout the story is the gentleness of the
Tibetans, who exhibit no violent tendencies despite all these incidents,
and when you compare them with the barbarian behavior of their Chinese
rulers, you can easily see that this is a story of good vs. evil.
It should be noted how the film had to be made secretly when filmed for
a week in Tibet (most of the film was shot in Nepal) with a video camera
and smuggled out of Tibet (it was shot on digital video and transferred
to film), and how some of the actors were in great danger and thereby
could not use their real names. It is easy to see why China doesn't want
the truth about its human rights violations known, or about the murders
it commits and acts of brutality, and its spy system and systematic
control over its subjects, or how it refuses to allow the people to even
have pictures of the Dalai Lama in their homes, arresting those that do.
All this being done to a people who just happen to have a philosophy of
life filled with compassion and love for everyone.
The film opens and ends on a powerful spiritual note, as you would
expect from a people who value so highly their traditional knowledge of
Buddhism. It shows what a windhorse is, which are prayer flags on the
mountain passes and scraps of paper left on the ground to be ridden by
the wind into the hands of the gods for victory, where each sheet of
paper offers such a prayer for freedom. Thereby, the film will rest its
case that the spirit world will always be there for them.
Director Wagner and screenwriter Tsering have pulled off a major
accomplishment. They made an emotional and a confrontational film, and
they made it inside a totalitarian Chinese regime and they got away with
it. That makes this a very special film for me, but it will probably be
too one-dimensional a story for those who feel it lacks the impact of
dramatics and cannot forgive the film for urgently wishing to send out
its message at the expense of being more "artistic." But I left the
theater with the impression that I was watching a brave people clinging
to the belief that they could find in their hearts all the goodness they
need to get over this dark spot in their history. I thought it was a
well-meaning film that had its exceptional moments, like fully realizing
the relationship of Dadon and Duan-ping as symbolic of the possible
reconciliation of the two countrys. These two lovers slowly come to
believe that they are being duped into thinking that things could work
for them in such a hostile setting, and Dadon realizes she can't betray
her people and be lured into singing on TV for a big contract, while he
knows that he can't be too vocal in his protest or he will be removed
from his position. They both, therefore, must compromise their love
because of current affairs.
But does the film reach an audience that doesn't know theTibetan
situation?
I hope it does reach a wider American audience than what I think it
will, because I  believe that the cause here is just, the acting is
first-class, the film is beautifully crafted, and that all people of
good faith must stand together and give hope to each other, in any small
or large way that they can. If this fictionalized film wasn't about the
real life situation in Tibet and had the same mundane story, I could see
it being criticized for being melodramatic. But since the politics of
the times indicate that this film does make a difference, so much so
that the Chinese government is doing everything in its power to ban it,
I therefore think that speaks volumes for how effective this film is as
a political vehicle and how its cinematic importance is enhanced by the
unflinching bravery of the Tibetan actors and their families still
living in Tibet, still the subject of untold horrors.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   On the day I screened this wonderfully dramatized story
on April 6, Chinese Premier Zhu arrived in Los Angeles in
preparation for his meeting with President Clinton in
Washington.  Since Mr. Clinton has taken a strong stand pro-
human rights by justifiably battling ethnic cleansing of Kosovo
Albanians by Serbs in Yugoslavia, the producers of this
film--including its entire cast and crew--would probably just
love to have our president see it before or during his meeting
with the Chinese leader.  The drama could awaken him to
such an extent that he would drive a harder bargain than
currently anticipated with China over its human rights abuses,
particularly in its western province of Tibet.  Stating that
1.2 million Tibetans have been killed by Chinese forces
since 1959 and that 100,000 of the Tibetan people have
trekked across the Himalayas to freedom in India and
Nepal is one thing.  Seeing the horrors of Chinese rule in
that brave area on top of the world is yet another.  What
could have been crude propaganda in the hands of a
second-rate filmmaker comes out--under the exquisitely
nuanced hand of writer-director Paul Wagner--as pure
poetry.  The very first feature film ever in the Tibetan
language, "Windhorse"--which has already been seen and
cheered by tens of thousands of Tibetan refugees in India,
Nepal and at U.S. film festivals--is a must-see for anyone
with the slightest interest in world politics.  Viewing the film
affords the sort of insight that only motion pictures can
provide into the brutality that humankind is capable of and
the unending desire for freedom that such ruthless
treatment engenders in its victims.
   The ponderous narration which frames the movie (its
only weak point) informs us that the titled windhorses are
pieces of paper left on the ground to be spirited to the
gods by the wind.  Each sheet of paper, written in the
Tibetan language, is a prayer, a plea for freedom.   The
story then opens in a remote mountain village in 1979.  Two
girls jump rope: Dolkar and her brother Dorjee are interrupted
from play by the arrival of two Chinese soldiers who
summarily execute their grandfather for putting up a poster
demanding that the Chinese leave Tibet and go home.  
   Director Wagner shifts to the year 1997.  The
children, now grown, have gone off in different directions. 
Dolkar (Dadon) is a beautiful singer with hopes of 
national fame, while her cousin Pema (Name withheld) has
become a Buddhist nun.  Dolkar and her brother Dorjee
(Jampa Kolsang) have moved to the provincial capital of
Lhasa where they live with their mother and feisty
grandmother. The latter adamantly refuses to stash her
pictures of the Dalai Lama into a hiding place per a ban by
the Chinese government on exhibitions of the Tibetan
spiritual leader.  The old lady's militancy is reflected in the
hostility which Dorjee feels toward the occupying power.
He has become a bum who drinks and hangs around the
pool hall while his sister, together with her Chinese boy
friend Duan-ping (Richard Chang), plan out a career for the
lovely singer.  To rise in her profession, Dolkar must sell
out: she must follow the orders of record producer and
party boss Mr. Du (Richard Chang) and go on China-wide
TV with songs praising the glories of Chinese rule,
comparing Chairman Mao to the Golden Sun.
   When Dolkar sees with horror the brutalities inflicted by
Chinese authorities on her cousin Pema--who had
spontaneously shouted "Free Tibet" in a public square
and was arrested, imprisoned, and beaten--she thinks
better of her actions, realizing that she may be gaining an
affluent livelihood but is losing her soul.
   The movie is not without humor, particularly when
centering on the grandmother who cannot stand to look at
Dolkar's Chinese boy friend, who spits secretly into his tea,
and who seems to challenge the authorities to do
something about her high-spirited defiance of the
occupation.  American travelers who have ever been invited
into foreign homes can readily identify with a scene showing 
the grandma making Tibetan tea for a Western guest, Amy
(Taije Silverman), who speaks fluent Tibetan and must
utilize her diplomatic powers to stomach a brew made with
a huge blob of churned butter and an abundant share of salt.  
Amy learns first-hand about the plight of Tibetans through the
hardships endured by Dolkar's family and is entrusted with
carrying the story of the Tibetan people's oppression to the
outside world.
   This endearing tale features both professional and
non-professional performers all acting up a storm.
Some refuse to put their names in the credits for fear of
reprisals against their families.  The movie has justifiably won
accolades at festivals in Santa Barbara, Washington D.C.,
Telluride and Florida.  Not only does this break ground by
being the first movie made in the Tibetan language:
"Windhorse" had to be filmed secretly while the crew were
in Tibet, using various signals to take the place of formal
Hollywood-style cues, while a smaller segment of the movie
was shot in independent Nepal.  The viewer comes away
from a heartfelt narrative which is bereft of crude propaganda
and which incidentally takes in some distinguished
travelogue-type photography of the Lhasa market place and
the glories of the Himalayan Mountains--where a hardy
group of people struggle to live out their lives, honor the
spirits, and resist Chinese rule as well as they can.

Author
Greg King
WINDHORSE (M).  
(Gil Scrine Films)
Directors: Paul Wagner and Thupten Tsering
Stars: Dadon, Jampa Kelsang, Richard Chang, Lu Yu, Taije Silverman, Gelek
Running time: 97 minutes.
Unlike recent big budget Hollywood productions dealing with
Tibet, the low budget Windhorse relentlessly pricks away at the
audiences' conscience by exposing the plight of the Tibetan people in
the years since the Chinese occupation.  Set in contemporary Tibet,
Windhorse shows the systematic repression and destruction of the
country's religion and culture in the forty years since the Chinese
invasion.
This is the first feature film from Oscar winning documentary
director Paul Wagner (The Stone Carvers, etc), but it has been largely
shaped by his years of documenting unpalatable truths for the camera.
Wagner's camera unflinchingly captures the depressing poverty of the
capital Lhasa, and depicts the many temples that have been laid to
waste.  However, the film also captures the resilient spirit and
character of the Tibetan people.  The title itself comes from the
Tibetan tradition of inscribing prayers of hope and freedom on little
bits of paper and letting them float through the air. Wagner has also
incorporated traditional Tibetan music into the evocative and haunting
soundtrack, which further enriches the film.
Unlike the lavish, albeit sanitised Kundun and Seven Years In
Tibet, much of Windhorse was actually clandestinely shot inside Tibet
itself, using hand held cameras smuggled into Tibet while posing as
tourists.  Wagner and his crew shot many of the important background
locations under the noses of the Chinese security forces, at great
personal risk.  (The remainder of the film was shot in nearby
Kathmandu.)  The gritty visual style gives the film a sense of urgency
and immediacy missing from those other productions.
Wagner paints a grim picture of contemporary Tibet, one in
which the people are constantly watched by the vigilant Chinese, who
ruthlessly suppress any hint of rebellion or dissension.  Images of
the Dalai Lama are forbidden, and the consequences for protest or
disobedience are severe.  In the past four decades, over one million
Tibetans have mysteriously disappeared, or been tortured, murdered or
exiled by the Chinese secret police.
Windhorse centres around three twenty something Tibetans who
have thus far managed to survive in this dangerous climate by avoiding
any sort of conflict with the Chinese authorities.  Eighteen years
earlier the three witnessed the brutal execution of their grandfather
by the Chinese.  Although the incident has left deep psychological
scars, they have come to believe that any thoughts of resistance are
futile.  Dolkar (Tibetan singer Dadon) sings karaoke in a night-club,
and eventually secures a recording contract singing propaganda for her
Chinese masters.  Her unemployed brother Dorjee (Jampa Kolsangi) is
resentful of the Chinese, but refuses to join the underground
resistance movement.  Their cousin Pema has become a nun.  But when
Pema is arrested for daring to protest against the Chinese occupation
in a market, Dolkar and Dorjee are finally forced to take action that
will forever change their lives.
Windhorse is a confronting, powerfully moving and insightful
film that boldly and openly criticises the harsh Chinese regime.
Wagner and his co-director Thupten Tsering used a cast and crew
comprising of Tibetan exiles, many of whom have withheld their names
from the production for fear of Chinese reprisals.  This gives a
poignancy to their natural and realistic performances, and further
adds to the overall feeling of authenticity that permeates the film.
However, the film is not without its technical flaws, most of
them a result of Wagner's lack of resources.
