Title
Review for Diaboliques, Les (1955)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
     DIABOLIQUE is a classic thriller and murder mystery that was made
in 1954, but while watching it I thought it was made in the 30s or
40s.  It has the look and feel of one of the original Hitchcock movies
from the 30s.  DIABOLIQUE is showing in limited engagements now in art
houses.  The original uncut version of the movie that is now showing
has fresh looking and handsome black and white prints and has seven
minutes of footage restored.
     I will set up the plot for you, but no more, since the twists in
the movie are the main reason to see it.  The principal of a French
boarding school for (rowdy) boys is played by Paul Meurisse.  His
Spanish wife is played by Vera Clouzot and his mistress by Simone
Signoret.  The other characters are unimportant and not worth
mentioning.  He beats his wife and his mistress so the two women become
good friends, and moreover, they both work at the school.
     Other than the fun script and all of the games it plays convincing
you of one "fact" only to start making you think that just the opposite
is true, the only other outstanding part of the movie is the
cinematography.  It transports you to France and to a time past.  The
feel of the countryside and of the little private school is at once
both hokey and wonderfully evocative of a simpler era.  Watch
especially how the camera will stop and pause on small features like
the dead leaves floating on top of the swimming pool.  The film maker
is careful to focus in menacingly on the expressions on the characters
faces when they are surprised or frighten--very Hitchcockean.
     The problem I had with the film and the reason I did not rate it
higher was the one dimensional acting.  The husband was supposed to be
the canonical cad, but I did not buy Meurisse performance for a
minute.  He was totally unconvincing.
     Signoret did an acceptable job of portraying a character who
showed no emotion at all.  The only interesting work was that of Vera
Clouzot--wife of the director Henri-Georges Clouzot.  Her performance
had some depth, but still she was mainly a stick figure.  Her version
of fear reminded me of a caricature of someone in Acting 101 learning
how to demonstrate fear.
     The movie runs about two hours.  It is not rated but probably
would get an R for the half dozen uses of the F word and the adult
themes.  There is no sex or nudity.  The little violence it has is
realistic, but not bloody or particularly frightening.  It would be
fine for any teenager to see.  I recommend the picture for a fun and
tricky plot and for the nostalgic filming, and I award ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are solely mine & not meant to reflect my
employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Initially released: 1955 
Rerelease:  Fall 1994 
Running Length: 1:56 (restored version) 
Rated: No MPAA Rating (Violence, language, mature themes) 
Starring: Simone Signoret, Vera Clouzot, Paul Meurisse, Charles Vanel 
Director: Henri-Georges Clouzot 
Producer: Henri-Georges Clouzot 
Screenplay: Henri Georges Clouzot, Jerome Geronimi, 
         Frederic Grendel, and Rene Masson 
Cinematography: Armand Thirard 
Music: Georges Van Parys 
Released by Kino International 
In French with English subtitles 
     Floating around the art house circuit these days is a restored
version of Henri-Georges Clouzot's 1955 murder mystery DIABOLIQUE.
Easily overlooked because of its limited distribution, this is a
picture that may demand some active searching to find.  It is well
worth the effort.  With a plot as deliciously curvy and complex as any
contemporary thriller, DIABOLIQUE is a masterpiece, and as accomplished
as anything done by Hitchcock.
     Unlike many noir thrillers, DIABOLIQUE takes as much time defining
and refining its characters as developing its plot.  By never taking
things to excess, Clouzot forms a chillingly realistic presentation.
There are moments of irreverent humor, but these are seamlessly
incorporated so as not to disturb the overall tone.  With its keen
insight into the base aspects of human nature, DIABOLIQUE has a lot
more to offer than a traditional entry into the genre.
     The less said about the plot, the better, since any excess of
detail is likely to afford an unwanted peek around one of DIABOLIQUE's
many corners.  In essence, this is the story of two women who conspire
to murder one man.  The intended victim is Michel Delasalle (Paul
Meurisse), a despicable sort of person who abuses the women in his life
while flaunting his mistress in front of his wife.  The potential
killers are Christina Delasalle (played by Vera Clouzot, the director's
wife), the ailing, fragile wife; and Nicole Horner (Simone Signoret),
the mistress who wears sunglasses to conceal her latest shiner.
     The three leads all turn in impeccable performances.  Paul
Meurisse presents an entirely convincing portrayal of a man with no
redeeming qualities.  Michel Delasalle is the kind of person no one
wants to know.  In his position as director of a boarding school, he's
the boys' worst nightmare.  Nicole Horner is suitably no-nonsense as
the practical mistress, and Vera Clouzot is more than credible as the
wife who is equally repelled and enticed by the thought of killing her
wretched husband.
     Diabolically clever in construction with perfect pacing and a
momentum that builds to the appropriate moment, this film is the sort
of intelligent thriller that is difficult to find.  The restored print,
which includes several previously-trimmed scenes, is clean and crisp,
making DIABOLIQUE every bit as enjoyable as Hollywood's best current
offerings.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
