Title
Review for Fiorile (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Claudio Bigagli, Galatea Ranzi, Michael Vartan, 
           Lino Capolicchio, Constanze Engelbrecht 
Directors:  Paolo and Vittorio Taviani 
Producer:  Grazia Volpi 
Screenplay:  Paolo and Vittorio Taviani and Sandro Petraglia 
Music:  Nicola Pilvani 
Released by Fine Line Features 
In Italian (with a little French) with subtitles 
     The latest offering from the Taviani brothers (PADRE PADRONE and
THE NIGHT OF THE SHOOTING STARS) is FIORILE, a series of four vignettes
interconnected by the common theme of a curse that haunts a family
through the centuries.  Since the late 1790s, the Benedettis--called
the Maledettis ("the cursed") by the peasants who accept the stories
about them--have been victims of a series of strange and tragic
events.  If fate has a sense of irony, it's on display here, as the
source of this family's riches lies at the root of their misery.
     The story opens a few years before 1800, as Napoleon's army
marches through Tuscany.  A young French officer, Jean (Michael
Vartan), falls in love with a local girl, Elisabetta (Galatea Ranzi),
whom he calls "Fiorile" after the French Revolutionaries' name for the
month of May.  While the two dally in the woods, Elisabetta's brother
Corrado (Claudio Bigagli) steals a chest full of gold that had been
placed in Jean's charge.  This act leads to the officer's disgrace, and
heartbreak for Elisabetta.
     One hundred years later, one of Elisabetta's descendents (also
played by Galatea Ranzi, to emphasize the familial relationship) is
given an opportunity to avenge her ancestor.  The target of her wrath
is her brother, a near-copy of Corrado (Claudio Bigagli again).
     During the war years of the mid-forties, another member of the
Benedetti family, Massimo (Michael Vartan's second role), must struggle
with his belief in the family curse while fighting to help the
anti-Mussolini rebels with whom he sympathizes.  Captured, then
inexplicably set free by the fascists, Massimo must live not only with
the specter of the Benedetti history hanging over his life, but also
the weight of guilt that he was spared when his comrades were killed.
     The final episode of FIORILE takes place in modern times, and has
Massimo's son and grandchildren visiting the old man at the Tuscany
home where he has become a hermit.  Their arrival opens old wounds and
forces him to face truths which he would prefer to hide from.
     The 18th Century segment of FIORILE is brilliantly-written and
performed.  Irony, tragedy, and romance blend together to form what is
by far the best half-hour of the film.  After that, however, the
characters become progressively less-compelling, and the storyline
gradually loses its appeal.  The second vignette is largely static; the
third manages something of a recovery; and the fourth goes nowhere,
doing little to close the "curse" story arc with a satisfying
resolution.
     The Tavianis have done some interesting things in this movie, the
most notable of which is casting the three main leads in multiple roles
to emphasize the intertwining of the fates of the Benedettis across the
decades.  Unfortunately, the brothers are unable to sustain the sense
of immediacy inherent in the first act.  FIORILE starts strong but
finishes weak.
     The cost of greed is not a new theme to the movies, nor is the
concept of the sins of the fathers being visited upon their children.
FIORILE weds the two together, but makes the mistake of presenting the
initial act far more impressively than the consequences, and that
somehow seems in large part to defeat the point that the filmmakers are
attempting to present.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Pedro Sena
It's hard to fault this film, aside from a few moments here and there where
it appears slow.  But the slow-ness, like Claude Berri's, is not waiting for
something to happen.  It is letting the actors shed their tears, for us to
see.  Which makes for a film, that is as
gut wrenching as the Jean de Florette/Manon of the Spring type of story.
And as sad and tragic as the events in this story are, the  film still comes
up with a bit of hope, even if it is a bit jaded, by  the innocence of a
youthful desire to play, or to follow through on
their own wishes.
It is a story that encompasses almost 200 years in the life of a  family
string.  It starts during one of the many franco/italian  conflicts a young
man in charge of a brigade carrying some gold,  gets attacked in Italy by
the noblemen who take the law in their
own hands. In the process they hurt one of their own daughters.  And the
French officer who is actually resting, helps her.  During  this time they
come to like each other after each other's original  fears.  And apparently
they make love, after her leg wound is cleaned.   Sadly, the young man was
the guardian of a fortune in gold coins,
which is taken away, by the girl's older brother and hidden.  The  young
man, Jean ends up facing a firing squad, and the young girl is  left
pregnant and in despair.  And this is just the beginning.
The story continues, being told to the two Bennedetti children, in today's
environment, as what is probably clear that these are people related in some
way, to the legends.  The man telling the story to his children, is on the
way to visit his own ailing father.  During the drive, the children learn of
this story which has many chapters and goes through nearly 200 years.
And at this point in the film, the outcome is still not clear, but it is
becoming evident that the innocence of youth is always getting scramble
somewhere along the line and in this case a sour old man, may be just the
thing for the playful children, who find out a thing or two in their fun.
They come away, mostly  untouched by the events and the old man's emotional
state, with  the exception that one child managed to get his hands on one
coin of gold, which may signal the continuance of the misfortunes in  the
family, although this particular generation seems to be doing  fine, and the
coin is taken as a souvenir, rather than any act of ill will, as has been
the case before.
With incredible attention to detail and shooting design, this film is a
marvel to watch.  It's hard to fault it for anything, or find anyone that
just seems out of place.  Both directors, brothers, are just a touch above
any others when it comes to attention for detail and story line.  Even the
continuity of this film is smooth despite jumping many years from chapter to
chapter.  A very rare event, indeed for the art of film.  There are bits and
pieces of nice touches here and there that just stand out every so often,
and the subtleties are apparent all the time.  It feels like a story of a
family that is intended to get back to its roots, the common people ( if
there is such a thing!!! ), but it is always stopped before it returns.  And
the acts that stop this return are always tragic, and not always obvious.
We usually find the answers as to why things happened but the characters
mostly do not, and this has caused tremendous pain along the way.  A series
of revenges and returns to what has become a "cursed" family, with a nice
double take on the family's last name in Italian.
An absolutely well photographed film, with not a frame that seems out of
place, and with some subtle shots that just leave your heart moved.
Wonderful story, and told as only an European could.  A sense of history
that Americans have not yet acquired, or acknowledged.
