Title
Review for Map of the World, A (1999)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
David N. Butterworth
        When the kids are acting up, parents may wish to be transported to
some solitary place where the rigors of domesticity can be placed far
behind them, if only for a couple of hours.  The state penitentiary would
probably not be most people's first choice of destination, but that's where
Alice Goodwin finds herself in "A Map of the World."  Oddly, Alice seems to
welcome, even relish, this opportunity to get away from her demanding
children and her ineffective husband, yet there's one thing she cannot get
away from no matter how hard she tries: the specter of irreconcilable guilt.
        How could anyone live with oneself when a child entrusted into
one's care dies?
        This act of criminal negligence isn't what lands Alice in prison,
but it is the start of a downward spiral that Jane Hamilton examines in her
book, and director Scott Elliot attempts to examine in his cinematic
adaptation, scripted by Peter Hedges and Polly Platt.
        Elliot's "A Map of the World" fails to pack any kind of emotional
wallop, however, which is strange given the film's subject matter and even
stranger given the confident performances of its leads.  Sigourney Weaver
is convincing as the emotionally-troubled Alice, David Strathairn plays her
husband Howard with his usual sensitivity, and Julianne Moore is typically
strong as Theresa, the friend and neighbor whose young daughter
accidentally drowns in the Goodwin's pond.
        Alice, who has promised to take Theresa's two young girls and her
own two daughters swimming, spends a little too long searching for her
bathing suit and returns downstairs to find one of her charges missing.  A
few panic-stricken moments later, Alice discovers the little girl lying
face down in the water.
        Compare this scene to the drowning at the beginning of Nicolas
Roeg's "Don't Look Now," for example, and you'll get a sense of Elliot's
lifeless handling of his film's dramatic content.  In fact, the director's
matter-of-fact approach to the material is a serious liability; scenes and
situations are presented rather than developed, and while Weaver gives
Alice her all, we are left feeling distanced from this woman and from this
cast of characters.
        After the accident, Alice, a part-time school nurse who has always
spoken her mind, is accused of child abuse as the unnamed Wisconsin town
turns its back on her and her family.  The film veers between rural
domestic drama and tacky women's prison melodrama culminating in an
impotent and blessedly-short courtroom sequence.  Again, Elliot keeps the
events at arm's length, as if afraid to commit one way or another.
        Arliss Howard plays defense attorney Paul Reverdy with a wink in
his eye which comes across as tasteless given the seriousness of the
charge, and that's Louise Fletcher (Nurse Ratched from "One Flew Over the
Cuckoo's Nest") as Alice's conscientious mother-in-law.  Their
contributions are adequate, but don't enhance the drama any.
        "A Map of the World" is a well-meaning but imperfect work,
recommended only for fans of Ms. Weaver, devotees of imperturbable cinema,
or, perhaps, cartographers.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Murali Krishnan
Facing extraordinary challenges or circumstances can define a person's
character. When an individual undergoes a trial by fire, they are
either destroyed or else they gain the ability to view themselves from
a pragmatic perspective. This film is an adaptation of a novel by Jane
Hamilton in which a woman is forced to cope with potentially
destructive challenges.
The story is primarily an examination of its main character, Alice
Goodwin (Sigourney Weaver). Her husband Howard (David Strathairn)
desires to be a farmer, so she has to deal with the many difficulties
of being a farm wife. The elder of her two daughters is at an age
where she is sometimes bratty and resentful of her mother. Her job as
a school nurse can be a minefield of uncooperative children and
negligent parents. Still, all these are merely minor inconveniences,
and the couple manage to enjoy their life. They are especially close
to their neighbors, Theresa (Julianne Moore) and Dan Collins (Ron
Lea), who have two daughters of a similar age, that are ideal
playmates for the Goodwins' girls.
The whole balance of life is disrupted when the younger Collins
daughter accidentally drowns while visiting the Goodwins' farm. As to
be expected, this wrenching tragedy unleashes a flood of emotions in
all the people involved. Dan and Theresa are devastated at their loss,
but Alice is even more debilitated by self-blame and grief.
At this point the film has a well constructed premise and it has
salient issues to explore. A small mental lapse can lead to grave
twist of fate. A web of smooth, established relationships can be
shattered in an instant by unexpected complications. Tragedy and grief
are sometimes unexpectedly injected into lives and those involved are
thrust into an uphill battle to recover. Just when these themes are
being addressed, the situation becomes even worse. Suddenly, sexual
molestation charges are brought against Alice by a mother of a young
school boy. Alice suddenly finds herself in jail and facing criminal
charges.
The film then enters two more extended acts, one where Alice is
isolated from her family and must deal with life behind bars, and then
a courtroom drama as she must defend herself against the sensational
claims. Although these additional developments may have been plausible
in the source novel, it is simply not possible to force this much
material into the restricted format of a feature film and expect all
facets of the issues to be adequately addressed. The story continues
to raise serious issues, such as the presumed guilt of people accused
of violence against children, and the abuse a community can dump on
the accused. However, each successive plague that is visited upon the
main character only detracts from the meaningfulness of the story.
To its credit, the story does not attempt to resolve all issues with a
saccharine ending. Clearly, the film is striving to present believable
characters in engaging, thoughtful situations. The film could have
done more emotionally if had done less narratively.
The screenplay is the only detriment to the film. Veteran actors
Weaver, Strathairn, and Moore, breathe life into deep characters.
Weaver is presented with the challenge of a prominent, charged
character, and she manages to keep it subdued even when it is being
inflated by the script.
Marginally recommended. This is an ambitious film that attempts to
address many deep issues. However, by taking on such a broad scope, it
fails to address each of its dimensions adequately. It encompasses
more issues than can be accommodated within the limits of a feature
film, and therefore can feel long and tedious. The acting is capable,
and the direction makes the most of the flawed script, so the end
result is a competent, but not completely successful, film.

Author
Michael Dequina
_A_Map_of_the_World_ (R) ** 1/2 (out of ****)
        Sigourney Weaver's portrayal of an Iowa farm wife/school nurse accused
of child abuse is indeed worthy of all the accolades it has received,
most notably a Golden Globe nomination.  The role of Alice Goodwin is an
exceedingly difficult one; her portrayer must have enough of a dark side
to make the accusations plausible while at the same time remain likable
enough to make the audience care.  Weaver's achievement is not only
pulling off the balance but making a real person.
        Unfortunately, Scott Elliott's film as a whole is far less convincing. 
_A_Map_of_the_World_ is the second in the new subgenre of drama I call
"the Oprah film": a woman faces adversity of a domestic nature in a story
usually coming from a novel on Oprah's book club list.  That should tell
you how gooey with sentiment the film is, not to mention the outcome of
the entire affair.  Nonetheless, Weaver and the rest of the stellar
cast--which also includes Julianne Moore, David Strathairn, Arliss
Howard, and Chloë Sevigny--do their best, even while saddled with some
very "movie" dialogue (e.g., a sobbing Moore laments, "It's amazing how
much a person can cry!").
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Christopher Null
     What AMERICAN BEAUTY did for the suburbs, A MAP OF THE WORLD aims
to do for the farm life.
     I said "aims," of course.  A MAP OF THE WORLD is deeply flawed yet
still worth a look, especially if you're into grandiose, weepy,
self-important dramas.  And hey, who isn't?
     Obviously based on an Oprah-class novel, WORLD is the story of
Alice Goodwin (Weaver), a put-upon school nurse who lives on a Wisconsin
farm as part of an "experiment" by her rather oblivious husband Howard
(Straitharn).  Right with the voice over at the film's beginning, it's
clear that Alice is going to have some Bad Times ahead, and within 20
minutes, said Times are upon us.
     Alice is so frazzled she can't even keep an eye on the neighbors'
precious daughter, who wanders off about 200 yards to the pond and
promptly drowns.  Hair tearing and chest beating ensues, and Alice's
mindset only gets worse.  Then the kicker: A real bitch of a woman
(Sevigny) accuses Alice of abusing her son, a student at the school
where Alice works.  Go to jail, Alice.  Courtroom drama follows.
     As a story, WORLD is all over the map (no pun intended) -- from
marital troubles between Alice and Howard to in-law problems (Fletcher
playing Howard's doting mother) to legal mumbo-jumbo to a bizarre and
out of place stretch with Alice doing time in jail during her trial.
The whole notion of jail as a metaphor for Alice's mental healing (you
know, a personal prison for dealing with her anguish over the death of
the neighbor child?) is unbelievably over-the-top and just comes off as
phony.
     In fact, very little of this holds together as a narrative, and at
127 minutes, so much of this is extraneous padding that the film
positively crawls.  Even worse is Weaver's character (not necessarily
Weaver herself, mind you).  Alice is so selfish, melodramatic, and just
plain dumb that the character hurts the film.  Contrary to speculation,
there will be no Oscar nod for Weaver this year.
     Still, there's something to like.  Most notable is Julianne Moore
as the too-perfect neighbor whose daughter dies.  Her character grows
more than the rest of the cast combined, and her heartfelt performance
makes up for a lot of the rest of this WORLD.  Still, the film can't
ride on her surprisingly small role alone, so unless this all sounds
like your idea of a great way to spend an evening, you'll probably want
to pass.
Director: Scott Elliott
Producer: Kathleen Kennedy, Frank Marshall
Writer: Peter Hedges, Polly Platt
Starring: Sigourney Weaver, Julianne Moore, David Strathairn, Ron Lea,
Arliss Howard, Chloë Sevigny, Louise Fletcher
http://www.flp.com/films/map%20of%20the%20world,%20A/pix/map_oscar_poster.htm
---
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 First Look Pictures
 Director: Scott Elliott
 Writer: Jane Hamilton (novel), Peter Hedges, Polly Platt
 Cast: Sigourney Weaver, Julianne Moore, David Strathairn,
Ron Lea, Arliss Howard, Chloe Sevigny, Louise Fletcher
   The state of Wisconsin has not fared well in the movies
lately.  Ralph Farnsworth gets laughed at for being from
"Wisconsin: the Party State," in "The Straight Story."  Susan
Sarandon can't wait to get away from Bay City in "Anywhere
But Here."  Matt Damon as a fallen angel is exiled to the
Dairy State in "Dogma."  And in "Wisconsin Death Trip,"
James Marsh exposes multiple cases of murder, madness
and mayhem in the Black River Falls, Wisconsin of the
1890s.  Now, in Scott Elliott's "A Map of the World," the
townsfolk in a rural Wisconsin burg misinterpret the words
and gestures of one of its outspoken residents, as Sigourney
Weaver, the urban transplant to a farm near Racine, makes a
painful transition from alien to outcast.
   "A Map of the World" confirms that of all the psychological
states you'll want to avoid, guilt is the real killer.  Of course,
you want to have a conscience--a sense of right and wrong,
as too many people seem to be adept at committing crimes
without the slightest compunction. But when you feel a sense
of dread for something you have done that has had tragic
consequences or for something you did not even do, be
prepared for the usual demons that send people running to
shrink their heads: depression, anxiety, nightmares, and self-
destructive acts.
   "A Map of the World," which opens for just one week in
December for Oscar consideration before commencing widely
the following month, is a picture that will boost Sigourney
Weaver's career several notches.  In fact, don't be too
surprised if the Academy will be juggling nominations that pit
Ms. Weaver against Tom Hanks, Kevin Spacey and Bob
Hoskins this time around.  She has the uncanny ability to
change her mood credibly from depression to a twinkling
blitheness, and back again to a tearful, near-breakdown
condition.  Watch her laugh almost hysterically when being
questioned by an investigator and you can sense her agony.
Don't be surprised if you do a double-take when she is put on
trial and answers a key question with a one word answer that
drives her own lawyer up a wall.  
   The film by long term Broadway actor and theater director 
Scott Elliott, from a novel by Jane Hamilton which was
adapted by Peter Hedges and Polly Platt, confirms Elliott as a
man who pays attention to visual detail and has a facility in
administering strong ensemble performances.  You may
wonder at the slow beginning, but will soon see that the
lengthy scenes of Alice Goodwin (Sigourney Weaver) juggling
the chaos of little kids in her farmhouse are there to show
how easy it is for a parent to be distracted for a moment, for
the twinkling that sets the stage for tragedy.  Alice and her
ditzy husband Howard (David Strathairn)--a guy who can
casually keep his hand in a cereal box while a panful of eggs
catches fire--are city people experimenting with life on a farm
outside Racine, Wisconsin (filmed north of Toronto).  The
Goodwins and their two children, the difficult eight-year-old
Emma (Dara Perlmutter) and five-year-old Claire (Kayla
Perlmutter), are recent arrivals, and in the tradition-bound
community they are considered outsiders.  Their one
friendship--with neighbors Theresa Collins (Julianne Moore)
and her husband Dan (Ron Lea)--is thrown into cataclysmic
jeopardy when the small daughter of the Collinses
accidentally drowns in the lake at the Goodwins' home while
Alice is distracted.  Racked with guilt, Alice is subsequently
accused by the sluttish Carol Mackessy (Chloe Sevigny) of
sexually abusing her child at the local elementary school
where Alice serves as nurse--the allegations presumably
encouraged by her neighbors' willful contempt for her as an
outsider and their attributing negligence to her for allowing
the little girl to drown.
   The choice scenes occur when photographer Seamus
McGarvey cuts back and forth from Alice's accommodations
in the Racine County jail, where the guilt-ridden woman puts
up no defense against the brutal sassing she regularly
accepts from fellow inmate Dyshett (Aunjanue Ellis), to the
setting at Theresa's home, where the distraught Howard
Goodwin comforts a disconsolate Theresa Collins to the point
of initiating an affair.  One detail made clear by the hostile
treatment Alice receives from many of her co-inmates is that
prison is hell largely because the inmates themselves make it
so.  Failing to bond, to see a common link to one another and
a class solidarity, they take out their frustrations on one
another, making their lives in close quarters an even more
damaging experience.  At Alice's trial, Arliss Howard turns in
a luminous, comical role as her clever lawyer, grinning his
way through the proceedings because, as he puts it, he
wouldn't want to be in the business if it were not fun.  
   Like "Anywhere But Here," a high quality movie made with
the same affection, "A Map of the World" is a searing yet
wholly believable journey of two people who are taken from a
closed, insular world into a new, unpredictable experience. 
Whether viewers have kids or not, they will likely be
immersed in the proceedings from the time that an innocent
child is drowned (evoking memories of "The Sweet
Hereafter"), through the remorse-ridden Alice's trial for sexual
abuse.  You'll think twice before deciding, like so many young
people during the sixties and early seventies, to uproot
yourself from an urban background, becoming an outsiders in
a stodgy, rural enclave.  The title comes from an imaginary
map which Alice had drawn of a fantasy world which
embraces a small, loving community.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "A MAP OF THE WORLD" (First Look Pictures)
 There's no greater tragedy than being responsible for the
death of a child, and that's just the first blow Sigourney Weaver
suffers at the beginning of this complex, dramatic portrait of a woman
in emotional agony. Then, still reeling with guilt, she's falsely
accused of child abuse, an offense which sends her to jail to await
trial. Based on the novel by Jane Hamilton and adapted by Peter Hedges
and Polly Platt, it's an implausible yet harrowing story of
victimization. Weaver plays Alice Goodwin, a devoted mother of two
daughters who works part-time as a school nurse in a rural Wisconsin
town. She and her wimpy, taciturn husband (David Strathairn), a
farmer, are a curiosity. They're relative newcomers who painted their
barn blue. But, above all, the bright, fiercely independent Alice
arouses people's ire with her cynical, sarcastic attitude towards the
complexities of life. Her only friend is a gentle neighbor (Julianne
Moore) who also has two little girls. Her nemesis is a tarty welfare
mom (Chloe Sevigny) whom outspoken Alice openly accuses of neglecting
her young son. When suspicion focuses on Alice after an accidental
drowning in a pond on her property, the town turns on her with
self-righteous fury, preferring to believe the flimsy, bogus charges
of child molestation brought against her rather than seek the
truth. Oddly, the unflappable Alice seems to relish her martyrdom,
openly enjoying her predicament. Whether it's because that's her
perverse way of coping with the bizarre situation or she's temporarily
insane is not made clear by director Scott Elliot, who makes it into a
masochistic, maudlin melodrama.  On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, A Map of the World is a dense, disturbing, depressing 4, made
tolerable only by Sigourney Weaver's intelligent, vivid performance.

Author
Ross Anthony
You've no doubt heard that one must "go through hell to get to heaven." In
"Map of the World" most of the going is through hell. As for the heaven
part, the strength or (as the press kit says) the "life-affirming" feeling
of living through the experience will have to suffice as a replacement for
the traditional blissful association. A rough analogy would be Rocky in his
first film -- he doesn't win, but he survives. However, unlike the underdog
boxer, Sigourney Weaver, seldom gets a punch in edgewise. It's all blow
after blow to her dignity, loved ones and "world" as she knows it.
The film opens to a real family ... something we don't see too often in a
movie. Kids scream driving parents nuts. At the end of the day, a naked
Weaver and Strathairn climb into the porcelain tub in a scattered bathroom.
The richly wrinkled tenderness of that scene is as real as the ornery
6-year-old daughter shouting, "I hate you mom!"
But, don't let that daughter steal your attention, Weaver is left in charge
of her best friend's children when one of the toddlers crawls off into the
nearby pond and drowns. And that's just the first knuckle-sandwich. A
discombobulated Weaver (a school nurse) encouraged by her normally passive
husband attends a PTA conference only to undergo an impromptu interrogation
in the hallway where she blurts this gem, "I'm trying to have a nervous
breakdown and no one will let me do it in peace."
Since the child's death, Weaver can hardly put two words together; however
when police show up at her door with handcuffs, she's miraculously able to
read the warrant (an abuse charge) and give directions to her husband before
being carted off. I believe the director was trying to indicate the odd
relief she experienced for having been extracted from her current torment -
still, her coherency inconsistency is rather abrupt. As is her best friend's
(Julianne Moore) upbeat attitude swing a short vacation or so after her
child's death.
Detained in prison awaiting trial, Weaver discovers an unlikely haven. The
concept of an overworked parent finding solace in lock-up is an interesting
one. I would have liked to have seen much more of Weaver's introspection,
but instead we (as the characters around her) are stuck with the view from
outside her head.
The husband, refusing to ask for his mother's assistance, leaves his kids
with the "egg lady" (a woman that terrifies them). Doubting even his own
wife with multiple abuse charges pending, one would expect the humility of
asking mom for help would be an easy choice.
Unlike the Rocky flick, this one has no bell. Suddenly, the fight is over;
no referee makes any call. By way of resolution, a three-minute monologue
recaps her year of pain.
For the most part, the acting is strong, but the direction is inharmonious,
some scenes weaker than others. Most of us can tolerate moderate amounts of
hard hits and setbacks for our protagonists; however, the 90% worth mapped
out in this film may overwhelm.
Map of the World. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Sigourney Weaver, Julianne Moore, David Strathairn.
Directed by Scott Elliott.
Written by Peter Hedges and Polly Platt.
Produced by Kathleen Kennedy and Frank Marshall at Kennedy/Marshall.
A First Look presentation.
Grade..........................B-
--
Copyright Š 1999. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz
A MAP OF THE WORLD (director: Scott Elliott; screenwriters: from the novel of
Jane Hamilton/Peter Hedges/Polly Platt; cinematographer: Seamus McGarvey;
editor: Craig McKay; cast: Sigourney Weaver (Alice Goodwin), Julianne Moore
(Theresa Collins), David Strathairn (Howard Goodwin), Louise Fletcher (Nellie),
Arliss Howard (Paul Reverdy), Ron Lea (Dan Collins), Chloe Sevigny (Carole
Mackessy), Dara Perlmutter (Emma Goodwin), Kayla Perlmutter (Claire Doodwin),
Marc Donato (Robbie Mackessy); Runtime: 125; First Look Pictures; 1999) 
Sigourney Weaver visited a Racine, Wisconsin, county jail to prepare for her
unglamorous prison part in A Map of the World, and she said it was the toughest
preparation she had to do in research for any part she's played. This is her
favorite role in her personal favorite movie. She finds sympathy in playing a
flawed character called Alice Goodwin who moves from a big Midwestern city to be
an outsider in a small rural Wisconsin town, with her awkward, supportive, and
stalwart husband Howard (Strathairn) running an alternative-lifestyle dairy
farm. He instigated this move she wasn't that crazy about, but went along with
it the best way she could. They have two precocious young girls, the older being
Emma and the more docile one being Claire (Dara & Kayla Perlmutter- real
sisters). 
Somehow you get the feeling the beleaguered mother has days where she is not all
that keen about living in the sticks, being a school nurse to the uncultured
school kids, and at times even being married to someone she has trouble
communicating with in a chaotic household. When the bratty Emma, someone she
really loves, has a temper tantrum for no apparent reason and breaks her cereal
bowl on the floor, the 'be-true-to-thine-own-self' Alice knows she doesn't like
her daughter at that moment and also doesn't have a clue on how to get her to
behave. 
It took 30 days to film, and it was mostly shot in Toronto with only the city
scene shot in Chicago. 
Sigourney mentioned that this is an unusual and uplifting film, though the
unusual nature of the film is easy to see, as this gritty dramatic film takes a
conventional soap opera story about a nuclear family and makes it into a moving
drama where the characters are forced to look at themselves again and undergo
changes they didn't expect. The uplifting part was harder to see and just might
be up to the individual to find what is meant by uplifting. According to
Sigourney, when I asked her, she said it was uplifting because the family was
still intact at the end and for the character she plays returning to the city is
not such a bad thing--and her husband who misses the farm the most, is still
pleased with the way things worked out for all of them. It was a difficult film
to come up with easy answers, as it required some thought to sift through the
many layers of the characters. It is based on a novel by Jane Hamilton and
adheres to the plot for the most part. 
The plot thickens when their hard but mostly satisfying stay on the farm
suddenly changes into a nightmare due to circumstances beyond Alice's control.
They're best friends with their neighbors Dan and Teresa Collins (Ron Lea &
Julianne Moore), and when Alice is baby-sitting for Teresa's two young
daughters, Lizzy and Audrey, the troubled Alice loses track of the younger girl
Lizzy, who quietly slips out of the living room and drowns in the Goodwin's
pond. 
The death of the toddler is not only devastating for Teresa, but Alice begins to
feel guilty about the accident and is on the verge of a nervous break-down. It's
at this vulnerable time that she gets blind sided by law officials, who question
her about a nasty child, Robbie Mackessy (Donato), who is always being treated
in her office for ailments she determines are due to neglect--as she doesn't
quite understand what the rather thick officers want from her and blurts out "I
hurt everybody I come into contact with." Robbie's single mom, Carole (Chloe
Sevigny), is too busy entertaining her many boyfriends to care for him properly,
and deeply resents the nurse for her interference. After the accident the
vengeful mother sees this as a time to get even with the nurse she resents as
the town begins to take a dim view of Alice, she thusly brings charges of child
abuse which results in her arrest. 
The film unexpectedly goes into a prison and courtroom drama, with the most
riveting scenes reserved for how she handles the demeaning time she spends in
prison; especially, when trying to handle herself when trying to deal with
hostile black prisoners who get their knowledge of the world from watching
Oprah. There's also the constant noise and lack of privacy to deal with. The
most touching prison scenes were of Howard trying to communicate with her from
behind the glass partition, this comes after he couldn't communicate with her
before when there were no barriers at home. 
She clearly becomes someone who is torturing herself more than any punishment
the law can hand out to her. In the courtroom, her expensive attorney (Howard)
stakes out a brilliant defense that is hampered by her need to say truthful
things she doesn't have to say to the court. 
Unfortunately there was one scene that was baked over too fine: that would be
the jail scene with Alice eventually winning over the hardened cons. It seemed
contrived and the film spent too much prison time, as it said everything it had
to say about the dehumanizing effect jail has in its opening shot when she was
booked and everything else seemed reduntant. 
Also, the last scene felt flat. A free from prison Alice is back in a Chicago
apartment eating an orderly pasta meal with her family. It seemed too theatrical
in framing the nuclear family to be convincing; framed with a slo-mo zoom shot
edging in on the family eating while enveloped by a dark background with only
the light from an overhead light piercing the faces, as each member of the
family had a slightly different expression to their new situation. I find it
hard to believe that was an uplifting scene as much as it was one that put an
exclamation point on the situation, visually indicating that things are still
tenuous for the family and even though they have gone over one terrible hurdle
and are perhaps psychologically stronger because of it--they are still not out
of the dark. But, then again, if you find that uplifting you'll get no argument
from me. 
The film is directed by Scott Elliott, making his film debut after being known
for his Broadway work and as the artistic director of the New Group; the film is
more ambiguous than pat, which is not necessarily a bad thing. Elliott also does
a great job of drawing out an outstanding performance from Sigourney Weaver. But
the film is somewhat taken aback by a few bad decisions, such as giving Julianne
Moore such a small part when she was so compelling as Sigourney's best friend
who misses her friendship while also grieving for her daughter. It was a part
that should have been expanded and it weakened the film by instead padding it
with stale prison and courtroom scenes that many films have done before.
Nevertheless, this is still a high quality drama, especially recognizing
Sigourney Weaver's tour de force performance of a complex woman who is a little
off-kilter. That should be rewarding enough for those who crave intelligent 'Mom
in trouble' dramas. 
I unhestatingly recommend the film for the way it intelligently examines the
family crisis--though it's not for everyone, as the casual viewer might not be
interested in a serious film that can be disturbing when a toddler is taken off
a respirator. 
The film's title comes from an imaginary map located in the heart, and how the
family in its pain and recovery use that map to guide them to where they should
live together. 
The film played at the Williamstown Film Festival. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
In Scott Elliott's A MAP OF THE WORLD, Sigourney Weaver gives an
Oscar-caliber performance as a woman racked with guilt for what she did
do, while in jail accused of what it appears she didn't do.
Based on Jane Hamilton's novel, the script by Peter Hedges and Polly
Platt explores the effect of massive guilt on a woman whose life isn't
exactly terrific even before her tragedies begin to strike.
Alice Goodwin (Weaver) is a school nurse and a farmer's wife. With two
girls aged about 3 and 5, she doesn't get much respect or love at home.
Her husband Howard, played by David Strathairn in an underdeveloped
role, is so out-to-lunch mentally that he doesn't even notice when the
stove next to him is on fire. The two of them haven't communicated in
years, and Alice is an anal-retentive chatterbox who pays no attention
to Howard when he does try to speak.
Alice hates her messy house and resents that her best friend, Theresa
Collins, played by Julianne Moore in another of the movie's underwritten
roles, has a perfect house and 2 well-mannered little girls. Alice's
older child, Emma (Dara Perlmutter), likes to manipulate her mom by
screaming, "I hate you!"  The quintessential brat, Emma gets plenty of
attention with little stunts like throwing her cereal bowl on the
kitchen floor, making an explosive crash.
The story revolves around a pair of tragedies. One day, while the
usually frazzled Alice is watching Theresa's girls, the youngest one,
Lizzy (Victoria Rudiak), wanders off and drowns in the pond. It is a
small negligence on Alice's part not to watch the child for just a few
moments, but it has cataclysmic consequences. It tears Alice's already
miserable life asunder. After the incident, she lapses into depressions
so deep that she has trouble getting out of bed.
Elliott, who sometimes lets his movie meander, stages the scene of the
child's death with particular poignancy. We observe Lizzy's death, which
occurs in the hospital, through Alice's ears and her sunken eyes.
Hearing only the pumping of the respirator, she watches through the
window of the hospital door and doesn't see the death directly. Instead
she suffers palpably as she witnesses it in the eyes of Lizzy's parents,
as they realize that their toddler has taken her last breath. The ending
of this scene will literally tear your heart out, and, yet, the way it
is presented is completely natural and unmanipulative.
The body of the movie concerns an accusation of child abuse. No, not
about the drowning. Out of nowhere, a neglected child of Carole
Mackessy's (Chloë Sevigny), whom we see briefly in the opening, claims
that Alice molested him at school. Once Alice is in jail, it becomes a
feeding frenzy with other kids accusing her and with the whole town up
in arms against her. This entire episode has chilling parallels with
recent, well-publicized cases of massive, false child abuse complaints.
Weaver, who is in most of the scenes, makes the picture rise above the
ordinary. Willing to look quite unattractive and to play a remarkably
unsympathetic character, she gives a frightening picture of someone on
the verge of losing it all in more ways than one. Sometimes, she is a
bundle of nervous laughter on the verge of uncontrollable crying, and,
other times, she is sullen and angry. A typical scene has her ignoring
her husband and her kids' emotional needs and instead lecturing her
husband from the jail phone about the proper way to do the laundry.
Another time, he has to interrupt her to ask if she cares at all how her
girls are holding up during the crisis. Her body language suggests that
she doesn't.
"I'll be in hell, and you'll be in heaven with the girls," Alice tells
her husband about their future. Although she claims she is kidding, this
is her fatalistic view of life.
In an otherwise hard hitting film with conspicuous ambiguity, the ending
wraps things up a bit too neatly. But after you leave the theater,
you'll quickly forget the film's few shortcomings. You'll be thinking
instead about Weaver's strong performance as a woman on the edge.
A MAP OF THE WORLD runs 2:05. It is rated R for some sexuality and
language and would be fine for most teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
