Title
Review for Coma (1978)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
There are some films that resemble quality wines - they get
better with each passing year and decade. But few of them
could enjoy such favourable fate because they became more
frightening for future generations than for their
contemporaries. One of such cases is COMA, 1978 thriller by
Michael Chricton. In its time, it was branded as science
fiction by most critics, even those very familiar with the
genre. But today, nobody would dare to do it, because some
of the future predictions in this film became chillingly
accurate. Which, of course, makes this film even more scary.
The script, written also by Michael Chricton, was based on
the best-selling novel by Robin Cook, author of many
successful medical thrillers. The movie protagonist is
Doctor Susan Wheeler (played by Genevieve Bujold), young
doctor in big Boston hospital. During her practice, she
begins noticing a strange pattern of young and healthy
patients falling into unexplained coma during the routine
surgeries. She begins to investigate, although everyone,
including her boyfriend and colleague Doctor Marc Bellows
(played by Michael Douglas), doesn't believe her claims
about all those cases being connected. Actually, the cause
of that phenomenon becomes even more sinister after Doctor
Wheeler survives an attempt on her life. Finally motivated
to push through the bitter end, she begins to reveal the
shocking truth.
COMA is just another example for all those film critics of
today who consider 1970s to be the Golden Age of world
cinema. That time period was very fruitful for many movie
directors who had made many great films, only to deliver
disappointments in the latter decades. Michael Chricton,
acclaimed novelist, screenwriter and director was one of
them, reaching the peak of his film career in 1970s. Many,
including the author of this review, would claim that COMA
happens to be his best film. One of the reason for that is
Crichton's medical background that provided him an
opportunity to create realistic settings and characters
(same as with his hit TV-show ER two decades later). As a
result, COMA is a film with very plausible plot and
convincing characters. And the realism worked very well in
order to create extremely scary atmosphere - the hospital,
institution where the people are supposed to be safer than
in all other places, is suddenly turned into place of
unimaginable horrors. The movie is even more scarier than
cult horrors that used to be very popular in those days; few
people could imagine themselves being attacked by sharks or
stalked by axe murderers and supernatural demons, but almost
everyone could expect himself to end in hospital, helpless
and totally at the mercy of people in white coats. Scariness
also sprang from the widespread feeling of post-Watergate
paranoia, when every segment of the establishment, including
even the medical profession, caused suspicion about its good
intentions or scruples.
Crichton's direction in this film is almost flawless. He
presents the scenes of Doctor Wheeler's boring and totally
unexciting domestic and professional every day life, shot in
almost quasi-documentary fashion, and quickly replaces them
with the breath-taking scenes of suspense. Doctor Wheeler's
battle with the assassin in the dark corridors and autopsy
room is one of those scenes that leave strong impact on the
viewers. And the truth, being finally revealed in the
Jefferson Institute, is one of the most memorable and
frightening images in the history of cinema. The movie was
deliberately left without original musical score for most of
its part, except in the suspense scenes, when always
reliable Jerry Goldsmith provides needed audio stimuli for
suspense and horror.
Acting talent in this film is excellent. Genevieve Bujold
was very well cast as a heroine of this film. She portrays
Doctor Wheeler as a liberated, professional woman of 1970s,
strong and stubborn, and yet vulnerable because of her
physical limitations. In many ways she resembles Sigourney
Weaver as Ripley in ALIEN, another feminist action hero
faced with unspeakable horrors. The other actors mostly fill
the blanks - Michael Douglas is, at best, passable as her
romantic interest. Richard Widmark is good as Doctor
Wheeler's mentor. The movie also shows many future stars and
respected actors like Ed Harris and Tom Selleck in small
roles, although the latter one looks rather lame.
That wasn't the only flaw of this film. The plot worked very
well until the very end, with the unexpected plot twist
which had reduced Doctor Wheeler from the heroine into
typical "damsel in distress". And the ending was rather weak
and not too cathartic. But that plot twist at the end was
also an opportunity for the authors to allow some of the
characters to explain the ethical challenges - the basis for
the plot premise. That same premise looked preposterous
twenty years ago, but today, it is taken for granted as a
sad fact of life. Perhaps that, more than everything else,
makes this film so scary and so effective after all those
years.
Review written on September 27th 1999
