Title
Review for Above Suspicion (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Fate can play cruel jokes on people, and the actors aren't
exception. In 1995 Christopher Reeve, actor best known for
playing lead character in SUPERMAN films, filled headlines
after suffering terrible riding accident that left him
paraplegic. It turned out that one of his last roles before
the accident required him to play wheelchair-bound character
in ABOVE SUSPICION, 1995 cable television thriller directed
by Steven Schachter.
Protagonist of the film is Dempsey (played by Christopher
Reeve), superb police detective who is loving father and
caring husband. Family considerations, on the other hand,
don't prevent his brother Nick (played by Edward Kerr) from
having an affair with Dempsey's wife Gail (played by Kim
Cattrall). One day, during a routine bust, Dempsey is shot
and paralysed. Knowing that he would have to spend the rest
of his life in a wheelchair, Dempsey decides to commit
suicide and provide for his family in the process. He
approaches Gail and Nick and asks them to help him in his
plan to end his life by staging his suicide as apparent
murder. Motivated less by compassion and more by huge
insurance policy, adulterous couple decides to participate
only to find themselves as targets of Dempsey's diabolical
scheme. Dempsey has committed a perfect crime, but his
former colleague Rhineheart (played by Joe Mantegna) is
convinced that the apparently helpless cripple, who happens
to be the most experienced homicide investigator, staged the
whole thing. But proving his suspicions is going to be much
harder than he has anticipated.
The script, which was written by Jerry Lazarus, Steven
Schachter and actor William H. Macy (who plays the role of
prosecutor in the film) had some potential. However,
suspension of disbelief, necessary for viewers to enjoy this
film, is forever marred by the real-life events that put the
entire plot of the film into completely different
perspective. But this is not the only problem of ABOVE
SUSPICION. Director Schachter is not able to make his mind
whether to make this film as straightforward thriller,
police action film or courtroom drama. Genre confusion is
not much helped by low budget that makes this film look much
cheaper than it should be. Great performances by Reeve and
Joe Mantegna as relentless investigator aren't reason enough
to watch this routine product of cable television. In the
end, ABOVE SUSPICION is a film that could be recommended
only to those who want to satisfy their morbid curiosity.
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
