Title
Review for My Darling Clementine (1946)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
One of the great American myths is the gunfight at the
O.K. Corral, which took place in the small Western
town of Tombstone, Arizona in 1882.  While the shootout
did take place, the event has served mainly as a starting
point for endless Hollywood dramatizations that have little
in common except for the names of the leading characters.
Perhaps this is as it should be, since historical accuracy
and storytelling are not one and the same.  A good
story does not need to be technically accurate, it
merely needs to seem that way.
"My Darling Clementine" interprets the famed gunfight
not so much as a grudge between stern lawman Wyatt Earp
(Henry Fonda) and crafty killer Old Man Clanton (Walter
Brennan), but as a soap opera starring self-pitying gambler,
gunslinger, lover, saloon owner and doctor John Holliday
(Victor Mature).  Earp becomes a disapproving big brother
to Holliday, courting his spurned wallflower love interest
Clementine (Cathy Downs) partly to demonstrate the error
of his ways.
What keeps the film from greatness is the characters.
Mature's endless pathos becomes unintentionally comical.
Also in that category is his erstwhile girlfriend, fiery saloon
girl Chihuahua (Linda Darnell).  Brennan's character merits
more screen time, and we don't see enough of Clanton's sons
or Earp's brothers to associate their faces with their names.
Down's character appears to have been introduced as an
explanation for the title.
Still, "My Darling Clementine" is a very good film.  Legendary
director John Ford knows how to tell a story.  The scenes of
Fonda dancing and balancing himself on a chair are well done.
The cast is excellent, and so is the black and white
cinematography (Joe MacDonald).
Surprisingly, "My Darling Clementine" was not nominated
for any Academy Awards.  However, it has since staked a
reputation as one of the best Westerns, perhaps due more
to the story and the Ford and Fonda names than for its
script and characters.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
