Title
Review for Little Romance, A (1979)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Brian Koller
While on a field trip with schoolmates to a movie studio in France,
Daniel (Thelonious Bernard) meets Lauren (Dianne Ladd), who has 
been taken there by actress Kay King (Sally Kellerman).  Both 
Bernard and Ladd are barely into their teens, and they have 
something else in common: they're very smart and virtually 
friendless.  They connect, and begin arranging furtive dates behind 
their parents' back.
For Ladd's birthday, a party for her has long been arranged.
But her own mother forgets about this and gives a wrap party for
her latest picture on the same day.  Ladd and her friends,
one of whom is Bernard, are relegated to her room, which is
just as well since they evade parental supervision, drink
champagne, and dance closely.  Leaving her room, Bernard
runs into the jerk director, who makes a public snide remark
about his scoring with Ladd.  Bernard punches the director
in the stomach and demands an apology.  This puts Bernard
on Kellerman's blacklist, and Ladd is told she cannot see
him again.  Which she does anyway.
Kellerman has been married three times.  Current husband
Richard (Arthur Hill) is patient but still frustrated with her 
cavorting with her latest film's director.  Good news (for him) 
comes when his company informs him that he will be transferred 
from France to Houston at the end of the month.  Kellerman isn't
happy about the coming move.  Even less so is Ladd.
While hanging in the park, Bernard accidentally knocks down 
an elderly gentleman (Laurence Olivier).  Bernard and Ladd
help him up and are then treated to lunch, with Olivier
telling lies and tall tales to impress them.  Ladd believes
the stories, but more worldly Bernard is suspicious.
One of Olivier's stories is that lovers who kiss in a gondola
in a Venice under a certain bridge at sunset when church bells
are tolling will love each forever.  Ladd takes this story
to heart and becomes obsessed at fulfulling this destiny
with Bernard.
Tbey need money for the trip, and go to the racetrack with
Olivier to win it.  Bernard's horse loses the race, but
Olivier switches bets and wins big.  (It turns out that
Olivier is a con artist and pickpocket, and he stole the
money).
Olivier, for some reason interested in getting himself and
his new friends in endless trouble for the sake of a first 
crush, helps Bernard and Ladd run away from home, putting
them on a train to Italy.  The kid's parents get wind of the
scheme and go to Italy to retrieve them.  Ladd's pretty
face is in the newspaper as a missing child.  To avoid
capture, Bernard, Ladd and Olivier join a bicycle race,
which appears to be a plot device to have Olivier crash his bike.
Bernard and Ladd after some further difficulty manage to
kiss in a gondola under that bridge at sunset with the church
bells tolling.  Olivier and the lovesick teens are caught
and return to France.  On the day that Ladd must return to the
states, Ladd sees Bernard and Olivier (who curiously is not
in jail) and has a tearjerker parting.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Jerry Saravia
Picture-postcard romances are not my cup of tea, particularly teenage or
coming-of-age romances. Therefore, it is with great enthusiasm that I report
that "A Little Romance" is one of the finest, most poignant picture-postcard
romances I have seen - genial and enlightening throughout. 
The film begins with a theatre showing clips from "Butch Cassidy and the
Sundance Kid." "True Grit," and "The Sting" laughably dubbed in  French. The
kid watching these American films is Daniel (Thelonious Bernard), a French kid
with eyes full of amusement at everything he sees (he would have been at home
in a Francois Truffaut film). Daniel emulates certain gestures and lines from
these American heroes, such as "bingo!" and "Here's looking at you kid." One
day, his class visits the film set of an American production starring Broderick
Crawford (exceedingly funny cameo). While Daniel observes the action, he
notices a girl reading a book rather than enjoying the action of filmmaking.
Her name is Lauren (Diane Lane, in her film debut), a lover of philosophy
books, who instantly senses something she likes about a kid who will carry her
books and has his own homespun philosophies on literature and American movies.
They start dating, meeting at subway stations, porno movie theatres, and
cavorting in front of the Louvre. Their dream is to go to Venice and kiss in a
gondola under a bridge where the church bells toll. This tall tale is told by
the supposedly worldly con artist (Laurence Olivier), who shares a train ride
with them to Venice after supposedly winning a bet at the races for the
lovebirds. 
"A Little Romance" moves swiftly from one episode to another, and it is the
charming performances by the three leads that engages us from the beginning.
Bernard and Lane have terrific chemistry, and we always hope that their
romantic fantasy is fulfilled. Lane in particular was already beginning to show
her flirtatious personality with her winks and frequent nods - quite a good
early performance. Bernard is also winning as Daniel, and evokes a smile that
is impossible to forget (say that about any recent child actors in the movies).
Olivier is at his hammiest and at his most assuredly comical - he obviously is
having a blast playing this fallible, elderly con artist and pickpocket. 
There are also brief supporting performances by Arthur Hill as Lauren's
agreeable father and Sally Kellerman as Lauren's nervous, flirtatious mother,
an actress who may be having an affair with a movie director (who looks like a
combination of Peter Bogdanovich and William Friedkin). She has a great line
when she shouts to Lauren proclaiming the move from France to "goddamned
Houston!" 
"A Little Romance" could have used more emphasis on Lauren's parents and
especially Daniel's father, who is practically left out of the film.
Nevertheless, this is an exceptionally sweet and uplifting film delicately
balancing between comedy and romance with unforced ease. And there is something
to be said about a film focusing on such smart kids with aspirations. Imagine
that. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, complaints or general comments at
Faust667@aol.com or at jerry@movieluver.com

Author
Shane Burridge
Light-hearted film by George Roy Hill shows once again how assuredly he 
is able to work in any genre of his choosing.  Two young teenaged 
geniuses (played by newcomers Diane Lane and Thelonious Bernard) meet by 
chance in Paris and pledge their hearts to each other.  They enlist the 
aid of an elderly gentleman (Laurence Olivier) to arrange themselves an 
interlude in Italy away from Lane's disapproving mother.  Amazingly, 
this film works despite what should be its only real weak point - Lane 
and Bernard's lack of chemistry together.  They are immediately likeable 
as individuals: Lane is impish yet level-headed; Bernard is savvy 
without being smarmy, and their friendship is believable.  Still, they 
don't demonstrate enough emotional highs and lows to prove themselves to 
us as lovers (although they are at least idealistic).  A LITTLE ROMANCE 
manages a perfect combination of elements: engaging performances, 
romantic European locations, a buoyant score (borrowed mostly from 
Vivaldi), and a smart, observant screenplay.
Hill avoids conscious stylistic elements and plays it low-key, making 
this more European and less American than his other films (Americans 
aren't portrayed flatteringly in this picture).  His shots of the 
youngsters watching movies or scampering through the city streets may 
remind you of Truffaut.  Hill also throws in a couple of references to 
his own movies, and has Bernard first meet Lane when he sneaks on to a 
film set - significantly, she is reading a book.  Bernard compares their 
partnership to Bogart and Bacall; Lane is more excited about being in 
the birthplace of Romeo and Juliet; Bernard is a fan of Robert Redford; 
Lane prefers Elizabeth Barrett Browning.  While both read literature, 
it's only Bernard who enthuses about film.  It's interesting, because 
while Bernard is the one more fascinated by the world of make-believe, 
it is the philosophy-reading Lane that wants to live out a romantic 
caprice.  And thrown into the mix is Olivier, going one step further and 
fabricating his entire life (as it turns out, nearly everyone in this 
film is living a lie of one kind or another).  Not one of this trio has 
the power to fulfil a fantasy on their own: it's the melding of their 
different forms of escapism that finally mobilize all three. 
Hill, a notoriously practical director, balances the romantic 
foolishness of his protagonists' escapade with a sense of studied 
feasibility.  What's really inspiring about A LITTLE ROMANCE is that it 
doesn't place its premise out of our reach - I don't doubt that several 
viewers have similarly sought out the story's special kiss on the 
waterways of Venice.  And of course it's great to see Olivier delivering 
a foxy performance as an old Parisian, enjoying the screen time he has 
with his much younger co-stars.  Like romance itself, this film has a 
timeless quality - it still holds up well after years of viewing.

