Title
Review for City Slickers II: The Legend of Curly's Gold (1994)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Billy Crystal, Daniel Stern, Jon Lovitz, Jack Palance,  
           Patricia Wettig, Noble Willingham 
Director:  Paul Weiland 
Producer:  Billy Crystal 
Screenplay:  Lowell Ganz, Babaloo Mandel, and Billy Crystal 
Music:  Marc Shaiman 
Released by Columbia Pictures 
     I'm not sure of the definition of "sequelitis", since it isn't the 
sort of term that can be found in a dictionary.  My best understanding is 
that it has something to do with the needless proliferation of 
unnecessary sequels.  To be sure, some series (such as STAR TREK or 
INDIANA JONES) are perfectly suited for future installments.  CITY 
SLICKERS, on the other hand, is a different matter.  I believe that Billy 
Crystal and the people at Columbia Pictures, left in a vulnerable state 
by the thought of more money, caught the sequelitis bug. 
     The original CITY SLICKERS was a reasonably-entertaining, unassuming 
romp that crept into the theaters in the summer of 1991, and ended up 
becoming a highly-successful venture.  CITY SLICKERS 2, on the other 
hand, is planned as one of this summer's big blockbusters, so anything 
less than a nine-figure gross is going to disappoint.  However, while the 
first movie was of the hit-and-miss variety, this installment is all 
miss-and-miss. 
     Billy Crystal is back as Mitch Robbins, a man whose fortieth 
birthday has spawned a mini mid-life crisis.  One night, while examining 
a hat that had once belonged to the late, lamented Curly, Mitch discovers 
what appears to be a treasure map (leading to $1 million in solid gold).  
After a trip to a library to verify the map's legitimacy, the "CITY 
SLICKERS" are off again into the wild west.  This time, Mitch is joined 
by best friend Phil (Daniel Stern), brother Glen (Jon Lovitz), and 
Curly's long-lost twin, Duke (Jack Palance).   
     The only thing I'll give the production team credit for is that they 
didn't try to re-hash the first movie.  Too many sequels are simply 
uninspired reworkings of the original material.  CITY SLICKERS 2, 
however, does something new.  The problem is that this "something" 
doesn't work. 
     Most discouraging is that the movie isn't especially funny.  Oh, 
there are laughs to be had here and there, but nothing memorable.  
Considering that the comic talents of both Billy Crystal and Jon Lovitz 
are represented on screen, this is surprising.  However, both men are 
restrained, which leaves the most humorous material to Daniel Stern.  The 
result:  as far as western comedies go, MAVERICK has this film trampled 
underfoot. 
     Speaking of MAVERICK, there are quite a few similarities between the 
Mel Gibson/Richard Donner flick and this one.  Both have a runaway 
coach/wagon sequence, both feature a similar playful tone, both are 
nicely photographed, and both run on for too long.  For me, the 
difference is that I walked out of MAVERICK satisfied, and out of CITY 
SLICKERS 2 disappointed. 
     Dramatically, this film is an amalgamation of bad cliches.  None of 
the various bonding sequences have any sense of depth, and the characters 
have been reduced to caricatures.  Everyone is still likable, but that's 
the only trait the main four can claim, and affability by itself is 
tantamount to being boring. 
     Movie references abound, although it's difficult to figure out why 
some of them are there in the first place.  THE TREASURE OF THE SIERRA 
MADRE stuff is self-evident, as in the INDIANA JONES AND THE TEMPLE OF 
DOOM sequence, but THE GODFATHER?   
     The conclusion is sappier than usual for a Lowell Ganz/Babaloo 
Mandel film.  These two have made a career out of happy endings, so it 
should come as no surprise that everything works out fine.  The manner in 
which the various threads are tied together is enough to send even the 
most devout fan of this type of movie into sugar shock.
     When money is involved, I no longer bother to ask why a particular 
film was made.  It may be a bad idea, but so what?.  Who cares that an 
inferior project like this cheapens the original?  With this movie, 
there's a bankable star, previously-established characters, and a 
recognizable name.  Given all that, who needs an interesting script? 
     Westerns and western comedies appear to be big this summer; 
hopefully, CITY SLICKERS 2 represents the least enjoyable of the bunch - 
otherwise, it's going to be a long wait until Labor Day. 
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     In the continuing saga of Hollywood trying to recycle old hits (it
worked with the Godfather trilogy didn't it - they made zillions from
them), we now have CITY SLICKERS II, subtitled THE LEGEND OF CURLEY'S
GOLD.  Rather than a cattle drive, this time we have Crystal coping
with another mid-life crisis (the big four-oh) by searching for buried
treasure.
     Almost all of the actors (Billy Crystal, Daniel Stern, Jack
Palance, and Patricia Wettig) are back, but we have a different
director (Paul Weiland rather than Ron Underwood), and it shows.  He
has Crystal playing it too reserved.  I would have preferred any of
Crystal's 10 minute Academy Award opening monologues for this movie.
     Yes, there are funny scenes.  The ongoing joke about the
possibility of being bitten on the rear by a rattlesnake is the best.
Between the funny scenes is a fair amount of boredom.
     The worst part of the show is Crystal's kid brother played by Jon
Lovitz.  Most scenes with him in them are close to unwatchable.
Patricia Wettig (whom I LOVED in "thirtysomething") is wasted here as
she was in the original for that matter.  Wish some producer would
"discover" her.
     Don't get me wrong, I did laugh many times, but they dragged the
story out too much.  It was 1:56 long, but there was not enough
material here for even an hour and a half.  The same writers as in CITY
SLICKERS, Billy Crystal, Lowell Ganz, and Babaloo Mandel, devised a
clever plot, but the script itself, although it had a great ending, was
slow going.  CITY SLICKERS II is similar in quality to the other
retread on the market now, BEVERLY HILLS COP 3, but BHC 3 has bigger
laughs yet with even more boring parts in between.
     CITY SLICKERS II gets * 1/2 from me, and I suggest you pass it by.
It is rated PG-13 and would be fine for teenagers if they have to see
it.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Hiroshi Saito
Starring:        Billy Crystal, Jack Palance, Daniel Stern, John Lovitz
Released by:        CastleRock Entertainment
Running time:        Approx. 100 minutes
     I had a chance to see a sneak preview of CITY SLICKERS II on
campus last night.  I went in with the expectation of a film with the
similar flavor which made the original such a success: personal growth
and insightful humor about life.  I came away somewhat disappointed in
this regard, getting some of the latter and not much of the former.
     The basic plot revolves around Billy Crystal, who plays Mitch
Robbins, turning forty.  He's now become the station manager of the
radio station in which he worked in the original.  He's given a job at
the radio station to his best friend, played by Daniel Stern, out of
sympathy while Stern's character works through his divorce.  His loser
younger brother (John Lovitz) comes to Mitch's house to bum a money and
place to live, all while Mitch and his wife try to celebrate his
birthday. During the celebration, Mitch discovers what appears to be a
treasure map in Curly's (the cattle drive leader in the original played
by Jack Palance) old hat.  After a business trip to Las Vegas,
Crystal, Stern, and Lovitz stay a few extra days to go off in search of
the treasure.  On the way, they run into Curly's twin brother, Duke,
played by (you know who) Jack Palance.
     First of all, the cinematography was beautifully done, especially
the outdoor scenes in the desert.  The scenes are such that I would
like to see some of those sights filmed myself.  There is some
character development during the film.  The actors remain true to their
characters and play them well, without overplaying the jokes.  The
movie is a good basic adventure, with enough plot twists to provide for
an ending that is difficult to predict.  The movie is paced well, but
with a couple slow spots in the middle and towards the end.
Humor-wise, the film has a good number of jokes which maintained my
interest throughout the film.  There are memorable moments like when
Stern is bitten by a snake, but there are fewer jokes to laugh at in
the sequel (surprise, surprise for a sequel, right?).
     However, the slight bitter aftertaste I have with this film has to
do mainly with the film's manipulation of the audience.  The film tries
to pull your heart-strings too much regarding how close the characters
are to each other, like when Mitch had decided to suck the snake marrow
out of his best friend's butt.  This is done again when the gang meets
up with some members of the cattle drive group from the original.
There were also some parts which appeared unrealistic, like whether the
stampede would start in the way it did or why they didn't worry more
about water while tromping around the desert.  Some strenuous stretches
of the imagination are required here.  Since the objective of the gang
is to find gold and get rich (unlike finding themselves in middle age
like in the original), I also found it harder to empathize with the
characters during their journey.
     Overall, I'd say that the film is an entertaining and humorous
adventure with some story-line deficiencies making it less worthy than
the original.  It may be worth the full price of admission, but a
matinee would be a better bargain.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Directed by Paul Weiland
Written by Billy Crystal and Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel
Cast Crystal, Daniel Stern, Jon Lovitz, and Jack Palance
MPAA Rating PG
Running Time Approx. 110 minutes
     Blame Francis Ford Coppola.  If his GODFATHER II hadn't been so
gosh-darned good, the American moviegoing public may have never known
the ill-effects of terminal sequelitis (JAWS 2, ARTHUR 2, ROBOCOP
2 ... shudder).  Of course, then we wouldn't get to see Jon Lovitz
recite Fredo's dialogue in CITY SLICKERS 2: THE LEGEND OF CURLY'S
GOLD.
     Lovitz replaces Bruno Kirby as obligatory third-wheel to Billy
Crystal and Daniel Stern, those cow-pokin' city folk who tamed the
not-so-wild-west in the smash 1991 original.  One year has passed (in
movie time) and Mitch (Crystal) is haunted by the fear that he may have
buried Curly (Palance) alive.  Remember Curly, the grizzled trail-boss
who knew one thing?
     Guilt gives way to gold-fever, though, when Mitch find a map to
buried treasure inside Curly's old hat.  Before you can say "Walter
Huston," the boys--Crystal, Stern, and Lovitz, as Mitch's
ne'er-do-anything brother--are saddled up and ready for another ride.
Whereupon they run into everything from rattlesnakes to Curly's twin
brother Duke. (Those are different?)
     THE TREASURE OF THE SIERRA MADRE it ain't, but, to use the best
excuse in "the business," hey, it's a sequel.
     Watching CITY SLICKERS 2 is like, er, watching CITY SLICKERS 1.
Once again, Billy Crystal bee-bops around a less-than-thrilled Jack
Palance.  Once again, a serious theme is weighing on the conscience of
the characters.  Once again, rousing music meets vibrant vistas.
SSDM.
     The trouble is that the original wasn't *that* great of a film to
begin with.  CITY SLICKERS was overlong and--surprise!--so is the
sequel.
     For about eighty minutes, CURLY'S GOLD is the sequel it should
be.  The gags are fresh, the situations are new, and Lovitz even nails
a couple zingers on the head.  But once out west, the film begins to
make the same mistakes as the original.  Mistake #1: the jokes stop
coming.  Mistake #2: the men start bonding.  The whole thing wraps with
great plot twist that's too little, too late.
     Though the handsome production values are certainly worth noting,
the cast is the selling point and, this time, they're a surprisingly
mixed bag.
     Freed of his character's middle-aged angst, Crystal is a
chatterbox of commentary.  He's not quite grating, but close.  Lovitz
doesn't have more than a handful of lines and the deficency shows.
(Heck, he was funnier in 1993 an Oscar presenter!) Neither actor acts
as goofy as Stern, the strongest and most believable of the three.
Jack Palance doesn't show until the hour mark and, of course, steals
every scene he's in.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Billy Crystal, Daniel Stern, Jon Lovitz, Jack Palance.
Screenplay:  Billy Crystal and Lowell Ganz & Babaloo Mandel.
Director:  Paul Weiland.
     It's a hard life being a sequel.  It must be something like being
the younger sibling of someone incredibly successful: the self-imposed
pressure to deal with the mystique of the predecessor; inevitable and
unforgiving comparisons; some level or another of disappointment.  We,
as viewers and critics alike, have tremendous difficulty separating the
Roman numeral from the name that precedes it, even when the sequel
might be a perfectly decent film in its own right.  CITY SLICKERS was a
lively, funny film with a dose of warm fuzziness; CITY SLICKERS 2: THE
LEGEND OF CURLY'S GOLD is less lively, less funny and a bit more
heavy-handed in its emotion.  For all that, it's still got more laughs
than any other comedy out right now, and a dose of high-spirited action
besides.
     One year after the events in CITY SLICKERS, Mitch Robbins (Billy
Crystal) is riding high.  He's now station manager at his radio
station, has provided a job for best friend Phil (Daniel Stern), and is
looking forward to a happy 40th birthday.  However, a few surprises are
in store.  One is the arrival of Mitch's ne'er-do-well brother Glen
(Jon Lovitz); another is the discovery of what appears to be a treasure
map in the lining of the Stetson left by deceased trail boss Curly
(Jack Palance).  Then there is Mitch's belief that he is being followed
by Curly's ghost.  When the map proves to be legitimate, Mitch, Phil
and Glen hit the trail to find $20 million in gold bars.  Along the way
they are joined by Curly's twin brother Duke (also Palance), and face a
variety of obstacles on their quest for the gold.
     CITY SLICKERS 2 faces a couple of problems from the get-go.  One
is that avarice isn't nearly as endearing a motivation as
self-discovery.  The Mitch Robbins of the original was in search of his
smile; this time around he is in search of money.  There is a lack of
depth to much of the humor as a result, and even the fraternal conflict
between Mitch and Glen can't pick up the slack.  The other problem is
that director Paul Weiland (whose only previous feature was the
legendary Bill Cosby debacle LEONARD PART 6) doesn't seem capable of
keeping his actors in the service of the story.  He indulges Billy
Crystal's worst tendencies toward hamming it up with Borscht belt
shtick, and Daniel Stern goes bug-eyed at the slightest provocation.
There was an irony and a light touch to Ron Underwood's direction of
the original, a touch Weiland doesn't seem to have.
     However, CITY SLICKERS 2 is consciously a very different kind of
film than its predecessor.  It's a big, broad, silly adventure and on
that level it succeeds.  The New York prologue is overlong (and
includes a pointedly anachronistic shot of the "Late Show" marquis on
the Ed Sullivan Theater when the film is set in 1992), but once the
slickers hit the trail the fun begins in earnest.  Jack Palance is
again a delightful presence, amd makes Duke a bit nastier yet also more
accessible than the crusty Curly.  No one plays a sadsack quite like
Lovitz, who outshines his co-stars with his oddball inferiority complex
and impromptu renderings of soliloquies from the GODFATHER films.  The
action sequences, while a bit too familiar, are still well-staged, and
the script by Crystal and CITY SLICKERS veterans Lowell Ganz and
Babaloo Mandel is full of funny lines.  They may not always add up to a
huge payoff, but they keep coming and there aren't many duds.
     CITY SLICKERS 2 centers its character growth on the value of
friends and family, but most of the time the emotion seems forced.
Ganz and Mandel seem to require a saccharine center to their comedic
confections, and the result is an even greater likelihood of an
unfavorable comparison to CITY SLICKERS.  Had Crystal insisted on a
pure romp, he might have scored big.  As it stands, CITY SLICKERS 2:
THE LEGEND OF CURLY'S GOLD is a sunny, funny comedy at least as
worthwhile as comedy/Western competitor MAVERICK ... and right now,
that might be the more valuable comparison.
