Title
Review for Sadness of Sex, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   "First you will be happy; then you will be sad."  This
succinct philosophy of love lies at the heart of "The Sadness
of Sex," a pot pourri of fifteen vignettes on the subject of
romance delivered into a microphone by Barry Yourgrau,
directed by music video/commercial helmsman Rupert
Wainwright, and gaudily illustrated by a rush of images to
open up the stand-up shtick.  Yourgrau, who wrote the
scenes--which average six or seven minutes each--is an
articulate fellow who rattles off monologue that are rich in
texture, lyrical in quality, and pretentious to the point of
audience exasperation.  The goateed, balding poet-raconteur
does not have Spalding Gray's charm, and, dressed
alternately in a sports jacket with an broad-collared open shirt
and in a large fedora circa 1940, he hams outrageously to a
night-club audience of beautiful women who laugh at his
every gesture and are obviously a casting setup rather than a
true assembly of fans.
   Perhaps the title, "The Sadness of Sex," was chosen for its
alliteration or conceivably to gain the attention of a broader
movie audience.  While sex is abundantly on Yourgrau's
mind, his real subject is love, whose pull he illustrates with a
combination of genres and a flurry of MTV-like imagery.  Yet
some of his scenes are meaningless and vulgar, particularly
one in which he describes a game a strip poker indulged in
by a group of unattractive business types who have invited a
cow to be one of the players.  They offer booze to the bovine
and decorate her ears with undergarments, while Yourgrau
treats us to a brief set of cartoons which appear to illustrate
the Kama Sutra. The pair of Indian paramours making love in
a variety of positions would have sustained audience interest
somewhat more than a shot of a plump card player splashed
across the face with milk.
   One of Mr. Yourgrau's allegedly postmodern sketches
describes the storyteller on a blind date with a woman who
excites him on the phone just previous to their meeting by
suggesting that he is in for a surprise.  Bursting with
excitement and anticipation, he discovers sadly enough that
the big surprise is really a very small one, in fact, his girl
friend for the evening is only twelve inches tall and somehow
attracts stares from all the diners in the restaurant.  He hides
the young lady behind a napkin, forcing the waiter to guess
the source of the wriggling behind the checkered cloth: is it
just spaghetti or is it this unusual date?
   Desperate for the companionship of a woman, Yourgrau at
one point hires Cupid, a lad of about nine years, who fires his
arrow into a woman who runs desperately across the park to
avoid this attacker.  In a happier situation, Yourgrau is sitting
at a cafe when a dazzling blond passes his table, looks briefly
at the performer, smiles, then appears to take on the wings of
an angel.  Peta Wilson in the role of this comely teaser
provides several moments of real interest in an otherwise
banal film.
   Not all of Yourgrau's women are coy: one, whose
strawberry-flavored bosom is irresistible to the middle-aged
lover, chastises him to end the foreplay by demanding "sex or
nothing," while in another instance a group of rebellious,
leathery women take over the country and beat up on the
male oppressors.  
   The varied soundtrack written by lyricists like Lori Carson,
Sergio Cervetti, Peter Scherer and Bill Elliott cannot infuse
enough oxygen into the absurd script, whose real message to
its audience is "When you come into some movies you will be
happy.  Then you will be sad."
