Title
Review for Jimmy Hollywood (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Joe Pesci, Christian Slater, Victoria Abril 
Director:  Barry Levinson 
Producers:  Mark Johnson and Barry Levinson 
Screenplay:  Barry Levinson 
Music:  Robbie Robertson 
Released by Paramount Pictures 
     Barry Levinson had an idea, and a pretty good one at that:  take
an actor, have him assume the role of a vigilante and, as public
adulation of his assumed personae escalates, blur the line between
being a vigilante and acting the part.  Unfortunately, the idea is all
that Mr. Levinson had, because the final result--JIMMY HOLLYWOOD--is
a somnolent mess.
     Jimmy Alto (Joe Pesci) moved to Hollywood from New Jersey to try
his luck in Tinseltown.  Now, despite a bus stop bench add proclaiming
his abilities as an actor, he's unemployed and barely eking out a
living, resorting to stealing from his girlfriend Lorraine (Victoria
Abril) when he needs money.  Then, one night someone breaks into
Jimmy's car and steals his radio.  Incensed that the police intend to
do nothing about this criminal behavior, he and his friend William
(Christian Slater) spend nights staking out the neighborhood, awaiting
the return of the thief.  When he makes another appearance, Jimmy takes
matters into his own hands, giving birth to the S.O.S. ("Save Our
Streets") organization and its leader, Jericho.
     The problems in JIMMY HOLLYWOOD start with the characters.  They
either aren't very interesting (Pesci's Jimmy), aren't interesting and
are annoying (Slater's William), or aren't interesting and don't have a
purpose (Abril's Lorraine).  The fault is not entirely that of the
script, since none of the principals gives a noteworthy performance.
Mr. Pesci, known for his caged energy, comes across as bland
throughout.  Mr. Slater and Ms. Abril successfully manage to blend
into the scenery.
     For a comedy, this isn't very funny.  There are a few lines here
and there worthy of a chuckle, but most of the jokes fall through, and
some are difficult to recognize as attempts at humor.  The dramatic
elements aren't much more successful, although several intriguing ideas
are proposed--such as the role of vigilantism in our society and what
a media frenzy can drive a person to do.  None of these are original,
but they're worthy of consideration.  Unfortunately, JIMMY HOLLYWOOD
doesn't do that very well, either.
     The film's tone is uneven, with lengthy periods of sluggishness
punctuated by bursts of action.  The ending is dragged out at least
twice as long as it needs to be.
     The best part of JIMMY HOLLYWOOD, and it is very good, is the
sequence over which the end credits are shown.  This minute-long spoof,
featuring an unexpected, uncredited cameo, is almost worth sitting
through the rest of the film for.  Almost, that is, but not quite.  The
other interest- capturing moments are few, far between, and quickly
over.
     Barry Levinson's work in the past has ranged from excellent
(AVALON) to mediocre (BUGSY) to awful (TOYS).  JIMMY HOLLYWOOD falls
far closer to being in the latter category than either of the former
ones.  In this case, let the preview be your guide to the movie--it's
an accurate representation of something that's flat, uninspired, and
desperately trying--and failing--to be witty and clever.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Joe Pesci, Christian Slater, Victoria Abril.
Screenplay/Director:  Barry Levinson.
     If there has been one theme one can identify running through the
work of director Barry Levinson, it is the search for the American
Dream.  He brought us the ambitious salesmen of TIN MEN, the optimistic
immigrants of AVALON, and the visionary BUGSY, all darkly-tinged
stories of guys trying to make their mark and make it big.  JIMMY
HOLLYWOOD is another such story, but it is lacking something previous
Levinson projects had, namely a firm grasp on what the protagonsists'
dreams were.  There are interesting ideas in the script, and some of
the dry humor characteristic of Levinson's dialogue, but it's never all
that compelling because the character of Jimmy Alto is too
schizophrenic, and with him the tone of the whole film.
     JIMMY HOLLYWOOD is the nickname of Jimmy Alto (Joe Pesci), a
struggling actor who has gone so far as to buy an advertisement for
himself on a bus stop bench.  He also adores the Hollywood of the
glamorous 1940s and 1950s, and spends afternoons memorizing the stars
on the Walk of Fame with addled friend William (Christian Slater).
That Hollywood is strongly at odds with the reality Jimmy sees around
him, however, and when a couple of crimes hit close to home he decides
to do something about it.  Along with William, Jimmy catches a thief
and turns him in with a note identifying the captors as the "S.O.S."
When the public begins expressing appreciation for the vigilantes,
Jimmy begins to play the role for all it's worth, to the dismay of
long-suffering girlfriend Lorena (Victoria Abril).
     At various times, Levinson appears to be trying to tell two
different stories through Jimmy.  One is about the thankless life of
being a struggling actor, including the cattle calls, waiting tables
and shameless self-promotion necessary to make it.  Jimmy never doubts
for a minute that his big break is just around the corner, and when his
vigilante persona "Jericho" becomes a media sensation, he is unwilling
to give up what he considers "the role of a lifetime."  At the same
time, Levinson paints a picture of a one-time Tinseltown which has
disintegrated into a city of drug deals, homelessness and ATM
muggings.  What happens is that it is never clear what motivates
Jimmy.  One moment it appears that he is a starry-eyed altruist who
wants only to return Hollywood to its former glory; the next, he is
simply a publicity-hungry would-be actor using crime to make a name for
himself.  The Jimmy who wants to strike fear into the hearts of
criminals doesn't gel with the Jimmy who reveals himself for a big
send-off.  It is typical of Levinson to make his heroes' motives less
than completely pure, but in this instance they're simply muddled.  It
is difficult to care all that much about Jimmy, and it's difficult to
figure out whether Levinson wants us to focus on his characters or the
setting.
     It is also a simple truth that JIMMY HOLLYWOOD was a hard film for
me to like.  While it has its humorous moments, it's too grim to be a
purely entertaining comedy, and it doesn't explore its dark themes
deeply enough to be an insightful drama.  Its two principal characters
are frequently more pathetic than they are sympathetic, the pacing is
extremely deliberate, and the shifts in tone had me shifting in my seat
a lot.  When I did find interesting elements, it was more a case of
detatched admiration than enjoyment.
     Among the objects of admiration were two performances, neither of
them Joe Pesci's.  Pesci needs to step back from motor-mouthed New
Yorkers, because they are all beginning to look the same.  His
co-stars, however, are quite good.  Victoria Abril livens up the token
girlfriend role with some strong scenes, particularly a hillside
farewell.  The big surprise is a funny and affecting Christian Slater,
whose forgetful William does the low-key performance in UNTAMED HEART
one better.  Slater is developing into a complete actor, and his
performance here is extremely interesting.  Yet perhaps "interesting"
is the faint praise with which I ultimately damn JIMMY HOLLYWOOD.  I
found a number of things in the film interesting.  I just found none of
them truly engaging.
