Title
Review for Rugrats Movie, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Steve Rhodes
THE RUGRATS MOVIE, being little more than a magnified version of the
television series, will undoubtedly be well received by its fans.  Those
who think that movies should be more than extended length television
shows will likely be disappointed.  And parents of kids younger than 5
or 6 may be shocked to find all the frightening images and gross humor
in an inappropriately rated G movie.  Given the popularity of the series
with the preschool set, the audience is likely to be filled with that
age group.
"Hold on to your diapies, baby, we're goin' in," Tommy Pickles (voiced
by Elizabeth Daily, who is also the new voice for BABE) commands his
diaper wearing brigade in the movie's opening sequence.  To the Indiana
Jones tune, they are recreating in a dream sequence the famous boulder
scene from RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK.
The very talky picture is only sporadically funny.  In the film's first
act, the Pickles have a new arrival.  Mrs. Pickles has a new baby called
Dylan, Dil for short.  Get it?  Dil Pickles.
When they go to the maternity ward, there is a large board overhead as
you would find in an airport arrivals lounge.  As the signs flip over,
they announce baby arrivals rather than planes.  The kids in the
audience may not get it, but it is one of the few jokes thrown to the
adults to keep them awake.
Perhaps the movie's funniest scene occurs when the sleep-deprived dad
goes hysterical and whines along with his baby.  The wise mom knows just
the cure.  She grabs a pacifier and sticks it firmly in the Dad's mouth.
Although filled with bright colors, the film's animation has a cheap
two-dimensional look to it as if they did the same slapdash job expected
for a kid's television show.  The backgrounds are almost always static
with only the characters given motion.
The reason that another production company, Pixar, has deservedly won so
much praise for their movies stems first from the imagination of the
storyline with the technology being an important second.  THE RUGRATS
MOVIE fails on both of these measures.  The scary story about young kids
lost in the wilderness has no more originality than one would find in a
weekly, television cartoon series.
Parents have a right to expect that G-rated movies should, without
question or research in advance, be acceptable for all ages.  THE
RUGRATS MOVIE may find parents of little tykes feeling a need to walk
out of the theater.  The list of questionable activities for a G-rated
movie is long, so I'll just touch on a few of them.
The kids are lost in a dark and ominous forest without their parents.
They encounter a drooling wolf with razor sharp teeth that tries to bite
off their heads.  Menacing monkeys attack them in packs.  To be fair,
directors Igor Kovalyov and Norton Virgien put a happy gloss on the
scary images.
Even if your kids have long since been anesthetized to violence, there
is still the issue of the bathroom, or more precisely the poopy, humor.
We have kids peeing in the air to make a rainbow.  Boys look in their
diapers to complain about circumcision.  There is a vomit scene, and the
movie is filled with defecating baby jokes.  One of the characters sums
it up well, "Hey, this is more fun than picking noses."
"I don't like this adventure anymore," Lil tells her twin Phil as their
fortunes turn from bad to worse.  And that is exactly what your
preschoolers may tell you before the ending credits roll.
THE RUGRATS MOVIE runs 1:19.  It is inappropriately rated G and would be
fine for kids older than 5 or 6.  People older than 10 will find little
of interest in the movie.
My son Jeffrey, age 9, said that he's always loved the TV show, and this
movie has the same activities so he really liked it.  His favorites were
the Reptar Wagon and the character of Dil.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
David Butterworth
        "Rugrats."  It's the most popular children's series on television,
according to the Nielsen ratings, a show watched by more that 23 million
viewers each week.  So it would seem only natural that after seven
successful seasons on the Nickelodeon cable channel, America's favorite
toddlers--Tommy, Chuckie, Phil, Lil, and Angelica--would make the leap to
the big screen.
        "The Rugrats Movie" is a just-in-time-for-Thanksgiving expansion of
the weekly program, a commercial-free, 90-minute feature blown up from a
heavily-sponsored, 15-minute television segment.  The result is
surprisingly watchable for kids and adults alike, producing only minimal
fidgeting.
        Judging from the closing applause, a sequel shouldn't be long in
coming.
        There's not much of a story--the irrepressible urchins get lost in
the woods--but the plot set-up is fun and gets most of the film's big
laughs.  Stu and Didi Pickles are expecting and, with the birth of baby
Dylan (aka Dil--get it?), big brother Tommy has to face sharing his
parents' attentions for the first time.  So demanding is Dil that Tommy and
his pals conspire to return his bawling baby brother to the "hop-sickle"
ASAP.
        The hospital in question is a humongous, international airport of
endless corridors, check-in lines, and tv monitors indicating due, delayed,
and arrival times.  The delivery room options are very creative, and the
nursery provides one of the film's first of many musical montages, and the
first of many references to bodily emissions, which had the under-twelves
rolling in the aisles.
        While the creative team behind "The Rugrats Movie" enthuse about
the themes of family loyalty, bravery, and friendship that run through the
film, the audience seemed more responsive to any and every reference to
poop, pee, or spit-up.  And Tommy getting hit on the head by a bottle or a
rattle--well, that just cracked them up too.
        Grown-ups are more likely to appreciate the first half of the
film--when the writers take amusing potshots at the universally-recognized
chaos that surrounds the birth of a baby--than the second.  Once Tommy and
his pals head for the great outdoors aboard Stu's latest invention, the
fire-breathing, Darth Vadar-sounding Reptar Wagon, the humor gets a little
more predictable.
        In the forest, pursued by the tempestuous Angelica and her
"butthound" Spike, the Rugrats encounter a variety of dangers, including a
"lizard" (some guy in a big pointy hat who grants wishes?), a wily wolf
("Red Riding Hood got eaten by one, but they got her out"), and a bunch of
simian escapees from the Banana Brothers Monkey Circus.
        Fortunately one of the savvier Rugrats must have planned ahead
because there's a never-ending supply of bottles and "diapees" on hand.
With little help from a couple of park rangers (guest voiced by Whoopi
Goldberg and David Spade), the toddlers finally make it back to the safety
and the security of their parents.

Author
Quentin Kendora
Hello, for those that are reading from the movie groups, this is my first
real review for the 'net.  Note that I'm a HUGE Rugrats fan, and some of the
stuff that I explain might be confusing to those that haven't seen the show.
While it's not the "Star Wars" saga, "Rugrats" has a lot of characters. I
recommend. "The Unofficial Rugrats Online" at
http://www.saginaw.simplenet.com I consider it "Rugrats for Dummies".
After months of waiting, I finally got the chance to see my favorite
cartoon, the Rugrats on the silver screen. Ever since I was ten (and since
the show began back in 1991), I have always loved the show. And let me tell
you, Klasy-Cuspo did not let me down. A fun, up beat movie that kids and
"growned-ups" will enjoy from start to finish. I attended a 7:05pm showing
of the film, the majority of the sold-out crowd were mainly tykes. Due to
the fact that I'm 17-years old, it really set me down that I didn't see any
other people close to my age other than Adults. At least I'm a kid at heart,
and I can see whatever I please.
The story picks off where "The Family Tree" left us. It begins with a
sharp-looking Indiana Jones spoof, putting our main man Tommy Pickles in his
shoes ready to snatch a prized possesion. Funny how imagination goes with
these kids, as the huge rolling ball that chases them happens to be a very
Pregnant Didi-Tommy's mom.
Shortly after, Didi gives birth to Dil Pickles, which becomes a total bane
to all the main Rugrats-Even Phil and Lil. Dil seems to be somewhat a very
fussy little babe. During most of the film, Dil loves to take batting
practice on Tommy's head (hitting), be it from a rattle or a bottle.
After some disscusion from twins Phil and Lil, they decide to take Dil "back
to the hopsickle". They do attempt to return him via a new Stu
Invention-"The Reptar Wagon". However, they get lost along the way, ending
up in a forest, scary with monkeys and more troubles. This ain't the playpen
folks.
And what does that little imp Angelica (My favorite Rugrat) has to do with
all of this? Since Dil loves to grab items, yelling "mine"!, her doll
Cynthia is grabbed from the hands of the feisty younging. Angelica goes out
under "Shirley-Lock Holmes"-donning rollerblades and all in order to retain
her dolly. However I was dissappointed with what they did to her. Angelica
does not get a lot of screen time compared to her other counterparts. And
Unlike the T.V. show, Angelica is much less of a brat, but she is more like
it in the early moments of the film.
Of course, the adults in the film are just as entertaining as the Rugrats.
The reporter Rex Pester is really a pest. And Grandpa, Stu and Drew bring it
on.
The animation is really on another level. Really cool use during the birth
scene. They really made some scenes 3-D like in appearance. And to be real
with you, it looks like the animators took a shot of speed, as most of the
movie speeds on by. Its not slow like most Disney films. It really has a
small amount of sugar-sweet moments. Also the songs aren't at all chessy for
an animated film.
This being the first G-rated movie I attended in a thearte in almost 8
years, I wonder how did Nick and K-C get away with some of the potty jokes.
They must've been borderline on PG. There are a good amount of them in the
movie, especially during the newborn song number in which involves a shower
of peeing, creating a rainbow. Now that's something that Disney will NEVER
touch. Dil also uses his fire hose as well. And Tommy's buttocks are
exposed.
The botton line: kids, parents, those in between, and diehard Rugrats fans
like me will love this film. Animation knacks may get a kick out of it
also.But those that don't like cute cartoons and those older kids may wanna
stay out of this. Of course its up to you.
 Although the animation is NOT "A Bug's Life" level, it is 1,000 times
better than the T.V. show. And it doesn't play like an episode ethier as
many "mislead souls" have said before the movie even came out. The action is
mostly non-stop. Certainly on a faster pace than any episode. Nickelodeon
and Klasky-Cuspo has made one exciting film. This film will really give
"Babe: A Pig in the City" and "A Bug's Life" a real run for their money.
Bring on the Sequel!!!
For more info about the Rugrats and Angelica, Check out my site dedicated to
her at Angelica Regins Supreme at
http://www.geocities.com/TelevisionCity/Stage/6602
--
Quentin R.
"The Imperial Choice"
The Purple Domain: http://www.geocities.com/SunsetStrip/Alley/7317
One of the few male Angelica fans in America
See http://www.geocities.com/TelevisionCity/Stage/6602 on why I am.
"Talk is Cheap Mothaf****s!"-DMX

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
The Rugrats Movie (1998)
E.G. Daily, Christine Cavanaugh, Kath Soucie, Cheryl Case, Tara 
Charendoff, Melanie Chartoff, Jack Riley, Joe Alaskey, Phil Proctor, Cree 
Summer, Michael Bell, Tress MacNeille, Michael Bell, Busta Rhymes, Whoopi 
Goldberg, David Spade. Produced by Arlene Klasky, Gabor Csupo. Screenplay,
 David N. Weiss, J. David Stem. Directed by Norton Virgien, Igor Kovalyov.
 82 minutes.
Rated G, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
I've been a fan of "Rugrats," the hit Nickelodeon cartoon series, for a 
long time. Tommy (voiced by E.G. Daily) is the plucky leader of the 
precocious toddlers, accompanied by his best friend, the timid, but loyal,
 Chuckie (Christine Cavanaugh). Earthy twins Phil and Lil (Kath Soucie) 
complete the fab four, with Angela (Cheryl Chase), Tommy's slightly older,
 very bratty cousin, always ready to cause trouble for the babies. The 
charm of the show comes from the kids' innocent outlook on the world, as 
well as their refreshingly matter-of-fact approach to dirt, bugs and body 
functions. Adding to the fun is the show's gently satiric portrayals of 
the infants' colorful parents and grandparents. 
"The Rugrats Movie" marks the first big-screen foray for the kids and any 
movie featuring a nursery full of singing newborns who create a fountain 
of water by peeing into the air is all right in my book. That said, "The 
Rugrats Movie" disappointments in a number of ways. While the film 
features nice music and boasts a number of ingenious moments, it overdoes 
the bombast, making the babies play second fiddle to a series of raucous 
action scenes and parodies of other movies.
Following a take-off of "Raiders of the Lost Ark," the main storyline 
kicks in. Tommy Pickles' life is disrupted by the arrival of baby brother 
Dil (Tara Charendoff), whose nonstop howling drives the child to 
distraction. When Tommy and company decide to return Dil to the "baby 
store," they hop in the Reptar Wagon, a super-powered Big Wheel created 
by Tommy's inventor father, Stu (Jack Riley, Mr. Carlin from "The Bob 
Newhart Show") and promptly get lost in the forest, leading to a series 
of misadventures with escaped circus monkeys, a wolf and various other 
scary things. Meanwhile, the families, aided by two forest rangers 
(Whoopi Goldberg and David Spade), desperately search for the kids, while 
the press (led by Tim Curry) bombard them with idiotic questions.
Judging from the laughter and applause, the kids at the screening I 
attended loved every second of the movie, especially the numerous body 
function jokes. My reaction was less enthusiastic. After a strong 
beginning, the film turns into a overly busy action movie, and that's not 
what I came to see. I love the "Rugrats" series not because of the action,
 but rather the characters' conversations and responses during the action.
 In the series, we get to hear the babies talk to each other, and the 
glimpses into their personalities provide the charm and fun of the show. 
There's some of that in the movie, but not nearly enough. Too much of the 
film consists of everyone racing frantically about, avoiding one brush 
with disaster after another. I can get that with any movie. From the 
"Rugrats," I look for personality, and the film comes up short in that 
department.
Because of the clever moments, the nifty soundtrack and my affection for 
the characters, I'm giving "The Rugrats Movie" a marginal recommendation. 
The film's target audience of little kids should make the production a 
hit. But if the filmmakers want to satisfy the grown-ups (and make no 
mistake, the TV show has a huge adult following), they'll tone down the 
frenzied action and turn up the personality and quiet moments for the 
next "Rugrats" movie. 

Author
Matt Williams
The Rugrats have made their way from Nickelodeon to the big screen, and
the result is, well, alarmingly similar to the television cartoon.
For those unfamiliar with the animated series, it is centered on the
point of view of several very young children (ranging in age from 1-2).
The leader of the pack is Tommy Pickles (E.G. Daily), a bald, but
fiesty, one year-old.  His best friend is Chuckie Finster (Christine
Cavanaugh).  Also along for the ride are twins Phil and Lil DeVille
(Kath Soucie), and obnoxiously precocious cousin Angelica (Cheryl
Chase).
The film features the arrival of a new member in the Pickles household.
Tommy gets a little brother, Dylan (aka Dill Pickles).  This, of course,
sets off a round of sibling rivalry, as Tommy must share the affections
of his parents with this loud newcomer.
In an attempt to solve the problem, Tommy's friends kidnap Dylan and
(with Tommy in tow), try to return him to the hospital.  Of course, the
five babies soon get lost in the wilderness (despite a high-tech dragon
wagon which provides their ride), and the film follows their attempts to
get back home.
Despite a few desperate pop-culture references, The Rugrats Movie is
strictly kids stuff.  From its incessant diaper humor to a series of
mispronunciations that only a Family Circus devotee could love, the film
is too obnoxious for younger kids, yet too juvenile for those much
older.
The animation style boasts a few computer-generated backgrounds, but
overall isn't that much more impressive than television quality.  In
fact, there's very little about this film that calls for seeing it on
the big screen.
The Rugrats Movie has the look and feel of a direct-to-video film.
Unless you're a hard-core Rugrats devotee, you can wait till then.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 650 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Norton Virgien and Igor Kovalyov.
Voices: E.G. Daily, Christine Cavanaugh, Kath Soucie, Cheryl Chase, Tara 
Charendoff, Tim Curry.
1998 - 76 minutes.
Rated G (nothing objectionable, except for the film itself).
Reviewed November 21, 1998.
By Dustin Putman 
Dustin Putman's Film Reviews >
Although I had not been a viewer of the "Rugrats" television series, I 
went into their first animated feature film, "The Rugrats Movie," with a 
positive attitude. The trailer looked cute enough, after all. After 
seeing it, I think the words in my recent "Antz" review, in which I 
stated that it was the worst film of its type since 1995's "The Pebble 
and the Penguin," were a bit premature. "The Rugrats Movie," is 
bottom-of-the-barrel children's fare at its worst, and starts to make, 
"Antz" look good in comparison.
As in the show, "The Rugrats Movie," is about a group of very little 
friends, ranging from babies to a three-year-old. The head of the group, 
Tommy Pickles (E.G. Daily), becomes distraught when his mother has a 
newborn baby named Dill (get it? Dill Pickles?...hardee-har-har!) and is 
informed by his three-year-old cousin, Anjelica (Cheryl Chase), that the 
new babies always take all of the attention away from the other 
children. When the other children, Chuckie, and twins Lil and Phil, 
suggest taking Dill back to the hospital, Tommy goes along with it, but 
on their way there, they crash in the forest, and become lost, running 
into wolves and circus monkeys, among other things.
"The Rugrats Movie," judging from the idea of being lost in the woods, 
could have been a potentially fun family film, and there were many 
different things that could have been done with the story. So what did 
the writers choose to do? Why, they set up a protracted, cliched scene 
where the children almost go over a waterfall, of course!
For the youngest of children (ages 3-7), "The Rugrats Movie," may very 
well entertain them, judging from the audience I saw this with. Of 
course, if you looked around at all of the older kids and their parents, 
they were all desperately struggling to stay awake, and that included 
me. For an adult, "The Rugrats Movie," is a piece of garbage. The 
plotline is unoriginal and the writing has absolutely no wit or charm. 
There isn't one laugh to be had in the film, nor is there any 
excitement. 
If anything is even marginally good in the picture, it is the bright 
animation style, so it is especially unfortunate that it wasn't to 
service a more quality film.
"The Rugrats Movie" is DOA from the start. I am all for a worthwhile 
family movie, but sometimes an animated film comes along that is simply 
awful. As said before, young children may like it, but even they deserve 
better than this. For adults, it is a nearly unbearable, excruciating 
chore to sit through. As for me, "The Rugrats Movie," is not the worst 
of the year, nor is it the most deeply hated, but it is the most boring. 
Parents: do yourselves a favor and take your kids to see the rerelease 
of, "The Wizard of Oz." That is a picture that contains a great deal of 
magic and wonder, two things of which, "The Rugrats Movie," is 
completely missing. 

Author
Ronald O. Christian
I've been fond of Rugrats the series since before my daughter was
born.  It not only provides a charming look into childhood, but also
lets us laugh at the parenting mistakes of ourselves and others as
Tommy's parents act all of them out.
When my daughter turned 3 a year ago, she was also charmed by the
series, and we would watch it together, she laughing at the kid jokes
and me laughing at the adult jokes.
So, how well does the series translate to the big screen?  That's the
wrong question, actually.  It's not a matter of translation, but of
implementation.  The possibilities of moving Rugrats to the big screen
are obvious -- better animation, bigger budget, clever use of
multichannel sound.  The opening underscores this by showing us the
classic opening on a tiny screen in mono sound, and then suddenly
opening to the big screen and full theater sound in the last few
moments.  Reminiscent of the Enhanced Star Wars trailer.  But the
implementation....  Ah, there's the rub.  It  isn't very good.
In fact, it's pretty bad.  There's only about a half hour of plot in
the 80 minute running time.  The rest is stretched out with unneeded
(and unfunny) scenes, and -this is the bad part- some of the worst
songs to assult our ears since Quest for Camelot.  The plot is...
embarrassing.  Not clever or illuminating as the series has been, but
just downright dull and painful to watch.
There are a few clever moments, but we've already seen about half of
them in the trailer.  There doesn't appear to be any reason for this
movie to exist, except to make us pay seven bucks a seat to see
characters we used to see for free.  And let's not forget the full
length commercial, excuse me, cartoon Catdog.  Or was that Dogcat?  I
forget.  And I wish I could forget that cartoon.  It reminded me
somewhat of Micky's Brain, in that I kept hoping that this was the
last scene... no, maybe this was... nope, maybe this one.
Anyway, on a 0 to 4 scale I'd have to rate the experience a 1.  Even
at discount prices, I didn't get my money's worth.
As I said at the beginning, there are two ways to look at this movie.
Here is the other one:
Kool, Duud!  Klasky/Czupo are geniuses.  With Rugrats they have raised
the bar for big screen parody, and have done it in such a subtle
fashion that almost no one will get it!  In the series, the Rugrats
scriptwriters routinely lampoon cutesy smarmy kiddie movies, and they
brilliantly continue the motif on the big screen.  Tommy, Chuckie and
the bunch want to see Reptar (an obvious reference to Godzilla and
other action movies) and couldn't care less about watching an achingly
saccarine movie about a bunch of babies.  So while the adults are
trying to figure out why Rugrats the movie is so bad, the kids are
sneaking out to watch Enemy of the State.  Oh, the humanity!  Check it
out -- all the morons who are assulting Rugrats because of poor plot,
awful music, bad dialog, are just too dense to understand that it's
SUPPOSED TO BE LIKE THAT!  It's SUPPOSED to be bad.  That's the POINT!
What Genius!  I'm going to see it again and again!
Ahem.  Anyway, whether you look at it as a rather flat kiddie movie or
a profound inside joke on the audience, one thing Rugrats the movie
certainly does not have is the charm and wit of the series.  If you've
never seen the series but were dragged into the movie, you owe it to
yourself to catch a couple episodes to see how it's supposed to be.

Author
Michael Redman
I've always enjoyed the few minutes that I've caught The Rugrats on
television. It wasn't absorbing enough to watch the entire program, but a
short time with Tommy, Chuckie, Phil, Lil and Angelica was fun.
Unlike animated youngsters of yore, these aren't little angels. They talk
about boogers and laugh at bathroom humor. They stand a good chance of growing
up to become Beavis and Butthead.
In their feature length film debut, the kids get lost in a forest. They meet
up with a vicious wolf, mischievous monkeys and look for a magical "lizard"
who can grant them the wish to go home. Tommy is in charge of taking care of
his newborn baby brother and agonizes over his "sponsibility".
There are some funny bits. Their misunderstanding of adult words makes for an
occasional humorous pun. The phenomenon experienced by every parent of a baby
boy while changing diapers will have the audience laughing despite itself as a
rainbow forms in the misty air of the nursery.
Although their shorts on television are enjoyable, the film feels too long.
Considering the attention span of the target audience, I'm unsure that they
won't be squirming in their seats. When I saw the movie, one young boy had
more fun running to the back of the theater and rolling down the aisle and
then doing it again, and again.
Maybe that's all they want - big cartoon kids on the screen while the kids in
the audience have their own party. It's probably no coincidence that this
opens during Christmas shopping season: built-in mall babysitters.
(Michael Redman has written this column for over 23 years and doesn't plan on
starting his Christmas shopping for, oh, about four weeks. Email electronic
gifts to Redman@indepen.com)
[This appeared in the 12/03/98 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington,
Indiana. Michael Redman can be contacted at Redman@indepen.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review at http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Mr. Brundage
Directed by Igor Kovalyov and Norton Virgien
Written by David Weiss and J. David Stem
Featuring the voices of: Elizabeth Daily, Christine Cavanaugh, Katie Soucie,
Cheryl Chase
    So I'm a little late in writing this review. I really don't care.
Neither do Tommy or Dill or Angelica or Chucky, who have pretty much been
chased out of their playpen box-office by the funny but unintelligent A
Bug's Life. But this movie succeeds where both A Bug's Life and its
competitor Antz failed: in creating a kids-love/adults-love movie. Kids love
A Bug's Life, Adults love Antz. Both of them love Rugrats.
    The most intelligent cartoon since "The Simpsons" (which the same
animation team behind Rugrats worked on) has come to the big screen. It's a
look at the babies of the new all-American parents: both at work, both armed
with cell phones and faxes. They're raised by their sleeping grandfather and
are intelligent beyond their single year.
    In this adventure of theirs, the ultimate kid's toy (NOT THE FURBIE), a
Reptar, takes Tommy, Tommy's new brother, Dill Pickles, Chucky, and a pair
of smart-mouthed twins into the forest for a great adventure. Having
accidentally taken Angelica's doll Cynthia, the junior sultan of sarcasm
tags along for the ride.
    The movie, with all of its slapstick comedy, will be riotously funny for
little kids, while at the same time letting "olders" like us sit back and
get the parodies of Indiana Jones and The Fugitive. It let's us get
malapropisms like "custardy" for "custody" while our youngers get singing
babies simultaneously peeing.
    The artwork is crude but, in my opinion, a representation of what a kid
would draw like (another intelligent touch). The lines, as said, are
intelligent, the storyline sensible. The only thing that I couldn't stand
were the musical numbers, which are paled by the ones in an average Disney
musical.
    But, that withstanding, it's a great film. Go see it. Go enjoy it. Don't
forget the kids.

Author
James Sanford

 It's every parent's nightmare. Your child kidnaps your newborn and
disappears into the woods on a stormy night with his friends. Then the media
descends on your home, anxious for all the details.
 That situation is played for laughs in "The Rugrats Movie," and while it
might also be a nightmare of many parents to have to pay to see Tommy,
Chuckie and Angelica on the big screen, "Rugrats" has more than enough
hijinks and gross-out humor to keep the under-10 crowd in hysterics for 90
minutes.
 Older viewers might catch themselves chuckling as well, especially when
Tommy's pregnant mom insists on checking into the Lipschitz Maternity Arts
Center -- which promises it's "state-of-the-art in primitive birth
alternatives" -- or when an obnoxious tabloid reporter grills grieving
parents with questions like "Is it true a dingo ate your baby?". Certainly
the kids won't pick up on how alternative-rock pioneers like Patti Smith,
Laurie Anderson and Beck provide the vocals for a nursery full of
complaining babies, or catch the easily recognizable tones of Whoopi
Goldberg and David Spade as a pair of forest rangers who assist in rescuing
the Rugrats from the wilderness.
 That's not to say that all of "Rugrats" is sophisticated and in-jokey. Many
of the jokes are built around "chocolate pants" (think diapers) and bodily
functions, the kind of lightly raunchy material that's, in Rugrat parlance,
"more fun than picking noses" to those whose ages are still in the single
digits.
 But, to balance things out slightly, "Rugrats" does offer a gently
delivered message about how older siblings need to overcome feelings of
jealousy and take part in raising a new baby. In this case, Tommy feels he's
lost his place in the Pickles family after the arrival of little brother
Dylan, who seems to exist solely to smack Tommy around and weep rivers of
tears. The only disappointment the target audience for "Rugrats" is likely
to feel comes from the movie's underemployment of bratty cousin Angelica,
who is kept out of the action for most of the movie.
 The feature is preceded by a raucous "Catdog" short, in which the
half-feline/half-canine manages to cause citywide destruction and an
airplane crash while trying to win a call-in radio contest. Its relentless
comic violence and hyperactivity would have made maverick "Golden Age"
animator Tex Avery proud.
James Sanford
