Title
Review for Fort Apache (1948)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dragan Antulov
People who like to classify movies according to their
quality are often reminded of a phenomenon called "guilty
pleasures" - films that are bad, but still liked, even by
those filmophiles who should know better. On the other hand,
we might encounter quite the opposite phenomenon - films
that should be viewed as masterpieces, but are actually not
very liked. The author of this review encountered such
phenomenon very often in the case of John Ford. The reason
for that probably lies in first impressions which weren't
very favourable towards John Ford's work. In my early years
I used to like westerns very much, but westerns by John
Ford, who had been often referred as the best and most
important director of the genre, looked somewhat "too
artistic" or not attractive enough to be actually liked.
Those impressions stuck with me in latter years, even after
my taste in films became evolved. Such was the case with
FORT APACHE, 1948 western by John Ford, first in his US
Cavalry trilogy.
The script of the film, written by Frank S. Nugent is based
on the story called MASSACRE by James Warner Bellah. Fort
Apache is small, desolate garrison of US Cavalry, populated
by rag-tag bunch of Civil War veterans, many of them former
officers and now reduced in rank and pay. The garrison gets
the new commander - Lieutenant Colonel Owen Thursday (played
by Henry Fonda), accompanied by his lovely daughter
Philadelphia (played by Shirley Temple). Thursday sees his
new post as humiliation and desperately seeks ways to
reclaim his honour and prove himself as capable military
leader. His arrogance would cause conflict with his
subordinates, and his class snobbery would make a rift
between him and Philadelphia, when she falls in love with
young Lt. Michael O'Rourke (played by John Agar), son of
Sergeant O'Rourke (played by Ward Bond). The biggest
conflict arises when Thursday, against the advice of his
much and experienced subordinate, Captain York (played by
John Wayne) decides to betray Cochise, legendary Apache
chief, in order to start war that would bring him
long-desired fame. At the end, Thursday would reach his
goal, but not in a way he had anticipated.
Since the plot of this film bears more than small
resemblance to the legend of Custer's Last Stand, John Ford
uses this opportunity to explore the reality of Old West,
and it the same time keep the mythical distance towards this
popular subject. This film indeed deals with the darker
pages of Old West history - the ways in which US government
dealt with the Indians and its own war veterans, and the
rigid class system that existed in US Army at the time.
Those motives are used in variety of vignettes that deal
with the everyday lives of Fort Apache cavalrymen. Although
many of those vignettes slow down the pace of the movie,
making it two hours long, some of them are very amusing, and
sometimes even touching; John Ford obviously liked his
characters and thanks to the actors of his legendary "Stock
Company" they appear as the most memorable element of this
film. This is not the case with the romantic subplot
involving Philadelphia and young O'Rourke - it seems
forcefully introduced into to the movie only to satisfy
Hollywood formula.
The acting in the film is, on the other hand, very good.
Henry Fonda, who plays arrogant and self-obsessed
militaristic maniac, never slips into over- acting and paves
a way for the role of the true villain role in ONCE UPPON A
TIME IN WEST twenty years later. John Wayne, who is
overshadowed by his performance, has a rather thankless role
of a second fiddle. That role is even more compromised by
the sudden and rather unexplained change of heart in Wayne's
character - Captain York, who was portrayed as a man of
integrity is following the party line at the end. Wayne was
probably less responsible for that than Ford himself, who
had rather ambiguous feelings about military while making
this film. On one hand, he clearly deplores militaristic
folly, while, on the other hand, sees the military as one
big family. That ambiguity is probably the biggest weakness
of this film, with the rather forgettable musical score by
Richard Hageman being the close second. So, this film isn't
among the best westerns ever made, not even among the best
films by John Ford. Despite all of its imperfections and
despite the fact that it isn't the must-see or cult classic
material, FORT APACHE is still a very good piece of cinema,
essential for those who want to see expressions of American
myths in Hollywood movies.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
FORT APACHE (1948) Directed and co-produced by John Ford, from
a screenplay by Frank Nugent, suggested by the story
"Massacre" by James Warner Bellah. Photography, Archie Stout.
Editing, Jack Murray. Art direction, James Basevi. Music,
Richard Hageman.  Cast: John Wayne, Henry Fonda, Shirley
Temple, John Agar, Pedro Armendariz, Dick Foran, Victor
McLaglen and others from Ford's repertory company. 126 min.
A genuine, entirely American masterpiece. The first of the
Ford U.S. Cavalry trilogy. Longish work centers on a military
garrison out West, mostly manned by veterans of the Civil
War--tactfully called here "the late war"-- most of whom had
held higher battlefield commissions. They live in rowdy
harmony until  the new colonel, Thursday (Fonda), a vain,
arrogant, class-conscious martinet, upsets all, from the
cavalrymen to the sensible, humanitarian Captain (Wayne), and
the Apaches of Cochise, whom he first betrays, then attacks
suicidally.
The film takes its delicious time with vignettes of the men
and their families, comic Irish shenanigans, and sub-plots.
The only weak subplot is the romance between Philadelphia
(Temple),the Colonel's daughter, and O'Rourke (Agar, in his
debut,) the new lieutenant from West Point.
It's an affair that starts before the film can get going.
Temple is all smiles and simpers. Agar, as the son of Sergeant
Major Ward Bond and lovely Irene Rich,  is overshadowed by the
masterful acting of his screen parents. But even this romance,
superfluous in other hands, scores some touching points with
Ford.
Whatever the minor flaws, these are entirely made up by the
excellence of the rest of the cast, from the trio of Agar's
three godfather sergeants (here McLaglen partly reprises his
role in "Gunga Din") to the Fonda-Wayne contrast.
Fonda is obviously patterned after General Custer, down to a
superbly filmed Last Stand. Ford has tremendous control over
his film. Army life may have never been quite the way it is
depicted but that's a moot point, one that you raise for
ordinary or "historical" films but not for Ford's stylized
masterpieces. By the standards of the genre, "Fort Apache" is
rather complex in plot, characters and visuals, but it feels
simple because it so cleanly made that even familiar devices,
treated in a fresh manner, become rituals and look un-cliched. 
The film has grandeur but no grandiloquence. Though everything
is a little or a lot bigger than life, nothing seems
self-conscious or artsy. Ford's eye for authenticity, forswift
and effective details of pathos or satire, is amazing. Compare
the brevity and genuiness of Wayne's encounter with Cochise
(whom he respects) with the same situation in another fine
film, Delmer Daves's "Broken Arrow." Ford's talent comes even
more sharply into focus. Even when horses ford a stream,
there's something more striking in their movements than in
most movies by others.
Morally, Ford is walking a tightrope. He blames military
folly, but at the same time he is so taken with the values of
the Army--a wonderful institution, an expanded family --that
at the end there is an inevitable cop-out when Wayne pays an
unconvincing tribute to Fonda. Yet it may be this very
partisanship that, in part, gives this and other Ford movies
their conviction. The warm poetry and lyrical visuals have not
dated a bit. Freeze the frames on a VCR and you get a
collection of splendid individual shots, compositions that
stand as single images and also flow in beautiful continuity. 
To my taste, Richard Hageman's score dates, now is
inappropriate, now like music for a B-movie. This is a
forgettable imperfection in a work that justifies those who
call Ford "King John." Please turn the control to defeat
colorization, if any.  (Edwin Jahiel) 

Author
Dennis Schwartz
FORT APACHE (director: John Ford; screenwriters: Frank S. Nugent/from the story
"Massacre" by James Warner Bellah; cinematographer: Archie J. Stout; editor:
Jack Murray; cast: John Wayne (Capt. Kirby York), Henry Fonda (Lt. Col. Owen
Thursday), Ward Bond (Sgt. Major O'Rourke), Shirley Temple (Philadelphia
Thursday), John Agar (Lt. Michael "Mickey" O'Rourke), Dick Foran (Sgt.
Quincannon), Pedro Armendariz (Sgt. Beaufort), Victor McLaglen (Sgt. Festus
Mulcahy), Miguel Inclan (Cochise), George O'Brien (Capt. Sam Collingwood), Jack
Pennick (Sgt. Schattuck), Irene Rich (Mrs. Mary O'Rourke), Anna Lee (Emily
Collingwood), Grant Withers (Meacham); Runtime: 125; RKO; 1948) 
The first of John Ford's trilogy of US Calvary films (She Wore a Yellow Ribbon,
49 and Rio Grande, 50). This one is a reworking of the Custer myth, in a film
that over sentimentalizes Army life and chivalry. It also puts Ford's liberal
spin on the treatment of Indians on display, as he believes unnecessary
conflicts could have been avoided if the white man didn't break his word to the
Indians and treated them with respect in their confinement to the reservations.
That is not to say that Ford rails against the Army establishment, as to the
contrary he goes out of his way at the end to have the John Wayne character give
a speech praising the self-aggrandizing, rigid disciplinarian, inexperienced
Indian fighter, and racist Henry Fonda character (a loose reflection on General
Custer) as a true American hero. It is mixed messages like that from Ford that
have always made me wary of him, and despite how layered in complexity the plot
and character development this western is and how tight Frank Nugent's rich
script is in pointing out traditional Army customs for those who gave their
lives in defending America's frontiers--it is still a film that loves war and
finds killing to be necessary. 
The film is also just as interested in all the formal ceremonies of Army life as
it is in the fighting scenes, as even in a frontier outpost in Arizona, the Army
men act with civility honoring the dance and all the formal rules of courtesy.
These social rituals seem to be just as important as learning how to shoot a
rifle. That the Fonda character dances stiffly and sees himself as an elitist
not sharing the democratic values of the community, makes him an outcast and a
divisive force. The film also has a half-baked romance that was not only dull,
but made the film feel longer than it should have. 
The film opens with the arrival of two new officers to the frontier outpost: Lt.
 Mickey O'Rourke (Agar), he's the son of Sergeant Major Michael O'Rourke (Bond),
who just graduated from West Point, and the other is the new commanding officer,
the uptight Lt. Col. Owen Thursday (Fonda). He is resentful that he has been
demoted after the Civil War and sent to such an unimportant outpost. He's a
widower who brings his radiant, doll-like young daughter with him, Philadelphia
(Temple). She smiles and coos and Mickey responds, as their romance starts the
film on its way to all the predictability that romance will bring to the story.
The film takes its sweet time getting to its main story, as it takes delight in
showing how the fort was one big happy family when Captain York (Wayne) was
running it but how the new commanding officer upsets things with his stuffiness
for regulations and his vain desires. As in all Ford westerns, there are his
stock characters and scenes devoted to comic humor about the Irish being heavy
drinkers and gallant fighters. Victor McLaglen as Sgt. Mulcahy does his usual
drunken binge scene and represents the Irish cause, while the women on the
outpost are made into saints. Emily Collingwood (Lee), the wife of Captain
Collingwood (O'Brien), is a picture of an ideal wife, who makes Philadelphia
feel at home, while the sergeant major's wife, Mary O'Rourke (Rich), is the
perfect Army wife and whatever she does is seen as noble. 
The film reaches its climax when Captain York is forced to break his word to the
honorable Apache leader Cochise, who took the Apaches out of the reservation and
made war because the corrupt Indian agents sold them liquor and exploited them.
He was such a formidable warrior, that no one could capture him. Under orders
from Thursday, York invites Cochise to talk about returning to the reservation.
But Thursday breaks his word and leads a suicide attack against the Apaches,
which results in him and his men being needlessly slaughtered. This Last Stand,
a reminder of the blunder Custer is known for, is covered up by the surviving
York. Wayne shows he's a 'team player' and makes Fonda out to be a hero, as the
press obliges with heroic stories. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ 
