Title
Review for Jack-O (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Andrew Hicks
        When I rented PUMPKINHEAD a few years back, I 
was hoping for a slasher movie where a killer monster with a jack-
o-lantern for a head decapitates people. I got it with JACK-O (as in 
"Lantern"), but the movie was just as bad as PUMPKINHEAD. I 
knew it would be bad, but there are different degrees of bad. Some 
bad movies you can laugh at and crack a lot of jokes about; others 
are so bad you can't even find humor in the awfulness. JACK-O 
falls into the latter category.
        It looks promising on the box, where a menacing 
pumpkinhead wields a scythe and the subtitle promises "It's 
harvest time!" There's even a stupid little poem on the back about 
how Jack-O's gonna get you, but after watching the movie you 
realize the poem should have read, "This movie sucks and that's 
no lie; Talent was the first thing to die. Decapitations and cheap 
boob shots abound; And the acting is better if you turn off the 
sound."
        Standard horror plot: A bunch of horny kids go into 
the woods and pull the cross out of Jack-O's grave. The pumpkin 
monster arises from his grave and slits throats, cuts off heads and 
picks up women with his scythe, hurling them across the woods. 
Then he heads off to town on (of course) Halloween night, where 
he kills a grumpy old man who refused to give candy to trick or 
treaters, then goes after the descendants of the family who 
originally buried him.
        Before too long, a Wiccan witch realizes what's going on 
and leads Jack-O back into the woods, with the usual mumbo-jumbo 
spells and stakes-through-the-heart crap. But the door is left open 
for a sequel, one the direct-to-video market will surely produce with 
the title JACK-O 2: HE'S BACK-O! I should probably stop now 
before I give the producers too many more ideas. Just one suggestion 
to elevate the sequel to the level of laughably bad instead of just 
bad -- Next time make Jack-O talk. That way, before he slays his 
first victim, he can ask, "Orange you glad to see me?"
The PUMPKINHEAD Review (written Halloween 1993)
        "There are bad horror movies, then there are BAD 
HORROR MOVIES! PUMPKINHEAD gets the all-caps 
distinction. While the name itself might suggest a giant jack-
o-lantern that eats unsuspecting trick-or-treaters, we aren't that 
lucky. Pumpkinhead is some sort of demon or something that 
you can invoke and sic on people who have done very bad 
things like murder or directing bad horror movies.
        "So, unless you are in the mood for something 
completely devoid of any entertaining value, I strongly 
recommend staying farther than a pumpkin's throw away 
from this movie."
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50th of a Century!
