Title
Review for Honeymoon in Vegas (1992)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Frank Maloney
     HONEYMOON IN VEGAS is a film directed and written by Andrew
Bergman.  It stars James Caan, Nicolas Cage, Sarah Jessica Parker, with
Pat Morita and Ann Bancroft.  Rated PG-13, for sexual situations.
     HONEYMOON IN VEGAS is a romantic comedy with an excellent cast and
a first-rate director-writer.  Andrew Bergman was once called by New
York magazine "The Unknown King of Comedy" for writing some very funny
comedies, such as BLAZING SADDLES, THE IN-LAWS, and SOAP DISH, inter
alia.  In 1981 he stubbed his toe directing SO FINE, but in 1990 he did
the wonderful THE FRESHMAN, a much neglected and underappreciated gem
that starred Matthew Broderick and Marlon Brando (in one of the boldest
and bravest self-parodies I have ever seen).
     Then we've got the considerable talents of the cast.  James Caan,
looking slim and healthy, an actor who broke my heart by being brilliant
in THE GAMBLER and then pissing away his career for years, is perfect as
the charming, vicious gambler.  Nicolas Cage, mercifully minus his most
mannered affections, is the straight man and plays it without a single
wink at the camera.  Sarah Jessica Parker, who impressed a lot of people
in last year's L.A. STORY as the spacy, hyper-kinetic beach girl,
SanDeE, is a lot smarter here, but still the slightly dense, slightly
innocent love interest of Caan and Cage.
     The situation -- a boobish everyman caught up in the wiles of a
gangster and an increasingly absurd solution -- is familiar Bergman
territory.  As if the basic situation were not absurd enough, Bergman
goes over the line with a running joke about Elvis impersonators that
culminates in a scene so full of plot holes and so unlikely as to
qualify as a contemporary version of the deus ex machina who has solved
so many dramatic and comedic situations throughout the history of
theater.  There is also a problem with way Bergman handles his villain,
Caan's Tommy the gambler.  He sets him up as a sympathetic, if
unprincipled, character, not unlike Brando's Godfather parody, and then
in the last ten minutes turns Tommy into the blackest and most vile of
men, destroying the dynamic and ambiguity that had made the rest of film
complex and interesting.
     I recommend HONEYMOON IN VEGAS for its virtues and for its
interesting flaws, but you should go to a discount matinee to see them
and it.

Author
Roger Snappy Rubio
Starring Nicholas Cage, Sarah Jessica Parker, James Caan, Pat Morita
Directed by Andrew Bergman
     All in all, a pretty solid piece of comic celluloid.  HONEYMOON IN
VEGAS is the latest flick from the man who brought you THE FRESHMAN.  In
this movie, Bergman throws in one bride, two grooms, and the outrageous
claim of "34 Flying Elvises."  Bergman is known for putting his main
characters into interesting predicaments that are not altogether
implausible.  He does not fail in this movie.
     Nicholas Cage plays the part of a private detective who abruptly
decides to get married to Sarah Jessica Parker, who plays a
schoolteacher.  They decide to get married and have their honeymoon in
Las Vegas.  While they are there, a professional gambler played by James
Caan, spots her and immediately set his sights on her.  Through a couple
of clever swings, Caan gets Cage to owe him a large sum of money, of
which cage doesn't have.  So Caan conveniently suggests that he borrow
his fiancee' for the weekend, and then the fun begins.
     When I say this is a solid piece of celluloid, I mean it is solid.
It is formulaic without really being formulaic.  That's what makes it
good.  It's got a couple of classic lines and some pretty outrageous
predicaments, but the best part about them is that they are all
believable.  Cage does wonderfully as a man who didn't know what he had
until he lost it.  I found both Parker and Caan to be ideally suited for
their roles, because they are not the most high-key of all actors and/or
actresses, and they do not have the most exciting roles in this movie.
But that's not putting them down; they did a fine job.
     If you want to see more of this kind of movie, check out THE
FRESHMAN if you haven't already seen it.  I believe HONEYMOON IN VEGAS
should have come earlier in the year.  It would have been more noticed
and more appreciated.  It a good flick, and worth at least a matinee
price at the box office.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  The writer of THE IN-LAWS and THE
     FRESHMAN tells the story of a love triangle of a neurotic New
     York private detective trying to marry his girlfriend while a
     big-time gambler tries to win her away.  Much of the story
     takes place in a Las Vegas infested with Elvis lookalikes.
     Lots of little pieces that only sometimes hang together well.
     Rating: +1 (-4 to +4).
     Andrew Bergman has been around making comedies for a long time, but in
HONEYMOON IN VEGAS he seems more like a new and talented amateur than a
seasoned professional.  Bergman wrote and directed SO FINE and THE FRESHMAN,
both of which jabbed at bad taste in American popular culture.  With
HONEYMOON IN VEGAS he has stopped his little jabs and pulled out a meat
slicer to go after the cult of Elvis worshippers.  Not that his basic plot
has anything at all to do with Elvis: he uses Elvis just to create a comic
background for his real story.
     Jack Singer (played by likably goofy Nicholas Cage) has been a
diffident lover to Betsy (played by Sarah Jessica Parker) due to a deathbed
promise to his mother (played by Anne Bancroft in cameo) that he would never
marry.  Finally Betsy overcomes the promise and the two head for Las Vegas
for a quick marriage.  That is where Betsy is seen by tough gambler Tommy
Korman (played by James Caan).  Betsy has a very strong resemblance to the
wife Korman lost to skin cancer, and Korman decides to snare Betsy for
himself.  He lures Jack into a high-stakes poker game, takes him to the tune
of $65,000, and then makes a deal with Jack: Jack's debt will be forgiven if
Betsy will be Korman's platonic companion for the weekend.  Korman wants to
use charm and his rather comfortable lifestyle to win Betsy.  Meanwhile,
Jack is becoming increasingly frantic to break up the pair as Korman spirits
Betsy off to Maui.
     What does all this have to do with Elvis?  Nothing really.  But the
background of the story is a Las Vegas having a convention of Elvis
impersonators.  Bergman constantly comments on the story with carefully
chosen Elvis songs and shows us an army of gaudy Elvis lookalikes, Elvises
of many races and sizes.  The film is just two Elvises short of pushing the
gag too far.
     The usually reserved James Caan and the never reserved Nicholas Cage
each seem to have a field day chewing up the scenery.  It is very rare to
see Caan putting this much expression in a role and clearly enjoying
himself.  Smaller roles go to the always enjoyable Pat Morita and Peter
Boyle as an unnatural naturalized Hawaiian.
     The photography is surprisingly spotty.  At least two scenes appeared
totally washed out in the print we saw.  Some scenes of natural beauty in
Maui and natural beauty (?) in Vegas owe more to William Fraker's
camerawork.  The cartoon credits were amusing and usually made sense.
Overall this is an amiable but unexceptional comedy.  I rate it a +1 on the
-4 to +4 scale.
