Title
Review for Vérités et mensonges (1975)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Shane Burridge
Playful documentary by Orson Welles may make your head spin, especially 
the chop-and-switch of the first ten minutes.  Thoroughly hermeneutic 
work is quintessential Welles even more than any of his fictional 
features, showing us Welles the actor, Welles the raconteur, Welles the 
parlor-magician, and Welles the film-maker, who blends his subject (art 
forgery) into the business of film fakery with a devilish sleight of 
hand.
Film's hall-of-mirrors approach has danger of becoming irritating after 
a while, but Welles guides us through its strange events with 
confidence.  Most of it is concerned with art forger Elmyr de Hory, who 
quietly circulated fake 'unknown' works of artists from his home in 
Ibeza.  Once uncovered he became the subject of attention by writer 
Clifford Irving....who then upstaged him by himself becoming the 
perpetrator of a hoax upon producing a fake biography of Howard Hughes.  
Hughes gives a telephone interview stating that he's never heard of 
Irving - but there is no guarantee that it is really Hughes giving the 
interview.  Meanwhile, Hory suspects that Irving has stashed some of his 
forged paintings for future sales; others think that the handwritten 
Hughes documents were forged for Irving by Hory; there is even 
speculation that Hory isn't a real fake, but a fake fake, and that the 
so-called 'forged' artworks are real paintings.  Get the idea?  Welles 
revels in the duplicity of his subject, reminding us time and time again 
that we can't trust the medium of film either (remember, this is the 
individual who pulled off the biggest media hoax in history with his 
famous 'War of the Worlds' broadcast).
Film takes a break from the machinations of its tricky story after an 
hour while Welles talks of the events that led him to Hollywood to make 
CITIZEN KANE (which at first was going to be based not on Randolph 
William Hearst but....Howard Hughes!), then spends the last twenty 
minutes of the film recounting an anecdote about Picasso.  At first it 
seems that this has been included into the documentary because the 
Hory/Irving/Hughes material couldn't be stretched any further - but keep 
watching: Welles isn't through with that idea yet.  It's a delight 
seeing him playing to the camera, sitting at a restaurant with friends, 
laughing while interviewing a gallery owner, studying footage through a 
moviola, and entertaining a youngster with conjuring tricks.  As Welles 
prefers not to discuss his films in interviews it's the closest peek 
into his mind we're likely to get.   


Author
Jerry Saravia
Orson Welles had the effrontery to believe that this highly original
film on art and the act of creating would be released in the United
States. It never was and was only shown on television in the United
States and in Europe, and at some film festivals. What a shame because
"F For Fake" is one of the director's finest achievements (and by far
his last complete effort), a Byzantine rethinking of what a film
should be and what it could be. It is also a reconstructive essay on
art and the artists who manage to create the art in question in any
given media. Welles takes the approach of looking at the media of
painting, literature, architecture and films, and this film is a
testament and a labor of love to anyone who is involved in the arts.
"F For Fake" begins with Welles arriving at a train station showing a
magic coin trick to an awestruck boy. He is interrupted by a passersby
(Oja Kodar) who asks him, "Up to your old tricks again?" Welles is
then greeted by a film crew led by another director Francois
Reichenbach, and tells them that there is a fascinating story
involving that passersby. We then realize that this is not really a
film and not quite a documentary, so what is it? Well, there is
another shot of Welles except this time he is at an editing table
looking at shots of Oja Kodar walking on a crowded street surrounded
by dozens of onlookers. But who is she?  Welles then apologizes for
jumping around all over the place, and sets forth in motion a story
about the most famous art forger of all time, Elmyr De Hory (who
tragically committed suicide after this film was released). He paints
fakes so brilliantly that museums often mistake it for the real thing
(Modigliani, Picasso, Monet are some of his famous "fakes"). Another
story circulates around a notable biographer, Clifford Irving, who has
written a bio on De Hory, and has just been accused of writing a fake
one on Howard Hughes! He insists he met with Hughes, but who is
telling the truth? And is it possible that De Hory is not a faker, but
a fake faker?
This may all sound ambiguous and confounding, but one of the pleasures
of "F For Fake" is the constant parallels Welles draws between all
these interweaving stories. He comes up with theories on the
importance of the creator or creators: in one beautifully stylized
sequence, we see superimpositions of the many facets of the cathedral
Chartres. Astounding architecture (independent film director Stan
Brakhage once made a short film about it) but in the end, does it
matter who created this wonder of the world? Of course not, probably
dozens of skilled artisans and the like and we may never know their
names.
Welles draws another parallel with his own life and work (apparently,
this film was intended as an attack against film critic Pauline Kael's
verbal accusation that Welles shared none of the writing credit for
"Citizen Kane"). He gives examples of his famous hoax, "The War of the
Worlds" broadcast, and the fact that all his films, indeed all films,
are illusions, essentially fakes. So by exemplifying this idea, Welles
often shows his film crew filming him as he makes his case before the
camera wearing a hat and a cape and performing magic tricks.
"F For Fake" is not an easy film to digest, and it will take more than
one viewing since it is not told in a straightforward manner. But the
rewards are plenty, and the sight of Welles speaking in his coarse,
deep voice is a splendid pleasure already. He keeps us involved and
intrigued, and we start to question the validity of the importance of
the creator of an artistic masterpiece - of course, it adds to
historical lore to know who the artist is, but the work must also
speak for itself.
As Welles explains at the beginning, any film is likely to be some
sort of lie, and so he insists that the whole truth will be spoken for
the first forty-five minutes of the film. At the end, when we discover
that Oja Kodar, the passersby from earlier, is in fact not Pablo
Picasso's daughter nor did she sell any of the paintings of herself
painted by Picasso to a museum, Welles declares that he did lie his
head off.
In its constantly time-switching narrative, freeze-frames, and sense
of self-consciousness, Orson Welles made one of his greatest
achievements on film - a master class on experimentation with the
medium and the infinite possibilities presented with tackling the
film-within-the-film. It is a shame it was not discovered initially,
but some of its style and rapid cutting is evident in Al Pacino's
superb "Looking for Richard," an expose on Shakespeare and Richard
III. Francois Truffaut declared "F For Fake" as one of the best films
of the 1970's - he could not have been more right. Right up with
"Citizen Kane," "Touch of Evil," and "The Trial," "F For Fake" reigns
supreme.
Footnote: There are cameos by Joseph Cotten and film editor on "Kane,"
Robert Wise. There is also a brief sequence with Oja and late actor
Laurence Harvey at an airport "from quite another film," says
Welles. I wonder if this was footage for his uncompleted film "The
Deep" since Welles can be seen in his cape minus a beard.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with questions, concerns or complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at
jerry@movieluver.com 
