Title
Review for Shadow Boxers (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jon Popick
Director Katya Bankowsky began filming Shadow Boxers, a documentary
about woman fighters, in 1995 when, after 68 years of being an all-male
event, the prestigious New York Golden Gloves tournament finally allowed
women to compete.  Much to the astonishment of the male-dominated sport,
the women turned boxing on its ear by proving girls can be just as
ferocious as boys in the ring.
Boxers concentrates on a former kickboxing champion from Holland named
Lucia Rijker.  She describes the sport as addictive and all-consuming,
telling stories about other fighters who abandoned their men and their
children to pursue success between the ropes.  Beautiful and well spoken
(at least for now), we see Rijker gain both confidence and credibility
with each opponent she faces.
There is another fighter who gets some quality screen time toward the
beginning of Boxers.  Jill `Flyin' Lion' Matthews, a diminutive,
smart-mouthed (at least for now) boxer who turns pro after winning her
division of the Golden Gloves, facetiously asks if her makeup is messed
up when she steps out of the ring.  When a reporter asks how she
prepares for her fights, she quickly snaps back, `With a manicure and a
pedicure.'
But the real draw to Boxers is the way Bankowsky pieces together the
boxing scenes.  They're elegant and hypnotic, playing out in slow motion
over a hip-hop soundtrack.  Bankowsky also switches between color stock
and grainy black-and-white film, which only adds to the film's
dream-like quality.
Bankowsky also edited and produced Boxers, which starts to drag a bit
toward the end, when the film isn't concentrating on boxing.  The only
other knock I can give the film is the repetitive score provided by DJ
Zoël, a former MTV Latino VJ.  Boxers isn't a first-round knockout, but
it's probably a second-round TKO.  Even if you dislike the sport, you'll
still find the film enjoyable and entertaining.
1:12 – Not Rated but contains some bloody boxing scenes and adult
language
