Title
Review for Well, The (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
Screenplay by Laura Jones, from the novel by Elizabeth Jolley
     Samantha Lang's debut feature, an exercise in character and 
creepiness steeped in a deep azure as if the print had been thrown in 
the wash with the colored clothes, is a test of patience.  That patience 
is ultimately rewarded, but it requires slogging through an awfully slow 
set-up.  Even in the payoff things never get too lively, but they do get 
intense.
     Lang begins in media res with the pivotal scene of the movie: two 
women, one dour and spinsterly and the other young and giddy, leave a 
late-night dance at a remote bar in the Australian outback.  The young 
one drives, recklessly, and kills a stranger on a lonely road.  Hester 
dumps the body down a dry well on her property.
     We now go back to discover how we got here.  Katharine (Miranda 
Otto), a recent reform school graduate, arrives as a sort of housekeeper 
at the farm where Hester (Pamela Rabe) lives with her old and dotty 
father.  The father soon dies, and Hester promptly sells the homestead 
and moves with Katharine into a smaller place.  They stow the cash a 
couple of cookie tins on top of a dresser, and begin to fantasize about 
a trip they'll take to Europe and New York. 
     Rabe plays Hester with the restraint and permanence of a part of 
the landscape.  She's a woman to whom the word "fun" has probably never 
occurred.  But she soon falls under the spell of, and in love with, the 
flighty Kathy, putting up with her rock music, buying her clothes and 
gifts, learning to laugh a little, and hiring another housekeeper so she 
won't have so much work.  Otto, a scruffy down-under Jodie Foster, 
combines tease, innocence, exuberance, spoiledness, and something 
darker.
     Then comes the accident, followed by the discovery that the money 
is missing.  Could the man Kathy hit have robbed them?  Is the money on 
him?  Kathy seems to go a little nuts.  She insists that he's alive down 
in the well, and that he's in love with her.  The mind games play out, 
in deep, sinister swirls of blue.  If you're still there at the end 
you'll either have had a nice nap, or you won't sleep easy for a while.
