Title
Review for American Tail: Fievel Goes West, An (1991)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Michael Dequina
_America's_Sweethearts_ (PG-13) ** (out of ****)
        Two types of comedies struggle for control in _America's_Sweethearts_:
one, a catty satire of the Hollywood hype machine; the other, a frothy star
vehicle for America's apparent real-life sweetheart, Julia Roberts.  Coming out
the loser in the ensuing mess is Joe Roth, who shows that spending the last ten
or so years heading movie studios hasn't done any favors for whatever
directorial ability he may have once had.
        From the looks of it, _America's_Sweethearts_ started out as an edgier
ensemble picture, and shades of that appear in the film's more effective
portion, the first half.  The sweethearts of the title are beloved off- and
on-screen pair Gwen Harrison (Catherine Zeta-Jones) and Eddie Thomas (John
Cusack), who fell in love on the set and then proceeded to make a string of
popular co-starring vehicles after getting married.  Alas, the fairy tale came
to an ugly end after Gwen fell in love with another co-star (Hank Azaria) on the
set of their latest movie, the sci-fi romance _Time_Over_Time_, which is now
being readied for release.  It's up to seasoned publicist Lee Phillips (Billy
Crystal) to make sure the two put on their best faces--and not kill each
other--during the multi-day, hotel-set publicity ritual known as the press
junket.
        The basic premise of _America's_Sweethearts_ paints the film as being
almost too 
inside.  After all, the story of a press junket being in danger is one that
could only be understood, much less appreciated, by journalists and others with
a keen knowledge of the workings of Tinseltown's PR process.  That said, some
effective zingers (by Crystal and Peter Tolan) directed at big studio glitz
provide some amusement for less showbiz-savvy audiences, as do some inspired
performances by Stanley Tucci, who plays a nervous studio chief; Christopher
Walken, who plays the eccentric, reclusive director of _Time_Over_Time_; and
Zeta-Jones, who obviously has a ball playing the stereotypical self-absorbed
screen diva.
        But somewhere along the line Julia Roberts decided to get involved in
the picture--not as the ostensible female lead, Gwen, but in the more secondary
role of Gwen's put-upon sister/personal assistant Kiki.  Roth then beefed up the
Kiki role in fair proportion to the "JULIA!" stature as any self-respecting
studio head/businessman would.  However, this turns out to be a ruinous
miscalculation not only in terms of storytelling but  in simple casting.  Kiki
is supposed to be frumpy and a bit of a loser, and regardless of whether or not
you think Roberts is the "pretty woman" she's celebrated as being, her charisma
and natural star wattage is undeniable and just about impossible to quash.  Not
even a fat suit, which she wears in some flashback scenes, is able to obscure
the fact that it's "JULIA!".  So when Kiki and Eddie start to develop feelings
for each other (which isn't giving away a thing that isn't already revealed in
the trailers or that could be easily predicted), what should have been a mere
plot complication becomes the focus, and suddenly "America's Sweethearts"
transforms into a "JULIA!" star vehicle about how she gets the guy--and an
especially weak one at that, given the glacial non-chemistry between her and
Cusack.
        Not that _America's_Sweethearts_ is too successful in general comedic
terms.  Apparently having little faith in the sometimes-spicy ideas and dialogue
as well as the talented actors delivering them, Roth throws in the broadest
lowest-common-denominator slapstick gags whenever he can.  A feisty, ferocious
dog takes an unnatural liking to Lee's crotch.  While jogging through a golf
course, Lee's underling Danny (Seth Green) gets hit in the head with a ball. 
And the point is...?  Certainly not laughs, for those goofy goings-on land with
a thud.
        Then again, the whole of _America's_Sweethearts_ doesn't seem to have a
point, either, given its split personality.  Roth would have been wiser to
choose between making a movie publicity send-up or a "JULIA!" showcase, for in
trying to achieve the best of both worlds, he ended up shortchanging the
audiences for either.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
The Movie Report/Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  www.mrbrownmovies.com
www.filmthreat.com  |  www.cinemareview.com  |  www.digitalwidescreen.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23
