Title
Review for Tango (1998)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Joy Wyse
This is a foreign language film, with subtitles.  That doesn't matter at
all.  You could enjoy this movie just by listening to the music.  The name
Lalo Schifrin is synonymous with wonderful music.  Add the tango to it and
you have a mesmerizing combination.   The world-renowned cinematographer
Vittorio Storaro [Apocalypse Now] has centered on various close-ups of
feet, the piano, etc.  The color is vivid.  Everything about the movie is
great - except for the story.
There are so many things going on that the plot is impossible to follow. 
It jumps from real life, to imagination, to memories, to history, and back
and forth.  Miguel Angel Sola portrays Mario Saurez, a director who walks
with a cane. We're never certain whether the leg injury is permanent or
not.  Cecilia Narova is Laura Fuentes, a dancer who was either his wife,
his girlfriend, or his dancing partner.  She is lovely and is a fabulous
dancer, especially when she is with Juan Carlos Copes who portrays Carlos
Nebbia,  an older dancer who continues to do what he lovesthe Tango.
Mia Maestro is cast as the new young dancer, Elena Flores, a `friend' of
Mario's investor, Angelo Larroca [Juan Luis Galiardo] who convinces Mario
to give the girl a chance.    He gives her more than that!   They have
some fairly torrid love scenes despite the danger that they face if Angelo
discovers their affair.  Again, even that is confusing.  He imagines
things, and some things actually occur.  It's just impossible to know
which is which.  Luckily, most of these scenes are done in dance, the
Tango.  This is more like a ballet or an opera than a movie with music and
dancing.  It's beautiful.  I wouldn't mind seeing it again, but I know
that I want to get the CD of the music.  I give it a B.

Author
Jerry Saravia
Tango is the kind of balletic dance that infuses sex and mystery in equal
parts, and is traditionally performed by a man and a woman. It necessitates
coordination and skill and lots of practice, like any other dance. Carlos
Saura's film, "Tango," is an attempt to understand the history of tango mixed
in with personal relationships and creative talents to produce a film on tango.
It is not a complete success, but it is a visually luscious trip. 
Miguel Angel Sola plays Mario Sanchez, a filmmaker who feels his private life
is in a state of confusion. His former wife, Laura Fuentes (Cecilia Narova), is
living with another man, though Mario still loves her. Laura is also a tango
dancer, and is part of the troupe who will perform in Mario's theatrical
presentation on the history of tango. A rich gangster, Angelo Larroca (Juan
Luis Galiardo), gives Mario a new recruit, an especially attractive dancer,
Elena Flores (Mia Maestro), who eventually has an affair with Mario. Naturally,
Angelo loves Elena and if he discovers she is having an affair, it will result
in death. 
"Tango" is imminently watchable when it shows us the pure tango dances against
creative, color backgrounds. There are silhouettes, flashes of color, and just
about every other camera trick you can imagine from the imaginative
cinematographer Vittorio Storaro, an active collaborator of Bernardo
Bertolucci's. I also love the moments when we witness the preparation of the
production itself, the set design and the choreography of the movements of the
dancers, etc. These are the moments that count, but the human interest level is
at a minimum. 
I wanted to know more about the middle-aged, flamboyant dancer Carlos Nebbia
(well-played by Juan Copes) and his tango desires. I also wanted to know more
about Mario Sanchez and the relationships with these women. There is one
effective scene where he has a dinner date with Elena and he tries to explain
his feelings about men and women, and fails to make sense. There is also a hint
of Mario's imagination unfolding before our eyes, like when we see him
inattentive as a young boy in school or when he envisions a strikingly sexy
dance in silhouette while he blows the fan to create the mood. But these are
all hints of character development and nothing more. 
Perhaps I expected more from director Carlos Saura, who made the flamenco
masterpiece "Carmen," a film of unbridled passions in every sense of the word
and strong characters. If you want tango dancing and colorful, imaginative
landscapes of color and sound, "Tango" is the film for you. If you like some
human involvement and a meatier story, look elsewhere. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, concerns or comments at Faust667@aol.com or at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com

Author
Pedro Sena

FILM TITLE:   TANGO 
DIRECTOR:     CARLOS SAURA 
COUNTRY:      SPAIN/ARGENTINA 1998
CINEMATOGRAPHY:  VITTORIO STORARO 
MUSIC:        LALO SCHIFRIN 
CAST:         MiguelAngel Sola, Cecilia Narova, Mia Maestro, Julio Bocca
(as himself), Juan Carlos Copes, Juan Luis Galiardo 
SUPER FEATURES:  The Dancing, of course. And the cinematography, too.
(Seen at the 22nd Portland International Film Festival, in Portland, Oregon)
 TANGO should either be considered one of the best designed dancing films
ever made, or simply an exercise in defining what the beauty of dancing can
be like that most of us will never catch in any theater in our lives.
 The inevitable comparison to this film, AND it is a distant one, is ALL
THAT JAZZ, and only in the design and mix of the Tango and modern dance. The
choreography is astounding, specially when devising the dramatic sequences
that this film creates for our imagination. I am not sure that many of us
can get this much WOW factor in the best show that we have ever seen. Add to
that a cinematographer that is capable of using light so well, and we have a
very beautifully made film, that even though it lags here and there, still
it comes off as great, and magnificent.
 There is a fine line when a film could be considered too artsy, to the
point of getting close to being a bore, and this film finds a way to tamper
that with fiery dancing sequences, that pretty much tell the story of the
film, even suggesting such dramatic opinions of history like it was the
Tango that helped people in Argentina come out of the depression in the
early 30's. A dance that helped people define and appreciate their culture,
if there is such a thing.
 The difficult thing in this film, is having the patience to sit through it
and make an attempt to find a story, which is rather lost in the film within
a film thing, that comes clear in the end, but is only suggested early.
However, in the early moments we only see the equipment, and not any
interaction with it. In ALL THAT JAZZ, the Bob Fosse character is totally
involved in his production to a level that is harmful to his health. In this
film, like many before for Carlos Saura, once again, this is the theme, but
Saura is not afraid to admit that it is his life that brings about the art.
Mario, is devising the show he is putting together from his own life,
despite the producers wanting a bit of a piece of fluff instead. Mario, is
learning as he gets older, that it is the women that inspire the Tango, and
it is his new found love that helps define the show. But he is by now well
aware that many of these women will be gone in the next day, and his taking
on a new dancer and lover is the defining moment for his production.
 But if this intricacy of story is not enough, an old story rehashed again,
one can at least take refuge in some of the freshest and best designed
dancing done on film since the ALL THAT JAZZ film. Well, there is more. If
the dancing is not enough, all cinematic styles of shooting are thrown out
the window to create a dazzling array of images with lights, scrims, and
camera movement, watching shadows of bodies dancing together. If this is not
making love to a dance, then the love does not exist, or the dance is dead.
 Carlos Saura has made mostly films that deal with dance, in his time. Even
in his early days, when he did Garcia Lorca's Bloody Trilogy all acted out
through dance, his style has only evolved in that in this film it hits its
heights as a visual art stunningly cinematographed by Vittorio Storaro. His
CARMEN, was very similar but lacked the outlandishly designed sets that this
film has. CARMEN may have the better story, but this film has the better
choreography and style.
 How, then is one to rate a film like this. It's really not a film, in the
sense that its totality is less a film than it is a magnificent evening at
the theater seeing a superb troupe of dancers amidst the best direction and
lights available anywhere. But Mario does tell his story, even from his
young days, when he became involved in it. His painful marriage breakup,
happens at a time when he needs the dance the most. The suggestion is that
his wife was the inspiration for much of his work. An older man, talks about
his days dancing, and how he has lost the joy of dancing since his wife
died. Mario, appears afraid that this will happen to him. While the whole
story is nebulously told, amidst the rehearsals and developing new moments
in his life, Mario manages to show us how his own design and choreography
takes shape. It may be simply the turning on of a fan, that immediately
shows us dresses moving in the wind, to immediately show us how an artist
can easily design and create his choreography. For Mario, it has been his
life, and it is continuing to be so, as Elena walks in.
 Carlos Saura has either elevated the Tango to a level that is beyond film,
or this film is strictly a tribute to it. The visuals add to that immensely.
I am not sure that this film would be as important, or as good as it is,
were it not for the design of the sets and the magnificent choreography that
it is centered around. For this task, three of the world's best considered
Tango masters took on the honors, and one of them is the tireless instructor
helping the young dancers go through their steps. Even though he is a much
older man, he still has the grace and the beauty that the Tango demands, and
he is not afraid to show it to his students.
 A truly beautiful film, if there is such a thing, although this reviewer
might have suggested that it need not be so darkly done. Colors everywhere
accentuate the dances and the choreography by Juan Carlos Copes, Carlos
Rivarola and Ann Maria Stekelman to make this a worthy candidate for the
Oscar for best Foreign Language Film. With masters like Vittorio Storaro at
the helm of the cameras, it shouldn't hurt its chances.
 If you like dance, of any kind, this film is for you. If you like steroid
films, please miss this one, or you will be bored senseless. But few films
are capable of elevating anything, specially when it comes to an art form,
and in this case it is impressive what one art form has done for another.
4 of 5 GIBLOONS
Reviewed by Pedro Sena, Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1999. All Rights Reserved.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

TANGO (director:Carlos Saura;  cast: Miguel Angel Sola (Mario Suarez),
Cecilia Narova (Laura Fuentes), Mia Maestro (Elena Flores) Juan Carlos
Copes (Carlos Nebbia), Carlos
 Rivarola (Ernesto Landi), Julio Bocca (as himself), Juan Luis Galiardo
(Angelo Larroca), 1998-Argentinia/Spain)
Tango is a romantic musical, supposedly influenced by Fellini's 8 1/2,
with political overtones to its otherwise almost mirthful mood, that is,
for a Saura film. He brings back memories of the generals of 1976
Argentina and their overthrow of the legitimate government, emphasizing
in one skit, how so many people just disappeared during that regime, by
showing bodies thrown into a mass grave, giving the film a jolt of
terrifying and evocative fear, that brings about an abrupt but temporary
shift of mood. Saura accomplishes his musical numbers with a rather
terse storyline, which means that if you don't care for the tango, you
could find yourself  bored with this slow-moving story. What is
exceptional about this film, is how superbly choreographed and
stunningly colorful and visionary a spectacle it is, as its
cinematographer is the great Vittorio Storaro (LAST TANGO IN PARIS).
Saura captures the passion of the tango, using Mario (Sola) as his
alter-ego to hold his story together. One of the tango masters, explains
to us that the tango is excellently done when experienced dancers can
perform it, so there is one body and four legs in motion.
Mario is in his opulently decorated apartment, recovering from a broken
leg in a car accident, as the film opens, despondent that his wife Laura
(Cecilia) has left him for another man, presumably a younger man (as far
as I could tell, Mario must be somewhere in his forties). He is busy at
his desk preparing a film that he is directing about the history of
Argentina, starting at the turn of the century. In his vivid
imagination, he intercuts what is currently happening to him with how he
saw things as a child and with what the film he is directing will be
about. All this imagining leaves the audience trying to figure out what
is real and what is illusionary, as the story revolves around his
tremendous passion for the tango and his need to be with a woman who
shares his zest for life, as he wonders if his life has been meaningful.
He meets a 23-year-old novice dancer, through a gangster, Angelo
(Galiardo), who happens to be her live-in boyfriend, and as the main
backer of the film, he requests Mario try her out for a part in the
film. He falls in love with her, and is concerned but not relenting,
when she tells him that if she leaves Angelo, he threatened to do harm
to her. With Elena in the picture, he seems to be over carrying the
torch for his ex-wife.
There is lots of innovative dancing and, by Mario, there is lots of deep
brooding thought about life and what must go into the film to make it
arty. We see see a wind machine and the next thing we see is a sultry
tango being performed, sets are designed out of seemingly thin air,
there are color filters for dance numbers created on the spot, a WEST
SIDE STORY look alike number is shown with all male dancers.
The dancing is good enough to carry this film alone. The tango is danced
with passion by everyone, especially graceful were the two women stars
and the great tango dancer Julio Bocca. But the story, that's another
story, it just didn't seem that important, including the nebulous
surprise ending, which in actuality, detracted even further from the
slight storyline. The only scene of dialogue that I thought was really
well-done, was when Mario was on a dinner date with Elena and was trying
to explain and sell himself to her, telling her how he thought like a
young man. He was eventually able to do this, by just being himself,
after trying to use a few far-fetched analogies, comparing men to women,
that didn't seem to go over with her.
The mood the musical numbers set was so convincingly dreamlike, that for
someone like me, who was born with two left feet, I felt like going to a
ballroom and trying this elegant dance, even if I never danced the tango
before.The dancing remains in my head, and that is what cinema can do to
you when it is so stunning to behold.
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
  "Tango" is film that possesses moments of rare, surreal
beauty, a surprise ending that will knock your socks off, and
one monologue in particular that plumbs the depths of its
principal figure's feelings.  Helmed and written by the most
Spanish of directors, Carlos Saura, it is creatively put
together and suffers only when we measure it against the
films with harsh political edges that Saura made at the height
of his career. During the Franco regime he had to disguise
his censures of the Fascist government through the use of
allegory, dreams and symbols and while there is no need
during this period of liberal, South American governments, to
do so, Saura seems content to make films more for the
tourists than for the politically engaged.  
  In a movie of almost two hours he shows us more about the
tango than we may wish to know at one sitting while the
story--which treats the theme of the circularity of history--is a
trifle underwritten.  Like Saura's previous film, "Flamenco,"
his current work shows us the steps of the dance, gives us
more than a hint about the passions that underlie it, and then
beats the subject to death.  Watching this periodically
involving drama, you might actually wish that Franco--or, in
this case, the Argentine generals that in the mid-seventies
overthrew the legitimate government of that South American
state--were in power for the ten weeks that the movie was
being put together.  "Tango" might then recover some of the
resonance of Saura's early films such as his "Los Golfos,"
which dealt with street kids in much the way that Vittorio De
Sica treated the urban waifs of his own country.  While Saura
continues to be influenced by Luis Bunuel's use of surrealism,
he has shucked off most of his predecessor's preoccupation
with the inanity of the bourgeoisie and the sufferings of the
down-and-outs.
   "Tango" opens on Mario Suarez (Miguel Angel Sola), a
choreographer in mourning for his lost love, as he recounts
his ecstatic days with Laura Fuentes (Cecilia Narova).  When
a mafioso who owns 50% of of Mario's show, Angelo Larroca
(Juan Luis Galiardo), suggests that Mario audition Angelo's
girl friend Elena Flores (Mia Maestro), Mario falls in love with
the 23-year-old beauty and asks her to live with him despite
Angelo's warning that he will kill her if she ever left him.  In
the most touching scene of the movie, Mario is on his first
dinner-date with the young dancer and spills his feelings to
her: "I feel energetic as a boy and want to act like it...I enjoy
a girl of 18.  Is that unseemly?  Where are my youthful
illusions?  I feel my life is superficial and that I'm just trying to
avoid sinking in the muck."
   If only Saura gave more vent to the story!  It's not that the
narrative is original, but the Spanish director shows here that
he has a gift for dialogue as well as for the dance.  Instead,
the exchanges appear to serve largely as a break from the
frequent dancing, though Saura does demonstrate his feel for
variety more than he did with "Flamenco."  He has the men
dancing separately from the women; two women dancing
seductively with each other as do two men; and a variety of
tangos performed in ballrooms as well as on the stage.  Lalo
Shifrin's original score points up the seductiveness of the
music to the tango, while Emilio Basaldua's design
transforms a set in a Buenos Aires suburb into a surreal
dream, vivid with reds while abundant in contrasting whites
and blacks.  People from eight to eighty twist their bodies
bewitchingly.  The most vibrant scene in the film occurs as
the dancers perform a re-enactment of the terror faced by the
people after the infamous coup of 1976 when several
thousand Argentinians simply disappeared. The entire film is
unified by a strong performance from Miguel Angel Sola as
the aging overseer of the troupe.
   Early on, the maestro of the dance company says, "I want
to see one body with four legs."  This statement pretty much
sums up the allure of the tango, perhaps the world's sexiest
dance, and for the major part of the movie we've got bodies
and legs in abundance.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Writer and director Carlos Saura's TANGO, this year's Oscar nominated
foreign film from Spain, is a disappointment in just about every
dimension -- think FLASHDANCE without the flash or drama. TANGO is two
movies, a languid romance that happens off the dance floor and a
lackluster dance film, with its the singularly uninspired choreography.
Rather than sizzle, the best the dancers ever achieve is a small
smolder.
In a year in which some wonderful foreign films such as Thomas
Vinterberg's THE CELEBRATION were not nominated, why TANGO got a
nomination remains a mystery. Recent pictures like DANCE WITH ME and
even the much maligned but energetic THE TANGO LESSON show how naturally
dance and film go together. Saura's TANGO, on the other hand, is
remarkably flat and lifeless.
So much is wrong with TANGO that it is hard to know where to start
discussing it. When the characters aren't dancing, the movie is DOA.
Miguel Angel Sola plays the story's lead, Mario Suarez, with all the
emotive power of a large stone figure. In one of the story's dead-end
subplots, his girlfriend, Elena Flores (Mia Maestro), used to belong to
a Mafia Godfather, who now may be a threat to her. Typical of the
problems with the non-dance "action," is the excruciatingly long scene
of Mario and Elena at a restaurant where they make small talk, very
small talk. She complains that men don't think beautiful women can be
intelligent, and he promises that he doesn't believe that at all. The
scene plays like the cinematic retread that it is.
The tango, described as "one body with four legs," with its carefully
controlled, limited movements is made to look easy and trivial. Whereas
most dance films develop appreciation among the audience for the dances,
this one makes the dances feel like they're being done in slow motion. A
tango can and should be exciting, the opposite of this film. Still, the
dances are preferable to the rest of the story. "What a lot of
nonsense," Mario says at one point. I couldn't have said it better.
TANGO runs way too long at 1:45. It is rated PG-13 for sensuality and a
little profanity and would be fine for kids around 10 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com
