Title
Review for Enfer, L' (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Raymond Johnston
Director: Claude Chabrol
Starring: Emmanuelle Beart, Francios Cluzet
Original screenplay by Henri-Georges Clouzot
This film has not been rated.
     Claude Chabrol was once the driving force behind the French New
Wave. A family inheritance gave him the money to abandon magazine
writing and produce his own films and those of others. His fellow
Cahiers du Cinema writers: Eric Rohmer,  Francios Truffaut, and Jean
Luc Godard soon followed him. Over the next fifteen years the four of
them turned out some of the most impressive films in history. Chabrol
gained the reputation of being the "French Hitchcock." Many of his
films dealt with characters driven to obsession, sometimes even
murder.  Buzzwords for describing his films always included cold,
analytical, detached. His films had little of Hitchcock's trademark
humor. Instead they were simple slice-of-life accounts of characters
becoming unwound.
     Henri-Georges Clouzot, who died in 1977, was also referred to as
the "French Hitchcock". His career is earlier than Chabrol's. His
classics include the original don't-give-away-the-secret-ending film,
DIABOLIQUE, and the taught action thriller WAGES OF FEAR. His ill
health forced him to abandon filming his script for L'ENFER in 1964.
     Just like in Hollywood, France is now relying on retreading safe
existing projects. The thirty year old script for L'ENFER has been
dusted off, given a nineties polish, and put on the big screen. The
resulting film, while neither Chabrol's nor Clouzot's best, is still
good enough considering the famine of watchable French art films  these
days.
     The film evokes Chabrol's early work. A few characters are trapped
in the confines of their own mental shortcomings.  The title roughly
translates to 'the inferno' or 'hell'. The hell is the obsessive
jealousness that lakeside resort owner, played by Francios Cluzet,
feels toward his flirty wife, played by the beautiful Emmanuelle
Beart.
     The truth of what is going is hard to discern, since the film is
most often told from the point of view a psychologically challenged
character who cannot tell fact from obsessive fantasy. The clues, the
overheard words, the remembered incidents, are all suspect of mental
tampering. There is no one correct way to read the 'facts' presented in
the film. Each viewer must decide what has really gone on. If in the
end it is too neatly contrived to be satisfying, at least it gives the
audience credit for being able to think on a complex level.
     What ultimately makes the film worthwhile is Emmanuelle Beart. She
has the difficult task of being a completely ambiguous character, whose
uncertain actions are the core of the film. Francios Cluzet turns in a
completely serviceable performance as the obsessed man. The minor
characters of hotel guests and townspeople all seem natural and
believable in low key performances. Emmanuelle Beart has an odd
connection the screenwriter Henri-Georges Clouzot. Clouzot directed the
original 1949 French version of MANON OF THE SPRING, and Beart stars
in the remake.
     Chabrol is at his analytical best, following characters around
like an invisible voyeur, never cracking a smile, never telling a joke,
never looking away from the unpleasantness. If you happen to catch
L'ENFER and find it interesting, Chabrol's best early work is LES
BICHES, LA RUPTURE, LE BOUCHER.  Among his English language efforts are
TEN DAY'S WONDER with Orson Welles and Anthony Perkins, and BLOOD
RELATIVES with Donald Sutherland..
