Title
Review for Macht der Bilder: Leni Riefenstahl, Die (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
     If you like documentaries (I love them) or if you are interested
in the making of films especially the cinematography and the editing, I
have an excellent film to recommend called THE WONDERFUL, HORRIBLE LIFE
OF LENI RIEFENSTAHL.  It is making short stops throughout the country.
I have also seen this movie referred to as THE POWER OF THE IMAGE: LENI
RIEFENSTAHL.
     Leni Riefenstahl, now aged 90, but looks much younger, was blessed
with being one of the most gifted filmmakers ever.  She was cursed with
having grown up in Germany with her formative years as a dancer,
actress, and finally a film maker and cinematographer being in the
Hitler era.  Unlike many of her contemporaries, she stayed when the
Nazis came to power.  She believed that she was apolitical and thought
that staying in her homeland made sense.  She made the fatal mistake of
agreeing to make a documentary for Hitler of the 1935 Nazi party
congress.
     Her 1935 Nazi documentary, called TRIUMPH OF THE WILL, has been
labeled in retrospect as the most important propaganda film ever made.
She claims it was just a very good documentary for which she worked
almost around the clock editing for 5 months to get it perfect.
     THE WONDERFUL, HORRIBLE LIFE OF LENI RIEFENSTAHL spends a lot of
time asking her in many different ways, why she agreed to make TRIUMPH
OF THE WILL and why she didn't realize that she was glorifying
something evil.  In response she keeps getting upset and saying she was
not pro-Nazi but just pro-German and that she didn't really realize
everything that was going on, etc.  Heavy denial.  You can watch this
part for yourself and see what you believe.
     The most interesting part of the film, has Riefenstahl talking
about making films, about camera work, and about editing.  She became
famous first in the acting of the mountain films of the 20s.  These
were physically challenging films where, without any stunt people, she
had to climb sheer mountain peaks - often barefoot and with no ropes.
Sometimes the scenes required her to be tied up and have simulated or
real avalanches fall on her.  She went from acting to directing during
this period although she stared in some of her movies, e.g., THE BLUE
LIGHT, as well.
     She was an absolute perfectionist as a film maker.  She got Agfa
to design custom film for her that would make blues appear black so
that she could make her mountain pictures appear to have been filmed at
night.
     Her 2 masterpieces were TRIUMPH OF THE WILL and the documentary
about the 1936 Olympics, titled OLYMPIAD.  Hitler did not like the
later because she showed a black American (Jesse Owens) beating
Germany's blue eyed Aryans.
     She was the master of special camera angles.  In OLYMPIAD, her
crew dug holes all over the Olympic field to shoot up at the runners
and pole-vaulters when she wanted that effect.  They tried everything.
Their favorite was a camera on a track that ran with the runners, but
they were not allowed to use it in the end.  For the swimming event she
used 3 cameras including one under water.  They also tried stuff that
proved useless like sending up a balloon with a small camera attached.
Everyday they sent the balloon up, but they never got anything that
made the final cut.  In all she used 35 cameras in Olympiad and shot 4
miles of film.  She then spent 2 years of long hours doing nothing but
editing the film.
     TRIUMPH OF THE WILL got the highest award from the French before
the war.  Even after the war, OLYMPIAD was voted one of the 10 best
films of all time by the Americans.  Soon however, she feel into
disgrace.  She ended up photographing remote African tribes in the 50s.
Given her zeal for perfection she never made any of this footage into a
movie.  By then she has lost all of her equipment and extensive crew.
Today she spends her time making an underwater movie.  Seeing this 90
year old swimming around making movies is amazing.
     THE WONDERFUL, HORRIBLE LIFE OF LENI RIEFENSTAHL is a excellent
film, but it needed Riefenstahl to edit it more!  The editors (Vera
Dubsikova and Beate Koester) made it into a film of 3 hours plus a 20
minute intermission.  At 2:15 it would have been much better.  The
underwater part that takes up the last half hour or so should have been
cut to 5.  The interrogation about why didn't she emigrate in the 30s
was too repetitious and should have been cut in half.  Many times
during the show, she would stop the interview to argue with the
director (Ray Mueller).  She would tell him he was not shooting from
the right angle, he was asking the wrong questions, etc.  This part was
amazing.  You could really experience her energy and her drive for
cinematic perfection.
     I give the movie *** 1/2 and strongly recommend it to all cinema
buffs.  It is unrated, but would probably rated PG.  Kids over 8
interested in movie making or in history would be fine seeing it.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Guy Berliner
Note: This film has also appeared in American theaters under the title,
THE WONDERFUL, HORRIBLE LIFE OF LENI RIEFENSTAHL (1994).  The original
German title, DIE MACHT DER BILDER: LENI RIEFENSTAHL (1993)
     Ray Muller has created in DIE MACHT DER BILDER: LENI RIEFENSTAHL
(LENI RIEFENSTAHL: THE POWER OF THE IMAGE), a sweeping documentary on
the life of the world's most famous woman film director.  Leni
Riefenstahl is an extraordinary and enigmatic woman by any measure.
Starting as a dancer in the 1920's Weimar Republic, she was inspired by
a poster for Fanck's DER BERG DES SCHICKSALS (MOUNTAIN OF DESTINY) to
see the film, and became so captivated by this new genre of epic
mountaineering films that she begged for a role from the director.
>From this she went on to direct her own films in this genre, among them
DAS BLAUE LICHT (THE BLUE LIGHT).  As the Third Reich took hold over
Germany in the '30's, the talented, attractive young lady director did
not escape the attention of the luminaries of the new regime.  As
Riefenstahl watched many of her friends and colleagues in pre-Hitler
German filmmaking leave the country, she stayed on, seemingly unaware
of the turmoil that was to come.  Muller does a good job of probing
Riefenstahl's perceptions of this period.  Riefenstahl viewed Hitler as
just a good patriot who would bring the economy around, put Germans
back to work, and follow egalitarian social policies.  She completely
overlooked the "master race" rhetoric, and chose to believe that that
was not really a central component of Hitler's ideology.  Through
Muller's questioning, we see a defensive Riefenstahl, whose political
naivete is convincing.  But we also see a Riefenstahl who has still not
come to terms with her own moral duplicity.  Riefenstahl convinces us
that she never liked Hitler's more odious propaganda or his vicious
agenda for German supremacy.  In 1934, Riefenstahl made one of the most
famous propaganda films of all times, DER TRIUMPH DES WILLENS (Triumph
of the Will), on the occasion of a Nazi party congress in Nuremberg.
She points out correctly that this film was the only major propaganda
piece she ever produced for the Nazis, and only after much resistance
on her part and the personal pleading of Hitler himself.  She also
demonstrates that the film contained no references to race propaganda
and, far from proclaiming Hitler's belligerent demands for
"Lebensraum," portrays a Hitler who calls for "peace and brotherhood."
She even plausibly defends herself when Muller confronts her with a
telegram she wired to Hitler on the occasion of his lightning conquest
of France in 1940.  The telegram is filled with rapturous praise and
the words, "My fuehrer, no one can equal the greatness of your deeds!"
Riefenstahl, in an interview with Muller, says: "I was ecstatic because
I thought this terrible war would be ended by this stroke! I just
wanted peace and I thought this would bring it!"
     But while Riefenstahl offers us a plausible defense when
confronted with some questions, she is less willing to admit to that
central human failing:  ambition, and the complicity in the crimes of a
murderous regime that it can lead to.  Muller quotes for her extensive
passages from the diaries, dated circa 1932-33, of Josef Goebbels,
Hitler's propaganda minister, detailing his intimate hobnobbing with
various noted German celebrities, including the attractive young
Fraulein Riefenstahl.  When confronted with this evidence, Riefenstahl
outright denies she had anything to do with Goebbels.  She says she
loathed Goebbels, and made early enemies with him, and that all the
quoted passages are fabrications of Goebbels' fevered imagination, or
lies.  These are obviously none too credible charges in light of the
elaborate details Goebbels includes, and the fact that these diaries
were never intended for public consumption.
     Through it all, though, the central theme of Muller's film is not
politics, but aesthetics.  We are convinced by Riefenstahl because she
is a person who is obviously too obsessed with art and aesthetic
perfection to give politics much attention.  As she describes DER
TRIUMPH DES WILLENS, probably her most famous film, she talks mainly of
the many small details which make it the artistic masterpiece that,
ironically, garnered top prize at the Paris Film Festival for that
year.  The politics of the film are, for her, mainly an afterthought.
Having been finally convinced to make the film after great reluctance,
she threw herself into the task with all her creative energies.  Her
"triumph" in this film was in turning what was, after all,  mainly a
parade of talking heads, yelling, screaming, and marching--maybe
exciting if you were there but not a recipe for an exciting film--into
an epic drama of movement.
     Her next great epic documentary, made for the 1936 Olympic Games
in Berlin, was OLYMPIA, another international award-winning film.  She
describes the techniques she used to bring to life the toil of the
athletes, the astounding perseverance of the runners, continuing on and
on in the face of utter physical exhaustion.  In the clips shown, we
see some of the most powerful imagery in the history of sports.  She
describes how she used daring and unprecedented techniques to get these
shots: the trenches she dug in the fields to get unusual angles, the
reversal of the film at certain points to give the divers the
extraordinary appearance of effortless flight, and so on.  This is a
fascinating inside look at the methods of one the great pioneers of
documentary filmmaking.
     Finally, we are ever amazed at the breadth of this woman who,
suffering ostracism and universal scorn in the postwar era as a
"collaborator," managed to pull off a second birth as world traveler,
ethnographer, and underwater photographer.  In the sixties, Riefenstahl
took an abiding interest in the lives and art of the native peoples of
the Sudan.  Taking many trips and eventually spending several years
living full time among the Nuba tribespeople, she captured rare
archival footage of Nuba life and became acquainted first hand with
these people as no European or other outsider had done before.  At the
age of seventy (she is now in her nineties), she got her scuba
certification so she could photograph rare marine life in exotic places
around the world.  Probably the oldest scuba diver in the world, she
had to lie about her age to get her certification!  Concerned about the
perils of pollution, overfishing, and environmental degradation on the
world's sea life, she has joined Greenpeace.
     Muller himself, appropriately enough, has made a documentary
worthy of one of the world's great documentarians.  This film's own
striking attributes include an unforgettable opening scene which is
surely one of the most discordant and dramatic to appear in a
documentary.
