Title
Review for Eight Men Out (1988)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Brian Koller
"Eight Men Out" tells the story of the Black Sox scandal,
the 1919 Chicago White Sox baseball team that threw that
year's World Series.  The film has the over-riding message
that greed is the root of all evil: stingy owners, corrupt
players, and cynical gamblers chase dollars, forfeiting their
future for a brighter present.  Only the sportswriters and
the fans are honest.
The players' owner is Charles Comiskey (Clifton James).  He is 
notoriously stingy, paying starvation wages, and welching on player 
bonuses.  When the team reaches the World Series, the players are 
given flat champagne to celebrate.  This fuels resentment among the
players that makes them susceptible to the influence of gamblers.
There are several very interesting characters in "Eight Men
Out."  The kingpin gambler Arnold Rothstein (Michael Lerner) 
carries a chip on his shoulder against athletes.  This is the result
of ridicule he faced as a child when trying to play sports.  He 
seeks revenge by fixing sports events and taking the profits, but
no amount of money will satisfy his resentment.
Christoper Lloyd also plays a gambler, a former pitcher looking
for a big score.  For once his role is not eccentric.
Once the fix is in, the gamblers get greedy and stop paying off
the players.  "It's all out on bets" is their favorite line.
Several of the Chicago players are in on the fix but play their
best anyway, leaving it to starting pitcher Eddie Cicotte (David 
Straithairn) to throw the games. In the film, I count six World 
Series games that Eddie starts. Web research indicates that 
Lefty Williams pitched and lost three series games but is portrayed 
at that position in the film. Perhaps the two characters were 
essentially combined for dramatic purposes.  Another inaccuracy is 
that the players are tried and suspended apparently during the 
offseason, when in fact they played much of the 1920 season.
The director focuses on one player in particular, and 
surprisingly it isn't Joe Jackson, the most famous of the 
Black Sox players.  The spotlight is often on Buck Weaver
(John Cusack) instead, perhaps because his character is
more eloquent than the simpleton Jackson.  Cusack has several
scenes hanging with kid fans that don't seem completely
credible.
Despite its minor weaknesses, "Eight Men Out" is an excellent
film that demonstrates a love of baseball and the corruption
of character that occurs with greed.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Shane Burridge
John Sayle's film about the 1919 Chicago White Sox scandal (in which 
eight players took bribes to throw the World Series) appeared in the 
middle of a 'baseball movie' revival at the end of the eighties.  The 
reason why it was not as popular as many of the others is simple: it 
does not portray ball players as larger-than-life heroes.  But it's 
easily one of the better pictures.  As would be expected from any Sayles 
production, the ensemble acting is terrific (no one 'star' outshines the 
others); no peripheral character is wasted.  The sense of period is also 
well evoked, aided in part by the leached photography.
The White Sox players are pulled into the fix early on in the story, 
leaving us to watch the Series, game by game, for the first half of the 
film.  It's not like the usual baseball pictures, where we're rooting 
for the team to win, and uplifted by some final spectacular catch or 
home run.  What makes the games compelling are the two opposing factions 
involved - there is always tension, regardless of whether the team is 
winning or losing.  In EIGHT MEN OUT the playing field is more like a 
minefield.  Half of the team doesn't know what the other half (who are 
on the take) are doing.  The half that is on the take are further 
divided - the younger players (John Cusack and Charlie Sheen) don't want 
to look bad, but know that they must 'fail' convincingly.  The coach and 
backstop are by turns bewildered and enraged.  The secret play signals 
become subterfuge.  The fans are confused.  The newspaper reporters (one 
of whom is Sayles, who at one point sings a sardonic version of 'I'm 
Forever Blowing Bubbles') are suspicious.  Behind all of this intrigue 
lie the gamblers, who have made their own arrangements around the fix.  
It's an interesting touch that they have all at one time been sportsmen 
themselves: the idea of playing a game on the level is for rookies.  The 
second half of the film, which is even more complicated, deals with the 
exposure and subsequent indictment of the players.
EIGHT MEN OUT is a fascinating picture because - like Robert Redford's 
QUIZ SHOW -  it deals with an event in history that undermined public 
faith and demonstrated that organized crime was able to corrupt what was 
regarded to be a wholesome, all-American institution.  Notice that while 
the public cries shame, they object to the scandal mainly on principal, 
and that it's the youngsters and the ball players themselves that it 
hits at gut level.  You won't exactly feel sorry for the team (Sayles is 
too smart to be that manipulative), but you will recognize the loss of a 
more innocent time.  The great final scene anticipates Kevin Costner's 
hit of the following year FIELD OF DREAMS, which fulfils many a fan's 
wishes and gives the eight 'Black Sox' a second chance. 


Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Intriguing account of the 1919 "Black
     Sox" scandal, well-directed by John Sayles.  Like MATEWAN, it
     is a good piece of historical story-telling with an
     intentional political edge.  Rating: +2.
     I guess it is official now, at least in my own mind: John Sayles is now
one of the major film directors of the day.  He slowly built a reputation
with RETURN OF THE SECAUCUS SEVEN (which pre-dated THE BIG CHILL but was a
sort of BIG CHILL with real people), LIANNA, and THE BROTHER FROM ANOTHER
PLANET.  But he really scored with MATEWAN, the Eisenstein-esque account of
the coming of the union to a West Virginia coal mining town.  He took what
was reportedly a modest budget and made an epic historical film.  EIGHT MEN
OUT is a cut or two below MATEWAN, but a pretty decent film in its own
right.
     EIGHT MEN OUT is the story of the "Black Sox" scandal of 1919.  In that
year seven players on the Chicago White Sox found themselves between the
carrot of mobsters offering them bribes and the stick of owners who made
large profits but did not pay a living wage and who cheated on their
promises of bonuses.  (The eighth man of the title maintained that he had
never accepted any bribes.)  Watching the results of this triangle from a
distance are, on one hand, sportswriters and on the other, the kids who are
the real fans of the game.  Then some hoods with ties to the notorious
Arnold Rothstein want to fix the World Series but are rebuffed by the
players until one of the players is denied a bonus he was to have gotten if
he won thirty games.  It seems he won twenty-nine and would have won more if
the owner of the club had not pulled him out of some games.  After that,
one-by-one the players surrender to the lure of a little easy money.  The
willingness of the Sox to be bribed starts a sub-plot of betrayal in
Rothstein's organization, a sub-plot (incidentally) that Sayles never ties
up.
     In some ways EIGHT MEN OUT makes a good companion piece to THE NATURAL.
Both are poetically filmed stories of early baseball, criminal influence,
and the ever-present sportscasters' commentary to a public hungry for sports
news.  But, perhaps because it is a true story, EIGHT MEN OUT lack THE
NATURAL's clean and uncomplicated storyline.  Actually, the film is more
likely to invite comparison to MATEWAN with its photography, its historical
storyline, and several overlapping actors (including Sayles himself).  EIGHT
MEN OUT is the best sports film since THE NATURAL.  Rate it a +2 on the -4
to +4 scale.
