Title
Review for Phantom of the Opera, The (1990/I) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The day that Tony Richardson's made-for-television version of THE
PHANTOM OF THE OPERA was due to be shown, my local newspaper did a feature
on it quoting the writer Arthur Kopit as saying, "[After having read the
novel] what struck me was that this story ... wasn't very good.  Still it
captured the imagination of people.  Why?  What bothered me about [the
previous dramatic] versions, what I thought they essentially missed, was
that you never knew why the Phantom was in love with Christine."
     I had very high hopes for this version.  There were four announced film
adaptations in the wake of the success of the Broadway play.  One starred
Richard Englund, whose most famous role was the razor-gloved Freddy Krueger;
one was simply a film version of the musical; one was set in Nazi Germany.
Of the four versions, the only one that sounded like a genuine new
adaptation of the novel was the announced four-hour television version.
Then I read Kopit's quote.
     What Kopit is saying is that he has no respect for the material itself,
only for its ready-made market.  He also thinks that the dramatic versions
missed the point of why the story is popular.  I could easily believe his
comment if it really was the novel that people remember but, in fact, the
book has not been what people have liked.  For most of the years the story
has been liked, Gaston Leroux's novel has been hard to find.  Andrew Lloyd
Webber tells an anecdote about how difficult it was to find a copy of the
novel when he wanted to read it.  The dramatic adaptations that Kopit thinks
missed the point of why the story is remembered are really what made the
story popular.  And here they cannot have missed the point.  Actually I
would contend that they have all missed what I like in the novel, but not
what has made the story popular.
     The novel is about a man with a great intellect and a horribly deformed
face.  All his life he was treated as a freak and just occasionally
exploited for his genius.  Eventually he finds the opportunity to build for
himself an empire in the darkness beneath the Paris Opera House.  There he
can enjoy the music and can be seen only when he wants.  This is Gaston
Leroux's Erik but he has never been done satisfactorily in a film or play.
I had hoped that in the three and a half hours or so of story there would be
time to show Erik's history.  In fact, this version did show Erik's history
but it bore little relation to anything in the novel.
     Kopit missed the point entirely by making his Phantom a petulant young
man (played by Charles Dance of THE JEWEL IN THE CROWN), who is being
shielded by a former manager of the opera house (over-played by Burt
Lancaster).
     Kopit's screenplay intends this Erik to be likable and steers clear of
the question in the novel of whether Erik might be psychotic.  This Erik
does not kill, at least in the course of the film.  Oh, his face may startle
and early on this causes a death, but that does not appear to be Erik's
fault.  This Erik has lost the feel of the sinister and instead controls the
fate of the opera house with practical jokes.  Even the cutting down of the
chandelier is not a murder attempt but an act  of angry vandalism intended
to vent rage and for which the audience was intentionally given time to get
out of the way.  Of course, this Erik had less reason for rage than the one
in the book.  The script claims that Erik's mother at least found his face
"flawlessly beautiful."  In the book Erik's mother gave him his first mask
because she could not stand to look at his face.
     There are a few nice touches to the script.  One of them is the
handling of the issue of how to handle the unmasking.  Sort of independently
of the quality of the rest of the production there is the question of how to
shock audiences when they do see the Phantom's face.  The approach here was
unusual and not badly done, though it was perhaps dictated by the
screenplay's efforts to keep Erik as a romantic Phantom.  Less endearing is
Erik's unexpected forest beneath the ground.  It isn't like the metal forest
of the novel but a real forest with live trees and unexplained sunlight.  It
appears that Erik must have built himself a holodeck.
     Charles Dance is a little whiny for my tastes, as well as not being
sufficiently sinister.  Lancaster as the former manager is overripe and Teri
Polo as Christine Daee (in the book Daae) is unmemorable.  She and her lover
Adam Storke as Phillipe, Comte de Chagney, are pretty people but boring
actors.  (Again, they got the name wrong on the Comte.  The character's name
was Raoul.  Phillipe is the name of Raoul's brother, older by twenty years.)
     The whole mediocre revision of the story is directed by Tony
Richardson, who directed TOM JONES.  I am not a fan of that film but it
certainly was better directed than this slow-moving version.  If I had never
heard of the story before I would have rated this a little higher, but as it
is I would give Richardson's version a low 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     [Postscript: Of the dramatic versions of THE PHANTOM OF THE OPERA I
have seen, I would list them best to worst as: the Webber play (which is
surprisingly faithful to the book), the Lon Chaney film (1925), the Claude
Rains film (1943), the animated cable version (1987) (lackluster but very
faithful to the book), the made-for-television Maximillian Schell version
(1983), the Herbert Lom film (1962), the made-for-television Charles Dance
film (1990), and then there is a very long gap down to Richard Englund's
putrescent version (1989).  I do not count films only inspired by the story,
such as PHANTOM OF THE PARADISE, THE PHANTOM OF HOLLYWOOD, and PHANTOM OF
THE OPERETTA.]
     [Post-postscript:  For someone with a better command of French than my
own: the name of the novel as "The Phantom of the Opera" but in the novel he
refers to himself less dramatically as "The Opera Ghost."  Isn't that
distinction purely on the part of the translator?  Don't both translate to
the same words in French?]
