Title
Review for Big Kahuna, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
17

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
THE BIG KAHUNA (2000) 
Rated R; running time 91 minutes 
Genre: Dramady 
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0189584 
Official site: http://www.lionsgatefilms.com/thebigkahuna/index.htm  
Written by: Roger Rueff 
Directed by: John Swanbeck 
Cast: Kevin Spacey, Danny DeVito, Peter Facinelli
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamskahuna.html
I walked into THE BIG KAHUNA not quite knowing what to expect--and came 
out realizing I had just watched 91 minutes filled with three guys 
jawjackin' about Life, The Universe, And Everything.
Bless its character-driven little heart.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
The three primaries in THE BIG KAHUNA are industrial lubricant salesmen 
who've reached different stages of their lives: Bob Walker (Peter 
Facinelli) is still young and wet-behind-the-ears; as clean-cut as they 
come, Bob is an unabashed Christian who takes his faith and how it 
defines him, seriously--maybe a bit *too* seriously--to the point where 
it seems more a crutch than an aide.  Larry Mann (Kevin Spacey), a 
fast-talking, cynical, take-no-prisoners sort, immediately challenges 
everything that Bob holds dear.  And Phil Cooper (Danny DeVito) is weary 
of it all; having gone through a nasty divorce, and feeling useless, 
Phil is used to Larry's caustic nature, and has seen plenty of Bob-types 
before--but he has reached the point in his life where nothing surprises 
him anymore, and he wouldn't care even if it did. 
While the men are waiting for an important client--a big kahuna--to 
visit them in a run-down hospitality suite in a run-down hotel deep in 
the heart of Wichita, the three discover things about themselves and 
each other that they never realized existed before.
The Upshot:
You must know, straight off, three things about "Kahuna": first, it 
takes place almost entirely in the smallish suite that becomes the bane 
of Larry's existence in the time that he's there; second, what little 
plot there is revolves around the three men's search for Richard Fuller, 
the kahuna in question; and third, the movie is based on a play 
(HOSPITALITY SUITE) - and looks every bit like one.  If you cannot get 
with that, then it's best to exit, stage right.  As for me, in the 
waning days of one of the worst five months of movie releases in recent 
history, and on the cusp of summer's Big! Movie! Events!, a film like 
THE BIG KAHUNA - all talk, little plot, much character development - is 
just what the doctor ordered.    
Obvious comparisons to GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS will be made, especially 
because Spacey was in both.  And while "Glengarry" was in many ways a 
superior film, "Kahuna" has its charms as well; not the least of which 
is the fact that because of its smaller cast, we get to "know" these 
characters a wee bit more, especially the Phil character.  Rumor has it 
that Kevin Spacey, one of the producers of THE BIG KAHUNA, talked Danny 
DeVito into co-starring in the movie under somewhat shady pretenses.  
After seeing DeVito's performance, I can say that the ends very much 
justified the means; shady pretenses or not, DeVito most def steals this 
particular show.
It's been a long time since I've seen DeVito so convincing in a role; 
known primarily as a comic actor (in flicks like ROMANCING THE STONE, 
WAR OF THE ROSES, and his TAXI TV series), not since his turn in L.A. 
CONFIDENTIAL has he impressed me as much as he did in "Kahuna".  Hard as 
it is for me to believe, DeVito outdid even Kevin Spacey, easily one of 
my favorite modern-day actors.  But don't be fooled; as Larry, Spacey 
was no slouch.  It is to his credit that Spacey didn't play Larry like 
part two of his "Glengarry" character, or rest on the laurels of his 
Oscar win in last year's AMERICAN BEAUTY.  A lesser actor might have 
done just that.  Between Larry's  snarkasm  and Phil's 
I-don't-give-a-damn (but, really, I'd *like* to) attitude, "Kahuna" did 
a fine job of showing, in an exaggerated sense, the desperate measures 
taken by men who feel themselves defined as what they do rather than who 
they are--even if those measures are taken only in words.
Of the three men, the least interesting to me was Bob; Peter Facinelli 
was workable in the role, and definitely looked the All-American Boy 
part, but I like my characters with some fat on their cheeks and some 
world-weariness in their bones, thankyewverramuch.  Which is, of course, 
The Point behind Bob's fascination with Phil; impressed by Phil's 
integrity of character (and, conversely, turned off by Larry's seeming 
lack of same), Bob sets out to create character lines in his own face as 
a reflection of what he sees in Phil.  And of course, it ain't that 
easy.  Hmmm...perhaps Bob was somewhat more interesting to me than I 
gave him credit for being.
To be sure, THE BIG KAHUNA had its faults.  Seemingly running without 
focus for much of the first half, the viewer was left to wonder whether 
they were ever going to get to The Point before the end credits rolled.  
And during the first half of the first half, the emphasis seemed to be 
put on one-liners and cute schticks, especially from Larry/Spacey.  But 
once Spacey's and especially DeVito's burners kicked in, "Kahuna" took 
off running, and brought audience members willing to make the effort to 
work with it, along for the ride.  Humorous and intense--especially in 
the final bits--"Kahuna" is a refreshing, though challenging, change of 
pace from the typical summer Hollywood movie.
[Though I do have to wonder whether the guy in my audience that damn 
near busted a gut throughout, was a shill.  Uh, doode, it wasn't that 
funny.  Well, except for that "spoken word" song in the end credits, 
"Everybody's Free [To Wear Sunscreen]".  Now *that* was worth a laugh or 
two].
I have to chuckle at the timeliness of this movie for me; in a few days, 
I'll be headed off to a computer-buyers convention, and very likely will 
be "wined and dined" by Phil, and Larry--and Bob--types, hoping to lube 
me up, so to speak, for my business.  So does that make me a big kahuna?  
Lord, I hope not.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
No, this "talkie" is not for everyone; but it worked for me. I loved THE 
BIG KAHUNA, for all the same reasons I loved its cousin-in-type, 
GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS.  The real surprise for me was, I liked Danny DeVito 
in it even more than Kevin Spacey.  
THE BIG KAHUNA (rating: greenlight): 
Easily one of the better of the "I could watch [insert kickbutt actor's 
name here] read the telephone book" group of films.

Author
Ross Anthony
At Press Day, I spoke with three principals of the film, ironically in a
Beverly Hills hotel hospitality suite...
Danny Devito, Peter Facinelli and John Swanbeck.
(One member of the press joked that this convocation's condiments were far
superior to those in the film.)
DD: "Better than a Cheeseball" (Danny Concurred) that's gonna be my new
line.
DD: He calls me up on a Friday night and says, "The part was written for
you." I say, "Oh yeah right - okay, just send me the script." He goes, "I'll
have someone walk it over tonight ... you can tell me tomorrow." So now I
begin to smell a rat ... "When do you want to do this movie?" He says, "Oh,
we start Wednesday." I said, "Oh, it was a part that was written for me,
huh?" (Laughs.) I says, "The next time I read a script with a liein' bastard
in it I'll send it to you!" (Laughs, in thought) ... Next year Jersey's
gonna make an epic about the phone book and [Kev's] gonna star in it.
(Suddenly more serious.) No, we had a good time, it was a good script, at
the right time. If you recognize that when it comes along, you gotta be open
to it ... you get gifts. This is a gift.
DD: We tossed him around, broke his chops. A couple of workhorses and a new
guy. (Laughs.)
DD: I was able to protect Quentin ... because I was a final cut producer and
there was no way anyone was going to tamper with that script no matter what.
DD: Everybody's free to talk and contribute and put his or her two cents in.
Whoever's setting up the game should make that understood by everybody, you
don't want to turn anything away, somebody might have a good idea.
RA: So what good ideas did you have ... that they used?
DD: What movie? (Laughs all around.) Well, I'm almost finished with the book
so I don't want to blow it. (More Laughs.)
PF: To work with talented actors makes my job easier. But at the same time I
was also fully aware that they're very powerful people and I didn't want to
get steam-rolled by them and be a piece of furniture while it's the Kevin
and Danny show. They are such great inspirations to me as not only actors
[but] as human beings. Kevin's at the top of his game, Danny's very
talented. They could have easily come in and been egotistical control
freaks. Kevin could have completely taken over ... you know he's producing
it as well. That's not how I felt at all ... It was three actors. Names,
egos, everything aside, it was three actors and a director working together
collaboratively, and everyone's opinions, voices, suggestions were valid and
everyone respected each other. We were exploring this piece together, and
learning from each other together. That's another thing I love about them,
they're not afraid to learn and grow.
PF: If I could pick an actor to pattern my career after it would be Paul
Newman, salad dressing and all.
JS: Roger gave me the script in 1991 and I sent it to Kevin with whom I'd
had a long history as one of his acting coaches. We had been looking for a
project to do together on Broadway ... [however] Kevin said, "Look, this
will make a great first small movie to help launch my film company (Trigger
Street)."
(On getting advice as a first time director)
JS: She says, "On a Clint Eastwood set, everyone is so cool because Clint is
so cool." So then I was really terrified because now I've got to go in there
and be like Clint Eastwood. (Laughs.) But the point was well taken and the
next day I went to the crew and said, "Look I'll make a deal with you. I'll
be very clear and decisive about the story we're telling and I will
concentrate on capturing that story with the actors and you guys will be
responsible for capturing it on film."
JS: "Pride and Prejudices," "Chinatown," "Godfather(s)" etc. ... I would
love to work with Susan Surandon sometime and Angelina Jolie. [However] this
is my feminist movie because, there's no women in the movie. Larry's
character has a line, "We're like dinosaurs..." For me the story captures
the way men were used to relating to each other and the way the world is now
challenging them to relate with each other and the old world, old boy
network doesn't really work anymore. There's much more honest intimate
connections that these guys are forced to deal with and that's what we were
going after.
JS: It's a part in Peter's character's life and not what the picture's
about. We don't play down to religion and we don't use it in any
self-serving, manipulative way. Really it's a story of humanity. I know a
lot of very religious people who have seen this film and loved it.
RA: Besides watching "12 Angry Men" and "Lifeboat" videos, what else did you
do to Prepare for this film?
JS: I think it was really key that I made a short film before we shot "The
Big Kahuana." We wrote, directed and produced it. So going through the
process once was probably the smartest thing I'd done. I had the story
direction experience, but I needed to learn the mechanics, I didn't want to
show up and spend 16 days learning who the script supervisor was and what
her job was.
JS: In the middle of editing, Kevin called and said, "We're shooting in
three weeks." So that become our lives for two and a half years.
RA: Now that "The Kahuana" is finished ... will you return to the short?
JS: Well we're thinking of re-shooting it digitally, because we want to get
our feet wet in the digital world. Or maybe making it into a feature.
RA: What was that one precious thing you learned while working on the short?
JS: It really taught me what the producer's job is. So I knew I could make
decisions as a director to do a better job for Kevin. I knew what was coming
down the pike before they happened.
RA: What was the budget for "The Kahuana"?
JS: 1.8 million - it was a passion project.
RA: What film directors have influenced your style?
JS: Mike Nicols and his improvisatory background, he gets great
multi-dimensional performances from his actors by playing a scene in
different ways to see how it looks. Ang Lee of "Ice Storm." Latest mentor is
Kimberly Peirce of "Boys Don't Cry." It was a grave injustice that she
wasn't nominated.
RA: The "Kahuana's" writer, Roger Rueff, was he on your set?
JS: We've known each other a number of years, I knew what he wanted from the
script. I thought movies are an image medium, but working more internally,
we were allowed to use the faces of the actors as our landscapes and the
special effects would be the emotions in their eyes. Roger was, in fact, not
on the set, and that was a request I made of him. I know actors when they're
working on material they love and then the writer shows up ... it brings an
element of consciousness to the work that I like to keep out of the process.
So Roger was only too glad to not get in the way of what these actors were
doing. But I'd call him every day, and play the audio tapes over the phone
to him.
RA: What appears in the film that is purely new that was not in the script?
JS: A little improvisation, but they were very intent on getting Roger's
words down, because they're all actors that admire a good script. Danny
would be up till 3AM memorizing his lines.
RA: If you were given a huge budget, what kind of film would you make?
JS: I'd like to tell a story without dialogue, not to say I want to make a
silent movie. Actually, that's what I tried to do with "The Big Kahuana." I
know the film was wall to wall dialogue. But we should really think as
though we were telling a story without words. So that the movie works on two
levels, there's the brilliant dialogue and then the emotional under level.
The non-verbal fascinates me.
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Don't go into this movie looking for a "good time", cause that's not what
this film is about. Of course, if they had billed this flick as the story of
three men going on and on about God, life and their jobs in a hotel room for
ninety minutes, I doubt the line-ups would be straddled around the block.
You can also forget the subtle hipness of GLENGARRY GLENROSS or the black
humor of AMERICAN BEAUTY, despite the commonality of the sales racket as its
setting, and the re-assessment of one's life, the main course on the menu.
PLOT:
Three salesmen, one quick and honest, one young and religious, and one tired
and fed up of the whole thing, prepare to spend a night entertaining clients
in a hotel room, while they await the arrival of the "big kahuna" (the big
lead). Despite this setup, the film is actually more about the interaction
between the three men, their inner thoughts, feelings and issues.
CRITIQUE:
Talkity-talkity-talkity...this film basically takes place in one room, with
three solid actors babbling away about a lot of stuff that's funny and
interesting, and other stuff that is just slow and repetitive. I actually
had to "tune out" for a few minutes while some of the conversation went back
and forth and back again, only to regain my composure, and re-establish my
connection to the characters. Admittedly, I saw this film while I was pretty
sleepy, so that definitely might've played a factor in the game, but this
certainly is no nail-biter or tension-filled piece, by any stretch of the
imagination. In fact, it's actually more like a play (based on one), with
three characters basically ping-ponging a diverse lot of subjects back and
forth, with the crux of the story centering around the one young man's
progression into the sales game/adulthood. The actors all do formidable
jobs, with Spacey clocking in his usual fast-talking, smart aleck with a lot
of the funnier written lines. Facinelli, definitely one to watch for in the
future, delivers a solid showing as the ultra-straight mid-westerner who's
still wading in a mini-pool of naiveté. And DeVito, who I personally have
been pretty critical against over the past few years, essentially razzing on
his staple performances in various two-bit productions, actually stretches
his thespianatic muscles for a change, and delivers one of the deeper roles
of his career. You can't help but feel the poor bastard's pain all over the
place. Pretty rough.
The film on the whole is actually kind of uneven, with the first thirty
minutes or so concentrating more on the hip one-liners and straight-talking
sales bullshit, while the second half seriously switches into a high
existential mode. Psychology students could have a field day with this film,
with each of the prime players going through some kind of head-trip or
another during the film's quick ninety minutes. Of course, it is ultimately
DeVito's character who seems to anchor the gang's frustration, with just
enough resolve left in his heart to do something about the situation. But
even then, the game is played out mostly in the mind of the viewer. Plot is
actually secondary in this film, with the "big kahuna" dopplegangering as
the big client for whom the boys await, and the mid-life crisis which
DeVito's character is seemingly going through. All in all, this film is to
be suggested to those who enjoy the plotless, deep character studies rife
with conversations on top of conversations, on top of a few more
conversations. But I certainly wouldn't recommend this to anyone really
looking for an interesting "story", which this film only eludes to, or
tension, suspense and drama, three other noticeably absent members of this
film. Like actors and theatre in general? Then see it. Don't enjoy "talky"
movies and think theatre is "boring"? Skip this puppy or wait till video.
That way, you could fall asleep and nobody'll be the wiser.

Author
Jon Popick
Based on Roger Rueff's play `Hospitality Suite,' The Big Kahuna is the
first film to be made by two-time Oscar winner Kevin Spacey's new
production company, Trigger Street Productions.  Kahuna is set almost
entirely in a sixteenth-floor hotel suite in Wichita, where three
industrial lubricant salesmen for Lodestar Laboratories contemplate the
meaning of life while pitching their wares to prospective clients over
hors d'oeuvres and an open bar.
Any film that features salesmen who love to gab risks being compared to
David Mamet's far superior Glengarry Glen Ross.  But Kahuna borrows
ideas from more films than just Mamet's masterpiece.  Since the three
principal actors are crammed into a hotel room for most of the picture,
your mind will likely wander to those rascally kids in The Breakfast
Club.  When they talk about the greatest salesman in Lodestar history,
you can't help but remember the Saturday Night Live skit where the guys
talk up a legend by the name of Bill Brasky.  And when an important
client (`The Big Kahuna') doesn't show up to their meet-and-greet, you
get a little taste of Beckett's `Waiting for Godot.'
Offering little else but dialogue, Kahuna is one of those films where
each character experiences some kind of major life change by the time
the closing credits start to roll.  Bob Walker (Peter Facinelli,
Supernova) is an eager, young, Bible-thumping newlywed with no
experience and even less personality.  Larry Mann (Spacey, American
Beauty) sees a lot of his younger self in Bob, even though he's become a
cynical, middle-aged bully.  Phil Cooper (Danny DeVito, Drowning Mona)
is already over the hill, dreads the prospect of watching his life come
to end, and chooses to fritter his time reading pornography.
As the three bicker about work and religion, it feels like you're
trapped in the room with them  and I don't mean that in a good way.
Kahuna begins and ends fairly promisingly (aside from the obnoxious Baz
Lurhmann song "Everybody's Free [To Wear Sunscreen]' playing over the
closing credits), but the middle is very slow.  It's still worth a trip
to the theatre just to see Kahuna's first-rate acting.  Spacey hasn't
skipped a beat since his [insert award name here] winning performance in
Beauty.  DeVito delivers what could be his best performance to date, and
Facinelli makes the most of his biggest part yet.

Author
Michael Dequina
_The_Big_Kahuna_ (R) *** (out of ****)
_The_Big_Kahuna_ is based on a play (_Hospitality_Suite_ by Roger Rueff,
who also wrote the screenplay), and first-time feature director John
Swanbeck doesn't hide that fact.  Aside from a couple of location
(Wichita, Kansas) establishing shots and fleeting detours into the
outdoors, the film is set in (as the title of the original play implies)
a hotel hospitality suite that serves as the venue of philosphical debate
between three industrial lubricant salesmen: hotshot Larry (Kevin Spacey,
who also produced), veteran Phil (Danny DeVito), and neophyte Bob (Peter
Facinelli).  Not exactly the most promising jumping-off point for an
exciting, thought-provoking drama, but that's exactly what
_The_Big_Kahuna_ evolves into. As the bickering trio's arguments shift
from business practices to how one should practice one's life in general,
Rueff's script freely confronts thorny issues of loyalty, morality, and
religion.  No easy answers are offered, but enough food for thought is
given to nourish just about any conclusions the audience may arrive at.
_The_Big_Kahuna_ is pretty much all talk, but the three actors bring to
the words fire, feeling, and meaning.  Spacey does a good job, but the
role of a sarcastic, flamboyant slickster is one he can easily do while
comatose.  Swanbeck is able to draw out surprising range and poise from
Facinelli, who had previously done little of note in such timeless
classics such as _Supernova_ and _Can't_Hardly_Wait_; the deeply
religious--but _not_ fanatical--Bob is the crux of the story, and
Facinelli  proves able to handle the demanding task.  His performance is
a revelation, but it's not the best; that distinction belongs to
DeVito's.  Usually called on to play the wacky person in the mix,
DeVito's world-wise and -weary Phil is a beautiful work of gentleness and
subtlety.  In a film of large ideas and screaming voices, his center of
calm speaks the loudest.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Scott Renshaw
THE BIG KAHUNA
(Lions Gate)
Starring:  Kevin Spacey, Danny DeVito, Peter Facinelli.
Screenplay:  Roger Rueff, based on his play HOSPITALITY SUITE.
Producers:  Kevin Spacey, Elie Samaha and Andrew Stevens.
Director:  John Swanbeck.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  90 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Raise your hand if the idea of a film version of a single-set,
dialogue-heavy play sets your pulse racing. Keep it up in the air if you'd
like to cross that with a story about the hard-knocks life of professional
salesmen. Now both of you, seek immediate help from Liars Anonymous. 
Stage-to-screen translations are hard enough without dealing with the
inherent limitations of a single location. And you can't imagine there's
anything left to be said about salesmen that Arthur Miller didn't slap a
copyright on fifty years ago. Technical stagnancy and narrative 
familiarity -- yep, sign me up for a double dose of that.
     It's hard not to go into a film like THE BIG KAHUNA without fearing
the worst, which makes it all the more impressive when it turns out to be
a splendid acting showcase with a few eye-opening bits of wisdom. The
story is set during one night in a Wichita hotel hospitality suite, where
representatives from industrial lubricant company Lodestar Industries are
throwing a little party-cum-pitch conference. Larry (Kevin Spacey) is the
pro focused on landing a potentially huge account; Bob (Peter Facinelli) 
is the young research representative with more existential concerns; and
Phil (Danny DeVito) sits somewhere in the middle, trying to balance his
job with the big picture.
     Screenwriter Roger Rueff (adapting his own play HOSPITALITY SUITE) 
writes the kind of snappy dialogue that actors kill for, and all three of
the principal performers tear into it with gusto. Spacey is predictably
sensational as the marketing rep for whom honesty has become a religion; 
there may not be a performer around who can be so pleasantly venomous. It
is surprising to see DeVito match Spacey's stride in what may be his best
film performance ever. Phil's voice of experience carries a regret that's
almost tangible, turning his every utterance into something you trust
implicitly as true and worth knowing. Facinelli has the least eye-catching
role, but that doesn't mean he's a week link; it's just Bob's job to
listen and learn. Between Spacey and DeVito, there's enough blistering
comic dialogue to keep three films afloat.
     There's also a surprising core of understanding in THE BIG KAHUNA
about the nature of salesmanship. The film's hard-nosed philosophy -- 
which wraps God and industrial lubricants in one not-so-tidy package -- is
likely to make plenty of viewers uneasy, but it's a challenging
perspective on proselytizing as a question of product, rather than
process. The subject proves to be only one of several on which Rueff
offers insights that keep you hanging on his dialogue. It's the only way a
talk-intensive film like THE BIG KAHUNA can work: Between the wicked wit
and the provocative ideas, you're too afraid to miss something to let your
attention wander.
     Director John Swanbeck does have some trouble overcoming the inherent
limitations of his setting. He's stuck in that one hotel room for 90
minutes, requiring him to have characters move the furniture around when
something needs to happen besides chatter. He does include a trio of
well-crafted fantasy sequences, including one that makes wonderful use of
Facinelli's resemblance to a certain A-list star in a sequence involving
fancy bartending moves. Still, it's essentially a film in which three
characters take turns talking to each other, a set-up that's never going
to produce the most visually arresting cinema. The only reason to watch
THE BIG KAHUNA is not to watch it, but to listen to it -- to absorb some
fine writing and the work of actors who know what to do with it. It's
enough to remind you that solid execution trumps low expectations every
time.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

BIG KAHUNA, THE (director: John Swanbeck; screenwriter: Roger Rueff/
based on his play "Hospitality Suite''; cinematographer: Anastas Michos;
editor: Peggy Davis; cast: Kevin Spacey (Larry), Danny DeVito (Phil),
Peter Facinelli (Bob); Runtime: 90; 1999)
This is a stagy film adapted from Roger Rueff's play "Hospitality
Suite.''Its about three travelling salesmen attending an industrial
convention, whose Chicago company has sent them to Wichita, where the
company has paid all their expenses. They rent a hospitality suite on
the 16th floor of the hotel, aiming to score a substantial account from
the Big Kahuna, Dick Fuller, who is the head of a big industrial
corporation. He is someone they have never met before, but they want to
sell him industrial lubricants and they want desperately to land this
new account.
"The Big Kahuna" revels in salesmen-talk among the three white Christian
males, two of them, Larry (Spacey) and Phil (DeVito), who are veteran
salesmen, having teamed together for the last twelve years, while Bob
(Facinelli) is a young man who has just recently been hired by the firm
to work in the research department. These three are virtually imprisoned
in their small hospitality suite waiting to meet the Big Kahuna, as the
focus of this claustrophobic film is on their interactions in the
hospitality suite.
The three salesmen are troubled by different personal things in their
life and have a different attitude to their job, and they are each going
through internal changes that are profoundly altering their life. What
comes into question is their opinions on life and death, on God and
morality, and on how they make a living. Their dialogue is acerbic,
witty, and analytical, following in the long tradition of salesmen films
from -- Death of a Salesman, The Tin Men, and Glengarry Glen Ross. This
film tries to get you to see what there is about salesmanship that gets
these men high. In this case, it appears to be in landing the Big
Kahuna. They each are trying to see why he's on top and why they are
chasing after him. What makes this film different than the others, is
its blatant religious message, comparing orthodox religion to what they
do, as both must sell their product. It also shows how after each one's
psyche is stripped clean by the other there is a pause and some lesson
about life has sunk in for the two salesmen who are in a mid-life
crisis, while the younger man thinks he is prepared to go out in the
world feeling that he can do his job without changing his beliefs. The
goal in the movie is not in literally landing the Big Kahuna, but in
finding out what bill of goods each of the men sold themselves to be
working as salesmen.
Larry and Phil have one way of doing things and have no qualms of
incorporating a sales pitch as part of their life. Bob thinks he is
above the fray and he pitches every chance he can get about his belief
in Jesus Christ. His vacuous character and smug outlook on life are
covered by a disarming smile and an eagerness for him to prove in his
actions the words of the Jesus he literally believes in.
Bob is a Baptist, who takes a very non-questioning attitude about
religion. To just look at another woman and lust after her is a sin,
according to the way he reads the Bible. When asked by Larry why he
married his wife, he seems puzzled and can't even say because he loves
her, only that marriage is something sacred to him.
The contrast in their personalities is stark. Larry is all business, he
simply wants to close the sale. He comes into the room pumped for the
convention, using his attack mode to establish how serious he is about
being a salesman. He criticizes Phil for being so placid, for getting
such a small suite, for having the cheap food tray of carrot sticks
rather than the one of stuffed shrimp, and for being burnt-out. He tells
him to go on a vacation. Get a woman.
While Phil is reflective on his life so far, he is contemplating a
career change, now that he is 52 and is painfully divorcing his wife,
after having lived too lonely a life on the road for too long. He now
finds himself suffering from some troubling dreams and questioning what
he believes in. He has always been a charmer, shaking everyone's hand,
trying to please his clients while trying to make the sale, but is
beginning to have doubts about how he has conducted his life.
Larry is the more aggressive salesman, he is always a heart attack away
from every big sale. In contrast, Bob is only in his twenties and
everything seems fresh to him. This is his first time for him on the
road.
When Dick Fuller doesn't arrive at the party the salesmen throw, Larry
becomes confrontational and asks Phil if he spoke to the man himself
about the gathering. When told that he spoke to the secretary, Larry
throws a tantrum and is resigned to going back to their home office
without the new account. But when they start talking to Bob, whom they
forced to act as the bartender, they are surprised to learn that Fuller
did indeed come but was wearing another man's name tag and that Bob
spent the entire evening consoling the tycoon over his recently deceased
dog and then talking to him about Jesus.
Bob then tells the boys about a private party Fuller is attending
afterwards, and that he invited Bob to attend. Larry and Phil can't
fathom how Bob didn't make a sales pitch. But they soon take another
tact and decide to prep Bob on how to get Fuller's attention about their
company's product as they sent him off to meet Fuller, and will await
his return in the hotel room. These two sharp salesmen are reduced to
waiting for this smug kid to come back and tell them he saved their ass.
The irony of their situation is played out in the darkness of the hotel
room, as they stay up late into the night trying to make sense out of
their lives.
These three performers were outstanding, each understanding what their
role called for, each coming through with a marvelous performance. The
only problem with the film, is that it's more of a play than a cinematic
experience. But the insightful dialogue and refreshing dramatics, give
it an intelligent selling point and make it a good product to see.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Christopher Null
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Max Messier.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/085ee8ec9855e55a8825688f0064f096?OpenDocument
When one thinks of a Big Kahuna, Kevin Spacey suits that title just
fine.  When he walks across a room in a scene, all eyes are drawn to his
presence.  His subtle pose and commanding smile act as a strong gravity
that draws all parties' interest.  Spacey's voice carries such
conviction that the most common of situations are made deep when he
speaks of them.  He echoes the great works of Barrymore and Grant and
carries the weight of these acting giants without even a shrug of the
shoulders.
The new film, The Big Kahuna, marks the first venture of Spacey's new
film production company in conjunction with Andrew Stevens's new
production company, Franchise Pictures.  I wonder of Mr. Stevens, a
veteran of late-night Cinemax, thought up the title all by himself.  The
only thing missing is Shannon Tweed.  I guess her acting chops weren't
up to par for Spacey.
The film revolves around the interesting and dramatic world of
industrial lubricant salesman holed up in Wichita, Kansas for one night,
looking for love.  No.no.sorry about that.  Got that mixed up with an
earlier Stevens film, Point of Seduction: Body Chemistry III.  The film
is actually about the interesting and dramatic world of industrial
lubricant salesman holed up in Wichita, Kansas for one night, trying to
`nail' (pun intended) a `Big Kahuna,' a CEO of a major industrial firm
that is looking to do business with some swinging industrial lubricant
salesmen.
The characters in the film are the strongest elements of the piece.  The
portrayal of men at different stages of their lives is brought to life
by the solid acting of Danny DeVito, Peter Facinelli, and Kevin Spacey.
These life stages are well-crafted: the naďve innocent babe with pure
thoughts and without character, the jaded middle-aged guy still fighting
the good fight with both fists, and the reserved older man with the
painful resolutions of a life spent without reward.  The use of mirrors
and dream states of introspection add depth and quality to the plight of
each man's silent and subconscious battle for identity.
The biggest surprise of the film is Peter Facinelli.  The infamous Mike
Dexter from Can't Hardly Wait, one of the best teenage/John Hughesian
films in recent years.  His portrayal of a religious man who would
rather sell Jesus than industrial lubricants is heavy and well-done.
The conflicts he creates with Spacey's character are some of the best
moments of the film and really show off its impressive writing.
The Big Kahuna is an amazing character study and can sit proudly among
any works by Mamet, Allen, Towne, or Schrader.  Anyone that enjoys
tightly woven films revolving around the examination of man's existence
in this somewhat strange thing we call the world will find satisfaction
with this piece of cinema.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Shannon Patrick Sullivan
Directed by John Swanbeck. Screenplay by Roger Rueff, based on his play
"Hospitality Suite". Starring Kevin Spacey, Danny DeVito, Peter
Facinelli. Running time: 91 minutes. Rated AA for offensive language by
the MFCB. Reviewed on August 2nd, 2000.
"The Big Kahuna" is a movie about religion and business. About what
happens when the two ideologies clash, and how they're really not all that
different in the end. It's about how there are some people who are so
caught up in their faith that they're blind to everything else, and how
there are a lot of us, the great unwashed masses, who are stuck in the
middle and just trying to muddle through. And it's about the nature of
God, the ultimate Big Kahuna.
The film takes place over the course of twenty-four hours at an industrial
lubricant convention. Representing Lodestar Industries are Larry Mann
(Kevin Spacey), Phil Cooper (Danny DeVito) and Bob Walker (Peter
Facinelli). Larry is an intense go-getter; Phil is a more laid-back
marketing veteran; and Bob, a devout Baptist, is a fresh-faced novice sent
along for appearances. Their job at the convention is to secure the 
account of Dick Fuller, a major player in the field referred to as the
"Big Kahuna".
The Big Kahuna has promised that he'll come by Lodestar's tiny hospitality
suite at some point during the evening. But he never shows up. Or, at
least, so it appears until Bob (relegated to mixing drinks) mentions a man
he chatted with most of the night. It turns out that this man was Dick
Fuller, wearing somebody else's nametag. Larry is aghast to discover that
he and Bob talked about not lubricants but instead Fuller's dogs, and God,
and life and death -- taboo subjects for a potential client. However, the
Big Kahuna has invited Bob to a private party that night. Larry and Phil
reluctantly send him off, their last chance to secure the important
contract.
"The Big Kahuna" was written by Roger Rueff from his play "Hospitality
Suite". That the movie is based on a theatrical script should come as
little surprise. The emphasis on dialogue is enormous. Apart from the
leads, there is only one other credited performer (Paul Dawson as a
bellboy). The camera rarely leaves the hospitality suite's main room. I
first encountered this type of moviemaking with "Glengarry Glen Ross"
(also co-starring Spacey). That film at least had the benefit of a larger
cast, and I cannot deny that "The Big Kahuna"'s tunnel-vision-like focus
on just the three performers and single set grew tiresome on occasion.
But only on occasion. For the most part, "The Big Kahuna" is a
brilliantly-written, beautifully-acted movie that draws the best out of
its talented cast. It is hard not to enjoy a movie in which the actors are
so obviously relishing their dialogue. Spacey in particular is magnetic --
watching his verbal sparring with DeVito and Facinelli is the oral
equivalent of an Evert/Navratilova tennis match. He brings great energy to
the role, and gets most of the picture's funniest lines. But he does not
treat Larry as a funnyman; Spacey brings a raw, naked truth to the 
character. At one point, Bob and Phil debate whether Larry is honest or
just blunt. "He's blunt and honest," says Phil, and he couldn't be more
right.
DeVito's is a complex role, the sort that surprises you in the end with
just how many layers were revealed. Phil is at a crossroads. At a time
when he is supposed to be settling in and looking forward to retirement in
the not-too-distant future, his life is in an upheaval (he's newly
divorced) and he's looking for direction. I know how difficult that is at
twenty-three; I can only imagine how frustrating and demoralising it must
be at fifty-two. DeVito turns in a sombre, realistic performance that is
intelligently conceived, conveying Phil's inner turmoil in little steps
rather than one big leap.
As the relative newcomer of the trio, Facinelli is challenged to compete
with his veteran co-stars, and does good work. In a way, Bob is the most
difficult role. He believes no more fervently in his religion than Larry
does in marketing, but whereas Larry preaches something most of us can
relate to (namely, business), Bob adheres to something more idealistic,
and hence potentially more ludicrous. Facinelli does an able job of giving
Bob his own strength without seeming too coy or wishy-washy.
And this is important, because it is Facinelli's ability to face off with
Spacey that gives "The Big Kahuna" its impetus and its balance. Both Larry
and Bob are representatives -- priests, in a sense -- of their respective
religions. Bob cannot conceive of a conversation in which God is set
aside. We get the impression that Larry feels the same way about
lubricants, at least for the duration of the convention. They are both
seeking, in their own way, the Big Kahuna. For Larry, of course, this is
Dick Fuller. Nothing is more important than meeting him, courting him,
getting on his side. Bob's "Big Kahuna" is God, but Bob's intentions
toward Him are hardly any different, except that they are spiritual
rather than material. Larry and Bob are opponents in a literal sense, but
they are really preaching the same mindset.
It is Phil, then, who provides the pivotal counterpoint in the movie. He
is ambivalent and uncertain about both God and lubricants. He represents
the average person, who is not so firm in their convictions, and is 
unwilling to give himself over entirely to his faith (be it religion
or lubricants or anything else).
But perhaps "The Big Kahuna"'s most thoughtful observations are reserved
for the title character(s). Fuller is only barely glimpsed throughout the
movie; instead, he is revealed to us through reverential musings. But
Fuller is human, and we discover this only through the one character who
does not worship him. With Bob, Fuller is able to open up, and talk about
something other than lubricants. The implication -- symbolised beautifully
in a dream Phil relates to Larry -- is that maybe God, Bob's Big Kahuna,
is no different. He's just never had anyone to sit down with Him, have a
drink, and chat.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at The Popcorn Gallery,
  http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/TheBigKahuna.html
  _______________________________________________________________________
 / Shannon Patrick Sullivan  | "We are all in the gutter, but some of us \
|       shannon@mun.ca       |  are looking at the stars." - Oscar Wilde |
 \___________________________|__________________________________________/
  | Popcorn Gallery Movie Reviews    www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies.html | 
  | Doctor Who: A Brief History of Time (Travel)            /drwho.html  |

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     When American playwrights want to have a character in a
frustrating, thankless occupation they usually pick that of
salesman.  We have had Arthur Miller's DEATH OF A SALESMAN, William
Inge's DARK AT THE TOP OF THE STAIRS, and David Mamet's GLENGARRY
GLEN ROSS.  Roger Rueff has taken a crack at the same field with his
stage play "The Big Kahuna," which he has now adapted for the
screen.  The plot of THE BIG KAHUNA is fairly minimal.  Two veteran
salesmen and a young representative from research come to a Wichita
hotel to sell industrial lubricants.  The three bounce off each
other as they talk about life, love, business, religion, death, and
each's history.  Almost the entire play takes place in one room with
little more than trimmings taking place outside the room.
     Lodestar Laboratories has sent three salesmen to a fancy hotel
hosting a convention in Wichita.  The three are to run a hospitality
suite.  Phil Cooper (Danny DeVito in one of his best roles ever) has
brought Tom Walker (Peter Facinelli) to his first convention.
Walker is not really a salesman, but was borrowed from R&D because
he had the right sort of image.  The pair is almost directly joined
by the supremely cynical Larry Mann (Kevin Spacey, reprising the
more nasty parts of his personality from AMERICAN BEAUTY), a
salesman with the personality of a thundercloud.  Larry goes
immediately into an angry tantrum because the food Phil has ordered
is not fine enough and the suite of rooms is not big enough.
Observing in timid fear is Bob.  As the three talk we eventually
find out about each of them.  Larry is intentionally crude and cruel
to get a reaction and to get his own way.  He has an unpleasant way
of turning a friendly conversation into a cross-examination.  He
analyzes and examines people around him like specimens on a slide.
Phil is nearly burned out and used up.  Divorced, he lives alone and
nurtures a death wish.  Placid and less intolerant than his long-
time partner Larry, he quietly sits and reads PENTHOUSE magazine
while Larry's storms blow over.  His job is most of his life now.
Young Bob is a Baptist with an urge to draw Christ into every
conversation.
     For any play that is really a filmed conversation, the rules of
plotting are different from most films.  The author only has to keep
the characters together long enough so something interesting comes
out of their mouths.  And THE BIG KAHUNA is a lot closer in style to
WHO'S AFRAID OF VIRGINIA WOOLF and MY DINNER WITH ANDRE than it is
to most films you will see in a theater today.  The film sinks or
swims by how interesting the conversation is and what it tells us
about the people having it.  For much of THE BIG KAHUNA the style is
like the old Sunday morning TV plays that showed modern people in
distress and at the end of a half hour they would smugly point to
religion as the ultimate problem solver.  This almost seemed to be a
longer version of one of those plays.  Toward the end even Bob's
religious fervor comes under attack with a few well-placed verbal
shots.
     The play is written with more symmetry and stylistic
contrivance than is at first apparent.  Each character has a secret
fantasy we see enacted.  The dialog is good dialog and is
engrossing, but that is not the same thing as realistic dialog.
(Ask William Shakespeare.)  In this case the Rueff contrives to have
each of the characters laid bare to the audience.
     This is a film that will not be for all tastes, nor will it
bring in the audiences that an action film would, but it has its
rewards.  If it does not do great boxoffice, at least the production
costs were small.  I rate it 7 on the 0 to 10 scale and a +2 on the
-4 to +4 scale.
     Oh, and the great monologue of advice at the end of the film.
That is "Everybody's Free (To Wear Sunscreen)" by Mary Smich and
read by Baz Luhrmann, and you can find the words at
http://www.thepositivemind.com/HTML/Sunscreen.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
THE BIG KAHUNA is about a lot of things, including God, friendship and
industrial lubricants.  In short, it's about the meaning of life as seen
from the perspective of two mid-Western, veteran, industrial lubricant
salesmen (Kevin Spacey and Danny DeVito) and a fresh young kid from
research (Peter Facinelli) in town together for a convention.
As directed by John Swanbeck and written by Roger Rueff, based on his
play, THE BIG KAHUNA will immediately remind you of GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS,
adapted by David Mamet from his own play.  Although not as good or as
raunchy the Mamet film/play, THE BIG KAHUNA is no less ambitious.
Sometimes seeming to bite off more than it can chew, the film dares to
ask many questions but provide few answers.
What it does most successfully is showcase Spacey and DeVito's acting
talents.  Getting the flashiest role, Spacey, the grand master of the
art of sarcasm, plays Larry Mann, a salesman who is petrified that they
may not have a grand-enough hospitality suite to lure in "El Kahuna
Grande," their biggest potential client ever.  The quality of their hors
d'oeuvres also troubles him.
With the meatiest part, DeVito plays Phil Cooper, a recently divorced
man who pensively ponders what he really wants to do with his life.
Although his good friend Larry knows that success means making the big
sale, a tired and weary Phil isn't sure anymore about anything.  "You
take guys away from their wives for any length of time, and they don't
know how to behave," Phil says, supposedly talking about the other
conventioneers but probably talking more about himself now that he is
wifeless.
Bob (Facinelli) is the most unusual of the characters and the hardest to
peg.  He is an All-American-boy type, who wears his faithfulness to his
wife on his sleeve.  Appearing to be some sort of born-again Christian,
he feels that it's his obligation to turn conversations, including those
with customers, toward his Lord.  The story, which takes no religious
sides, makes his character the most intriguing and the biggest enigma.
One could easily read into his character that he represents salvation,
but there are other possible interpretations.
"You ought to apply for sainthood, Bob," Larry tells him, mockingly
uncomfortable with Bob's faith.  "Competition isn't as stiff as it used
to be."  A likable cynic, Larry loves to taunt Bob and ridicule religion
in general.  "You don't smoke," Larry says to Phil.  "I don't drink.
And Bob here doesn't lust after women.  Between the three of us here,
we're practically Jesus!"
Basically a filmed play, the movie happens almost entirely in a single
room, which is both a blessing and a curse.  Although it can be
claustrophobic, this approach focuses our attention on the acting and
the script and away from such diversions as supporting characters,
props, camerawork and all of the other trappings of traditional motion
pictures.  Most films would quickly become stuffy with this limiting
approach, but it is a tribute to the sharpness of the acting and the
dialog that THE BIG KAHUNA rarely does.  In fact, it is only when the
director tries to open up the play just a bit by including a few brief
dream sequences that the movie goes seriously awry.
A hard-core non-believer, Larry resists attempts to suggest that life
has a bigger purpose than closing the next big sale.  In one of the
movie's best interchanges, Phil suggests certain possibilities to Larry.
"Strange things happen," Phil tells him in summation.  "No they don't,
not unless they're printed in USA TODAY first."
THE BIG KAHUNA runs a fast 1:30.  It is rated R for language and would
be acceptable for most teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

BIG KAHUNA, THE (director: John Swanbeck; screenwriter: Roger Rueff/
based on his play "Hospitality Suite''; cinematographer: Anastas Michos;
editor: Peggy Davis; cast: Kevin Spacey (Larry), Danny DeVito (Phil),
Peter Facinelli (Bob), 1999)
This is a stagy film adapted from Roger Rueff's play "Hospitality
Suite.''Its about three travelling salesmen attending an industrial
convention, whose Chicago company has sent them to Wichita, where the
company has paid all their expenses for them to rent a hospitality suite
on the 16th floor of the hotel, where they aim to score a substantial
account from the Big Kahuna, someone named Dick Fuller, who is the head
of a big industrial corporation. He is someone they have never met
before, but they want to sell him industrial lubricants and they want
desperately to land this new account, it is their only reason for coming
to the convention.
"The Big Kahuna" revels in salesmen-talk among the three white Christian
males, two of them, Larry (Spacey) and Phil (DeVito), who are veteran
salesmen, having teamed together for the last twelve years, while Bob
(Facinelli) is a young man who has just recently been hired by the firm
and works in the research department. These three are virtually
imprisoned in their small hospitality suite waiting to meet the Big
Kahuna, as the focus of this claustrophobic film is on their
interactions in the hospitality suite.
The three salesmen have different things on their mind that is troubling
them and a different attitude to their job, and they are each going
through internal changes that are profoundly altering their life. The
outstanding cast tries to figure out in their own way what they are
doing and why. What comes into question is their opinions on life and
death, on God and morality, and on how they make a living. These are
tough questions and the truth seems to be somewhere in their sales
pitch. Their dialogue is acerbic, witty, and analytical. Following in
the long tradition of salesmen films -- from Death of a Salesman, The
Tin Men, and Glengarry Glen Ross, as this film tries to get you to see
what there is about salesmanship that gets these men high. In this case,
it is landing the Big Kahuna. They each are trying to see why he's on
top and why they are chasing after him. What makes this film different
than the others, is its blatant religious message, comparing orthodox
religion to what they do, as both must sell their product. And how after
each one's psyche is stripped clean by the other, there is a pause and
some lesson about life has sunk in that is pertinent to each. The goal
in the movie is not in literally landing the Big Kahuna, but in finding
out what bill of goods they sold themselves that made them be salesmen.
Larry and Phil have one way of doing things and have no qualms of
incorporating a sales pitch as part of their life. Bob thinks he is
above the fray and he pitches every chance he can get about his belief
in Jesus Christ. His vacuous character and smug outlook on life are
covered by a disarming smile and an eagerness for him to prove in his
actions the words of Jesus he literally believes in.
Bob is a Baptist, who takes a very non-questioning and literal attitude
about religion. To just look at another woman and lust after her is a
sin, according to the way he reads the Bible. When asked by Larry why he
married his wife, he seems puzzled and can't even say because he loves
her, only that marriage is something sacred to him.
The contrast in their personalities is stark. Larry is all business, he
simply wants to close the sale. He comes into the room pumped for the
convention, using his attack mode to establish how serious he is about
being a salesman. He criticizes Phil for being so placid, for getting
such a small suite, for having the cheap food tray of carrot sticks
rather than the one of stuffed shrimp, and for being burned-out. He
tells him to go on a vacation. Get a woman.
While Phil is reflective on where all his best years have gone for him
and is contemplating a career change, now that he is 52 and is painfully
divorcing his wife, after having lived too lonely a life on the road for
too long. He now finds himself suffering from some troubling dreams and
questioning what he believes in. He has always been a charmer, shaking
everyone's hand, trying to please his clients while trying to make the
sale.
Larry is more aggressive as a salesman, he is always a heart attack away
from every big sale. In contrast, Bob is only in his twenties and
everything seems fresh to him. This is his first time for him on the
road.
When Dick Fuller doesn't arrive at the party the salesmen throw, Larry
becomes confrontational and asks Phil if he spoke to the man himself
about the gathering. When told that he spoke to the secretary, Larry
throws a tantrum and is resigned to going back to their home office
without the new account. But when they start talking to Bob, whom they
forced to act as the bartender, they are surprised to learn that Fuller
did indeed come but was wearing another man's name tag and that Bob
spent the entire evening consoling the tycoon over his recently deceased
dog and then talking to him about Jesus.
Bob then tells the boys about a private party Fuller is attending
afterwards, and that he invited Bob to attend. Larry and Phil can't
fathom how Bob didn't make a sales pitch. But they soon take another
tact and decide to prep Bob on how to get Fuller's attention about their
company's product as they sent him off to meet Fuller, and will await
his return in the hotel room. These two sharp salesmen are reduced to
waiting for this smug kid to come back and tell them he saved their ass.
The irony of their situation is played out in the darkness of the hotel
room, as they stay up late into the night trying to make sense out of
their lives.
These three performers were outstanding, each understanding what their
role called for, each coming through with a marvelous performance. The
only problem with the film, is that its more of a play than a cinematic
experience. But the insightful dialogue and refreshing dramatics, give
it an intelligent selling point and make it a good product to see.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Ross Anthony
Didn't get enough of Kevin Spacey this Oscar season? Well, the Kahuana has
got plenty more of that dry dark humor and smug eyebrow raising to quench
your appetite for the snake-tongued hard guy with a heart.
Adapted from its more appropriately named play: "Hospitality Suite," "Big
Kahuana" never leaves a 16th floor Wichita hotel room. But that's okay,
because acting power times three doesn't necessitate a change of scenery -
though direction and script are pretty darned important too. Don't worry,
they're included with the price of your ticket.
Three industrial lubricant representatives discuss sales strategy, religion,
character and carrot sticks vs. shrimp on ice. Spacey plays the aggressive,
no-holds-barred, long-time friend of the depressed, yet sweet Danny Devito.
Facinelli is the new guy, Bob, innocent and perhaps a bit too saintly for
the task at hand.
Spacey is a devilish delight. Devito's films can be hit or miss, but this is
one is certainly more on than off and refreshingly devoid of his Louie
character persona. Facinelli shows great talent and patience with his role,
flaunting his range when compared to that interstellar killer role in
"Supernova."
If we've all got something to sell, what parts do character and integrity
play in our occupational goals? The film explores these questions in a
simple, compelling, entertaining, stage-felt way.
Best quote: "That's the last thing I need to do ... grease another ***hole
for the lubricant industry."
See Ross Anhony's interview with Danny Devito, Peter Facinelli and John
Swanbeck at the website:
http://www.rossanthony.com/interviews/devito.shtml
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Allan Jenoff
Larry (Spacey) and Phil (DeVito) are salesmen for an industrial
lubricants company.  They are hosting a hospitality suite at a 
convention and they desperately need to make contact with a
potential customer, the big kahuna of the title.  With them is Bob 
(Facinelli) who is from the engineering department and there to
be the technical guy and mostly to tend bar. Unfortunately, Larry
and Phil miss the big customer, but Bob talks to him and gets an
invitation to a private party afterwards.  For Larry and Phil this
is the big chance and maybe their last chance.
By their nature, good salesmen must be good psychologists.  And
Larry and Phil reveal that they know a lot about human nature.  We
learn this as they analyze each other for Bob's benefit and even
more so as they start to analyze Bob's motives.  
All this talk is very interesting and I'm sure the play the film
is based on is very good.  But the movie is claustrophobic (with a
few short exceptions it takes place in one small room) and it fails
to make us interested in any of the characters with the exception
of Phil.  The writing reminds one of Mamet, but second rate Mamet.
And the acting, with the exception of DeVito who seems to find 
some depth in his character, is two dimensional.
Spacey is a hot commodity these days and this film is getting a lot
of hype.  Don't be fooled.  

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Some actors were born to play scam artists.  Alec Baldwin
as chief huckster Blake in "Glengarry Glen Ross." Ben Affleck
in a similar role as Jim Young in "Boiler Room,"  Steve Martin
as Jimmy Dell in "The Spanish Prisoner."  Kevin Spacey as
an industrial lubricants salesman, Larry, in "The Big Kahuna." 
There's one difference, though.  In "Kahuna," written by
Roger Rueff from his play "Hospitality Suite" and directed by
first-time helmer John Swanbeck, Spacey comes across as
huckster in the initial part of the story, the comic scenes. His
con-man guise gradually fades as Swanbeck moves him into
the second part: a deeper, more intense, more human portion
of the narrative.  By watching this remarkable staged play on
the big screen, we leave the theater with more insight about
the characters and, I dare say, more intuition about
ourselves.  Isn't this what good cinema is all about?
   "The Big Kahuna" exhibits the typical structure of a
theatrical drama--a group of people essentially locked up
together in a room to work out emotional difficulties (a good
example being Eugene O'Neill's "Long Day's Journey Into
Night" in which a single family reveal with brutal honesty the
causes of their tragic lives).  Playwright Roger Rueff is no
O'Neill, but in showing us his trio's long night's journey into
day he cuts through their defenses so incisively that he
reveals the goodness beneath one seemingly shallow man's
bravado and the inanity behind a seemingly principled
character's saintliness.  An older man is the catalyst for the
war between two opposing viewpoints of life, a referee in a
90-minute bout pitting people of contrasting philosophies in
the ring, each taking something from the other that makes
him a better person.
   "The Big Kahuna" is set almost wholly inside a relatively
small hospitality suite on the sixteenth floor of a hotel in
Witchita, Kansas, to be the hub of a business party taking
place in a few hours.  Three marketing reps from a company
selling industrial lubricants--middle-aged, fast-talking Larry
(Kevin Spacey), the older Phil (Danny De Vito) and a nervous
kid on his first real job, Bob (Pete Facinelli)--have been sent
to the Midwest location to sell the company's product.  Their
major target is the president of a client corporation whom the
trio are eager to snare into a big sale.  The big problem is
that the big Kahuna seems to be a no-show, but just as Larry
and Phil despair, they find out from young Bob that this kid
was talking to the man all night.  He was not discussing
lubricants, though; a practicing Baptist, Bob spent the hours
addressing the nature of God with the corporate president.
   "The Big Kahuna" turns our expectations inside out.  As we
observe the cynical Larry deliver quips about beautiful women
and complaints about the cheap look of the room and the
food; as we watch the newly divorced and troubled Phil
reading a copy of Penthouse magazine before the party is to
begin; we imagine that the hero of the evening will be young
Bob, who is pure at heart, a young man who takes seriously
the New Testament concept that if you lust after a woman
you are as guilty as the man who actually commits adultery. 
Having gazed down his priggish nose at the "fallen" men with
whom he is teamed, wearing a shining, metaphoric halo
about his head because he discussed higher things with the
client than plain old lubricants, Bob is jolted, absolutely
stunned, to find that of the threesome, he is the one with the
least character.  How he comes to this cognizance should not
be revealed in a review.  The point of the movie is to have us
indulge the threesome working on one another rather than on
their clients and to discover how each of the three--Phil, who
is tired and looks to another way of life now that he faces his
mortality; Larry, whose repartee hits all the right comic notes;
and Bob, who is so full of his upright self that he cannot
distinguish character from cottage cheese--leave the hotel in
the morning wiser, more attuned, more human. For a script
this trenchant, director Swanbeck and the writer, Roger Rueff,
could not have assembled a better cast than the
extraordinary Kevin Spacey, the remarkable Danny De Vito,
and, big surprise, newcomer Pete Facinelli who as an actor
must have felt like the salesman he is playing.  In a room
with the two greats, he must have been most deeply affected
by the key line in the story.  The cynical Larry asks the kid,
"You think you're ready?" to which Bob answers, "There's
only one way to find out and that is to throw me into the
ocean and see if I can swim."  Larry's retort: "We are about
to throw you off a cliff and see if you can fly."  Bob does
indeed fly as does the whole film.  Well done all around.
Rated R.  Running Time: 91 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Frankie Paiva
Plays that become movies usually have a different feel than normal pictures. 
Few rise above the play on film point, and most often those who see it 
onstage like it the best. The strange Parker Posey comedy The House of Yes 
comes to mind when thinking of the unsatisfactory play to film movie cooked 
up by several independent studios. The Big Kahuna is the same in lots of 
ways. It takes away any chance for visual originality and instead puts the 
movie on the shoulders of the actors. Kevin Spacey, Danny DeVito, and Peter 
Facinelli brilliantly play the main characters. Add Roger Rueff’s smart 
adaptation of his play to the mixture. The result is a comedy turned drama 
that asks serious questions and forces the audience to think. It never dips 
below the satisfactory mark.
Larry (Kevin Spacey), Phil (Danny DeVito), and Bob (Peter Facinelli) 
represent an industrial lubricant sales company. They are attending a 
convention in a Kansas hotel. Larry is an individual who is not afraid to be 
frank when talking to people. He often voices his opinion loudly and says 
what’s on his mind. Phil is an alcoholic who is starting to lose interest in 
the lubricant business. He is Larry’s best friend and acts in a middle child 
way. He rarely participates in Larry’s oral sparring matches and tries to 
promote peace with himself and others. Bob is a young, devout Baptist whose 
religious and traditional ways clash with Larry’s beliefs. All three are 
hoping to catch the grand kahuna. A deal with a company so big, it would put 
their tiny business on the map. As the search for the kahuna goes on, the 
characters begin to search inside themselves for answers to their confusion 
about life, mortality, and the heavens.
It may take place almost entirely in a hospitality suite, but The Big Kahuna 
is never boring or familiar. Things are constantly changing for the trio and 
the script moves around as well. What starts as a wickedly sharp comedy ends 
as a solemn and meaningful drama. There is not as much tension as the recent 
one room drama Deterrence, and in the end that is a better thing. The film 
always moves along in a relaxed and comfortable way. Kevin Spacey is 
marvelous as fast-talking Larry. His performance reminds one that he is not 
only a great leading man, but a creative character actor as well. Danny 
DeVito makes a wonderful recovery from Drowning Mona and Screwed. His 
redemption here gives hope for his next movies. Peter Facinelli is excellent 
as well. While he has been bad in bad movies (like Can’t Hardly Wait or 
Supernova) he shows the excellent promise here that he exhibited in Dancer, 
Texas Pop. 81. When the actors work together, they create a fantastic 
chemistry unseen in recent movies.
The questions asked and advice given from character to character is 
unparalleled. Among the subjects examined are life, death, fidelity, and God. 
Everything has such an air of truth to it. A character will handle and often 
defend their position when met with a judgement of himself in a real way. 
Nothing ever feels fake, and the depth that’s reached is astonishing.
This is a verbal movie of conflicting views. Despite being a tad slow near 
its end, it is always interesting and perfectly fits its short running time. 
The acting is superb, and the script well written. The Big Kahuna should be a 
pleasing surprise for adults. It has the rare qualities of being smart, 
poignant, and reality based. This is a true wonder indeed.

Author
Chuck Schwartz
The Big Kahuna
Rated [R], 91 minutes
Starring Kevin Spacey, Danny DeVito and Peter Facinelli
Screenplay by Roger Rueff; based on his play
Directed by John Swanbeck
website: www.lionsgatefilms.com/thebigkahuna
A couple of things I've noted in other places about plays adapted to the
big screen, compiled here for the first time: They are "places" where
no-name actors can make a name for themselves if their performance is
great and if the film director can figure out how to make one set
interesting. They are opportunities for star-name actors to stretch
their acting chops with "pure" theater in which the odds are much
bigger. If the director can't make it interesting then the job of the
actors is magnified. Simply, if you walk into a theater thinking you'll
see, in this case, Kevin Spacey and Danny DeVito "on stage," and you
walk out thinking you've saved $65+ dollars from the cost of a Broadway
ticket, then they have failed. If you walk in to see Space and DeVito
perform and walk out having seen them transform into Larry Mann (Spacey)
and Phil Kooper (DeVito), then you've experience what would be called in
the theater, a "magic" night.
That didn't happen for the two critics (female) behind me, both of whom
admitted in their post screening talk that they didn't like Spacey's
movies, in general. Cranky admits to no such problem and can point with
great specificity to the point at which The Big Kahuna, essentially
three men in a hotel room, made that transformation from stars
performing a play to great acting performances on the screen. The set-up
.. . .
Mann is the salesman. Kooper the account manager. Both have been sent to
a convention in Wichita, Kansas with the intent of meeting, schmoozing
and signing up potential client Dick Fuller, President of a Company
which is the largest user of industrial lubricants in the Midwest. Third
man on the team, representing the research "brains" of the company is
Bob Walker (Peter Facinelli), a just-married, utterly devout Baptist who
has no idea of the kind of land he has wandered in to. The two veterans
snipe at each other like an old married couple and vie for influence
over the new kid. Both have their minds focussed on landing Fuller's
account as they schmooze a roomful of lesser freeloaders. When Fuller
doesn't show, both know that only the teetotaler Walker, who spent the
evening ineptly tending bar and talking about dogs and Jesus to some old
guy, will survive when the ax falls back at the main office.
Dogs and Jesus. A moment of revelation that hits you before it hits the
poor saps onscreen. Walker, with his priorities all in the wrong place,
essentially exits stage left to allow the veterans take full command of
the screen; characters that have been beaten and know they will never
rise higher in the corporate ranks talk grown-up talk about life, the
universe and everything. This third act alone is worth the ticket price
for it is here you sense all the power that you'd get from watching the
men live on stage.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to The Big Kahuna, he would have
paid...
When you're aware that you're watching a play, The Big Kahuna is a
better than average adaptation. When it hits the magic button, well,
that's what it is. Magic.
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 2000
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com
