Title
Review for Limbo (1999)
Number of Reviews
16

Author
Steve Rhodes
John Sayles (LONE STAR) is one of the world's best cinematic
storytellers.  Typically writing, directing and editing, as he did in
LIMBO, he makes movies the way he wants.  In a time of plodding plots
and silly scripts his works stands head and shoulders above most of the
others.  With meticulous stories containing heartfelt, but never
overdrawn, characters, his work has a subtle honesty that leaves you in
awe of his talent.
Sayles's movies have a strong sense of place and community.  LIMBO is
set in an Alaska populated with ambitious, boastful developers ("Think
of Alaska as one big theme park"), roaming bands of geriatric tourists
and average working class folk.  The latter is the subject of Sayles's
tale.
Joe Gastineau, played with an endearing reserve by Sayles veteran David
Strathairn, is -- or more accurately was -- a fisherman.  His last
girlfriend broke up with him for being "too downbeat."  He's a
middle-aged guy who has never married and doesn't feel the need to talk
about why.  He's the sort who keeps quiet as much because it's a part of
his nature as because there is anything to hide.
Lately he's been casting his glances toward a new singer in town, Donna
de Angelo (Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio).  Donna's a single mom with a
high school daughter named Noelle (Vanessa Martinez).  Although mother
and daughter are both good people, sometimes it seems the only things
they have in common are their allergies.  Donna's allergic to wool and
Noelle is allergic to her mom's boyfriends.
Donna, who has sung in "36 states and the territory of Puerto Rico,"
appears to change lovers faster than states.  Dating guys with "loser"
written on their tattoos, she has sort of a reverse Midas touch when it
comes to men.  Still, she has her limits.  She brags that she has never
stooped so low as to date a drummer.
This time she has her eyes set on Joe, perhaps the only decent man she's
ever sought.  Her life has been coming apart at the seams lately, which
for her is pretty much status quo.  Joe looks like the type of gentleman
that might finally make the difference for her.
Sayles, a sublime stager of subtle movements, has Mastrantonio give a
knowing smile and raise her eyebrows in a tentative, furtive motion in
order to signify her romantic interests.  Later Joe and Donna will kiss
a few times, but nothing will surpass the erotic spark of that earlier
look she gives him.
The chemistry between these two very different types is genuine and
tender.  He loves the outdoors, but she warns him of her loathing for
it.  "Things where you wear gear rather than clothing, I don't do," she
explains.
The story's first half, which is a little too slow and cluttered with
extraneous characters and subplots, is full of ominous tales of horror.
Many scenes set at the town's bar have the locals talking about the
natural dangers of the area.  More fisherman than you can count have
"bought it" in a variety of horrific accidents that have cost them their
lives.  And then there's the winter.  Many end up blowing their brains
out through the depression caused by the cold, the unrelenting darkness
and the lack of gainful employment.
The second half of the story, when the inevitable tragedy strikes, is
when the film really comes into its own.  The three, Joe, Donna and
Noelle, form a sometimes contentious but deep bond during this section.
The story's emotional impact is intense even while the tragedy has an
undeniable tranquility to it.  The characters, which were well developed
in the first half, are finely polished in the last half.
The show's ending will be talked about for years.  Suffice it to say
that I thought it was absolutely perfect.  It is probably proof,
however, that Sayles doesn't test screen his movies or, if he does, he
promptly throws away the survey cards.
LIMBO runs 2:00.  It is rated R for some violence and a little profanity
and would be fine for kids 12 and up.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Michael Dequina
For 99% of its running time, the latest unconventional, uncommercial
opus from writer-director John Sayles clearly had me and the entire
audience with whom I saw it.  _Limbo_ is set in sleepy Port Henry,
Alaska, where lounge singer Donna (Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, belting
her own vocals) and fisherman Joe (David Strathairn), both damaged from
their pasts, take their first, tentative steps in a romance.  One such
step is Donna, reluctantly accompanied by self-destructive daughter
Noelle (Vanessa Martinez), agreeing to join Joe on a boat trip that
quickly goes awry in a number of ways, leaving the three to fend for
themselves against all manner of threats in the Alaskan wilderness.
The audience was completely engrossed by the intelligently crafted story
and involved in these believably complex characters, all terrifically
played by the lead trio (newcomer Martinez is particularly affecting). 
When the ending came, however, everyone was noticeably upset, as was I. 
Without giving too much away, Sayles extends these characters' emotional
limbo into something literal, and while I understand what he was going
for, it doesn't quite work.  Ultimately, he leaves his characters (and
the audience that grows to care for them) in, as one of the definitions
listed in the film's trailer goes, "a state of oblivion or neglect," all
in the name of a gimmick that is less clever than it is fatally
distracting.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com


Author
Christopher Null
     These are words that could be used to describe the emotions of John
Sayles' characters in his latest, LIMBO.  But no, I use them to describe
myself after sitting through his latest little exercise in indie
egomania.
     I can forgive many things.  But using some hackneyed, whacked-out,
screwed-up *non*-ending on a movie is unforgivable.  I walked a
half-mile in the rain and sat through two hours of typical, plodding
Sayles melodrama to get cheated by a complete and total copout finale.
Does Sayles think he's Roger Corman?
     LIMBO is the story of a bunch of deadbeats in a small Alaskan town
who pretty much have nothing to live for, but make a go of it anyway.
These deadbeats include David Strathairn as Joe Gastineau, a washed-up
fisherman, Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio as Donna, a washed-up singer, and
Vanessa Martinez as Noelle, her freakish daughter.
     LIMBO begins as light comedy, with these characters lightheartedly
interacting, and Joe and Donna slowly getting together as a couple.  But
an hour later, Joe, Donna, and Noelle decide to take a boat trip with
Joe's deadbeat drug runner of a brother, Bobby, and all hell breaks
loose, leaving them stranded on a cold and wet island off the coast of
Alaska.
     The movie then becomes THE EDGE by way of THE PIANO.  As the trio
tries to survive on nothing, we learn of this little issue of some men
who may be looking for them.  By the end, we've finally started to care
(barely) about these characters, but only after 120 minutes of babbling
and preaching.  The moment of truth arrives.  Roll credits.
     Whoops.  I'd give away the ending but I *can't.*  There is nothing
to give away because there is no ending.  Ho ho, you're supposed to
reflect on the movie and draw your own conclusions.  We're left in
`Limbo,' get it?  Screw that!  Sayles is a hack of the worst sort.
People deserve a little payoff after spending their cash and their time
on a film.  Our crowd would agree.  I've never heard such booing in a
theater in all my life.
     I was going to give LIMBO three stars.  Even though it has fifteen
minutes of a character reading aloud from a book.  Even though my butt
hurt like a nail went through it after sitting in an uncomfortable seat
for so long.  Like I said, I was going to give LIMBO three stars for
giving it the old college try.
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999, ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Author
Greg King
LIMBO (M).  
(Screen Gems/Columbia Tristar)
Director: John Sayles
Stars: David Strathairn, Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, Vanessa Martinez, 
Kris Kristofferson, Casey Siemaszko, Leo Burmeister
Running time: 127 minutes.
Limbo is both a metaphorical and a physical state for the
central characters of this new drama from John Sayles, one of
America's most idiosyncratic yet prolific independent film makers.
His most expensive film to date (with a budget of $8 million), Limbo
is a subtle, yet intelligent and sedately paced character study that
explores themes of isolation, survival and redemption.
The film is set in Port Henry, an Alaskan fishing town that is
about to lose its main source of income, thus throwing it into a state
of economic limbo.  In the film's first hour, Sayles introduces us to
this picturesque town and its rich tapestry of life.  He tracks its
eccentric inhabitants through the busy social fabric of this remote
outpost, where people have been known to go mad and murder people just
to relieve the boredom of the long, frozen winter months.
But the central narrative thread of this subtle, gentle
character-driven drama is the developing romance between two
emotionally scarred people, who exist in their own sort of limbo
within the town itself.
Joe Gastineau (played by Sayles regular David Strathairn) has
been dealt some harsh blows in the past and approaches life with a
sense of reserve and caution.  At college he was a talented basketball
player with a bright future until a crippling knee injury forced him
to give up the game.  Years later a tragic fishing accident left two
people dead, and Joe has not been on a boat since.  He now works as a
handyman, performing odd jobs around the town.
Donna De Angelo (Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, from Robin Hood:
Prince Of Thieves, etc) is a night club singer with an unlucky track
record of boy friends.  Her daughter Noelle (Vanessa Martinez) is
solitary, melancholy and withdrawn, and resentful of her mother's
lifestyle.  Slowly, Joe and Donna form a relationship that brings some
spark back into their lives.
Then Joe makes a fateful decision to go on a boat trip with
his younger, irresponsible half brother Bobby (Casey Siemaszko).
Events take a violent turn when some men with guns board the boat and
kill Bobby.  Joe, Donna and Noelle escape and manage to swim ashore to
an isolated and remote island.  Trapped with little hope of rescue,
the three form a strong bond shaped by a desire for survival.  Sayles
injects some psychological tension into the film as the three struggle
to cope with their inhospitable environment.
It is here that Sayles also pulls off his most annoying
director's trick yet - he finishes the film abruptly with a non-ending
that leaves the three facing an uncertain fate - abandoning them in a
state of limbo, as it were.  The screen suddenly fades to black and
the credits roll, leaving audiences to finish the film for themselves.
If the technology was available, Limbo would be the first film with an
interactive ending in which audiences could vote for the way they
would want it to end.  Instead, audiences emerge from the cinema
heatedly discussing this deliberately ambiguous conclusion.  It's an
effective gambit from Sayles, and marks Limbo as one of his more
interesting movies.
The title has many meanings within the context of this
intriguing film.  The writing is typically strong, and Sayles
beautifully captures the warm emotional journey of the well-developed,
three dimensional characters.  He also subtly depicts the inherent
dangers of this savage and remote wilderness location.
Sayles draws strong performances from his cast, and the
audience develops an empathy with them and their plight.  Strathairn
brings a wonderfully haunted and vulnerable air to his understated
performance here, while Mastrantonio initially has a brassy confident
persona that hides her own vulnerability and emotional pain.  The
nicely laid back Kris Kristofferson brings an ambivalent quality to
his small role as a pilot who "shares a past" with Joe.
Limbo is a richly rewarding experience, but it's also at times
a frustrating film that sticks in the mind long after the credits have
finished!

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Columbia Pictures
 Director:  John Sayles
 Writer:  John Sayles
 Cast: Michael Laskin, Leo Burmester, Heminio Ramos, Dawn
McInturff, Vanessa Martinez, David Strathairn, Tom Biss,
Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, Kris Kristofferson,
   Back in 1890 the famous historian Frederic Jackson Turner
declared that the American frontier was closed.  Manifest
Destiny had made its mark, the country had been fully
explored, and presumably only the moon was left to survey. 
Turner should have seen "Limbo," yet another of writer-
director-editor-novelist John Sayles's looks at contemporary
American culture.  Situating his story wholly in Alaska, Sayles
wants to tell us that Seward's Ice Box is at once an
overdeveloped, over-touristed theme park and a yet-to-be-
charted piece of majestic land despite its encounters with
hordes of summer tourists who mostly visit by ocean cruiser
   He tells two stories in one, essentially. The first part
includes a satirical view of a developer who wants to turn the
entire state into a theme park with perfectly safe adventures
for septuagenarian tourists from all over the mainland.  The
balance is a Robinson Crusoe-like melodrama of people
stranded on a hopelessly unexplored and untraveled northern
island to the north of Juneau.  The audience will plausibly be
divided into two parts as well: one with the patience to scan a
slow-moving narrative with just a modicum of suspense but
with an enormously satisfying examination of character; the
other, the sorts who will take in the scenery in much the say
they'd read a novel by James Michener but who, in the final
analysis, might say, "So what?"  Count me in as part of the
former bunch.
   You will need to give the film an hour or so of Robert
Altman-style vignettes to understand its title.  You'll see that
Sayles is dealing not only with the physical limbo
of people marooned on a isolated island but with the
emotional purgatory of individuals who are psychologically
trapped by guilt, introversion, loneliness and bitter memories. 
With excellent rendering of his female characters, Sayles
hones in on two unhappy women: Donna De Angelo, (Mary
Elizabeth Mastrantonio), a forty-ish lounge singer with a
history of marital failure; and her alienated teen-age daughter
Noelle (Vanessa Martinez), a pretty young woman with a
creative mind and complex suicidal tendencies.  While the
unhappy chanteuse seems ready to give up on men,
she is immediately attracted to the brooding loner, Joe
Gastineau (David Strathairn), once an all-American high-
school basketball star whose knee injury disrupted his chance
at a college education, leading him into a career as a
fisherman--which was cut short by his responsibility for two
deaths in a boating disaster.  When Joe's half-brother Bobby
Gastineau (Casey Siernazsko) turns up surprisingly to ask
a favor, Joe, his new girl friend Donna, and Donna's daughter
Noelle are led into the adventure of their lives, once which
wholly belies the cocoon-like safety enjoyed by the elderly
retirees stomping through the historic town of Port Henry.
   If the story lacks the tension which a mainstream audience
has the right to expect of a traditional tale of drug smuggling
and survivalist travel, Sayles probably means his account to
be just that.  With his background (a psychology degree from
Williams College), the director has made quite a name for his
exploration of the contemporary American scene with this
country's diverse population of often disparate fancies.  His
"Lianna," a study of a lesbian affair, is reflected in his current
tale, which includes a business proposition that two gay
women have with a disgruntled boat-owner, Harmon King
(Leo Burmester). His "Brother from Another Planet" proved
that Sayles could develop a character from outer space in a
way that no sci-fi writer had quite attempted before.  If
"Matewan" concerned a West Virginia miners' strike in the
1920's, then "Limbo" would follow up by giving credence to
the grievances of workers in a salmon packing plant. 
Throughout his career, Sayles has shown an ability to handle
many characters within each story.  "Limbo" is Sayles's
territory.
   David Strathairn has come back from his miscasting in "A
Midsummer Night's Dream" (where he seemed more like a
bond trader than a duke) to deliver a delightfully under-acted
portrayal of an loner getting by on odd jobs and treating a
new romantic attachment with all the passion of a kindly
grandfather.  And did you know that Mary Elizabeth
Mastrantonio--who was underwhelming as the colorless wife
of a wealthy Scotsman in Hugh Hudson's "My Life So Far"--
could sing like Judy Collins?  With Vanessa Martinez as the
cranky third wheel of this modern Swiss Family Robinson,
"Limbo" moves at a deliberate pace toward its wonderful,
open-ended conclusion--a Lady-or-the-Tiger resolution that
might well frustrate a mainstream audience but which will
encourage the more imaginative and sophisticated viewer. 
While the few shots of the Alaskan inlets surrounding Juneau
could encourage interest in travel by a movie audience of
popcorn-crunching couch potatoes, photographer Haskell
Wexler never quite gets the opportunity to do much for the
business of the Alaskan Tourist Board.  We'd like to hiss the
full-of-himself developer who'd not mind turning the interior of
the state into a parking lot, but we never do get to see
enough of America's largest state to justify that judgment. 
But we sure get a feel for characters--for their survival skills,
their idiosyncrasies, their hopes and dreams.  If that's what
you look forward to in your movies, you're in for a treat with
this "Limbo."

Author
Stephen Graham
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
John Sayles makes movies the way James Michener wrote books,
traveling to fascinating places and placing imaginary characters
amidst very real situations. Think of the intelligence and creativity
of Sayles' "Secret of Roan Inish," "Lone Star," "Matewan," "Passion
Fish," and "Men with Guns."
Alaska is America's last frontier. Its vast expanse of rugged,
untamed wilderness is both setting and antagonist in "Limbo," the
story of three isolated people who come together to face their own
demons and to explore the very nature of emotional and physical risk
Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio plays a tough, frustrated bar singer with
a troubled, strong-willed teenage daughter, Vanessa Martinez. David
Strathairn is a quiet, traumatized ex-fisherman-turned-handyman who
invites them to join him for a weekend cruise which goes sour when his
half-brother (Casey Siemaszko), who owns the boat, reveals he's being
pursued by killers after a drug deal went bad. Their lives, past and
present, form the crux of the superbly crafted drama which places them
in a life-threatening survival situation from which they may not
successfully emerge, depending on the whim of a quixotic bush pilot
(Kris Kristofferson).  "Limbo" is John Sayles' most unflinching,
daringly original, and powerfully disturbing film, and Mary Elizabeth
Mastrantonio's performance of bruising, heart-wrenching intensity is
definitely Oscar-caliber. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Limbo" is a piercing, suspenseful 8. The ambiguity of its ending may
be frustrating, but your reaction and subsequent conclusion reveal
more about you than about the characters in the film.  Remember,
"limbo" is defined as "a condition of unknowable outcome."

Author
Ian Waldron Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Cornerhouse (Manchester)
Released in the UK by Columbia TriStar on January 21, 2000; certificate 15; 
126 minutes; country of origin USA; aspect ratio 1.85:1
Directed by John Sayles; produced by Maggie Renzi.
Written by John Sayles.
Photographed by Haskell Wexler; edited by John Sayles.
"The nights aren't that long this time of year," a man named Joe says, which 
suggests that it is summertime. But the surroundings are dull and damp, as 
they would be in autumn, and Joe and his companions are shivering and 
worrying about pneumonia, as they would be in winter. This sense of confusion 
persists throughout John Sayles's "Limbo", in which nothing ever really seems 
definite. How intentional the mood is, I'm not sure. I do know that it makes 
for depressing cinema.
"Limbo" takes place around a small Alaskan fishing community, where big 
businessman have begun to exploit the landscape as a sort of giant theme park 
for elderly tourists, who want to see the wilderness, but want it tame. One 
tour guide even takes vacationers into a nondescript local tavern, to talk of 
its "local significance". They click their cameras, muttering and pointing, 
as if they are in a museum, and the locals are exhibits.
Those locals have come to the bar to drown their sorrows. There is no longer 
any great demand for the fish their area produces, so its cannery has been 
shut down, and all its workers laid off. The workers react with neither anger 
nor attempts at positive thinking; they just seem to hang around, confused, 
not knowing what to do.
Sayles, the writer and director, spends time exploring the politics and 
hierarchy of this locale, then selects three main characters and uses them to 
veer off into another direction. The underlying sense of uncertainty is even 
present in the characterisations of these people: Joe (David Strathairn) was 
once a bright and successful chap, who lost a lot of his nerve in an accident 
at sea, and may or may not have recovered.  Donna (Mary Elizabeth 
Mastrantonio), his girlfriend, is a low-rent singer who can't decide whether 
to be a mouthy bitch or a sweet and caring lady. Her daughter, Noelle 
(Vanessa Martinez), is going through a bout of depression that may be typical 
teenage angst, or may be something more sinister.
As the result of plot happenings that are not really relevant here, this trio 
find themselves stranded on a miserable, freezing little island, possibly 
pursued by murderous gangsters. After some initial terror, and worries about 
starving to death, Joe, Donna and Noelle simply gather edible matter, and 
firewood, and do what they can to survive. There's no high drama; everything 
keeps unfolding as vague inactivity.
I suspect this is the intention, judging by the film's title and its cryptic 
ending. Or perhaps the film was loaded with symbolism that I just didn't pick 
up on. "Limbo" is certainly not engaging on a straight dramatic level -- if 
Sayles wanted the material to be taken that way, he would have depicted the 
situation with more raw, menacing detail. Instead, no event seems as 
important in itself than as in terms of some bigger picture; the story is 
constantly moving on, as if to some grand thematic payoff. The payoff never 
comes, and that's the point. We're left in limbo.
This is very watchable: Strathairn, Mastrantonio and Martinez are intense 
performers, and the cinematographer, Haskell Wexler, is a fascinating mixer 
of realistic brightness and rich colours. But "Limbo" is pretty much 
impossible to like, as it deliberately sets out to leave the audience 
unsatisfied.
Next week I'll be reviewing "American Beauty", the current front-runner to 
win the Oscar as best picture of the year. I'll be recommending that film 
because it carefully studies isolation, loneliness and alienation; "Limbo", 
on the other hand, creates such feelings. One character says she knows she's 
in limbo because "it sure ain't heaven and it's too cold to be hell". Not a 
worthwhile experience, then. Sayles should have remembered that before making 
this movie.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, David Strathairn, and Vanessa Martinez
Synopsis: 
Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio is lounge singer Donna De Angelo. Vanessa
Martinez is Donna's teenage daughter Noelle. David Strathairn plays Joe
Gastineau, a handyman who was once a fisherman. They all live in a seaside
town in Alaska, and they all have issues. Donna has survived a string of
failed relationships and her career as a singer hasn't panned out. Noelle
is profoundly unhappy. Joe feels responsible for a boating accident years
ago. The three of them take a boat ride up the Alaskan coast and end up
stranded together on an inhospitable, deserted island. 
Opinion:
Some movies are all about action and effects. A beautiful, high-maintenance
cast of stereotypical characters goes through a prefab movie formula to
entertain us with big budget bangs and booms and give us manufactured warm
and fuzzy feelings. Other, smaller budget movies are more like the small
theater experience. The plot allows the audience to develop empathy with an
ensemble of less than perfect characters. Then the characters are put in a
tight situation or place and all their issues come out. A lesson is learned
or an aspect highlighted.
LIMBO is more like the latter than the former. I'd like to see a theater
version of it someday. Characters in LIMBO behave the way real people might
act. They're not superheroic. They're not overly dramatic, overly
successful, stereotypical, or even glamorous. Everyone stays in character
even when life throws a bunch of dangerous and unexpected curve balls. And
there's no formula to this movie. 
To tell the truth, the editing seems a little choppy in the last part, and
the movie's finale is a complete surprise. But it's good that way. In life
some of the most profound events, friendships, or forks in the road occur
in an unannounced way, sometimes not even recognized or noticed till years
later. LIMBO is sort of like that. Characters make life-changing decisions
and never even realize that they are making decisions. That's the beauty of
this movie. 
Copyright Š 1999 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
     In my review of John Sayles' 1996 film LONE STAR, I wrote that my
initial frustration with the film must have meant that I missed something.
Such was my confidence in Sayles' storytelling that I was convinced I
could find the unifying thematic thread if I just pondered long enough.
In that particular case, I was right.  Sayles' new film LIMBO presented me
with the same initial frustration, and the same determination to find the
one piece that would turn the merely intriguing into the truly brilliant.
And it just wasn't there.
     For the first hour, there are plenty of reasons to believe LIMBO
could be the latest thematically rich cinematic Sayles novel.  The setting
is Port Henry, Alaska, a remote fishing town in the Southeastern islands.
Among the residents is Joe Gastineau (David Strathairn), a former
fisherman turned jack-of-all-trades after a long-ago trauma.  He becomes
interested in new arrival Donna de Angelo (Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio), a
singer who has her own problems dealing with moody teenage daughter Noelle
(Vanessa Martinez) and a string of bad romantic choices.  As Joe and Donna
grow closer, they begin to break out of their protective shells and face
their demons.
     As he has with the settings of most of his recent films -- THE SECRET
OF ROAN INISH's coastal Ireland, LONE STAR's Texas border town, MEN WITH
GUNS' unnamed Latin American interior -- Sayles turns LIMBO's Alaska into
a character as carefully drawn as any of the people.  Here, Alaska has at
least two faces: the raw, blank-slate wilderness that provides escape and
opportunity for new beginnings, and the tourist attraction that provides a
sanitized version of that wilderness.  Sayles offers plenty of local color
with his supporting characters, but it's the way those characters interact
with the place that gives LIMBO weight.  For half the film, LIMBO sets a
tentative romance against a backdrop of civilization trying to claim one
of the few remaining frontiers, even as residents who should know better
keep searching for a predictability that just isn't there.
     I suppose you could see the second half as Sayles' attempt to show
just how far civilization has to go, if you were feeling particularly
generous.  An abrupt twist in the proceedings finds our three principal
characters in trouble, stranded on an uninhabited island after a botched
drug deal by Joe's hustling half-brother Bobby (Casey Siemaszko).  The
metaphorical connections to the three characters' respective troubles are
a bit too tidy -- Joe has two people to save after being responsible for
two deaths, Donna is stuck with a guy she can't run from, and Vanessa has
to confront her sense of isolation.  Even worse, the links to the first
half's portrait of Alaska at a cultural crossroads become tenuous at best.
The second half is solid enough, but it's a jarring shift.  Instead of a
novel, Sayles has written two short stories slammed together in an
uncomfortable fit.
     John Sayles' films are always comparative pleasures in the bigger
picture of filmmaking, with their smart dialogue and attention to human
detail.  Strathairn, Mastrantonio and Martinez all do fine work, with
Mastrantonio providing the added pleasure of performing her own songs in a
beautiful smoky voice.  Sayles has also become a more visually interesting
director with every film, turning in at least one hypnotically beautiful
sequence of Joe returning to fishing (another triumph for cinematographer 
Haskell Wexler).  He can say fascinating things both with his dialogue and
his camera.  In LIMBO, all those fascinating things just don't add up to a
fascinating, unified story.  LIMBO isn't a disappointment because he
doesn't say enough, as in the ambiguous final shot.  It's a disappointment
because he tries to say too much.

Author
David Dalgleish
"It sure isn't heaven, and it's too cold to be hell."
Starring David Strathairn, Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, Vanessa
Martinez, Casey Siemazko, Kris Kristofferson;
Written & Directed by John Sayles;
Cinematography by Haskell Wexler
When John Sayles's career is over, his oeuvre will almost certainly
stand as the most complex, committed, complete attempt by an American
director to portray America in all its variety--not as a mythic land of
freedom and opportunity, but as a place populated largely by ordinary
people struggling to find the right person, to pay the bills, to balance
morality and necessity, to cope with the curveballs life keeps delivering.
Although not all his work is set in the U.S., Sayles is a staunchly
American director, and while other directors tend to focus on specific
elements in American society--Scorcese on the world of the mob, Spike Lee
on black America, Woody Allen on Manhattan intellectuals--Sayles ranges
from the Mexican border to New Jersey turnpikes to the coast of Alaska,
always taking the time to contemplate the small details that comprise the
substance of our lives.
        His films are therefore a remarkable cross-section of the melting
pot--a teenage girl graduating from high school, striking miners in West
Virginia, the middle-aged wife of an academic discovering she is a lesbian,
Mexican immigrants building new lives in a small Texas border town, and
more, and more.  LIMBO brings us to Port Henry, Alaska, painting a few more
tiles in the American mosaic.  The principal players, all superbly
portrayed, are Joe (David Strathairn), a former fisherman and pulp mill
worker who now works as a handyman; Donna (Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio), an
aging harried lounge singer spending a year in Port Henry; and Donna's
daughter Noelle (Vanessa Martinez), a precocious troubled teenager who
resents her mother's string of deadbeat boyfriends and the subsequent lack
of attention she receives.
        Joe and Donna meet in an early scene, circumstances throw them
together, and they embark on a cagy relationship.  There is no love at
first sight, no sense of fate bringing two people together--their
relationship develops as relationships often do (though not in the movies),
incrementally, hesitantly, uncertainly.  Donna sings in a local bar, and
Joe comes to hear her; one night between performances she and Joe have a
straightforward conversation about who they are and where they come from,
the type of conversation two mature people hurt by previous mistakes might
have.  It is a wonderful scene because it seems so uncontrived, so
unassuming.  Given the spate of recent American movies which are either
Tarantino wannabes or slavish purveyors of Hollywood scriptwriting
formulas, it seems extraordinary for two people in a film to have an
ordinary exchange, charged with subtle emotion, fraught with human
vulnerability.
        The film offers many similar pleasures, such as the vivid secondary
characters who bring the community to life: the two women who run a
restaurant and employ both Joe and Noelle, the cannery worker whose boat
they now own, the pilot whose brother died in a boating accident which Joe
survived (Kris Kristofferson), Joe's brother Bobby who thinly disguises his
failures with bluster and false cheer (Casey Siemazko).  Because Sayles
takes the time to linger on the socio-economic realities of the town and
the specifics of place (the dialogue, for instance, is rich in atmospheric
details like the mechanics of fishing and sailing), the characters'
troubles and burdens take on poignancy and authenticity.  It is easy to
care, because if Joe and Donna and Noelle do not exist, people very like
them do exist, in Port Henry or elsewhere.  Despite some concessions to
conventional plotting, the first hour of the movie is a slow, expansive,
absorbing look at life in Port Henry, consciously presented as a
non-simplistic response to the tour-package vision of Alaska as the last
great American frontier, of nature as theme park.
        LIMBO is remarkable because of the vivid clarity with which it sees
its characters and gives them life, engaging our interest--there are two
sequences which I found to be as tense as anything I have seen in a theatre
in recent months, because I was so involved in the inner lives of these
people.  But LIMBO is also difficult and problematic, because it defies our
narrative expectations.  Midway through, the movie shifts gears to become a
harrowing account of flight and survival in the wild, when Joe, Donna, and
Noelle are stranded on an uninhabited island and forced to shelter in an
old house, stripping them of their familiar routines, bringing them to an
impasse where they must confront the stasis of their lives while waiting
for help which may never come.  Both halves of the movie are excellent on
their own, but as a whole it seems disjointed--although this seems to be
intentional.
        And then it ends.  Much has been made, already, about the
provocative ending, which some reviewers seem to dislike because it
violates an unwritten compact between auteur and audience; my problem is
not with the technique as such, but that it makes much of the expository
material in the slow first half seem, in retrospect, pointless.  Still, I
admire Sayles for being brave and foolhardy enough to stick to his guns.
LIMBO is intent on showing us life as it is really lived, not as it is
imagined in fiction.  In fiction, we usually know how the story will end,
or we at least know that it will end.  In real life, you never know what
will happen next, and that at least is also true of LIMBO.
                Subjective Camera (subjective.freeservers.com)
        Movie Reviews by David Dalgleish (daviddalgleish@yahoo.com)

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Limbo is "a place or state of restraint or confinement; an
intermediate or transitional place or state; a state of uncertainty."
The essence of limbo is being between this and that.  Limbo is waiting.
One knows what has passed, but not what is coming.  John Sayles has
constructed LIMBO like a fractal pattern of limbos within limbos.
Alaska is in limbo politically.  And within Alaska the town of Port
Henry is in limbo economically.  And within Port Henry most people are
within a state of limbo in their personal lives.  As the film opens a
major chapter has just ended in the life of Donna De Angelo (played by
Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio).  When the film closes a major chapter in
her life is about to start and there is complete uncertainty as to what
that chapter will hold for her.  The film covers that period of limbo.
It also covers a limbo in the life of Joe Gastineau (David Strathairn),
once a fisherman that he can no longer be and waiting for the next
chapter in his life.
     LIMBO begins with a 1950s travelogue showing what wonderful times
it is in Alaska.  The film has faded, but not as badly as the local
economy.  Hard times have hit in Port Henry, Alaska.  With demand
vanishing for canned salmon the local economy is slowly dying.
Factories are closing one after another.  A few wealthy people plan the
next big thing for Alaska with more enthusiasm than wisdom.  ("Think of
Alaska as one big theme park.")  Within Port Henry people are trapped
between the old and the new.  Their old jobs, mostly in the local
salmon canning plant, are coming to an end.  There may be a future for
Port Henry or there may be just oblivion.
     Donna has for years stayed without commitment with one man and
then another.  In her singing career she does the same.  Currently she
has a not very good job singing in the local saloon.  She has a
troubled daughter, Noelle (Vanessa Martinez), who has seen her father
only twice.  Unknown to her mother, Noelle has a friend and confidante,
Joe Gastineau, and in spite of his much greater age Noelle is starting
to think of him in romantic terms.  Joe used to be a fisherman, but for
his own reasons wants to stay away from the water--not an easy feat in
Alaska.  Donna is sour on all men and barely notices when she meets Joe
that he may in fact be something special.  Still, the two of them build
a relationship.
     For most of the film Sayles lets the story drift along without any
obvious direction.  We just spend time with the three main characters
getting to know them very well.  Noelle is very intelligent but
completely alienated from her mother and is rebelling purely by being
morbid.  The film delves into her relationship with her mother as Donna
and Joe become increasingly serious about each other.  Eventually all
three relationships will be tested by hard realities of survival in the
Alaskan wilderness.
     This is a film that has been wisely cast.  David Strathairn and
Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio are two very fine actors who rarely get the
public attention they deserve.  Certainly they are far more talented
than many actors with much more bankable marquee value are.
Mastrantonio even does her own singing in this film.  Strathairn has
the quiet, likeable stage presence of a Henry Fonda.  Kris
Kristofferson is along with a small role as the bush pilot Smilin'
Jack.
     Sayles's story is an enigma and a curiosity.  It very clearly is
an independent film, because it does some things and goes some places
that are more intelligent than profitable.  Not everyone will be
pleased by some of the decisions that Sayles makes, but on reflection,
it is just those decisions that are the point. I give LIMBO a 7 on the
0 to 10 scale and a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Joy Wyse
Starring: David Strathairn, Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, Vanessa        
Martinez, Casey Siemaszko, Kris Kristofferson
Review by: Joy Wyse, the SILVER Screen Critic
The Thesaurus says that another word for Limbo is Nothingness.  In this
case, it's not true.  There is so much for the viewer in this marvelous
film.  The scenery alone is breathtaking.  Set in the area surrounding
Juneau, Alaska, you find yourself amazed at the endless terrain.  It must
have been what it was like for the pioneers when they first came to
America, just colder.
The main focus, however, is on the characters.  We get to know them as
real people and we understand why they have chosen to live in such a
remote area.  Each has a reason for seeking a `new' life.    We
immediately feel a relationship for David Strathairn as Joe Gastineau, a
fisherman who does odd-jobs rather than face another tragedy aboard a ship
such as the one that killed the younger brother of Smilin' Jack, played by
Kris Kristofferson.    He is making a delivery to the wedding of the
daughter of a prestigious Alaskan businessman.  Various conversations at
the wedding give us great insight into life in Juneau as it isand as they
wish to portray it to tourists.
Also working at the wedding are Donna and Noelle De Angelo.  Donna,
portrayed by Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio is the lead singer for the group
entertaining the guests.  She has suddenly decided to break up with the
bandleader  during a song.  When she walks offstage, she coerces Joe into
taking her into town to pick up her belongings.
Noelle, wonderfully played by Vanessa Martinez, is working there as a
waitress.  She is so good in this role.  You feel all the pain, hurt,
shame, and frustrations that she is going through while watching her
mother again changing boyfriends, this time to Joe.  Her reading of the
diary later in the storyline will definitely move you.
For a while, you think that this is simply a love story, or a story about
Alaska, but it isn't.  It could have limited itself to that and it would
have been very entertaining.  Again, the characters are so perfect.  I
especially liked the two women, who are self-proclaimed lesbians, who
stand up for their rights.  And, there are the graphic scenes in the
salmon packing plant.
When Casey Siemaszko, as Bobby Gastineau, Joe's half-brother shows up,
the plot takes off in another direction.  Survival becomes the big issue. 
 I keep thinking about the end of the movie.  It isn't what I expected. 
When you leave, take another look at the poster.  This film is very good. 
I want to see it again.  I give it a B+.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
Not many notice it, but American cinema wouldn't be the same without
someone like John Sayles.  While many low-budget filmmakers do their
dirty work and move on to bigger things, Sayles sticks with his roots
and keeps on making films that are personal, important, very
independent, and most of all, extremely good.
John Sayles got his directing start in 1980 with "Return Of The
Secaucus 7", an ensemble piece that supposedly inspired "The Big
Chill". He then moved onward, past "City Of Hope" and "Eight Men Out",
to his classic, 1996's "Lone Star"; a tale of a soft-spoken sheriff
uncovering a dark past. Sayles followed that up with last year's
underrated Spanish-language drama "Men With Guns". The man's latest
work is "Limbo", a remarkable, if uneven, independent film that is too
unique to fit into any specific genre.
Like all John Sayles films, "Limbo" takes a while to get going, as we
meet the two protagonists living in Alaska; America's final
frontier. Donna De Angelo (Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio) is a folksy
singer (a la Mare Winningham in "Georgia") whom we first see at a
wedding ceremony in which she is performing for the last time with her
ex-boyfriend (one of many, we are told). Donna's cynical,
self-mutilating daughter Noelle (Vanessa Martinez) is working as a
waitress for the caterer. Donna begs for a ride home with her
daughter's employer, a quiet, secretive man named Joe Gastineau (David
Strathairn).
Inevitably, a relationship begins, but just when you think things
couldn't get any simpler, a few complications arise. As it turns out,
Joe never used to be such a quiet man; that is until he let two of his
friends drown in a fishing accident a few years back. However, Joe has
started to fish again, just as his estranged half-brother, Bobby (Casey
Siemaszko), returns to Alaska. Bobby asks Joe to accompany him on a
"fishing trip", for reasons that he cannot disclose.  Mistakenly, he
asks Donna and Noelle to join them, their best laid plans go very
awry, and they end up in "limbo", called so because "It sure ain't
heaven and it's too cold to be hell."
David Strathairn, a character actor who made his debut in Sayles'
"Return Of The Secaucus 7" comes into his own here as the typical John
Sayles' antihero (a soft-spoken, simple-looking maze of a
man). Mastrantonio (who does all her own singing) is more showy, and
just as good. The action hits a little to quickly in "Limbo", and
there are bits of throwaway dialogue, but it is another great
achievement for Sayles.
It is the ending of "Limbo", however, that will cause the most
backlash. In a very daring move, John Sayles has given "Limbo" an open
ending. Those who read my "eXistenZ" review will know that I enjoy
open endings more than the average person, and in "Limbo", it works
wonders. The ending provoked a collective groan from the none-too-kind
audience, but I thought it to be a move of pure genius. By cutting out
one second of film, Sayles shows the audience the difference between a
Hollywood happy ending and a realistic, inevitable truth.
John Sayles, the most gifted of filmmakers, grips us to the story and
then makes us the characters.  Realism has never been more
thought-provoking. The groan of the audience just goes to show how
involved we are by the end of the film. A landmark moment for John
Sayles, the messenger of independent film.
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://www.angelfire.com/mo/film


Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A single mom songstress who's been moving from loser boyfriend to loser
boyfriend for years with her teenage daughter, meets a nice ex-fisherman in
Alaska, caught up in his own past demons. When the man's deadbeat
half-brother takes them all out for a boat ride, the film suddenly switches
gears, and turns into an all-out battle of self-discovery and survival.
CRITIQUE:
People will be divided on this film. On the one hand, it is a wonderfully
photographed picture set in a lush environment not often caught on film,
Alaska, with genuine performances from all of its main leads, interesting
characters and an ending that might have you appreciating its fresh
unconventionality. On the other hand, it's basically a movie featuring an
Alaskan fisherman who falls for an over-the-hill folkie singer with a messed
up daughter, that runs a little over 125 minutes, moves at a slow pace, and
might have many people screaming "foul" after its anti-Hollywood ending. I
personally reside somewhere in between these two views (I guess you could
say that I'm in "limbo" over my opinion....hehe....sorry, but I had to!),
with heavy kudos to Vanessa Martinez, who played the daughter, John Sayles
for executing an interesting character study inside an unexciting
environment (for me, at least), and the ending, which initially left me
feeling betrayed, but ultimately challenged me to think about the deeper
meaning of this film's message.
The actual goal of the film wasn't to tidy things up nice and cozy, it was
to present us with the lives of various characters interacting amongst one
another under different life experiences, motivations and vulnerabilities.
In the end, I felt as though many of their innermost fears had been
conquered and they were ready to take on the world/or disappear from it. If
you are the type of person who does not like films with open-ended finishes,
you will probably HATE this movie! I personally found it to be a little long
for my taste (I think they could have cut some parts of the daughter reading
endlessly out of the diary), a little boring in others, but overall, it
didn't dull me as much as I thought it would. The screenwriter and actors
should be commended for that, since it was their characters who sparked that
subtle interest within me. All in all, think character study meets THE EDGE
(7.5/10) with an ending that nobody can agree on.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
John Sayles has been nominated for an Oscar on two occasions for Best
Screenplay, one for PASSION FISH and the other for LONE STAR. He is also
well known to support himself as a Hollywood script doctor, and has written
numerous scripts for other directors including THE CHALLENGE for John
Frankenheimer and BREAKING IN for director Bill Forsyth.
Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio made her big-screen debut in Martin Scorsese's
THE KING OF COMEDY (8/10) and followed that up with her infamous role of Al
Pacino's younger sister in SCARFACE (8.5/10). She also starred in a film
called THE JANUARY MAN, directed by her husband Pat O'Connor, with whom she
now resides in London, with their two kids.
David Strathairn began his acting career in John Sayles' RETURN OF THE
SECAUCUS SEVEN. He also starred in six other Sayles movies, including this
one. The San Francisco-born actor graduated from Williams College and earned
another degree from the Ringling Brothers Clown College before turning his
talents to film and stage.
Kris Kristofferson has eight Grammy nominations and the Best Song Grammy
Award for "Help Me Make It Through The Night". In 1970, he won Song of the
Year and Songwriter of the Year awards from the Country Music Association.
The part of Noelle was written for 19-year old Vanessa Martinez, who had a
small but pivotal role in Sayles' LONE STAR, her feature film debut.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
LIMBO (director/writer: John Sayles; cinematographer: Haskell Wexler;
cast: Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio (Donna De Angelo), David Strathairn
(Joe Gastineau), Vanessa  Martinez (Noelle de Angelo), Kris
Kristofferson (Smilin' Jack), Casey Siemaszko (Bobby Gastineau), Kathryn
Grody (Frankie), Rita Taggart (Lou), Leo Burmester (Harmon King), 1999)
An emboldened narrative that weaves a tale around the embittered
characters who live in Juneau, Alaska and struggle to make ends meet and
keep their lives in check. They are in a precarious state of limbo
between the natural beauty of the unspoiled last frontier of Alaska and
the increasing commercialism, where developers want to turn the state
into a theme park.
The three main characters are caught in their own psychological states
of limbo, as fate has made life a tough go for them. They are a former
fisherman and a former local high school basketball star around fifty
years old, now working as a handyman, but who has the opportunity to
fish again, "Jumping Joe" Gastineau (David Strathairn). Then there is
Donna De Angelo (Elizabeth Mastrantonio), a forty-ish singer who reminds
one a lot of Judy Collins, but who has not reached the pinnacle of her
profession and is forced to eke out a living singing in lounges across
36 states and the territory of Puerto Rico. She travels to these jobs
with her sensitive and resentful teen-age daughter who is gifted in
writing stories and is an aspiring writer, Noelle (Vanessa  Martinez).
She is bewildered by her life and feels unwanted and unloved, not
understanding how her mother keeps making wrong choices in the men she
picks for boyfriends and why her real father, a musical composer, is
unheard from. Her anger and disenchantment with life causes her to
perform acts of self-mutilation.
They are really nice people, who each have a story to tell how they got
trapped by their circumstances and how they reacted to it. Donna is the
optimist, who even when she realizes that her career is going nowhere,
still sometimes feels the songs she is singing "hook onto her" and
sometimes that energy revitalizes her and gives her the warm smile she
is capable of having, inspite of all the set backs in her life.
Joe is much more reticent and taken aback by the demise of his once
promising life that went suddenly downhill through unforeseen
circumstances. As a college basketball player he blew out a knee and
lost his scholarship to a California university, returning to Juneau to
work on his own charter boat, where he had a terrible accident when he
and his two best friends got drunk, and while they were sleeping the
boat capsized and he couldn't save his friends, plus he lost his boat
and means of earning a living. This was too much for him to handle and
he lost his will to go on living, withdrawing from people and his life
as a fisherman.
For Noelle, her childhood is a bad memory, and to try to make sense out
of it, she makes up stories, almost sharing the same down-trodden view
of life that Joe has. And when she sees her mother leave her latest
good-for-nothing boyfriend and fall for the quiet nice guy, who is an
avid reader of books and also a rugged outdoorsman, it strikes her to be
unfairly strange that she also had a crush on him.
What is noteworthy about the telling of the story, is how earnest and
real their situation is, and how magnificently graceful the actors are,
slowly revealing the sore points and tender sides of their troubled
souls. This part of the film is played out against the background of an
Alaska being ravaged for business interest, where the locals are being
squeeezed out of their livlihoods. But this is a land of dreams, where
hope is ever-present, even for those who spend their time in the
colorful local saloon, whiling their time away with their own long
stories.
The subplots that develop connect somehow with the main characters in an
effortless way. The veteran fisherman and angry former boat owner
working in a fishing processing plant that is closing down, Harmon King
(Burmester), rails against what is happening to him and to Alaska, as he
confronts the lesbian couple whom he lost his boat to in a business deal
gone wrong. But the two can't even come close to understanding each
other's side. This is the same boat that Joe is able to charter as he
gets back to his love for fishing. It seems whatever you do in modern
Alaska, you have to hurt someone or something, whether intentionally or
not. Sayles plays upon the theme of the two Alaskas, one of the untapped
future, which romantically holds visions of the beautiful wilderness,
the other is the state where tourists come to hear stories about the
past from the safety of a stagnant civilization.
The first part of the story draws the kindred spirits together, as Joe
and Donna seem on their way to finding some happiness together, that
their romanticism will prevail, and that they will not succumb to the
pessimism that surrounds them. But Joe's much younger half-brother,
Bobby (Siemaszko) shows up after a long time of them not seeing each
other, and the two who never lived under the same roof and never had the
same interests in life, but still maintained a distant but cordial
relationship, talk about the father they had, who could not love them.
Bobby innocently gets Joe to go out with him on his charter boat,
concocting some story about meeting some businessmen and wanting to
appear as the head of a business himself, so he needs Joe to act as a
captain while he acts as an admiral. Joe uses this opportunity to lure
Donna and her daughter out to sea, so he can get to know her better.
The second part of the story takes a troubling turn, as the ill-fated
trio runs into a worst karma situation than theirs, that of Bobby. They
end up stranded on a deserted island, with little hope of being rescued,
as Bobby is shot by the drug dealer's enforcers, after a drug deal Bobby
was involved in didn't work out right. They now must learn how to
survive together, as their journey into the interior of the Alaskan
wilderness takes away all the glamor of living away from civilization.
Here the three of them realize how unprepared they are for life in the
wilderness, finding a broken-down abandoned shed to keep warm at night
and signaling for help on an island where no one would logically come
looking for them. The ending of the film is problematic and
inconclusive, though it seems apparent that they are doomed. Smilin'
Jack (Kris Kristofferson) finds them with his small seaplane but can't
take them with him, as he tells Joe that he was hired by two people to
find them. He leaves them there with a faint hope that he will act in a
conscionable way. Smilin' Jack is the brother of one of those who was
drowned in Joe's boat, something that this maverick drug smuggler has
never forgiven Joe for. The film ends with a plane returning the next
day, and the lingering question is, is it a rescue plane or one with the
gunmen aboard? Their fate is tied to how the unscrupulous Smilin' Jack,
ultimately, feels about them.
Many viewers will be disappointed that there is no payoff in the story.
The film was well served by a capable cast; and, even if, its story bit
off a lot of ground to chew, a lot more than it was capable of fully
digesting (too many topics from environmental issues to dysfunctional
families), it was still good storytelling. But it did try to get too
clever with the plot allowing every angle of the character's problems to
fit too nicely together-- there was too much of a parallel symbolism of
the castaways relating to their three lives that was too neat for its
own good.  For instance, Noelle is no longer isolated from her mother
and is forced into accepting her mother's love, Joe has another chance
of saving two people who couldn't before. But this is topped by thought
provoking storytelling, one that was visually stunning as well as
accomplished with mature dialogue.
The film didn't always work, as melodramatics seemed to take away from
the tremendous drive the story had on its own merits as a straight
romantic tale. But what kept it compelling was the human drama, that
made me want to think that the trio had found something on their journey
that they didn't realize that they had before. In any case, one can bank
on a John Sayles film (Lone Star, Matewan, Passion Fish, Men with Guns)
being  interesting and provoking. Though the unresolved ending to the
film might bother some viewers, that of being in a state of limbo is not
the worst way in which to end a film, especially one where the
storytelling itself is the aspect of the film that veers from guarded
hope to fatalism, where each of the characters is seen on this deserted
island as not being able to run away from their problems anymore.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Murali Krishnan
Limbo, a term meaning "a condition of unknowable outcome", is the
perfect title for this film. Not only are most of the characters
mired in this state, but the audience is also thrust into it. This
will appeal to some viewers, but it will undoubtably put off many who
expect a standard narrative. John Sayles has a track record of being
a master storyteller, and because he has established the ability to
successfully construct an unconventional narrative, he is able to
take risks in this film.
Alaska is different things to different people. For cruise tourists
it is a picturesque countryside with quaint attractions. For tour
operators it is potentially "one big theme park." For loggers it is
a treasure chest of available timber. For the local people, it is a
tough place to make a living, but it is a part of who they are. Joe
Gastineau (David Strathairn) has lived there his whole life. He had a
chance to leave to become a college athlete, but injury ended those
hopes. He became a successful commercial fisherman, but a tragic
accident deeply scarred him and made him abandon that line of work.
He has scratched around doing odd jobs and lately he has become
a handyman at a local lodge. Donna De Angelo (Mary Elizabeth
Mastrantonio) is there only temporarily. She is a lounge singer who
is booked in Alaska for a year, and is currently working at a local
bar. She is certainly talented, but a recording career never gelled,
and now she is too old to expect her singing career to amount to much.
Still, she feels enough passion for it that she would feel stifled
doing anything else. Donna has brought along her daughter, Noelle
(Vanessa Martinez), who has slowly drifted away from her mother. The
years of continuous uprooting, moving between schools, and enduring a
string of her mother's boyfriends has left Noelle friendless and
disaffected. Because she blames her mother for these problems, their
relationship has grown tense, although it is apparent they still care
deeply about each other. These three scarred souls form the nucleus of
the story.
When Joe and Donna meet, they hit it off and grow closer gradually.
Although they have different personalities, they have a palpable
chemistry. Sayles develops all the inter-relationships (Joe and
Donna, Donna and Noelle, Joe and Noelle) with care and attention to
detail. All three actors are outstanding in their roles. The standout
is Mastrantonio, who takes what is usually a stereotypical character
and gives it depth. She skillfully displays Donna's passion in the
vocal performances (using her own impressive singing talent), and her
vulnerability in her infatuation with Joe. Strathairn is convincing
as the pensive, brooding Joe, a strong man wounded by self-doubt. The
only flaw with Joe is that his character, as written, is slightly
exaggerated, and his likability is overstated. Besides the main
characters, there are many others who are interconnected. All of them
are developed as important subcomponents, each defining an aspect of
the overall theme.
While the first part of the story builds the relationship between
Joe, Donna, and Noelle, the story abruptly shifts when Joe's half
brother Bobby Gastineau (Casey Siemaszko) enters the picture. Bobby
recruits Joe into doing him a favor, helming his boat for a simple
run. Joe, assuming the trip to be an innocuous one, invites Donna
and Noelle along. When the situation unexpectedly deteriorates, the
trio are forced to abandon the boat, and become stranded on a remote,
unpopulated island. The focus of the story then becomes their attempt
to survive in the wilderness in hope of rescue. In close quarters,
they are forced together closer than they would have imagined. Noelle
finds a diary in an old abandoned shack where they seek refuge, and
the story that unravels from her daily readings are a microcosmic
reflection of the larger story.
The problem that many viewers will have with the film is with the
ending. Without revealing too much, it is enough to state that it
is an unusual conclusion based on the standard flow of typical
dramas. Although it may be viewed as a gimmick, or an attempt at
cleverness, it is a device that was carefully planned by Sayles. The
ending is consistent with with the rest of the story, and it is even
alluded to in more than one way, and thus it is an integral part of
the film.
This is not a flawless film. It has some missteps when using
generalizations to define several of the characters. However, the
level to which Sayles aspires is not imaginable for most filmmakers,
who restrict themselves to easily digestible stories designed for the
largest audience possible. Sayles has the specific intention of making
the viewer an active participant in the story. His idea is to provide
enough material that a rich portrait is drawn with the characters on
screen, and the viewer is allowed to fill in any remaining details
themselves. By doing this, Sayles strives to create a highly literate
film, but risks isolating the part of the audience that desires a
simple passive viewing experience.
This film has a lot in common with Sayles' previous work, "Lone
Star". Both have a rich tapestry of characters whose composite reflect
the personality of the region in which they live. Both feature a
primary plot element which is the most insignificant part of the
story. In this film, the main narrative is merely a skeleton on which
Sayles overlays a story about people.
Highly recommended. This film will definitely not appeal to some
viewers. It will be a disappointment to anyone expecting a standard
narrative. It chooses to minimize the importance of the main plot
and instead, focus all attention on the characters. It is successful
in drawing full portraits of the many individuals and the land in
which they live. It is a typical John Sayles film in which he cares
deeply for his characters and he tells a moving story.
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.
