Title
Review for Extraordinary Visitor (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: John the Baptist is sent from Heaven to see is the world
is worth saving.  He must find some sign of hope in the people of
Newfoundland.  This is little more than a TV skit in movie form.  It is
watchable and apparently will be released to theaters in Canada, but it
is unlikely to be seen on the international market.  It is diverting
but hardly a serious piece of cinema.  Rating: 4 (0 to 10), 0 (-4 to
+4) Minor spoilers in this review.
   - Written and directed by John W. Doyle.
   - John the Baptist sent to St. John, Newfoundland.  Gets an
     invitation to live with a family.  That extraordinary hospitality
     for some reason does not count as a reason for hope.
   - Script has a lot of holes.
   - Friend who adopts John is surprisingly militant and is planning
     actions to destabilize Wall Street.
   - John does look Middle Eastern, but somehow one expects John the
     Baptist to be more dramatic.
   - There is a conspiracy in the Vatican riding on the result of the
     visit, though that result seems small compared to the end of the
     world.
   - Big yucks like seeing a nun give the Pope a pedicure and evil
     Pope's aid praying to a Mendes goat.
   - In large part a satire of life in Newfoundland taking licks at
     things like the poor produce.  The one good tomato in grocery (by
     virtue of a miracle) "must have fallen off the truck to Toronto."
   - Based on a 20-minute short film.

Author
Richard Scheib
Canada. 1998. Director/Screenplay - John W. Doyle, Producers - Paul Pope 
& Jennice Ripley, Photography - Brian R.R. Hebb, Music - Eric Cadesky & 
Nick Dyer, Production Design - Pam Hall. Production Company - Film East 
Inc.
Raoul Bhaneja (John the Baptist), Mary Walsh (Marietta), Andy Jones 
(Rick), Jordan Canning (Alison), Rick Boland (Pope Innocent XVI), Greg 
Malone (Cardinal Vignetti), Janet Michael (Virgin Mary)
Plot: On November 1, 1999 The Virgin Mary appears to The Pope to 
announce that God has decided to shut the human experiment down. John 
the Baptist is sent to Earth to find one last shred of hope. Arriving in 
St John's, Newfoundland, John is taken in by Rick, an electronics 
repairman, and Marietta, his wife who hosts a local tv talkshow. An 
innocent in the 20th century, John is talked  into posing as a millenial 
expert on Marietta's show where his prophesying of the end of the world 
in four days time suddenly gains him a following.
Among the profusion of millennium themed films either being commissioned 
or trying to cash in at the moment, this is one of the few that actually 
uses the date with any significance. Among the majority of other 
millennial films the date is of almost to no relevance. The crucial 
question should be whether it makes any difference to the story whether 
the film is set around the millennial crunch point or upon another date 
to which in most cases the answer is invariably a resounding no.
This Newfoundland-made production concerns itself with the Biblical End 
Times prophecies etc etc. The whole hysteria is gently deflated by a 
highly engaging sense of humour. For one the film plays upon John the 
Baptist's turning up in Newfoundland, somewhere that is generally 
regarded by the rest of Canadians as being the hayseed boondocks of the 
country. For the most part the film doesn't concern too much with the 
theological issues but rather sets itself up as a highly amusing 
outsider comedy with St John played as an innocent amid civilization. 
The contrasts of cultures between John circa 0 A.D. and now are rather 
wittily played: "Do you think they know we're watching them ?" John asks 
upon watching tv for the first time. Director/writer Doyle also jabs a 
number of irreverent jokes at the Catholic church - with the Pope being 
brought ordained animal biscuits and being seen being given a pedicure 
by an obeisant nun; and in one bawdy joke having a drunken John throwing 
up while in telepathic prayer communication with The Pope.
Doyle's greatest ability, aside from a wonderful sense of humour, is an 
ability to get the best from an excellent ensemble cast. Raoul Bhaneja 
affects just the right balance of serene aloofness and naive earnestness 
as John. And Mary Walsh's performance blind to most of what is going on 
is marvellous - there's an hilarious conversation between her and 
Bhaneja with her misinterpreting his Christ-like proclamations, "I am 
not a man" to hysterical effect. Immensely enjoyable.
Reviewed at the 1998 Vancouver International Film Festival
Copyright 1998 Richard Scheib

