Title
Review for Naked Gun 2 1/2: The Smell of Fear, The (1991)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Brian L. Johnson
[No, the names on the From:- and by-lines are not mistakes; this is by a family
member of the account owner.  -Moderator]
Synopsis: Los Angeles Cop Frank Drebin, Nielsen, is invited to a lunch
with the President of the United States.  At the lunch, the President
announces that a scientist will unveil his suggestions for the new U.S.
energy plan at a public meeting.  Of course, whatever the scientist says
will go into effect.  The coal, oil, and nuclear energy spokespeople
suspect that the scientist's recommendation will be for more energy from
the sun.  That would greatly hinder their business.  At the time of the
meeting the scientist's laboratory is bombed.  Nielsen rushes to the
scene and finds that there is only one witness, Presley.  Presley is
Nielsen's old lover who he hasn't gotten over yet.  Nielsen's only
suspect for the bombing is the spokesman for nuclear energy (Goulet),
who Presley is now seeing.  Presley won't believe Nielsen when he tells
her what his suspicions are because she thinks that he is jealous.
     The following may contain spoilers that might hinder the enjoyment
of watching the film.  If you have not seen the film proceed with
caution.
     Leslie Nielsen's portrayal of Frank Drebin, a cop who stays
straight-faced while totally messing up, is great.  Priscilla Presley is
back as Drebin's old lover who has seemed to survive the break up;
unfortunately Frank is not that lucky.  He spends the entire movie
trying to win her back.  The evil man portrayed in the film is totally
evil without caring for those around him; all he is interested in is to
make sure his business succeeds.  The film's portrayal of George Bush is
almost perfect.  Those hand motions of his that he does when he is
talking (first lampooned by Dana Carvey in "Saturday Night Live") have
been added in.  One of the scenes not to miss is the parody of GHOST's
love scene with the pottery wheel.  Put in the hands of Nielsen and
Presley not even that is safe.
     Director David Zucker returns again from his television series
"Police Squad!" and his hit film THE NAKED GUN to direct this film.
Like THE NAKED GUN this film relies on slapstick comedy for it laughs.
For serious people who like subtle humor this would not be a film to
see.  For those of you who have seen THE NAKED GUN and liked it, I
highly suggest seeing this film.  It is written by David Zucker and Pat
Proft, who both wrote for the TV series "Police Squad!"
     Where as this film may not be the blockbuster film of the summer (I
expect Arnold Schwarzenegger's film TERMINATOR 2: JUDGMENT DAY will
have that ranking), I feel this is worth going to see before it leaves
the theaters.  On a 0 to 5 scale I give this film a 5.
     THE NAKED GUN 2 1/2 is rated PG-13 for adult situations, explicit
language, and adult humor.

Author
David N. Butterworth
     From the brother of the director of GHOST comes THE NAKED GUN 2
1/2: THE SMELL OF FEAR, a movie two-and-a-half times funnier than last
summer's paranormal blockbuster, an uproariously daffy (if equally
para-normal) follow-up to the 1988 comedy, THE NAKED GUN: FROM THE FILES
OF POLICE SQUAD!
     And the good news is that THE NAKED GUN 2 1/2: THE SMELL OF FEAR"
is just as dumb, just as silly ... and just as hilarious as its
predecessor.
     Based on an short-lived TV series (one that CBS is slated to
re-broadcast later this month), THE NAKED GUN: FROM THE FILES OF POLICE
SQUAD! sent up the police/crime drama to the point of idiocy.  Now,
with THE NAKED GUN 2 1/2: THE SMELL OF FEAR, that lunatic tradition is
continued, with Frank Drebin (Leslie Nielsen), the soft-boiled Police
Lieutenant with the deadpan delivery, embroiled in an irrelevant plot
about some political campaign for clean energy.  
     Watching the inept, monosyllabic Drebin blunder his way through
this nonsense is a hoot and a half.  It's an inspired and goofball turn
by Nielsen.
     The original film wound up with Drebin finding himself in a
compromising position with the Queen of England.  It seems only fitting,
therefore, that the sequel would have a go at this nation's President
and First Lady.  Most people wouldn't consider Barbara Bush a natural
stooge, but in THE NAKED GUN 2 1/2: THE SMELL OF FEAR, she takes it on
the chin -- literally -- on more than one occasion.
     Priscilla Presley once again plays Jane Spenser, the object of
Drebin's affections.  "She has the kind of body that could melt a cheese
sandwich from across the room," he observes, in typical police melodrama
voice-over.  "With the kind of breasts that say, 'Hey - look at me!'"
Presley is the straightest thing in the film, and it's nice to see her
finally finding her niche.
     Robert Goulet plays Quentin Hapsburg, an oily, David Niven-esque rogue with
designs on the curvaceous Jane.  Although THE NAKED GUN 2 1/2: The Smell
of Fear" is far from being brilliantly conceived, the way in which Hapsburg
buys the farm is, and is worth the price of admission alone.
     That earlier reference to GHOST, of course, is more than just
familial.   There can be few people who haven't yet seen the film's
central "homage" to director Jerry Zucker's 1990 tearjerker, and I won't
spoil it for those who haven't.  Suffice it to say the obligatory stock
footage of trains going into tunnels and oil wells erupting has never
been funnier.  And I was humming "Unchained Melody" days after seeing
this movie, which is more than I can say for GHOST.
     Another cleverly constructed scene is the one in which Drebin
visits a lounge called "The Blue Note," a morose and dimly lit hangout
frequented by manic depressives, with its wall-to-wall paintings of the
Hindenburg, Titanic and other national disasters.  When Drebin orders
the strongest thing they have, a body builder shows up.  So when he
settles instead for a Black Russian, the audience groans in
anticipation.  But the waiter's ahead of us and, facing the camera,
shrewdly shakes his head.
     Similarly, when one of the bad guys is spotted in Washington,
D.C.'s red light district, Drebin questions his motivations.  "Sex,
Frank?" suggests Captain Ed Hocken (George Kennedy, in a reprise of his
role).  Drebin appears to contemplate the statement for a while and then
declines the "offer" with a "No.  Not right now, Ed."
     As you can tell, the impetus behind these films -- which began in
1980 with AIRPLANE! -- is to cram as many sight gags and corny
one-liners as possible into ninety minutes.  In that film, producers
Zucker, Abrahams and Zucker's machine gun scattering of belly laughs
were constant and hysterical, and the film set the pattern for future
comedic outings, such as the under-appreciated TOP SECRET!
     Of course, with this many jokes-per-minute, not all of them can
work.  But those that do are consistently big enough to sustain you
throughout the few that don't.
     A minor criticism with THE NAKED GUN 2 1/2: THE SMELL OF FEAR is
the way in which characters often react to an on-screen witticism by
moving their eyes from side to side in bewilderment.  A more distracted
approach, with no observed response to the joke, might have been
funnier.  But why carp?
     When asked why the sub-title "The Smell of Fear," director David Zucker
responds "It just sounded funny."  That thinking appears to be what fires
THE NAKED GUN 2 1/2" -- go for the quick laugh fast.
     From the wild ride (with an equally wild conclusion) of the opening
credits to the trumped up finale, it's a film overflowing with cheap,
stupid and side-splittingly funny jokes that will make even the most
hardened criminal crack a smile.

Author
Randy Parker
NAKED GUN 2-1/2 is more of the same from the Zucker brothers.  And while
the same is still sufficiently funny, it's hard not to yearn for some new
tricks from these old comedy dogs.  David and Jerry Zucker are just
coasting on their proven Airplane formula of piling silliness upon
stupidity.  The laughs are still there, but considering that these guys
could make 100 of these films in their sleep, you can't help wondering what
the point is.  Where's the challenge?  Where's the film's creative spark?
A few of the sight gags are extremely creative, including a hilarious pot
shot at Michael Dukakis.  But, for the most part, the sameness of the
moronic humor has made the jokes bland.  The result: 2-1/2 is difficult to
distinguish from the Zuckers' previous efforts, including the original
NAKED GUN.  And yet, when a movie makes you laugh about once every 30
seconds, it's hard, and unfair, to complain too strenuously.
