Title
Review for Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls (1995)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Melissa Martin
     If critics don't hate this movie with every bone in their body, I
will be stunned. At times, this inane piece of drivel is even worsely
written than DUMB AND DUMBER ... and funny as hell.
     There is no plot to this film. The pseudo-plot exists apart from
the scenes on film, never really having a lot of impact on the viewer's
experience. But what story does exist is cliched beyond belief.
Basically, Ace (Jim Carrey) has to find a white bat that is sacred to
two tribes of African aboriginals before they go to war.  Meanwhile,
he's up to his old Ace tricks.
     There is only one reason to see this film... Jim Carrey. Some may
be (and rightly so) disgusted by the fact that the general public
craves Jim Carrey so, but in this film he is hilarious. Nothing new in
the Carrey department, same wayy-too-overstated-enunciation, same
rubber eyebrows.  But he's funny. Perhaps his moronic excuse for
quality comedy appeals to the eight-year-old in me, but Carrey never
failed to put me into tears of laughter.
     The other characters consist of a Traditional Villain, who is
not portrayed interestingly or originally in any way whatsoever, a
Traditional Sidekick, who is too dopey to be truly likable, a
Traditional Beautiful Seductress, who was actually surprisingly
enjoyable, and a Traditional Flustered General, played with a yawning
performance.
     The animals are nicely used, especially the adorable monkey and
the raven. Far less of the animals is seen than might be expected from
all the hype surrounding them.
     Pleasantly enough, there is considerably less sexual innuendo in
this installment of ACE than the first (although there are still
gratuitous references). It's more of a kid's film than the first, which
frankly just disgusted me.
     I wouldn't suggest seeing this film unless you're either really
bored or really crave that goofy humor. If you don't look for any
glimmer of intelligence in the writing or acting, you'll have a blast.
But if you're hoping for anything at all meaningful, you're in the
wrong department. I for one laughed till I gagged, and so did everyone
else in the audience.
     PARENTAL NOTE : There are only two expletives (Ace says 'damn'
twice, no biggie), but many not-so-subtle references made to genitalia
and sex (including one blatant scene where Ace is caught masturbating).
There are two full-nudity scenes, but all that is shown are bare
buttocks (in the Ace nude, it seems like there should be more showing,
but there isn't).
ACE VENTURA - WHEN NATURE CALLS: B+, or ***.5 stars

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Warner Brothers has scored another marketing coup.  The one-two
punch was started in the summer, with the release of BATMAN FOREVER.
Trailers for ACE VENTURA 2 were bundled with the Bat, ensuring that
every Jim Carrey fan in the free world would know about the impending
sequel.  Carrey went on to win raves as the Riddler and the ever-wise
Warner chose Halloween as the release date for the video ($11.99 at
Wal-Mart); a mere two weeks before Carrey's return in this marketwise,
but misfired comedy.
     ACE VENTURA: WHEN NATURE CALLS is a painful reminder of just how
grating the rubber-faced comic can be when allowed to perform within an
uncontrolled environment.  He may have been brilliant under the
direction of Joel Schumacher, in BATMAN FOREVER, but, here, left to his
own devices, Carrey quickly wears out his welcome.  The opening
sequence is by far the best--an amusing spoof of CLIFFHANGER, with Ace
performing a mountain rescue of a stranded raccoon.  (You can guess
what happens to Mr. Paws.  Hint: it sounds like splat.)  The plot
quickly shifts to a temple in the Himalayas, and then to not-so-darkest
Africa, where Ace is on the case of a missing white bat.
     With his hair and limbs both wildly askew, Carrey flies through
his routine in about thirty minutes.  The rest of the film is just more
of the same.  Sure, the plot's linear, and the production values solid,
but where is the scripted humor to support Carrey's sloppy slathering?
Writer and director Steve Oderkerk provides precious few set-ups.
Instead, Carrey just mugs away, playing for the camera even when most
of it isn't funny.  The better gags have been shown in the ads, though
a bit with Ace emerging buck-naked from the backside of a mechanical
rhino is something to see.
     Though an arguable improvement over the original, ACE VENTURA:
WHEN NATURE CALLS is still a snooze for anyone over the age of ten.
The script is virtually devoid of wit.  Tribal MASK jokes?  Jerry Lewis
cameos?  Forget it.  If anything, the inexplicable presence of Simon
Callow (FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL) and Bob Gunton (THE SHAWSHANK
REDEMPTION) suggests that working with Carrey is the classical actor's
ultimate challenge.  Just how long *can* they keep a straight face?
Michael J. Legeros - Raleigh, NC
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)

Author
Peter Wels
     I've got to admit it...  I'm a huge Jim Carrey fan.  I loved the
first ACE VENTURA, as well as THE MASK and DUMB AND DUMBER--and even in
BATMAN FOREVER (which was a pretty awful movie), Carrey was one of the
few people to come off looking reasonably good.  Until I saw ACE
VENTURA 2, I had no idea how people could find the guy annoying.
     Sadly, ACE VENTURA 2 shows just how irritating and annoying Carrey
can be.  Carrey goes through the same schtick he went through in the
first Ace movie, but this time it is no longer funny--it is just a
rehash of many of the same jokes used in Ace I.
     The plot sees pet detective Ace Ventura retiring after failing to save 
a raccoon (in a reasonable Cliffhanger spoof).  Soon he is called out of 
retirement to find a bat which was kidnapped and, if not returned in 
four days, will cause two warring African tribes to destroy each other. 
Once again, it's up to Ace to save the day, using his uncanny detective 
skills.
     Those who have been disappointed by Carrey's more restrained roles
in the films following the first ACE VENTURA may be glad to see him
over-acting to the best of his ability, but some may be disappointed by
the fact that this sequel doesn't capture the feel of the original.
     The original benefited from what looked to be Carrey's constant
hyped-up improv sequences, which were hysterically funny.  Here,
however, the tighter script (which is reminiscent of the old Disney
telemovies) takes the improvised material from the first, and
shamelessly recycles it in the new movie, giving Carrey little chance
to improvise.  Instead, his extremely funny manner has been reduced
to just walking around stupidly.
     But one of the biggest problems I had was with the character of
Ventura himself.  In the first movie, he was always cool, and one step
ahead of every one else--perfect for Carrey's off-the-wall approach.
But here, Ventura is made to look a lot stupider, and is often made out
as the straight guy--a role which is definitely not Carrey's style.
     There are definitely some very funny moments, but they are few and
far between.  They are also nowhere near as funny as anything Carrey
did in the first ACE VENTURA, or even DUMB AND DUMBER.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Apparently, when crap calls, Jim Carrey answers. Here he is, 
mugging it up in countless unfunny ways for the fifth time, his second 
go-around in the role of Pet Detective Ace Ventura. That means more 
talking ass-cracks, penis jokes and cries of "Al-l-l-l-l-l-l-l-l-l-lrighty 
then." It all adds up to a sequel that makes the original resemble 
SCHINDLER'S LIST in terms of dramatic merit, or lack of. Granted, 
there are a few laughs amid the constant barrage of pre-school humor, 
but anyone who appreciates good comedy will bang their head against 
the wall ten times for every minor chuckle. It's a painful experience for 
anyone with a brain.
        Ace is distraught after accidentally dropping a racoon into a 
canyon (in a parody of the opening scene of Sylvester Stallone's 
CLIFFHANGER, Jim Carrey being the only person who can make 
Stallone look like a college professor in terms of intellect, or lack of) 
and decides to retire to the mountains of Tibet to gain a higher level of 
consciousness (or, in his case, a level of consciousness). But he is 
pulled out of retirement to the tune of $20,000 to retrieve a sacred 
white bat for an African tribe. Why Africa? So Carrey can disguise 
himself nude inside a fake rhino and later climb out the rear end as a 
tourist family watches ("Look, the rhino's about to give birth!"). If that 
seems like hee-haw humor to you, by all means, see the movie. If not, 
claim your place in human civilization with the rest of us.
        Obviously, there are quite a few nonmembers of civilization 
who made this movie, like the first ACE VENTURA film (I use the 
word "film" only because it was filmed, not because there's any level of 
artistic merit.), a huge success. In fact, Carrey only has a career 
because of the decline of intelligence in our culture. You may say to 
me, "But Andrew, look at Jerry Lewis. He was born with a negative 
I.Q. and look how popular he was thirty years ago." Maybe, but I still 
say Jerry Lewis is a notch or two up on the comedic ladder because he 
never actually did an impression in a movie of a rabid bulldog biting 
off a man's testicles... Lewis at least had the dignity to save that 
performance for when company came over.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
James Berardinelli
     Much as I disliked ACE VENTURA: PET DETECTIVE, it pains me to admit
that Jim Carrey's first star vehicle was better than this hopelessly
unfunny followup.  PET DETECTIVE, while being exceptionally silly and
dumb (that, I suppose, was the whole point), still had its humorous
moments.  The same cannot be said of WHEN NATURE CALLS, which, although
equally moronic, left me sitting stone-faced in my seat for ninety
minutes while it tried vainly to coax a laugh.  There's nothing worse
than a film which mistakenly believes it's the comic event of the year.
For no legitimate reason whatsoever, WHEN NATURE CALLS is full of itself
to the point of being offensive.
     In the eyes of some fans, the rubber-faced Carrey can do no wrong,
and they will undoubtedly lap up WHEN NATURE CALLS, then come back for
seconds.  This film was made for them.  For the rest of us, who can
endure the comedian only in small doses or when he's carefully reigned
in (as in THE MASK), the picture is virtually unwatchable.  Like cough
medicine, the taste gets worse the more you're forced to ingest.
     WHEN NATURE CALLS opens with an uninspired take-off of CLIFFHANGER
(a movie that was almost a self-parody in its own right).  After that,
it's off to a brief interlude at a Buddhist monastery, then on to
Africa, where Ace Ventura has been hired to find a stolen white bat.
If he fails, the Wachatis and Wachootoos--two stereotyped African
tribes--will go to war.  Of course, Ace solves the case, but only after
an inordinate number of idiotic jokes and failed sight gags.  It's
beyond my comprehension how a British actor of Simon Callow's (FOUR
WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL) stature can allow himself to be put through the
ritual humiliation of appearing as one of Carrey's straight men (in
this case, he's the bad guy).  The pay check must have been handsome.
     Carrey's meteoric rise started with the first ACE VENTURA, so it
was certain there would be a sequel.  What's so surprising is how
creatively barren Steve Oedekerk's movie is.  WHEN NATURE CALLS relies
solely on Carrey's personality and performance to sustain it, which
doesn't happen.  The writing is sophomoric and the humor often makes
DUMB AND DUMBER look enlightened.  It's hard to imagine Carrey doing
something worse than WHEN NATURE CALLS, but then I previously thought
he'd have a hard time lowering himself below the standards set by PET
DETECTIVE.
     The phrase "answering the call of nature" commonly refers to
activities involving a toilet.  All things considered, that's an
appropriate place to dump this latest installment of the Ace Ventura
saga.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
