Title
Review for Jack the Bear (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Danny DeVito, Robert J. Steinmiller, Miko Hughes, 
           Gary Sinese, Reese Witherspoon
Director:  Marshall Herskovitz
Producer:  Bruce Gilbert
Screenplay:  Steven Zaillian from the novel by Dan McCall
Released by Twentieth Century Fox
     Since the tragic death of his wife in an automobile accident, John
(Danny DeVito) has been raising his two sons, Jack (Robert
J. Steinmiller) and Darian (Miko Hughes) by himself.  Many, especially
the other children in the neighborhood, consider John to be the perfect
parent, but he has a dark side which occasionally manifests itself in a
tendency to drink too much.  JACK THE BEAR is the story of what happens
to these three people in the fall of 1972 in Oakland, California and
how the delicate balance of a family already hurt by tragedy is further
jeopardized by the actions of a neo-Nazi (Gary Sinese).
     With many films that stray off-course, it can be difficult to
identify exactly where things go wrong.  Not so with JACK THE BEAR.  It
takes little insight and virtually no digging to excavate the turning
point.  Since it happens about midway through the ninety-eight minute
running time, it's appropriate to refer to the movie by its two
halves--one good and the other less than that.
     The first half of the movie is a little like a deeper, more
thoughtful version of TV's THE WONDER YEARS.  While the distant shadow
of tragedy still hangs over this part of JACK THE BEAR, it's a
background element to the day-to-day life of Jack.  We see him take
care of his little brother, experience his first day in a new school,
develop a crush on a girl and invite her to his house for dinner, and
stay up late at night to watch a horror-movie show that his father
stars in.
     Nothing of great import happens during this portion of JACK THE
BEAR.  The film moves along at a leisurely pace, gradually drawing the
viewer into its magic.  It's clear that the writer and director
remember what it's like to be under ten years old.  Their perceptions
of childhood are less those of an adult looking back than those of
someone who is genuinely of that age.
     However, about the time that Gary Sinese's Norman starts playing a
major role, the film shifts from light drama to leaden melodrama, with
doses of action and silliness thrown in for good measure.  The second
half of JACK THE BEAR isn't bad--it just fails to follow through on a
promising beginning.   Ultimately, it's a wild-but-unfulfilling ride.
     The child actors chosen for this film are completely believable,
although Robert J. Steinmiller cries a little too often for my taste.
There are more effective ways of getting across pain than always
turning on the faucets--even for children.  Although she doesn't have a
large part, Reese Witherspoon continues to show the impressive range
and ability which has been evident in her other films (THE MAN IN THE
MOON, A FAR OFF PLACE).  She may be someone to watch in the years to
come.  That said, however, I had a little trouble with her as Jack's
girlfriend.  The age difference is the problem--Karen seems much older
than Jack.
     Danny DeVito is pretty much a non-entity in the film.  His role is
subdued and definitely not a focal point.  Gary Sinese, who, like
DeVito, directs in addition to acting, does his best to flesh out a
purely one-dimensional character.  Because of the limitations of the
script, however, he is unsuccessful and Norman turns out to be another
cardboard cut-out bad guy.
     Shortly into JACK THE BEAR, I thought this was going to be a
wonderful film.  As it neared its conclusion, I couldn't help lamenting
what had gone wrong.  Some will enjoy the bizarre twists and turns
taken by the film, but I prefer a more consistent tone.  The characters
and circumstances which feel so real and close-to-home in the first
half are later distorted beyond belief.  This is another instance of a
film slipping off-track and never being able to find itself all the way
back.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
