Title
Review for Alan Smithee Film: Burn Hollywood Burn, An (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Scott Renshaw
     I'm guessing -- and from the available evidence, it's not a great
guess -- that BURN HOLLYWOOD BURN began life as an insider satire of
Hollywood excess, stupidity, ego and power-mongering.  If so, the film
that ended up on the screen ranks as one of the most spectacularly ironic
unintentional jokes in film history.  It has already been well-documented
that the original title, AN ALAN SMITHEE FILM, became a problem when
miserable test screenings forced re-cuts against the will of director
Arthur Hiller, prompting Hiller himself to opt for the Directors'
Guild-mandated pseudonym of Alan Smithee.  That left a film satire in the
hands of writer Joe Eszterhas, as humorless a hack as ever put finger to
word processor.  And you could just smell the disaster brewing.
     If you're unfortunate enough to sit through BURN HOLLYWOOD BURN,
you'll still be smelling that disaster long after the lights come up.
Ostensibly, it's a pseudo-documentary account of a director named Alan
Smithee (Eric Idle) who loses control of a big-budget action film called
TRIO starring Sylvester Stallone, Whoopi Goldberg and Jackie Chan (all of
whom appear as themselves).  When the only recourse available to him is
abandoning the project to be called "An Alan Smithee Film" -- which, of
course, it already is -- Smithee steals the negative of the film and
threatens to destroy it.  Among the parties interviewed are the film's
producer James Edmunds (Ryan O'Neal) and studio boss Jerry Glover (Richard
Jeni), who spend virtually the entire film narrating the story while
painfully unfunny things go on around them.
     It's bad enough that BURN HOLLYWOOD BURN has -- literally -- not a
single laugh for its entire, blissfully brief 84 minutes.  What makes it
even worse is Eszterhas' insistence upon telling every bad joke not once,
but twice or even three times.  Michael Ovitz references, SHOWGIRLS
references, oral sex references, Whoopi Goldberg/Ted Danson references --
all show up multiple times with all the subtlety that is Eszterhas'
stock-in-trade.  The reduncancy even manages to turn actively offensive
with some frequency, notably with the hilarious use of the word "feminist"
as an identifying caption for every single female character in the film.
By the time Coolio and Chuck D show up as black independent film-makers
the Brothers Brothers (cleverly identified as "bad a--" and "badder a--",
among other unprintable things), you may be ready to walk out of the
theater with your coat over your head to avoid being identified.
     Those documentary captions, for all their leaden obviousness, allow
the best insight into what's so hideously wrong with BURN HOLLYWOOD BURN.
Not content to stick any Hollywood type with only one jab from his rapier
wit, Eszterhas fills the screen with bullet points every time a new
character appears.  The producer is a "liar" who "slept in the White
House;" the media are "maggots" and "leeches" working for publications
like "The New York Slimes" and "Newsleak" (with the camera zooming in on
the altered title to make sure you don't miss the joke).  It doesn't even
matter that Eszterhas tags "penile implant" after his own name when he
makes a cameo, because it seems like such a desperate attempt to feign
self-deprecation.  This is a petulant schoolboy's idea of satire --
pictures of Hollywood insiders to which Eszterhas has taken a pen to
draw little moustaches and black out the teeth.
     The last stomach-churning straw comes when BURN HOLLYWOOD BURN closes
with out-takes over the closing credits, the kind that show the audience
how much fun everyone was having making the film that just sucked an hour 
and a half of your life away.  Perhaps it was just a final, desperate
attempt by Eszterhas to convince himself there was some purpose behind the
film, or to convince everyone involved that a few blown lines warranted
threatening to blow their whole career.  Pity everyone involved with this
excessive, ego-driven "satire" of excess and ego.  It's too bad that only
directors can remove their names from noxious material like this.
Otherwise, you might have seen credits for BURN HOLLYWOOD BURN overflowing
with Alan Smithees.

Author
Michael Dequina
The wildly overpaid screenwriter Joe Eszterhas has written so many
masturbatory fantasies for the movies that it was only a matter of time
before he himself jacked off onscreen.  And that's exactly what he does in
his absolutely atrocious "inside Hollywood satire," which cannot even
decide what its title is.  Originally billed simply as An Alan Smithee
Film, its "official" title is An Alan Smithee Film Burn Hollywood Burn.
However, in the opening titles, the "An Alan Smithee Film" appears more as
a possessory credit and Burn Hollywood Burn is given the showcase title
treatment, not to mention that numerous sources refer to it as simply Burn
Hollywood Burn.  However, a dash (--) curiously appears after "Film," so
I'll call this self-indulgent waste of celluloid is (An Alan Smithee
Film--) Burn Hollywood Burn.
As far as I'm concerned, Eszterhas is a comic genius.  It takes a certain
gift to not only pen the notorious laff riot Showgirls but to also liken
the lapdancing extravaganza as "a religious experience."  But his comedic
talent only shines through when he's blissfully, hilariously unaware--that
is, when he's dead serious.  Burn Hollywood Burn is written and conceived
as a comedy, and this sorry excuse for a satire just proves the opposite
point: "funny" Eszterhas is not only unfunny, but excruciatingly so.
"Structured" (using that term _very_ loosely) as a mockumentary in three
haphazardly labeled acts (titled "Missionary Position," "Whips and Chains,"
and "Doggie Style"--are we laughing yet?), the film details the disastrous
making of the most expensive film in Hollywood history, the (fictional)
action extravaganza Trio, starring Sylvester Stallone, Whoopi Goldberg, and
Jackie Chan (all of whom appear in cameos--and undoubtedly regret it).  The
film's unctious producer (Ryan O'Neal) wrests control of the final edit
from its director (Eric Idle), who wants his name removed from the project.
 The problem is, his name is Alan Smithee, and Alan Smithee is the
Directors Guild-required pseudonym used for the director's credit whenever
the true helmer wants his name removed.  Apparently at a loss for options,
Alan steals the only existing negative.  What does he do with it?  Three
guesses (if you need a hint, read the movie's title again).
That's it.  There's barely enough plot to fill the worst of Saturday Night
Live sketches, let alone this movie's running time, which, at 83 minutes,
is overlong by at least 82.  But plot, or, for that matter, characters or
witty dialogue, is of little concern to Eszterhas.  Burn Hollywood Burn
only exists to serve Eszterhas's own personal agenda, badmouthing just
about everyone in the business (it's hard to tell who are his friends and
who are his enemies--or is it that he just has no friends?).  While this is
certainly fun for Eszterhas, it is a torturous bore for the
audience--unless there are some people who delight in the figurative sight
of a shaggy, oversexed middle-aged man pleasuring himself.  I'm all for
wicked, mean-spirited humor--when it's funny.  But nothing in Burn
Hollywood Burn reaches even the snicker level.  His idea of a running gag
is identifying all the women as a "feminist" in the docu-style on-screen
labels and repetitive jabs at former Creative Artists Agency head Michael
Ovitz.  And while I have never minded the inclusion of outtakes during a
film's end credits, the blooper reel that closes Burn Hollywood Burn is so
pointless and unamusing that I am seriously reconsidering my position on
the practice.
(An Alan Smithee Film--) Burn Hollywood Burn is now truly an Alan Smithee
film after director Arthur Hiller had his name removed.  The scariest part
of this story is that his original version of the film tested _worse_  than
this final edit cobbled together by Eszterhas himself.  Eszterhas has joked
that this Burn Hollywood Burn is "the most expensive home movie ever made,"
and like all of his intentially humorous comments, it comes off as far from
a joke.  Burn Hollywood Burn plays just as he facetiously said--as an
extended home movie that may be fun for its makers, "stars," and their
friends and family to watch, but a leaden bore to anyone outside the
circle.  Burn, Eszterhas, burn.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
mrbrown@michaeljordanfan.com  |  mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
mrbrown@iname.com  |  mst3k@digicron.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
Personal Page: http://welcome.to/w3md
CinemaReview Magazine: http://www.CinemaReview.com
"I didn't know what to expect. It's like something you chase
for so long, but then you don't know how to react when you
get it.  I still don't know how to react."
--Michael Jordan, on winning his first championship in 1991
...or, my thoughts after meeting Michael on November 21, 1997

Author
Berge Garabedian
AN ALAN SMITHEE FILM: BURN HOLLYWOOD BURN
RATING: 1 / 10 --> So bad it hurts to watch
For more movie reviews and trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Token director Alan Smithee steals the only copy of his film "Trio" from the
studio, after they complete the "final cut" without him. He threatens to
burn the film reel if they do not allow him to keep his vision.
CRITIQUE:
Wow. I really can't remember the last time a movie sucked on so many levels!
The "comedy" in this film is pathetic, obvious and dated (OJ Simpson jokes
galore). The plot is uninteresting, boring and bad. The structure of the
film is annoying, repetitive and pretentious. The acting is pretty bad,
especially Jackie Chan, who can't act to save his life. The cameos are lame
and seem forced, and the ending blows chunks.
All in all, this movie believes itself to be a clever, humorous and edgy
look behind the closed doors of Hollywood, but comes across as a boring,
stupid and completely unentertaining piece of shite. I love to see movies
about Hollywood shenanigans, but this one bites the big one. See it if you
like to watch really bad movies, otherwise skip it, because it will just
have you hating every star that makes an appearance in it. Luckily for us
all, this mess only lasts about 80 minutes, and Miramax honcho Harvey
Weinstein plays a lead-faced detective. By the way, is there any reason why
the studio or the producer couldn't have cut another version of the film by
the way of all the filmed stock that was left over? Who knows, who cares,
this "satire" sucks the bag.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Ironically, the original director of this film, Arthur Hiller, also
requested his name be taken off the credits and replaced by the DGA's Alan
Smithee moniker. This was after the film's production company, Cinergi
Pictures, preferred the cut made by producer/writer Joe Eszterhas to his.
The original script of this film included Arnold Schwarzenegger and Bruce
Willis.
Eszterhas announced through the media during post-production that Cinergi
Pictures didn't have the money to pay for soundtrack. He said that he would
finance the soundtrack from his own money and asked to submit tracks for it
to him. He received 9,200 CDs and cassettes from mostly unknown and unsigned
artists, listened to all that was sent (at least a couple of tracks from
each record) and compiled the soundtrack.
This film practically swept the "Razzie Awards" in 1999, given out to the
worst of all movie categories of the year, with no less than the "Worst
Picture" award, the "Worst Screenplay" (Joe Eszterhas), the "Worst
Supporting Actor" (Joe Eszterhas), the "Worst New Star" (Joe Eszterhas tied
with Jerry Springer) and the "Worst Original Song" ("I wanna be Mike Ovitz!"
as written by Joe Eszterhas).
