Title
Review for Jungle Book, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE JUNGLE BOOK (1994) is a Disney live action version of the
famous Rudyard Kipling story.  Disney made a cartoon version of the
story in 1967, and famous director Zoltan Korda made a live action film
of it during the war (1942).  In this 1984 Disney version, Stephen
Sommers is the director and the screenwriter.
     In the confusion of a wild animal attack and subsequent fire, five
year old Mowgli (Sean Naegeli) gets separated from his girlfriend Kitty
Brydon (Joanna Wolff) and his family.  He becomes lost in the dense
Indian forest.  He grows up there among the animals of the jungle with
no other human contact.  He says of it the jungle, "The jungle speaks
to me because I know how to listen."
     Soon time advances, and we have Jason Scott Lee (from MAP OF THE
HUMAN HEART) as the seventeen year old Mowgli.  Lee's acting is a bit
too serious for my taste, but he tries hard.  Mowgli eventually finds
his way back to "civilization."  Once there, he is reunited with Kitty
(Lena Headey) and the leader of the soldiers, Colonel Brydon (Sam
Neill), who was with the family during the incident when he was
originally lost.  He finds civilization wilder and scarier than any
jungle.
     Part of the show is devoted to the love interest between Mowgli
and Kitty.  Whereas the frightening scenes may scare off the youngest
kids, the love part may lose the slightly older ones as well.  At least
their interest may wane.  By the end, Colonel Brydon begins to really
appreciate Mowgli and says to him, "I think a man lucky who could count
you as a friend."
     This movie version of the story is true to the book which means
that it will scare younger kids.  The only question is what is the
cutoff age.  We have scenes of tigers attacking and killing people.
People die realistic deaths in quicksand.  Other people are about to be
crushed by large rocks, and still others meet their deaths by falling
from high cliffs.  The death scenes, while not overdone, are
nevertheless realistic.  I thought the show would be fine for kids 7
and over since my son Jeffrey (recently turned 7) did not visibly
appear to be that scared.  He informed me after the show that he
thought the movie would be fine for kids 7 1/2 and over, thus cutting
himself out of the appropriate age group for the show.  Apparently it
troubled him more than I realized.
     The technical aspects of the film are impressive.  The
cinematography is lovely.  The surreal sets (Allan Cameron) of an
abandoned temple in the jungle is filmed in a nostalgic sepia tone.
The forest and most of the picture is filmed in bright colors with a
predominate jungle green complimented by earth tones of brown.  In one
of the most impressive pieces of cinematography we have a scene of an
Indian town at night.  The deep blue is punctuated with the lights of
the town in a Christmas tree look.  The music (Basil Poledouris) is
stirring and dramatic.
     The best acting is by all of the animals.  Of these, I thought the
monkeys were the best.  Certainly Shere Khan, the tiger, is the most
frightening.
     THE JUNGLE BOOK runs too long for a kids' movie at 1:51.  The film
is rated PG.  Do not let any child under 5 see it.  As far as older
kids, I still think those 7 and above generally will be able to handle
it.  Certainly by age 9, there will be no problems.  Jeffrey gives it a
partial thumbs up as he does not like being scared at all by a picture.
I give it a thumbs up and award it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Jason Scott Lee, Cary Elwes, Lena Headey, Sam Neill, 
          John Cleese 
Director: Stephen Sommers 
Producers: Edward S. Feldman and Raju Patel 
Screenplay: Stephen Sommers and Ronald Yanover; story by Ronald Yanover & 
            Mark D. Geldman based on characters from "The Jungle Book" by 
            Rudyard Kipling 
Cinematography: Juan Ruiz-Anchia 
Music: Basil Poledouris 
Released by Walt Disney Pictures 
     For the most part, despite an impressive track record with
animated films, Disney hasn't awed anyone with its recent live-action
releases.  Poorly-scripted, weakly-acted, and unaplogetically
politically correct, these features have been more like cookie-cutter
cinematic candy than anything worth consuming.  Thankfully, THE JUNGLE
BOOK represents something of an entirely different breed.
     Beautifully photographed and tightly paced with a spate of solid
performances, this latest Kipling-inspired motion picture is an
enjoyable and exuberant film-going experience.  Where Disney's animated
JUNGLE BOOK was a light-hearted affair, this rendition is more of a
straightforward adventure.  That's not to imply that it's in any way
stodgy or somber; comic relief is provided by an orangutan called King
Louie and a human named John Cleese.
     Taking place in late 19th-century, British-occupied India, THE
JUNGLE BOOK's story is uncomplicated:  a human boy who has grown up in
the jungle is lured back to civilization by the sight of a beautiful
young woman.  There, surrounded by a few who wish to help him and many
whose motives are less pure, he learns to speak and act like a man.
Eventually, his enemies, motivated by jealousy, ill-will, and greed,
drive him back into the wild.  Once there, the battle for life becomes
a struggle of man's guns against the Law of the Jungle.
     Those familiar with the animated feature will recognize some non-
human characters, including King Louie, Baloo the bear, Bagheera the
panther, and, of course, Shere Khan, the tiger king.  Mowgli, the "wild
boy" of the Black Jungle, is portrayed by Jason Scott Lee.  This
performance, while not of award-winning caliber, is characterized by a
number of nice little "man/beast" touches.  Lena Headey, as Katherine,
is the object of Mowgli's love, but she's engaged to a British officer
(Cary Elwes) who kills wild animals for sport.  Sam Neill plays
Katherine's father, and John Cleese is the kindly Dr. Julius Plumford.
     The most remarkable thing about THE JUNGLE BOOK is Juan Ruiz-
Anchia's photography.  With its striking shots of lush forests,
cascading waterfalls, and catacomb-like treasure chambers, the movie is
a visual feast.  Nevertheless, THE JUNGLE BOOK rarely pauses to savor
the scenery, moving instead with a pace that disallows opportunities
for boredom.
     There are moments when THE JUNGLE BOOK may be too intense for
small children.  Animal maulings, while shown obliquely, occur on
screen.  Those old enough not to be disturbed by such things should
enjoy this movie, regardless of whether they consider themselves
adults, kids, or something in-between.  Disney isn't just courting the
younger audience with this film, either.  Jason Scott Lee's wardrobe,
frequently limited to a loincloth, is designed to display his tanned,
well-muscled body.
     THE JUNGLE BOOK doesn't offer any thought-provoking philosophical
messages, and its view of good and evil is simplistic (characters
clearly fall into one category or the other), but that lack of
complexity is part of its charm.  This film proves that the company
behind THE LION KING can create worthwhile entertainment regardless of
whether the animals are real or illustrated.
The above represents the opinions of the author, and not necessarily
those of Bellcore or any organization within Bellcore.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com) 

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     An old cartoon shows someone asking "Do you like Kipling?" and
getting the response "I don't know, I never Kipled."  Certainly there
is not much Kipling going on in Disney's sumptuous second film
nominally based on Rudyard Kipling's THE JUNGLE BOOKS.  [Am I the only
one who thinks the book's title was in the plural?]  Indeed, while
Kipling might enjoy the new film for its stupendous vision of India,
with the exception of recognizing a few character names, mostly
animals, he would find little in this film to remind him of his own
writings either in plot or style.  Besides Mowgli himself, the major
characters of his Mowgli stories are all animals; in the film the
animals are minor characters.  The new film gives a (highly inaccurate)
origin for Mowgli and then entirely skips over the period that the book
covers and returns to Mowgli as an adult (now played by Jason Scott
Lee).   Mowgli has picked up martial arts someplace and is now ready to
interact with the Man-pack.  In fact when he does what we have has is
much more the plotting of a Tarzan movie with the setting moved to
India.  But even if that is so, admittedly it is a highly watchable
Tarzan movie.
     In the Kipling, Mowgli is a baby who has strayed from his village
and nearly killed by Shere Khan, the great tiger.  The Man-cub is
raised by wolves.  In the new film version, Mowgli is about five years
old and already has facility handling elephants when he is separated
from his caravan and thought to have been killed.  Why he has never
returned to civilization remains unexplained since he seems to have a
city with a major fort just a day or two's walk away.  However, he
remains in his jungle until he sees and is attracted to Catherine (Lena
Headly), the beautiful daughter of the commander of the fort (Sam
Neill).  She is already being courted by a handsome young soldier (Cary
Elwes) who is a favorite of the commander, but of course the audience
knows that he is a treacherous cad and a bounder to boot.  When the
nasty young soldier realizes that Mowgli must know the way to a
legendary lost treasure city, all the expected happens.
     On top of the plotting being sophomoric, it is didactic.
Kipling's animals live by the Law of the Jungle, a complex and logical
code which includes rules like not to kill Man as well as rules like
when it is legal to take another's prey.  In this version it is changed
into modernistic rules of conservation.  The major rule is "do not kill
what you cannot eat."  And the animals enforce these rules on humans.
In fact, Mowgli is first stranded in the jungle when Shere Khan attacks
his caravan because the travelers had killed more animals than they
could eat.  (This is an heroic and selfless action for Shere Khan ...
totally out of character.)  The heroes of THE JUNGLE BOOK all seem to
have late 20th Century American values while the villains are all
politically incorrect.
     Another interesting problem with the film is the placing of jungle
so near the fort.  (In fact, the fortress is Jodhpur's breath-taking
Meherangarh Fort.  Having explored the 15th Century fort myself--
perhaps the term "walled city" is more accurate--I can tell you the
name Meherangarh, or "majestic," is no exaggeration.  But perhaps the
film makes that obvious.)  Even if the fort is supposed to be just some
generic fort, the architecture is Rajasthani.  You will probably see
that style only in dry country a very long distance from any tropical
jungle such as we see in other parts of this story.  The decision to
film the fort over-looking Jodhpur is purely an aesthetic one.  This is
a very beautifully photographed film.  The clarity and detail of the
shots and the use of color may be the best of any film I have seen this
year.  Disney Studios has a reputation for making high-quality prints.
The score by the underrated Basil Polidouris only adds to the lush and
rich texture.
     The acting, as directed by Stephen Sommers, is generally
acceptable though Jason Scott Lee is an odd casting choice for Mowgli.
He does not look so much Indian as Oriental.  Cary Elwes makes a
reasonable villain who snidely personifies all that was wrong with the
British Raj.  Unfortunately, some of the worst acting comes from the
animals who just followed direction without worrying about their
careers--more is the pity.  The apes in particular behave like
fugitives from the Cheetah School of Bad Animal Acting.  And I wonder
what an orangutan is doing in the jungles of India.  Rudyard Kipling
treated the animals as characters but in this film the apes are sort of
a Greek chorus and the rest are little more than additional fists for
Mowgli to use against his enemies.
     Taken as a Tarzan film or a sequel to the Kipling story, this is a
watchable children's film.  But putting Kipling's name over the title
is gross mis-representation.  The pity is that such care was taken with
the visual aspects of a film so betrayed by the scripting.  Parts of
this film are terrific, parts are just awful.  On balance this one gets
a low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Although Nobel-Prize-winning Rudyard Kipling's stories written in
the late 1800s and early 1900s have already twice been made into film
(once animated, once live), Disney has attempted once again to bring
the story to life as a live adventure.  The story of the law of
"civilized" man vs. the "law of the jungle" seems to be a classic with
which every generation is intrigued.  Our own is no exception.
     If you are old enough to go back to 1942, you will remember
"Sabu."  In 1967, Disney gave us an animated version.  With the 100th
anniversary of the books' first publication, Disney Studios decided the
time was ripe for a brand new, more adventurous, version that would
please not only the youngsters but also adults.
     Mowgli (Jason Scott Lee), who grew up in the jungle not far from
the civilized world, but still apart from it, decides to see what the
rest of the world is like after he catches a glimpse of the lovely
Kitty (Lena Headey).  He is suddenly aware that he has been missing out
on something and wants to see how the rest of the world lives.  Being
friends with jungle animals is great and being able to speak their
language has its advantages but Kitty is a whole other species worth
checking out.
     Captain Boone (Cary Elwes), is the film's villain.  In addition,
he is engaged to Kitty.  When Boone discovers that the jungle holds
treasures of which the outside world is unaware and which he wants to
remove, Mowgli realizes that the so-called "civilized world" can also
contain malicious, greedy people such as Captain Boone.  Mowgli, of
course, is unaware that Mark Twain once said that it was a shame
animals were called "beasts" when, in fact, it is human beings who
contrive and kill not just for food but for treasure and possessions.
     Fortunately, Mowgli has a forestful of friends: the wolf (Grey
Brother), the bear (Baloo), and the black panther (Bagheera), who are
all on his side.
     If there is any criticism to be made of the film, it is that some
of the scenes are a bit too ferocious for youngsters accustomed to THE
LION KING, ALADDIN, BAMBI, etc.  THE JUNGLE BOOK movie even has someone
immersed in quicksand.  So use a bit of judgment with your PG-13. On
the other hand we have Sam Neil (Kitty's father) and John Cleese as
Dr. Plumford.  Jason Scott Lee's Mowgli looks more Asian than Indian
but does well as our hero.
