Title
Review for Séparation, La (1994)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dennis Schwartz
SEPARATION, LA (director: Christian Vincent; cast: Isabelle Huppert
(Anne), Daniel Auteuil (Pierre), Louis Vincent (Loulou), Jerome
Deschamps (Victor), Karin Viard (Claire), Laurence
Lerel (Laurence), Nina Morato (Marie), France-1994)
Pierre (Daniel Auteuil), a book illustrator, and Anne (Isabelle
Huppert), a professional woman, are about to become separated despite an
apparently satisfactory marriage. They are an affluent couple, living in
a swell Parisian apartment, both of them nurturing all the love they
possibly can muster for their 15 month old boy Loulou (Louis Vincent,
the centerpiece of their lives), and are fortunate enough to have
supportive friends. The surprise comes when they are watching an Ingrid
Bergman film, where Ingrid states, "We have to change our way of
living," as he tries to hold her hand, which she rebuffs, saying she
just wants to watch the movie. Outside the theater she stuns him further
by saying she is in love with another man. And that's the gist of the
plot for this sophisticated and superbly acted romance story, that turns
the tables on the old notion that the man controls the destiny of the
household. Because of the expressiveness and raw emotions of the stars,
as they go through all kinds of mood swings and power plays until they
resolve this very ticklish and perplexing problem they face, we are
confronted with a situation whereas Pierre has done nothing ghastly to
ruin the marriage and the couple still profess a love for each other,
yet they are undergoing a separation.
The news of what is happening to Pierre takes some time to sink in, as
he doesn't know quite how to respond, at first, except by showing how
much his pride has been hurt. Anne's reaction is to avoid eye contact,
trying to console him gently, realizing how much she has hurt him. His
quiet manner, hurt expression, and look of bewilderment says it all.
While, strangely enough, they try to carry on with life as usual in
their apartment, as their ideal nanny, Laurence (Laurence), minds the
baby (she's a gem). After a few weeks of living like this, a rage starts
to build in him and his jealousy starts to take over. He confides in his
friend Victor (Deschamps) about how difficult it is for him, and Victor
is supportive of him, but there is little one can say that is eloquent
in such situations.
"In a couple, one suffers and the other one's bored, and vice versa."
This epigram, revealed near the beginning of  La Separation and repeated
near its end, explains in some way what has happened to their marriage.
It now becomes a question if they can weather this storm and the
bitterness that is so much a part of their love. A pivotal scene is when
the verbal fighting, accusations and hitting take place, that was really
unexpected from this urbane couple, except we see it building up and
festering inside the stricken Pierre. He feels like a wounded animal who
must strike back. When the 40-year-old Victor tells him that he going to
marry his long time girlfriend Claire (Viard), he can't even feel a joy
for his friend's decision, as he is totally wrapped up in his own
problems to be concerned with any one else's life.
The director wisely doesn't give us too much information about her lover
or the details of their love life. We are left to fend for ourselves and
see how uncommunicative they really are. At one point in the film, we
are told about a California woman who had no conversations with her
husband, so she miked their house and played back the tapes for divorce
court, where she collected a bundle from her husband. That more or less
sums up the direction the director was going with this one, by trying to
explain the imponderable reason for the snag in their marriage due to a
lack of communication.
This is an intelligent film, told from the point of view of the man,
though this film is not as powerful as Paul Cox's similar type of film
"My First Wife."  Its huge plus, however, is that it avoids the use of
cliches usually reserved for explaining why a couple is breaking up and
plays up the small petty things in a relationship that strain one's
nerves. This is exemplified in the scene where Anne is forced to fly a
kite, even when she tells her husband no. Her anger at him, brings home
the point of how silly most fights are.
When Pierre appears to be almost reconciled to the fact that he has lost
his wife and now 18 month old child, he wistfully responds by saying, "I
will now have to learn to live without you and Loulou."
Perhaps, Victor's comment to Pierre, "The last thing you find out is how
others see you," clarifies how couples after several years of a
seemingly contented marriage lose sight of each other's needs and a
destructive behavioral pattern sets in.
This marriage-go-round leaves us off in familiar territory. Most of us
know how it feels to be unsure of someone we love. And it stings. This
work is a testament to a confused couple who are sensible enough to face
things that are unpleasant to them in a forthright manner without
covering it up. It is only the real good directors, as evidently
Christian Vincent is, who can pull off such an imbroglio with everything
turning out to be in a daze for them; but, nevertheless, ending up
intact.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Phaedra Cinema
 Director: Christian Vincent
 Writer: Christian Vincent, Dan Franck, novel by Dan Franck
 Cast: Daniel Auteuil, Isabelle Huppert, Jerome Deschamps,
Karin Viard, Laurence Lerel, Louis Vincent, Nina Morato,
Jean-Jacques Vanier, Estelle Larrivaz, Gerard Jumel,
Christian Benedetti, Frederic Gelard, Claudine Challier
   When President Clinton and his wife Hillary were in Russia
during the late summer of 1998 meeting with Yeltsin, Hillary
introduced him everywhere: "This is Bill Clinton, the president
of the United States."  Why is this unusual?  In every previous
instance, she would introduce him as "my husband, Bill
Clinton."  So says Joe Klein, a top political columnist in a
recent issue of the New Yorker magazine.  That's not all.  "B
touches H gently on shoulder as she passes.  H stares
straight ahead."  This too from the notepad of Joe Klein.  A
small matter?  Nope.  Significant?  You bet it is.  If you doubt
the gravity of this subtle body language, sit through Christian
Vincent's engrossing film "La Separation," a 1994 picture
released in New York and other markets this October.  
   "La Separation" deals with a couple who have been living
together for just about two years.  They have a lovely child of
eighteen months, Loulou (Louis Vincent) who is cared for
largely by a young and attractive nanny, Laurence (Laurence
Lerel).  You could probably imagine that when life was rosier,
Anne (Isabelle Huppert), a business executive, introduced her
lover (Daniel Auteuil), as "Pierre, the man I live with."  Now
that their relationship seems to be headed south, she'd
probably inform everyone, "Meet Pierre: he's a commercial
artist."  How do we know this?  By the little things that mean a
lot.  They sit in a crowded theater watching an Ingrid
Bergman movie.  Pierre is more interested in Anne than in the
screen.  He closes his palm around hers.  She pulls away. 
"I'm trying to watch the film," she complains.  He pouts.  They
still live together, attend parties, and visit their best friends,
Victor (Jerome Deschamps) and his live-in girl friend Claire
(Karin Viard).  But their connection is frayed and is not likely
to be patched together.  "La Separation" is about reality.  It is
not at all influenced by American-style optimism.
   The glory of "La Separation" is that Christian Vincent
captures it in a distinctly different style from the way an
American romance-gone-sour would be played.  There is just
one violent scene that's over in a flash.  The man is at first
quite understanding when his live-in lover tells him flat-out,
"Pierre; I think I fell in love with someone."  We all know how
a red-blooded Texan would react to that, and for that matter
look at how Takuro Yamashita (Koji Yakushi) responds in
Shohei Imamura's Palme D'Or winner at the '97 Cannes
Festival, "Unagi."  A blood bath results when he falls upon his
wife in flagrante delicto with another man.  
   "La Separation" is a simple enough story of a relationship
gone bad.  If this were an American movie, a critic would
seek Anne's motivation for alienating Pierre's affection.  Here
it's not necessary: in fact the audience is encouraged to
guess, based on what the mature, intelligent viewers have
experienced or witnessed in their own lives.  Perhaps, as is
quickly hinted, she got bored while he suffers.  No matter. 
What does count is that "La Separation" features two first-rate
actors whose every gesture speaks volumes about their
feelings.  Isabelle Huppert, who dazzled critics and audiences
alike in the far more action-filled drama "La Ceremonie,"
proves her mettle once more by communicating her emotions
by a twitch of the right eye here, a look to the side there.  She
elevates the film, produced by the famed Claude Berri, far
above melodrama by turning her feelings on and off
unpredictably.  One moment she is agreeing to Pierre's
decision to separate, to live apart.  In a twinkling she rests her
head lightly on his chest in a show of tenderness which in the
hands of another actress would seem laughable if not
downright bizarre.  
   Pierre is not so able to hide his emotions.  He lets it all
hang out with his pal Victor, probably a mistake because no
one can really help a man who is losing not just the woman
he cares for but the infant he cherishes and has carefully and
regularly videotaped.  When he appears toward the
conclusion red-eyed, dazed, not knowing even how to get
home, even the passing taxicabs sense that something is
wrong and refuse to stop for him.  While director Vincent may
not have intended us to take sides, we can't help feeling that
Pierre is being treated unfairly.  But what "La Separation"
really wants to say, I think, is that life is unfair, romantic love
is fleeting, and that the two lovers face an existential dilemma
that is all too common.  As one character reports, "Love
stories start rosy, then the relationships go to the dogs."  
   La Separation is obviously not for an audience targeted by
producers of Van Damme films, nor is it even for the folks
who think a show is first-rate because "I laughed, I cried."  It's
for a discerning constituency seasoned enough to have been
battered by life's inexplicable impasses, people who can
empathize equally with a couple who have loved and lost
through no apparent fault of their own.  The understated
performances by Huppert and Auteuil are nothing short of
astonishing.

Author
Steve Rhodes
There are certain unmistakable omens in a long-term relationship.  Anne
and Pierre, who live together with their adorable toddler, experienced
theirs at the cinema.
As Pierre reached over to hold Anne's hand, she pulled it away.  When he
confronted her with the faux pas later that night, she had a
devastatingly, simple answer, "You bothered me."
In LA SEPARATION, a film whose meanings are revealed mainly in subtle
nuances of the characters' body language, Anne's outright admission of
her displeasure forms one of the story's more explicitly dramatic
moments.
Eventually, Anne will nonchalantly tell Pierre that she has fallen in
love with someone else -- someone "who pays attention to me."  Since
Pierre thinks he is particularly attentive to Anne and to their son, on
whom he dotes, he is perplexed.
Isabelle Huppert, winner of the French best actress award in 1996 for LA
CEREMONIE, plays Anne, the film's enigma.  An attractive professional
with deep brown eyes, Anne possesses a breezy confidence.  She does what
she wants in life and isn't the least bit concerned how it might affect
those around her.  Whether she's happy or sad, she keeps her emotions
firmly in check.
Daniel Auteuil, winner of the French best actor award in 1996 for THE
EIGHTH DAY, plays Pierre.  Strikingly handsome and sweetly sincere,
Pierre's personality is as open as Anne's is closed.  He is sure and
certain that he wants Annie to stay with him, regardless of whether
Annie has another lover.
"Every couple goes through crises," one of Pierre's friends advises him.
"It's normal."  Well, the relationship that Pierre and Anne evolve into
isn't.
As an author (the most popular occupation, it seems, in French films),
Pierre works at home while a sexually alluring, college-age nanny takes
care of their son.  Annie doesn't see much of any of them since she
meets her other lover after work.  Still, as long as she does not leave,
Pierre's willing to go along with this.  On the surface they look like a
completely contented couple.
The story by Dan Franck and the director, Christian Vincent, is as
remarkable for the scenes that don't occur as those that do.  The big
angry outbursts are almost totally absent, and Anne's other lover is
only discussed but never shown.
In the typically French style, the characters talk incessantly.
Cinematographer Denis Lenoir keeps the camera rigid during these
talkfests, letting the two characters' heads and shoulders fill the
frame.  The movie is a character study, and the director clearly wants
us to focus on the two leads.  In order to accomplish this, he takes a
minimalist approach to the sets and the dramatic actions.  LA SEPARATION
is a subtle movie in which facial expressions are where the action is.
"A couple's a transient thing," Anne casually but firmly tells Pierre.
"It doesn't last forever."  Like the band on the Titanic, Anne and
Pierre keep going through the motions of the relationship, ignoring the
unrepairable hole in the side.  But beneath their false calm, they both
know it's all over.
LA SEPARATION runs just 1:28.  The film is in French with English
subtitles.  It is not rated but would be PG-13 for a little profanity
and mature themes and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com
