Title
Review for Lethal Weapon (1987)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Kawashima
     This is a police thriller in the tradition of 48 HOURS and THE FRENCH
CONNECTION.   It's taut, well-executed, and not entirely predictable.  It comes
to us from Richard Donner, of SUPERMAN fame, who is noted for his interest in
characterization and making the characters seem real and believable to the
audience despite their often superhuman abilities.  In SUPERMAN, this took the
form of an alien with amazing super powers.  In LETHAL WEAPON, this takes the
form of Martin Riggs (Mel Gibson) whose incredible prowess with any kind of
firearm as well as his proficiency of a number of martial arts make him the
"lethal weapon" to whom the title refers.  He also spends some of his evenings
alone in his motor home mourning over his dead wife and deciding whether or not
he should join her.  He is what one could call a cop on the edge.  He is paired
with Roger Murtholdt (Danny Glover) who is a family man, celebrating his
fiftieth birthday.  The idea of pairing two opposites is by no means a new one,
especially in police stories, but Donner pulls it off well.  Both characters
are basically likable.  Neither pull a lot of comedic one-liners or fit any
stereotypical cop roles.  Murtholdt (sp.?), Glover's character has a kind of
presence simply due to his stature coupled with his natural soft-spoken style.
Gibson's character is so interesting because we never know for sure whether or
not he is as insane as Glover as well as the police psychologist seem to
believe.  He certainly does well as a killing machine, claiming that killing is
"the only thing he could ever do well."
    As a thriller, the movie is nearly flawless.  There are few slow scenes
(one in a firing range where the two are discussing a case seemed to drag a
bit).  The plot is interesting and not as predictable as some reviewers have
claimed.  True, the idea of having ex-CIA men going BAD and smuggling drugs is
not a new one, but it's used well in this film and provides some interesting
interplay between the good guys and the bad guys.  The action scenes are, on
the whole, extremely well executed; I was on the edge of my seat for most of
the movie.
    In short, this film is a must see for anyone at all interested in the
present rage of killer-cop and angry soldier movies this Spring (and also for
those who aren't interested but like action).  Credit is also due to Gary Busey
who turns in a fine performance as a psychopathic Vietnam vet (he's good at
playing crazies) and to Tom Atkins as Glover's old war buddy whose daughter
stars in one of the most stimulating opening scenes I have ever seen.

Author
Jeff Meyer
     LETHAL WEAPON tends to be one of those marginal, on-the-border films; its
qualities and weaknesses are glaring, and tend to cancel one another out.  The
story, which is nothing special, centers on an aging family-man police
detective (Danny Glover) who is saddled with a series of drug-related crimes
and a new partner who is rumored to have a death wish (Mel Gibson).  Together
they begin to track down the men behind a multi-million dollar drug smuggling
operation, which is complicated when members of Glover's family become hostages
for the hoods.
     With almost anyone else playing the main roles, this would have been a
major failure; but Glover and Gibson begin a relationship that somehow
transcends the dialogue they've been given (or at least transmutes it into
something believable).  They form a symbiosis that the movie was no doubt
shooting for -- Glover (and family) providing Gibson with something to care
about, and an emotional base after the death of his wife, and Gibson providing
Glover with a lean, mean, crazy machine who can kill like nobody's business.
But it's not due to the script; it's almost as if the two actors pull their
characters over their heads and disappear into them.  To my mind, Gibson is
probably the two or three actors in Hollywood who really fits as an
"action-adventure" hero.  Eastwood's too old, Bronson was never any good to
begin with, Stallone too lifeless, Norris too stupid, and Harrison Ford looks
too much like John Fogerty :-).  But Gibson -- he provides something behind the
eyes to make you think he re- ally might be a psycho, yet he gains sympathy in
an early scene where he almost "eats his gun".  I loved the sequence where they
break out through the disco; Gibson pulls a nonchalant rap as he blows away
the three or four goons between himself and the door (to rec.arts.comics
readers -- yeah, the parallels between the character and The Badger are really
phenomenal).  He and Glover are very comfortable in these roles; I remember
halfway into this hoping their would be a sequel (it'd be a great basis for a
TV series, but no way would you get Gibson into it).
     On the other hand, there's the plot.  It may not be as inept or as
improbable as COBRA or INVASION: USA, but the rest of the film is good enough
to make the accompanying story jarring in comparison.  Ridiculous plot element
is heaped on to ridiculous plot element: the two cops are invited up to a
Beverly Hills home of one of the key figures in the drug organization, where an
assassination attempt is made; the police aren't going to make the connection
if their two detectives disappear during their visit?  Fire-fights break out in
the most unlikely places.  The kidnapping of Glover's daughter makes sense, and
she does act as I imagine any average 16-year-old girl would when faced by such
a dilemma -- she gets hysterical; but by the end it's almost a pastiche of the
Helpless Female role.  And nothing, absolutely nothing, could justify the
anti-climatic fight scene between Gibson and Gary Busey, the albino-crazed
henchman.  Pure, unadulterated dumb.
     I've tried to come up with a thumbs-up/thumbs-down rating for this, but my
mind changes every few hours.  Let's put it this way: it averages out to a C,
but the standard deviation is HUGE.

Author
Steve Fritzinger
     LETHAL WEAPON is a light-weight action thriller that quickly degenerates
to an extremely stupid movie.
     While a detective whose name I don't remember is investigating the murder
of a friend's daughter, he and his new partner, Riggs, a suicidal burned-out
ex-Vietnam sniper, stumble onto a heroin ring.
     This movie is so loaded with cliches, ex-CIA men turned to crime, a tough
looking guy holding his arm in a flame to prove his loyalty to Fearless Leader,
kidnapped daughters, and so on, that there is no room left for any genuine
suspense.  What is left is an adventure movie with no guts or heart.
     If you look hard for something worthwhile in this movie, there is a vague
chemistry between Glover and Gibson that provides a couple of good laughs.  But
that chemistry is erratic at best, and doesn't come close to saving the film.

Author
Dragan Antulov
The author of this review didn't need advice of Wes Craven
to build opinion about movie sequels. Together with remakes,
now extremely popular among big studio executives, sequels
represent the embodiment of Hollywood's creative bankruptcy.
I became aware of that almost decade and half ago, when the
inevitable comparisons between sequels and original films
began giving disappointing results. To make thing even
worse, bad quality of sequels even managed to change the
initial good impressions of originals. Such thing almost
happened to LETHAL WEAPON, one of the most successful movie
franchises in modern Hollywood. The slide of quality in
sequels wasn't that severe, but the change of character was.
While the last film in the series represents one of the
purest examples of action comedy genre and "high concept",
the 1987 original, directed by Richard Donner, was made as
deadly serious police film.
The plot, based on the screenplay by Shane Black, is set in
Los Angeles during Christmas. Roger Murtaugh (played by
Danny Glover) is black LAPD homicide detective who has just
turned 50 and has every reason to be proud of his life
achievements - perfect service record, nice family and
suburban home that is embodiment of American dream. Martin
Riggs (played by Mel Gibson) is white LAPD narcotics
detective who became expert in marksmanship and martial arts
while serving in Special Forces during Vietnam War; recent
death of beloved wife, on the other hand, made him
emotionally unstable and nearly suicidal so nobody wants to
work with him. Murtaugh reluctantly becomes his partner and
two policemen, who don't have anything in common except
Vietnam War record, starts investigating suicide of
high-class prostitute. The case stops being routine when it
turns out that the prostitute happened to be daughter of
Michael Hunsaker (played by Tom Atkins), rich banker and
Murtaugh's war buddy. Hunsaker hints that his daughter's was
actually murdered in order to stop him from spilling beans
about large and sinister conspiracy. His words are taken
seriously when everyone connected with the case, including
him, starts getting killed by expert assassins. Murtaugh and
Riggs continue with the investigation that would lead them
towards "Shadow Company", group of former CIA agents and
mercenaries led by General McAllister (played by Mitchell
Ryan). In the meantime, Riggs himself becomes assassin's
target and Murtaugh's daughter Rianne (played by Traci
Wolfe) gets kidnapped.
First viewing of LETHAL WEAPON was more than pleasant
surprise to me. On the surface, the script contains enough
cliches to make this film indistinguishable from multitude
of 1980s action romps featuring Vietnam veterans and their
deadly skills being used on hordes of evil drug dealers in
three-piece suits. But LETHAL WEAPON looks different from an
average film of such kind, thanks to the very good direction
by Richard Donner. This director never belonged to the major
league of Hollywood filmmakers, but his reputation of
reliable craftsman is well deserved, since he always
succeeds in turning his mega-budgets into pleasant viewing
experiences. In case of LETHAL WEAPON, big budget became
evident in a series of elaborate and spectacular action
scenes (stuntman died during filming one of them). But the
spectacle comes second to the well-created atmosphere of the
film and Donner's clever use of sharp contrasts - Murtaugh's
suburban idyll vs. Riggs' living in cheap trailer, glamorous
lifestyle vs. corruption and depravity. But the sharpest
contrast is provided by combined forces of Eric Clapton and
Michael Kamen whose musical score confronts spirit of
Christmas with atmosphere filled with loneliness, tragedy
and death.
Actually, action scenes, no matter how spectacular they are,
come second to the atmosphere of the film. But the most
memorable things about LETHAL WEAPON are its two leading
characters. What differentiates remarkable action films from
simple action films are the protagonists we care for, and
Shane Black did wonderful job in providing that by writing
Murtaugh and Riggs. Actors playing them did even more
remarkable job. Danny Glover is simply excellent as
policeman who embodies American middle-class ideals -
successful career, material wealth, loving family - and his
insistence on police procedure and reluctance to shoot first
and ask questions later - qualities usually associated with
hero's monkey-wrenching superior in average police movies -
become quite understandable. But Murtaugh hides skeletons in
his closet - his painful and (presumably violent) Vietnam
past is well hidden from his family, and when his family
becomes endangered Murtaugh gets as irrational as Riggs. Mel
Gibson, on the other hand, embraced Riggs as opportunity to
play character very different from the one that made him
famous in MAD MAX series. Unlike the deadly but cool Road
Warrior, Riggs is initially presented as "damaged goods" and
he stays that way until the last shot. We are glad that the
person with such skills is employed on the side of Good, but
few of us would like to be in his company. The scenes that
feature Riggs' outbursts have intensity rarely matched in
the history of cinema. Both Glover and Gibson employ a lot
of talent in order to slowly build tolerance and later the
bond between those two almost irreconcilable personalities.
All other actors were shadowed by such great performances,
although some, like Traci Wolfe as Murtaugh's daughter with
teenage crush on Riggs, underlines humanity of lead
characters.
Unfortunately, the film loses its momentum in the second
half, when character exposition gives way for action and all
cliches associated with it. In many ways, those actions
scenes, although well-done, are implausible (Murtaugh and
Riggs, no matter how insane they are, would hardly go after
whole army of vicious killers without back-up) or even
predictable (dreadful final showdown between Riggs and chief
assassin played by Gary Busey). Some critics would frown
upon the such first class characters being used in third
grade plot that deals with government agents going bad and
using covert ops for selfish and nefarious purposes -
something that became action movie cliche by itself in late
1980s. Such plots, inspired by Iran-Contra scandal and all
conspiracy theories that followed it, could, unfortunately,
be inspired by some world conflicts that are actual today
and where the line between political intrigue, military
operation and organised crime is always blurred (as the
career of recently deceased Serb paramilitary leader Arkan
clearly shows).
Despite being associated with uninspired sequels and cliched
one-liner about old age and certain bodily function
(actually borrowed by Friedkin's TO LIVE AND DIE IN L.A.
shot two years earlier), LETHAL WEAPON remains one of those
rare 1980s action films that passed the test of time.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
