Title
Review for 54 (1998)
Number of Reviews
23

Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z rating: ** (out of 4 = fair/below average)
1998, R, 95 minutes [1 hour, 35 minutes]
Starring: Ryan Phillippe (Shane O'Shea), Mike Myers (Stevie Rubell), Salma
Hayek (Anita), Neve Campbell (Julie Black); produced by Ira Deutchman, Richard
N. Gladstein, Dolly Hall; written and directed by Mark Christopher.
Seen August 30, 1998 at 6:45 p.m. at Rotterdam Square Mall Cinema 6
(Rotterdam, NY), with Renée Gentile for free using my Sony/Loews critic's
pass. [theater rating: ***: good seats, picture, and sound]
        Some films from the last few years have had simple stories and plot actions,
but have succeeded as fascinating pieces of film-making. Just the opposite is
true of "54," in which a large amount of action happens, and yet by the end,
nothing interesting has happened. It's the most commotion a film can make
without saying anything at all.
        Right from the opening it's clear the film doesn't want to make much of an
effort at detail, setting, or other such elements necessary to flesh-out an
atmosphere that a story like this should have. The time is the late 1970s
where the world seems to be in crisis, but everyone is partying like there's
no tomorrow. We only learn this through a quick montage and voice-over by the
main character Shane (Phillippe), a young stud from New Jersey (complete with
token accent) who lives across the river from New York City where he dreams of
going to make it big.
        But the film is not really Shane's story, it's the story of "Studio 54," an
infamous nightclub where anyone who is anyone is seen, from celebrities, to
artists, and all the regular, everyday people who are fortunate enough to be
hand-picked by the club's director, Stevie Rubell (Myers). Shane tells us
Rubell somehow built the club from the ground up, and managed to make it THE
place to be. But here's the first of the film's many holes - how did Rubell
manage to gain such an reputation from the club? Why does he claim it's a
place where the common can disco with the elite on the dance floor as equals
when he refuses to let the most common people in the door?
        Shane was one of those fortunate enough to be picked by Rubell because of his
image and attitude. Of course his dorky friends aren't allowed in, but after
initially defending them, he has a change of heart and almost instantly turns
into the Studio 54-type where all that matters is the glamour in the midst of
the anarchy. Nothing really surprising is going on at this club, so what if
people are doing drugs and having sex out in the open? I'm sure that was quite
shocking at the time, but the way writer/director Mark Christopher tells it,
it's brushed off as no big deal.
        What is a big deal is the money flow. Shane is hired as a busboy and quickly
learns the club is run the way the mob might run a casino, where everyone
skims off the top and moves cash around in secretive manners. As if the script
hadn't been generic enough, Phillippe's monotone narration makes it bland and
boring to make sure there's not much shock value. But this contradicts what
seems to be the entire point of the film - to shock us with the outrageousness
that went on there (this is supposedly based on a true story), but there's no
hook to the delivery.
        The film does try to expand by occasionally going off on tangents to define
some of the other characters such as fellow busboy Greg (Breckin Meyer) and
his coat-checking wife Anita (Hayek), who let Shane shack up with them for a
while. What's surprising is the fact no cheesy love triangles come into play.
Shane and Anita become good friends, but their friendship is just as corny and
poorly-acted as a teen melodrama. Everyone's constantly hugging and of course
hanky-panky is suspected, haven't we seen this all before?
        Approximately 80 of the 95 minutes are completely conflict-free. What we get
is a collage of scenes at the club that have very little significance to
anything. When things start to slow down Shane miraculously stumbles upon
another of 54's secrets such as the basement room where celebrities hang out.
Shane himself wonders how Rubell could make a dirty old room underground the
place to be for the glitterite, but we never get much of an explanation. Maybe
because everyone's too high on drugs to think care - that explains it!
        Not until the last act, which last about 15 minutes does anything remotely
complicated happen. Rubell is busted by the IRS for tax evasion, but it's
amazing they took as long to shut the place down as they did. But the final
scene is a happy one, so at least we don't have to go home sad.
        I'm sure there's a message to "54," but how we're supposed to find it in the
midst of such a mess is beyond me. Maybe it's that having too much fun can be
hazardous to your health, but I think this film confuses fun with stupidity.


Author
Steve Rhodes
     Late in 54, the latest movie about the death of disco, there is a 
revealing scene.  The dancers' fantasy world of lavishly costumed bodies 
is briefly interrupted by an ugly reality.  The disco's octogenarian 
regular, played by Ellen Albertini Dow from THE WEDDING SINGER, has just 
ODed on the dance floor.  The club's owner reluctantly agrees to bring 
up the house lights and turn off the music.  The revelers usually exist 
in darkness punctuated by flashing colored lights.  They are quite 
uncomfortable being able to see each other in full brightness.  Not to 
worry.  Reality is soon banished, and the body is promptly whisked away.  
     Writer and director Mark Christopher takes an almost documentary 
style to 54, about the famous disco called "54."  His wooden characters 
take a back seat to Christopher's laying out of all the details of 54's 
social structure, the people that visited there, and the legal problems 
the owner got into with the Internal Revenue Service.  The dialog is as 
dull as the costumes are flashy.  
     The movie stars Ryan Phillippe as Shane O'Shea, a young New Jersey 
native, who goes across the river to the bright lights of Manhattan to 
make his fortune.  With "the body of David and the face of Botticelli," 
he is granted permission to enter the sanctum sanctorum.  Once in the 
club, he manages to get one of the prized busboy jobs.  From there, he 
moves up to bartender, with all the rights and privileges thereof.  
Bartenders at 54 get invited to all of the right parties of the rich and 
famous.  And from there, the sky is, naively, believed to be the limit.  
Ryan Phillippe, unfortunately, gets the pretty boy look right but 
nothing else.  The casting of such a weak lead is one of the film's many 
problems.  
     Comedian Mike Myers, from AUSTIN POWERS and WAYNE'S WORLD, takes a 
turn at a serious part as Steve Rubell, the owner of 54.  Myers, whose 
sole expression in the picture is a frozen toothy grin, should stick to 
comedy.  He demonstrates no emotional range as a dramatic actor.  In the 
most embarrassing scene for Myers, Steve, stoned out of his mind, 
propositions a very reluctant, heterosexual busboy.  When Steve is 
turned down, he vomits in the wads of cash in which he was lying.  
     Neve Campbell plays Shane's hero, Julie Black, a woman who made it 
out of Jersey to go on to become famous.  It turns out that she is only 
in a soap and spends all of her time at the club, looking glamorous in 
order to make the right contacts.  
     Salma Hayek plays a hatcheck attendant named Anita, who wants to be 
a recording star.  Her husband, Greg, played by Breckin Meyer, wants to 
be promoted to bartender but is willing to steal and openly deal drugs 
in the club in order to make his fortune in the meantime.
     Part of the implicit job description of 54's employees is that they 
are available for on-premise sex with the customers.  This is considered 
a perk, given the clientele.  No one objects, although the clap turns 
out to be one of this promiscuity's downsides.  The other major employee 
benefit is drugs, which can be found lying around for the taking.  The 
story only partially demonstrates their destructive effects.  
     When two movies are released in the same year about the same topic, 
comparisons are inevitably made.  Whit Stillman's THE LAST DAYS OF DISCO 
is full of fascinating characters and an intriguing story.  The script 
is so richly textured that it takes at least two viewings to ponder and 
laugh at all of its subtly humorous dialog.  54, on the other hand, 
tells a similar story, blandly.  If you've seen Stillman's film, there 
is no reason to see 54.  And if you haven't, pass on 54 and wait until 
THE LAST DAYS OF DISCO makes its way to video.  
     54 runs 1:32.  It is rated R for sex, nudity, profanity, and 
pervasive drug usage.  The film would be acceptable for teenagers only 
if they are older and mature.  
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Miles Kaplan
Rating:  * 1/2 out of * * * *
Directed by:  Mark Christopher
Staring:  Ryan Phillippe, Salma Hayek and Mike Myers
    To sum the entire film "54" up in one sentence, it would be:  Watch a
VH1 documentary instead.  "54", seems like someone brought William Faulkner
into 1978, brought him into Studio 54, got him really drunk, told him to
write about it, and then dumbed that down to be released to the public.
    A sloppy version of almost stream of conciousness spirals down into an
oblivion of the illusion of sex, drugs, and disco.  The narrator, Shane
O'Shae (Ryan Phillippe), works as a grease monkey in New Jersey who, of
course, on a whim decides to go into New York and try to get into Studio
"54".  Phillippe gives a passable performance which could have been made by
any young, attractive actor with a six pack stomach.
    He is let in by Steve Rubbell (Mike Myers), the infamous co-owner of
Studio 54, because he is attractive.  He eventually becomes a bus boy and
then a bartender . . . you expected more, didn't you.  There isn't.  The
film builds up from nothing and becomes nothing as it's climax (isn't that
an apt word for Studio 54) lands with a thud.
    The glitz of the club and perpetually semi-clothed patrons are used in
an to attempt to show the it's glamour.  For much of its target audience,
college age to early thirties, it attempts to show celebrities mixing with
"normal people."  This even fails since the only two celebs truly introduced
are Andy Warhol and Truman Capote.  You can be sure that half of the
audience hasn't heard of them, another quarter only know their names, and
the other quarter knew they were there already.  The humor, if you can call
it that, is built on an eighty year old woman getting high and 70s
references like John Travolta and Olivia Newton John making us laugh at how
stupid we were back then
    The best performance in the film is given by Mike Myers as the
perpetually high, sexually ambivlaent, very New York Steve Rubell.  He seems
to play Rubell better than Rubell would if he was still alive.  He looks
like Rubell and sounds just like him while giving a subdued, almost
nostalgic performance, when needed.  It reminds you of his Saturday Night
Live character Linda Richmond on "Coffee Talk" sans dress and wig.
    The supporting cast of Salma Hayek, Breckin Meyer, and Neve Cambell are
their only there to give added subplots which are introduced but lead
absolutely nowhere.  The romance between Phillippe and Cambell, as a soap
opera star, is completely implausable.  The two share about half as much
screen time as there are shots of the eighty year old hooked on
amphetimenes.  Hayek's wanna-be singer seems extremely forced and her
husband, Greg (Meyer) stands in as Shane O'Shae's surrogate best friend. 
The subplots seemed forced and seem like they have been added just to make
sure the film was over an hour and a half long.
    Overall, "54" tried to give a view of the brashness of the place where
crack flowed like heroin which flowed like wine.  The film never leads to
anything, has no obserable point, and covers up a lack of real plot with a
veil of beautiful people.  In truth, that reminded me of the eighies.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Mark Christopher
Cast:  Ryan Phillippe, Mike Myers, Neve Campbell, Salma Hayek, Brecklin
Meyer
Screenplay:  Mark Christopher
Producers:  Ira Deutchman, Richard N. Gladstein, Dolly Hall
Runtime:  95 min.
US Distribution:  Miramax
Rated R:  language, sex, drug use 
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
54 is dull, perfunctory, uninspired, and boring.  A greater writer
might have created a lyrical sentence for each of those adjectives,
flowing in lovely arangements with soaring metaphors.  I, however, would
rather cut to the chase.  54 is dull, perfunctory, uninspired, and
boring.  There is nothing in it -- not a glimpse of depth, nor a shimmer
of intelligence or insight.  There is no electricity in any of the
scenes, or a moment of interest in the story or its subplots.  And it's
underdeveloped, and features an array of bland characters played by
actors who think they're in this year's Boogie Nights.  They are so
wrong.  The picture has been assembled by Mark Christopher.  Based on
this film, I don't know how he got a job in the business.  
54 is supposed to be an amazing insight into the world of the dance
club of the same name, which originated in the 70s and closed down in
the 80s.  I don't know if this film went into production after Boogie
Nights was released, but Christopher has managed to plagiarize Paul
Thomas Anderson's brilliant work in every possible way, from the
framework of the plot down to the style of the cinematography.  What it
lacks is everything that made Boogie Nights great:  depth, intelligence,
energy, fascinating characters, and challenging themes.  54 can't even
measure up to The Last Days of Disco, which is flawed, but still smart
and entertaining.  It's remarkably bad timing, I'd say, to release a
film this tedious after a couple of noteworthy pictures of the same
kind.
I have exaggerated, though:  there is one interesting character, and
one terrific performance.  That character is Steve Rubell, played with
more perceptiveness by Mike Myers than this limp production deserves. 
Steve Rubell is the owner of Studio 54, and if Christopher had focused
on him, then Myers could have forced a good film out of this wreck all
by himself.  Alas, we are instead guided to endure the trials of a young
man named Shane (Ryan Phillippe), a going-nowhere New Jersey teen who
gets a job in the club, thanks to Rubell's homosexual impulses.  It's
here that he meets his friends, the array of uninteresting characters: 
his co-worker, Greg (Brecklin Meyer), his wife, Anita (Salma Hayek),
and, of course, the love interest, Julie Black (Neve Campbell).
Shane is just an innocent young fool in the beginning, and he has a
reasonably sturdy home life.  (Some of the scenes with his father border
on interesting, while Heather Matarazzo, who plays his sister, pushes
Phillippe off the screen.)  But he decides to envelop himself in the
disco scene, and succumb to peer pressure and to drugs.  Why his
"friends" push him into drugs is never really explained, but the fact
that they are "friends" is questioned only is superficial ways (Greg
gets really mad at Shane because he's been elevated to bartender
status).  There isn't a single conflict that takes center stage, except
that Shane has some kind of unexplored reservation with the business in
which he works.  
Most of the film is dumb, and most of the dialogue is inane.  There's a
scene late in the film in which Shane confronts Julie Black, and, in the
next scene, they're arm-in-arm without a bit of development.  Then,
they're kissing in a bowling alley!  This is five minutes of material,
thrown into the picture at the last minute (well past the one-hour mark,
and this isn't a long film to begin with).  Campbell is a talented
actress, but she needs a role that gives her a little depth.  This one
doesn't.  And Phillippe has almost no presence whatsoever; this
performance pales in comparison to Mark Whalberg's star-making role in
Boogie Nights.  He seems dumb and misguided, and his voice never changes
tone.  I guess he was picked for the color of his hair and the shape of
his body, but he seems pretty lanky to me.  He's all wrong for a lead
role, but it doesn't help that Christopher has forgotten to develop his
characters.  By the end of 54, Shane's most notable trait is his stupid,
fake accent.  
The rest of the performances are wasted.  Hayek is an energetic,
talented young actress, and does almost nothing here.  Meyer is
endearing, but allowed to be no deeper than cardboard.  Only Myers, by
sheer force of talent, manages to rise above Christopher's wading-pool
of a script.  Rubell has been written just as depthless as the rest of
the characters, but Myers is good enough to inject subtleties that help
round out the performance.  In fact, Myers is the sole reason to see 54,
and all it really does is make you wish that the film had revolved
around him.
I've read that Studio 54 has been recreated down to the last detail. 
Frankly, I don't care.  It's easy to recreate something technical like
this.  A fairly skilled production designer and a few carpenters can
manage such a task.  Besides, Christopher keeps the lights so low that
the sets are invisible, anyway.  Aside from Myers' performance, 54 is a
complete failure.  It's dull, perfunctory, uninspired, and boring.  Some
may find my comparisons to Boogie Nights unfair, but they're so obvious
to me.  In any event, 54 is pallid without the contrast.  It doesn't
even work as mindless entertainment:  it's so shallow that the most
escapist viewers are likely to dismiss it.  So, don't forget those key
words:  dull, perfunctory, uninspired, and boring.  Everything else I
said was just padding.

Author
David E. Smith
54 (1998) - Mike Myers, Ryan Phillippe, Neve Campbell, Salma Hayek
   Based on the true story of a New York nightclub, "54" strives for the
   essence of all things cool - sex, drugs and disco. It's got plenty of
   all three and a number of rich stories trying desperately to get out
   and be seen amidst all the '70s ambience.
   On the surface, it's the story of Steve Rubell (Mike Myers), the owner
   of Studio 54 - the place to be seen in the Big Apple. Steve is cast as
   a visionary, a man who wants to host a never-ending party. But Steve's
   success is based as much on his crooked b ookkeeping as it is on his
   club's wild, lurid atmosphere.
   Into the mix comes Shane (Ryan Phillippe), a gas-station attendant
   from New Jersey who sees the exclusive club as his way out of a quiet
   life of seeming mediocrity. After getting hired on as a busboy, he is
   quickly immersed in the dangerous lifestyle of S tudio 54 and its
   celebrity clientele.
   "54" has a number of equally deep stories hiding behind the disco
   beat: Steve's business practices; Shane's search for his own identity
   and a touch of romance with soap-opera star Julie Black (Neve
   Campbell); and the shaky marriage of another busboy and an aspiring
   singer (Breckin Meyer and Salma Hayek).
   It's a shame that some of those great stories are barely touched upon,
   but the elaborate sets that upstage them are so eye-catching that you
   may not notice. Whether for good or ill, the real star of "54" is the
   club itself, with true-to-life recreations of famed set pieces like
   the cocaine-snorting crescent moon. Its twisted, dark atmosphere fits
   the dark deeds associated with the club, like drugs served along with
   the champagne.
   In contrast to the shadowy sets, the late '70s soundtrack is bright
   and uplifting but rarely distracting. In fact, it complements the film
   perfectly, providing that essential reminder that "54" is loosely
   based on real life.
   Myers, best known for his roles is odd comedies like "Austin Powers"
   and "Wayne's World," isn't likely to win any Oscars for this film, but
   at least he has the chance to demonstrate that his acting talents
   range beyond pure comedy. Most of the other actors are under-utilized
   and rarely given a chance to shine - even Phillippe, whose Shane is
   ostensibly the main character of the film.
   "54" is a classic example of style over substance. Visually and
   aurally, it's a sharp movie, but it's not so sharp that you completely
   forget about the stories. Director Mark Christopher tries to take us
   to the best of all possible worlds, but j ust leaves people wondering
   what happened to the characters. Rather like the dying drugs-and-disco
   scene of the time, "54" is shallow, decadent and ultimately not
   fulfilling.

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: August 28, 1998
Starring: Ryan Phillippe, Mike Myers, Salma Hayek, Neve Campbell,
Breckin Meyer, Sela Ward
Directed by: Mark Christopher
Distributed by: Miramax Films
MPAA Rating: R (sexuality, drug use, language)
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/54.htm 
In one of its recent reports, Reuters newswire gave Miramax Films' new
movie 54 the label of a "disco film." Granted, the movie is about one of
the most exclusive 1970's disco dives, and that disco music could be
considered an entire culture, but the disco label itself is quite
circumstantial. One of the things that 54 does best is give a general
critique of the less fortunate making fame and success for themselves on
a single break. The critique is thematically inspiring and thoughtful,
but it's so well buried in the glamour of the movie that it's almost not
worth noticing. On the surface, 54 is a muddled project. 
54 was written and directed by the same man - Mark Christopher - and
this is his first feature made for nationwide release. Previous to this,
he's made a living directing short films or segments of features, and
for extending his reach to 90 minutes, he does well. Unfortunately, any
brilliance that might've surfaced in the script is lost in the acting
corps' rough-on-the-edges job. Ryan Phillippe, as the star, uses his
good looks to his advantage but can't come up with anything worthwhile
in terms of substance. Salma Hayek and Mike Myers have limited screen
time, playing supporting roles to the story's main man, and both of them
fail to make an impression. In fact, only Neve Campbell is any good, and
this marks her first impressive dramatic feature. Though she was
noteworthy in SCREAM, she hasn't done much in the way of quality since,
and she was fun to watch here. 
Phillippe (I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER) is Shane O'Shea, a young
Jersey kid with ambitions to be somewhere more exciting. One night he
convinces a friend with a car to take him across the river to New York
City, where they make their way to the exclusive disco dive Studio 54.
Only the beautiful people get inside, though, and so there's throngs of
people outside the door. The club's eccentric manager, Steve Rubell
(Mike Myers, AUSTIN POWERS), makes the call to let Shane in, and then
days later Shane is hired by Rubell to work as a busboy. With the help
of newfound friend Greg (Breckin Meyer), he's quickly promoted to
bartender and instant fame inside the club. It's then that he meets
Julie Black, a soap opera actress; the two hit it off, and that's
perhaps the last good thing to come of the waning days of Studio 54. 
Christopher tells the story in as much of a straight line as is possible
without staying on course. Though only 90 minutes long and very much to
the point, 54 has too many plot devices that bog it down. Because of
this, and because of Christopher's inexperience with directing
full-length features, none of the possibly-interesting subplots come to
fruition. The love story between Shane and Julie is over and done with
in the last half-hour; the story of Rubell's battles with the IRS isn't
in the light until the last twenty minutes, and even that is unexpected;
and Shane's fallings-out with Greg are formulaic in all respects. For
the most part 54 is a so-so movie, unable to find something to bring it
up but not pulled under by any of its flaws. It's hard to dislike with
such a short running time, and so in some sense it's almost a guaranteed
worthwhile watch.
FINAL AWARD FOR "54": 2.5 stars - an enjoyable movie.

Author
Ryan Davis
Studio 54 looks like a really crazy place, from what I have seen in a ton of
documentaries on 54, on such "informative" channels like VH1 and E!.  These
programs depict lots of sex and extreme amounts of drug use, it doesn't
appear to be dull. Then why would a movie about a wild exclusive night club
be so ordinary? Maybe its because, in his first major film writer/director
Mark Christopher didn't want to upset any studio executives. The film never
dares to take any risks, it follows the path you would expect and doesn't
challenge you to anything.
You would think a director like Mark Christopher would be more risqué.  He
has made a few independent films, The Dead Boys' Club (1992) and Alkali,
Iowa (1995). Both of these films deal with young homosexuals, and their
coming out stories. Therefor, Christopher has taken risks with his films
before, and instead of making a movie like 54 that tried he to make
mainstream while also trying to tell a story that isn't mainstream just
doesn't work.
The story is told though the eyes of Shane O'Shea (Ryan Phillippe), a young
guy with dreams to get out of his lame life in New Jersey, and go into the
city where things are really hot. Shane coerces some of his Jersey friends
to go to New York City one night, to party at 54. They reluctantly agree and
when they arrive Shane is the only one admitted in to the club, by the owner
of 54, Steve Rubell (Mike Myers) himself.
Needless to say Shane loves it and shortly after gets a job as a busboy at
54. He makes friends with Greg (Breckin Meyer), another busboy, and Anita
(Salma Hayek), a amateur  Latin singer. Things go well for Shane as he works
his way up to bartender at 54 and he meets and "connects" with Julie Black
(Neve Campbell). But it can't be this good forever you know it has to come
crumbling down.
People have described this movie as 1998's "Boogie Nights". It isn't, so
don't expect it. "Boogie Nights" was raw and told it like it was. 54 is a
watered-down version of it, shorter and far less entertaining. Plus he doesn
't show all that went on at 54, it barely touches on all the sex and drug
abuse that went on there.
The directing and writing were mediocre at best. The dialog just didn't pop
like it should have, and they actually use the line, "Its not the size of
the boat, but the motion of the Ocean."
As far as acting goes, it was surprisingly good on all counts. I was
thoroughly impressed with Mike Myers who took his one dimensional character
and really worked with it. Kudos to Mike for his excellent freshman dramatic
role. It was also nice to see Heather Matarazzo from "Welcome To The
Dollhouse" again, she has a small role as Shane's sister.
But the acting doesn't cover up all the flaws.. Next time Christopher make a
movie with some energy and don't be afraid to take risk,  if you are dealing
with a topic as outlandish  as Studio 54.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
The 1970's are on a roll.  In 1997, the film 'Boogie Nights' opened to
critical success.  It's box office numbers were not as impressive,
however.  There was also 'The Last Days of Disco', released earlier this
year and the Fox network is hoping to score big with 'That 70's Show'
which just debuted recently and a brand new re-mastered version of the
'Saturday Night Fever' soundtrack is available on CD.  Personally, I
found the 70's, as tacky as they were, as the decade with the best
movies.  I suppose some of the worst movies were also released in this
time frame but checking the list, it certainly seems impressive.
There's nothing tacky about such films as 'The Godfather' and its
impressive sequel, 'Star Wars', 'The Deer Hunter', 'One Flew Over the
Cuckoo's Nest', 'Chinatown' and the list goes on and on.
Like 'Boogie Nights', the protagonist in '54' is a teenager on the verge
of becoming a man.  Ryan Phillippe stars as Shane, a dreamer and
decadent minded young 19 year old who lives two miles across the river
from New York City in New Jersey.  He observes that while it's only two
miles away, it seems like a whole other world.  He lives with his two
younger sisters and his father.  His mother died when he was 12 and he
struggles to find his way in life.
The film is set in 1979 and one night Shane and two of his friends make
their way into Manhattan, hoping to get into the hottest nightclub in
the world named 54.  Hundreds gather outside the club each night in the
hope of being admitted entrance to the club and the hopeful sheep are
scrutinized carefully by the club's owner, Steve Rubell (Mike Myers).
Most are turned away.  Rubell only wants the best looking to mix with
the VIP's in his club.  He notes at one point that the nephew of the
king of Saudi Arabia travels 7000 miles to come to the club for one
night and then leaves the next morning and observes that it's the only
place on Earth where he truly feels free.
Shane is later hired by Rubell as a bus boy and the constant theme that
runs here and there in the film is a possible audit by the IRS.  Rubell
is fixing the cash register tapes and pocketing some of the cash as we
see in some of the film's scenes.
Shane makes contact  and eventually becomes friends with a young married
couple who also work in the club.  Greg and Anita (Brecklin Meyer and
Salma Hayek) help Shane in showing him the nightly operations of the
club and the demands Rubell makes on his staff are high indeed.  Some
prominent visitors the club are a wealthy socialite (Sela Ward) and a
daytime soap opera star (Neve Campbell).
'54' is a film that is high on the intimacy of its characters but short
on plot substance.  It's atmosphere is well captured but the film ends
up becoming a watered down version of 'Boogie Nights'.  Director Paul
Thomas Anderson, who made 'Boogie Nights', wrote his characters in close
proximity with each other and gave their lives progress as he set the
film over a course of six years.  '54' barely makes it out of 1979 and
has scenes of a repetitive nature and is riddled with cliched dialogue.
Writer/director Mark Christopher doesn't want to escape from the film's
limited diversity but does make his characters interesting and Mike
Myers is good as Steve Rubell.  Myers has his accent down very well and
the film is a good dramatic turn for Myers and he keeps pace with his
colleagues Jim Carrey and Robin Williams who have jumped into the realm
of serious films with great success.  '54' won't quite do it for Myers
but if he stays on track, he can hold his own with those other actors.
The rest of the cast in '54' reminded me somewhat of the characters in
1980's 'Fame'.  A group of young people with dreams of reaching the big
time and finding it through any means necessary.  As the closing credits
of '54' come into focus, snapshots of the real Steve Rubell are shown
with very famous VIP's who frequented his club which closed in 1986 and
Rubell died in 1989, closing the book on a chapter of popular culture
which takes its place in the history of the 20th century.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Bob Bloom
 The people who populate the movie 54 are shallow, self-absorbed and
self-indulgent. In other words, they perfectly mirror the era as well as
the movie this feature depicts.
 54 is the story of that well-publicized New York disco, Studio 54, the
in-place in the '70s where anybody who was anybody went to be ogled,
photographed and pampered.
 The difficulty with 54, which was written and directed by Mark
Christopher, is that his script takes no point of view. Christopher neither
condemns nor glorifies the legendary excesses that were Studio 54's
hallmark.
 He keeps an uninvolved distance, thus keeping us from forming any
emotional attachment with any of the protagonists.
 The movie's one main asset is the surprising performance by Mike Myers as
Steve Rubell, the famous owner of the nightspot. He is part rebel, part
dreamer, part shrewd entrepreneur. He's smart enough and childlike enough
to pander to the dreams and desires of his clientele, yet stupid enough to
brag on TV about hiding profits from the IRS.
 Myers, in his first straight character part, is in turn appealing and
appalling. At one moment he can try to pressure a male employee into a
sexual situation, then at the next moment apologize for his bad behavior
and offer the young man a handful of cash.
 The story is told by Shane O'Shea (Ryan Phillippe), a New Jersey lad who
dreams of crossing the river to the Big Apple. Shades of John Travolta's
Brooklyn-bound Tony in Saturday Night Fever.
 Eventually, Shane does come to New York, attracts Rubell's eye and is
admitted to the promised land. His looks get him a job as a busboy, and he
is later promoted to the prestigious position of bartender, where he mixes
with and makes drinks for the rich and famous.
 Shane's dream is to meet soap star Julie Black (Neve Campbell), a fellow
Garden Stater. But both characters are so sketchily drawn that even when
they do hook up, it's no big deal. The chemistry between Shane and Julie is
nonexistent.
 54 is a very cold, uninvolving movie. It's all strobe lights and glitz,
all substance. It's sort of like the musical era it covers.
Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
STARRING:   Mike Myers, Neve Campbell, Ryan Phillippe, Salma Hayek
DIRECTOR:   Mark Christopher
WRITER:     Mark Christopher
RATED/YEAR: R/1998
        It's always disappointing to realise, halfway through a movie,
that you have no idea what it's about.  On the surface, "54" seems to be
straightforward enough: it tells the story of a legendary '70s Manhattan
nightclub, a place so trendy that the doorman refused admission to 9 out
of every 10 people who tried to get inside.  For those lucky enough to
gain entrance, drugs and sex were free for the asking.  Simply being seen
at the club could get you invited into an elite social circle, which
included not only royalty, but the biggest celebrities of the day.
        Shane (Ryan Phillippe) is a teenager with a crush on soap-opera
star Julie Black (Neve Campbell).  When a newspaper article reports that
Julie has been spotted at the nightclub several times, the handsome but
dim-witted Shane pays a visit.  Gaining admission via his rugged good
looks, he manages to land a job as a busboy, eventually working his way
up to bartender.
        The club's owner, Steve Rubell ("Wayne's World" creator Mike
Myers, in a highly-touted dramatic role), is a drug-addict who runs
the nightclub his way, with little regard for the consequences of his
actions.  (In a nationally-televised interview, for example, Rubell
cheerfully admits that he lies to the IRS about how much money the club
makes.)  His is a world of pills, music, and regrets, none of which are
easily remembered the next day.
        This had the potential to be an interesting story, but the
execution is, alas, very clumsy.  The script is unfocused; it doesn't
really succeed at conveying either the excitement of the era, or any
indication why the club was so highly regarded.  It's "The Last Days of
Disco" meets "Boogie Nights," with all the high-points somehow lost
along the way.
        But whatever flaws the film may have, they are not the fault of
Myers; indeed, so convincing is his performance that all thoughts of Wayne
Campbell and Austin Powers were forever purged from my mind.  Myers knows
that Rubell is not a hero; he's just a junkie trying to get by the best
way he knows how, and he plays the role accordingly.  I have new respect
for his abilities as an actor.
        In fact, Myers is so good that the film suffers when he's not on
the screen.  Although the character of Rubell is intriguing, he's reduced
to a relatively small part.  Considering that nearly all the events which
happen in the movie (including an IRS audit of the club and the death of
a patron) would significantly affect his character, it's surprising that
he's given so little screen time in comparison to the exceedingly bland
Shane.  Ryan Phillippe seems to be sleep-walking through his role,
mumbling his lines and showing little interest in any of the remarkable
things that happen to him.  Neve Campbell turns in her usual competent
performance, but the script never allows her to become a "real" person.
She remains just another face passing briefly through Shane's life.  This
is one of the most disappointing facets of the movie: getting to know the
"real" person behind the Famous Actress persona that Julie wears should
be fascinating; instead, it comes off as trite.
        The movie succeeds, however, at capturing the claustrophobic feel
of a crowded nightclub.  Nearly every scene is "lit" only by neon signs
or disco strobe lights.  The grainy, underexposed look which results from
this method of shooting is just right.  The music is also well-chosen,
capturing the feel of the late '70s.  Rubell's spoken introductions to
many of the songs are also quite amusing.  An "A+" for atmosphere, but
alas, that alone doesn't make a great film.
        "54" isn't horrible, but it steps all over itself while attempting
to convey a story.  Rather than needing MORE plot, the film needs to drop
its superfluous elements and instead focus on its most interesting
storyline: Steve Rubell's struggle to keep the club open in the face of
adversity.  The film rolls along nicely during Mike Myers' scenes, but
overall it plays out like the disco music featured on its soundtrack:
occasionally pleasant, but ultimately going nowhere.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please write
to the above address and ask to be put on my mailing list.

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Ryan Phillippe; Salma Hayek; Sela Ward; Breckin Meyer & Sherry
Stringfield
54 focuses around the character of Shane O'Shea, played by Ryan Phillippe,
and how his life takes a dramatic turn after he becomes an employee of New
York's infamous nightclub, Studio 54, during the 1970's. The fictitious
story of the Phillippe character that is quite weak, but the interesting
look at the fact-based events at the club more than made up for the
weaknesses of the main character. I actually didn't expect a whole lot going
in, so I was very surprised at how good 54 really was.
Mike Myers is brilliant as Studio 54's owner, Steve Rubell -- I had to
actually remind myself a couple of times that I was watching Myers and not
the real Steve Rubell. Salma Hayek and Neve Campbell fans will be
disappointed. While both actresses are featured prominently in the ads for
the movie, their parts are really nothing more than fairly minor supporting
roles. The film's unlikely star, Phillippe (I Know What You Did Last
Summer), is not a bad actor, although I'm not sure if he would have been
able to carry the movie if it weren't for the 70's atmosphere. It kept my
attention most of the time, thereby minimizing the possibility of catching
any deficiencies in his performance. Also helping Phillippe was the fact
that the entire supporting cast was strong. While Myers and Campbell have
limited roles in this film, they do add significantly to it. Hayek isn't bad
for the most part, but there are a couple of scenes where she is a bit
painful to watch.
I have to admit it -- I actually enjoyed listening to all of the 70's disco
music. I feel I should be attending some sort of group therapy session after
owning up to that. Although I am happy to say that I still think that
everybody in the seventies had to be on some serious drugs for them to
actually go out in public dressed like they did. I must say that after
watching 54, I really wished that the club were still open. It looked like
it was a hell of a party. I think 54 captured the reason the club became the
hot spot that it was during the late 70's and early 80's. Sure, the
fictitious story of Phillippe's character was not great, but just the
atmosphere and look of the movie really did make me feel as though I was
actually there experiencing the party times at 54 during a more carefree and
swinging era. I'm sure another Mike Myers' character, Austin Powers, would
have approved. Worth checking out if only for the interesting look into the
world of the beautiful people in the 70's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Mike Myers transforms himself in 54, in virtually every way a
performer can transform himself.  Myers plays Steve Rubell, the nightclub
impresario who created the Manhattan disco to be the center of the party
universe in the closing years of the 1970s.  Rubell presides over his
kingdom in a heavy-lidded barbiturate stupor, wheezing a forced monotone
cackle as he moves among his glitterati guests.  In his first truly
dramatic screen performance, Myers is still recognizable with his
open-mouthed little boy grin, but here he uses it to create an overgrown
little boy convinced he can only find friends by throwing the coolest
party.  Wearing Izod shirts and sweaters, thinning hair perched
pointlessly on top of his head, Rubell is a proto-Gates portrait of
entrepreneurial geekdom.  If people won't play with him because they like
him, he'll make them play with him because they need him.
     Rubell is a fascinating character, performed by Myers with a mix of
savvy, pathos and self-absorption.  If writer/director Mark Christopher
had had the common sense to make 54 the story of Steve Rubell, he might
have created a great film.  Instead, he makes his protagonist a New Jersey
kid named Shane O'Shea (Ryan Phillippe) who comes to Manhattan in 1979 to
break away from his dead-end family.  He first manages to catch Rubell's
eye and gain entry into the club, then lands a job as a busboy, eventually
moving up the Studio 54 social ladder to bartender.  Along the way he
befriends another busboy named Greg (CLUELESS's Breckin Meyer) and Greg's
wife, aspiring disco diva Anita (Salma Hayek).  He also becomes infatuated
with Julie Black (Neve Campbell), a soap opera ingenue whose
Jersey-to-the-big-time success story inspired him to action.
     54's base-line narrative is so trite it almost plays like a parody, a
disco-era goof on MIDNIGHT COWBOY or some far less seminal corruption of
the innocent melodrama.  Naturally, the fame and flash go immediately to
Shane's head as he poses for modeling shoots and buys a Camaro with
personalized plates; naturally, he is lured into a sordid world of sex,
drugs and money; naturally, he begins to alienate his friends and family.
Christopher heads down every obvious path in the interactions between
Shane, Greg, Anita and Julie, apparently oblivious to the fact that every
one of those characters is a piece of cardboard.  Perhaps it was his idea
of irony:  like Studio 54 itself, his movie invites people in so they can
stand around and be attractive.
     The plotting and pacing are so relentlessly predictable that the film
doesn't even work well as a sociology lesson.  Occasionally it offers
peeks at the side rooms or basement hot spots where the elite meet to
revel in their elite-ness; occasionally it focuses on the politics of
succeeding in an environment of glamour for glamour's sake.  Shane's
voice-over narration dutifully informs us why Studio 54 was so unique and
popular, but there's never enough energy for us to believe him or care.
54 spends 91 minutes pointing off-handedly at this or that detail like a
bored tour guide.  For a film that includes money-laundering, ripping off
the mob, sex, drugs, celebrities and plenty of boogie oogie oogie-ing, it
almost never gets the pulse racing.
     The notable exceptions are the scenes involving Myers as Rubell.
Sure, the character isn't perfectly realized; in fact, it probably seems
better simply because it's surrounded by so much uninspired junk.  There
is something undeniably intriguing about Rubell, however, as his king of
the playground glee mingles with self-destructive anxiety and paranoia.
It's also amusing watching him tell a talk show host "the road of excess
leads to the palace of wisdom" after we've seen him lying in a pile of
money, drooling vomit.  There's a great story in that unhappy collection
of contradictions, but you won't find it amidst the smothering cliches of
Mark Christopher's script.  With all the stranger-than-fiction truth at
his disposal, he somehow found the least interesting approach possible.
Steve Rubell would have been disgusted to see Studio 54 turned into
something so...mundane.

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "54" (Miramax Films)
 This is the second movie about decadence of the late '70s era
and, like Whit Stillman's "The Last Days of Disco," it never achieves
what it sets out to accomplish. Written and directed by Mark
Christopher, it's the story of a working-class kid (Ryan Phillippe)
who escapes from the dingy reality of New Jersey by using his angelic
looks, lithe body, and ingratiating personality to infiltrate the
netherworld of Manhattan's night club scene. He's befriended by a
groggy, drug-addled homosexual, Steve Rubell (Mike Myers), one of the
owners of Studio 54, who hires him to be one of the bare-chested
busboys, joining the other narcissistic wannabees at the nightly
bacchanal. There's the coat-check girl (Salma Hayek) who wants to be a
diva; her drug-peddling husband (Breckin Meyer), who wants to be a
bartender; and the soap-opera actress (Neve Campbell) who wants to
social-climb. Everyone wants to be rich and famous. No one wants to
admit the truth. There's a sad, revealing exchange when Rubell bawls
out one of his doormen for allowing some "yids" through the velvet
rope and into the club. "But they were your family, Steve," the
unfortunate employee explains. Where the film falls short, however, is
in evoking the spectacle, the glamorous glitter, and the deafening
musical excitement that epitomized the legendary Studio 54. It was
filmed on a tiny sound stage in Toronto, and it shows. The characters,
particularly the women, are woefully underwritten, and, since Ian
Schrager, Rubell's real-life partner and a pivotal force at the club,
refused to participate in this venture, there's an obvious gap in the
quasi-historical narrative. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"54" is a sleazy, seedy 6, capturing only the deceptive energy of that
hallucinogenic, cocaine-snorting era.

Author
Michael Redman
There are some people who, no matter how good a time they're having, no matter
how great a place they're at, are convinced that somewhere, someone is having
more fun than they are. There must be a better party elsewhere and they're
going to find it. Obviously it's an endless quest.
In the late seventies Studio 54 was that better party for the world. Whatever
was going on there must be the ultimate revelry. All the glitteratti were
there and it was all so decedent.
Nineteen-year-old Jersey boy Shane O'Shea (Ryan Phillippe) is hanging out with
his dull friends at the same old dull discos and desperately wants to see the
bright lights. He convinces his buddies to drive across the river in hopes of
catching a glimpse of his fantasy girl, soap actress Julie Black (Neve Campbell).
Star-watching in front of the club, Shane impresses owner Steve Rubell (Mike
Myers) with his angelic looks and is allowed access to the zone forbidden to
mere mortals. Figuratively and literally leaving his friends behind, he enters nirvana.
Our ambitious, but non-too-bright hero is willing to do anything to get ahead.
With the help of his new pals, buser Greg (Brecklin Meyer) and his wife
coat-check girl Anita (Salma Hayek), Shane soon rises to the sought-after
position of bartender. Christened "Shane 54", he has all the drugs and women
he can abuse.
Let me get my prejudices out of the way up front. Disco barely qualifies as
music and the late seventies were an ugly time. Fashions, culture, the mood of
the nation: ugly, ugly, ugly. With that in mind, here's my opinion of the movie:
Did the shirtless busboys really look that bad in their short shorts? Beneath
the glitz, was it all that lifeless? 
Although the club is filled with Andy Warhol, fifteen-minute celebrities,
flashing lights, pounding music, sex and drugs on the dance floor, sex and
drugs on the balcony and sex and drugs in the basement, it's fairly boring.
Somehow I had the feeling that Studio 54 was more exciting. This film makes
decadence look downright listless. Like many people, they're doing the same
thing every night and not really enjoying it very much.
The club is the place to be seen and everyone is working the crowd or trying
to. Anita wants to be a singer and is willing to sleep with whoever she has
to. Julie wants better roles and is willing to sleep with whoever she has to.
You get the idea.
With one exception, the actors are disappointing. Phillippe certainly looks
the role of the fallen cherub, but "confused" is the only passion that he can
summon. The women are beautiful, but, as in the real world, that only goes so
far. Some personality would be nice. 
People are introduced, almost become interesting and then disappear. Sela Ward
is a record executive with a fondness for nose candy and younger men and the
potential for characterization, but where does she go? Ellen Dow plays an
elderly disco grandma who might be a human being, but turns into a cliche.
The exception is Myers' Rubell. Known for "Wayne's World" and "Austin Powers",
this role is a change of pace for the comedian. The ultimate host of the party
that never ended, Rubell is pathetic. Wallowing on a bed filled with cash, he
is propositioning a young busboy but has to pause for a moment to vomit on the
money. He's the rich guy with lots of friends because he has cool stuff, but
no one really wants to spend much time with him. Myers does a grand job with
the character. As unpleasant as he is, the movie only comes to life when he is onscreen.
You feel sorry for Rubell. He wants so much to be liked. Pity and
embarrassment are the primary emotions that nearly every character inspires.
Poor Shane. He doesn't fit with the "in" crowd. Poor Shane. Now he does fit in.
The plot is a thinly-disguised old one. Small-town boy goes to the big city,
is seduced by the glitter but finds out that the old values are the true ones.
According to this film, Blake was wrong. The road of excess doesn't lead to
the palace of wisdom, it goes nowhere. Surprise, surprise, the folks were
right. Sex and drugs are bad things. Come home Shane.
Like a disco, the film is fascinating and looks great for the first half hour.
Then nothing happens. As the third and lessor seventies movie after "Boogie
Nights" and "The Last Days Of Disco", "54" may be the one to finally put that
decade to rest. Hopefully the movie-going public is discoed-out.
If everyone wanted to be at Studio 54, I wonder where the people who were
there wanted to be. Surely there was a better party somewhere else.
Michael Redman has written this column for over 23 years and doesn't have the
time to think about why disco died. He's trying to figure out where the summer
of 1998 went. Email your theories to Redman@indepen.com.
[This appeared in the 9/03/98 "Bloomington Independent", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at Redman@indepen.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@indepen.com
This week's film review at http://www.indepen.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
54 (1998)
Ryan Phillippe's abs, Salma Hayek, Breckin Meyer, Mike Myers, Neve 
Campbell, Sela Ward, Heather Matarazzo, Ellen Albertini Dow. Written and 
directed by Mark Christopher. 91 minutes.
Rated R, 1.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
The barkers at old-time carnival freak shows lured customers in by 
promising they would witness spectacles like "The Incredible Two-Headed 
Dog" or "The World's Tiniest Man." After the suckers plucked their money 
down, they were led behind dingy curtains only to encounter a bored dwarf 
and a mummified puppy with a "second head" clumsily grafted on. "54" is 
the cinematic equivalent of one of those phony carny shows. After 
promising a festival of bare bodies, wild sex and debauchery set in the 
epicenter of late 70s - early 80s hedonism, they instead deliver a tepid 
morality tale that plays like a half-baked rip-off of "Saturday Night 
Fever."
It wasn't always this way. In an recent issue of "Interview," "54" star 
Ryan Phillippe described the film as an edgy work showing, among other 
things, a pivotal character free-basing onscreen. He spoke of kissing his 
buddy and co-star Breckin Meyer in one scene. Phillippe said "Who's going 
to deny that at Studio 54 in 1979 there were a lot of people going both 
ways, guys who'd make out with a boy upstairs and then head down to be 
with a girl? That was real; it happened. Why should I be afraid of 
evoking reality?"
Apparently all that evoked reality scared the bejesus out of the 
executives at Miramax, because the free-basing is gone, along with 
Phillippe and Meyer's kiss and virtually all of the gay and bi-sexual 
scenes (one anonymous male/male smooch remains, immediately followed by a 
reassuring glimpse of a hetero couple screwing with their clothes on). 
Hell, there's hardly even any straight sex scenes left in the film, for 
that matter. In their zeal to avoid making mainstream audiences feel 
squirmy, Miramax cut the hedonism out of a movie about hedonism. What in 
the world were these people thinking? Did they actually believe we wanted 
to see Studio 54 presented as a bowdlerized "Afterschool Special?"
So what's left? "Saturday Night Fever Jr." Phillippe plays Shane O'Shea, 
a lower-class Jersey kid who leaves his blue-collar neighborhood for the 
glitz, glitter and excess of Steve Rubell's Studio 54. After baring his 
torso for the smarmy Rubell, Phillippe gets hired as a busboy, making 
friends with barback Greg (Breckin Meyer) and his wife Anita (Salma 
Hayek), a coat-check girl with disco diva aspirations. Shane soon lands a 
coveted job as a 54 bartender, a position ensuring instant fame in 
Rubell's world of flesh and flash. The young buck sets his sights on soap-
opera actress Julie (Neve Campbell), even as his increasing drug use 
begins to numb his feeble little brain. Meanwhile, Rubell rolls in money 
(literally), taunts the IRS on television and swallows every pill in 
sight. You can figure out the rest of the story on your own.
Mike Myers gives a broad, but diverting performance as geeky dictator 
Rubell, playing him like a male version of his "it's like buttah" 
character from "Saturday Night Live." Rubell's notion of mixing 
celebrities and civilians in a glamorous exclusive neverland of 
debauchery was inspired, and watching this nebbish Napoleon rule his 
kingdom is fascinating, but Rubell serves only as a supporting player 
while the focus remains on the utterly vapid Shane O'Shea.
As Shane, Ryan Phillippe is very, very bland. One female admirer 
describes him as having "the body of Michelangelo's "David" attached to a 
Botticelli face." This woman clearly needs to get out to art museums more 
often. Phillippe is a slight, somber introvert and, try as he might, he 
is never believable as a stud here. Breckin Meyer displays far more 
charisma as the frustrated barback deemed too short to be a bartender 
(oddly, Meyer is only a bit shorter than Phillippe, who is not a tall man 
either). Salma Hayek is adequate as a would-be singer, while the 
cadaverous Neve Campbell barely makes any impression at all. 
Memo to Miramax. Having Ryan Phillippe describe the wild life at Studio 
54 in voice-overs doesn't cut the mustard. We want to see it. If you're 
going to finance a movie like this, give the final cut to the director 
and have the balls to stand behind him. Memo to everyone else. If you 
want to see an edgy film about sex, drugs and excess, rent "Boogie Nights.
" If you want a gritty, well-acted portrait of the disco era, rent 
"Saturday Night Fever." But whatever you do, don't waste your money on 
the superficial, cowardly "54."  

Author
Michael Dequina
If there were a subject just screaming to be made into a film, it was
Studio 54, the late Steve Rubell's infamous New York discotheque, which
came to symbolize the taboo-smashing excesses of the disco era's heyday:
easy drugs and even easier sex between everyone, all set to a thumping
dance beat.  So when Miramax started production on _54_ last year, the buzz
of hype and resulting anticipation began: an edgy film as down-and-dirty as
the club itself, written and directed by a promising first-timer (Mark
Christopher) and starring some hot young talent (Salma Hayek, Neve
Campbell, newcomer Ryan Phillippe, and Mike Myers in his dramatic debut).
My, how easily does the worm turn.  Hype turned into damage control when
word got out about 11th-hour reshoots (wrapped only a month ago), a rash of
studio-imposed edits that left virtually the entire cast and crew
(especially Christopher) unhappy, and the very likely possibility that
Miramax would not screen the finished film for critics.  At the last
minute, though, Miramax did decide to screen the film (so hastily scheduled
was the screening that Myers's last name was misspelled on the invitation,
not to mention the numerous typos in the press notes) for a media audience
that came away noticeably less than impressed, myself included.  And with
good reason--somehow, some way, the supremely disappointing _54_ has made
the historically hip haven of hedonism... boring.
Although Christopher has distanced himself from the finished film, he
still must shoulder some of the blame for _54_'s lifelessness.  _54_
focuses, for the most part, on a tight-knit trio of employees at the club:
coat check girl/aspiring disco diva Anita (a wasted Hayek); her busboy
husband, Greg (Breckin Meyer); and, most prominently, the fresh-from-Jersey
Shane O'Shea (Phillippe), who enjoys a quick rise from busboy to head
bartender.  These characters are about as generic as those descriptions.
In focusing on the hired help, Christopher really missed the boat.  With
the exception of the flamboyant, always-woozy Rubell (Myers, in a
well-modulated turn), the meaty stories to be told at Studio 54 are not the
workers' but those of the people who went there to party; not necessarily
the numerous VIP guests, but the wild eccentrics who managed to be picked
from the crowd by the club's famously hard-ass doormen and dance (among
other things) the night away with the rich, famous, and infamous (the only
taste of the crowd comes by way of Ellen Dow's feisty Dottie, a disco- and
drug-crazed granny, but she's a peripheral character at best).  As such,
aside from the expected overhead crowd shots, there is precious little
actual _dancing_ in _54_.  What is a disco film--especially one about the
pinnacle of the movement--without the dancing?  Even Whit Stillman's
_The_Last_Days_of_Disco_, which wasn't so much concerned with disco as it
was witty dialogue within a group of hip-to-only-themselves club-hopping
preppies, featured at least one extended dance scene.
Dancing isn't the only thing glazed over in _54_--so is the sex, but that
may not be entirely Christopher's fault.  From what I've heard, his
original vision was something considerably more dark and daring, starting
with the Shane character: he was conceived (and actually filmed) as a wild,
morally ambiguous bisexual, which would have made an efficient springboard
to cover the pansexual pleasure palace aspect of Studio 54's legend.  But
somewhere between principal photography and the final cut, Shane was
defanged and quite literally straightened out; consequently, so was the
film.  Aside from a brief glimpse of erotic encounters toward the beginning
of the film, Shane's fleeting dalliance with seductive socialite Billie
(Sela Ward), and an abbreviated bedhopping montage, the sexual dimension is
just about ignored.  Shane, in this incarnation, is sanitized to the point
of blandness, an idealistic do-gooder who pines for a frequent guest at the
club, Julie Black (Campbell), a worldly soap star with, yes, a heart of
gold.  This tacked-on "romance" would have been slightly less tedious if
either Campbell or Phillippe made some connection with each other or the
audience.  They fail on both counts.
Ultimately, _54_'s failure comes down to three letters: F-U-N.  As in,
there isn't any to be had for the audience.  Too much time is spent with
the boring Shane, and too little is spent on the club floor, where all the
action took place.  Anyhow, though, whatever time is spent on the 54 floor
is not used very effectively.  When Anita finally gets her big break and
perform onstage at the club, it should be a euphoric height, for her, the
crowd, and the audience; however, the moment doesn't get a chance to reach
that level, for it is cut short by a moment of forced sentimentality, which
also mars the film's conclusion (one of the last-minute reshoots).
Strangely upbeat and wistful, the resolution is wholly unconvincing and
unsatisfying.
There is an interesting portrait of Studio 54 out there--two of them, in
fact--but _54_ is not one of them.  They're on cable TV: a couple of
documentaries produced by E! and VH1.  These two fascinating looks at the
club and all the sordid goings-on within it show that there's still a great
disco movie to be made.  The problem is, after the critical and certain box
office failure of _54_, the subject may have run its Hollywood course.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
J.K. Salisbury
Cast: Ryan Phillippe, Salma Hayek, Mike Myers,
Previews: Ronin, Rounders, A Civil Action
The late 70's and early 80s was a period of decadence.        Also, the end of
innocence as we now know it.  It was our last dance, our chance to be wild,
crazy, uninhibited, before the specter of AIDS unknowingly came down upon us.
I was a child of this decade, I lived through the hostage crisis, fuel
shortages, and yes...even disco.  Recently, Hollywood has grasped to relive
this era, via the movies.  Films like Boogie Nights, The Wedding Singer and
The Last Days of Disco have tried to recreate the attitude and essence, of a
time that some don't want to remember.        Some people are not proud of their
actions then, responding to questions with the response of..."Yeah, I lived
through it" and nothing more. In the annals of these dark decadent days, lies
the legend of Studio 54.  Steve Rubell's non-stop party, the place where the
rich, and average, stripped away their social titles, and just had fun,
ignorant of the consequences.
This was a legend that was ripe for a good retelling, it had sex, scandal,
reckless abandon, stars, drugs, and a complete and total lack of basic
morality.  Why then, is this telling of the story so boring.  You would think
that a movie about the one place on earth where nothing was taboo,   and the
people who inhabited it, would be a story of never-ending energy.  But alas,
this movie falls flat, very flat.  The reason..the characters, and the script.
I didn't care what happened to the characters, because I didn't care about
them.  The director tried to cram so many stories down your throat, that he
never bothered to develop any of them, so that we could care.
Also, the music, the one thing that most people of that era remember, is the
music.  The lemming-like infectiousness of such songs as YMCA, Hot Stuff, and
Don't Leave Me This Way, made disco memorable, if not despised, by most back
then.  But 54 fails miserably to cash in on the current retro trend.  The
Wedding Singer, Grosse Pointe Blank, and Romy and Michelle's HS Reunion
succeeded in this facet.
It is hard to judge the performances, because the script is do devoid of any
cohesiveness.  Ryan Phillippe, (I Know What You Did Last Summer's pretty
blond stud-o-the-moment) has nowhere near the acting ability to carry this
film (He should contact Mark Wahlberg, for "80s Movie-Acting Lessons
101")..you, my son, are definitely no John Travolta. He seems more concerned
with flexing his ab's, and grooming his blond locks, then actually acting.
Salma Hayek is radiant, and oozes sexuality, but she, along with husband
Breckin Meyer are given too many stories, and not enough smart dialog to make
us care. The biggest waste in this movie is Neve Campbell, not because of her
performance, as much as her purpose in the movie.  She has about 15 minutes
of screen time, and seems to serve only two purposes really.  One, to draw
hormonal teens, Scream fans, and Party- of-Fivers in, and Two, to be the
obligatory love interest.  Short of those, I fail to see the relevance of he
character here at all.        Also, an underplayed, undeveloped appearance, by the
very talented Heather Matarazzo (Welcome To The Dollhouse), who steals every
scene with Phillippe, and maybe, if more of the focus was here, we would've
cared more.
The true star, and shining moment of this movie, is Myers. He played his part
perfect, made you forget you were watching Wayne, or Austin Powers.  It made
me wish he was given a better script or story to flex his dramatic muscle
with. His portrayal of Rubell, in his pallid, sickly, yet relaxed exuberance,
was very well done, and for those who knew, or met Rubell, may bring back
some haunting images. His presence onscreen, is the only time the movie is
even mildly interesting.
Boogie Nights set the standard for movies aiming to show the decadence of
this era, and succeeded because it never tried to be too much, and made us
care, and empathize with each character.  That is this movie's greatest
failure.  A pointed analogy occurs near the climax of this movie, which was a
bit cheesy, but did make it's point.  Indeed, the party is truly over, wait
for cable, and hustle, bump and busstop, in the privacy of your own home.($$)

-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Mark Christopher
Starring: Ryan Phllippe, Salma Hayek, Breckin Meyer, Mike Myers, Neve
Campbell, Sela Ward, Heather Matarazzo, Sherry Stringfield, Ellen Albertini
Dow, Lauren Hutton, Michael York, Jared Haris, Art Garfunkel, Peter
Bogdonovich
Studio 54 attracted so many weird and bizarre people to its gates that it's
a wonder why the film about the life and death of the Studio centers itself
on one very boring, cliched individual, not to mention an ensemble of
people who wouldn't be at all fascinating unless they worked at the Studio,
which they did according to this film.  Are we supposed to believe that out
of all the strange folk who populated the Studio nightly, that a character
who is a bland ripoff of Tony Manero would really make a good protagonist
for the film about it?
"54" belongs in the elite group of films known as "The Big
Disappointments": the films that attain so much hype and/or so much
potential in its creation that they come off worse than they are when they
are finally finished.  I was heavily awaiting "54," not the least because
I've become fascinated with the infamous club, which has been the subject
of an engrossing documentary that's been running all summer on VH1, which
is, weirdly enough, much more intriguing and engrossing than this "edgy"
film.
Perhaps more importantly, "54" is part of the blossoming subgenre, "The 70s
Nostalgia Film," which has been picking up mighty steam, what with "Boogie
Nights" and "The Last Days of Disco" coming out within the year, and both
being such damn good movies that not only captured the feel of a certain
time period (the late 70s party and the early 80s wakeup period), but
brought us interesting and real characters, like Scotty, the tragically gay
boom mike operator from "Boogie Nights," and Charlotte, the ironically
clueless and bitchy co-protagonist from "The Last Days of Disco," not to
mention several others.
"54" deals not so much with the timeline of the Studio (how it began, how
it was run, how it ended) - that's all dealt with in the narrated opening
and finale - but more interested in the characters who populated it.  This
is a definite plus.  Here's a film that could have been a fascinating 2
hour plus film about the tragic people who went there to party, and had to
wakeup in the 80s when things like diseases, economy problems, and perhaps
worst of all, Reagan, all hit and forced everyone into a rude awakening. 
The story of the studio is tragedy in itself: let's look at how it all
affected the people.
But this film doesn't let that happen.  It gives us a half-assed
protagonist named Shane O'Shea (Ryan Phillippe, from "I Know What You Did
Last Summer"), who's chief character trait is the fact that he's from New
Jersey, which also happens to be his chief character flaw (I guess).  He's
dim-witted, into being part of "the scene," and soon finds he's become a
bit of a rave amongst the Studio regulars...a bit like "Saturday Night
Fever," 'cept no Travolta and no real interest put into him.  Poor, poor
Phillippe struggles to make him interesting, but all he is a half-assed
character and not at all our ticket to the glimpse of the decadence going
on inside the club that he could have been.
Shane begins to hang out with some other denizens of the club, like Anita
(Salma Hayek), a wannabe Donna Sommers, and her young hubby, Greg Randanzo
(Breckin Meyer, from "Clueless"), who helps Shane become a bartender and
rise to a bit of fame.  Although he begins to get somewhere when he sleeps
with the foxy Billie Auster (Sela Ward), an exec of sorts, he falls in lust
with a soap star named Julie Black (Neve Campbell), and thus the boring
romance subplot that's all too not necessarily important to anything else
in the film and never really becomes interesting at any point in the film.
The film's sole point of interest and one major strongpoint is the all-too
necesary personage of Steve Rubell, played by Mike Myers (you heard me). 
Rubell, the famous head of the Studio acted as if he never stopped partying
ever, and is an easy metaphor for the life and times of his creation, but
the film, thanks to a surprisingly strong performance by Myers, makes him
out to be more than that.  Notice the scenes sole shocking scene, where he
tries to get felatio from one of his male employees in turn for a
promotion: Myers brings the humanity to Rubell in this scene, and a couple
others, that some of us who've only seen him on TV never saw, and proves to
be perhaps the one aspect of Studio 54 that this film actually nails.
First time feature director Mark Christopher proves that he's a better
director than a writer, though not too terribly much.  His story is trite
and shallow, as are his characters, and his direction is shockingly flat,
especially for a film about this subject.  It's as if he had a great story
to tell, but instead opted for the easier route.  The Studio's recreation
is amazingly accurate, though, and very impressive, but his direction is
never captivating enough.  Some people say that a film does its job if it
makes you want to visit the locale it takes place in (despite the film's
tone, I still want to go to Rome and its many nightclubs after I saw
Fellini's "La Dolce Vita"), and when I watched "54," I didn't particularly
want to stay.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
DeWyNGaLe
Ryan Phillippe, Neve Campbell, Mike Myers, Breckin Meyer, and Selma Hayek star
in this drama about the nightclub called 54.  54 is a nightclub that existed in
the 70s and 80s in Brooklyn, New York.  This film tells the story of a man's
dream of becoming a star, and how he made it to the top.  Ryan Phillippe stars
as Shane O'Shea, a city kid.  He and his buddies always hang out on the
weekends, and don't have much to do.  Shane always wonders what is on the other
side of the bridge, in Brooklyn.  One night he decides to go there with a few
buddies.  He sees the club of Studio 54.  He has heard all about it in the news
and papers.  Many stars go there, people he admires.  The only problem is, you
are only allowed in if you are on the list, or you are good looking enough to
enter.  
Mike Myers plays Steve Rubell, owner of Studio 54.  He has it made.  He is
pulling in a ton of money from 54.  He is the one who makes the list of the
people allowed in, and he is also the judge of who is good looking enough to
enter.  On the night that Shane comes, he allows Shane in, but he does not
allow his friends to come in.  Shane feels guilty, but enters anyway.  He is
about to have the time of his life.  He enters 54, and sees all the glitz and
glamour.  People are dancing, music is playing, and everyone is happy.  It is
like a dream come true.  He is now placed on the list, so he is allowed in at
anytime.  As he comes back more and more, Steve offers him a job as a
bartender.  He meets Greg (Breckin Meyer) and his wife Anita. (Selma Hayek) As
the movie progresses, the three of them become great friends.
One night at 54, Shane spots his dream girl, Julie Black. (Neve Campbell) Julie
is a soap star who is extremely popular.  He has always wanted to meet her and
now is his chance.  He talks with her, and they seem to get along.  As the
movie goes, Julie and Shane meet some more and get together.  They become
boyfriend and girlfriend after meeting the day after Chirstmas.  The
relationship between Shane and Julie was way underdeveloped and not told very
well at all.  Neve Campbell gives a fair performance in her short, ten minute
roll.  She could have been shown a lot more, and her character could have been
developed.
Greg and Anita's marriage is having many problems.  Greg thinks that Anita and
Shane are having an affair, which they are not.  Anita's dream is to be a
singer.  She wants to sing at 54 in front of everyone, and she finally gets the
opportunity at a New Year's Eve party.  Everyone likes her performance, and
Greg is very proud.  Greg and Anita eventually work everything out, including
their friendship with Shane.
Steve keeps bumping Shane up in the ranks at 54.  Shane is making a lot of
money now, and he is modeling for magazines.  Steve is proud to have Shane at
54.  Greg is becoming quite jealous, and their friendship is becoming
jeopardized.  Shane is still close to his family at home, but he is mostly in
the city now.  He is starting to become unhappy with his life and what he is
doing.  The only thing he has is the title "Shane 54" and a whole lot of money.
 Now, Steve is in a lot of trouble with the law.  He is losing money, and they
are ordering for 54 to be shut down.  Once it is shut down, everything is back
to normal.  Shane is still a big star, rich and famous.  Anita and Greg stay
together and remain friends with Shane.  A few years later, they re-open 54 for
a couple of years.  Everyone is there for the reunion, including Shane.  Shane
simply smiles at Steve, not speaking a word to him.  54 is not all that it used
to be, and a few years later 54 would shut down once again.
54 is an over dramatic tale of the rise and fall of a boy with a dream.  It had
a lot of potential to be a great film, but failed.  The plot is not strong at
all, and a lot of things aren't explained in the film.  Ryan Phillippe over
acts throughout the entire movie.  Mike Myers deserves an Oscar nod for his
role as the owner of 54.  Breckin Myer, Neve Campbell, and Selma Hayek all give
mediocre performances in their underdeveloped roles.  If they had not cut out
so many scenes, and added about twenty more minutes of footage, 54 could have
been a real winner.

Author
DeWyNGaLe
Ryan Phillippe, Neve Campbell, Mike Myers, Breckin Meyer, and Selma Hayek star
in this drama about the nightclub called 54.  54 is a nightclub that existed in
the 70s and 80s in Brooklyn, New York.  This film tells the story of a man's
dream of becoming a star, and how he made it to the top.  Ryan Phillippe stars
as Shane O'Shea, a city kid.  He and his buddies always hang out on the
weekends, and don't have much to do.  Shane always wonders what is on the other
side of the bridge, in Brooklyn.  One night he decides to go there with a few
buddies.  He sees the club of Studio 54.  He has heard all about it in the news
and papers.  Many stars go there, people he admires.  The only problem is, you
are only allowed in if you are on the list, or you are good looking enough to
enter.  
Mike Myers plays Steve Rubell, owner of Studio 54.  He has it made.  He is
pulling in a ton of money from 54.  He is the one who makes the list of the
people allowed in, and he is also the judge of who is good looking enough to
enter.  On the night that Shane comes, he allows Shane in, but he does not
allow his friends to come in.  Shane feels guilty, but enters anyway.  He is
about to have the time of his life.  He enters 54, and sees all the glitz and
glamour.  People are dancing, music is playing, and everyone is happy.  It is
like a dream come true.  He is now placed on the list, so he is allowed in at
anytime.  As he comes back more and more, Steve offers him a job as a
bartender.  He meets Greg (Breckin Meyer) and his wife Anita. (Selma Hayek) As
the movie progresses, the three of them become great friends.
One night at 54, Shane spots his dream girl, Julie Black. (Neve Campbell) Julie
is a soap star who is extremely popular.  He has always wanted to meet her and
now is his chance.  He talks with her, and they seem to get along.  As the
movie goes, Julie and Shane meet some more and get together.  They become
boyfriend and girlfriend after meeting the day after Chirstmas.  The
relationship between Shane and Julie was way underdeveloped and not told very
well at all.  Neve Campbell gives a fair performance in her short, ten minute
roll.  She could have been shown a lot more, and her character could have been
developed.
Greg and Anita's marriage is having many problems.  Greg thinks that Anita and
Shane are having an affair, which they are not.  Anita's dream is to be a
singer.  She wants to sing at 54 in front of everyone, and she finally gets the
opportunity at a New Year's Eve party.  Everyone likes her performance, and
Greg is very proud.  Greg and Anita eventually work everything out, including
their friendship with Shane.
Steve keeps bumping Shane up in the ranks at 54.  Shane is making a lot of
money now, and he is modeling for magazines.  Steve is proud to have Shane at
54.  Greg is becoming quite jealous, and their friendship is becoming
jeopardized.  Shane is still close to his family at home, but he is mostly in
the city now.  He is starting to become unhappy with his life and what he is
doing.  The only thing he has is the title "Shane 54" and a whole lot of money.
 Now, Steve is in a lot of trouble with the law.  He is losing money, and they
are ordering for 54 to be shut down.  Once it is shut down, everything is back
to normal.  Shane is still a big star, rich and famous.  Anita and Greg stay
together and remain friends with Shane.  A few years later, they re-open 54 for
a couple of years.  Everyone is there for the reunion, including Shane.  Shane
simply smiles at Steve, not speaking a word to him.  54 is not all that it used
to be, and a few years later 54 would shut down once again.
54 is an over dramatic tale of the rise and fall of a boy with a dream.  It had
a lot of potential to be a great film, but failed.  The plot is not strong at
all, and a lot of things aren't explained in the film.  Ryan Phillippe over
acts throughout the entire movie.  Mike Myers deserves an Oscar nod for his
role as the owner of 54.  Breckin Myer, Neve Campbell, and Selma Hayek all give
mediocre performances in their underdeveloped roles.  If they had not cut out
so many scenes, and added about twenty more minutes of footage, 54 could have
been a real winner.

Author
Jamie Peck
54
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
Studio 54 was a haven for the rich, famous and generally good-looking 
before it closed its doors forever in 1986. Inside, anything went and, 
we are told, everything did. The film's fictional main character is 
Shane O'Shea (Ryan Phillippe, the jerky jock from "I Know What You Did 
Last Summer"), a fresh-faced 19-year-old who dreams of venturing beyond 
the club's velvet rope and coming face-to-face with the wild decadence 
he can only read about in magazines. His wish comes true when Studio 54 
owner Steve Rubell (Mike Myers) spots him amongst a crowd of gawkers one 
night in '79 and permits him passage - but not before he doffs his 
hideous shirt, of course. 
Once inside, Shane becomes seduced by the club's dizzying vortex of sex 
and drugs. He has such a good time that he doesn't want to leave, so he 
seeks employment as a busboy. He quickly becomes friends with Greg 
(Breckin Meyer) and Anita (Salma Hayek), a married couple who work along 
side of him; Greg's a fellow busboy with aspirations to make the big 
money as a Studio 54 bartender, while Anita checks coats but desires a 
recording contract to call her own. After rubbing elbows (among other 
things) with a renowned socialite (Sela Ward) and gaining the personal 
interest of Rubell, Shane begins to ascend to the upper echelons of 54. 
But fame doesn't come without a price. 
"54"'s major shortcomings lie within its handling of the supporting 
players - at a slim hour-and-a-half, the film is too short to take on 
such a multi-character focus, and more than a few balls are dropped in 
the resulting juggling act. Alleged last-minute edits and reshoots are 
more than likely to blame for the occasionally rushed development and 
ambiguous interaction, since "54" sometimes feels like it's missing a 
scene here or there. Nowhere is this more apparent than in Shane's 
relationship with soap opera actress Julie Black (Neve Campbell), a 
frequent Studio 54 patron whom he's long admired from afar. The romance 
is prodded along before it has a chance to transform into something 
special. 
That "54" works despite these limitations, then, is largely due to the 
competence and energy with which it's assembled. Sure, it's shallow, 
slick, sanitized portrait of a bygone age, and sure, we've seen the 
rags-to-riches story gazillions of times, but debut director and 
screenwriter Mark Christopher keeps things moving with lively snapshots 
of the Studio 54 hustle and bustle and an even livelier cast to inhabit 
his bouncy vision. The film boasts some fine comic creativity, the 
pinnacle of which is Disco Dottie ("The Wedding Singer"'s Ellen Dow), an 
elderly dancing queen who plays the loving grandmother in public, but 
slides up to Shane behind 54's closed doors and asks for a "funky little 
treat." 
The solid, sexy cast smooths out - if only while you're caught up in the 
film - any rough spots belonging to their alter-egos or the plot. 
Newcomer Phillippe has the charisma and Joisey accent down pat; he and 
Campbell, as fetching as ever, look so good together it's a shame their 
subplot goes nowhere. Meyer exhibits the congenial appeal that made him 
a delight to watch in "Clueless" (he was the stoner with the 
Joker-smile), while Hayek simply sizzles, especially when leading a 
dance class with the mantra, "One, two, three, attitude!" Sherry 
Stringfield, unidentifiable under big '70s hair, takes on her first 
big-screen gig since she left "ER" as Rubell's accountant, but she's 
criminally underused. 
As the droopy-eyed, drug-addled Steve Rubell, Myers is worth the price 
of admission alone. When he's not playing the life of the party, the 
ex-"Saturday Night Live" comedian strips away all of Rubell's confidence 
and swagger to show a man desperately trying to fill his empty, unhappy 
life with exorbitance; it's a moment worthy of pity when, while lounging 
on a bed of money and vomiting from a particularly heavy evening, he 
attempts to seduce one of his employees. And while his performance is 
largely serious, Myers mixes the empathy with a delicate "Austin 
Powers"-esque wink, thus keeping consistent with "54"'s overall feel - 
gaudy, larger-than-life and satisfyingly ornamental, not unlike a giant 
disco ball.

Author
Matt Williams
The 70s are a hot era in Hollywood right now.  54 is the latest film to
jump on the retro train.  This time, the infamously exclusive disco,
Studio 54, is the backdrop for yet another drama detailing the
soullessness of the disco age.
The central character of 54 is Shane O'Shea (Ryan Phillippe), a young
man who sees the exotic world of Studio 54 as his escape from his
pathetic life in New Jersey. Catching the eye of the Studio 54 owner,
Steve Rubell (Mike Myers), Shane soon finds himself with a job as a
busboy.  Night after night, he is able to catch glimpses of the rich and
famous, including his dream girl, soap star Julie Black (Neve Campbell).
Shane quickly strikes up a friendship with some other club employees, a
married couple Anita and Greg (Salma Hayek and Breckin Meyer).  Anita is
only a hat check girl, but she dreams of being a disco diva, if only she
could get a break.  Greg is a busboy, with his eye on the best job at
Studio 54:  being a bartender, where you're a mini-celbrity and the
money, drugs and sex just keep rolling in.
Money, drugs and sex are the lifeblood of Studio 54 (the disco's most
prominent piece of decor is cocaine-related).  So much of flows
throughout the film that you just know there's going to be a big
denouement.  And when it comes, the moral message is awfully heavy
handed.  The entire climax of the film ends up being awkward and
unconvincing.
But at least the film delivers a message there, which is more than can
be said about the remainder of the film's half-dozen subplots.  They're
simply tossed into the film with no thought (or screen time) given to
any semblance of resolution. A few of the luckier subplots are tidied up
with a quick gloss-over narration, but in any case it's sloppy
filmmaking.
Ryan Phillippe is rather unremarkable as the film's centerpiece.  Of the
entire cast, only Mike Myers truly stands out.  And that is mostly due
to the fact that he displays a heretofore unknown range of talent with a
dramatic role.
For all its glitz, 54 paints the 70s as a rather boring era. Billed as
the party that never ends, in 54 it seems more like the party you just
can't wait to leave.  At least the soundtrack is interesting.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Harvey S. Karten
  Would you believe that disco is dead?  The clubs with long
lines of people who had to beg the bouncers to admit them;
the pulsating music that took the hordes of young far from
their daily troubles; the throbbing rhythms that propelled John
Travolta into stardom with his great film "Saturday Night
Fever," now a mere historical curiosity making way for his
darker, more cynical works.  It's gone the way of the cha cha. 
Or has it?  In the final scene of "The Last Days of Disco," last
year's meditation on the dance phenomenon, writer-director
Whit Stillman gets a contemporary subway car to its feet,
passenger by passenger rising to boogie, then an entire
station on the New York transit swinging to the beat.  If the
clubs are boarded up or metamorphosed into shopping
centers filled with stores like P.C. Richard and Kmart, the
music in our minds remains, a lasting tribute to the 1980s
phenomenon that captured youthful hearts and minds
throughout the west.
   This introduction might serve as a model of what a movie
about the country's most notable disco should elicit by its
conclusion: an excitement in the audience, a feeling that,
"Hey, the music, the dancing were great!  Maybe we'll come
to our senses and revive the delirium that defined the era?"
Unfortunately Mark Christopher, who wrote and directed "54,"
is not sure what he wants to do with the material.  Loosely
constructed as a series of incidents in the life of a rising
young protege of "54" impresario Steve Rubell, Mr.
Christopher's movie at times looks like a parody of the era, at
other times like a celebration of a period haplessly gone by. 
Trash bags full of money turn up from time to time with only a
smidgen of evidence of how this much cash changed hands,
but most important the film does not make clear exactly how
its narrator and central character rose from a New Jersey
working-class boy to a semi-celebrity of New York's nightly
social scene.  There is an a hint of how his sexual chemistry
gave him all the push he needed to transform his life. No
sooner does any sensuality hit the screen than Alexander
Gruszynski's camera pans away to introduce the next
vignette.
   The fictionalized story of how Studio 54 changes the life of
one young man opens in a small New Jersey town just three
miles across the water from the Manhattan which few of its
residents seem ever to visit.  When 19-year-old Shane
O'Shea (Ryan Phillippe), his curly blond hair newly coiffed by
some small-town Vidal Sassoon, hitches a ride across the
river with two friends, he finds himself just outside the
entrance of the famed Studio 54 where Steve Rubell (Mike
Myers) himself, aided by a bouncer, makes careful picks as to
who gets admitted.  When Shane gets the thumbs up and his
two friends dismissed, we get the earliest hint of a chemistry
between him and Mr. Rubell.  Asked to remove his shirt to
display the body of Michelangelo's David (according to one
female admirer) he ascends the hierarchy to bartender and it
is in that position that he, by adding assorted pills to the
patrons' drinks and by performing services not clearly defined
by the movie, begins to acquire heavy cash with his growing
fame.  But he never quite loses his working-class roots and in
one case, at a Park Avenue party, he becomes the butt of
jokes by patronizing richniks, one of whom calls him a
troglodyte (which Shane thinks is a compliment).
   Shane's female side, Julie Black (Neve Campbell), is a
soap-opera performer eager, like Shane, to use whatever
charms she has to rise in her career, obviously not stopping
at the bedpost on the way to the ladder.  In her case just as
in his, director Christopher barely hints at the intrigue as
though he wants to give Shane and Julie the benefit of the
doubt--to allow us to assume that pure looks and bauble were
enough to make their calling a success.
   Nor do we get to see much dancing. Compare "54" with
"Dance With Me" for an indication of how a story--not
necessary a great one--can feature both hot dancing and a
semblance of chemistry from its stars.  For all of Ryan
Phillippe's good looks, he is oddly uncharismatic, and Mike
Myers, in portraying a man who electrified the disco scene
like no other in his time, performs the role as a man
perpetually on downers.  
Rated R.  Running time: 89 minutes.  (C) Harvey Karten 1998
