Title
Review for Simple Twist of Fate, A (1994)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Steve Martin, Gabriel Byrne, Catherine O'Hara, Laura
Linney, Stephen Baldwin, Alana Austin.
Screenplay:  Steve Martin.
Director:  Gillies MacKinnon.
     Give this to Steve Martin:  he has an eye for the classics.  In
1987, he updated "Cyrano de Bergerac" into the gentle romantic comedy
ROXANNE; this year, he has turned George Eliot's SILAS MARNER into A
SIMPLE TWIST OF FATE.  It would appear, however, that Martin did not
learn the lesson of ROXANNE's success.  His script for ROXANNE retained
only the most basic plot elements, while ditching the tragedy.  With A
SIMPLE TWIST OF FATE, he has been perhaps too faithful, letting a
deliberate exposition and somber tone dull a potentially appealing
redemption tale.
     Martin stars as Michael McCann, a one-time schoolteacher who
retreats into seclusion and bitterness in a small Virginia town after
his wife betrays him.  Five years later, McCann's life takes another
unexpected twist when an infant girl wanders into his home.  The
child's mother, a heroin addict, has died of an overdose; her father,
Congressional candidate John Newland (Gabriel Byrne), is unwilling to
take the political risk of claiming his illegitimate daughter.
Instead, Newland arranges it so that McCann can raise the girl, who is
named Mathilda.  Fatherhood coaxes McCann out of his shell, and he
begins to live life again.  However, as the years pass, Newland begins
to regret his decision, and tries to insinuate himself back into her
life.
     There is something jarring about watching a film constructed like
a 19th century novel set in the present day.  A SIMPLE TWIST OF FATE
takes its own sweet time establishing its plot and characters, and for
the first half hour it seems muted to the point of inaudibility, and
very dark in its tone.  But curiously, the one thing missing from this
overlong first act is any sense of who Michael McCann really is.  He is
viewed mostly through the reactions of townspeople, or filmed in shadow
hoarding his precious gold coins.  I felt that I knew more about
characters like Newland's wayward brother (Stephen Baldwin) than the
man whose transformation is to provide the centerpiece for the film.
     To be fair to Steve Martin the screenwriter, Steve Martin the
actor may not have been the best choice for this role.  For the past
couple of years, in such films as LEAP OF FAITH, Martin has been trying
to establish himself as a legitimate dramatic actor, and while he is
always an appealing presence, he just doesn't look comfortable in
scenes which require serious emotion.  His standard "repressed emotion"
take is on frequent display in A SIMPLE TWIST OF FATE, and it usually
just makes him look slightly constipated.  At those moments, I just
couldn't lose myself in the pre-Mathilda McCann.
     There is much more to enjoy in the second act of SIMPLE TWIST.
Martin is very good as the nervous novice father, and his scenes with
the various child actors playing Mathilda are generally quite
charming.  Alana Austin gets the most screen time as the 11-year-old
Mathilda, and she has an easy chemistry with Martin (her sister Alyssa
plays the 5-year-old Mathilda).  Also appealing are the performances of
Catherine O'Hara as a quirky antique shop owner who befriends McCann
(and, in a pleasant surprise, *doesn't* become his romantic interest),
and Gabriel Byrne, slipping in and out of a Virginia accent but
providing some nice shading for a part that could have been a stock
villain.
     Unfortunately, the conclusion of A SIMPLE TWIST OF FATE becomes a
predictable and overlong custody battle, complete with courtroom scenes
and a hissable lawyer.  The more melodramatic A SIMPLE TWIST OF FATE
became--and ironically, the more like its source material-- the less
effective it was as a film.  As nicely as the bonding between father
and daughter was portrayed, it couldn't compensate for the plodding
story on either end of it.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Steve Martin is at it again remaking classic stories in new,
fresh, and wonderful ways.  His best still is "Cyrano de Bergerac",
which he called ROXANNE but which I wish he had called it simply
CYRANO.  This time it is "Silas Marner" and he titles this one A SIMPLE
TWIST OF FATE, but SILAS would have been my choice.
     As you undoubtedly remember, Silas Marner is a story about a
cynical and angry hermit who has gold hidden away that gets stolen,
but, as a twist of fate, he somehow gets a little girl to care for and
raise in return.  Martin, who wrote the excellent script, plays Silas
as a more positive creature especially after he gets his little girl.
Whereas the real Silas Marner story dwells on the gold, this one
focuses more time on the interaction of Martin and the girl.  Overall,
the original Silas Marner is a morose story, but with happy parts.
Martin's version is much more upbeat.  Even the villains are not that
awful.
     This is a wonderful and realistic movie yet with a fairy tale feel
to it at times.  You can especially see this in the mystical and
symbolic balloon episode.
     The high points of the movie are the ingenuity of the script and
Martin's acting.  Mathilda McCann, the little girl, was played by Alana
Austin (age 11), Alyssa Austin (age 5), Alaina Mobley (age 3), Callie
Mobley (age 3), Victoria Evans (age 1 - 1-1/2), and Elizabeth Evans
(age 1 - 1-1/2), and they were excellent.  The rest of the characters,
especially Catherine O'Hara as April Simon, were all good.
     The major problem in the show was the miscasting and misdirecting
of the villains.  The rich bad guy was played by Gabriel Byrne and his
evil brother by Stephen Baldwin.  Byrne barely acted in his part -
Zzzzz.  Baldwin, who was a character you should have really hated,
played him way too soft.
     A SIMPLE TWIST OF FATE is a very positive and life affirming
movie.  I heartily recommend it to everyone.  It is rated PG-13, but I
thought of it more as a PG show.  No profanity that I can remember nor
any violence.  Personally, I would take any kid over say 9.  The movie
runs 1:41.  I give it ***.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: September 2, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     If you read George Eliot's SILAS MARNER when you were in school,
you will recognize the story has been used as the basis for this film
written by Steve Martin and updated to 1984.
     Michael McCann (Martin) is a cabinet maker who leads a quiet life
as a recluse.  When one day a woman with a small child is near his
secluded home, the woman falls and freezes to death.  When the cabinet
maker goes out to investigate a noise he heard, the young girl toddles
into his home through the open door ... and McCann's life changes
forever.
     McCann is everything a father should be to the baby, who he names
"Mathilda,"  unaware that John Newland (Gabriel Byrne), a local
politician, is the biological father.  However, Newland, who is
wealthy, intends one day to get her back.  When that happens, the court
must decide if the biological father, who can afford to bring up his
daughter in style and send her to an Ivy League school when she grows
up, should get custody or should the poor man who raised her.
     The cast includes Stephen Baldwin as Newland's thieving brother,
Laura Linney as John Newland's wife and five young girls who are
Mathilda at various ages.  Alana Austin is Mathilda at age 10 and a
great little actress she is!

Author
James Berardinelli
     A SIMPLE TWIST OF FATE is Steve Martin's re-telling of George
Eliot's SILAS MARNER.  This is not the first time Martin has
coordinated a cinematic adaptation of a classic--his ROXANNE applied
a modern twist to Edmond Rostand's CYRANO DE BERGERAC.  However,
whereas ROXANNE's appeal came through its affable mix of humor and
light drama, A SIMPLE TWIST OF FATE's uneven tone and poorly-crafted
last act make it a far less successful effort.  It's on the occasions
when A SIMPLE TWIST OF FATE strays some distance from SILAS MARNER that
the film flounders most noticeably.
     The story opens in 1979.  Michael McCann (Martin) is in a state of
nervous anticipation.  His wife is pregnant and he's delighted--until
she tells him that he's not the father.  Four years later, Michael is
living alone in a ramshackle house with painted-over windows.  Since
his divorce, he has become a sullen recluse who cares only about his
ever- growing collection of gold coins.  Gold, someone once told him,
will never let you down.  Not like human beings.  Then, one night while
he lies in a drunken stupor, a thief (Stephen Baldwin) breaks in and
steals everything.
     Not long after that, on a cold winter's evening, a child
mysteriously appears in McCann's house, having wandered in out of the
snow.  Outside, her mother (Amelia Campbell) lies dead of a heroin
overdose.  McCann is unexpectedly touched by the little girl, and
decides that fate has brought her to him to replace his lost coins.  In
a move that surprises everyone, he decides to adopt her.  With the aid
of local politician John Newland (Gabriel Byrne)--who happens to be
the child's natural father but won't acknowledge her for fear of
damaging his career--he is given custody of his daughter, whom he
names Mathilda (played by a number of child actors, most notably Alana
Austin).
     Over the next decade, there is no more devoted a father than
Michael McCann.  Newland, however, is beginning to have second
thoughts, especially since his wife Nancy (Laura Linney) can't have
children.  He makes it a point to get to know Mathilda, courting her
favor by buying her expensive gifts.  Eventually, when he feels the
situation is ripe, he sues for custody.
     The movie's limited strength lies in the bonding between 10-year
old Mathilda and her father.  There's a sense of genuine emotion in
this relationship.  Some of the scenes between the two display a
lightheartedness that almost lifts A SIMPLE TWIST OF FATE from the
miasma that had settled around it during the overly-long introduction.
     Unfortunately, Martin's script calls for more than the simple
telling of how a man's love for a child changes his personality.
Hence, we're subjected to court scenes featuring the attempts of the
(nasty) Mr.  Newland to take away the beloved daughter of the (nice)
Mr. McCann.  The premise is preposterous and the execution inept.
     Like fellow comedian-turned-actor Robin Williams, Steve Martin has
the ability to give a competent dramatic performance, especially when
the role allows for a little comic relief.  The problem with A SIMPLE
TWIST OF FATE is that the comedy is not well-blended with the drama.
With a tone that wobbles like an unsteady top, this film leaves its
lead actor floundering for a point of equilibrium.
     Alana Austin's greatest asset is her charm.  Her acting skills are
certainly not well-honed, but her smile can file off a few rough
edges.  Thankfully, she's also not insufferably cute.
     A SIMPLE TWIST OF FATE is riddled with problems (the film's Labor
Day weekend release indicates how uncertain Touchstone is about its
appeal).  It doesn't seem that anyone had a clear idea of what they
wanted the film to be--a frothy dramatic comedy or a maudlin
melodrama.  Working from solid source material, it's amazing how
disjointed the result is.  SILAS MARNER is worthy of an update--just
not this one.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
