Title
Review for Eu, Tu, Eles (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Laura Clifford
When Darlene (Regina Case) returns to her poor home in the Brazilian Northeast
after giving birth to her son, she finds her mother being waked and her
old neighbor Osias (Lima Duarte) in a matrimonial frame of mind.  She gives
a second son to Osias, the homeowner, but her third belongs to his cousin
Zezinho (Stenio Garcia), the kindly homemaker.  A fourth son is clearly 
on the horizon with the arrival of handsome field worker Ciro (Luiz
Vasconcelos) in the Brazilian entry for Best Foreign Language Film, "Me
You Them."
While "Me You Them" is described as a film about a woman with three husbands,
it's really about how earth mother Darlene takes a series of lovers and
manages to keep peace among them.  Osias is a marriage of convenience - he
offers a roof, but uses Darlene as a cook, accountant and slave laborer.
Zezinho, who clearly adores his cousin's wife, gives Darlene the frienship
her husband does not.  Osias is duped by the affectionate couple until the
arrival of his second son, who bears the blue eyes of Zezinho.  Unexpected
jealousy causes Osias to take more of an interest in Darlene, accompanying
her and Zezinho to the dances they used to attend alone.  It's during one of 
these outings that Darlene meets Ciro (who resembles a "The Fly" era Jeff
Goldblum).  Osias offers to take Ciro in as a border to thwart Darlene's
romance with Zezinho, but they both lose out to the handsome stranger.
When Darlene confides to Zezinho that she's pregnant with Ciro's child and 
that he wishes to leave with her, Zezinho convinces Osias to build Ciro
his own room in order to get Darlene to stay.
Where Andrucha Waddington's film excels is in its ability to immerse us
in the culture and environment of a remote land.  Unlike the fantastical
Brazilian comedies "Woman On Top" and "Donna Flor and Her Two Husbands,"
"Me You Them" is very rooted in reality.  Life and conditions are harsh,
people are sturdy and get dirty working in the fields.  The film has a
bright glow about it, however, with brilliantly crisp lensing by Breno
Silveira.  And while Regina Case is no Penelope Cruz, she embodies a magnetic
vitality, an earthy sexiness.  Gilberto Gil's original music reflects
the regional sound, with heavy emphasis on the accordian.
"Me You Them" tells the tale of an extraordinary woman in a male dominated
society.  It will also transport you to a place of harsh and uncommon beauty.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Brazil's entry to this year's Best Foreign Film competition at the Oscars
(Me, You, Them  wasn't nominated) is set in a remote area in the northeast
part of the country.  It's extremely flat, barren, burnt and desolate, and
its inhabitants live well below the poverty level.  Hammocks are the rage
because nobody can afford a proper bed, which is a good thing because the
film's main character jumps from man to man so quickly, she'd probably have
broken one or two of them.
As the film opens, a pregnant woman named Darlene (Regina Case) gets stood
up at the altar.  She hitches a ride out of town and, three years later,
returns with her son in the hopes of having her mother bless him.  But she's
too late.  Her mom has died, and Darlene finds herself fighting off marriage
proposals from an old man named Osias (Lima Duarte). "You're not ugly," he
declares, "Marry me."  She accepts, largely because he has a nice house.
Ah, to be in love.
Osias doesn't treat Darlene too well, using her basically to perform the
cooking, cleaning and baby-birthing (they have one child together).  This
drives the attention-starved Darlene into the arms of her husband's live-in
cousin, Zezinho (Stęnio Garcia).  He and Darlene have an affair, and a kid
of their own, and the whole process repeats itself when the hunky young Ciro
(Luís Carlos Vasconcelos) shows up.
The men are all jealous of each other, but nobody really ever shows it.
They're all just happy to be involved in Darlene's life for some reason.
She's a radiant woman - not conventionally attractive, especially by
Hollywood standards, but special enough for a group of men not to act
like...well, men, and beat their chests to win her affection.
Them is full of long stretches with no dialogue, giving the film a very high
nod-off factor.  It's kind of like a baseball game - the ball is only in
play for about 10 minutes.  The dialogue picks up toward the end, but until
then, you'll be able to enjoy the film's wonderful scenery and
cinematographer Breno Silveira's exquisite compositions bathed in natural
light.  Gilberto Gil provides a soothing score that gives the film a real
flavor.  Director Andrucha Waddington keeps things interesting with a series
of long shots that enhance the film's beauty.  Them may not be for everyone,
but fans of polygamy and Iranian director Abbas Kiarostami should thoroughly
enjoy it.
1:44 - PG-13 for sexuality and thematic content
