Title
Review for Bad ma ra khabad bord (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
George Wu
Abbas Kiarostami's latest film, The Wind Will Carry Us, starts off
with a series of extreme long shots depicting a lone vehicle winding
along hillside roads while its inhabitants amusingly discuss how to
locate their destination.  These people come alive for us before we
ever see a face, and this is a tactic Kiarostami utilizes throughout
the picture.  As a matter of fact, we will only ever see one of these
journeymen up close, a certain Behzad (Behzad Dourani), initially
identified as a telecommunications engineer.  These men reach a
provincial village of white buildings couched in a small valley, but
what are they doing here?  Why are they concerned with the health of a
sick old woman?  And is Behzad really who he says he is?  Kiarostami
is slow in offering up answers, and ironically the film is more
interesting before we get them around the midway point.
The film takes its title from a poem recited within it, and refers to
how certain things are beyond our control and is simply dependent on
nature.  Like Kiarostami's Taste of Cherry, the theme of The Wind Will
Carry Us is life and death, but more specifically our governance over
death and exploitation of life.  To this end, Kiarostami injects
technology into the mix.  The village Behzad finds himself in  resists
the use of his cell phone in a comical manner, and the villagers
resent his camera.  Both embody the conflict of technology with a
specific culture, a way of life.  Metaphorically, Behzad and we, the
audience, are continually unable to see many of the people Behzad
encounters.  The sick woman never appears onscreen, a milkmaid refuses
to show her face, and the most we glimpse of a hole digger is his
feet.
Kiarostami's camera placement and use of space is extraordinary here.
His cinematographer, Mahmoud Kalari, perhaps Iran's foremost Director
of Photography, deserves praise for capturing landscapes that
practically glow.  Some of Kiarostami's metaphors are overburdened --
a turtle turned over on its back, a dug-up leg bone -- and the film
becomes a little overlong and repetitive, but for the most part,
Kiarostami makes nigh a misstep in producing one of his best films
yet.
