Title
Review for No Contest (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Chuck Dowling
No Contest (1994) ** out of ***** - Cast: Shannon Tweed, Robert Davi, Andrew
Clay, Roddy Piper. Directed By: Paul Lynch. Running Time: 98 minutes.
"No Contest" is a VERY blatent rip-off of "Die Hard", just on a much lower
level of intelligence, credibility, and creativity.
The film opens as Sharon (Shannon Tweed) is hosting some sort of silly
beauty pagent. Ms. Galaxy, or something like that. We are told that Sharon
is a famous action film star, and immediately all common sense is thrown out
the window. A group of terrorists, led by the "Diceman" himself Andrew Clay,
then takes over the hotel where the beauty pagent is being held. If there
was any residual common sense left over, throw it out the window too, cause
it's "Die Hard at a beauty pagent!!!" They apparently are trying to kidnap a
congressman's daughter who is participating in the pagent.
Robert Davi, who was actually in "Die Hard", plays a private security agent
assigned to the congressman's daughter. It's an odd bit of casting, making
Davi a hero. But Tweed is supposed to be a kickboxing champ, so nothing
matters at this point. Wrestler Roddy Piper has a brief, but menacing role
as one of the terrorists. Basically, he's the Alexander Godunov character.
In a strange way, "No Contest" is almost fun. ALMOST. It's just so silly,
you might just be entertained. Clay is subdued in his role, but he does a
good job with it. Davi is interesting to see as the good guy, and Piper is
always fun to watch no matter how bad his movies are. And Tweed? Well, she
doesn't even get naked in this one, and really, 99% of the people who rent
Shannon Tweed movies are only after that one thing. I seriously doubt anyone
will care that Tweed (well, actually a horrible body double filmed as far
away from the camera as possible) is kicking the bad guys in the groin.  [R]
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, film related
links, and reader's reviews.

Author
Zeke M. Towson
     Did you ever see "Die Hard?"  Imagine Shannon Tweed as Bruce
Willis, Andrew Dice Clay as Alan Rickman, Robert Davi as Reginald
velJohnson, and Roddy Piper as Alexander Godunov.  Make Tweed a former
Ms. Galaxy/Tae Kwon Do expert/movie star.  Make the hostages beauty
queens instead of business people.  Make the loot $10 million in
diamonds.  Instead of the company vault, have the loot come from the
senator/father of one of the beauty queens.  Change the office building
into a hotel.  Change L.A. into Toronto.  Keep the computer geek.  It's
all there.  DIE HARD at the Ms. Galaxy contest.  C-4 rigged to blow
the building, inept cops trying to rescue the hostages.  Davi giving
instructions to Tweed on a cellular phone.  Tweed running roughshod all
over the terrorists.  Snappy one-liners.  Certainly not an HBO
"original" if you know what I mean (and I think you do).
     For what it's worth, the movie is very, very disjointed.  I found
myself wondering time and again how a character made it from one place
to another, or how they picked up object A or item B.  The director
seems to have a fetish filming Shannon Tweed running up and down
stairwells.  I can think of maybe six or seven "stairwell" scenes, none
of which are in the artistic vein of Luc Besson.  Character development
is nearly non-existent.  Character interaction is pretty much the
standard bad guy/good guy fare, with a little twist that doesn't really
lead anywhere.  The main purposes of this film seem to be:
     I'm not exaggerating, almost every character is a potty-mouth.
The dialogue leaves much to be desired as well.  Aside from maybe one
or two scenes this movie really is DIE HARD re-worked.
