Title
Review for Love, etc. (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Marion Vernoux.
Cast: Charlotte Gainsbourg, Yvan Attal, Charles Berling.
1999 - 100 minutes.
Rated R (for nudity, sexual innuendo, and profanity).
In French w/ English subtitles.
Capsule Review, August 15, 1999.
Marion Vernoux's "Love Etc." is a rare French film that could almost be 
mistaken for an American film in its portrayal of three characters who are 
about as annoying and dim-witted as a bunch of flies. Marie (Charlotte 
Gainsbourg) is a lonely art restorer who puts a personal ad in the local 
newspaper in hopes of meeting a charming companion who can sweep her off her 
feet. Benoit (Yvan Attal), a man with no self-esteem and a low self-worth 
level, answers it, but afraid that she will be turned off by his appearance, 
sends her a picture of his better-looking, womanizing best friend, Pierre 
(Charles Berling), instead. Once Benoit and Marie meet, they instantly hit it 
off, even going as far as to get married soon after. Unfortunately, their 
unexpected happy existence is threatened when Pierre begins hanging around 
more and more, until Benoit is convinced they are having an affair behind his 
back. If not for the mature performances by the three leads, especially 
Charlotte Gainsbourg, "Love Etc." would be an almost completely worthless 
drama, but as is, it is more frustrating than anything. From the very 
beginning, it is obvious that the actors are playing characters who are well 
below their own personal intelligence, as they all are forced to do unlikely, 
at times cruel, things to one another. A few subtle, quiet moments sneak in 
every once and a while, but the asinine screenplay, by Julian Barnes, 
destroys all signs of cinematic promise.
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman.
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Seth Bookey
(France, 1996; French with English subtitles)
   *Love, etc.* is one of those artsy French films that give good French
   art films a bad name. It is full of uninteresting characters with
   incomprehensible motivations and a lot of annoying touches that are
   supposed to make it more "fascinating." Truffaut's Jules et Jim is the
   film to which this one is compared, but Jules et Jim it ain't.
   The hook in *Love, etc.* is the "odd couple" friendship of Benoit (Yvan
   Attal) and Pierre Thibault de Montalembert. The former is shy and odd,
   and not lucky with the ladies, while the latter is cocky and confident
   and usually arranged the blind dates. Personally, I thought Benoit was
   much cuter than Pierre, and I guess a zero of self-esteem makes him
   such a schlub that when he eventually meets Marie (Charlotte
   Gainsbourg) via a personal ad, it is Pierre's photo he sends to her.
   So, Benoit and Marie fall in love and get married, but something odd
   develops between Pierre and Marie. The film's most interesting moment,
   cinematically, is when the wedding photos are being taken and the
   three principal characters speak directly to the camera about how they
   are feeling, while the rest of the image is still.
   What ensues is painful: Pierre starts harassing Marie with
   protestations of love soon after the wedding. Eventually, Marie's
   resistance is broken and all three characters get twisted in the
   inevitable emotional wreckage.
   I guess what bothered me most about this movie was that it confirms
   every horrible feeling you have about humankind. It's horrible to see
   a "best friend" betray another, simply because he decides at the last
   minute he is in love with the man's wife. Marring the film also is the
   "artistic" inclusion of music that is supposed to be a fine little
   touch, but gets very annoying very quickly.
   The best performance belongs to Attal as the wronged husband and
   lonely soul, as he vents his rage on Marie and Pierre once he finds
   out he's been betrayed.
   THEATRE NOTE: Despite reserved seating and plush seats, and an
   attentive and courteous staff, a gaggle of annoying women still had to
   be shushed by yours truly during the dramatic highpoint of the film.
   This seems to be a worldwide phenomenon.
   Based on a novel by Julian Barnes. Directed by Marion Vernoux.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html
