Title
Review for Freedom Song (2000) (TV)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
Freedom Song (2000) 
Running time 150 minutes
Genre: Drama
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0213668 
Official site: http://tnt.turner.com/tntoriginals/freedomsong/
Written by: Phil Alden Robinson and Stanley Weiser
Directed by: Phil Alden Robinson
Music by: Sweet Honey In The Rock and James Horner
Starring: Danny Glover, Vondie Curtis Hall, Vicellous Reon Shannon, 
Loretta Devine, Glynn Turman, Stan Shaw, Michael Jai White, 
John Beasley, Jason Weaver, Rae Ven Larrymore Kelly, 
Marcello Thedford, David Strathairn
Turner Network Television World Premiere Sunday February 27, 
 7pm Eastern
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsfreedom.html
There will be some who flip past TNT next Sunday at 7pm Eastern, 
dismissing the movie "Freedom Song" as Yet Another Attempt by a 
White-owned media outlet to "cash in" on Black History Month before our 
29 days are up.  There will be others who will quickly change the 
channel because they're sick and tired of seeing "free at last" movies 
["Are you people still on that issue?  Haven't we gotten past that yet?  
Haven't you all Overcome by now?"].
My response to the latter would be to mention a little something called 
"Schindler's List". And to the former, I say, put the remote down and 
have a seat.  You just might learn a little something; and even if you 
don't learn something new, at least you'll remember something you may 
have forgotten.
The Story (WARNING: some spoilers contained below):
This is the question asked of Owen Walker (Vicellous Reon Shannon), a 
Black teen growing up in Mississippi during the 1960s--a time when Jim 
Crow segregation laws were not only legal, they were looked on by many 
Whites as being "the way God wanted it".  
Owen's involvement in the civil rights movement begins when, as a young 
child in 1949, he wanders into the waiting room of a bus terminal--a 
waiting room marked "Whites Only".  For this "crime", a racist White man 
sitting in the waiting room forces Owen's father Will (Danny Glover) to 
spank Owen, against Will's wishes.  This is a turning point in Owen's 
life--as he said, the events prior to that during that summer day was 
his "last happy memory" as a child.
It's also a turning point in Will's life.  Having come home from 
servicing in the military, Will was no longer content to accept the 
status quo, and tried to organize the Black vote.  When they got wind of 
it, the Whites in his town conspired to put his gas station out of 
business.  Knowing full well that he'd have to "go along to get 
along"--to insure the survival of his family--Will soon ended his 
efforts to fight for change in the community.
But not Owen; already not respecting Will for having, in his eyes, caved 
in to racism instead of fighting against it, Owen becomes "hungry for 
courage", and joins a burgeoning struggle for civil rights in his small 
town of Quinlan.  Inspired by his Uncle Jonah (the magnificent John 
Beasley) and by the "Freedom Riders" he sees on TV, Owen dreams of the 
day that he can go back to that waiting room and get a small measure of 
revenge--even at the cost of his relationship with his father and mother 
Evelyn (Loretta Devine).
Others soon enter the movement, in different capacities.  Local barber 
T-Bone Lanier (Glynn Turman), and fellow students Isaac Hawkins (Jason 
Weaver) and Dora Charles (Rae Ven Larrymore Kelly), are joined by 
members of the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee (SNCC), a 
group of older students who "join the crusade to desegregate Quinlin".  
Among the SNCC members helping the young students' efforts are Archie 
Mullen (Stan Shaw), Coleman Vaughnes (Michael Jai White), and Marcello 
Thedford (Tyrone Franklin).  Peter Crowley (David Strathairn), a member 
of the U.S. Attorney General's Office (needless to say, a White man), 
also tries to help the growing movement.  And in the quietest 
tour-de-force that I've ever had the pleasure to witness, Vondie Curtis 
Hall plays Daniel Wall, a French teacher from Chicago that becomes the 
focal point for the drive to register Black voters--a task that becomes 
increasingly harder to do as local White opposition builds against him 
and the group.
The Upshot:
I'll be the first to admit that hearing "We Shall Overcome"--in the 
voices of my soft, sated contemporaries--makes me angry.  Partially, 
because it's sung with such little feeling and with so much ironic 
emptiness, by people who mouth the words without knowing the true 
meaning--but also because some forty years after the civil rights 
movement started in earnest, it should be "We HAVE Overcome".  Yes, to 
some extent, We have; but it's the extent that We haven't--mostly, 
because We failed to remember the lessons our mothers and fathers taught 
us--that makes me the most angry.  But that's another rant for another 
time; the tale told in "Freedom Song" predates the jadedness I sometimes 
feel about the lip service that's being done about the movement today.  
This movie is so rich, and its story so historically important, that I 
find it difficult to narrow it down to a simple review.  A few things do 
stand out in my mind, and are reinforced in the background info that was 
included with my tape.  
The first thing was that this story, unlike others we've read about in 
history books and in class (after "our story" finally began to be taught 
in school, that is) is that it was told from the standpoint of "ordinary 
people doing extraordinary things"; in this, I got a much more personal 
connection with what was happening.  Before there was Martin and 
Rosa--two who were and still are larger than life for many in the 
Black community--there were the unsung heroes who put their lives and 
their livelihood on the line, for what they thought was right; for what 
they thought was just.  This sense of paying homage to those "little 
people" comes across powerfully in "Freedom".  It's as if King and Parks 
were "royalty", admired but somewhat untouchable, more a concept than a 
reality; but soft-spoken people like Daniel Wall, struggling against all 
odds to do what he thought was right, were "jus' folks" like you and me.
Another aspect that "hit me where I lived" was the portrayal of just 
what it meant to show non-violence in the violently charged atmosphere 
of racist rage.  Two scenes in particular display this in full force: 
one involved the refreshingly good Michael Jai White; in a scene where 
his Coleman character speaks to Owen about the difference between being 
non-violent and practicing non-violence "as a political strategy, 
because it works," White showed off his physical and acting muscles.  An 
earlier scene was even deeper: to prepare the teens for the ugly hatred 
and violence that they would surely face at a sit-in, the SNCC workers 
subjected the kids to a taste of the kinds of heinous speech and actions 
the racist Whites would pour on them.  It is with no small sense of 
irony that I watched that scene; having heard much of the same kinds of 
filth spewing--for vastly different reasons--from modern-day Black 
characters such as the ones in 1999's "Thicker Than Water", I truly 
wanted to cry from the bitterness that welled up in me.
There are, admittedly, some problems with this production.  The whole of 
the civil rights movement, as portrayed in "Freedom", seems to be 
simplistically narrowed down to Blacks not being allowed to register to 
vote or to sit in "Whites Only" cafeterias and bus stations [this, of 
course, doesn't include the beatings and killings of Blacks in the 
effort to vote or sit; contrary to the silly definition of some American 
laws, I don't consider murder a "violation of civil rights".  Murder is 
murder, plain and simple].  By concentrating primarily on those two 
issues on an individual level--with emphasis especially on Owen's 
stubborn blindness about wanting to sit in the waiting room of his first 
experience with racism--the story almost trivializes the fullness of the 
struggle for civil rights, ending up making an unwitting "White Man's 
Ice Is Colder" statement (which is ironic in and of itself, considering 
a humorous scene at the end of the movie).  Had this been based on a 
specific true incident, this wouldn't have been as problematic; but 
since this is a fictionalized account, this weakness is more pronounced.
It also doesn't help that there's a sense of repetition, especially in 
Owen's scenes; with the caveat firmly in place that I'm reviewing the 
unfinished press version, this movie could definitely stand some tighter 
editing.   As for Owen's role, while I like the power that Shannon 
brings to it, his constant screen-time and Owen's one-note 
characterization, detracts from other key players--notably Glover and 
Devine, both of whom I was anxious to see more of, and sad that their 
own stories of struggle were not given as much "play".  Without those 
seasoned actors providing more of Will and Evelyn's grayshades view of 
the reality of Living While Black in states like Mississippi in the 
1960s, the viewer was left with an overabundance of the non-subtle black 
and white broadstrokes painted by the majority of the characters.
Still, even with these and other minor problems, "Freedom Song" remains 
a powerful movie about a period that some people want to forget--and 
other people never can.
Behind the scenes:
There's so much involved with this story, so much "behind the scenes" 
info that I'd love to share with my readers, but time and space do not 
permit (and I've probably said too much already).  Allow me, though, to 
share three of those background pieces with you...
I was thrilled when the folks at TNT told me that acappella group Sweet 
Honey In The Rock were doing the soundtrack for "Freedom"; I've long 
been a silent fan of theirs, ever since I saw them perform here in 
Lansing "Culture City, it ain't" Michigan.   I was doubly thrilled to 
read the press release from the Sony Classical group that said the 
soundtrack for "Freedom Song" which features "Sweet Honey" and composer 
James Horner, would be available in stores starting February 15; it's 
also featured on Sony Classical's web site.  You know I have one on 
order...
I was also pleased to find out that Turner Learning, Inc is providing a 
"Freedom Song Educator Guide", along with copies of the movie itself, to 
schools nationwide to help prompt classroom discussion of the struggle 
for civil rights.  In these days where high school students are being 
babysat with movies like 101 Dalmations (I'm not exaggerating; it sets 
my teeth on edge when my son tells me things like this), I commend TNT 
Learning for providing educational products like these for our youths' 
growth.  If your school doesn't have one of these guides, or wants more 
info on Turner Learning offerings, educators may call 1-800-344-6219 or 
visit the Turner Learning web site.
Finally, along with the other enriching information TNT provided in the 
press kit for this movie (for which I very much thank them; the Q&A 
sessions with various cast, crew members, and consultants, were very 
edifying), there was a bit of history that is the basis for many of the 
events in this movie:  February 1, 2000, marked the 40th anniversary of 
the F.W. Woolworth lunch counter sit-in.  On that date in 1960, Ezell 
Blair, Jr.  (now Jibreel Khazan), Franklin McCain, Joseph McNeil, and 
David Richmond--"the Greensboro Four"--sat down at the F.W. Woolworth 
"whites-only" lunch counter in downtown Greensboro, N.C.; this act 
sparked a movement that would not be denied.  I find it mindboggling 
that this event isn't given the national recognition it deserves; as 
much as I love MLK and what he stood for, I would think that even he 
would say that this far-reaching event, and many like it, are truly 
worthy of annual celebration. 
A Personal Reflection:
Some Americans mark their passage into adulthood with the ability to 
drive a car.  Some, when they finally could go to the bar, legally.  For 
me, I knew I was an adult when I signed up to vote.  It meant something, 
something very real to me, when I knew I could pull a lever, 
and--regardless to what the jaded observers of Our Life And Times tried 
to tell me--I could make a difference in the way my block, or city, or 
county, state, or country, was run.  For many years, I believed that, 
and made sure I voted every chance I got.  Something happened somewhere 
down the line, and I found myself voting only for the "big" stuff--and 
at times, not even remembering to do that.  The movie "Freedom Song" was 
written for folks like me, who need a swift kick in the butt to make us 
remember.
As difficult as it is to deal with the crooked politicians, with their 
lies and their fake smiles, with the knowledge that they only really 
care about The People when it comes time for elections (and even then, 
only The People with The Money)--even knowing all of that, I remain 
firmly convinced that we, all of us, owe it to those whose thirst for 
freedom in THIS country led them to the ultimate sacrifice, to get up 
off our lazy, spoiled-by-relative-success asses, and *vote*.  And MAKE
our elected politicians work for all of us, for once.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
"Those who forget history, are doomed to repeat it".  The thoughts and 
deeds behind the film "Freedom Song" admonishes us to not forget it, 
even when that means holding your nose, getting your butt up, and 
registering to vote.  And more: doing something about the conditions 
that lead many of us--"us" being people of all colors--to feel that we 
no longer vote for anyone, we only vote against something more "evil" 
than the other choice.  But vote, we should.  The memories of our 
forbears, many of whom were beaten and killed for the right to vote, 
demands it.
"Freedom Song" (rating: greenlight): 
The song of Freedom is beautiful, but it exacts a great price.  It is a 
shame that some of us have forgotten just how great a price has been 
paid throughout the years, for that beautiful song.
Catch the premier of the TNT original film "Freedom Song" on February 
27, 7pm Eastern and Pacific, with additional air dates on March 2, 4, 5, 
8, and 11.

Author
James Brundage
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member James Brundage.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/60e74e041ca9cd6b8625626f0062219f/d7d9a2e0f6e7f14d88256909005df932?OpenDocument
Long and annoying have been the boasts of TNT of its status as "the best
movie studio on television."  With that celebrity narrator whose voice
you know by heart and whose name always escapes you, TNT's
advertisements for its latest western directed by Bill Pullman, or, in
this case, Gandhi-rip off starring Danny Glover pop up right in the
middle of the TV edit for an old movie that you could probably go
without seeing and normally cause people like me to switch to the
upper-channel echelon of HBO, Cinemax, Showtime, and The Movie Channel
where I don't have to bother about hearing from some moron boasting that
their station produces really good "made-for-TV" movies as if this was
something to be proud about.
Having finally caved in and sampled TNT, having sampled HBO on a fairly
regular basis, I can now say without a doubt that not only is TNT not
the best movie studio on television it is by far one of the worst. 
With large payments towards directors who do not demonstrate fair
ability, TNT seems to reward the kind of schlock-TV that has made
"TV-movie" into a status symbol in the film industry.
A case in point is Freedom Song, yet another "based on a true story"
TV-movie that is slightly above the limbo bar set by Lifetime.  With
shaky camerawork, a simplistic script, a simpler purpose and characters
that seem to be cut out of the pantheon on the civil-rights movement
clichés (the outsider, the old soldier who gave up, the subversive who
has been fighting in his own way his entire life, and, of course, the
narrator with a conflict that he has to get over), Freedom Song just is
another example of why TV movies are only examples of what couldn't make
the cut of the silver screen.
Freedom Song deals with the civil rights movement in the really deep
south of Mississippi where Owen Walker (Vicellous Reon Shannon) is still
sore over being spanked by his father because he accidentally walked
into the Whites Only waiting room at the train station.  His father
didn't want to spank him, but was forced to by whites, and because of
this his father has lost his own spirit for fighting for The Movement,
only to watch his son grow into the person who eventually desegregates
the Whites Only washroom (by staging a march on City Hall and getting
the Freedom Riders to desegregate the place).
Now I am of the generation (and race) that never had to deal with the
Jim Crow laws, but this should not stop me from saying what needs to be
said about "Freedom Song:" that it is a gimmicky movie-of-the-week
quality made-for-TV movie that should have never been aired, let alone
released on video.  I've read the history books, I've watched Gandhi,
Malcolm X, and Glory... all of them more than once do I REALLY have to
see yet another flimsy excuse at filmmaking when I could just read the
books (history ones, that is), and get at least as good of an idea at
Freedom Song offers, or watch some incredible films dealing with racism
(such as American History X), and get a better idea of the message
behind Freedom Song?
Please.  No more games, no more gimmicks, and, above all, no more claims
that TNT is the best movie studio on television because, with films like
Freedom Song, you can rest assured that it is not.
Director: Phil Alden Robinson
Producer: Amanda DiGiulio
Writer: Phil Alden Robinson, Stanley Weiser
Starring: Danny Glover, Vicellous Reon Shannon, Vondie Curtis-Hall, and
Glynn Turnman
">http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html"> 
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
