Title
Review for Soft Fruit (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Greg King
Some of the more common themes among recent Australian films
have been dysfunctional family relationships and mortality (Crackers,
Radiance, etc).  Soft Fruit is an emotionally draining drama that
combines both these elements in a story that is honest, warm,
compassionate, unexpectedly funny and upbeat, yet somehow endearing.
Soft Fruit is the first feature film from Christina Andreef,
an acclaimed short film maker and former assistant to Jane Campion,
whose films include the festival favourite Shooting The Breeze.
When their mother Patsy (Jeanie Drynan, from Muriel's Wedding,
etc) is diagnosed with terminal cancer, her four children return home
to Port Kembla to help care for her.  Divorcee Nadia (Sacha Horler,
from Praise) returns home from Sydney, bringing her two kids with her,
while the bossy Josie (Genevieve Lemon, from Sweetie, etc) flies home
from America.  Although Vera (Alicia Talbot) has moved out of the
family home she still lives in the same town and works as a nurse in
the local hospital.  Also returning home is family black sheep Bo
(Russell Dykstra), who is briefly paroled from prison on compassionate
grounds.
It's a trying time for all, as old rivalries and tensions and
frustrations again bubble to the surface.  Dad (Linal Haft) resents
their noisy presence, and quickly banishes Bo to the woodshed.  Yet
this tragic gathering also provides an opportunity for painful healing
and reconciliation.  Resigned to her fate, Patsy is determined to
bring the family together again no matter what.
Andreef explores emotionally-laden terrain with sensitivity
and understanding and presents us with flawed but readily identifiable
characters.  Soft Fruit explores the family dynamics with an insight
rare in Australian film, and Andreef taps into some honest emotions
here.
 
She also beautifully focuses on that strong and strange bond
that seems to exist between mother and son.  While the three sisters
argue about medications and diets, and tiptoe around their terminally
ill mother, Bo brings with him a healthy and cynical irreverence that
is as much a tonic for Patsy as her regular doses of morphine.  He
reads to her from her beloved biography about the tragic Jackie O, and
helps her fulfill her wish to live her remaining time to the fullest.
He even sneaks her out of the house for a wonderful day at the beach,
and does an illicit drug deal while the pair are out shopping for
coffins.
Soft Fruit is occasionally episodic in nature, but the film is
held together by the luminous performances of the ensemble cast.  In
particular, the brilliant and vital performance of Drynan, who
suffuses her performance with warmth, humour and sensitivity,
dominates proceedings.  In his first major screen role theatre veteran
Dykstra is superb as the volatile and complex Bo, combining his
dangerous edge with a real sense of compassion and understanding.
Despite solid work from Horler, Lemon and Talbot, the three sisters
ultimately seem to become indistinguishable by the end of the film.
Soft Fruit is one of the best locally produced films of this
year, and its honesty and humanity should strike a strong responsive
chord with audiences.
