Title
Review for Dead Poets Society (1989)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Randy Parker
        DEAD POETS SOCIETY, "starring" Robin Williams, is anything but a
comedy.  While the film does have plenty of laughs, it wears the trappings
not of a comedy, but of a Greek or Shakespearean tragedy.  DEAD POETS
SOCIETY is at times quite serious and somber, and it's also without
question the finest film of the year.  Its riveting, gut wrenching drama
had me on the edge of my seat and glued to the screen.
        DEAD POETS SOCIETY is set in 1959 at Welton Academy in Vermont, a
private college prep school for boys where discipline almost has become an
end in and of itself.  The faculty has just one goal: to grind out future
lawyers, doctors, and scientists.  But one voice stands out amid the
school's rigid, narrow-minded administration; it belongs to Professor John
Keating, a Welton alumnus who has returned to the academy to teach English.
        Unlike his conservative colleagues, Keating employs decidedly
unorthodox teaching methods and strives to teach more than just his subject
matter, which is poetry.  His goal is to inspire his students to suck the
bone of life to the marrow, to seize the day and make their lives
extraordinary.  In Keating's class, you learn passion, courage,
romanticism, and--of course--poetry.  You pass if you avoid conformity and
find your own voice, and you fail if you neglect to live life to the
fullest.
        Robin Williams is nothing short of brilliant as Keating.  In the
classroom, he cuts loose and shows his usual comic flair with antics like
impersonating John Wayne while reading "Macbeth" aloud to his students and
conducting discussions as if the class were a game show.  But Williams is
most impressive in the quiet, dramatic scenes which require a knowing
glance or a subtle flash of sorrow.  Once again, Williams deserves
recognition and respect for his prowess at straight drama; he has matched
or surpassed his fine work in GOOD MORNING, VIETNAM, MOSCOW ON THE HUDSON,
and THE WORLD ACCORDING TO GARP.
        DEAD POETS SOCIETY, however, is not a Robin Williams vehicle.  In
fact, Williams is the first to admit that the movie doesn't even revolve
around his character: "I'm not carrying this film and I don't feel
pressured that the whole movie rests on me.  The real story of the film is
the boys.  I come in and I'm a catalyst, but how they react and their
tribute back is the power." (from the press kit)  Indeed, most of the young
actors in the large, ensemble cast of unknowns and newcomers have at least
as much screen time as does Williams.  The movie follows a handful of
Keating's students as they get swept away by their teacher's enthusiastic
spirit.  They decide to reorganize "The Dead Poets Society," a secret club
which used to meet in a cave (when Keating attended Welton) to experience
inspiration through poetry--their own and that of the greats: Whitman,
Keats, Thoreau, and so on.
        Broadway stage actor Robert Sean Leonard has perhaps the meatiest
role in the film.  He plays Neil Perry, a charismatic young man whose
membership in the society leads him to discover his passion for acting.
But unfortunately, his domineering, unyielding father stands in the way of
Neil's dreams.  Mr. Perry wants his son to go to Harvard medical school and
forbids him to engage in extracurricular activities (such as acting) which
might interfere with his studies.  Mr. Perry is played by Kurtwood Smith,
who seems to specialize in uptight, anal retentive characters (he was the
sadistic criminal in ROBOCOP and the dirty D.A. in TRUE BELIEVER).  Neil's
conflict with his father is infuriating, tragic, and in some ways, the
heart and soul of the movie.
        Director Peter Weir has elicited exceptional performances from his
entire cast.  Ethan Hawke is a natural as Neil's shy and inhibited
roommate, Todd, who suffers from low self-esteem.  Under Keating's
tutelage, Todd finally learns to express himself and to cultivate a sense
of self-worth.  Josh Charles is charming and endearing in a down-to-earth
John Cusack sort of way as Knox Overstreet, the club's resident tormented,
love-struck romantic.  The "Dead Poets Society" inspires Knox to find the
courage to declare his love to a cute cheerleader who attends the local
public high school.
        Gale Hansen, Dylan Kussman, Allelon Ruggiero, and James Waterston
(actor Sam Waterston's son) round out the cast as the other members of the
clandestine club.  And while the film doesn't fully develop every
character, each one seems complex and genuine, nonetheless.  These students
are much more than just stock characters.  In a radical departure from his
role as Dr. Auschlander on "St. Elsewhere," Norman Lloyd evokes fear and
contempt as Welton Academy's austere headmaster, Mr. Nolan.  His stiff,
uncompromising manner reflects the school's oppressive teaching
philosophy--a philosophy based on the four pillars of faith: tradition,
honor, excellence, and discipline.  While the students admire Professor
Keating's unconventional style, Mr. Nolan and the faculty react to it with
shock and disapproval.
        Perhaps the individual most responsible for DEAD POET SOCIETY's
impact is Australian director Peter Weir (WITNESS, THE YEAR OF LIVING
DANGEROUSLY, MOSQUITO COAST, GALLIPOLI).  With the help of Oscar-winning
cinematographer John Seale (RAIN MAN, GORILLAS IN THE MIST), Weir has used
the medium to its fullest.  The director's imaginative camera work and
Seale's breathtaking cinematography make the film absorbing and
exhilarating.  Weir and company shot DEAD POETS SOCIETY almost entirely on
location at St. Andrew's School in Delaware, and they have made good use of
the school's photogenic qualities, such as its 2,000 acres of beautiful
farmland and gloomy stone architecture.  Complementing the film's superb
direction and acting is Tom Schulman's incredibly literate script, which is
based in part on his own experiences at private school.
        DEAD POETS SOCIETY is virtually flawless.  As you watch the movie,
you keep expecting it to make some fatal blunder: to become melodramatic,
to succumb to predictable Hollywood cliches, or to milk an easy laugh.  But
DEAD POETS SOCIETY avoids these pitfalls.  Every time you think you know
where the film is headed, it surprises you by going in an altogether
unforeseen direction.  Even Academy Award-winning composer Maurice Jarre's
score is immaculate; it is rousing without being overbearing or
distracting.
        And I should warn you that DEAD POETS SOCIETY will make many of you
cry or come damn close.  If you want to see a crazy Robin Williams comedy,
go rent POPEYE, because DEAD POETS SOCIETY is for people looking for an
intellectually stimulating and emotionally involving cinematic experience.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Robin Williams plays an unorthodox and
     charismatic teacher branded as dangerous in what is basically
     a retelling of THE PRIME OF MISS JEAN BRODIE told
     sympathetically to the teacher.  Fundamentally good, but it
     has some problems with its narrative style.  Rating: high +1.
     There are lots and lots of films about schools but very few films
really about the teaching process and the influence of a teacher on
students.  Perhaps the best is Ronald Neame's 1969 film THE PRIME OF MISS
JEAN BRODIE, which managed to tighten up the narrative of the Muriel Spark
novel (one of the rare occasions a film adaptation improves greatly on the
novel, incidentally).  Neame's film tells the story of a teacher who
broadens her students' world but at the same time molds them into her own
likeness.  Having myself been greatly influenced by a very charismatic high
school teacher who I think greatly affected my world view, I find THE PRIME
OF MISS JEAN BRODIE hits very close to home for me, though because I liked
this teacher a lot I sometimes try also to see the film from a point of view
sympathetic to Miss Brodie.  What does the story become then?  It becomes
something very much like Peter Weir's new film, DEAD POETS SOCIETY.
     The year is 1959.  The setting is Welton Academy, a very posh and
expensive prep school dedicated to bleaching any sort of non-conformity out
of its students and programming them to be successful, if unimaginative,
social leaders.  The new English teacher is one John Keating, played with as
much control and and reserve as Robin Williams could possibly put into a
performance.  But even Williams's most reserved character could never fit in
as a teacher at a place like Welton.  His Keating uses unorthodox efforts to
get his students to feel the emotion of the they read, and he gets them to
live lives that will allow them to feel their own emotions and the emotions
of the great poets.  Keating's class is a good show, but we know from the
beginning it is a show that will not outlast the season.  As in GOOD
MORNING, VIETNAM, which had a very similar story line: we admire the non-
conformist, but we know he will not be around for long.  DEAD POETS SOCIETY
is his story and the story of his students while he is there.  In
particular, it is the story of a group of friends who form the Dead Poets
Society and sneak out to the woods after hours in order to read poetry and
discuss life.
     And it is in the film's depiction of these meetings that Weir's film
lets us down the most.  We hear a little poetry and we see the lives
changing, but the connection between the two is never clearly drawn.  What
poems are influential and why--a very major question of the film--is never
really explained.  We never really see why the meetings transcend being bull
sessions that have occasional poetry readings.  The real value of these
meetings, so central to the film, is never clear.  Similarly, we are told
one of the members has written a very controversial article for the school
newspaper but we are given only the vaguest idea of what the article said.
And because the exact influence the teacher and the poetry has had on the
students is left as vague as it is, when the film starts following the lives
of the students outside of school hours it rapidly loses interest for me.  I
found myself not really caring whether one of the students would or would
not work up the courage to kiss his current heartthrob.  I found myself just
looking at the nice, misty, snowy photography, and waiting for something of
interest to happen.
     Another problem with the script is that, while Keating is clearly
played for sympathy, he is not entirely such an ideal teacher. Early on he
has his students cut an article on poetry analysis out of their textbooks
and destroy it before they had read more than the first paragraph.  And the
enthusiasm that he can get from his students for this sort of an action
reinforces his similarities to the dangerous Miss Brodie and other dictators
in history who have been more dangerous.  One final complaint: in 1959 the
sort of regimentation that the film complains about may have been a problem.
If anything this country's schools have the opposite problem of insufficient
discipline today.  Weir is preaching to the choir.
     This review has concentrated mostly on the negative aspects of a
basically good film.  Enough reviewers will be telling about the film's good
points.  I was concerned that these flaws might be less likely to be
mentioned.  In a field of films about drugs, car chases, and plastic
monsters, DEAD POETS SOCIETY is a good choice, albeit flawed.  I rate it a
high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
John Carroll
Dead Poets Society, starring Robin Williams, Robert Sean Leonard, Ethan Hawke,
Josh Charles and Gale Hansen.  Directed by Peter Weir.  1989.
   The "hero" movie is very common among movie buffs, however, most of these
films are only about sappy and cheap sentimental value.  However, the "hero"
films that tend to stand out are the ones made to perfection.  Rocky and Rudy
are two fine examples, and one more to add to such a prestigious list is Dead
Poets Society, in which a group of boys become men throughout the trials and
tribulations and school.  Terrific performances are turned in by such a young
cast and Robin Williams once again adds his unique sense of humor and drama to
this film.
   With the teen drama so burnt out these days following catrastrophes like
Drive Me Crazy and Teaching Mrs. Tingle, Dead Poets Society stands out like The
Blair Witch Project among the summer blockbusters.  The actors are all mainly
young and in their first big screen roles, and all turn in terrific
performance.  With Robin Williams starring, the movie should obviously flow
around him, yet it does not.  Williams starts the film off strong, but then
gives it off to Hawke, Leonard, Charles and Hansen, just to name a few.
   This young cast should not have been expected to do much, but even so, they
go above and beyond the line of duty.  Such an emotional film calls for
believable acting, among other things, otherwise, it just looks like another
sentimental piece of trash.  The two main roles for the youngsters are those of
Neil Perry (Robert Sean Leonard) and Todd Anderson (Ethan Hawke).  The two play
opposite ends of the rainbow, with Perry acting as the opportunistic student
turned actor and Anderson playing the pessimistic youngster who wants to let
everything out, but turns back to the old way of doing things.  However, the
Dead Poets Society that is formed by the boys turn out the real people beneath.
 They truly enact the theme of the film to "Seize the Day," otherwise known as
Carpe Diem.
   The rest of the cast is terrific, and perhaps the best performance of them
all, comes from Gale Hansen who provides a stunning sense of humor to a film
that may have suffered without it.  Despite being such a meaningful film,
Hansen is able to portray the sense of youth among all of the boys becuase
despite the true intentions of the film, the setting is still in a high school.
   Dead Poets Society also proves why Peter Weir always tends to deliver in his
films.  After seeing The Truman Show, I personally did not think Weir could
outdo that performance, and he comes oh-so-close with Dead Poets Society.  He
consistently delivers in his films, ranging from uniqueness with The Truman
Show to thrilling us with Witness to putting everything into perspective with
Dead Poets Society.  Weir exemplifies good cinema and Dead Poets Society is a
definite for even the mildest of Weir fans.
   Boiling down, Dead Poets Society finishes up strong.  As the film
progresses, the ending becomes pretty predictable, yet Weir is able to
concentrate on the effects it has on the characters, not the actual event. 
This once again enforces the whole point of the film, instead of trying to play
off a sentimental finale.
   Dead Poets Society ranks high up on a must-see list, and for very good
reason.  It provides all different aspects of entertainment and is very hard to
find one bad point with it.  When you finish viewing Dead Poets Society, only
one thought should be left in your head:
Final Verdict: A
The Movie Page- http://moviepage.hypermart.net/
Reviews, Previews, News and So Much More!

Author
David N. Butterworth
     Few comedians command such respect as comics that, when they pause a while
for serious introspection, the audience sits up and listens.  Robin Williams is
such a performer.  In his latest film, Peter Weir's DEAD POETS SOCIETY,
Williams manages to blend humor and pathos without compromising either,
fashioning a part that is both touching and appealing.
     The action takes place at Welton Academy, a stuffy, upper-class edifice of
preparatory education rooted in pride and tradition.  Williams plays John
Keating, a charismatic English teacher whose unorthodox teaching methods endear
seven of his pimply-faced students to him, ultimately changing their lives
forever.  But these unconventional practices raise many an eyebrow amongst his
fellow professors, none the least of whom is the school's unswerving principal,
effectively played by Norman Lloyd of TV's "St. Elsewhere".
     Williams' character provides the essential catalyst in the story,
encouraging his pupils to reconvene the Dead Poets Society, a scholarly
opportunity he had as a youth to actively explore the language of Walt Whitman,
Dylan Thomas and William Blake.  Enlivening them, Keating urges that they "suck
all the marrow out of life", stimulating romance and passion and allowing it to
"drip from their tongues like honey."
     Scurrying busily to a nearby, off-limits cave to indoctrinate themselves
into their chapter of the club, the boys resemble monks, their hoods pulled up
over their heads like habits, flashlights cutting through the dense blue fog.
It's a superbly photographed sequence in a film which is both striking and
technically excellent.  The scene is altogether magical, taking on a special
wonder.
     But there is a darker side to the story, however.  The boys huddle around
Keating to look at the blurred, photographed faces of their predecessors now
housed under glass, faces not unlike their own.  "We're food for worms, lads,"
he tells them.  "These boys are fertilizing daffodils now."  Life does not go
on uninterrupted.  Their time too will come.
     Keating inspires his boys to seize the day - "Carpe Diem!"  - to act on
their impulses and be spontaneous, free thinkers.  He teaches them
non-conformity by camaraderie.  One, Neil Perry, maturely played by Robert Sean
Leonard, pursues an acting career, albeit against his malevolent father's
wishes.  Another, Todd Anderson (played with quiet reserve by Ethan Hawke),
builds confidence.  A third, Knox Overstreet (played by Josh Charles) finds
true love at last.
     Williams himself is a fine actor and his John Keating is a
characterization of rare sensitivity.  It's certainly his best work since THE
WORLD ACCORDING TO GARP.  GOOD MORNING, VIETNAM might have been a more
popular film at the box office, but wasn't Robin Williams simply playing Robin
Williams - loud, irreverent, hysterical?  His role here is a far cry from that
of the ostentatious, freewheeling Adrian Cronauer, but it is every bit as
effective.
     Contrary to the impression the previews would give us, Williams' role has
been reduced to somewhat of a supporting one.  He does get to utilize his
standard nightclub schtick, but it's both in character and in context.  People
coming to see the film simply for Robin Williams might be disappointed, but
they will also be missing the point.
     DEAD POETS SOCIETY takes the often frivolous ingredients of classical
literature - love, romanticism, passion - and turns them into a universal
theme, man's ability, man's right (if you will) to think for himself, to act
with spontaneity.  Ask yourself when it was that you last thought about these
subjects with anything more than a smile, or with a passing, cynical glance?
     The film makes us, the audience, take a long hard look at what inspires
us, what governs our motivations and determines our actions.  It emotes
feelings rarely felt in the movies these days.  Peter Weir skillfully handles a
subject matter which, in the hands of a lesser director, might have come across
as trite, even laughable.  But he has gathered together a young ensemble cast
of relative unknowns and allowed them, much as Perry as Puck in A MIDSUMMER
NIGHT'S DREAM, to shine.
     In so doing, DEAD POETS SOCIETY finally triumphs, laying to rest the age
old fallacy that the only good poet is a dead one.
