Title
Review for Footloose (1984)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Sanford
         Not long before "Footloose" was originally released 15 years
ago, I was assigned by an editor to go to Jenison High School, the only
school in the Grand Rapids area that did not have a prom. My article was
supposed to answer the question "what do teens who can't dance do for a
good time?".
 After checking with our lawyers, my boss decided the answers
were unprintable.
 Suffice to say, the youth of Jenison had a good deal in common
with the kids of Bomont, the sleepy hamlet that serves as the setting
for "Footloose," a movie which still has a lot to say about parent-child
relationships. Although Bomont has successfully outlawed dancing, that
hasn't stopped their young people from drinking, smoking pot and raising
hell every time the adults are out competing for the attention of
Reverend Shaw Moore (John Lithgow), Bomont's self-appointed spiritual
leader.
 Ironically, the Reverend is a much better father to the
community than he is to his 17-year-old daughter Ariel (Lori Singer),
one of the sassiest and most obnoxious kids around. Rev. Moore's idea of
concern is to constantly check up on Ariel, something she's come to
resent. "How come when I'm here at home you're never as interested in
what I do or say as you are when I walk out that door?" she asks him, in
a scene sure to make more than a few parents uneasy.
 The scenes between Rev. Moore and Ariel are beautifully played
by Lithgow and Singer and, much to his credit, director Herbert Ross has
given them just as much weight as the movie's showier segments. One of
the many elements that puts "Footloose" far ahead of most pictures about
teen life is that Dean Pitchford's script doesn't automatically paint
everyone over 21 as an idiot. Nor is Ariel's irresponsible behavior
presented as something to emulate; only when she stops hanging out with
rednecks and sleeping around does she find a purpose in life.
 "Footloose" is primarily remembered as the "dance movie" that
made Kevin Bacon a star, but it's a good deal savvier than it seems on
the surface. While the plot revolves around a clash between new kid in
town Ren McCormick (Bacon) and the Bomont town council -- led by Rev.
Moore -- over a proposed senior prom, interestingly "Footloose" does not
condemn the church. Instead of looking like a buffoon, Rev. Moore comes
off as a genuinely concerned, albeit somewhat misguided man who is torn
between doing what he feels is right for his followers and what his
daughter wants him to do.
 His wife Vi (a superb performance by Dianne Wiest) is the voice
of reason in the house, serving as a mediator between the two sides.
She's supportive of her husband, but recognizes his weaknesses,
including his tendency to debate with Ariel instead of listening to her.
"You can lift a congregation up so high, they have to look down to see
Heaven," Vi tells him. "But it's the one-to-one where you need a little
work."
 Gradually, we come to realize the majority of the townsfolk
have simply been overreacting to a tragedy that occurred five years ago,
in which several teens (including Rev. Moore's son) were killed in a
drunk driving accident following a party. In their shock, the Bomont
town council elected to abolish drinking and dancing, and, in the time
since, some of the locals have become progressively more paranoid about
other possible "corruptions." The movie's real villains are the
ultra-conservative couple Roger (Alan Haufrect) and Eleanor (Linda
MacEwen), who organize book burnings and get rid of teachers who assign
Kurt Vonnegut's "Slaughterhouse Five."
 Yes, there are musical numbers in "Footloose" (including the
memorable "Let's Hear It For The Boy" sequence in which farm boy
Christopher Penn learns to strut his stuff), a few uninspired fight
scenes and some now-unbelievable bits involving "Sex in the City"
goddess Sarah Jessica Parker as Ariel's dowdy best friend. But, like
"Saturday Night Fever," another movie adapted for the stage, it's
essentially a sturdy drama that could hold up even if you cut out all
the dancing and fighting. In fact, the only thing that truly dates the
movie is its soundtrack, which holds up lame metal acts like Quiet Riot
and Moving Pictures as examples of "subversive music"; if this kind of
stuff was considered shocking, imagine what the Bomontians would have
made of Marilyn Manson and Korn.
 Although the conflict over the prom is resolved predictably,
the relationship between Rev. Moore and his daughter is not. Instead of
one triumphing over the other, they reach a compromise.
"I just don't know that I believe in everything you believe in," Ariel
tells her dad. "But I believe in you." It's moments like that that make
"Footloose" much better than its reputation might lead you to believe.
James Sanford

Author
David Nusair
Starring Kevin Bacon, Lori Singer, John Lithgow
"Footloose" has only one goal in mind: to reel in an audience with cheesy
sentiment and feel-good antics.  And I hate to admit it; I fell for it.
The movie is about a teenager (Bacon) who moves to a small town from the
big city, and discovers that dancing has been banned by the local Reverend
(Lithgow).  He ends up falling for the preacher's daughter (Singer) and
showing the whole town what the magic of dance can do.
As mentioned at the beginning of this review, "Footloose" is an extremely
hokey and predictable teen drama.  There are virtually no surprises, and
the writing is second-rate.  So why did I enjoy it so much?  For one
thing, the cast is great.  Kevin Bacon oozes charisma in an early role. 
We're rooting for him right from the start, and, unlike most films of this
genre, Bacon doesn't play him as the "Rebel without a Clue" sort.  Yes, he
does rebel, but he's also polite when he needs to be.  And he never
broods. 
The rest of the cast is equally impressive.  John Lithgow, seen here
playing a normal guy for a change, is playing a man who would normally be
a flat out villian.  But Lithgow plays him as a concerned father who is
trying to do what he feels is best for his daughter.  By the end of the
film, we feel a genuine sense of love and understanding between him and
the Lori Singer character.  
Another nice touch is the music.  We see the parents of the kids
complaining that the music they listen to is filled with "sexual
innuendos", but that's not true at all.  The title track, performed by
Kenny Loggins, is upbeat and fun.  During the final sequence, I was
overcome with the urge to get off the couch and start dancing.  Of course,
I soon realized that would be a little pathetic.
Anyway, "Footloose" is a charming little surprise.  Don't let the premise
prevent you from watching it.  It sucked me in, and it'll do the same to
you. 
