Title
Review for Getaway, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Vijay Ramanujan
     Well, actually it wasn't that bad.  The movie starts off quite
well, with the opening scenes of the prison break and the "delivery"
going quite well.  I maybe a fool, but I still think that Alec Baldwin
can deliver the goods.  For every horrible movie he's done (a la
MALICE) there is also a great performance (like his Jimmy Swaggart from
GREAT BALLS OF FIRE).  He is great, if consumed in small quantities.
These scenes work for him because he is secondary to the action.  For
about twenty minutes of this movie, I actually cared what was going to
happen to him.
     Then came Kim Basinger.  Our local paper said that this was the
movie in which Bassinger finally proved she could act.  WRONG!  There
was no such thing.  She walks, she talks, she looks like she is there
because she enjoys being on film with Alec.  There is no conviction in
her performance, and she is not helped by a screenplay that looks as if
it was cut and pasted from previous action thrillers.  "Do you trust
me?" she asks, ready to help him shave. (read--if she cuts him, sad
ending--if she doesn't, happy ending.)
     The relationship between the two of them had me thinking "Gosh,
they could have called this MARRYING MAN 2: THE GETAWAY!  They fight,
they make up, they have sex.  They fight, they love each other.  Then
why is she pulling a gun?  Because she loves him.  So they have sex.
They fight, while having sex.  They have sex while fighting.  But they
really do love each other.  You can tell, because they keep reminding
us.
     The middle of the movie was ... well there was too much of it.
James Woods is excellent as the "bad guy," although he is given almost
nothing to do.  Had he been given a little more screen time, the movie
might have moved at a little better pace, he seems more capable than
the rest of carrying a slow movie.  But instead, his character is,
surprise, cannon fodder for Baldwin and Basinger.
     Then there is the Freddie Kreuger character, in the form of
Michael Madsen.  That's right, he never dies.  You shoot him
repeatedly, he falls, bleeding, into a river, then he crawl back out.
You beat him senseless with a pipe, and he comes back, stronger.  And
somewhere along the line, he picks up our comic relief, the ultra horny
Jennifer Tilly.  Of course, I saw this coming from shortly after the
opening credits.  A little too obvious. (And not really funny either).
     And then the shoot-out at the end.  What can I say ... way too
long.  People jumping from windows and getting shot.  People standing
on stairs and getting shot.  People being held down and tortured.
Basically, lots of gore.  If this is what you want, save yourself $6
and watch some 12 year old playing Moral Kombat.  It's probably more
entertaining.
     If there was one saving grace for this movie, it was an absolutely
hysterical ending, involving some old geyser and a pick-up truck. (And
Yes, it was intended to be funny.) So, on the basis of the beginning
and the end--1.5*/4 (not as bad as MALICE, but not good either).

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Though flat as the proverbial pancake, Roger Donaldson's THE
GETAWAY is the best alternative, yet, to a season overloaded with
oppressive drama.  In the wake of everything from Vietnam to the
Holocaust, this throwaway Basinger/Baldwin vehicle is pleasingly
passable pulp.
     The original GETAWAY, directed in 1972 by Sam Peckinpah, starred
Steve McQueen and Ali MacGraw.  Now, cutest-couple Alec Baldwin and Kim
Basinger takeover the roles of a crime couple who double-cross both
their partner and their sponsor in a million-dollar heist.
     Even when sporting a temporary beard (which makes him look like
GI-Joe), the former Jack Ryan outclasses everyone else including his
wife.  Poses and all, he's a surprisingly steely presence.
     Kim Basinger tries to look tough, but she's no more intimidating
than costars Michael Madsen (the partner) and James Woods (the
sponsor).  Together, they provide three textbook examples of good bad
acting.
     Talent (or lack thereof) notwithstanding, the four do pretty well
for about an hour.  With Baldwin in the lead, they plan their crosses
and double-crosses and create a level of tension that never evaporates
from the film.
     The pace stinks and nothing's funny, but director has a flair for
action that keeps the first hour interesting.  The midday robbery at a
dog track is a keeper.  As is a chase on a train with Baldwin stalking
a petty thief.
     Mousey-voiced Jennifer Tilly shows up around the film's midpoint
and completely changes the tone of the film.  Playing a dim-but-buxom
hostage, she has the Meyer Touch: every scene she touches turns to
camp.  Which is frustrating as all get-out because the rest of the cast
is playing things straight!
     Of course, a little unintentional humor isn't bad.  Until the
writers beginning adding their *own* jokes into the last half-hour.  By
the inevitable Big Shoot-Out, everyone's going in three different
directions.  Some are doing deadpan.  Some are trying to be funny.
Others are funny *without* trying.
     If nothing else, THE GETAWAY rewards the patent with a few
deliriously dumb moments.  Madsen talking tough with a kitten on his
chest is something to see.  As is Basinger and Baldwin having a
heart-to-heart in a landfill.  But, for my money, nothing screams
"stop" louder than the sight of a Basinger haymaker striking Tilly's
joke jaw.
