Title
Review for Blown Away (1994)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Jeff Bridges, Tommy Lee Jones, Forest Whitaker, Lloyd
Bridges, Suzy Amis.
Screenplay:  Joe Batteer & John Rice.
Director:  Stephen Hopkins.
     Sometimes, timing is everything.  A few years ago, Kevin Costner
beat two other Robin Hood projects into production, forcing one to
television and killing the other entirely.  This year, Costner is on
the other end, as his WYATT EARP was beaten into theaters *and* onto
video by TOMBSTONE.  Now, in the mad bomber department, BLOWN AWAY
comes hard on the heels of SPEED, and suffers greatly by comparison.
SPEED's greatest asset was that it never took itself seriously; BLOWN
AWAY, on the other hand, takes itself far too seriously.  Though there
are some nice moments of suspense, BLOWN AWAY sputters out in puddles
of melodrama.
     Jeff Bridges stars as Jimmy Dove, a member of Boston's bomb
squad.  What only Jimmy's Uncle Max (Lloyd Bridges) knows is that Jimmy
was once Liam McGivney, a radical in Northern Ireland who now sees
defusing bombs as a kind of penance for the crimes of his youth.  But a
blast from the past comes to Boston in the form of Ryan Gaerity (Tommy
Lee Jones), Jimmy's former Irish cohort.  Escaped from prison after 20
years in custody, Gaerity blames Jimmy for his incarceration and begins
targeting friends and loved ones with elaborate bombs, including
Jimmy's new wife (Suzy Amis).  Jimmy, along with his new partner
(Forest Whitaker) must track down Gaerity before all of Beantown is
blown away.
     There's no better way to describe the key problem with BLOWN AWAY
than to say that it's overblown but underdeveloped.  Everything in the
screenplay by Joe Batteer and John Rice feels forced and artificial.
Nothing exemplifies this more than the attempt to ladle on the Irish
atmosphere.  The characters in BLOWN AWAY speak in heavy brogues, drink
Guinness, dance jigs, even listen to us ... everything, practically,
but say "faith an' begorrah."  Fine, they're Irish already; they're
just not real.  The same is true of the Boston locations, which are so
omnipresent they cease to be atmospheric and become simply oppressive
(and there's no excuse for a television announcer calling a home run in
Fenway Park "over the Green Monster" when the ball is shown landing
over the right field wall).  And the same is true of the big emotional
breakdowns, and the slow motion build-ups to the explosions, and the
length of nearly every scene.  BLOWN AWAY simply never clicks because,
like Gaerity's bombs, everything is far more convoluted than it needs
to be functionally.
     Meanwhile, two of the most talented actors in America are stuck
with underwritten characters and ineffectual direction.  Jeff Bridges
is supposed to be haunted by his past, but instead he generally appears
simply dazed.  He brings no energy and none of the intelligence he
usually brings to his roles.  Tommy Lee Jones doesn't fare much better,
as there is never any clear sense of Gaerity's motivation or state of
mind.  He's just plain weird, bouncing on beds and making bizarre
videotapes, but for all his supposed cock-eyed creativity he never
comes off as smart enough to be genuinely threatening.  Forest Whitaker
is good as the cocky new guy on the bomb squad, but he is the only
bright spot among the actors.  When two actors like Bridges and Jones
go wrong, it's difficult not to point the finger of blame at a director
who wasn't doing his job.
     Though he fails his actors, Stephen Hopkins has other things
working.  He manages to create a mounting tension with each subsequent
bomb, as we begin to suspect that at any given moment, anything could
be a trigger.  This is nowhere better handled than in a great scene
where Bridges' wife and stepdaughter proceed through their kitchen
turning on appliances which may be set to blow.  But the production
just isn't lean enough to sustain that energy.  Watching BLOWN AWAY, I
felt that I had had slightly too much to drink:  everything seemed a
step slow and Peter Levy's photography seemed slightly out-of-focus.
Oh, to be sure, there are lots of big explosions in BLOWN AWAY, but the
amount of cinematic heat generated could be measured with an oral
thermometer.

Author
Dragan Antulov
1990s would remembered as the era of binary movie events in
Hollywood - two movies dealing with the same subject, or, to
be precise, same "high concept". In Summer 1994, that "high
concept" was "mad bomber action thriller". In few weeks,
"thrillride of the summer" actionfest SPEED was followed by
rather action thriller BLOWN AWAY, so disappointing that
most of the people these days associate the title with the
1992 thriller in which Nicole Eggert did few nude scenes.
The movie begins in the prison in Northern Ireland, where
Gaerity (Tommy Lee Jones), IRA terrorist with the great
talent to make lethal explosive devices from almost any
material, escapes from prison. He comes to Boston, where he
accidentally notices Jimmy Dove (Jeff Bridges), dedicated
bomb disposal expert within Boston police. Few people except
Gaerity know the Dove's violent past, when he used to be IRA
terrorist before becoming sick with violence, betraying
Gaerity and emigrating to America where he changed the name
and started using his experience for good purpose. Gaerity
holds Dove personally responsible for his captivity and
begins the campaign of bombing terror, directed specifically
at Dove's colleagues, friends and relatives. Dove, who is
just going to retire and start family, now must confront the
mad bomber.
While SPEED doesn't even try to bother with plot and
characters, using them only as an excuse for long and
spectacular action scenes, BLOWN AWAY tries to be more
conventional and provide the action with some back story.
And that is the main reason why it is inferior to SPEED.
Badly written plot and badly written characters are
sometimes worse than no plot and no characters at all.
Screenplay by John Bateer and John Rice, barely touches the
complicated issues of Northern Ireland, using the tragedy
only as the cheap backstory for even cheaper drama. The plot
is, of course, full of implausibilities. The main one is the
fact that movie fails to explain how the single individual,
no matter how brilliant he is, can produce thousands of
deadly devices and hold entire city at bay. Those questions,
same as in the case of SPEED, could be forgotten while the
action goes on, but the pauses between action scenes are
filled with cliched and predictable situation that should
provide some background to the characters. Because of them,
movie seems a little bit too long, and boring at times. The
most annoying element of the film, however, is Tommy Lee
Jones in the role of mad bomber. His acting is so
over-the-top that potentially fascinating villain turns into
pathetic caricature of himself. This role is in painful
contrast with the strong performance given by that same
actor in FUGITIVE. The film have few bright points, though.
Some of the action scenes are fine, which should be credited
to director Stephen Hopkins (PREDATOR II, JUDGEMENT NIGHT).
And Forrest Whitaker really shines in minor role of Dove's
colleague. But, all in all, BLOWN AWAY is a film that was
justifiably shadowed by its more famous, yet hardly
unforgettable competitor.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Bombs detonate, debris raining down on streets as fireballs
explode skyward.  A cop who makes a habit out of playing the hero
prepares for his latest mission, this one far more dangerous than
anything in his past.  A woman, sitting in the driver's seat of a
speeding vehicle, can't put her foot on the brakes for fear of the
explosion that action might cause.
     This may sound like the storyline for SPEED, but it's really a
thumbnail sketch of some of the highlights of BLOWN AWAY ... and that's
the problem.  It's unfortunate that two movies with so much in common
have been released within a month of each other.  Unfortunate for BLOWN
AWAY, that is.  Because not only is SPEED the better movie, but it was
released first and, regardless of which film went before the cameras
earlier, Keanu Reeves' picture will be viewed as the original by the
movie-going public.
     Actually, after sitting through the roller coaster ride of SPEED,
BLOWN AWAY is a disappointment.  It's a little slow by action picture
standards, but in comparison to its forerunner, it's an absolute drag.
SPEED is a masterpiece of pacing and excitement; BLOWN AWAY is a talky
cat-and-mouse affair occasionally interrupted by bursts of
pyrotechnics.
     The film opens in Ireland, at Castle Gleigh Prison, where lifer
Ryan Gaerty (Tommy Lee Jones) is making his escape using a homemade
bomb.  Once out of prison, he heads to America, where he sees news
coverage of a daring bomb defusion by Boston bomb squad officer Jimmy
Dove (Jeff Bridges).  That, however, is not the name that Ryan used to
know this man by.
     Meanwhile, Jimmy has decided to retire from active duty to begin a
life with his new wife Kate (Suzy Amis) and stepdaughter.  Ryan,
however, will have none of that, deciding that the best way to get back
at Jimmy for a past "wrong" is by turning the city into a raging
inferno, bringing "chaos" and "anarchy" to Boston, courtesy of his own
unique skills.
     BLOWN AWAY tries to be more than an explosion-laced thriller by
attempting some character depth and originality.  It doesn't work.  All
the exposition about Jimmy and Ryan's past involvement is so much
window dressing and, considering the amount of time it takes up, ends
up hamstringing the action.  On top of that, it's unnecessary.  A
faceless villain, adequately portrayed, would be as effective as Ryan,
and there are dozens of other, equally-convincing motives that could be
supplied.
     Jeff Bridges manages to add an extra layer of depth to his
character, but the actor's considerable skills are underused.
Similarly, while Tommy Lee Jones brings a suave coolness to Ryan, the
villain seems too restrained for this sort of movie.  The sadistic
charm of an Alan Rickman or the scenery-chomping of a Dennis Hopper is
much preferred to Jones' internalized bitterness.
     BLOWN AWAY is not a bad motion picture, and in any other summer,
it might represent an appealing box-office attraction.  In 1994,
however, it comes in a distant second to SPEED, and the presence of the
other movie serves only to magnify BLOWN AWAY's faults.  In trying to
build additional complexity into the script and characters, this film
has succeeded only in mangling its pacing.  There are moments of high
tension, but the time spent on the edge of your seat is likely to be
outmatched by the time spent drumming your fingers on the armrest,
waiting for things to get moving.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Roger Snappy Rubio
Starring Jeff Bridges, Tommy Lee Jones, Forrest Whittaker, and Lloyd Bridges
Directed by Stephen Hopkins
     I'll say the explosions in this movie are breathtaking.  But the
rest of the movie was lacking something.  Hopkins tends to direct his
movies too much like music videos (don't know if he was a video
director before, but it seems like it), and this movie is not immune.
And maybe I'm too used to Tommy Lee Jones in other movies, but I
couldn't see him as an Irishman (let alone that accent).  BLOWN AWAY
could have been better, but wasn't.
     I would assume the bombs are the main focus of this film, because
I had a hard time finding exactly what the focus was.  These intricate,
somewhat confusing contraptions are supposed to be intimidating and
frightening, are to some extent they are, but there is too much to be
really plausible.  I can understand cutting the right color wire,
determining the type of explosive, etc.  I think everyone can
understand the reasoning behind that.  But when the bombs reach the
type of complexity they did in this movie, it's hard to feel any
suspense because you don't know if Bridges is really in over his head
or just does this thing everyday.  I know that was the point--the
audience is not supposed to know if the bombs are being disarmed
correctly, but it's hard to feel tension when there's a million wires,
switches, traps, connections, and contraptions.  In reality, nothing
could help you figure out which wires to cut or which switch to
disable.
     Do you see my point?  If there were four wires of different
colors, you would know that cutting one or two of them might disarm the
bomb.  If there are 50, well, I can't believe even the best bomb
disposal expert would know which one to cut in that instance.  The best
use of suspense this year would have had to have been SPEED, because
the bombs in that movie were a little more plausible.  But BLOWN AWAY
is just too complicated.
     Tommy Lee Jones does his best with what is essentially a madman,
but Jeff Bridges seems a little confused.  He even lapses into an Irish
accent midway through the film that threw me off (I know why he did it,
I just think it wasn't necessary).  The history between these two was
presented at a breakneck pace, which led me to believe that it was only
presented in the first place so that there would be some motivation for
blowing things up.  In SPEED, the relationship between Keanu Reeves
character and Dennis Hopper's is established early in the film, in
BLOWN AWAY it's scattered all over the place.
     BLOWN AWAY needed some more organization.  It has it's good
points, like the explosions, some of the bombs, and a grueling sequence
where any household item could be a trigger for explosives.  But I
believe the movie lacked focus.  Were we here to see the explosions,
the drama, or the whole movie as something neat to look at?  I don't
know.  I would have to say this is a good dollar flick, but paying
matinee or regular prices would be questionable.

Author
Steve Kong
It's funny how films of the same type get released so closely together.
Maybe it's a Hollywood studio thing, but it happens.  In 1994 the type of
film that got released was the "mad bomber" type.  The two films were Speed
and Blown Away.
In Blown Away a mad bomber is on the loose in Boston where he seeks
revenge.  Tommy Lee Jones who carries an Irish accent plays the mad bomber.
 The person he seeks revenge against is a police officer, who not to our
surprise, is in the bomb disposal unit and is played by Jeff Bridges.  
Blown Away is completely implausible, the major thing drawing to this
implausibility is: How the heck does Tommy Lee Jones' character have time
to create so many intricate bombs?  There's a bomb in a computer in MIT's
computer lab, a bomb in a set of earphones, a bomb on a boat, and wait, a
bomb in a car.  There are a few other bombs also.
The difference between the bomb Blown Away and the hit Speed is in the
title.  Blown Away is slow and Speed is fast.  And though Speed was just as
implausible as Blown Away, the film was just fun to watch and it moved
along at a quick brisk pace that allowed the audience to forget about the
implausibility and concentrate on the fun.  Blown Away tries to fill in the
time between the blasts with back-stories and human interest.  The
back-stories include the motivation for the Tommy Lee Jones character and
the human interest includes Bridges new wife.
Had director Stephen Hopkins cut down Blown Away's running time and tighten
up the script a bit, it might have been a fun movie to watch.  Hopkins does
have the eye for tension; my favorite scene was the one in which Bridge's
new wife and child are in the kitchen cooking dinner.
Blown Away lost in 1994 and for good reason, this film is implausible but
on top of that it slow.  If you're looking for a good mad bomber movie to
see go rent Speed.  If you want to see a bomb, see Blown Away.

Author
Tak
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     Jim Dove (Jeff Bridges) has been with the Boston bomb squad for
quite awhile.  He's a hero.  But now he wants out. He wants to settle
down with Kate (Suzy Amis) and her daughter Liz.  However, a figure
from his obscured past comes back to haunt him in the form of Mad
Bomber Ryan Garrity (Tommy Lee Jones).
Tak Thoughts 
------------
     BLOWN AWAY sucked.  I wanted to see lots of things blowing up.
Hoards of things.  And, to be fair, they did blow up a bunch of
stuff--a toilet, a truck, a man, a bridge, and a boat-of-eternal-
shrapnel-that never-hits-anyone.  They could have blown up more stuff
but our hero, played by Jeff Bridges, has this annoying tendency to
disarm the damn things.  And they missed a damn fine destruction chance
in one scene, where they imply that some lurking news and police
choppers were in for serious shrapnel.  But alas, no chunks-of-truck-
in-the-rotors.  A bomb's just not a bomb if it doesn't blow up, as
pointed out by Dennis Hopper in SPEED.
     Action.  That's what I wanted.  I've got a soft spot for mad
bomber movies, and SPEED hit the spot.  But BLOWN AWAY just didn't do
it for me.  Instead of lots of action, all sorts of PLOT gets in the
way.  Jeff Bridge's character is haunted by his past, he's the best but
he doesn't like it, he accidentally blew up some people he loved, he's
in Bomb squad to repent, blah blah blah.
     And the mad bomber?  The angry, insane IRA bomber is kinda old,
and the U2 soundtrack playing in the background is a little much.
Plus, Tommy Lee Jones is now robbing his own crazy man skit from UNDER
SIEGE.
     Oh, yeah. And there's BLOWN AWAY'S idea of suspense.  It's called
"extreme closeups" and slow-motion.  Dunno about you, but I though Jeff
Bridges' face looks awful stupid in extreme slow-mo.  And although
there are no spring-loaded cats (as horror movies are fond of for a
cheap scare) there's a kitchen scene where they'd have you believe
everything possible is gonna blow.  It works for the first grab at the
fridge, but the second?  Then the stove?  Then the light?  And the
phone?  And all five dials on the stove?  one by one? There was
laughter in the theatre on the third extreme closeup of the stove dial
hitting "lite."
     Any good stuff?  Yea, I guess so.  Let's see--the mad bomber has
a preference for Rube Goldberg type bomb triggers which make some
pretty neat scenes.  The bomb lore is pretty fascinating--"bouncing
betty's," and distilling explosive crystals with coffee filters.  They
killed a dog.  I dunno.  Read some other reviews for good stuff. I
don't wanna spend too much time remembering BLOWN AWAY.
Tak Rating system:
------------------
     Bah.  BLOWN AWAY took itself too seriously and got bogged down in
needless plot that didn't add anything to the experience.  Go see SPEED
again if you want a mad-bomber action flick.  Go rent IN THE NAME OF
THE FATHER if you want an Irish/IRA flick.  But don't spend your summer
movie cash on BLOWN AWAY.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Tommy Lee Jones is an Irish terrorist and a mad bomber.  Jeff
Bridges is the most brilliant and daring member of the Boston bomb
squad, but he is a burn out case who is retiring.  Suzy Amis plays Jeff
Bridges always about to be killed wife.  Lloyd Bridges plays the wise
old man.
     This movie features lots of gigantic explosions.  If you are from
Boston, you will love the many nice scenes shot on location there.
Very picturesque cinematography (Peter Levy).  Other than as a guide to
pyrotechnics or as a travelogue, the only compelling reason to see the
show is Tommy Lee Jones.  He tries his darndest to shine in a bad
movie, and although it is one of the weakest acting jobs I have seen
from him, he is still interesting to watch.
     Jeff Bridges is an actor who can be pretty pathetic sometimes.
This was one of them.  He was either whining through most of the show
or being mister macho - willing to put his family and crowds of
hundreds of people at risk.  If a mad bomber was after your family, you
would not want to share credit in their rescue by asking for any backup
would you?  Of course not.
     Lloyd Bridges's character was not much, and he did not do much
with it.  Suzy Amis played a caricature of the poor little wife who
needed her husband to save her all of the time, and who could not see
danger when it was staring her and her daughter right in the face.
     The plot had few twists and could have been written as the term
project by anyone taking screen writing 101 at their local community
college.  The script (Joe Bateer, John Rice and M. Jay Roach) features
l-o-n-g slow parts followed by tedious action sequences.
     The director (Stephen Hopkins) has the actors mumble most of the
dialog.  Jeff Bridges is especially good at this.  This means that you
will not have to bother hearing a fair amount of what they say.  This
is aided by having the sound editor make the background noise
frequently much louder than the actor's speech.  Listen to them pouring
the wine at the restaurant; it sounds like they are filling a bathtub.
Their talking however is very muted.  Given the gibberish of the script
you can look upon this as a real blessing of course.
     The movie gets a well deserved R rating and lasts for a tediously
long 2:00.  For the brilliance of casting Tommy Lee Jones, I award it *
and recommend you neither see nor rent this movie.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Directed by     Stephen Hopkins 
Written by      Joe Batteer and John Rice
Cast Jeff Bridges, Tommy Lee Jones, Forrest Whitaker, Suzi Amis, Stephi
     Lineburg, Lloyd Bridges
MPAA Rating     "R" (for violence, profanity, and well-cooked corpses)
Running Time    Approx. 120 minutes
     BLOWN AWAY is more blarney than blast--a bum 'boiler about a
brilliant bomber baiting a Boston bomb squad bloke. Jones is the joker
and Bridges the bluecoat and, if you believe the script, they're both
IRA buddies from before.  At least they *were*, until a botched bombing
sent the set scurrying.  Jones went to jail and Bridges went to
Beantown, where he changed his identity and became a policeman.
     Forget the sustained suspension of SPEED, this "thriller" has
holes big enough to drive a city bus through.  Here is a film that,
among other things, asks its audience to believe that someone with IRA
ties (and an Interpol record, no less!) could be hired as a police
officer!  [Insert clip of author shaking his head.]
     Taken "as is," BLOWN AWAY isn't even good escapism.  Every
character talks too much, and, when the time comes to blow something up
(which isn't often enough), the film never shifts into high gear.  The
filmmakers even botch *the* best set-up in the biz:  a chance to cue a
scene to the finale of Tchaikovsky's "1812 Overture!" Somebody check
the cemetery--Hitchcock *must* be rolling in his grave.
     (And what about that stupid scene of a booby-trapped hard-drive?
Gimme a break!  Do big-city bomb squads *really* face situations as
seemingly absurd as these?  Rigged elevators I'll buy.  But not this.)
     The acting is all fine, with Forrest Whitaker a particularly
welcome addition as another bomb squadder.  His presence may be a nod
to THE CRYING GAME, but the less said about the Irish angle, the
better.  Especially in the wake of the just-out-on-video IN THE NAME OF
THE FATHER.  And don't forget to listen for those great bad accents,
including (Jeff) Bridges' back-and-forth Bostonian.
     The leads shouldn't fear the future. However badly BLOWN AWAY
bombs, Bridges will still be standing.  As will Tommy Lee Jones, signed
to square off with Val Kilmer in BATMAN FOREVER.  But what about
director Stephen Hopkins?  He's a smart talent who hasn't been given
anything *exciting* to film since the vastly underrated PREDATOR 2.
Hopefully we haven't seen the last of him.
