Title
Review for Double Team (1997)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: Trippy, hyperspeed action machine from Hong Kong's accomplished
Tsui Hark. Van Damme and Rodman have nice chemistry, the stunts are
eyepopping, and stuff gets blowed up real good; what more do you want?
I admit I was all set to loathe DOUBLE TEAM; it reeked of cheapjack
timing-oriented marketing (stick Dennis Rodman in a movie, quick, while he's
hot, and do something about Jean-Claude Van Damme's flagging career while
we're at it!). Surprise -- DOUBLE TEAM transcends its dumb roots and turns
out to be a mess of fun. Bring some friends, get some pretzels, and have a
blast.
Van Damme is Jack Quinn, an ex-agent who is brought back in for "one last
mission" -- you'd think any spy worth his shoe phone would run like hell
when he hears those words. But Van Damme's character has a pregnant wife
who's also a sculptor, and some unpleasant pressure gets used to get him to
come through on this mission. He's been assigned to take down an old enemy,
a terrorist named Stavros (Mickey Rourke, looking oddly subdued), who may be
back up to his old tricks.
In the first showdown between Quinn and Stavros, the movie wears its
ambitions proudly on its sleeve: nonstop action. An amusement park, a
hospital, a private "retired spy"'s retreat, most of Rome, various houses,
planes, cars and other modes of transport, and the Coliseum (!) all become
arenas for some of the most bone-rattling shoot-outs and punch-outs filmed.
They are better seen than described and are reason enough to see the film:
one jaw-dropping scene has Van Damme taking on a man who uses a switchblade
with his *feet*. (Van Damme is a good, dextrous athlete and fighter, but he
is often upstaged.)
There are other nice touches. Stavros and Quinn both want the same thing: to
retire in peace with their families. That ambition ties them together in
various ways, and also humanizes them a bit. One of the things about HK
action movies is that there's always some form of human element, and that's
carried over into this movie as well. It gives weight to scenes that would
otherwise be forgettable. Also good is Dennis Rodman, playing a weapons
dealer named Yaz -- a character who sticks out like a fistful of broken
fingers and who is funny just standing there. Rodman is natural on screen;
he's fun to watch, especially when slinging bad guys like basketballs, and
deserves to get a movie of his own, based on what's seen here: a
lightweight, fast-moving entertainment that showcases all of its pieces
excellently.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Jean-Claude Van Damme, Mickey Rourke, Dennis Rodman, Natacha
Lindinger, Paul Freeman Director: Tsui Hark Producer: Moshe Diamant
Screenplay: Dan Jakoby and Paul Mones based on a story by Dan Jakoby
Another day, another Van Damme action flick with the same recycled
elements of mind numbing violence, gore and countless explosions.
1.  The use of innocent children in bullet riddled scenes to help
heighten the lagging suspense. Rourke's child dies in the cross fire
when an undercover operation to capture him, goes badly wrong, and Van
Damme is to blame. Shortly after this horrendous event, the two of them
tussle it out with fists and bombs in a post-natal ward where cots and
babies are tossed, pushed about and used as shields in the ensuing
battle.
Leave the kids alone!!! I cannot condone the manipulation of children as
tools to create excitement for the sole enjoyment of overwhelming,
senseless violence.
2.  A brotherhood of 'cybermonks', and the use of a colourful basketball
star who changes his hair colour more often than Van Damme changes his
clothes.
3.  The addition of a tiger to the final dual in the Colosseum; where
ironically, Van Damme and Rourke play out the roles of gladiators who
have done battle there two thousand years earlier.
4.  And amusingly, the destruction of the Colosseum when there was
nothing left to blow up. I wander how the Italians responded to this?
Strangely enough this movie was not as bad as I imagined it would be.

Author
Jamie Peck
TriStar / 1:30 / 1997 / R (language, violence, Dennis Rodman)
Cast: Jean-Claude Van Damme; Mickey Rourke; Dennis Rodman; Natacha 
Lindinger; Paul Freeman 
Director: Tsui Hark 
Screenplay: Dan Jakoby; Paul Mones 
Ripe with explosions, mass death and really weird hairdos, Tsui Hark's 
"Double Team" must be the result of a tipsy Hollywood power lunch that 
decided Jean-Claude Van Damme needs another notch on his bad 
movie-bedpost and NBA superstar Dennis Rodman should have an acting 
career. 
Actually, in "Double Team," neither's performance is all that bad. I've 
always been the one critic to defend Van Damme -- he possesses a high 
charisma level that some genre stars (namely Steven Seagal) never aim 
for; it's just that he's never made a movie so exuberantly witty since 
1994's "TimeCop." And Rodman ... well, he's pretty much Rodman. He's 
extremely colorful, and therefore he pretty much fits his role to a T, 
even if the role is that of an ex-CIA weapons expert. 
It's the story that needs some major work. Van Damme plays 
counter-terrorist operative Jack Quinn, who teams up with arms dealer Yaz 
(Rodman) to rub out deadly gangster Stavros (Mickey Rourke, all beefy and 
weird-looking) in an Antwerp amusement park. The job is botched when 
Stavros' son gets killed in the gunfire, and Quinn is taken off to an 
island known as "The Colony" -- a think tank for soldiers "too valuable 
to kill" but "too dangerous to set free." 
Quinn escapes and tries to make it back home to his pregnant wife 
(Natacha Lindinger), but Stavros is out for revenge and kidnaps her. So, 
what's a kickboxing mercenary to do? Quinn looks up Yaz and the two 
travel to Rome so they can rescue the woman, kill Stavros, save the world 
and do whatever else the screenplay requires them to do. 
With crazy, often eye-popping camera work by Peter Pau and Rodman's Lite 
Brite locks, "Double Team" should be a mildly enjoyable guilty pleasure. 
But too much tries to happen in each frame, and the result is a movie 
that leaves you exhausted rather than exhilarated. The numerous action 
scenes are loud and headache-inducing and the frenetic pacing never slows 
down enough for us to care about what's going on in the movie. 
And much of what's going on is just wacky. There's a whole segment 
devoted to net-surfing monks that I have yet to figure out. And the 
climax finds Quinn going head-to-head with a tiger in the Roman Coliseum 
while Yaz circles them on a motorcycle, trying to avoid running over land 
mines and hold on to Quinn's baby boy (who's in a bomb equipped basket) 
-- all this while Stavros watches shirtless from the bleachers. Did I 
mention "Double Team" is strange? 
When it all comes down, this is just another rarely entertaining formula 
killathon, albeit one that feels no need to indulge in gratuitous 
profanity. Rodman juices things up with his blatantly vibrant screen 
persona, though, leading up to a stunt where he kicks an opponent between 
the legs. But we didn't need "Double Team" to tell us he could do that, 
did we? 
Š 1997 Jamie Peck 
E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu
Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Jean-Claude Van Damme's third pairing with a renowned Chinese film-
maker-- director Tsui Hark, a veteran of fifty films including ONCE UPON
A TIME IN CHINA-- is wonderfully dumb fun.  And, I believe, even more
movie than either HARD TARGET (directed by John Woo) or last year's MAX-
IMUM RISK (Ringo Lam).  In fact, the plot is so convoluted that even *I*
couldn't follow all the twisty turns.  (Terrorists.  Counter-terrorists.  
Six-foot-eight arms dealers.  Pregnant wives in peril.  A Roman order of
Internet-surfing monks.  An island think tank of "retired" specialists.
And one big Bengal tiger.  Got it?) However head-spinning it sounds,
this is another movie of stunts and set pieces and explosions.  Lots of
explosions.  Forget the holes.  Forget the believability quotient.  For-
get the high-profile presence of Dennis Rodman, one of many internation-
al "stars" who appear here.  It's Hark, his editor, and his many stunt
coordinators and choreographers who take your breath away.  All you have
to do is buy a ticket.  And a Coke.  

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Jean-Claude Van Damme, Mickey Rourke, Dennis Rodman, 
      Natacha Lindinger, Paul Freeman
Director: Tsui Hark
Producer: Moshe Diamant
Screenplay: Dan Jakoby and Paul Mones based on a story by Dan Jakoby
Cinematography: Peter Pau
Music: Gary Chang
U.S. Distributor: Columbia Pictures
     Jean-Claude Van Damme must have an affinity for working with Hong 
Kong directors (or maybe it's the other way around).  DOUBLE TEAM, 
directed by Tsui Hark (the ONCE UPON A TIME IN CHINA series, THE CHINESE 
FEAST), is his third such collaboration, following efforts with John Woo 
(HARD TARGET) and Ringo Lam (MAXIMUM RISK).  While Van Damme's 
physicality is an asset in such straight action pictures, his complete 
lack of acting range assures that lapses into drama, no matter how 
brief, will fail, and, as a result, there's a well-defined ceiling for 
how good a Van Damme vehicle can be.  DOUBLE TEAM approaches that 
ceiling.
     Fortunately, DOUBLE TEAM proceeds with tongue in cheek.  There are 
the requisite shoot-outs, fights, explosions, and chases to keep Van 
Damme die-hards happy, but there's also an impossible-to-miss sense of 
self-mocking.  Although DOUBLE TEAM is neither a straight satire nor as 
infectiously fun as a Jackie Chan flick, its lighter tone is refreshing 
in comparison with many of the too-serious action films that glut the 
market these days.
     Then, of course, there's basketball bad boy Dennis Rodman, who's 
making his big league "acting" debut here.  After DOUBLE TEAM, the jury 
is still out on whether Rodman has a future in movies.  His screen 
presence is undeniable, but all that's really required of him in this 
film is to change hairstyles every other scene, utter a few quips, and 
punch or kick just about everyone with whom he comes into contact.  Like 
Shaquille O'Neal and Michael Jordan, who paved the recent path from the 
court to the screen, Rodman has the personality to develop a motion 
picture career, but he'll have to do more than play sidekick to the 
likes of Van Damme.
     The story isn't as much of a throwaway as we have come to expect 
from Van Damme films.  In fact, it's so convoluted that at times it 
borders on being unintelligible.  Jack Quinn (Van Damme) is a retired 
counter-terrorism expert who was once regarded as the best in the 
business.  When his arch-nemesis, Stavros (a beefed-up Mickey Rourke), 
re-surfaces after three years of invisibility, Quinn leaves his pregnant 
wife, Katherine (Natacha Lindinger), to rejoin the service.  After 
stopping by a shop in Antwerp to buy specialty weapons from Yaz (Dennis 
Rodman), an eccentric arms dealer, Quinn heads into an amusement park 
confrontation with Stavros.  The operation turns into a bloodbath, with 
nearly all of Quinn's associates, along with Stavros' young son, dead.  
Quinn is seriously injured.
     He awakens from unconsciousness to find himself as a member of "The 
Colony", an ultra-secret anti-terrorism society comprised of agents who 
have screwed up, but are "too valuable to kill, but too dangerous to set 
free."  The Colony is a think-tank, the "last line of defense against 
global terrorism."  Since all of its members have been declared dead and 
its island location is escape-proof, no one knows about the Colony 
except those at the highest levels of various governments.  No one, that 
is, except Stavros.  And, while Quinn's experience and knowledge prove 
to be valuable assets to the Colony, he devotes much of his time and 
effort to devising a means of escape.
     Despite being financed with American money, not one scene of DOUBLE 
TEAM takes place in the United States.  The locations include the South 
of France, Rome, and Antwerp.  The director, who, like many of his Hong 
Kong contemporaries, is known for his visual flair, brings that aspect 
of his bag of tricks to this effort.  In fact, there are times when 
DOUBLE TEAM's polished look successfully distracts us from the 
preposterous plot.  
     As I indicated earlier, the film never takes itself too seriously.  
For example, while running around Rome, Quinn is aided in his attempt to 
track down Stavros by a group of "cybermonks" -- cloistered friars who 
spend their time surfing the Internet.  On another occasion, our hero 
pauses in the middle of a fight on an airplane to ascertain that his 
opponent is wearing a parachute.  There's also a unique product 
placement for Coke near the end of the film -- rarely has a "free" 
advertisement been so crucial to the outcome of a motion picture.  Last, 
but not least, is the climactic confrontation in the Coliseum which 
features Quinn kick-boxing a tiger (don't try that at home).
     Your reaction to DOUBLE TEAM will probably depend largely on how 
you feel about concussive action films.  While this one is better than 
most, it still falls considerably short of what I consider to be a 
"good" movie.  One thing's for sure, though:  like most flicks that 
boast more stuntmen than cast members, DOUBLE TEAM is unlikely to 
function as a Sominex.  You may not enjoy it, but you won't fall asleep.  
And that's the best thing I can say about this loud, brash, ultimately 
pointless morsel of eye candy.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Michael Dequina
Double Team (R) ** 1/2
        Van Damme.  Rodman.  Rourke.  Not the recipe for disaster it appears
to be, thanks to Hong Kong action maestro Tsui Hark (Once Upon a Time in
China), whose brisk, stylish, and inventive direction keeps Double Team
moving fairly smoothly over some turbulent patches--but not smoothly enough.
         One such turbulent patch is the preposterous plot.  Jean-Claude Van
Damme plays Jack Quinn, a CIA operative who, after inadvertently causing the
death of the son of terrorist Stavros (Mickey Rourke), is sentenced to a
top-secret penal colony/think tank for dangerous agents.  After a daring
escape, Quinn hooks up with flamboyant arms dealer Yaz (Dennis Rodman) to go
after Stavros.
        The star of Double Team is not Van Damme nor Rodman but the action,
and Tsui, working with a number of HK luminaries such as Samo Hung, stage
some wild and exciting set pieces.  One early sequence that begins in an
amusement park and ends in a hospital is more exciting and entertaining than
the endings of Van Damme's last four films combined (make that the
_entirety_ of those four films).  Tsui reaches a delirious high with a manic
hotel room fight with a Chinese assassin (Xi Xi Xiong, a vet of Tsui's Once
Upon a Time series) who holds a knife with his toes, a scene that duplicates
the outrageous exuberance of the best HK productions.
        But, as it stands, the great scenes are just that, good parts of a
mediocre whole; the talent of the director is not quite enough to make up
for the minimal ability exhibited by some of the other people working on the
production.  The line of the plot cooked up by Don Jakoby and Paul Mones is
quite hokey, to say the least, and certain plot devices stretch credibility,
even for an action film, most notably how the heroes survive the finale
(oops, did I ruin it for some people?).  Without giving the specifics away,
it makes me wonder just how much a certain company paid for such a
blatant--and, admittedly, creative--product placement.  Even though Van
Damme thankfully has little dialogue to work with, when he does speak, he is
as wooden as ever.  The big question here is whether or not hoopster Rodman
can act, and after seeing the film, I'm not completely sure.  He plays a
variation of his own outrageous personality, which, naturally, he does well
enough; time will tell if he can actually play a character.  The problem
with Rodman, however, is that he sticks out like a sore thumb throughout the
picture; his involvement is obvious stunt casting--a bit too much so.  Not
helping matters at all are the numerous throwaway basketball references
served up by the scripters; they just serve to take the audience out of the
movie even more.
        Double Team is certainly one of Van Damme's best, but in light of
his less-than-sterling body of work, that isn't saying a whole lot.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  mj23@the18thhole.com
Visit Mr. Brown's Movie Site at http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/
Personal Page: http://members.tripod.com/~MrBrown/home.html
