Title
Review for We're Back! A Dinosaur's Story (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Scott Renshaw
Voices:  John Goodman, Joey Shea, Yeardley Smith, Kenneth Mars,
Walter Cronkite.
Screenplay:  John Patrick Shanley.
Directors:  Dick Zondag & Ralph Zondag.
     For the first time in several years, Disney does not have a new
animated release for the holidays, as The House the Mouse Built instead
readies THE LION KING for summer 1994.  Into that void steps WE'RE
BACK! A DINOSAUR'S STORY, hoping to rake up some of the family
entertainment dollars now available for the taking.  If I didn't know
how long animation takes to produce, I'd swear Universal had thrown it
together in a few months just for that purpose.  WE'RE BACK is sadly
uninspired kiddie fare, perhaps moderately diverting for elementary
schoolers but likely to be a tedious 70 minutes for their parents.
     WE'RE BACK is the story of four dinosaurs subjected to a unique
experiment by time-traveling scientist Captain NewEyes (voice of Walter
Cronkite).  Rex the Tyrannosaurus rex (John Goodman), Elsa the
pterodactyl (Felicity Kendal), Woog the triceratops (Rene Levant) and
Dweeb the apatosaurus (Charles Fleischer) are all given an
intelligence-enhancing grain and invited to the future to fulfill the
wishes of children who want to see a real dinosaur.  They agree, and
find themselves in modern day New York where they meet two lonely
kids:  cocky Louie (Joey Shea) and poor-little-rich-girl Cecilia
(Yeardley Smith).  They also meet Captain NewEyes' evil brother
Professor ScrewEyes (Kenneth Mars), whose scary circus threatens both
children and dinosaurs.
     From a story standpoint, WE'RE BACK is a mess.  It seems to
have no idea what it wants to be--fast paced adventure, goofy comedy,
dark mood piece--so it throws a little bit of everything into the stew
in the hope that something will work.  But the chase sequences are only
interesting thanks to gut-churning computer effects, the comedy is limp
and the scarier segments, which are the best, come far too late.  There
is even an attempt at a musical production number, a lively enough
James Horner-Thomas Dolby composition called "Roll Back the Rock," but
it strains so hard to be charming that it's an effort to watch.  The
schizophrenic tone is not necessarily a problem for a 7-year-old
attention span, but the lack of continuity gave me a headache.
     Visually, the film fares only slightly better.  The prehistoric
setting is appropriately gloomy, but we only see it for about a
minute.  Most of the film takes place in a New York colored in oranges
and golds, and it's just not at all interesting to look at.  Professor
ScrewEyes' circus is dark and creepy, but it is a real missed
opportunity.  Directors Dick and Ralph Zondag could have gone for a
real PINOCCHIO-style funhouse of frights, but they just let the circus
sit there full of unexplored potential.  They manage to pull out one
truly arresting image, involving a flock of crows, but the film is
almost over by that time.  Nothing in WE'RE BACK captures the eye or
the imagination.
     Perhaps the fatal flaw in WE'RE BACK is a collection of characters
which might almost scrape together a personality between them.  Disney
built its empire on carefully created and memorably performed
characters, but screenwriter John Patrick Shanley turns in as bland a
bunch as I can imagine.  John Goodman does a half-hearted Bing Crosby
impression as the affable Rex, Charles Fleischer simply recycles Roger
Rabbit as Dweeb, and Felicity Kendal and Rene Levant are each thrown a
token character trait as the other dinosaurs.  Walter Cronkite and
Julia Child seem to be present only for the novelty of doing trademark
lines to animation, and Jay Leno is genuinely annoying as Captain
NewEyes' alien sidekick.  The kids are not bad, nicely performed by
Joey Shea and "The Simpsons'" Yeardley Smith, but the only real fun
comes from Martin Short as a frustrated clown in the scary circus.  His
antics are as random as everything else, but at least they were funny.
     As if the slipshod Disney knockoffs (the contract signing from THE
LITTLE MERMAID, zoom-ins on the wide-eyed heroine) weren't bad enough,
WE'RE BACK gives in to insipid moralizing.  Uncle Walt had more respect
for kids than that.  It's too bad when parents' only matinee options
are as monotonous as WE'RE BACK.  Better to rent FREE WILLY again.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring the voices of John Goodman, Felicity Kendal, Jay Leno, 
         Walter Cronkite, Martin Short, Julia Child
Directors:  Dick Zondag, Ralph Zondag, Phil Nibbelink, and 
            Simon Wells
Producer:  Stephen Hickner
Screenplay:  John Patrick Shanley based on the book by Hudson Talbot
Music:  James Horner
Released by Universal Pictures
     Call it JURASSIC PARK JR., although it's likely to appeal only to
a small fraction of the audience that enjoyed Steven Spielberg's summer
mega-hit.  Where that one was a thrill-a-minute ride filled with
spectacular effects and well-orchestrated tension, WE'RE BACK is an
exercise in endurance--not only is it on the dull side, but it has
such an overwhelming sense of sweetness that it threatens to become
nauseating.
     Young children--presumably WE'RE BACK's intended audience--will
likely enjoy the adventures of four dinosaurs and two New York youths.
It's adults accompanying their offspring who will have problems
because, even considering the short length of the film, this is the
visual equivalent of a Sominex.  To say that there's not much of
interest going on is an understatement.  While the plot is adequate for
the under-ten group, it won't do much to satisfy the older viewer.
Hopefully WE'RE BACK's single musical number, a nicely jaunty tune, is
sufficient to keep the eyelids open.
     The premise is simple (and simple-minded).  The oddball Captain
Neweyes (voice of Walter Cronkite) takes his "Wish Machine" back in
time to collect for dinosaurs:  a tyrannosaurus named Rex (voice of
John Goodman), a pterodactyl, a hadrosaurus, and a triceratops.  After
feeding them his "Brain Grain" cereal, Neweyes drops them into New York
harbor, charging them to reach the Museum of Natural History where
children from all over the world can have their wish to see a real
dinosaur granted.  Unfortunately, the quartet gets sidetracked by the
devious schemes of Captain Neweyes' evil brother, Professor Screweyes,
who wants the dinosaurs as the prime exhibit in his Circus of Fear.
     With a talented writer like John Patrick Shanley (MOONSTRUCK) at
the keyboard, I expected more than this trite, vacuous effort.  Sure,
there's an occasional line thrown in for the adults, but that hardly
makes the experience worthwhile.  The best animated films are those
that have something for viewers of all ages.  Over the years, Disney's
films have proven that "animation" doesn't equate with "juvenile."  The
creators of WE'RE BACK didn't learn the lesson, so their product turns
out to be an overly-long, big screen cartoon.
     The animation is serviceable, and occasionally above-average.  The
limitations of a "quickie job" are often apparent, but there are a few
nice sequences when it appears that some effort was put into the visual
aspects of the story.
     Whoever picked the voices for WE'RE BACK made some unusual
choices, none of which leads to an impressive or inspired performance.
Walter Cronkite, Julia Child, and veteran British comic actress
Felicity Kendal all have parts, as do the more "typical" vocal artists
John Goodman, Martin Short, and Jay Leno.  Mr. Cronkite gets an
opportunity to say "And that's the way it is...", but I don't recall
Ms. Child ever making mention of "Bon appetite."
     In a year when there's no new offering from Disney, the temptation
is to search for something to fill the void.  By choosing the time when
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST came out two years ago and ALADDIN last year,
WE'RE BACK is obviously making a cheap bid for this distinction.
Parents should not be fooled into thinking they're getting anything in
the same league.  If they don't mind fighting off a desire to snooze,
their kids probably will enjoy this movie.  Otherwise, THE LION KING
(Disney's next animated feature) is only six months away.  It's an
unfortunate choice to have to make.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     In 1993 Steven Spielberg decided to turn his attention away from
live action films featuring dinosaurs (JURASSIC PARK) to cartoons with
dinosaurs.  WE'RE BACK! A DINOSAUR'S STORY was produced by Spielberg in
an apparent attempt to cash in on the dinosaur craze by making a film
for kids so young as to be scared out of their wits by JURASSIC PARK.
If creating a non-offensive movie filled with sweet dinosaurs who have
had a lot of time on their hands and not much to do is a measure of
success, then the movie accomplishes what it set out to do.  Young
kids, say those under 8, will find the film pleasantly diverting albeit
not highly memorable.  Adults and older children will find little to
hold their interest.
     The story is a simple time travel one.  Captain NewEyes (Walter
Cronkite) goes back in time to the age of the dinosaurs.  He wants to
get a nice collection to bring back to the present so he can exhibit
them in a museum where they will be a live exhibit that will interact
with the museum visitors.  Bringing them back presents a bit of
difficulty in that dinosaurs in the wild are ferocious and liable to
eat him.  Moreover, wild dinosaurs will probably not be on their best
behavior in the museum and will treat the visitors as delectable little
lunch treats.
     Captain NewEyes solves this problem with his invention of a cereal
he calls Brain Grain.  Once the animals eat the cereal, they get an
instant IQ and can converse in fluent English.  Being smart, they no
longer want to eat humans and are happy to chew the fat with them
instead.  I will not go into all of the logical flaws here since this
is a kids show afterall.  With cereal in hand, the good captain manages
to capture Rex the tyrannosaurus rex (John Goodman), Elsa the
pterodactyl (Felicity Kendal), Woog the triceratops (Rene Levant) and
Dweeb the apatosaurus (Charles Fleischer).  He takes them all back with
him to the present.
     This scheme is put in jeopardy by Captain NewEyes's evil brother
known as Professor ScrewEyes (Kenneth Mars).  The evil professor wants
to steal the animals and put them in his Circus of Fear where they will
frighten rather than delight the kiddies.  Personally, I think P. T.
Barnum would have preferred Professor ScrewEyes plans as more
lucrative, but P. T. did not make an appearance in the film.
     After the set up of the plot, not a lot happens.  The characters
are all sweet enough, too sweet if anything, but the script by Patrick
Shanley based on the book by Hudson Talbott gives them little to do and
few lines of any merit.  The directors (Phil Nibbelink, Simon Wells,
Dick Zondag, and Ralph Zondag) have no sense of what they want to
accomplish other than have dinosaurs and not take risks.  The only risk
with the movie is terminal boredom.
     WE'RE BACK! A DINOSAUR'S STORY runs just 1:12, which is good.  It
is correctly rated G and if there was an MG (Much less than G)
category, it would get it.  These characters would not even think an
offensive thought.  My son Jeffrey (almost 7) liked the movie, but I
can not recommend it.  I do give it * 1/2 for its wholesomeness.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
