Title
Review for Maniaci sentimentali (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Peer Wandel Hansen
Rating (0-10)   6.0
Directed by     Simona Izzo
Written by      Graziano Diana, Simona Izzo, Giuseppe Manfridi
Cast            Barbara De Rossi, Ricky Tognazzi, Alessandro Benvenuti,
                Monica Scattini, Giuppy Izzo, Veronica Logan, Pat O'Hara,
                Edoardo Mottini, Clelia Rondinella, Alessandro Giannini
Cinematography  Alessio Gelsini Torresi
Music by        Antonio Di Pofi
Produced by     Renato Izzo, Giorgio Leopardi, Ricky Tognazzi
     MANIACI SENTIMENTALI is a sweet and funny movie by Simona Izzo but
as the movie progress it's becoming almost to neat.  To me it looked
like a mix between PETER'S FRIENDS with all the chaos happening in the
house, and HANNAH AND HER SISTERS with the adultery and deception
taking place.  Everything is perfect, the actors, the setting, the
story, no detail is accidental and because of this it is a bit boring.
     Situated in the house "La Casa," a family feast is being
prepared.  The audience are introduced to all the characters, and it's
difficult to keep track of them all.  Mara (Barbara De Rossi) has been
married for a decade to Luca (Ricky Tognazzi) and they still love each
other, but facing his midway crisis Luca is also in love with Cristina,
or so he think.  Luca's sister Serena is chasing all men and so does
both of Mara's sisters, but they are not sure with whom they are in
love and how.  Sandro, a friend of Luca visit the house.  He is not
really interested inn women but take part in all the fun and so does
all the other lovers and mistresses that pop up when the story need
some action.
     Eventually it all come a major conflict where the air get cleared
and life can go on.  The story has some rather funny moments.  In
particular I remem- ber a part where a cellular phone is lost in the
forest and it start to ring.  A frog approaches and begin to croak in
the same rhythm, like it is attracted to the phone.  Or when the family
Labrador is made a guinea pig for some Fettuchini with mushroom picked
on the forest, a small drama ending up with the dog giving birth to a
puppy.
     You will really enjoy this film if you thought that FOUR WEDDINGS
AND A FUNERAL was the masterpiece of the century.  If you have a
romantic (naive) idea about the family life of the Italians, this movie
will not let you down, but if you want renewal, difference or a moving
picture, this is not the one.  It portray Italians almost lifeless, the
more they yell and scream at each other, the less passionate they
seem.  The central conflict between Mara and Lucas become a matter of
secondary importance to the story.
