Title
Review for Final Conflict, The (1981)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Graham Baker
Writer: Andrew Birkin
Starring: Sam Neill, Lisa Harrow, Rossano Brazi, Don Gordon, Barnaby Holm,
Leueen Willoughby
"The Final Conflict" ends the "Omen" films as far as the story of Damien is
concerned (there's another one, but that's really not counted as one), and
sadly enough, it does it with an anticlimactic bang.  We've seen Damien
growing up, as people discovered that he's the antichrist, as well as
himself discovering that, and in this film he's all grown up, successful,
and fully aware of what he can do, and willing to do anything in his power
to see that the prophecies of the Book of Revelations, that says that he
will eventually perish, don't come true.  What a bore.
Or at least it shouldn't be.  If anything, the second "Omen" film proved
that despite a film being a total contradictory mess, it could at least be
worthy of some entertainment value.  This film can't even be very
fascinating.  Damien is now the slasher, instead of Satan, and this brings
about a huge problem: the first two, where Satan killed people, was
mysterious and eerie; here, when Damien kills people himself, it seems
bland.  The magic of the original films is definitely gone in this one.
"The Final Conflict" has to do with "The Great Recession," when Jesus'
second coming is supposed to take place, which is a big threat to the
now-30ish Damien (a younger Sam Neill), who's now filled the shoes of both
his father and uncle by not only being the Ambassador to England, but also
the head of the largest company in the world (or something like that). 
Damien wants to rule the world, and overcome the prophecy that says that
God will pervail, and luckily enough has a pretty nice-sized cult of
Satanists to back him up.
Also introduced are a group of monks, headed by Brother DeCarlo (Rossano
Brazzi, who was once a semi-star in the 40s and 50s - he was the lead in
the movie version of "South Pacific"), who have recovered the special
knives that need to be used to kill Damien right (although I think that the
whole killing-him-on-sacred-ground spiel has been voided, or at least
forgotten).  The first hour tracks their attempts to assasinate Damien
somehow, but instead of being competent monks with real passion and
intelligence in killing him, they come off as the Keystone Kops (get this:
one monk tries to kill him in a TV studio while he's being interviewed,
slips, has his foot caught in a stage rope, manages to blow something up,
sets himself on fire, and burns to death - HA!).
The film also tries to balance a cheap love story as well, dealing with
Damien's affair with a British journalist, Kate Reynolds (Lisa Harlow), who
actually sleeps with him (there's something to tell her girlfriends), but
finds that he's much more interested in her younger son (Barnaby
Holm)...for his successor.  Eventually, Kate is visited by DeCarlo, the
only surviving monk from the first half, who takes it on himself to
actually get some aide from others in his attempt to save the world.
The main thing that is wrong with this film is it's passionless.  Although
it still has Jerry Goldsmith's frightening and adrenalin-rushing score to
undertone everything, and even a couple great sequences, the film just lays
flat on screen and assumes that we're really fascinated by it's high level
of Christian paranoia, something that the other two films neatly worked
with.  There are fewer murders, as well as fewer scenes of general horror,
and it actually tries to come off as being a serious drama, and later on, a
part of propaganda for being a hearty follower of Christianity (it has not
one, but three passages from the bible posted on its screen at different
times).  The trilogy has moved from being a series about the rise and fall
of Damien or finding horror in the Holy Scriptures, and is now a serious
way of rounding up people to go to Church and pray for their souls.
This is sad because there are some really great moments in this film,
especially a frightening bit in the middle where we see Damien giving a
speech to legions of his followers, and them on the hunt to kill any male
child born on the night that Jesus was apparently born.  These are some of
the best moments of the trilogy, and it's sad that there weren't more like
them.
The thing is by the third film, and after probably seeing several films
about the coming of the antichrist (need I mention "Rosemary's Baby?"),
you're probably done being scared by the idea of the antichrist coming. 
And it's not like "The Final Conflict" gives you any other incentive for
being scared by it because it's not even a real horror film as much as it
is a bit of melodrama about ideas that are only scary on principle and not
so when put in a film like this.  "The Final Conflict" lacks the fun of the
other two, the way that they weren't afraid to be essentially paranoid
slasher films, and how they preyed on general Christian fears.  This one
tries to play it straight, to save the others from being too gory or
satanic, and instead, it comes off as being, well, lame.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
