Title
Review for Swimming with Sharks (1994)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: George Huang
Starring: Kevin Spacey, Frank Whaley, Michelle Forbes, Benicio Del Toro
I hated my last boss.  I mean it.  He was a giant schmuck who, after two
years of service, one of them being without a doubt the most competent
worker in my field of work, gave me a total of five raises, culminating
at the current minimum wage while my peers were being promoted to the
better next level (cook - I was a busboy, by the way).  He was also too
moody, often acting like a total asshole, which was different than him
being only a quarter of an asshole the rest of the time.  I mean, I was
afraid to even approach this guy to tell him the sink was clogged.  I
know that if I had the chance to literally bit the shit out of him
without anyone knowing about it and no repurcussions for my actions, I
would have done it.
That's what this film does...well, sorta.  It also gives a satirical
look at Hollywood, but it seemed only secondary to the whole "My boss is
an asshole!" spiel.  Watching the abused employee finally enact his
revenge on his sadistic, immature boss throughout the film, between
flashbacks, is one of the most entertaining things I've ever seen.  Of
course, not all of the film is as good as watching this and laughing at
the boss mock the employee.
Frank Whaley plays a hopeful filmmaker, and recent graduate of film
school, who lands a temporary desk job at a film company, acting as the
secreatary to one of the executives of the company, Buddy (Kevin Spacey,
the year he was in four films and became a superstar and in one of his
most memorably flawless performances).  The outgoing secretary (Benicio
Del Toro, stealing scenes as usual) warns him that he'll become a
bitter, coffee-downing, chain-smoking nervous wreck but will finally
settle into cynicism, but Frank's optimistic.
Buddy is the most childish excuse for a man.  A selfish, immature
asshole who makes my boss look like Mother Teresa (God rest her
overlooked soul, since Di's death overshadowed that of the most
selfless, caring person since Jesus).  He humiliates him from the first
sentence, and mocks him sadistically throughout the film, uses him for
his own personal gain, treats him like a slave, and drives him into near
insanity.
Also going on in poor Frank's life is a relationship with another
selfish woman (Michelle Forbes), who is also in the film business, has
slept her way to the top, and may be using Frank to sleep her way into
Buddy's services.  But she claims to really care about him, even when
he's sleeping into insanity and possible homicidal tendencies.
In the beginning (and gradually throughout the film, since the past is
told through flashbacks), Frank walks into Buddy's house with a gun,
ties him down to a chair, and proceeds to torture him in some original
and not-so-original ways (to get an idea how cool it is, he uses an
envelope to give him some uncomfortable paper cuts).  The plot twists a
bit, we laugh some more, then things get dark and kinda depressing.
While the torture scenes and flashbacks are well done, the ending is too
dark for what happens.  It works well, but this whole obsession with
being brooding and overly serious doesn't mesh well with the black
comedy of the first hour or so.  But other than that, this is a really
funny black comedy that satisfies anyone's needs to ever beat up their
awful, power-hungry bosses.  And, it even says a bit about how horrible
those nasty Hollywood-ites.  But, we all knew that anyway, didn't we?
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
John Roberdeau
I don't know why, but this hasn't been an easy review to write.  Maybe part
of it is that I'm sort of divided about why I like it (and there are lots of
acceptable reasons, believe me).  The original reason it interested me is
that Kevin Spacey is the star.  I first heard of this movie (and first
watched it) the day after I saw the Usual Suspects for the first time, and
for those of you who have seen that, you know Spacey is unbelievable (and so
does the Academy, come to think of it).
After I started watching this, I found another good reason to like it --
Benicio Del Toro (also in Usual Suspects).  He has a really small part
(probably less than 5 minutes of screen time), but he manages to do a lot
with it, as he so often does.  Del Toro's exit is about the time the movie
begins to get extremely funny.
This film is billed as a comedy, and it definitely has some pretty strong
elements of the dark variety.  However, I have always been more of the mind
that the dark and non-comedic elements tend to overshadow the dark and
comedic elements.  Actually, in that way it reminds me of "In the Company of
Men" (an excellent movie, by the way).  It's undeniably funny, though it's a
somewhat guilty sort of humor.  And then, before you really notice, it's
suddenly disturbing and not-at-all funny and you realize that it hasn't
actually been funny for a while.
The plot, basically, is this:  Guy (Whaley) is a small-town kid who comes to
Hollywood to work for Buddy Ackerman (Spacey), a big-shot producer.  The job
turns out to be a total nightmare, as Guy has found his boss to be
demanding,
obnoxious, and utterly devoid of any respect for him or anything else.
Amidst much on-the-job yelling and ridicule, Guy's resentment grows and
grows
until he finds himself taking his boss hostage and torturing him.  This
happens in the first 5 minutes, however -- the whole movie is a flashback.
Not knowing how to say what I want to say about this movie has caused me to
ramble on for quite a while, so I will try to sum this up now.  The first
2/3
of this movie are incredibly funny dark comedy which I imagine Kevin Spacey
enjoyed heartily.  As is customary in such a film, there is some moderately
disturbing stuff going on, but it's all in good fun.  I'm honestly not sure
what it is about this movie that makes me like it so much, but if you like
Kevin Spacey and aren't bothered by black comedy, it's well worth your time.
I recommend it quite highly.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: limited release 5/95 
Running Length: 1:33 
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, profanity, mature themes) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1 
     If Robert Altman's THE PLAYER taught film makers one lesson, it's 
that it's hip to satirize Hollywood.  There have been a lot of recent 
motion pictures cashing in on this theme, with varying degrees of 
success.  SWIMMING WITH SHARKS, the latest entry, tries a slightly 
different tactic than most of these other movies--instead of focusing 
on writers prostituting their talent, George Huang's picture looks at 
corporate ladder climbing within a fictional production studio. 
     Kevin Spacey, in a performance that must be seen to be appreciated, 
plays Buddy Ackerman, the nastiest executive in the movie business.  
Aside from rarely showing a trace of humanity, Buddy loves to shout, 
insult, and generally demean everyone under him, and since he's the 
Senior Executive Vice President of Production, there are a lot of people 
in that category.  Spacey plays the role with relish, managing somehow 
to retain the skeleton of a legitimate character in what was written as 
a pure caricature.  Far more credit goes to the actor than to the script 
for Ackerman's nasty, vicious flair.   
     If Buddy is the boss from hell, Frank Whaley's Guy is the poor sod 
who has to serve his every whim.  Personal Assistant to Ackerman might 
be the first step up the corporate ladder, but it's a pretty dismal 
place to start.  In this position, you're not supposed to think, just 
please and pamper the man who signs your checks.  And that's what Guy 
does, day in and day out, until he finally snaps.  What follows is like 
a variation on DEATH AND THE MAIDEN, with Guy tying Buddy up, then 
subjecting him to a verbal and physical barrage. 
     Somewhere along the way, SWIMMING WITH SHARKS loses its direction.  
What starts as a biting, and often effective, satire turns into a 
dramatic look at the dehumanizing effects of losing one's hopes and 
dreams.  The split focus doesn't really work.  Not only is it 
disconcerting to watch a funny movie turn suddenly grim, but Whaley's 
character doesn't have the necessary depth for us to believe the 
transformation he supposedly undergoes--a transformation that is key 
to accepting the conclusion.   
     SWIMMING WITH SHARKS contains some tremendous scenes.  Most of 
these are early in the film, before it takes its bleak detour.  Certain 
comments about Hollywood are scathing, pointed, and hilarious.  
Unfortunately, there doesn't seem to be enough material here to satisfy 
a full length feature, and the movie, which starts with such promise, 
begins to drag around its midpoint.  From then on, despite a few brief 
rallies, the script never regains its early momentum or clarity, and, by 
the closing credits, SWIMMING WITH SHARKS is just treading water. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
John Beachem
Guy (Frank Whaley) is an aspiring writer who just landed the job of his 
dreams. He's going to be working for one of the biggest executives in 
show-biz, Buddy Ackerman (Kevin Spacey). As Buddy's personal assistant, Guy 
will have the opportunity to go on to bigger and better things in time, as 
all of Buddy's previous assistants have done (one is directing all the 
Macaulay Culkin action pictures). Yep, Guy is certain that all his dreams 
are about to come true. Too bad for him, he's actually gone to hell. Buddy 
turns out to be the most evil, vicious boss ever to walk the planet, and 
Guy's life quickly becomes like that stuff you find underneath your toe 
nails. The only thing he has left is his relationship with Dawn Lockhart 
(Michelle Forbes), a producer who often works with Buddy. Then, after a year 
of dealing with Buddy's demands, something finally causes Guy to snap. One 
evening he enters Buddy's home, takes Buddy's gun from its secret hiding 
place, ties him up, and proceeds to make him pay for every insult and 
offense of the past year.
Make no mistake, "Swimming With Sharks" is one vicious little movie. It's 
the kind of film designed only for those people who like their humor black 
and bitter. If you're going in expecting a cute little story about a young 
guy trying to make it in Hollywood, you're in for quite a surprise. You have 
to not only be able to handle people acting in an appallingly base manner, 
but you have to be able to find it funny. If you can't do that, avoid this 
film like you'd avoid "Home Alone 4" (knock on wood that that never comes to 
be). Here's a quick quiz to see whether or not you'd enjoy the movie. Number 
one, do you find a man getting pencils, file folders, pens, and paper clips 
thrown at him while his boss mocks him to be funny? Two, do you find the 
thought of a man getting reemed by his boss for not knowing the difference 
between Sweet-N-Low and Equal funny? Three, do you find the thought of a man 
being tortured in various ingenious ways by his assistant to be repulsive? 
If you answered no to either of the first two questions, you might want to 
consider giving this one a miss. If you answered yes to the last question, 
definitely give this one a miss and go rent the latest Meg Ryan / Tom Hanks 
romantic comedy.
A lot of what makes the film so funny is the excellent cast. What makes this 
feat even more amazing is that the film is carried by only three actors. 
First up we have Frank Whaley ("Pulp Fiction"), playing a guy who bounces 
back and forth from being sympathetic, to being flat-out annoying. Whaley 
does an excellent job never letting the character fall too far into either 
of these categories. Whenever Guy gets to be too much of a schmuck, he gets 
reigned in to the point where we start disliking him as much as we dislike 
Buddy (okay, maybe not that much). Next up is Michelle Forbes (Ensign Ro 
from Star Trek: The Next Generation), playing a woman who is good at giving 
orders, but doesn't seem to know what she really wants. I found it rather 
amusing that she asks Guy that question at one point, but we get the 
impression throughout the film that she isn't too sure what she's looking 
for either, bouncing from one man to another. Forbes does give a good 
performance, but she isn't given quite enough screen time. Last is Kevin 
Spacey ("American Beauty"), and were the film pure garbage, his performance 
alone would make it worth seeing. Never before have I seen a man walk the 
fine line between overacting and playing a character as a true monster so 
nimbly. He doesn't falter once, and I'll say just this. While his first 
Oscar may say it's for "The Usual Suspects", I can't help but think the 
Academy members were really thinking of his performance here. Benicio Del 
Toro ("The Usual Suspects") also makes a brief, but excellent, appearance as 
Buddy's former assistant.
An interesting thing happened to me while watching "Swimming With Sharks" 
for the first time. When the film first started I was laughing like an idiot 
every few minutes. Yet as it progressed, I laughed less and less. By the 
time the final third of the film hit I realized I wasn't laughing at all, 
and hadn't been for awhile now. Does the movie run out of laughs? Well, in a 
way, yes. However, I don't think that really does justice to what happened. 
Instead, the film slowly changes into something else entirely. What starts 
off as a string of brilliant comic moments changes into a more involving 
story about how cutthroat Hollywood really is. This is the debut film of 
George Huang, who actually worked as an assistant for a major Hollywood 
producer. Word has it he actually went through some of the horrors captured 
here, and it's no surprise that his script is tinged with just a touch of 
bitterness. For a first time writer/director, Huang proves remarkably adept 
behind the camera. His direction is astute, and his script has just the 
right blend of comedy and shocks.
While the flashbacks to Guy's life as an assistant are certainly funny, the 
real brilliance of the film is in the torture scenes. No, I don't mean the 
torture itself is brilliant (although it is quite imaginative), I mean the 
dialogue between Guy and Buddy is brilliant. Watching Buddy slowly turn the 
tables on Guy is astonishing because it's actually believable. Buddy is just 
the sort of man who could torture his torturer by pointing out his flaws. 
Guy, on the other hand, is just the sort of man who would be devastated by 
these flaws being made clear to him. The finale to this little exchange 
first struck me as contrived, but after watching it for a second time I 
realized it made perfect sense. I won't say how it all ends here of course, 
but if you watch the film, do one thing; before you brush the end off as I 
did, really think about what each characters says, and you'll notice a 
wonderfully hidden double meaning to everything being said. One final thing 
I want to note is the soundtrack. It really features only one instrumental 
piece by composer Tom Hiel being played over and over during key scenes. 
It's a great piece, but I wish Hiel had written more so I could get a 
soundtrack. "Swimming With Sharks" runs a decent 101 minutes. I'd recommend 
it to fans of Kevin Spacey and to those who love their comedy black as 
pitch. I give it four and a half out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.
Share information about yourself, create your own public profile at 
http://profiles.msn.com.
