Title
Review for Daytrippers, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Greg Mottola
Starring: Hope Davis, Parker Posey, Liev Schreiber, Anne Meara, Pat
McNamara, Stanley Tucci, Campbell Scott, Marcia Gay Harden, Andy Brown,
Paul Herman, Marc Grapey
The trailers for this film revelaed that this was to be a quirky,
fast-paced, and very funny little comedy, filled with a great
screenplay, good characterization, a simple-but-loveable plot, and even
some depth.  I mean, yeah, I laughed at some of the good lines, was
hooked by the fact that it had a good cast, and even in a bit of awe
since it boasted it was an official selection to be shown at Cannes. 
So, I was up for a good little bit of indie fun.
Now, granted, this aims for some depth, and has a lot of very funny
moments, but overall, it's a disappointment, failing at nearly
everything it aims for.  It wants to be quirky and funny, and yeah, it
is for a lot of it.  It wants to have good characterization, and some of
the characters are, although some of them are pure characteriteurs, and
not real people at all.  The simple plot is simple and likable, so that
works.  And there is some depth, but not a lot of it.  And any depth it
has is never followed up, and therefore fails.
Well, the plot deals with a woman named Eliza (Hope Davis, a dead ringer
for Julie Delpy, although with a smaller mouth, I guess) who's married
to a book editor, Louis (Stanley Tucci, who seems to be in everything
these days), but one morning finds a love letter in her house after he
leaves for work.  Is it from him?  Is it to him?  All she knows is it
has nothing to do with her.  So she freaks.
She high-tails it over to her parents' house, consisting of her
overbearing, and annoying-as-hell mother (Anne Meara), and her quiet and
soft-spoken father (Pat McNamara).  Also there are her sister (Parker
Posey, who IS in everything these days), and her long-time
boyfriend/possible fiance (Liev Schreiber), who's a very pretentious
writer who's in the process of writing a satirical book about a man with
a dog's head, which sounds like it might actually be a book I'd read. 
Oh well.
So they read the letter, and they decide to ask Louis to his face (since
you can tell if someone is lying when you see them face to face).  So
they all cram into the family station wagon, and head into Manhattan to
find him.  This is a light-weight plot, and luckily writer/director Greg
Mottola decides to go the road not-less traveled and give us a lot of
interesting and funny dialogue, as to waste time and make the trip, and
subsequently the film, more fun.  So we get some little discussions,
sometimes intellectual (Liev Schreiber's character is one of those
pseudo-intellectuals, who repeatedly talks about how bad society is and
how we should be in an aristocracy - this is later challenged).
We also get the occasional supporting character to take up some screen
time with some speeches, lines, scenes, etc.  The most interesting is a
writer played by Campbell Scott (Stanley Tucci's bosom buddy) who seems
to flirt with anyone with breasts, and tries to steal Posey from
Schreiber.  I've never really seen a whole lot of Scott, but he was just
awesome in this flick.  We also get a little pointless comic bit from
Marcia Gay Harden at a party that they arrive at.
The ending aims for a lot of depth, etc, but just seems to end abruptly
without a lot of explanation.  There's a twist, which was much talked
about, and yes, it's clever, but it's not brilliant or anything.  It
basically goes for the quick shock you might not have thought of.
But the big problem with this film is the mother.  First off, let me say
that she is wonderfully played by Anne Meara.  She makes her totally
overbearing, annoying, and does it so much that at one point, we almost
want to cheer at one point where some obvious bottled-up-anger is
released.  But she's a flat character.  There's no depth to her
character.  She's just annoying and overbearing, and that's it.  Of
course, we want to cheer at the point I just talked about - she's
annoying.  Anne does try to give her some depth, but the writing is just
not there for her.  Her character's portrayal in the writing is the weak
link in the film, and brings it down.
I will say that this is more well written than the film actually ends up
becoming. The dialogue is clever, very witty, and the characters are
well-defined...well, almost.  And the acting is very good, with the best
performances coming from Posey, Schreiber, Scott, and...McNamara (I
really liked what he did with the father, I don't know about anyone
else).  And there is a bit of depth to the film, but it's never deepend
to its fullest potential limits.
"The Daytrippers" is an occasionally funny, sometimes dramatic, but
overall unsatisfying little indie film which had potential to be an
excellent comic drama and even a parody of the nuclear family (I
guess).  Anyway, I was pretty disappointed with this film, but it didn't
suck.  So much for advertising.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Chris Loar
Starring Hope Davis (Eliza D'Amico), Stanley Tucci (Louis D'Amico),   
Parker Posey (Jo), Liev Schreiber (Carl), Anne Meara (Rita Malone), Pat   
McNamara (Jim Malone), Campbell Scott (Eddie)
THE DAYTRIPPERS is Greg Mottola's feature debut, and it's a fairly   
promising one, full of fine performances and well-written scenes.  But if   
you find the memory of it slipping away from you within moments of its   
denouement, don't be surprised.  The film's plot is loosely constructed,   
and although there is an intriguing interplay of theme and story, Mottola   
ultimately doesn't have enough control over his material to turn it into   
anything affecting or memorable.  But his little micro-Odyssey is   
nonetheless a good trip; it's worth going along for the ride.
The story is rather picaresque in structure; our heroes, somewhat hapless   
suburbanites, take an impromptu trip through the amoral jungles of   
Manhattan.  All this gets rolling when Hope, who appears to have a   
strong, loving relationship with her husband, Louis, finds a love note in   
the form of an early modern lyric poem, and doesn't know what to make of   
it.  Encouraged by her domineering and slightly unhinged mother (played   
with frightening presence by Anne Meara), she decides to head down from   
Long Island to Louis's Manhattan office to ask him in person.  Dad (an   
underused Pat McNamara) drives; Mom, younger sister Jo (played with   
casual quirkiness by Parker Posey), and younger sister's beau Carl (Liev   
Schreiber) tag along for the ride, offering moral support and comic   
relief, as the mood dictates.
When Louis turns out to have taken the day off from work, the family's   
suspicions grow, and they spend most of the rest of the film searching   
around Manhattan for Louis, or for evidence of his infidelity.  This   
quest, such as it is, is the real meat of the film, for as our displaced   
adventurers roam about town, they bump into all sorts of eccentric urban   
types whose concerns are, more or less, intertwined with their own.   
 Everyone's life in the city is all about sex, and about family.  The   
dysfunctional troupe meets up with a son who's hiding his   
child-support-dodging dad from the police; with sisters squabbling over   
their mother's estate, fighting tooth and nail down to the last codeine   
pill.  Hope meets a spurned lover at a party, while Jo meets a man who   
might be perfect -- or might be a clever, manipulative schemer.  It's   
just another day in the big city.
But the real theme here is how the thick glaze of a good story gets   
scraped away by real pain.  Most of our little suburban squadron looks at   
their trip into the city as something of a lark, but for Hope and Louis,   
it's deadly serious.  Mottola has found a great newcomer in Eliza   
D'Amico; she's able to make her face speak louder than her family's   
words, and some of the film's most affecting moments come while we watch   
her face tugging at itself with worry while family glibly froths.
The rest of the cast is also strong.  Liev Schreiber gives a convincingly   
naive performance as a young intellectual without many good ideas; he has   
some difficulty in scenes that require more emotional intensity, but   
then, so does his character.  And Stanley Tucci, during his brief moments   
on screen, is utterly, hopelessly, devastatingly convincing in a part   
that requires him to play a good liar.
At its best, THE DAYTRIPPERS reminds me of recent films that celebrate   
the bizarre way that human lives are woven together in the modern city --   
films like Krzysztof Kieslowski's RED and Wong Kar-wai's CHUNGKING   
EXPRESS.  But here these themes serve more as connective tissue than   
anything else, holding together a plot that might otherwise -- and   
sometimes still does -- seem rambling and pointless.  In the end, the   
film's main pleasures are momentary and idiosyncratic -- the leisurely   
progress of a plot and the pleasantly unpredictable performances of the   
lead players.  These are not pleasures to be sneered at, mind you.   
 Mottola's debut is on the whole a real pleasure to watch, a deft piece   
of storytelling with some moments of real beauty and passion.   

Author
Ben Hoffman
A "daytripper," I have learned, is someone who cheats on a spouse,
usually around lunch time or while "staying late at the office."  THE
DAYTRIPPERS is a delightfully humorous look at one family when wife
Eliza (Hope Davis) who thinks her marriage is just great comes across
what may very well be a love poem from someone signed "Sandy" to her
husband, Louis (Stanley Tucci).
What is a shocked, suspicious wife to do but run off to her parents'
home, Rita (Anne Meara) and Jim (Pat McNamara) to seek advice.  Jim is
the downtrodden, silent husband who never comments about anything.
Wife Rita makes up for his silence by never shutting up for a moment,
voicing opinions on everything and expecting her every command to be
obeyed.
When Eliza arrives, she is met not only by her parents but also by her
sister Jo (Parker Posey) and Jo's boyfriend Carl (Liev Schreiber).
After reading the poem, mom Rita decides that this calls for immediate
action, ordering the five to hop into a cab and go to the office where
Louis works.  Louis is not there; he has been given the day off.  Wifey
did not know he was going to be off..  Smell a rat?  Something rotten
in Denmark? Nothing to do but track that daytripper and find out what
is going on.
Anne Meara's "mom" is the film's main character . . . and "character"
is the precise word. She is an overbearing, driven, take-no-prisoners
Mom.  Meara is superb; good to see her in action again.  Everyone in
the cast is just right but the star is really the wonderfully realistic
dialogue by writer Greg Mottola. . . and the film's surprise ending.
All the speaking lines ring true, a great plus for any film.
What happens when the family finally finds the elusive daytripper?  Why
not see the film and enjoy it and laugh as I did, right down to the
last moments.  Excellent.
Written and directed by Greg Mottola.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     One day Eliza D'Amico (Hope Davis) accidentally finds a love note,
presumably to her husband Louis (Stanley Tucci).  After quoting a
pre-Shakespearean poet named Andrew Marvell ("Therefore the love which
us doth bind"), the letter ends, "Love forever, Sandy."
     Eliza doesn't know anyone named Sandy.  "Maybe he's desperately in
love," bemoans Eliza about her husband.  "Don't be ridiculous," advises
Eliza's mother.  "Nobody is desperately in love."  After discussing the
letter more with her family, they all leave in the old family station
wagon to confront Louis at his book publishing office in Manhattan.
The show is a comedic mystery as the daytrippers follow the clues
around town in an attempt to find Louis and see if he is having an
affair.  And yes, stick around because there will be a surprise.
     In the car on the day trip are Eliza's working class parents Rita
and Jim Malone, her sister Jo, and Jo's boyfriend Carl.  The
domineering mother is played by Anne Meara, the hen-pecked father by
Pat McNamara, the independent sister by Parker Posey, and the
pseudo-intellectual boyfriend by Liev Schreiber.  The other major
member of the ensemble cast is Campbell Scott as the author Eddie.
     Written and directed by Greg Mottola, DAYTRIPPERS's tone from the
beginning is dark, quiet and aloof. Mottola's script is much better
than his directing.  There are many thought provoking little lines,
with most of them coming from Carl, the story's philosopher.  (On
Architecture: "The Europeans may have been imperialists, but they know
how to make a building.")  Carl explains that his upcoming novel is an
"allegory about spiritual survival in the contemporary world."  Carl
ridicules the crassness of modern society in general and the
middle-class in particular.  He would replace our failed democracy with
an aristocracy.  Carl and all the characters in the film deliver their
lines antiseptically.  The director seems to be trying to shut the
audience out rather than drawing them it into the story.
     The show bubbles over with oddities right down to a Maurice
Chevalier barometer.  Eventually, the daytrippers' journey will take
them to a book party honoring Amy Corinne Fairbright-Lebow (Amy
Stiller), where Amy will deliver one of the film's typically convoluted
lines.  "I feel it odd to be experiencing such a feeling of joy over a
book about spiritual asphyxiation," she confesses.
     After an hour and a quarter of dead pan humor that only works in
fits and spurts, the film finally comes alive in the last ten minutes.
The change is so dramatic that you will swear you can hear the actors'
shells breaking.  If only the rest of the film had been this genuine.
     DAYTRIPPERS runs 1:27.  It is rated R for some profanity and
sexual references.  The film would be fine for teenagers.  Not a bad
movie, but the story is too thin to be able to recommend it to you.
I'll give it **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     THE DAYTRIPPERS has the feel of a story written in a PC.  It
starts as scenario that can be described in two or three sentences.
But that is too short to make a film so sequences are added one at a
time like Christmas decorations on a tree to pad the scenario until
there is enough there to fill out a script.  Some of the added
sequences interconnect, most do not.  Mostly you take the scenic route
through the original three sentences, learning about the people
traveling with you and some of the people you pass along the way.  In
the end the value of the whole comprises very little more than the sum
of the value of the parts.  It is apparently writer/director Greg
Mottola's belief that if you see the characters in enough disconnected
situations you will see sufficient facets of their personality to come
to understand them.  Perhaps there is some truth to that, but one wants
more of a story than is provided here.
     Eliza (played by Hope Davis) and Louis (Stanley Tucci) are a
comfortable suburban couple living not far from Eliza's parents Rita
(Anne Meara) and Jim (Pat McNamara).  Eliza teaches fourth grade and
Louis is an executive at a Manhattan-based book publisher.  Then on the
day after Thanksgiving, Eliza finds an Andrew Marvell love poem that
has fallen out of Louis's pocket.  Asking Rita for advice, her mother
suggests going into Manhattan and confronting Louis directly.  And the
more people for support the better.  So Eliza, her parents, her sister
Jo (Parker Posey) and her sister's boyfriend Carl (Liev Schreiber) all
go trooping off in the family station wagon to Manhattan to find Louis
and hopefully the truth.  It is a trying day in the city for each of
them as well as some of the people in Manhattan that they involve.
Along the way they have various small adventures, but the adventures
are not very interesting in themselves, do not tell us a lot about the
family members, and do not advance the plot.  Much of this film is
picking up on the texture of the characters, which is a bit threadbare,
and waiting for something to happen.  We get validation of our first
impressions that Rita is a meddling busybody.  There is confirmation
that Jim is a long-suffering father who really is a font of wisdom if
people would only notice and listen to him.  We see that Jo is not as
ready to commit to Carl as she thinks she is.  And Carl, the writer, is
really just a big fish in a small intellectual pond.  We get something
of how he thinks as he recounts in detail the plot of his novel, a
rather simplistic symbolic work about a man with the head of a dog.
(Curiously the release of this film seems to coincide with the
publication of a real novel that would seem to have some similarities
to his fictional novel:  Kirsten Bakis's LIVES OF THE MONSTER DOGS.)
     Anne Meara actually does a fairly good job as the overbearing
Rita.  In many ways she is more believable than Debbie Reynolds was in
MOTHER.  The film does not make adequate use of Pat McNamara who really
makes the film come alive when he is given anything to do.  Parker
Posey who at one time seemed to overpower her roles intentionally gives
a somewhat more subdued performance in this as she did in WAITING FOR
GUFFMAN.  Director Mottola seems to be keeping an eye on expenses as is
producer Steven Soderbergh, whose films tend to be simple actors in
front of a camera. The score is apparently done on a single guitar.
Perhaps it was just the quality of the print I saw, but the colors were
a little washed out.
     By structuring his story so that the most interesting events fall
in the very latest part of the film Mottola makes his film at once too
long and one that the viewer is hoping will not end when it does. This
is a film for the patient.  I rate it a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Hope Davis, Pat McNamara, Anne Meara, Parker Posey, 
      Liev Schreiber, Stanley Tucci, Campbell Scott, Marsha Gay Harden
Director: Greg Mattola
Producers: Nancy Tenenbaum and Steven Soderbergh
Screenplay: Greg Mattola
Cinematography: John Inwood
     Pity poor Eliza (Hope Davis).  On the surface, her family seems 
normal.  She lives with her husband, Luis (Stanley Tucci), in a nice, 
Long Island home only a short distance from her parents' house.  Under 
that roof are her mom, Rita (Anne Meara), dad, Jim (Pat McNamara), 
sister, Jo (Parker Posey), and her sister's SO, Carl (Liev Schreiber).  
When Eliza discovers incriminating evidence indicating that Luis could 
be cheating on her, she is bundled into the car by the rest of her 
family for a sleuthing day trip to New York City.  By the time night 
falls, Eliza will probably wish she had stayed in bed.
     THE DAYTRIPPERS, from first time director Greg Mattola, starts out 
as a droll comedy about a group of oddball characters forced by 
circumstances to spend a day together, but finishes as a slightly 
overbearing drama about relationships in crisis.  The change in tone 
from playful to somber, which takes place about three-quarters of the 
way through, is jarring.  The melodrama that follows, while adequate to 
wrap up the story, isn't nearly as effective as the offbeat comedy that 
persists for most of the running length.
     Leaving out the final act, which includes a lot of bickering, 
anger, and one "shocking" revelation, THE DAYTRIPPERS satirizes a 
suburban family's trip into a big city.  Of course, they're there on a 
mission -- to spy on Eliza's husband.  They hang around outside the 
possible address of his mistress, waiting.  When he finally appears and 
jumps in a cab, the chase is on.  Unfortunately, a red light immediately 
intervenes, resulting in "the world's shortest car chase."  Undaunted, 
however, Rita leaps out of the car to follow her son-in-law on foot, or, 
as Jo puts it, "My mom suddenly turns into Wesley Snipes."  
     Of course, it's not all fun and games.  There are hidden tensions 
in the various relationships, many of which eventually spill into the 
open.  The problem with THE DAYTRIPPERS is that, once the drama shifts 
into high gear, Mattola forgets about the lighter side of things.  More 
humor in the final twenty minutes would have made the climactic 
sequences fit better with the rest of the film.
     The actors all do fine jobs.  Hope Davis, who bears a striking 
resemblance to the better-known Julie Delpy, shows aptitude for both 
comedy and drama.  Anne Meara, unsurprisingly, is much better at the 
former than the latter.  Parker Posey (PARTY GIRL) is delightful as the 
impish Jo, and Liev Schreiber is effective as her put-upon boyfriend.  
Stanley Tucci and Campbell Scott have smaller roles.
     THE DAYTRIPPERS is at its best using parody to paint an incisively 
humorous picture of a modern American family.  We see here just how 
dysfunctional the typical nuclear family can be, and that "family 
values" aren't always the solution.  Even though THE DAYTRIPPERS is 
played primarily for laughs, there's a lot of truth lurking beneath the 
comic exterior.  The message comes across to anyone who wants to listen:  
preserving the family is about fostering communication, not mouthing 
platitudes.  Unfortunately, that's something that the film makers 
understand far better than most politicians.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
web: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin (or) http://www2.cybernex.net/~berardin

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on 26 July 1997 at the Cineplex Odeon Worldwide for $3 by myself.
Just after Thanksgiving, happy couple Louis (Stanley Tucci) and Eliza
(Hope Davis) make love; the following day she discovers what appears to be
a highly literate love note to her husband. How she deals with it and what
ensues is not realistic, but if you let that slide, you will enjoy the
film. What does she do? She immediately discusses the matter with the
whole family, who, since they were going into New York anyway, pile into
the station wagon and head for Louis' office.
The Malone family includes Rita (Anne Meara), Jim (Pat McNamara), younger
daughter Jo (Parker Posey), and her boyfriend Carl (Liev Schreiber). Their
journey is improbable and leads to some other implausible events a la
After Hours. But, the guaranteed overheard dialog is still engaging and
entertaining. First Eliza and Rita invade Louis publishing office. Later,
when tracking Louis down to a Soho apartment, the entire group winds up
invading the home of a young man who is hiding his deadbeat dad from the
authorities. 
And yes, they eventually invade the book party Louis is supposed to be at
later that night. All this in a car without a working heater. 
The movie's strengths are the dialogue and the pacing. It is a low-budget
independent feature, and the real-time telling of tales lends itself to
the no-money-for-editing look of the film. There is a drabness and
darkness (literally) that suits it well. A lot of the dialogue gems are in
the side stories and overheards.
The Daytrippers sums up the very American characteristic of spilling ones
guts to anyone and everyone: the publishing assistant recounting his
latest sexcapade; Eliza walks into a party and a guest (Marcia Gay Harden)
latches onto her for dear life. Rita, who is insufferable to everyone in
her family, hold back nothing to Rob and Leon, just after taking over
their kitchen. [Great line from her long-suffering husband: "For the love
of God, don't let her make soup!"]
Early on, true to his student nature, Carl pontificates how the middle
class is concerned with trivialities that keep them from meaningful
interaction. What he, and everyone else, learns is that being on vacation
is enough to make relationships buckle or unravel.
This is writer/director Greg Mottola's first feature-length effort. For
what it is, it succeeds. The casting is good: Anne Meara dominates as the
shrewish Rita; Liev Schreiber is as convincing as the novelist wannabe
college boyfriend as he was as one of the kidnappers in Ransom; Parker
Posey works well as the rebellious, quirky, and annoyed Jo. Campbell Scott
(a co-producer) makes two appearances as a writer.
Also noteworthy is Richard Martinez's music, which makes a ride on the
Long Island Expressway feel like some sort of dream or fairytale (believe
me, it's not). 
Copyright (c) 1997 Seth J. Bookey, New York, NY  10021,
sethbook@panix.com.
More movie reviews are available at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Cinepix)
Starring:  Hope Davis, Anne Meara, Parker Posey, Liev Schreiber, Pat
McNamara, Stanley Tucci, Campbell Scott.
Screenplay:  Greg Mottola.
Producers:  Nancy Tenenbaum and Steven Soderbergh.
Director:  Greg Mottola.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  88 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     There is a quality to certain independent films which I have referred
to in the past as an "oppressive quirkiness."  As frustrating as it can be
to watch a Hollywood release which is a non-stop monotone of plot or
action, it is similarly frustrating when a film-maker's infatuation with
colorful characters at the expense of narrative results in all those
colors blurring into a dull brown.  Actors understandably love playing
those characters, but independent writer-directors -- frequently rookie
auteurs -- can't always tame their creations into a solid story.  Greg
Mottola's THE DAYTRIPPERS is characterized by a quirkiness more pervasive
than oppressive, and some of it is quite entertaining.  By the time it's
all over, however, you may find yourself wondering what the point of it
all was.
     Hope Davis stars as Eliza D'Amico, a Long Island schoolteacher with a
happy marriage to husband Louis (Stanley Tucci), a publishing house
editor.  At least she thinks it's a happy marriage, until she finds a love
letter which appears to be to Louis from someone named Sandy.  Unsure what
to do, Eliza brings her concerns to her family, gathered in town for
Thanksgiving:  mother Rita (Anne Meara), father Jim (Pat McNamara),
younger sister Jo (Parker Posey) and Jo's boyfriend Carl (Liev Schreiber).
They suggest that Eliza needs to investigate her suspicions, and accompany
her into New York City for a Friday-after-Thanksgiving day of sleuthing.
As it turns out, they may find out more about each other than about
Louis's fidelity.
     For well over half of THE DAYTRIPPERS, the character riffs provide a
lot of laughs without becoming repetitive or abrasive.  Liev Schreiber has
the most subtly amusing role, an intellectual would-be author who bashes
middle class obliviousness even as he sucks up to the obliviously middle
class Rita.  His rather pompous diatribes are played straight and in a low
key, making his later humbling at the hands of a rival author (Campbell
Scott) as sad as it is funny.  Anne Meara and Pat McNamara play the
bickering parents with interesting shadings on stereotypical
characterizations, and Parker Posey again shows off her indie-queen charm.
Mottola puts them in a variety of bizarre situations, including what Posey
aptly describes as "the shortest car chase in history," and peppers the
film with memorable minor roles like Marcia Gay Harden's turn as a drunken
party-goer trying to deal with the presence of an ex-boyfriend at the
party.  At the sane center sits Hope Davis's Eliza, a woman trying to
maintain her dignity under stressful conditions -- if worrying about your
husband having a mistress were not bad enough, _you_ try to deal with it
while trapped in a car with your parents.
     As the story plays out, Eliza's positioning in that sane center
proves to be one of THE DAYTRIPPERS' most glaring problems.  Ultimately,
this story is about how Eliza comes to be in the situation of chasing
around her possibly-philandering husband, but mostly we watch Eliza
reacting to the people around her.  It may be part of Mottola's vision for
Eliza that she is too passive, yet the result is that we don't understand
enough about who Eliza is or how she feels about her life.  We see that
Rita has manipulated her daughters' relationships in a thinly disguised
disdain for their value as individuals, and that should guide us to an
awakening in Eliza.  Instead, we get an abrupt emotional response and an
even more abrupt conclusion to the film, hard on the heels of a revelation
which feels more self-consciously clever than appropriate for the rest of
the film.
     On an even more fundamental level, THE DAYTRIPPERS loses its audience
because it loses its sense of humor.  After sixty minutes worth of
appealing wit, Mottola perhaps falls victim to a concern that his film
will be considered too frivolous.  Thus follows a series of shouting
matches, confrontations and Big Dramatic Moments which ends up melding two
acts of George Bernard Shaw to one act of Tennessee Williams.  THE
DAYTRIPPERS has a lot of good-natured humor to recommend it, but I'm not
sure Greg Mottola really knew what he wanted to do with the lively
characters he had created.  He may have learned one lesson of independent
film-making the hard way:  it's a good start to put a bunch of interesting
characters together in a vehicle and set them on their way, but sooner or
later that vehicle has to come to a destination.  THE DAYTRIPPERS is an
entertaining ride while that vehicle is in motion.  Mottola just needs to
learn how to park as smoothly as he drives.
