Title
Review for Edward II (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Frank Maloney
     EDWARD II is a film by Derek Jarman, written by Jarman, Stephen
McBride, and Ken Butler, based on the play by Christopher Marlowe.  It
stars Steven Waddington, Kevin Collins, Andrew Tiernan, Jody G. Raber,
Jerome Flynn, Tilda Swinton, and Nigel Terry.  Art direction by
Christopher Hobbs.  The film is rated R for violence and sexual
situations.
     EDWARD II is Jarman's ninth feature film and it's a stunner.  You
will either love it or hate it.  There is no middle ground here.
Jarman, the director of SEBASTIANE, CARAVAGGIO, JUBILEE, and THE
TEMPEST, is in no mood to shilly-shally here and has produced an angry,
provocative film, a polemic against homophobia, agit-prop, radical
propaganda.  I think it is very good theater; I don't think that it's
perfect film-making, however much I applaud its politics.
     The only problem I have is that EDWARD II looks like a filmed stage
play, not like a movie, except for the fast-paced editing.  The
minimalist sets, designed by Christopher Hobbs, consist of slablike
blocks and walls; there are no exteriors at all.  This is a response to
Jarman's shoestring budget, but it must always be a fault in film.
This is not to say the sets are ineffective; they communicate the
primitive world of Plantagenet England (Edward II ruled from 1307-1327),
the even more primitive world of power politics and bloody hatreds that
are not, unfortunately, so bound by time.  The costumes are mostly
contemporary.  Edward and his lover Piers Gaveston appear in dark,
stylish suits and ties, the Queen Isabella (Tilda Swinton) stalks
through the entire movie as a fashion parade of campy haute couture
fashion, the rebellious Mortimer (Nigel Terry) wears the uniform of a
British officer, right down the bristly little mustache.
     Jarman never stops reminding us that this is not just a costume
flick, that this is about now, that it is happening now.  The most
blatant exercise of this insistence is the battle scene that becomes a
confrontation between OutRage activists with very contemporary placards
and riot police with truncheons and plastic shields.  (The extras were
real-life members of OutRage, a British group somewhat akin to ACT-Up in
the U.S.)
     The language, however, is purely Marlowe's, although Jarman and his
co-writers use only a third of the 1592 play.  The writers have several
characters repeat the question "How can you love what the rest of the
world hates?" (remembered approximately).  How indeed?  Is this the
crux?  The antique blank verse and modern costumes fuse powerfully at
this moment to open the play and the film to the largest possible scope
of meaning.
     Jarman also does something very interesting with the ending, which
he rewrites for Marlowe.  It can be justified from contemporary
documents, I am told, and it certainly can be justified from the
political demands of the movie.  Marlowe's ending is foreshadowed
throughout the action and is enacted in all its brutality and then
thrown away as a bad dream.  Instead, we have a symbol of what happens
when the oppressed help each other, instead of the oppressors, as moving
in its own way as the ending to the novel THE GRAPES OF WRATH.
     As for the performances, let me say first off that I deeply
appreciate the care and precision with which the British actors spoke
Marlowe's words.  I understood every one of them, not something one can
usually say, especially with U.S. productions of Elizabethan drama.
The lovers, Waddington as Edward and Tiernan as Gaveston, were
energetic, impudent, imprudent, and very passionate, without chewing any
scenery.  However, Swinton as the Queen steals the entire movie.  She
took Best Actress at Venice and deservedly.  She has the carriage of a
runway fashion model, slinking, slouching, projecting her bony shoulders
like leathern wings.  She is passionate, too, and much more dangerous
than any of the males; she doesn't quite eat her mate, but she comes as
close as possible, familially speaking.
     When Gaveston and Edward part, we head Annie Lennox's version of
Cole Porter's "Ev'ry Time We Say Goodbye" from the AIDS fund-raiser
album, "Red, Hot & Blue."  Lennox then appears and gives us a new
interpretation of this beautiful song, bringing out its quiet sadness.
(Jarman came out in 1987 when he announced he was HIV+.  Since then the
British press, in particular, has mounted a death watch on each of his 
films, WAR WORKS, THE GARDEN, and now EDWARD II; Jarman, by all reports,
continues to be creative and productive, despite a series of
opportunistic infections last year.)
     I don't have the name of Jarman's cinematographer.  I should
because the film is beautifully shot, relying on carefully arranged
tableaux vivants and chiaroscuro lighting, as it does in the main, the
effects are stagey but visually rich.
     I kept thinking of Peter Greenaway throughout this film, that
despite the contrast of Jarman's stripped down sparseness and
modern-dress plainness the two had much in common in their painterly
sensibilities and their determination to shock and challenge us, the
success with which they entertain us at the same time with the passion
and purity of their anger.
     There is male nudity, homoeroticism, brutality and violence in this
film.  Be forewarned, this may not be your cup of tea.  But for those
whose cup it is, or who are willing to take a bit of a flutter, EDWARD
II will reward them handsomely.  It is not going to be easy to find;
even in Seattle, it is only playing at the Broadway Market in the heart
of the gay ghetto of Capital Hill.  Pay whatever you must; it's worth
it.

Author
Pedro Sena
Much like Peter Greenaway's PROSPERO'S BOOKS, this play is not for everyone,
and specially for those who have intellectual visions about both the poetry
and the play.
In keeping with the general trend in England over the past thirty years to
assault all theatre with every interpretation of the same play, anyone can
come up with, this play is not erratic, or strange to follow.  In all
probability, it carries more truth than it does theatre, if the situations
were considered possible, or true, if they were actual history.
The king is a homosexual ( nothing new there ) and has an affinity for a
particular childhood friend ( Gaveston ) with whom he wishes to share the
throne and every possession he has.  However, this is a major problem for
the nobility surrounding the court, and leads to the destruction of the
king, supported by his jealous wife, who comes of as the gorgon.  The
Gaveston is ordered to be killed by the queen, and eventually the throne is
taken away from Edward II and passed on to his young son, who happens to be
a pawn in the whole thing.
While the conformists will never even stay for five minutes to watch this
play, there is a bit too much kissing amidst the homosexuals in the court,
the fact remains that its probability ( were it fact, and there is no reason
not to accept a bit of literary license upon an old story ) of truth are
actually better than the glorified events of any other tragedy, which both
Marlowe and Shakespeare went after in the years to come.
There is also another thread which is difficult to ignore, and has also been
explored on the stage.  That Marlowe himself, was a young man that spent
much of his time with other boys, thus sharing a few things with the king.
However, this is not all too hard to take when it is a well known fact that
younger men played all the roles of women in Shakespeare's time, and were
well known to engage in sexual activity other than what was, and is,
considered normal by any social standards.  By all intents and purposes,
this makes Doctor Faustus an exercise in narcissism, rather than a pact with
the devil to fight an institution.  At the time, much like the Hebrew
counterparts, if a man was not married, or had children, he wasn't
considered a man at all, but a detriment to society, and one to be made fun
off.
Regardless of any of these facts, this is an excellent play, with some
outstanding poetry, though it doesn't have the rhymes that Shakespeare was
capable of, and it plays very straight forward......and well.
And although it isn't my special type of theatre, or the way I would really
present it with its incredible directness and disregard for the audiences
proclivities, it makes for a more open attitude in presentations, thus
affording a better, clearer, and therefore more effective theme about the
way humans tend to treat each other.
EXCELLENT PLAY.  OUTSTANDING ACTING. NON COMPROMISING IDEALS.
And not for everybody.
Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1994
Member of the Internet Movie Critics Association
