Title
Review for Boxer, The (1997)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "You can't believe the relief it was to feel the pain," Danny
Flynn tells his ex-sweetheart, Maggie.  Danny, once an IRA terrorist
has been incarcerated for most of his adult life.  Released for good
behavior, his feelings have been bottled up inside until his recent
boxing match, when he was beaten to a pulp.  Although he was convicted
for his IRA activities, which he now renounces, his passion has always
been boxing.
     Daniel Day-Lewis in another of his meticulous performances plays
Danny in THE BOXER.  Emily Watson, whose 1996 performance in BREAKING
THE WAVES has been unsurpassed by any actor since then, plays Maggie.
In an underwritten role, she manages to shine with her intensity and
sincerity.  The chemistry between them is taut and real.  The
complication in their affair and the reason it has trouble getting
rekindled is that she is married to an IRA member in prison.  Even
dance with a prisoner's wife, and the IRA will blow your knee caps off,
or worse.
     A beautiful story with wonderful performances by an ensemble cast,
it suffers a single but all-encompassing problem, the over-restrained
tone set by the director, Jim Sheridan.  Sheridan, whose previous films
with Daniel Day-Lewis were MY LEFT FOOT and IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER,
normally brings emotional fire to his subjects, but this time he takes
a too cerebral approach to the material.  You can almost feel him
keeping his actors' emotions in check.  At certain points in the story,
when things are going most awry with Danny, the picture comes into its
full glory, but at others it just hints at what could have been.
     Sheridan's meticulous staging of the IRA activities at the time of
a truce has an almost documentary authenticity.  The details, including
the way they smuggle in Maggie's father, Joe (Brian Cox), since he is
an IRA big-wig, are fascinating to watch.  And when Joe, who wants to
negotiate a peace treaty, is challenged by Gerard McSorley in a
chilling performance as Harry, one of his lieutenants, the tension is
palpable.  Harry doesn't trust anyone, least of all someone from the
other side offering an olive branch.  Joe's peace negotiations are
prima facie evidence to Harry than Joe has sold out.  The result makes
for an unglamorized view of the IRA's inner workings.
     Danny sets up a "nonsectarian" gym ("The Holy Family Boxing
Club"), in which both sides of the struggle meet and box.  A radical
but subtle pacifist, Danny becomes a symbol of the struggle for peace
and thus hated by Harry and his men.  Against this backdrop, the
romance between Danny and Maggie tries to unfold but their constraints
are too strong.
     A disappointing show but a powerful one without a bad performance
in it, it never quite engages the audience.  The last third of the
story, especially the ending, where things don't go according to plan
brings out some of the strong passions that are rarely in evidence in
the rest of the picture.  Even given its flaws, its haunting images are
likely to stay with you for a while.
     THE BOXER runs 1:50.  It is rated R for violence and profanity and
would be fine for teenagers.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(Uni)
Directed by     Jim Sheridan
Written by      Jim Sheridan and Terry George
Cast            Daniel Day-Lewis, Emily Watson, Brian Cox, Ken Stott,
                Gerard McSorley, Ciaran Fitzgerald
MPAA Rating     "R" (presumably for violence and profanity)
Running Time    108 minutes
Reviewed at     The Cary Imperial, Raleigh, NC (10JAN98)
     Though not particularly engaging as either a sports film or an IRA
drama, THE BOXER *does* boast a great love story.  Daniel Day-Lewis and
Emily Watson (BREAKING THE WAVES) play Danny and Maggie, former teen
lovers rekindling their romance almost a decade-and-a-half after Danny
was sent up the river for IRA activities.  He's out of prison, but not
out of hot water.  Seems Maggie's now a prisoner's wife, having married
another IRA lad in the interim.  And she's not supposed to date-- no
prisoner's wife is.  (They risk broken kneecaps, among other forms of
societal scorn.) Now, for Maggie, the situation is even *more* dicey,
'cause her dad (Brian Cox) is an IRA bigwig.  He's trying to negotiate a
cease-fire that not everyone in his Belfast group is supporting, so he
can't afford even the *appearance* of impropriety.  He's also observed
that Danny has gone the way of the pacifist, forgoing his IRA ties in
favor of a more localized goal:  renovating the community center into a
sports gym.  Got it?  Yeah, there's lots going on here-- arguably too
much for this third collaboration between Daniel Day-Lewis and director
Jim Sheridan (IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER, MY LEFT FOOT).  Neither the
sports stuff nor the IRA in-fighting ends up particularly affecting, but
it does keep your brain busy.  (Do *all* Brits watch fights as if in a
dinner-theater, with no shouting or yelling?  Or just the upper-crust?)
The romance is right there, though, thanks to two well-paired actors and
enough obstacles in their characters' paths to ensure that tears will
flow, no matter which way the story goes.  Bring a hankie.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Jim Sheridan
Writers: Jim Sheridan and Terry George
Starring: Daniel Day-Lewis, Emily Watson, Brian Cox, Ken Stott, Gerard
McSorley, Ciaran Fitzgerald, Elanor Methaven, Kenneth Cranham
Contrary to the title, "The Boxer" is not another Rocky story only this
time spliced with some cold hard politics.  It's actually three movies
in one: a political film, a boxing film, and a love story.  All of these
work in their own respects and have some pretty decent balancing betwixt
the three elements of the story, but somehow it seems kind of cliched
and unoriginal.  We've seen it all before, and we're just not blown away
with it like we should be.  Oh well.  It's still an excellent irish
story.
"The Boxer" of the title is Danny Flynn (Jim Sheridan staple Daniel
Day-Lewis), an ex-IRA member who gets out of a Belfast prison after 14
years, and finds out that his troubles are far from over.  First off,
the IRA is having a small civil war between its leader Joe Hamill (Brian
Cox), and one of its sub-leaders, Harry (Gerard McSorley), both having
opposing views on getting many of their members out of jail.
While this is going on, Danny and his old drunkard buddie, Ike (Ken
Stott, who played the chief inspector in Danny Boyle's "Shallow Grave"),
re-open an old gym which allows the two opposing religios sects,
Protestant and Catholics, to work together.  Danny not only begins
teaching kids how to box, but has stayed in great shape whilst in
prison, and is ready to start boxing real people again.
And Danny runs into his ex-love, Maggie ("Breaking the Waves"'s Emily
Watson), who hasn't seen him since he went in.  They don't easily start
up their romance again because she's the wife of a prisoner whom she
married during Danny's tenure in prison, and also has a son, Liam
(Ciaran Fitzgerald), from him, whom Liam is hoping will get out soon. 
But the two are slowly re-drawn to eachother again, and this begins to
complicate things.
The political story is nothing really special but works in itself. 
We've seen it many a time before, but it's at least interesting,
sometimes emotional, and even riveting at times.  There's a big riot
towards the middle of the film which is frightening in its brutality and
honesty.  The boxing story is very minor to the story, but does
represent people coming together to fight eachother fairly, and even
with good sportsmanship.  There are only a few boxing scenes, but
they're never like "Raging Bull"/let's-strip-down-the-sport-to-its-bones
brilliant.  They're more realistic, and instead of bone crunching, we
hear the sound of the gloves hitting eachother, which is slightly
unerving at times.  And I didn't know Daniel Day-Lewis was in such good
shape.
But the backbone of the story is the love one.  Because these characters
are given such horrible circumstances, and since the two leads have such
great chemistry together, we really feel for their plight.  As the film
goes on, and circumstances get worse and worse, the characters have to
make real human decisions, and we can sympathize with them as humans not
characters.  This is how you write a love story - take note, Hollywood.
These elements are pretty much equally balanced, with each of the parts
of the stories working hand-in-hand with eachother.    I loved how each
of the different parts of the plot mattered, and sometimes spilled over
into the next.  It made sure that we didn't just care for one of them. 
I'm not saying they're all equally great, because the love story really
carries the film, but at least they all work out respectively.
The acting is amazing, with Day-Lewis and Watson giving excellent
performances and showing great chemistry.  I'm not sure if they're
Oscar-nominee bound, but they're very good.  In the supporting roles,
Billy Cox is greatly sympathetic as the IRA leader losing control of his
daughter and his workers.  But the film is stolen acting wise by Ken
Stott as Ike, who is just a great scene stealer.
The direction and co-writing by Jim Sheridan (with the other co-writing
credit going to Terry George) is excellent, rounding out the characters
well, but not pacing everything greatly.  I noticed that the first half
was very leisurely (yet fascinating), but the second half whirls by at a
quick pace, and ends much too quickly.  More time could have been spent
thinking up the ending, since it does seem quite sloppy.
Though "The Boxer" is a good film, it never achieves the greatness that
it should.  Sure, it's a masterpiece compared to most of the Hollywood
drivel we usually get, but on it's own, it just could have been better. 
But it still works out, gives us a great love story combined with a
political and boxing drama, and features great acting.  Even if it could
have been better, this'll do.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Daniel Day-Lewis, Emily Watson, Brian Cox, Ken Stott, 
      Gerard McSorley, Ciaran Fitzgerald
Director: Jim Sheridan
Producer: Arthur Lappin
Screenplay: Jim Sheridan & Terry George
Cinematography: Chris Menges
Music: Gavin Friday, Maurice Seezer
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures
     Films about Ireland's troubles come in all different sizes and 
shapes -- everything from exploitative thrillers (THE DEVIL'S OWN) to 
keenly-realized explorations of human brutality (IN THE NAME OF THE 
FATHER).  In almost every case, the movie has a clear political 
viewpoint, because in stories where the issues are so divisive, it's 
virtually impossible to pretend objectivity or to take the middle 
ground.  Invariably, a certain portion of these motion pictures come 
down on the side of the IRA, and are viciously criticized for exposing 
such an unpopular point-of-view (no matter how dramatically potent the 
narrative may be).  Many will probably argue against THE BOXER for 
similar reasons, although, to anyone who cares to look beneath the 
surface details, it will become clear that this is not a political movie 
at heart, but an examination of far more primal forces.
     That's not to say that politics don't play a part in the story.  In 
fact, they are a crucial element.  But the message is that, in a 
struggle where violence is the weapon of choice for both sides, there 
are no winners.  Most of the main characters in THE BOXER are pro-
Republican, but this is no IRA recruiting film.  The moderates, who are 
weary of the violence, are the men and women we are meant to sympathize 
with.  In contrast, the hard-liners are clearly the villains.  Their 
case, as stated by a spokesperson, sounds as barbaric and outdated to 
other members of the IRA as it does to us.
     Although it takes place in Belfast, THE BOXER's themes are 
universal.  This is a meditation on hatred and intolerance, and upon the 
"kill or be killed" mentality that fuels many conflicts.  Change the 
names and places, and this could be a story about similar wars in Bosnia 
or the Middle East.  Director Jim Sheridan (IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER) 
refuses to demonize or lionize the IRA, exposing the deep fissures 
within the organization that crack open in the wake of a cease-fire.  To 
one group, peace means an end to the brutal cycle of violence.  To 
others, inured to bloodshed and all-too-willing to continue it, peace 
means selling out to the English and betraying the memories of hundreds 
of dead IRA "soldiers."  
     At the center of all the turmoil is Danny Flynn (Daniel Day-Lewis), 
a boxer by trade and a Catholic native of Belfast by birth.  After 
serving fourteen years in prison for terrorist activities, Danny has 
just been released because of good behavior.  At age 18, he was a 
staunch soldier in the IRA, and, when he was captured, he refused to 
name his co-conspirators.  Now, free again at age 32, he wants nothing 
more to do with his former associates.  In his view, they have stolen 
the best years of his life.  He wants to rebuild the community, and, 
with the help of his old trainer, Ike Weir (Ken Stott), he intends to 
re-open the Holy Family Boxing Club -- a non-sectarian training center 
where Catholics and Protestants can practice together.
     The IRA in Belfast is split.  The main branch, headed by Joe Hamill 
(Brian Cox), is negotiating with the British government to establish a 
peace treaty.  A group of mavericks, led by an embittered man (Gerard 
McSorley) whose only child perished as a result of a British military 
action, threaten to break the cease-fire.  Danny, a high profile figure, 
is caught in the middle.  And he's not the only one.  His one-time 
girlfriend, Maggie (Emily Watson), whose husband is in prison, becomes 
another central figure in the power struggle.  It's only a matter of 
time before the bubbling tension and hatred boil over.
     THE BOXER's story is presented with a sense of overwhelming pathos 
and sadness, and it's not hard to empathize with the characters' 
despair.  When Danny says, "I'm not a killer [but] this place makes me 
want to kill," we understand the depth of his distress.  And, when 
members of the younger generation are drawn into the struggle, Danny 
realizes that something -- anything -- must be done to change the 
situation.  
     The film is not without weaknesses, chief of which is an erratic 
pace.  The beginning is slow and murky, and the end seems rushed and 
incomplete.  THE BOXER doesn't offer more than a token sense of closure, 
but that's in keeping with the current situation in Ireland, which is 
anything but stable.  The symbolism -- especially the relationship 
between boxing and politics -- is at times a little too obvious.  The 
same is true of the parallels between the physical and emotional 
barriers within Belfast.
     The best scenes in THE BOXER are not the boxing bouts -- the ROCKY 
movies accomplished these just as well, if not better.  Nor are they the 
sequences that depict rioting in the streets -- these sights are 
familiar to those who have seen other movies about "The Troubles."  
Instead, the most remarkable scenes in THE BOXER are those that feature 
Danny and Maggie engaged in quiet conversation.  Both are former 
prisoners straining to taste freedom -- his bars were physical; hers 
were formed out of society's conventions and expectations.  The two 
actors, Daniel Day-Lewis and Emily Watson (BREAKING THE WAVES), give 
such forceful performances and interact so well that it's impossible not 
to be mesmerized by their interaction.  And, although the two share 
plenty of moments together, I wish Sheridan had devoted even more screen 
time to their love story.  It is THE BOXER's anchor.  
     THE BOXER is the fourth film in twelve months to deal with the 
situation in Northern Ireland (it follows in the wake of SOME MOTHER'S 
SON, which was co-written by Sheridan and Terry George, THE DEVIL'S OWN, 
and NOTHING PERSONAL).  Although not as gripping as SOME MOTHER'S SON, 
THE BOXER is strong enough to overcome its occasional missteps and leave 
a lasting impression.  This may be a work of fiction, but its themes and 
issues are as real and immediate as those addressed by any contemporary 
documentary.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Daniel Day-Lewis, Emily Watson, Brian Cox, Ken Stott, Gerard
McSorley, Ciaran Fitzgerald
Director: Jim Sheridan
Screenplay: Jim Sheridan & Terry George
I usually dislike movies that carry a strong political agenda and when
it concerns the IRA, the feeling sinks even lower. For one thing these
movies contain too many bombings, innocent killings, human suffering and
unhappy endings for my liking. Too much gloom and misery may be
gut-wrenching informing, but it sure kills the entertainment in the
industry. Fortunately, THE BOXER is more than just a political
statement. Director Jim Sheridan shows us the feelings of loss and pain
within a very closed secretive, community of the IRA. He paints for us a
gritty world of genuine suffering with non-glamorised footage of the
Irish world - cold concrete walls, perpetual grey skies, the rattle of
machine gun fire in the distance and the cries of an unhappy nation
shouting for independence.
What makes THE BOXER different is its approach to the subject material
and also an outstanding performance from Daniel Day Lewis. It shows us
how willing young lives are sacrificed for the belief in a single
principle. It focuses on a man who is a victim of circumstance (Daniel
Day Lewis). After being imprisoned for twelve years, he tries to rebuild
his life after being released from the penitentiary. A poignant point is
made when he realises that the best years of his life have been taken
away from him, by and for the IRA. His potential to be a great boxer,
his future, his childhood sweet heart, all the missed opportunities. It
is heartbreaking to see this grown man try to salvage the remains of the
day and to pick up where he left of with life. Fortunately, he sees the
need for change, to unite Protestant and Catholic and sets about doing
it the best way he knows how – through boxing. One of the most symbolic
moments of the movie comes when Day Lewis is fighting an African in the
boxing ring. His opponent is beaten, but instead of going on to finish
the man with more strokes, he puts his gloves down. Basically saying
that there comes a time to stop fighting.
This is thought provoking material, despite the fact that the ending is
rather ambiguous. One isn't quite sure what happens to THE BOXER. Does
he leave Ireland or does he go back to his neighbourhood? Otherwise this
movie does make a valiant attempt to try to shed some unbiased views on
the entire Irish Republican Situation.
Timothy Voon
e-mail: stirling@netlink.com.au
Archives http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Tim+Voon
Movies in Melbourne
http://www.labyrinth.net.au/~bouclier/week/movies.html

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Jim Sheridan and Terry George, contemporary cinema's poets laureate
of the Irish "Troubles," are building an extraordinarily well-received
body of work.  Sheridan's 1993 film IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER earned
multiple Academy Award and Golden Globe nominations; George's 1996
directing debut SOME MOTHER'S SON garnered many critical plaudits.  Their
earnest, well-crafted stories of folks caught up in the turbulence of
political violence have moved many viewers to heap adjectives of praise
upon their films.  And while all this occurs, I find myself sitting and
thinking, "You know, it was good, but..."
     Sheridan and George's latest collaboration, THE BOXER, falls into a
very similar category.  It tells the story of Danny Flynn (Daniel
Day-Lewis), a former IRA member who has just completed a fourteen year
sentence for his involvement in terrorist activities.  All Danny wants is
to pick up the pieces of his life, perhaps returning to the boxing career
interupted by his incarceration, but things are not to be so simple.  His
teenage sweetheart Maggie (Emily Watson) is now married to another
prisoner and has a teenage son of her own; Danny's former running partner
Harry (Gerard McSorley) is none-too-pleased that Danny has shunned his
former IRA friends.  While IRA political leader (and Maggie's father) Joe
Hamill (Brian Cox) tries to create peace at the bargaining table, Danny
makes his own small efforts to bring the warring factions together, but
finds his personal and professional desires encountering dangerous
opposition from Harry.
     There are always plenty of things to like about a Sheridan film, most
notably his ability to create a vibrant sense of place.  The divided
Belfast of THE BOXER is a startling image, with its physical wall dividing
the people even more concretely than the differing ideologies.  One early
scene finds IRA memberrs leading Joe through a series of cut-out walls so
that he can reach a party without having to walk outside; explosions rip
through the characters' lives without warning.  The insanity and
self-perpetuating violence of the Irish conflict are starkly portrayed,
with more ambiguity surrounding the question of right and wrong than most
films on the subject -- including Sheridan and George's own previous films
-- have managed to explore.
     For all its welcome complexity of theme, however, THE BOXER tends to
drift in the exploration of its main characters.  Nowhere is this more
evident than in the love story between Danny and Maggie, a star-crossed
romance which feels more obligatory than well-developed.  Furtive glances
and snatches of conversation establish tension between them, but their
connection is never entirely convincing.  It doesn't help that the central
impediment to their relationship -- Maggie's husband, to whom she is
expected to be unerringly faithful in support of The Cause -- never makes
an appearance.  In one sense, it's an effective device which turns him
into an abstract rallying point for the IRA rather than an individual
human being.  At the same time, we are forced to take for granted that
Maggie belongs with Danny, and that Liam's devotion to his absent father's
memory is the foolish stuff of childhood.
     None of which is to suggest that the performances aren't strong from
top to bottom, because they are.  Daniel Day-Lewis brings a resigned
dignity to Danny; his unwillingness to return to the IRA's ways seems as
much a result of fatigue than moral scruple.  Brian Cox and Gerard
McSorley do solid work as the warring factions within the IRA, and Ken
Stott has a few nice scenes as Danny's old trainer, reduced to a pathetic
drunk by the dissolution of his boxing club.  Their stories always hold
your attention, but they never engross the way great film stories do.
Perhaps my sense in THE BOXER, and with IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER and SOME
MOTHER'S SON for that matter, is that Sheridan and George are more
interested in making a point than making a movie.  The result is a
cerebral film with too little gut-level emotion.  Sheridan and George are
good film-makers, but they could be great if they were as attentive to
their people as to their politics.

Author
Walter Frith
Oscar-winning actor Daniel Day-Lewis and director Jim Sheridan have
combined their talents on two previous films, 'My Left Foot' (1989 for
which Daniel Day-Lewis won the Best Actor Oscar) and 'In the Name of the
Father' (1993) and these two films have made a powerful impact on the
film industry and Day-Lewis and Sheridan continue their good working
relationship with 'The Boxer'.  The creative mind of director Sheridan
is a dramatic one at best with hardly any comic relief and that's great
to see.  His writing partner Terry George worked with him on 'In the
Name of the Father' and teams up with Sheridan this time to write a film
that once again has it's story line roots in the Irish Republican Army.
'In the Name of the Father' showcased Lewis in a true story as a
wrongfully convicted man sent to prison for fifteen years along with
three others for a bombing they had nothing to do with.  He was accused
of being a member of the IRA in that film and plays a former one in 'The
Boxer.'
Released from prison after 14 years for his actions within the IRA,
Daniel Day-Lewis stars as a boxer who returns to his former
neighbourhood in Belfast and opens a boxing gym and tries to bring peace
to the region by promoting boxing events that will unite Catholics and
Protestants in the entertaining spectacle of it all.  Some of his former
associates within the IRA object to his peace making efforts and
sabotage his actions by connecting them to further the cause of IRA
violence.  In one case a policeman's death is caused by a car bomb
outside the arena on the night of one Day-Lewis' boxing matches,
sparking riots and his boxing gym is burnt to the ground in the mayhem.
All the while this is happening, Day-Lewis is re-uniting with an old
flame (Emily Watson) whom he courted before he was sent away to prison.
She is the wife of an imprisoned IRA man and is raising a young son and
is caught between her feelings for Day-Lewis and he loyalty to marital
fidelity.
'The Boxer' works on many levels.  The film has an incredibly simple
tone and feel to it but is a powerful drama of spinning proportions.  It
has a slow beginning but is one of those films that's to be appreciated
once the entire thing is absorbed.  For a man released from
incarceration, Day-Lewis plays his role in a very low-key manner as a
man who knows he's wasted half his life and is determined to make the
most of things from now on.  There is a constant reference to many of
the character actors in the film who discuss IRA activities on a regular
basis and the secret meetings show dissent within the organization and
the eventual downfall of one of its members in a very violent fashion.
When Neil Jordan made 'The Crying Game' in 1992 to the release of Jim
Sheridan's 'In the Name of the Father' in 1993, there was a cease fire
declared within the IRA after that and although violence has flared up
once again in a few incidents, at least the release of those two films
and their messages of anti-violence caused some movement towards ending
the bloodshed.  Films CAN change things socially and politically.
An art film in every sense of the word, 'The Boxer' is a well-crafted
piece of film making, derived from social statements of the past,
relying on the future in which films like this will continue to thrive
within the community of film lovers who appreciate this sort of thing.
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Jim Sheridan
Cast:  Daniel Day-Lewis, Emily Watson, Brian Cox, Ken Stott, Gerart
McSorley, Eleanor Methven
Screenplay:  Jim Sheridan, Terry George
Producers:  Arthur Lappin, Jim Sheridan
Runtime:  113 min.
US Distribution:  Universal
Rated R:  Sex, language, drugs, violence
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
When Danny Flynn (Daniel Day-Lewis) is released from prison after
fourteen years served for involvement in the IRA, he heads back to his
hometown of Belfast.  Times are rough--the IRA is in full swing, and
Danny's old neighborhood has been reduced to a war-torn ghetto.  When he
arrives, he immediately meets up with his old friend and boxing trainer,
Ike (Ken Stott).  Together, they reinstate an old gym and assemble a
boxing league.
The IRA members for whom Danny went to jail--most notably Harry (Gerart
McSorley)--give Danny a bad time because they feel that his actions are
breaking up the community.  Most people recognize that Danny is actually
helping his fellow citizens, but Harry is not in his right mind.  Even
though he is in danger, Danny remains in Belfast, but only because of
Maggie (Emily Watson), the woman he left behind to spend fourteen years
in prison.  Maggie's father, Joe (Brian Cox), is also a member of the
IRA, but he is interested in slowing the destruction, and finds himself
at odds with Harry.  
The Boxer, directed and co-written by Jim Sheridan, is an intelligent,
brilliantly-acted film.  The story is straightforward and easy to
digest, while the characters are intricate and uniformly interesting. 
Sheridan's direction and pacing is also impressive:  he handles the
story with just the right tone and mood, and the result is an
accessible--if not always completely involving--drama.
I realized as I watched The Boxer that I had never seen Daniel
Day-Lewis in any film before.  This is only relevant because I can't
asses the quality of this performance in comparison to his others; I can
say, however, that this is an excellent performance in its own right. 
Danny is a brooding, thoughtful character--he seems to frequently hold
his words, and he only bursts out once or twice during the film. 
Day-Lewis' portrayal of this man is extremely good; I can tell he is the
kind of performer that loses himself in the character, and this allows
the audience to forget that they're watching a performer do his job.
This is Watson's first performance since Breaking the Waves, and I'm
still as impressed as I was when I first saw her in the earlier film. 
She's a dynamic, emotive actress, and she demands presence the way few
actresses can.  I'm actually surprised that she didn't nail a nomination
for this role--in just two performances, Watson proves she has more
range than most performers working in the business.  The leads are
complimented by a talented and seamless supporting cast:  Cox does a
good job as Maggie's constantly-agitated father, McSorley elicits plenty
of negative reactions as the IRA man who has lost his mind, and Stott is
likable as Danny's alcoholic friend.
A love story like this can only work if we like and identify with the
characters and their story.  Sheridan's script is quiet and subtle
enough that the political subplots don't get in the way of the human
story behind it.  Danny and Maggie are realistic, well-drawn characters;
what makes their relationship interesting is that it's not static--it
changes and evolves through the film, and in ways that make us care
about the people.  
Technically, the film is terrific.  The cinematography is always
impressive, particularly during the boxing matches.  These scenes start
off slowly, but Sheridan's eclectic use of the camera increases in
intensity, and the matches are very exciting to watch.  Similar build-up
is used throughout the film, which results in numerous mini-climaxes
that keep the film entertaining.  However, the film could have been a
bit more emotional.  I like how Sheridan steers clear of that awful
manipulative sentimentality, but some of the scenes that should be
moving feel dry, and are carried only by the performers themselves.  Not
all scenes are like this--much of the film, including the conclusion, is
very satisfying.  
I felt that Sheridan was a little too charitable with Danny's
character, however.  By the last scene of the film, he hasn't done
anything wrong:  he is, essentially, a perfect individual.  The one
complication which I assumed would lead to a violent outburst on his
part was resolved without his involvement, and each time he is forced to
make a split-second decision, he makes the right one.  While this
doesn't hurt our perception of him, his perfect judgment and seemingly
endless wisdom make him slightly difficult to handle as a realistic,
everyday character.
Nonetheless, The Boxer is a good, solid film.  It's a smart, original
love story that both entertains and gives its audience something to
think about.

Author
Kevin Patterson
At its root level, Jim Sheridan's THE BOXER is a commentary on the
political strife that plagues Northern Ireland and a challenge to both
sides to put down the guns. But rather than focusing on the violence
itself, it fashions a political statement by showing us how the "Troubles"
have affected everyday people.
Daniel Day-Lewis stars in the lead as Danny Flynn, a former IRA member who
has just finally finished his 14-year prison sentence for terrorist
activities and no longer wants anything to do with the violent side of the
Republican movement. He and his former girlfriend Maggie (Emiliy Watson)
quickly discover that they are still in love, but she was married to
another prisoner many years ago. Because she is a "prisoner's wife," her
marriage, though she herself no longer believes in it, carries political
significance: if it breaks up, it stands as a sign of disunity among
Republican forces. Day-Lewis and Watson perform admirably, portraying their
relationship with almost no cliche or cheesiness, and I particularly
enjoyed the way they found themselves drifting back together without
consciously trying to do so.
Danny, in the meantime, has teamed up with his friend Ike Weir (Ken Stott)
to start a non-sectarian boxing club in Belfast. He is not without enemies,
most notably Harry (Gerald McSorley), an IRA hard-liner who wants nothing
to do with the emerging peace agreement. Joe Hamill (Brian Cox), Maggie's
father, is a moderate IRA leader who would like to settle for peace, but he
disapproves of his daughter's relationship with Danny because of the
political element.
There is, I suspect, a temptation for filmmakers to take politically
controversial material like that of THE BOXER and fashion an extremely
intense and volatile story around it. Sheridan and co-writer Terry George
take a different approach: the tone of their film is more sad and regretful
than anything else, augmented partly by their decision to shoot most of the
scenes in bluish, hazy cinematography. When a bomb goes off during the
first match at the boxing club and rioting breaks out in the streets,
Sheridan chooses not to stage a pumped-up action sequence and instead gets
his audience to share in the disappointment of Danny and Ike that their
attempt to hold a peaceful gathering between Catholics and Protestants has
failed.
As a matter of fact, one problem that THE BOXER runs into is that it is so
far removed from the mentality of violence that the violent pasts of Danny
and Joe are never quite convincing. Joe, in particular, seems like a nice
family man who just happens to have once ordered quite a few people to be
killed by IRA terrorist attacks. Danny is less of a problem, given that he
left the IRA at a young age, but sometimes he seems too mild-mannered even
for boxing, much less terrorism.
Sheridan also runs into a structural problem in that none of the conflicts
in THE BOXER have easy solutions. (After all, if they did, Northern Ireland
might have had peace years ago.) He and co-writer George accordingly force
a "big confrontation" at the end which basically relies on McSorley's
character turning into a complete loose cannon. It solves the characters'
personal problems, but not the political conflicts that gave rise to them.
I'm not saying that the screenplay should have tried to solve the political
conflicts, as this would have been completely unrealistic, but this ending
just didn't seem to work: it was as if they were trying to fake dramatic
closure instead of simply acknowledging its impossibility.
Films that receive the three-star rating from me generally fall into two
categories: those that are only moderately ambitious in the first place and
just try to entertain for a little while (e.g. THE GAME or AUSTIN POWERS),
and those that have lofty goals and solid underlying ideas but don't quite
cross all the Ts and dot all the Is (e.g. GATTACA or THE END OF VIOLENCE).
THE BOXER is an example of the latter: the execution is sloppy in a few
places, but its heartfelt examination of the "Troubles" is enough to make
it a good film.

Author
David Sunga
Written by: Jim Sheridan and Terry George
Starring: Daniel Day-Lewis, Emily Watson, Gerard McSorley
Synopsis:
Irish boxer Danny Flynn has just gotten out of prison. He was in an
Irish prison because he took the rap for an Irish Republican Army buddy
named Harry (Gerard McSorley). Danny has suffered his 14-year sentence
in silence without ratting on anyone and now he is finally out.
Unfortunately, he lives in Belfast, Northern Ireland, an urban setting
where Catholics and Protestants are in violent political confrontation
with each other, and random bombings are a fact of life. Back on the
street, Danny tries to sort out his life by starting a boxing training
center. He also restarts a relationship with his former lover, Maggie
(Emily Watson) who is now married to a jailed IRA terrorist and has a
preteen boy. Danny fights a total of two boxing opponents during the
entire film, which is not about boxing. The film is actually about
intense sadness and despair and a messed up political situation which
can't seem to be solved. THE BOXER is a sympathy movie about Northern
Ireland.
Opinion:
There is a lot of fine acting in this movie, but the film crawls along a
little too slowly for my tastes; it has a slow pace and people speak
slowly, too. An oft heard line seems to be, "What do you mean?" THE
BOXER succeeds in portraying the dismal, unresolved, and hopelessly
depressing life of occupied Belfast more so than telling any story about
boxing competition. 
Speaking of boxing, I think actor Daniel Day-Lewis makes a very credible
boxer. His character is intense and brooding. His hands are fairly fast,
and he has nimble footwork. He throws the left straight, with crispness
and authority. Punches thrown with the right hand, however, have a
crooked looping motion, and seem weaker. Daniel would probably make a
passable real life southpaw, provided he remembers not to drop his left
guard after each punch. 

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Universal Pictures
 Director:  Jim Sheridan
 Writer:  Jim Sheridan, Terry George
 Cast: Daniel Day-Lewis, Emily Watson, Brian Cox. Ken Stott,
Gerard McSorley, Eleanor Methven, Ciaran Fitzgerald, David
McBlain, Damien Denny, Clayon Stewart, Kenneth Cranham
   The troubles in Northern Ireland have been going since
1969, the term referring to the effort by Catholics living there,
particularly by militant organizations like the Irish Republican
Army, to force out the British troops whom they consider an
army of occupation.  As shown in Jim Sheridan's
straightforward yet highly emotional and visceral movie "The
Boxer," the city of Belfast looks bombed out, and what's more
the hapless metropolis is separated into East and West
districts by sandbags and checkpoints with British troops on
patrol to check I.D. cards of those passing through.  You
wonder why the Catholics don't move to Ireland, the
Protestants, perhaps, to London.  Danny Flynn (Daniel
Day-Lewis), the film's quietly intense hero, explains in his
typically terse manner: This is my home.  Not only does
Danny choose not to move to London where he could pursue
a promising career in the boxing ring: he returns from a
British prison where he has served a fourteen-year sentence
for IRA activities, and when he finds his flat sealed with
stones, he takes a sledgehammer to the shelter and re-opens
it for occupancy.  Not that Danny has retained a
dyed-in-the-wool yearning for the city of Belfast.  He has
returned from jail, from a sentence he could have avoided if
he had only mentioned names of his co-conspirators, to
reclaim the woman he romanced in his teen years and who
remained in his mind throughout his incarceration.
   With "The Boxer," Daniel Day-Lewis, an Oscar recipient
from his role in "My Left Foot," is once again collaborating
with his favorite director, Jim Sheridan, perhaps the most Irish
of all filmmakers from a land actors, writers, and storytellers. 
This time Day-Lewis is teamed up with a marvelous English
actress, the thirty-year-old Emily Watson, who turned in a
magnificent performance as an eccentric Scottish 19-year-old
in "Breaking the Waves," and the chemistry is palpable.  As
the unhappy wife of Danny's best friend who insists that her
marriage was "over" before her son Liam was born, Maggie
(Emily Watson) is herself in a kind of imprisonment.  Since
her husband--who was Danny's best friend--is now a political
prisoner of the British, her activities are scrutinized by the
whole community.  Her Catholic neighbors, whether highly
politicized or not, believe that any fooling around by women in
her circumstances would demoralize them in their struggle
against the Brits.  The sexual tension between Danny and
Maggie remains in the foreground of this complex film
as Danny, who has barely uttered two words to his long-time
sweetheart because of his emotional bottling up in prison,
gradually warms up once again to Maggie while realizing that
the two can barely touch without bringing on the
condemnation of the neighbors, and even worse, severe
punishment from the IRA.
   Jim Sheridan succeeds in bringing home the torment of the
people of Belfast who are surrounded by British soldiers,
watched over by British helicopters, and kept under
surveillance by their fellow Catholics in the IRA.  Maggie's
own father, Joe Hamill (Brian Cox), is the district leader of the
organization.  He must contend not only with Maggie's
obvious attraction to Danny but with a hothead in his own
organization, Harry (Gerard McSorley) who threatens to stoke
the fires of hatred even as Joe is close to negotiating a
peaceful end to the conflict with Britain.  For her part Maggie
must not only fend off the advances of the man to whom she
is still mightily attracted but deal with her son, Liam (Ciaran
Fitzgerald), a troubled lad who is convinced that his mom is
about to leave him and run off with her teenage heartthrob.
   Director Sheridan's sympathies appear to be with the peace
faction of the IRA led by Joe and decidedly against the
fanatical Harry, who is so opposed to any compromises with
London that he singlehandedly reverses a peace process
which is bringing opposing camps together.  Using the sport
of boxing as metaphor to bring home the conflicts faced on
Europe's edge, Jim Sheridan and Terry George's script has its
mellowed hero organize a gym to give the district kids
something to do while simultaneously unifying the community
by making his ring non-sectarian: Catholics and Protestants
have been invited to box and to join as spectators and
contestants together.  In the movie's most surprising scene,
Danny resorts to a tactic while boxing in London amid a
crowd of upper-class British spectators which will bring to
mind a surprisingly rebellious act in Tony Richardson's
wonderful "The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner."
   Ultimately, "The Boxer" does not take sides between the
British and the IRA, as such partisanship would not serve the
cause of peace.  Sheridan seems, however, to want the
Catholics move forward and not be imprisoned--as both
Maggie and Danny feel they are--by memories of the people
who died for the cause, particularly for the ten imprisoned
young men who starved themselves to death to call the
world's attention to their country's plight.  He is as sincere in
bringing home the necessity for peace as is Kevin Costner in
that actor-director's corny but equally unaffected epic, "The
Postman."  He succeeds in evoking audience sympathy not
only by an honest screenplay which resorts to melodramatics
only when clearly called for, but by superb ensemble
performances highlighted by the suppressed romance of its
principals.  Daniel Day-Lewis once again shows his range as
an overly controlled prizefighter whose most challenging
struggle is in a continued pursuit of his romance with Maggie,
while Emily Watson gives an endearing performance as a
woman bound by her community's strictures, moving both
toward and away from the man with whom she is still in love
like a puppy exploring the trials of a new territory.  The fight
scenes are believable, if not particularly awe-inspiring while a
broken-down area of Dublin serves well to depict the
barbarous nature of Belfast's dilemma. Rated R.  Running
Time: 107 minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey Karten
