Title
Review for Hanussen (1988)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ben Hoffman
As a voice-over intones "Our Father Who art in Heaven....", the camera
pans across hundreds of infantrymen in trenches, guns pointed in front
of them.   Then comes the command "attack!" and the men clamber out of
the trenches and start running forward and firing.  The next
counterpoint scene shows the dead.  Ironic and strongly anti-war scene
it is in the opening few minutes.  It is WW1.  Austro-Hungary.
The film, based on a true story, is of a soldier, Karl Schneider, lying
on the battlefield, physically and psychologically wounded.  Shift to
the psychiatrist's office where Schneider describes his dreams as well
as an incident from his early childhood when he rescued a young girl
from her home which was on fire.
Before the war Schneider had been in vaudeville  doing a
clairvoyant-hypnotist act.  He now decides, with the war over, to try
it again.  His act consists of reading questions written on paper by
members of the audience.  He then is able to single out who wrote the
message and to reply.    This astounds the audience as well it should,
One question, from a young woman whose parents are on a cruise to
America is, will she go to America one day, too?  Schneider tells the
audience that he does not see a ship.  He then tells the woman that she
will not go to America.  Next day's headlines announce the sinking of
that ship.
One of the many happenings that make the film so fascinating is the
foretelling of the future and the hypnotism with which Schneider is
able to get people to do things such as crowing like a rooster, setting
fire to a curtain.  He himself feels that it is his empathy for the
masses that enables him to "see" what is going to happen.
When his fame spreads and reaches into the highest ranks of the Nazis
and Hitler becomes aware of him, Hanussen's life is in danger.
Meanwhile, inflation and unemployment are causing the masses to be
fearful. Schneider predicts the Reichstag fire and Hitler becoming
Chancellor.
There are not many light moments but one is of a Baron asking what the
price of a certain stock will be.  It's 92 now.  Schneider, who uses
the stage name, Hanussen, because it is more exotic than his own, tells
him he doesn't do that kind of foretelling.  When the Baron insists, he
tells him, I'll give you the number of my grandmother's home.  25. "Is
that true?" asks the Baron.  "Absolutely.  That was my grandmother's
address." The next day the stock drops to 25.
Just as Hanussen took advantage of those on stage to make them play the
fool, crow like a chicken, so too was Hitler  able to manipulate and
impose his will on the people.
The film stars that fine actor, Klaus Maria Brandauer.
