Title
Review for Lie Down with Dogs (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Christopher Null
     "When you lie down with dogs, you get up with fleas."  This chorus is
the unifying theme of Wally White's new feature, LIE DOWN WITH DOGS, a
disappointing film about the letting go of guilt and, basically, the
embracing of promiscuity and shallowness.
     The film starts out as an odd "get inside my mind" piece about a gay
man named Tommie (played by White himself), who decides to head off for one
last summer of frolicking in Provincetown, Massachusetts ("the ultimate gay
resort").  Leaving the big city of New York behind, Tommie casts his worries
aside, whips out a few credit cards, and, badda-bing, it's party time.
     Tommie embarks on what starts out as a promising voyage of self-
discovery, but after about five minutes, the film sadly degenerates into an
over-the-top quest for nonstop, meaningless sex.  And Tommie is only one of
a large ensemble cast of totally unlikable characters, all of whom are
carbon copies of one another: shallow, stupid, and unbearable.  The
ostensible point of the film, ultimately, is that you should live your life
to the fullest and without any shame or guilt, but I have to believe that no
self-respecting person would take things to the extremes promoted here.
     The production values are, well, strange.  White breaks down the
"fourth wall" and spouts a number of droll monologues about how crummy his
life is, directly to the camera.  And when he's not talking, the director of
photography is generally experimenting with new camera tricks like a kid
with a new toy.  I can't begin to count how many times the "spinning camera
shot" was used, but after the first 15 times, you'll be too dizzy to care.
In the end, the only saving graces are a couple of good jokes and a few of
these camera tricks that are actually clever.
     Unfortunately, there's no big payoff at the finale; Tommie has no
sudden realization that he's a nimrod.  The end result is 80 minutes of film
that seem like 160--with no socially redeeming value whatsoever.  White was
correct on one count, though: When you lie down with dogs like this movie,
you do get up with fleas.
-Christopher Null / null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Film Critic, Screenwriter, Novelist (Mailing list available)

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Wally White, Bash Halow, James Sexton, Darren Dryden, Randy Becker
Director: Wally White
Producers: Anthony Bennett and Wally White
Screenplay: Wally White
Cinematography: George Mitas
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Pictures
     Not counting TO WONG FOO, which has an entirely different agenda,
the Summer of 1995 has given birth to a pair of gay comedies: JEFFREY
and LIE DOWN WITH DOGS.  The two are as different in quality as they are
in humor level.  JEFFREY, with its sly, sardonic wit and wonderfully
droll performance by Patrick Stewart, is a joy to watch.  LIE DOWN WITH
DOGS, with its sophomoric, silly jokes and pointless, meandering plot,
is as likely to put viewers to sleep as keep them interested.
     The premise is to follow one man's summer vacation in Provincetown,
Massachusetts--the gay mecca for beach-goers.  LIE DOWN WITH DOGS
opens in New York and introduces us to Tommie (played by
writer/director/co-producer Wally White), a guy with no roots, little
money, and a desire to get out of the city for a while.  So he hitches a
ride with some friends and heads off to Cape Cod.  And, once the film
gets there, it grinds to a halt.  There's no story to speak of and no
significant character development---anything, in fact.  Watching LIE
DOWN WITH DOGS is akin to sitting through someone else's home movies.
They may enjoy them, but they're the only ones.
     Certainly, White never intended anything deep with LIE DOWN WITH
DOGS.  This film is at the far end of the spectrum from the serious,
too-noble PHILADELPHIA.  Here, the film maker is going for something so
frothy it's almost insubstantial.  The sole message is '70ish in nature:
life is short, so enjoy yourself.  The dangers of the gay lifestyle are
touched on, but only briefly.
     The film tries to be original, and there are clues to indicate that
White could develop into a real talent in the film making industry, but,
ultimately, his first effort is a bust.  This is sit-com fare without a
plot.  The jokes are occasionally funny, and there are moments of
quirky, offbeat humor (like a pointed parody of the porn industry), but
those isolated incidents don't justify an eighty-five minute motion
picture.  As a short, LIE DOWN WITH DOGS might have been palatable, but
as a feature, it's an endurance test.  At best, this is an advertisement
for Provincetown.  At worst, it's a waste of time.
     The phrase from which the title comes goes like this:  "If you lie
down with dogs, you get up with fleas."  In all honesty, I was itching
to leave before the movie was half over.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
