Title
Review for Jin-Roh (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Steve Rhodes
Hiroyuki Okiura's JIN-ROH: THE WOLF BRIGADE is an animated film with handsome
images, haunting music and a nearly incomprehensible story.  This is further
complicated by the animators' proclivity to draw the characters so that they are
only distinguishable by sex.  The women all look alike as do most of the men. 
The movie works best when you ignore the narrative completely and let the
background visuals and the magnificent score sweep you up.
As best one can tell, the movie is set in Japan sometime after World War II. 
The twist is that Germany appears to have won.  The fairy tales are printed in
German, and the cars are exclusively VW Beatles and Mercedes.  The People's
Democratic Movement, a.k.a. the sect, in its battle with the government forces,
has turned the streets into an urban war zone.  One of the many confusing
subplots concerns internecine warfare among the various police and government
forces who are fighting the sect.
The animators capture beautifully the buildings, the sky and all the inanimate
objects.  But the characters are drawn lifelessly as if they were little more
than talking statues.  Perhaps I could have gotten beyond the limitations of the
animations if the story were better developed.  (For an example of Japanese
anime at its finest see PRINCESS MONONOKE, one of my all-time favorite films.)
The story's central event occurs when Constable Kazuki Fuse (Michael Dobson), in
full riot gear, confronts a frightened teenage girl in the sewer.  The
impressive uniform of the policemen with its bright red night-vision goggles for
eyes make the cops look like science fiction monsters.  As the teen shivers, she
begins to pull the string on the bomb that she is carrying for the sect. 
Although Kazuki should shoot her, he doesn't.  Her subsequent death from the
bomb's explosion will later cause him to have surrealistic nightmares that won't
go away.  
The problem with JIN-ROH is that it keeps feeling like you've just started
reading the eighty-third edition of a comic book that you've never even heard of
before.  But all is not lost.  Turn off your brain, and let the images and music
flow in.  Whatever you do, don't go down the rat hole of trying to make any
sense out of it.
JIN-ROH: THE WOLF BRIGADE runs at least a half hour too long at 1:42.  The film
is in dubbed English.  It is not rated but might be an R for graphic violence
and would be acceptable for kids around 12 or so and up.
My son Jeffrey, age 12, who thought the movie was only pretty good, gave it **
1/2.  He liked the images but complained that you couldn't tell the characters
apart and that the story, especially the ending, was confusing.
The film is playing in limited release now in the United States.  In the Silicon
Valley it is showing at the Camera Cinemas.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Rachel Gordon
Anyone growing up on Disney animation would be shocked by Japanese
Anime, a genre now famous for giving human experience a different look. 
It does what family-enticing animation has refused to, including
violence, sex, and other adult motifs normally reserved for live-action
big blockbusters.
Jin-Roh takes Anime another courageous step forward.  Its beginning is
chock-full of useful information, adding a documentary feel by
establishing the cultural setup in black and white with voiceover.  It
may sound like a high school lecture, but the images never get boring. 
Not to mention that without this necessary information, you'd be lost
when the key story starts to roll.
The setting is Tokyo, but if Japan had lost World War II to Nazi Germany
instead of the United States.  More than ten years later, the occupation
troops are gone, but domestic terrorists still fight against the
fascist, government-sponsored, military forces: the Capital Police. 
Another faction adding to the mess is "The Wolf Brigade," a rumored
extremist sect of the Capital Police that can't be pinned down.
We follow Kazuki Fuse (Michael Dobson), a young member of the elite
counterintelligence force.  During a city raid, Kazuki fails to kill a
young rebel girl face to face and she blows herself up.  As he tries to
continue on with his duties, he begins to obsess over her, dreaming of
her.  He contacts her older sister, Kei (Moneca Stori), and they spend
time together, finding a tenuous connection in the oppressive society.
As time goes on, the fight between personal needs and duty to his
command increases in Kazuki.  He is talented and therefore allowed to
continue training, but he is constantly being watched and even plotted
against with one mental test after another.  His times with Kei are
pleasant, but there is always an underlying tension as to just how much
is really possible.
Like many Anime films, Jin-Roh is brutally honest.  The storyline mimics
real human interaction, and none of the subplots are easily solved
because the terrorists' motivations are complex.  Blood, sweat, and
tears aren't covered up to save shock.  And even if the animation isn't
always as minutely detailed as the ever-popular CGI, this is made up for
in realistic bodily movements.  When a character gets hurt, his limp is
real.
The dialogue can be predictable, mimicking almost any other political
jargon heard in the average American blockbuster.  This could be from a
language gap in the translation from Japanese or simply a case of
rushing things.  It can be annoying but doesn't affect the overall
quality of the film.
More depressing than enjoyable, Jin-Roh demands respect because the
story is compelling and it's difficult not to be emotionally engaged
with the characters.  A far cry from something to show the kiddies, but
fascinating for those who appreciate an original gem.
Director: Hiroyuki Okiura
Producer: Tsutomu Sugita, Hidekazu Terakawa
Writer: Mamoru Oshii
Starring: Michael Dobson, Moneca Stori, Doug Abrahams, Colin Murdock,
Dale Wilson, Michael Kopsa
http://www2.production-ig.co.jp/eng2/jin-roh.htm
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
