Title
Review for Chongqing senlin (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Pedro Sena
This film has been hailed as a new style of the French New Wave, and at
least, in Quentin Tarantino's words, is very much a reflection of Jean-Luc
Godard and his pioneering work in the 60's and 70's.
If so, at least the film is not as idiosyncratic as Godard can be, but it
does have a few touches of the old master. The totally "reckless" shooting
style, which creates a faster paced movement of the action, makes for a
film on steroids, that is hard to keep up with. Jean Luc Godard, always gave
you a rest, by stopping the camera literally, as the action even walked away
from it.... in this film, there are no pauses, and there is no time for
characterization, which was one of Godard's strong points, and led to film
makers like Mike Leigh, who do similar work with the camera.
So, is ChungKing Express a good film?. As far as a pioneering piece of work,
I would say no. Perhaps what it does best is display a society that is
moving so fast that is on a crash course, when it comes to its own inner
direction, and attempt at finding itself. The pace is dizzying, not to
mention the ever continuous camera movement, that at times is actually nerve
wrecking, and I believe takes away from the film.
Like the story of the film, the main character is shy and can not keep a
relationship, all characters are restless and not ready for any kind of
relationships. He Quiwu has lost his girlfriend, who has left for someone
better, presumably more fun than this guy anyway. And the girl that he  is
beginning to like is a bit on the strange side, likes him, but like him, is
also afraid of discussing things.
And then, there are the intrigues.... the film starts with a woman in a
blonde wig, a killer, and it is as if this is not a part of the story,
which is very Godard'ian, but in a way it is. The characters through out the
film are in a world where "excitement" is lacking, and this woman is almost
like a film symbol... she exudes the excitement, and takes it as it comes.
We can only assume that when she lays down for a rest at He's apartment,
that the end is near for her, or for the characters... that they have to
eventually face the enemy, themselves, rather than the outside.  She wakes
up, tosses the wig, and we don't see her again in the film. And the story
now focuses on He Quiwu, and his attempts at self analysis, and getting over
his asking a girl he sees everyday at the Midnight Express cafe.
Other than the very typical French New Wave usage of names of places and
people, this film is not that bad, but it is not for everyone. It is a film
maker's film, in that it goes through an incredible array of intuitive
camera work, that is very difficult to keep up with, specially American
audiences with their canned style of entertainment. But the way it is shot,
in blazing color, will add an element that Godard could not do. By
comparison, Godard's camera style is a slow crawl.
But like the Truffaut's and Godard's, that paid homage to the film noir,
this film pays homage to the French heroes. It does so, however, in a far
subtler way than we care to notice, and one has to be a film enthusiast to
catch on to it. The name of the cafe is Midnight Express, and it is a place
where nothing happens, and lives just go by and get wasted. And the constant
mention of California through a Mamas and the Papas song that keeps
repeating itself, as the only real image that the girl that works in the
cafe has.
Not specially a great film, it does have a story, but it is hard to discuss
per se. A security policeman, works his daily shift, and has lost his
girlfriend. He goes through his "menopause" in trying to figure out what he
did wrong, but in the process he fails to notice that someone has an
interest in him. And he never notices that she has been in his apartment,
and cleaned it, etc, etc. But a lot of this is hidden in the film's pace and
shooting style, which, while exceptional, it still has not figured out how
to make a complete film. Like a Godard, it has an edge that says
"unfinished", or as Godard himself loved to say, " a work in progress ".
Unfortunately, this film comes off as unfinished for the audiences, and we
do not seem to be asking for more. Godard films, kinda gave you a  "wow" and
left you there. This film wants to make a serious move, but it seems to shy
away from doing so. Perhaps it was just a nice piece of fluff to do, that
almost worked to perfection in the film maker's head, but not for this
reviewer.

Author
Andy Wright
Directed by Wong Kar-Wei (Happy Together, Ashes Of Time)
Written by Wong Kar-Wei
Starring: Tony Leung (Hard-Boiled), Brigitte Lin (Peking Opera Blues)
Year of Release: 1994
Capsule Review:
One of the dangers of being a hard-core movie freak, besides a 
diminished social life and the threat of accidentally seeing something 
starring Pauly Shore, is the possibility of burnout. I was in an 
extremely ashen phase when I stumbled across the low-budget Hong Kong 
flick. Things haven't been quite the same since. Watching director Wong 
Kar-Wei's goofy ode to dysfunctional relationships is the most fun I've 
had with a movie since John Woo's legendary THE KILLER. A barely 
connected pair of stories filmed in kamikaze fashion (Kar-Wei would 
write scenes in the afternoon and shoot them that same night), this 
borders on complete incoherence at times, but always manages to recover 
to spectacular effect. The first story involves a lovesick cop, a 
blonde-wigged female smuggler who can blow away a roomful of bad guys in 
the time that it takes Stallone to remember a line, and 31 cans of 
pineapple. The second, and infinitely more amusing, story features 
another cop (Woo regular Tony Leung, who picked up a Chinese Oscar for 
his great work here) and his wacked-out relationship with a waitress who 
constantly breaks into his apartment to redecorate. To say anything more 
would be to spoil the fun.
At its best moments, this movie delivers a sustained jolt of pure 
cinema; it'll get you high.
Copyright 1998 by The Critic formerly known as Andrew Wright
For more insanely biased reviews, check out http://www.seanet.com/~louk/
e-mail louk@seanet.com
