Title
Review for Adventures of Sebastian Cole, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
Late in "The Adventures Of Sebastian Cole", there is a prom scene. But
it's not a normal high school movie prom scene. A conversation arises
between the title character and his friends, about how different their
prom is from proms they've seen on film, that it prompts Sebastian to
say, "I hate those high school movies."
But Tod Williams' "The Adventures Of Sebastian Cole" turns Ferris
Bueller flat on his face, bringing us a high-school flick that is
offbeat, unsentimental and dead-on. The structure of "Sebastian Cole"
is set up so that we, the viewer, get to experience the randomness of
adolescence.
Sebastian Cole (Adrian Grenier) is a 17-year-old slacker who lives in
upstate New York with his stepfather (Clark Gregg), his mother (Margaret
Colin) and his sister (Marni Lustig). One day, the father calls a
family meeting to announce that he is going to have surgery in order
to become a woman. Sebastian's sister throws a fit and runs off to
California, while Sebastian leaves with his mother to England.
But after six months in an uptight school, he leaves his neurotic mom
and comes back to New York to start his new life with Hank/Henrietta,
his stepfather/stepmother.  Sebastian continues to do poorly in
school, and announces that he just wants to "live" more, and the movie
becomes his adventures.
His adventures include an up-and-down relationship with a girl (Aleksa
Palladino), riding his bike at top speed through the halls of school,
and seeing what happens when he drinks way too much.
Writer/director Tod Williams has the 80's mood down perfectly, but he
is helped by two amazing performances. As Sebastian, newcomer Adrian
Grenier ("Hurricane Streets") pulls off a more-than-believable
portrayal of teenage angst, but it is Clark Gregg, as Hank/Henrietta
who steals the show. He is exceptional without being over-the-top, and
I can see a starring role for him in the near future.
Since many questions are left unanswered, many will leave "The
Adventures Of Sebastian Cole" baffled. But Tod Williams has infused a
subtle grace to the seemingly shaky structure, and he shows that in
teenage life, the answers aren't always there.
"The Adventures Of Sebastian Cole" is not a great film, but it is one
of the most original portrayals of adolescence that I've ever
seen. Tod Williams has made an excellent first film, a film with the
quirkiness of John Irving, but with a style all his own.
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://teenagemoviecritic.8m.com 


Author
Dennis Schwartz

ADVENTURES OF SEBASTIAN COLE, THE (director/writer: Tod Williams;
cinematographer: John Foster; editor: Affonso Goncalves; cast: Adrian
Grenier (Sebastian Cole), Margaret Colin (Joan), John Shea (Hartley),
Aleksa Palladino (Mary), Marni Lustig (Jessica), Clark Gregg
(Hank/Henrietta), Gabriel Macht (Troy), Peter McRobbie (Principal), Tom
Lacy (Grandfather), Joan Copeland (Grandmother), Russel Harper (Wayne);
Runtime: 100; 1998)
An affectionate coming-of-age tale, set in 1983, about a teenager from
the upper-middle-class environment of Dutchess County, New York. The
film has a series of eccentric characters influence the life of the
underachieving teenager Sebastian Cole (Adrian Grenier), but it is his
shaggy-haired stepfather Hank (Clark Gregg) who influences him more than
anyone else, including his real parents. Sebastian's ambition to be a
writer is never developed except through the adventures he goes through
in his senior year in high school. These misguided adventures are things
a kid needing parental help might do in an environment where he feels
adrift. The adventures include a hapless teenage romance, an heroic
rescue of a kidnapped girl from a pimp, trips into NYC's punk rock
scene, and nearly killing himself while trying to prove how much he
could drink. He considers these episodes to be Ernest Hemingway-like
experiences. With all its fantastic developments and its obscure way to
tell a story, the film still remains grounded in reality, accurately
picturing the wasteland of suburban life in the 1980s.
Sebastian has a pretty Prince Charles haircut, looking a lot like a
handsome Prince Charming, as he looks innocent even when he seems to be
bleeding to death in Mexico or someplace in the American Southwest,
where the film opens, or when innocently engaging in a spicy dinner
conversation with all of his dysfunctional family present (Is there any
other kind, in teen movies?).
The film is told in flashback from the point where he is bleeding and
being nursed by a beautiful senorita, and he looks at a wallet-sized
photo of his family and remembers how his family life quickly unraveled
when his stepfather, Hank, announced that he's planning to become a
woman. His bitchy sister Jessica takes off on a motorcycle with her
unappealing boyfriend Troy (Macht) for an early start to Stanford in
order to get far away from the family; his perturbable, alcoholic,
British mother Joan (Colin), leaves her second husband and takes
Sebastian back to England with her; while, his real father Hartley
(Shea), a successful but egocentric architect, tells him the only way to
be successful is not to be a nice person and let no one interfere with
your ambitions.
Unhappy with life in England, he returns to upstate New York to live
with Hank, who has changed his name to Henrietta and now wears dresses.
He is undergoing hormonal treatment as he awaits his sex change
operation. Henrietta becomes a real mother to him, making the tardy
student get to school on time, threatening him with military school if
the capable student doesn't get his grades up, and he provides support
for him financially and emotionally, as Sebastian tries to work out his
disappointment that Hank broke up his family with his announcement. But
even if Henrietta is strict with him, he offers him a mother's love and
a father's guidance.
Sebastian's only ambition is to graduate early from high school (needing
Physical Ed to graduate, he fakes an expertise in karate in front of gym
teachers, in lieu of attending regular classes), as he is restless about
his future and not ready to fit into life in Dutchess County just yet,
he mainly hangs around with another rebellious student Wayne, and while
shooting arrows for target practice, meets Mary (Palladino). Their
romance is a sexually charged teenage one, probably not going anywhere
until Mary professes a love for him. This frightens him, arousing his
hidden insecurities, and he moves away from her. It becomes apparent to
him as his life becomes troublesome, that the only one who is there for
him, is Henrietta, the ex-marine, who dishes out his love with a barrage
of pep talks and lectures.
The charming Adrian Grenier is appealing to a certain point as the hero
who is both naive and adventurous in a self-destructive way. Clark Gregg
plays his role as someone who feels inside like a woman, but who has
been a man so long and still looks like one, that there is certain
smugness he has that he can be both a man and a woman. But, the story
never leaps beyond its startling revelation of a sex change and the
devastating reaction it has for his family. It seems to wither towards
its climax. Henrietta becomes unexplained, as if he/she has no
psychology and that we must just accept him as the one-dimensional
angelic character he is portrayed as. When we see him hitting baseballs
at a batting range and then beating up someone who makes fun of him,
we're into a typical macho Hollywood response mode to such problems, and
it becomes apparent that this character will remain underdeveloped. The
film setups an engaging story but didn't take it anywhere special, as it
was a let down after such a fast start and such a promising look at a
youngster needing guidance and getting it from such an unlikely source
as Gregg. You can rest assured, that this offbeat teenager comedy/drama,
returns safely back to its genre's teen movie fold by the film's end,
and that is its main fault.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Dennis Schwartz

ADVENTURES OF SEBASTIAN COLE, THE (director/writer: Tod Williams;
cinematographer: John Foster; editor: Affonso Goncalves; cast: Adrian
Grenier (Sebastian Cole), Margaret Colin (Joan), John Shea (Hartley),
Aleksa Palladino (Mary), Marni Lustig (Jessica), Clark Gregg
(Hank/Henrietta), Gabriel Macht (Troy), Peter McRobbie (Principal), Tom
Lacy (Grandfather), Joan Copeland (Grandmother), Russel Harper (Wayne);
Runtime: 100; 1998)
An affectionate coming-of-age tale, set in 1983, about a teenager from
the upper-middle-class environment of Dutchess County, New York. The
film has some eccentric characters influence the life of the
underachieving teenager Sebastian Cole (Adrian Grenier), but it is his
shaggy-haired stepfather Hank (Clark Gregg) who influences him more than
anyone else, including his real parents. Sebastian's ambition to be a
writer is never developed except through the adventures he goes through
in his senior year in high school. These misguided adventures are things
a kid needing but not getting parental help might do. The adventures
include a hapless teenage romance, an heroic rescue of a kidnapped girl
from a pimp, trips into NYC's punk rock scene, and nearly killing
himself while trying to prove how much he could drink. He considers
these episodes to be Ernest Hemingway-like experiences. The film with
all its fantastic developments and its obscure way to tell a story,
still remains grounded in reality, accurately picturing the wasteland of
suburban life in the 1980s.
Sebastian has a pretty Prince Charles haircut, which allows him to look
innocent no matter the incident, even when he seems to be bleeding to
death in either Mexico or someplace in the American Southwest, where the
film opens, or when innocently engaging in a spicy dinner conversation
with all of his dysfunctional family present (Is there any other kind,
in teen movies?).
The film is told in flashback from the point where he is bleeding and
being nursed by a beautiful senorita, and he looks at a wallet-sized
photo of his family and remembers how his family life quickly unraveled
when his stepfather, Hank, announced that he's planning to become a
woman. His bitchy sister Jessica takes off on a motorcycle with her
unappealing boyfriend Troy (Macht) for an early start to Stanford in
order to get far away from the family; his perturbable and alcoholic
British mother Joan (Colin), leaves her second husband and takes
Sebastian back to England with her; while, his real father Hartley
(Shea), a successful but egocentric architect, tells him the only way to
be successful is not to be a nice person and let no one interfere with
your ambitions.
Unhappy with life in England, he returns to upstate New York to live
with Hank, who has changed his name to Henrietta and now wears dresses.
He is undergoing hormonal treatment as he awaits his sex change
operation. Henrietta becomes a real mother to him, making the tardy
student get to school on time, threatening him with military school if
the capable student doesn't get his grades up, and he provides support
for him financially and emotionally, as Sebastian tries to work out his
disappointment that Hank broke up his family with his announcement. But
even if Henrietta is strict with him, he offers him a mother's love and
a father's guidance.
Sebastian's only ambition is to graduate early from high school (needing
Physical Ed to graduate, he fakes an expertise in karate in front of gym
teachers, in lieu of attending regular classes), as he is restless about
his future and not ready to fit into life in Dutchess County just yet,
he mainly hangs around with another rebellious student Wayne, and while
shooting arrows for target practice, meets Mary (Palladino). Their
romance is a sexually charged teenage one, probably not going anywhere
until Mary professes a love for him. This frightens him, arousing his
hidden insecurities, and he moves away from her. It becomes apparent to
him as his life becomes troublesome, that the only one who is there for
him, is Henrietta, the ex-marine, who dishes out his/her love with a
barrage of pep talks and lectures.
The charming Adrian Grenier is appealing to a certain extent as the hero
who is both naive and adventurous in a self-destructive way. Clark Gregg
plays his role as someone who feels inside like a woman, but who has
been a man so long and still looks like one, that there is certain
smugness he has that he can be both a man and a woman. But, the story
never leaps beyond its startling revelation of a father undergoing a sex
change and the devastating reaction it has for his family. It seems to
wither towards its climax. Henrietta becomes unexplained, as if he/she
has no psychology and that we must just accept him/her as the
one-dimensional angelic character he/she is portrayed as. When we see
him hitting baseballs at a batting range and then beating up someone who
makes fun of him, we're into a typical macho Hollywood response mode to
such problems, and it becomes apparent that this character will remain
underdeveloped. The film setups an engaging story but didn't take it
anywhere special, as it was a let down after such a fast start and such
a promising look at a youngster needing guidance and getting it from
such an unlikely source as Gregg. You can rest assured, that this
offbeat teenager comedy/drama, returns safely back to its genre's teen
movie fold by the film's end, and that is its main fault.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
High school student Sebastian Cole (Adrian Grenier) has been having the
sort of little, slightly bizarre adventures that happen in movies.
Lying in his underwear on the roof of his house while the rain pours
down is typical of the episodes in first-time writer and director Tod
Williams's THE ADVENTURES OF SEBASTIAN COLE.
In another, a stranger with strawberry-flavored lipstick kisses
Sebastian as he lies in the grass one evening.  "Sorry, I thought you
were someone else," she apologizes before vanishing into the dark.
Most of the time Sebastian hangs around with his buddies, smoking and
drinking.  Once he guzzles one and a half fifths of whiskey in order to
see how it feels to be seriously drunk.  This is one of the few times in
his life when he over achieves, waking up afterwards in the hospital.
The movie, however, shows him not the least bit tipsy before he passes
out and not looking any worse for wear when he finally awakes days
later.
The one dramatically unusual aspect to Sebastian's life is his
stepfather Hank (Clark Gregg) -- soon to be his stepmother Henrietta.
The sweet but assertive Hank/Henrietta is an exemplary father/mother,
something that Sebastian's real father, Hartley (John Shea), never has
been.  Among other things, Hartley complains that Sebastian has "way too
many friends and cares about way too many people."  This sensitivity, he
fears, will dull Sebastian's creative writing edge.
Other than wearing dresses and light make-up, Henrietta looks and acts
little changed from Hank after her first operation.  She's a tough mom,
who's willing to slug a guy who gets out of line, but who still likes
hitting on cute waitresses.  She is, however, a minor character.  The
story is structured as a montage of incidents from Sebastian's life.
His rich paternal grandmother can't figure Sebastian out.  "I don't
understand how such a vain boy could spend so much time making himself
unattractive," she complains about his slightly streaked hair.
Actually, the quiet and pensive Sebastian is anything but vain.  He
doesn't seem to care much about anything, least of all his appearance,
even if he is strikingly handsome.  His life is a blur, much like the
movie.
The small film is filled with tiny, frequently unrelated incidents that
never amount to anything.  The filmmaker shows no talent at
storytelling, leaving the movie to live or die on the basis of the
characters it creates.  And none of them, save Hank/Henrietta, are
compelling.
THE ADVENTURES OF SEBASTIAN COLE runs 1:40.  It is rated R for language,
crude sexual references and some substance abuse and would be acceptable
for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Chuck Schwartz
Cranky CriticŽ movie reviews: The Adventures of Sebastian Cole
Rated [R], 99 minutes
Starring Adrien Grenier, Clark Gregg, Aleksa Palladino,
Margaret Colin, Mami Lustig, John Shea
Written and Directed by Tod Williams
website: http://www.paramountclassics.com/cole_frame2.html
The Adventures of Sebastian Cole is one of those arthouse-centric movies
that goes heavy on character development and light on big story points.
Which is fine if the characters actually develop in some way. If they
progress from point A to, say, Point S. If they only get as far as Point
B, you're left to do all the work that the filmmakers should have done.
Sebastian Cole looked to be another coming of age story but is, in
actuality, more a series of reactions by the main character to small
events. Actors like pieces like this, because they get to develop Inner
Worlds to work from. If they their jobs well, we don't get to see them
"act". (usually a good thing). They do their jobs here, which means
there wasn't enough provided in writer/director Tod William's script to
satisfy me. It isn't that this is just a "small" film. It's downright
tiny.
The Adventures of Sebastian Cole begins with promise. Told in flashback,
we meet an upper-middle class family living life in the early 1980s.
Daughter Jessica (Mami Lustig) is leaving for college. Son Sebastian
(Adrian Grenier) is closing in on his last year of high school.
Step-father Hank (Clark Gregg) announces that he'd rather be Mother
Henrietta. Mom Joan (Margaret Colin) decides to take her son and return
to her native England.
That's a great beginning. Think how you'd react to this literally life
altering news. You could get angry, as Jessica does. You could meekly
accept, as Joan does. You could try to deal with it, which is what
Sebastian will do eight months on when he returns from England looking
like an 80s version of a mod. He's got frosted hair, styled clothes, not
as extreme as Flock of Seagulls but on that track.
His friends welcome him back. He finds a girlfriend, Mary. He balances
his real dad (John Shea) and that family with the very masculine
authority figure, who is always wearing a dress, that he lives with.
While Clark Gregg makes a really ugly woman, he pulls off the transition
with great skill. Indeed, his is the only character that you get a real
feeling for as Hank/Henrietta makes the full move from imitating
woman-hood to establishing a full identity as a woman to the final trip
to the clinic for the snip snip that will permanently end one life and
begin another.
Which leaves Sebastian, who has the usual rebellious streak that
teenagers have. Despite the strange twist life has presented, he seems
to be a fairly normal kid. He harbors ambitions to have great adventures
and to write of his experiences, as the young Hemingway did. While he
does have what he considers to be adventures, he never writes of them.
In short, just your average slightly-better-than-slacker teen.
When I first started writing this review, just after the screening, I
was really prepared to dump it into arthouse hell. Now, 24 hours later,
I've softened but not much. I don't consider The Adventures of Sebastian
Cole to be a great flick but the performances, at minimum, were good
enough to keep my attention focused while waiting for something to
happen. When that time hit, and I won't tell you what it was, it wasn't
enough for me.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to The Adventures of Sebastian Cole, he
would have paid...
Rental level. The Adventures of Sebastian Cole is strictly for the
arthouse and festival circuit. If this is where you hang, this is what
you'll see.
Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark and Copyright Š 1999 by Chuck
Schwartz. All Rights Reserved

Author
Frankie Paiva
There are two fantastic and wonderfully original characters at the heart of
this movie. The first is Sebastian Cole, (played well by Adrian Grenier who
made this before appearing in teen flick Drive Me Crazy) he's a rebellious teen
in the 80s who has to live with a family full of his mother's ex-husbands. One
morning, Sebastian's stepfather Henry (Gregg) announces to the family that he
plans to become a woman. This sets off Sebastian's sister and mother,
especially, who drags him along with her to a boarding school in England.
Henry/soon-to-be Henrietta is the second fascinating character in the film. The
two leads are both so endearing that the movie will quickly suck you in until
it's conclusion. Sebastian moves back to live with Henrietta and he begins what
he calls his adventures. All of them are designed to help him become a writer
in his later years. Some of these adventures include riding his bike everyday
down the school hall, buying a motorcycle, having an on-again off-again
relationship with a girl named Mary, and seeing what happens when you drink
half a bottle of Vodka in one gulp. When Henrietta asks him why he's trying to
get himself into trouble, Sebastian replies, "Because I need something to write
about." 
This is one of the best movies I've seen in a long time, mainly because of the
disjointed storyline (meant to symbolize the confusion of the teen years) and
it's intriguing characters. There are some very funny scenes, particularly
Sebastian's demonstration of karate, and Sebastian's grandfather who doesn't
quite know the right thing to say at the right time. Clark Gregg has done an
incredible job with his small role in this movie. Everytime he is on screen you
can just look into his eyes and see that he has good intentions behind them. He
always looks like there's an emotional bubble in him just about to burst. And
just like another recent transgender character (Philip Seymour Hoffman in
Flawless) I actually believed he wanted to be a woman. I wish that there would
have been more of him in the movie. Grenier makes a good debut, and if he shows
the promise he has shown here in other pictures, he should become a leading
young actor. The camera work in the movie is very simple, there's nothing too
fancy, but it suits the movie, and allows the human emotion to sink in. It's
also enjoyable that most of the film is script driven. This little seen
festival film has just arrived on video and I urge you to give it a try. It is
a worthwhile way to spend your time and money. I hope that you enjoy this
movie, which I believe gets pretty darn close to perfectly depicting the
loneliness, confusion, anger, and happiness of teenage life in it's true form.
