Title
Review for Batman (1989)
Number of Reviews
14

Author
David N. Butterworth
For those of you who were smitten by Pennsylvania Lottery fever earlier
last month and avowed never to stand in line again, you might want to think
twice.
Hot on the heels of all the hype and the hoopla and the hullabaloo, the
movie itself finally makes an appearance, overshadowed, in part, by the
furious fervor that preceded it, a marketing blitz the likes of which
Hollywood has rarely seen.
But put away the bat memorabilia for a moment and ask yourself the one
question which surely must be on everybody's lips: was it worth the wait?
One cannot begin to talk about BATMAN--the phenomenon--and not use
superlatives.  It's certainly the biggest, boldest, most-publicized, most
eagerly awaited film of the summer.  BATMAN--the movie--doesn't quite live
up to its own high standards or expectations--how could it?--but you won't
leave the theater feeling cheated or ripped off.  BATMAN delivers all
right, every high-tech, high-brow minute of it.
For those of you who have been in a coma for the last six months, BATMAN is
the latest depiction of the two-dimensional character created by comic book
artist Bob Kane.  It's the story about the
millionaire-by-day/daring-do-gooder-by-night who rids Gotham City of its
criminally undesirable.
Although the film is thoroughly entertaining, it does contain some serious
production flaws.  Fortunately, these are offset by a refreshingly original
look which helps keep the film on track.
For instance, Michael Keaton's woeful miscasting as Batman proves to be a
major liability.  Bruce Wayne is portrayed as a sensitive introvert, an
interesting digression from the campy, tights-clad Adam West of the 1960s
television serial.  But Keaton walks through the movie with a puzzled look
on his face as if he's misplaced the keys to the batmobile.  His scenes
with photographer-turned-love-interest Vicki Vale (played by Kim Basinger)
are awkward and unconvincing and his cherubic looks invariably do him in.
But once Keaton puts on that batsuit - well, it could be Pee Wee Herman
under that cowl for all we care.  It's a transformation; Keaton IS Batman
... though does anyone ever remember Batman, the character, referring to
himself as such?
Another limitation is the fact that there is virtually no plot to speak of.
In some movies this would be a drawback but in BATMAN it seems to matter
little that the storyline is relegated to second place.  Overwhelming it is
Anton Furst's impressive production design, which borrows intelligently
from the likes of Fritz Lang's METROPOLIS and H.R. Geiger's metallic
constructions for ALIEN.  Gotham City has never looked more architecturally
imposing.
And we don't learn much more about the man behind the mask.  Who dug the
bat cave?  Where did Bruce get all his money?  Who actually makes the bat
gadgets?  He's already up and running when the film opens, so we never
learn how he got started in the crime-fighting business, though we are told
why (his parents were callously gunned down by a pair of aspiring hoodlums
on Gotham's violent streets).  Since the film is reputed to be closer to
the original comic book character, the writers should have dug a little
deeper and unearthed some of this dirt.
Last but not least, supporting characters are wasted.  Jack Palance (as
Carl Grissom) is severely under utilized, and you often wonder why he, or
Billy Dee Williams, who plays political candidate Harvey Dent, was ever in
the picture to begin with.  On a related note, has anyone else noticed that
the mayor of Gotham City bears more than a passing resemblance to Ed Koch?
What, does this film have a biting,  satirical edge to it too?
But the film's trump card is Jack Nicholson.  If you thought Nicholson's
part as the Devil in THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK was the ultimate showcase for
his talents, wait until you get a load of him here.  As the Joker, the role
he was born to play, Nicholson is at his roguish, flambuoyant best--and
absolutely astonishing!
No other actor could have pulled off this role without leaning towards
self-parody.  But Nicholson plays the villainous reincarnation of Jack
Napier straight down the middle and, as a result, flabbergasts the audience
with his rendition of the maniacally wide-eyed, white-faced jester.  The
climactic face off between the Joker and Batman requires the viewer to
suspend considerable belief--and by that time you'll be rooting for
Keaton's caped crusader--but it's Nicholson's movie every step of the way.
BATMAN will no doubt become not only the summer's top grossing movie, but
quite possibly the most profitable film ever made.  If you do go to see the
film, and chances are you will, go see it for Nicholson.  Director Tim
Burton pulled off the casting coup of the decade when he signed Nicholson
to play the Joker, a role for which Nicholson was reportedly paid $11
million.  No wonder he's smiling throughout!

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Tim Burton
Writers: Sam Hamm and Warren Skaaran
Starring: Michael Keaton, Jack Nicholson, Kim Bassinger, Robert Wuhl, 
Michael Gough, Jack Palance, Pat Hingle, Billy Dee Williams, Jerry Hall, 
Tracey Walter
A simple pleasure comes from watching this first full-length Batman 
film...especially after having just witnessed the latest opus in this 
series, the dreadful "Batman and Robin."  To get over that experience, 
which wasn't totally horrible but incredibly unfulfilling, one must go 
back to the roots - the original, with the original cast and crew.  To 
watch Tim Burton's intense view of comic books with a pefectly amazing 
score by Danny Elfman reminds us how fun it was to watch these little 
stupid action hero films.  
I can't totally explain my love for this film - it's just plain fun.  
Maybe I'm bitter because I didn't enjoy the latest one.  But I remember 
being almost obsessed with Batman prior to seeing it and actually 
becoming more obsessed after seeing it.  When does that happen?  When 
does a big budget pic ever live up to its potential and even go further? 
 Hopefully, "Men in Black," which I have been calling "orgasmic" will 
live up to the hype as well.
Now, director Tim Burton's view of Gotham is incredibly different from 
that of Joel Schumacher.  It's bleak yet bright, filled with life and 
seems rather inspired by "Metropolis" and "Blade Runner."  Crime is so 
bad that the local government has had to cancel their 200th anniversary 
celebration.  The criminal world seems to be ruled by a Carl Grissom 
(Jack Palance).  But there's a superhero in hiding who is pretty much a 
myth - Batman (Michael Keaton), who just happens to be the alter-ego of 
billionaire (or millionaire), Bruce Wayne (also Michael Keaton), a 
reclusive, weird type.
Carl Grissom's big man on campus is none other than Jack Napier (Jack 
Nicholson), who is sleeping with Carl's mistress, Alicia (Jagger wife, 
Jerry Hall).  He has him set up in a big factory scene with the cops AND 
Batman battling the goons.  To finish up this amazingly cool action 
sequence, Jack falls into a vat of chemicals and turns up deformed.  
After plastic surgery, Jack emerges as the Joker, taking over the crime 
world by storm.  
Meanwhile Bruce has fallen in love with Vicki Vale (Kim Bassinger), a 
photographer who's working with a Batman-obsessed reporter, Alexander 
Knox (Robert Wuhl).  As she gets closer to Bruce, he finds himself 
wanting to reveal himself to her, even though the consequences may be 
horrible.  Their romance is interesting, but when she finds out who he 
is, it should have been a lot bigger.  I mean, this cat's Batman, for 
Christ's sake, not Bill Gates.
The thing that makes this great is the wonderful black humor and 
intriguing action sequences.  His humor is best represented by Jack 
Nicholson, who all but steals the film and becomes the trend setter for 
future Batman villains to rule the show, while Batman and his kind are 
left behind.  But Tim Burton infuses a kind of psychological approach, 
since it was Jack Napier who killed Bruce's parents.  He becomes 
obsessed with this and starts to question what he's doing.  This is a 
nice approach to the character and it is wonderfully done by, in my 
opinion, the quintessential Batman, Michael Keaton.
The action sequences are amazing as well - adrenalin-rushing and 
hilarious.  Tim is a true master for creating these intense scenes and 
he does it by minimalism.  He doesn't use a billion Bat-Gadgets, just 
the ones he needs.  In the newer ones, they have gadgets for everything. 
 "Hand me the Bat-Sock-Warmers, will you, Robin?" will be the next quote 
in the next Batman.  But in this one, he has a few things and a mere two 
vehicles - the Batcar and Batwing.  These are cooler than any of the 
later models.  
Danny Elfman's amazing score is also highlighted by some campy Prince 
tunes.  These fit nicely into the campy, darkly comic scenes that Tim 
Burton creates.  
Tim creates a Batman with depth, humor and action and also creates the 
quintessential superhero film - it feels like a comic book but not like 
the hammy TV show.  He perfectly balances the film noir qualities with 
the humor.  And with Jack Nicholson playing the Joker, the circle is 
complete since we have the best Batman and the best Batman-villain.  
The only weak point is the female - Kim Bassinger, who gets to fall in 
love with Bruce (and not Batman).  She's good most of the time, but the 
scene where she finds out who he is just kills her character.  She's 
good except for that essential part.
Overall, this is probably the best superhero film ever made.  Of course, 
with Tim Burton handling it, how could you miss?  Okay, well "Mars 
Attacks!" wasn't that great, but at least he has this one on his oeuvre.

Author
Chad Polenz
*** (out of 4 = good)
1989, PG-13, 126 minutes [2 hours, 6 minutes]
[adventure/crime]
starring: Michael Keaton (Bruce Wayne/Batman), Jack Nicholson (Joker/Jack
Napier), Kim Basinger (Vicky Vale), Robert Wuhl (Alexander Knox), produced by
Jon Peters, Peter Guber, written by Sam Hamm, Warren Skaaren, directed by Tim
Burton, based on characters appearing in DC comics, Batman created by Bob
Kane.
>From the premise alone, "Batman" should be one of the greatest adventure
films of all time, but it is not. It tends to trade substance for style and
its storytelling is choppy. Despite all these flaws, there is a sense of
exciting adventure, even if it exists for the superficial qualities.
The opening establishes one of the most vivid and powerful moods I've ever
seen. The Gothic design by Anton Furst provides for an almost horrific
atmosphere as it works with the script to create an entirely different
reality quickly. We see an ordinary family take a wrong turn through a
typical dark alley and become another statistic of street crime. The thieves
are more pathetic than vile and when we see Batman (Keaton) confront and
disarm them (mostly through fear), it shows how mighty the sheer presence of
Batman can be.
I wish that attitude of fighting real crime had been the theme of the film
as it gives everyone a sense of pride. But this is a major Hollywood picture
and it must portray (read: "cash in on") all the marketable aspects of the
Batman persona to make it appealing. Everyone knows the basics of Batman: he
is really billionaire Bruce Wayne by day and his arch nemesis is The Joker.
Unfortunately, Batman is assimilated with cartoon-like qualities with all the
characters and plotlines plugged in at all the right places.
The basic story involves mob warfare and betrayal between the two heads of
the biggest gang; "Boss" Grisham (Jack Palance) and Jack Napier (Nicholson).
The first act is very jumbled, it tries to establish a complex criminal
organization and a rivalry. Although the details are very sketchy, it serves
its purpose; to lead up to Napier's transformation to The Joker and his
psychotic rampage on Gotham City.
The middle act is slowly paced but works fine for character and plot
development. Nicholson is often hilarious as The Joker, but his zaniness is
countered by a supposedly serious relationship between Bruce Wayne and
investigative photographer Vicky Vale (Basinger). Of all the cliche elements,
this one does not synchronize smoothly. They seem to fall for each other
extremely fast, but Keaton and Basinger have little chemistry. However, the
storytelling is interesting enough as to never become dull. We become
curious, but not as involved as the film would like us to be.
And since this is supposed to be a grand Hollywood adventure we must have an
ultimate showdown between the two forces of good and evil. The ending itself
seemed a little dry to me. We get some fight scenes between Batman and
Joker's goons, but in a very cheesy manner. In fact, The Joker almost wins in
the end!
This film had so much potential it could have been a work of genius. On one
hand it does establish a mood chisled with detail which is interesting; but
on the other hand the blatantly evil and cartoony nature of The Joker doesn't
seem to keep to with the film. The Joker's cars, helicopters, and badges on
the gang members is too lighthearted compared to the dark, Gothic mood of
Gotham and Batman.
Still, "Batman" isn't bad at all. It's disposable adventure, but at least
it's original and enjoyable.
Visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
Jeff Meyer
     Between all the hype and anticipation surrounding this movie, I've heard a
good deal of discussion about whether the new film will be "true" to the Batman
character.  That was not one of my concerns when entering the theater.  Over
the last 50 years, Batman's gone through any number of conceptual revisions:
he's been the grim spooky loner created by Bob Kane; the gimmicky detective
with the boy sidekick; the TV camp buffoon; and the obsessed, driven vigilante
who is probably over the edge of sanity.  My feeling was this: Tim Burton could
do damn near whatever he wanted to do with the character, as long as he made
the film work.
     With that said, this film is a mess.  A visual treat of a mess, but still
a mess.  If it was meant to lean towards satire/spoof, it's not nearly funny
enough.  If it's meant to hold together as drama/action, the characters are
cardboard, and the plot is pockmarked with holes towards the end.  In any case,
the script and dialogue (with the frequent (but not continual) exception of
Jack Nicholson's Joker) isn't exceptional to entertain on it's own; it usually
keeps moving (the major exceptions are the scenes which seem tailor-made to be
used for the Prince MTV video for BATMAN), but it's all over the place.  The
conclusion suffers through Siskel & Ebert's "handy stupidity" theory, where
people act ridiculous to keep the plot moving.  And there were so many
sequences that seemed either unclear or muddled that I wondered if a lot of the
film had been cut down from the original length, or that some of the footage
just didn't come out, and they had to make do with what they had.
     As to the acting, Michael Keaton looks *damned* uncomfortable.  I still
think he could have made a decent Batman, because he has shown the ability to
throw out a lot of intensity in his previous roles.  Here, though, it's
monotone -- a stoic obsession that barely filters through his costume.  He's
given a few opportunities to escape this as Bruce Wayne, but it's almost as if
he were still playing it in costume.  Jack Nicholson is fun to watch here, and
he is definitely given the lion's share of good lines in the film, but this is
not the "exceptional performance" I've been reading about in film magazines.
It's over the top, and he's definitely having fun with it, but it's on the same
par as John Lithgow's Dr. Emilio Lizardo.  Kim Bassinger plays her usual
damsel-in-distress character; she ends up looking almost as strange as Batman
and the Joker.  The other characters (outside of Alfred) aren't given much room
to move in; Billy Dee Williams, as DA Harvey Dent, is the only law enforcement
official who appears to have his act together.  (And, if there's a sequel and
he follows the comic book scenario, he won't be working for the DA's office for
long.  :-) )  Jerre (sp?) Hall walks in and out, and Jack Palance can still
hiss like a sunuvagun.  My favorite bit character was Bob, the Joker's chief
henchman, who played the repo yard mechanic in REPO MAN.  Oh, well.
     The visuals in this film, though, are gorgeous, and almost make up for the
rest of the film.  Gotham City is a dingy fantasyland, Wayne Manor is a
moribund crypt of vengeance, and the Batcave is lovely.  This is not a
surprise; visuals and miniatures have always been Burton's strong suit, with
his background in animation.  There's a scene with the Batmobile approaching
the Batcave which is very well orchestrated between camera, music and visuals.
The music by Danny Elfman is somewhat tinny at times -- almost like BEETLEJUICE
over again.  I can't stand Prince, but even if he was Peter Gabriel, the
backdrop of the Joker's music video escapades wouldn't have helped.
     So, what's the verdict?  Some of my disappointment could be put down to
over-advanced hype, but I think most of it has to be laid at Burton and Hamm's
door.  I'd put this on a par with INDIANA JONES AND THE TEMPLE OF DOOM: a
roller-coaster ride (but with better effects, and a tolerable, over-blown
ironic/tragic air).  No depth whatever.  If you like a visual movie well
enough, go see it (and see it in 70MM for that reason); otherwise, go find SAY
ANYTHING or FIELD OF DREAMS at your local repertory theater.
     Overall, I thought the first half of the film was slow, but held together;
the last half faster, but started to fall apart early on.  On the good side,
the introduction of Batman on the roof I liked; and the drive with Vale to the
Batcave was great.  And the visuals of the Batplane over the city were a
pleasure to see -- the entire art direction kept the brooding feel glued on.
A few complaints/comments (I'm more amused than anything by this stuff):
Query #1: Where exactly *are* the Gotham City Police during the Joker's
balloon/money hoo-haa?  As far as I see, these guys only appear after they're
all holed up in the church.
Query #2: Why does Vale try to drive off without letting her reporter friend in
the car?  Never figured that out.  (Not to mention why he throws himself on the
hood of the car -- I'd put that down to "stupidity providing plot
opportunity".)
Query #3: It's just barely explained that the Joker is trying to make people
believe that his white-face is makeup -- why is this?  Is the flesh-makeup his
"secret identity."?  
Character Concept Problem: OK, I can buy Batman with guns, but firing missiles
into a crowded street?  Attempting to murder the Joker in cold blood?
(Punching him over the edge of the cathedral.)  Blowing up the gangsters
headquarters with them still in it?  I guess this is a Batman whose first
interest is definitely vengeance, over justice or protecting the innocent.
Judge Dredd in a Batman costume...  Perhaps it was Burton's intention, but I
felt that Batman, while not portrayed as a villain like the Joker, is portrayed
as a fairly negative character.  Fine -- but that doesn't jell with him posing
for his legendary shot in the final scene of the movie.
More on Nicholson:  Yes, there were some funny lines, but some of it (like the
TV commercials) became tedious fairly quickly.  Like Keaton, I thought he could
have done a better job with a better script.  I'll be curious to hear how much
this film deviated from the early revisions of the script by various netters
who read it.
The Ending: So, Vicki Vale gives up her award-winning career as a hostage, err,
I mean a photographer, to be the Batman's lover?  (Licking her lips in the back
of the limo....  I guess Alfred's kind of immune to odd behavior by then.)
Well, she does have a thing about bats....  (I did like the bit between them
about "trying to love one another" -- had a certain sadness that the movie
could have used more of.  Made me wonder if the ending had been changed to make
for a "happy" conclusion.)  Also, the police are awfully quick to turn over to
Batman's side at the end; but then, they were basically straw men throughout.
     There are probably more glitches if I thought about it, but I'll leave it
at that.  Overall, I wished they'd cut much of the background hooplah that went
on during Prince's songs, and spent the time filling in some of the gaps in the
film.

Author
Craig Good
     I haven't had this kind of fun at a movie since RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK
It's not that BATMAN is anything like that film, but my emotional reaction was
similar.  There's nothing quite like seeing a big film with an opening-night
crowd at a big theatre.  The crowd and I ate it up.
     Tim Burton gets a lot of credit for the outstanding design work, and also
for staying in control of his players.  A project of this size has buried many
a good man, and just ending up alive, let alone triumphant, is a worthy
accomplishment.  Burton doesn't talk down to the audience or spoon- feed plot
points to us.  My faith in animators as directors is stronger than it's ever
been.
     The look of BATMAN is pure eye candy.  This is some of the best art
direction I've ever seen.  It's on par with that of BRAZIL and BLADE RUNNER.
Shot after shot I found myself opening my eyes wide, just trying to drink it
all in.  Books are stories told with words, and movies are stories told with
pictures.  The pictures in this movie are poetry.  There are images I'm never
going to get out of my head -- and I don't want to try.
     Michael Keaton, in whom I had doubts, was dead on target as Bruce Wayne.
The risk Burton took with this controversial bit of casting paid off in spades.
I actually bought Wayne as a playboy millionaire -- with some very serious
emotional problems bubbling below the surface.  The emotional scars of the
event that warped young Bruce are clearly present even before the details are
revealed in the film.  (Comic book readers know what that event is already).
     As Batman, Wayne doesn't so much take on another personality as he buries
his own.  He becomes almost more machine than man, as I could reasonably expect
from someone who felt compelled to put on a costume to fight crime.  Batman
isn't so much a good guy as he is an anti-bad guy.  Revenge, of the calculated
sort, is clearly one of his major motivators.  Another motivator is style.  I
think one of the keys to the Batman character's success is that we all secretly
wish we could do what he does.  Who wouldn't want to fight evil using awesome,
intimidating aesthetics and superior technology as weapons?  Face it.  Being
Batman could be way cool.
     Jack Nicholson triumphs as the other side of the same coin: The Joker.  He
manages to do three things which I might have thought mutually exclusive, any
one of which is difficult for even good actors to achieve.  First, he is right
out on the edge without losing control.  Compared to The Joker, his character in
THE SHINING was a calm, trustworthy and compassionate soul.  Second, he is
genuinely funny.  He not only gets all the best lines, he  makes jokes with his
body language.  Third, and particularly impressive in combination with number
two, he is viciously, maliciously, deeply evil.  I mean that given the choice
between spending time with The Joker and hanging out with Frank Booth (BLUE
VELVET) I'd be at Frank's place with bells on.
     One of the happiest accidents to befall the production was Sean Young's
broken leg.  I think Kim Basinger did a much better job than Young would have
as Vicki Vale.  I'm very much enjoying the current trend away from dumb women
in movies.  Vale is, of course, a mere mortal (there is, after all, room for
only one super hero in this movie) but an intelligent one.  She may need
rescuing now and then, but she's quite capable of helping.  While slightly
bothered at first by her relationship with Bruce Wayne, I came to realize how
important it was to knowing Bruce's character and providing a window into his
emotions.  It also never hurts to have someone to rescue.  I think a key to
Batman can be found by paying attention to who else he rescues in the film.
     I must also single out the editor for some praise.  The pace is taut,
shocking or flowing depending on what is needed.  Some of the scene transitions
are a real gas.  In spite of Prince's somewhat disappointing songs, which are
fortunately only a tiny part of the movie, the music is satisfying and
supportive of the action.  In typical Tim Burton fashion, some off-the-wall
music adds spice to a few key sequences.  One of The Joker's henchmen carries
around a boom box which plays everything from Prince to an elevator arrangement
of "Beautiful Dreamer."
     The Batmobile and Batplane, which are mercifully never called such in the
film, are stunning.  Burton has a talent for mixing the right amount of cartoon
physics into his live action, and he applies it well to both the vehicles and
other key shots.  The sense of motion in BATMAN is clearly born of animation,
and that's a very good thing.
     I know they were nervous, but I've got to hand it to the execs at Warner
Brothers for even allowing this film to get made.  It is not the sort of thing
one expects from Hollywood these days.  I can only dream of the day when Terry
Gilliam gets the kind of support Tim Burton has managed to muster.  The studio
bigwigs can relax now.  BATMAN is going to be pulling down the bucks by the
bucket.  See it soon.  See it with a big crowd.

Author
Monika Huebner
Director: Tim Burton
Cast: Michael Keaton, Kim Basinger, Jack Nicholson
Tim Burton, the man who recently brought us the bizarre and shrill
'Mars Attacks!' directed 'Batman' in 1988. I've been avoiding movies
like that for years. Let's see if I was right. 
The running time is 118 minutes. It took me one of those almost two
hours to find out what was going on. Half the movie. Unbelievable, the
fans will say. In this first hour the viewers are introduced to Gotham
City and the people who live there. In one of the first scenes we meet
Batman (Michael Keaton), who scares away two dark figures in a dark
night. So, he's one of the good guys, I understand. Two other
characters we meet are Jack (Jack Nicholson) and the press
photographer Vicki (Kim Basinger). Then there's Bruce Wayne, a
mysterious single gentleman who falls in love with Vicki. Or vice
versa, I'm not quite sure. After another long while I understood that
he is Batman. I wish they'd told the uninitiated viewer a little
sooner. And Tim Burton worked so hard on his introduction. 
The story is simple: Jack turns out to be the evil Joker who wants to
poison the whole city to take over control. Batman tries to stop him.
He has an old bone to pick with Jack, who many years ago shot his
parents while he was watching. 
Jack is easily spotted as the villain. A guy who looks like this can't
be up to anything good. Jack Nicholson certainly was a good choice for
the part. He has the potential to play a real psychopath. He didn't
need much make-up: just some white and red color and stuffed out
cheeks and you have a joker. Once more I thought that this is the
ideal kind of part for Nicholson. As long as he can be mean he is
great. But even the best villain in the end has to succumb to the good
guys. 
Michael Keaton is Batman. The honor of saving Gotham City dressed in a
black rubber suit is his. Allegedly there are some women who saw the
movie for this reason alone. I was surprised to find that he was seen
more often as Bruce Wayne without the suit. His acting was more
convincing in those scenes than the bat-scenes. To me the rubber suit
is as sexy as a hose. 
I can't say much about Kim Basinger as Vicki either. She is introduced
as a press photographer who neglects personal danger to obtain a good
story. And that's all. Her character remains flat and one-dimensional.
Batman (of course) gets to save her from evil joker. Why is it that
women in Hollywood movies always have to be saved? 
All in all the movie looked less "comic-like" than I had feared. The
set design was gloomy rather than shrill and colorful. However I had
hoped for a more bizarre movie. At least that was what I expected a
Tim Burton movie to be after seeing 'Mars Attacks!'. But 'Mars
Attacks!' isn't supposed to be a typical Burton movie. I heard that
his real fans don't like it. Danny Elfman's musical score wasn't too
good this time either. I think I'll leave 'Batman' to the real fans
and watch 'Mars Attacks!' again.
Homepage: Book and movie reviews
http://www.inka.de/sites/darwin/indexalt.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Tim Burton is an imaginative filmmaker with an obsession for the
visual aspects of films, especially the darker motifs.  After his
quirky 1988 movie BEETLEJUICE starring Michael Keaton, in 1989 he
resurrected the BATMAN series, which was last seen in the 1960s TV
series with Adam West and Burt Ward.  As the lead, Burton again cast
Keaton, but the script by Sam Hamm and Warren Skaaren has a Robin who
is AWOL.
     When reviving a series or a movie, there should be an idea of what
new can be said.  Burton's vision was that he wanted a dark Gotham City
and little more.  Anton Furst's Academy Award winning sets are massive
monuments to nothingness.  They are ugly without form or purpose, but
they do create just the right mood of hopelessness and despair that
Burton wanted.  (An experiment worth making would be to turn off the
sound and see if the movie has just about as much impact, which it
probably would.)  BATMAN is a celebration of form over story.
     Keaton's Batman is serious and broody.  His would-be girlfriend,
Vicki Vale (Kim Basinger), provides a plastic beauty.  The chemistry
between Keaton and Basinger never becomes believable.  Batman is too
cerebral to care, and Vale too untouchable to really get involved.
Regardless of what transpires, their love appears like little more than
unconvincing flirting.
     The show drags along until Jack Napier, played by Jack Nicholson
in one of his lesser performances, tangles with Batman and loses.  The
resulting accident destroys Napier's looks so he comes back as The
Joker, a guy with a clown's make-up.  ("Wait 'til they get a load of
me," he brags.)
     The Joker gets most of the film's few good lines.  "The pen is
truly mightier than the sword," he proclaims after killing someone by
throwing a pen into his throat.
     Other than the comic book story and the sets, the only other
things else worth seeing are Batman's toys.  Chief among these is his
gadget laden Batmobile.
     If Franz Kafka had ever made a comic book, it would undoubtedly
resemble this version of BATMAN - dark and depressing, but holding a
certain undeniable fascination nevertheless.
     BATMAN runs too long at 2:06.  It is rated PG-13 for its
cartoonish violence.  My son Jeffrey, age 8, liked it, but not nearly
as much as his favorite, BATMAN FOREVER.  As much as I admire the
technical details of the film, I cannot recommend the movie, but I do
give it ** for its visual impact.

Author
Randy Parker
        What surprises me most about the long-awaited BATMAN is that the
movie centers not on the Caped Crusader but on the Joker.  The Dark Knight
actually has less screen time than his homicidal arch nemesis!  I can hear
Batfans everywhere protesting: "First they had the nerve to cast Michael
Keaton as Batman, and now they think they can get away with making him
second banana to the Joker!!"  And, indeed, this situation would have been
altogether inappropriate and intolerable were it not for the fact that
someone at Warner Brothers had the savvy to cast Jack Nicholson in the role
he was born to play.
        Nicholson deserves the top billing he is receiving in the posters
and opening credits since his astounding, Oscar-worthy performance as the
Joker is the highlight of BATMAN.  Nicholson shows no inhibition or shame
as he pulls out all the stops to create a Joker that makes Cesar Romero
look like Bozo the Clown (Romero played the Joker in the '60s TV series).
On one hand, Nicholson's Joker is extremely funny.  His murderous escapades
and manic outbursts (which include defacing paintings in an art museum and
invading the television airwaves with hilarious pirate broadcasts) bring
humor and laughter into an otherwise dark film.  But on the other hand, his
outwardly jovial disposition is only a mask for his intense contempt for
all of mankind.  The Joker's cruelty and demented, diabolical nature are
truly frightening and sinister.  This guy is off his rocker, and he not
only knows it, he flaunts it!
        But enough about Nicholson as the Joker: I'm sure most people are
wondering about Michael Keaton as Batman.  Like many, I was outraged when
Warner Brothers announced that Keaton had been cast as the Caped Crusader.
But Batfans need not worry becauseholy unconventional casting!Keaton
delivers.  He is convincing as the tormented millionaire, Bruce Wayne, and
beneath his hard, black body armor, he is mysterious and formidable as the
Batman.  Even though the screenplay only halfheartedly attempts to develop
the character, Keaton manages to give hints of the inner turmoil and
emotional rage that drive Wayne to don his Bat gear and battle the low life
scum of Gotham City.
        Visually, BATMAN is a knockoutnothing short of a triumph for
director Tim Burton and his production team.  The movie successfully
captures the film noir look and bleak, gloomy atmosphere of such Batman
comic books as "The Dark Knight Returns" and "The Killing Joke."  Burton's
film is a feast for the eyes; the $35 million budget is definitely on the
screen.  The sets, costumes, and make-up are stunning and worthy of Oscar
nominations.  Nicholson isn't joking when he boasts, "Wait 'till they get a
load of me!"  His grimacing smile, green hair, and purple suits over orange
shirts are colorful and outrageous.  Keaton's wardrobe is equally
appropriate.  Batman's cape, mask, and body armor make him look
threatening, frightening, and invinciblebringing to mind not Adam West's
campy costume in the TV series but Peter Weir's outfit in ROBOCOP.
        Production designer Anton Furst's sets are a wonder.  Gotham City
is dark and foreboding, almost as if it were an expressionist vision of New
York.  The Batcave is cold, bare, and desolate.  The world that Burton and
Furst have created in BATMAN is a melancholy nightmare of violence and
corruption.  The movie's gritty BLADERUNNER/ROBOCOP look is a joy to
behold.
        The plot, on the other hand, is not as rousing.  The screenplay is
not up to snuff in comparison to the  stylized sets and superb acting.  It
takes forever for what little story there is to finally kick into gear.
BATMAN tries to walk a thin line between action and character psychology,
but it fails to give us enough of either one.  As I mentioned earlier, the
screenplay gives us plenty of the Joker, but it never fully establishes
Batman's psychological motives and underpinnings.  In terms of action,
BATMAN is not as thrilling as you might expect.  Burton seems more
concerned with the visual and dramatic elements of the story.  More than
anything, BATMAN is a mood film.
        While BATMAN may not completely absorb and excite you, it will
likely impress you with its success at bringing to life the style and
spirit of the Batman comic books.  Thanks to its distinctive look, the
movielike a good comic booktransports us to another world.

Author
Bruce Oberg
     I think I made a mistake by rereading THE DARK KNIGHT RETURNS this week.
While watching BATMAN, I kept being distracted by things that were missing.  A
few gaping plot holes, and an almost total lack of tension, mystery, or danger
in the film keep me from being able to recommend it (not that I think there's
anyone who hasn't already decided to see it eventually).  It tries to be dark,
but ends up just being dim, with too few ideas to flesh out the gadgets and
confrontations.
     Not that there isn't a lot to like in here.  Jack Nicholson is spectacular
as The Joker.  He sparkles in every scene -- partly because he's given every
good line in the script and partly because Jack is Jack.  In the end this is
really his movie, since we see more of how and why The Joker operates than we
see of the Caped Crusader.
     This is perhaps my biggest gripe with the film.  We just don't learn
enough about The Batman.  Sure, they fill in (and take some liberties with) his
history, but the extent of his skills and motivation are left relatively
untouched.  It's even more distracting given Writer Sam Hamm's and Director Tim
Burton's pre-hype comments about "fleshing out his character" and "putting him
at risk."  Michael Keaton's Batman just doesn't hold my interest, and not
because he's played poorly.  The script just doesn't give him very many
interesting things to say or do.  Bruce Wayne, on the other hand, is done very
well.  When Keaton is allowed to move his head and show some expression, he's
completely believable as a concerned and disturbed millionaire playboy.
Combine this with a pleasantly subtle portrayal of Alfred by Michael Gough and
just about every scene within Stately Wayne Manor rings true.
     Another selling point is the impressive art direction by Anton Furst.  I
like his neo-gothic vision of Gotham City; it's big, dark, and oppressive,
while never smacking of BLADE RUNNER.  Besides, it goes well with the nice
reworking of all the Bat-stuff.  The Batcave, Batwing, and Batmobile and the
rest of Batman's paraphernalia are appropriately black and slick; none of the
blue and grey from the comics.  Burton's direction is unobtrusive; a few
interesting segues here and there, but nothing that grabbed me like some of the
things in BEETLEJUICE.  The orchestral score by Oingo Boingo's Danny Elfman was
fittingly apocalyptic when it needed to be, and the songs by Prince were kept
in the far background (shame too -- the few I heard on NPR were *hot*).
     Commissioner Gordon and Harvey Dent are given scant attention, which would
have been okay if the filmmakers hadn't tried to fill the space with two
unsatisfying new characters: some newspaper reporter who's name I can't even
remember and, of course, Kim Basinger as photojournalist Vicki Vale.  I didn't
buy Vale's relationship with Wayne/Batman for one second.  For being the
centerpiece for most of the movie's confrontations, her character's motives are
never very clear.  Also, the film too often slips into "Damsel in Distress"
mode; ruining claims that she's a tough, independent reporter.  Worst of all,
the *key* scene between her and Batman is never shown....  All of a sudden,
something is very different (you'll know what I mean).  Ugh.
     In most cases, a good villain makes a good thriller (e.g., DIRTY HARRY, TO
LIVE AND DIE IN L.A.).  However, BATMAN is not a thriller.  It ties some so-so
action sequences together with a nice look and an off-the-meter performance by
Jack Nicholson.  I might go back to see it again at a cheap matinee, but with
all the dramatic potential that The Batman has, I'll probably stay disappointed.

Author
Max Scheinin
Batman is not a perfect movie. It is a perfect entertainment. It takes
place in a dark world in which no one is safe. Police roam every street but
they are no match to the criminals. A new breed is rising. Led by...the
Joker. A grotesque face that never stops smiling is the mask that serves
Jack Napier, the criminal who, as a young man, killed the parents of Bruce
Wayne. Wayne swore that he would protect the night skies and grew up into
Batman, a cowled figure who, in dark shadow, swoops by the moon as a
warning to all those who do not abide the law. 
Batman, according to the internet's Scott Renshaw, is at this point the
eleventh highest grossing film of all time. It made 251.2 million dollars.
It is the only art house block-buster ever made. Yes, I consider it a work
of art--Batman as Batman should be. Dark annd secluded, living alone in the
Wayne manor atop a stormy hill. But Burton never forgets that his subject
is a comic book character--he keeps him fun. Now that we've been awarded 
three awful sequels--Batman Returns, Batman Forever, Batman And Robin--we
can sneer at the Batman name, but that's not fair. Burton created a kind of
comic book masterpiece--I wouldn't quite place it on par with all-time
genre classics like Back To The Future, Jaws and Raiders Of The Lost Ark.
But all those would be in my personal top 30--coming from me, I would like
to believe that that is quite a compliment. Rather, comparisons with The
Fugitive are on par--it's exciting and funny, crisply edited and a joy to
watch. The Fugitive would be in my top 50--which is still a high place--and
so would Batman. There's a moment in the film when we see what a film of
this sort should be like--the Batplane flies by the moon--what an
unforgettable image. 
In the end everything works out as planned and we see a stylish little
adventure flick that does what it wants to--it keeps all who watch
enthralled in the tale of Batman.

Author
Steve Kramer
     It's hard to know where to start on a supposed blockbuster film such as
this.  It's been hyped up so much on rec.arts.movies it's ridiculous, and
there's been lots of controversy about whether or not Keaton would be able to
fulfill the role of the Dark Knight respectfully enough that it wouldn't be a
laughable thing.  In my opinion, at least, Keaton did a very good job,
bordering on excellent.  However, in all honesty, I would have to say this is
*definitely* Nicholson's movie.  Both actors did an excellent job of
captivating the attention, but Jack exuded an irresistible magnetism during his
parts that didn't allow my attention to waver at all.
     The beginning of the movie starts us off in Gotham City, which looks
busier than New York City during rush hour.  A family walks down a street
together, heads through a seamy alley, and gets mugged by a gang of hoodlums.
The hoodlums go to a nearby rooftop to count out their loot, and one begins to
express his fear about the mysterious creature that's been haunting the night
lately: the "Bat."  Apparently many of the 2-bit hoodlums in the city have been
plagued by the same vision, leaving the ambulance attendants who pick up the
nervous wrecks, as well as the policemen, in an utter state of confusion.  The
Batman has of course noticed this mugging and proceeds to stealthily "glide"
down upon them, a spooky sight if there ever was one for a criminal.  They
shoot him, and "Bat" falls down ... only to rise again in a few seconds,
sending the thieves into an utter state of terror.  After Batman dispatches one
of them, he dangles the other over the edge of a rooftop while the blubbering
thief pleads for his life.  The "Bat" says that he will not kill the man, but
that he wishes him to give a message to his friends that He is out there.  The
thief asks in a tremulous voice who he is, and the 2 simple words "I'm Batman."
send the theatre into spontaneous cheering and clapping.
     From then on we cover the newspaper angle a bit and discover Ms Vicki
Vale, a la Kim Basinger.  She is the staff photographer for a major magazine
and has come to Gotham to find out more about this mysterious Bat.  Ms
Basinger does an excellent job as Ms Vale, displaying her professionalism and
street-smartness as well as her personal side.
     Michael Keaton, as Bruce Wayne, does a very believable job of how Bruce
Wayne could actually be after the trauma of his parents being killed.  He is
first seen during a charity bash he is hosting, and his mansion looks as big as
a fabled English castle.  Wealthy beyond belief, he seems initially quite
cheerful and lighthearted, but as the movie progresses, we see more of the real
Wayne: serious, concentrated, and locked inside a world of his vow: to stop
crime.  Ms Vale's initial opinion of Mr.  Wayne before having met him is a
vain, egocentrical playboy; after having met him, however, is another matter....
     And of course, Jack Nicholson.  Jack begins as Jack Napier, a very
powerful criminal apparently, pulling capers in the city, paying police
kickbacks to keep them off his case, and seems to be an underling of a crime
boss, Grissom, who is played by Jack Palance.  Grissom apparently decides Jack
has outlived his usefulness and cleverness to him, and asks him to personally
supervise the robbery of a chemical plant.  After Jack and company leave to
plan said robbery, Grissom telephones the police and tips them off to it.  In
the ensuing police shootout, the criminals almost escape, except who should
show on the scene but Batman (what a surprise).  Batman corrals the majority of
criminals quickly and almost nabs Jack, except for the fact that as he nabs
Jack, Jack's right-hand man nabs Commissioner Gordon, along for the sting, and
threatens to blow his brains out.  After Batman lets him go, Jack kills a
police lieutenant (the one who he had paid the money kickback to), and the
Batman comes back to apprehend him.  Jack fires a bullet, it bounces off
Batman's body armor and shatters a nearby gauge, which send shrapnels of glass
into Jack's face, at which point Jack falls over a railing and Batman catches
him.  Unfortunately, Jack happens be over a chemical tank loaded with
chemicals, apparently part of which is a nerve gas the government had banned
from use some years back.  Whether it was Batman's conscious decision, or
whether he could not hold on, we cannot say; but Jack falls into the chemical
tank ... and later arises.  He goes to a back-alley surgeon who tries to doctor
him up as best he can, but he cannot undo the nerve damage Jack has suffered
to his face: it has fixed his face in an unalterable grin.  Going a little
nutso at this point, the Joker is born.  
     The movie is fraught with battle, murder and spectacular special effects;
interspersed with the secondary storyline, which is the developing relationship
with Bruce and Vicki, and as it turns out later, the Joker.  Apparently the
Joker has developed the hots for Ms Vale as well and means to make her his
own.  The interaction between the 3 is very well done; especially with the
Joker's twisted insanity.  One of the funniest parts of the movie is when the
Joker is in an art gallery with his goons, on the way to Ms Vale.  One of
them is carrying a boom box (with, of course, the Batman soundtrack inside!
:^), and watching the Joker and his goons caper and dance about is worth the
price of admission itself.  The battle scenes are quite well done, with martial
artists, climatic fist-fights, and the wonderful array of gadgets the Batman
has, including the Batcave (complete with real live bats, the only question is,
who did he get to construct it?), the Batplane (a marvelous collection of
gadgets inside a sleek stealthy plane in the shape of (what else?) a bat), and
of course, the fabled Batmobile.   Some of the effects with the Batmobile were
done with computer graphics, I'm convinced, like the Batmobile's shields to
protect it from harm.  It's quite a stunning piece, as are the rest of Batman's
gadgets.  However, it is the acting (which it should be in all good movies)
which gets the movie it's excellent rating.  The final battle between the Joker
and the Batman is quite impressive, and proves Batman to be a mere mortal after
all; in fact, in some places, Batman gets out of his inevitable death by sheer
luck.  And as we find that Batman "created" the Joker (SPOILER!),
we discover the Joker has also, in effect, "created" the Batman.  In the
interests of leaving this movie a bit of a mystery, I'll leave it for you all
to watch.
     Give this one 4 to 4.5 out of 5 stars.  Excellent movie, and possibly the
best "blockbuster" movie of the summer.  Go see it.  Today.  Now.
[ Steve Kramer-Always go out with a :^)| "Those toys. Where does he get those ]
[ kramer@tramp.colorado.edu            | wonderful toys?" Nicholson, "Batman" ]
[..!(ncar.nbires)!boulder!tramp!kramer | internet: kramer@tramp.colorado.edu  ]

Author
Chuck Dowling
Batman (1989) *** out of ***** - Cast: Michael Keaton, Jack Nicholson, Kim
Basinger, Robert Wuhl, Jack Palance, Pat Hingle, Billy Dee Williams, Michael
Gough, William Hootkins, Jerry Hall. Written by: Sam Hamm and Warren
Skaaren. Directed by: Tim Burton. Running Time: 126 minutes.
About a year before the release of "Batman", the hype began. But by the time
the film was released, you had basically seen the entire movie, in clip
form. Unfortunately, it seemed to work much better as a series of clips.
We are introduced to Gotham City, a strange town which seems to both exist
in reality and not exist in reality at the same time. Everything in the town
is dark, gloomy, and bleak. Gotham's new district attorney Harvey Dent
(Williams) vows to end the stranglehold of the crime boss of the town
(Palance). But also at the same time, a new player enters the game. His name
is Batman.
Batman's normal persona is that of millionaire Bruce Wayne (Keaton). He is
forced to bring Batman into the public eye to confront the Joker
(Nicholson), who once was a henchman of Gotham's crime boss, until Batman
dropped him into a vat of chemicals. Now the Joker is trying to basically
kill people in various ways, with no real rhyme or reason to his plan.
No matter how many times I see the film, one thought always stays with me:
the film has never looked like it was finished. The editing is erratic, the
sound sometimes in non-existant, and the effects look like they needed
serious enhancement in post production. For example, look at the Batmobile.
Sure it's supposed to be cool and speedy, but really look at it when it's on
screen. You'll never see it going faster than about 5 miles per hour. That's
an obvious flaw to me. Also, everything obviously looks like a movie set,
even though the production design won an oscar. I could just imagine the
camera panning back at any moment to reveal the crew standing there. Things
like that spoil the illusion that is supposedly being created. And they
really needed to decide how this city was going to be perceived. Obviously
there is no city in the country resembling Gotham, so they needed to make
Gotham a world of its own. People and places resemble the 1940s, but use
1980s expressions and concepts. It doesn't mix.
And I don't much like having to buy stupid ideas or concepts "because it's a
comic book movie". For example, (and I know I'm nitpicking a little but darn
it all, it bothers me) the Joker really doesn't exist for much longer than a
week or so. But immediately he has a whole gang with "Joker" jackets and
"Joker" cars, all in "Joker" colors with a big "Joker" logo on them. It's
absurd, you're a homicidal maniac alive for about a week, but you take the
time to get a fleet of cars painted purple and green and get specialized
jackets for your gang? I know it's just a movie, but come on, it's too
silly.
Also on the negative side, the soundtrack contains numerous oddly-placed
songs by Prince which were obviously dubbed in after the film was completed.
Prince is awful, as are these songs, and they just don't gel with the look
and feel of the film. Danny Elfman's score is a mixed bag. The actual theme
and anthem are good, but just the normal background music gets annoying. And
there are too many unnecessary characters, namely Robert Wuhl's reporter and
a crooked cop played by William Hootkins. Like I said, some better editing
was needed.
But, even after all that (and it's a lot, I know), I'll admit that the film
is still entertaining. Despite what everyone said before the film opened,
Keaton makes a fine Batman. Nicholson's acting is SO over the top that it
reaches a new level of silliness, but it fits the character perfectly and
therefore is fine with me. And had it not been for the success of this film,
there wouldn't have been 1992's "Batman Returns" which is my favorite of the
series. [PG-13]
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, film related
links, and reader's reviews.

Author
Doug Skiles
Starring: Michael Keaton (Bruce Wayne/Batman), Jack Nicholson (Jack
Napier/Joker), Kim Basinger (Vicki Vale), Robert Wuhl (Alexander Knox),
Michael Gough (Alfred Pennyworth), Pat Hingle (Commissioner Gordon),
Billy Dee Williams (Harvey Dent), Jack Palance (Carl Grissom)
Directed by: Tim Burton, Written by: Sam Hamm and Warren Skaaren from a
story by Sam Hamm based on characters created by Bob Kane
Rated PG-13 by the MPAA for violence, blood, strong language, and a
sexual situation
The best way to review this film is to put it in one word: classic.
Yes, BATMAN (1989) is as much a classic film as is SUPERMAN (1978). 
It's Batman as he should be portrayed, living up to all that the classic
comics taught us as kids and all that they're teaching kids about the
character now.  It's not a bastardization of the Batman legend like the
old tv series from the late 60s with Adam West was, or the film, BATMAN
(1966), that spun off from it.  
Batman is a dark character.  As his core is an obsession with his
parents' murder, which he witnessed as a child.  That story, and the
obsession that springs from it, is portrayed perfectly here, and Michael
Keaton fills the Batman role nicely.  He seems like a very unlikely
candidate - not exactly the buff type of guy you expect for Bruce
Wayne.  But his acting makes up for his lack of physical presence.  As
Bruce, he's tormented, a little odd - everything you'd expect.  And when
he's in the suit, he IS Batman.  To this day, no actor yet has held a
candle to Keaton's portrayal.  Only the recent animated Batman can
compete.
And only the animated Joker can compete with Jack Nicholson's expert
portrayal, as well.  He's evil, as he should be, and very funny, as
you'd expect him to be.  Again, not exactly the kind of guy who looks
like the skinny fellow we associate the Joker with, but his acting
speaks for itself.  
Vicki Vale, the photojournalist, is a thankless role when dropped among
scene-stealers like Keaton's Wayne/Batman and Nicholson's Napier/Joker,
but Basinger fits in nicely.  She's not over the top, but at least she
doesn't blend into the background, and she doesn't disappoint in any of
her scenes.  As another plus, Wuhl gets a humorous and notable role as
Alexander Knox, her co-worker.
Speaking of the background, what a nice background it is.  The late
Anton Furst created a fantastic Gotham City, a dark and decadent land
with giant skyscrapers that spike up into the air and have a unique,
dominating presence all their own.  It speaks highly of a design when it
sticks in your memory, and Furst's does.  It's a very fitting look for
Gotham.
Danny Elfman's score is another element of the movie that is now the
stuff of legend.  The main theme is rousing and memorable on the level
of the RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK (1979) theme, and that's high praise. 
Elfman's music is dark at times, fun at times, and always appropriate.
If you haven't seen the original film in the BATMAN series yet, don't be
put off by some of the later, lamer sequels.  This is a very different
vision, and much better one.  It's a true classic, and something that
must be experienced.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  A triumph of visual imagery over story
     for the music video generation.  Ironically, Keaton is better
     as Batman than Nicholson is as the Joker.  The art design is
     superior but just about everything else is pedestrian.
     Better than the television series or the serials, not as good
     as the comic.  Rating: 0.
     Excuse the pretentiousness of starting a review with an 82-year-old
quote, but Adams might very well be talking about BATMAN, whose images,
often contradictory or of clashing styles, far overpower the flyweight story
that binds them together.  BATMAN is a triumph of visual imagery over story.
While Jack Nicholson is the top-billed star, his character is paper-thin and
just as flat.  We are down here to the level of villains whose biggest
crimes can be explained only by nastiness.  Nicholson apparently was chosen
not because he had a single responsive chord for the man behind the famous
face, but because both are known for their smirking.  Nicholson does not
even look the part.  His face is not thin and angular enough and his non-
angular body is better suited to playing the Penguin.  Of course, it is a
pity that the original model for the Joker is well past the point where he
could have played the part.  Conrad Veidt, best known for playing Col.
Strasser in CASABLANCA and Cesar in CABINET OF DR. CALIGARI, played the
title role in THE MAN WHO LAUGHS, a poor wretch whose face is twisted into a
perpetual rictus grin.  His nightmarish look was reportedly the real
inspiration for the Joker so he looked the role.  Nicholson can be a decent
actor but he lacks range and in spite of all the fuss and expectation,
Michael Keaton is much better cast as Batman than Nicholson is as the Joker.
Keaton, first of all, looks the part of Batman.  That is not all that
surprising if you realize what you are seeing is two eyes, a perpetual
frown, and a chin.  Everything else is plastic shell.  Any actor with a chin
and reasonable musculature could have looked good in the Batman suit.
Keaton's role was a little more demanding when he played the man behind the
mask--he is not a character out of Dostoevsky, understand, but his role did
require a little acting and while he was neither superior nor memorable, he
was at least equal to the role.  Surprisingly, Michael Gough played against
type as a sympathetic Alfred the butler (sort of a Batman's batman!).  At
one point he does severely overstep what the original Alfred would have
done, but that is a script fault, not Gough's failing.
     The story, what there is of it, gives us an origin for the Joker, a
touch of one for Batman, and one fiendish though not very coherent scheme by
the Joker which is, f course, foiled by Batman.  I will not say much about
the Joker's scheme, but it involves chemical contamination.  The Joker makes
the part about chemical contamination quite public, but apparently Batman is
the only person to do a chemical analysis of the contaminated products.  (To
judge how likely that is, the Berkeley ellness Letter reports, "The smoke
from a single cigarette contains about 100 times more cyanide than did the
two grapes from Chile that were impounded by government officials in March."
Any idea how many chemical labs got involved in analysis after that tiny
level of contamination was found?  How likely do you find it that only
Batman would do a complete chemical analysis of the Joker's product?)  The
plot also concerns what must be the world's tallest cathedral.  At a minimum
it looks to be at least fifty stories tall.  That does not make for a
believable story, but it is there for visual style more than credibility.
     In the quote above, Adams talks about contradictory images, and that is
precisely what BATMAN offers.  There are wide mood swings from somber, dark,
and brooding, to just exactly the sort of tongue-in-cheek campiness that the
producers have long promised would *not* be in this film.  Scenes of the Joker
dancing Mardi Gras fashion to songs by Prince in front of cheering crowds
are not classic Batman style by any means.  And when Batman laments, "This
is not exactly a normal world," this is not exactly a Batman sentiment.
Also, one wonders how many worlds Batman has seen.  Again and again the
story stops--literally stops--in a time-out for a visual image.  One of the
most ridiculous of these has the Batplane break off a confrontation with the
Joker so it can fly above the clouds and be seen outlined against the moon,
looking like an aerial bat-symbol.  If the script gives no explanation, the
cheer of the audience does.  Logic is less important than the visual image.
     BATMAN is an art designer's film all the way.  Gotham City is a highly
stylized New York City with the art deco of the 1930s and the futuristic
feel of Fritz Lang's (not Superman's) Metropolis.  It is a collection of
dark somber streets seen only at night or under overcast skies.  This is a
film without sunshine.  To tie Gotham to the present, the mayor of the city
was cast not for any acting ability, but because he looks like Ed Koch.  In
spite of the beautiful visual design for the city, the eye still rebels
because of the matte paintings and building models that are just not
convincing as being anything but mattes and models.  That is not a serious
fault in a film with a strong story, but when a film's strongest suit is its
art design, it becomes very important to execute those designs flawlessly.
     Finally, a word about the music.  Danny Elfman has written a decent
score, but choosing Prince to write the songs, apparently for the nihilism
of his previous work, was as big a blunder as choosing Nicholson for his
smirk.  Director Tim Burton claims to be a fan of Batman comic books, but it
seems to me they were better than his film.  I have to give the film a
neutral 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.  I guess I did not expect better, but I had
hoped for it nonetheless.
