Title
Review for Roman Holiday (1953)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Roman Holiday" was the film that made Audrey Hepburn
a star.  Playing a young princess, her slender body,
her beauty, and her ability to project youth and innocence
made her perfect for the part.  While "Roman Holiday"
is slightly over-rated, most of the comedy works, and
the few sad scenes add to our sympathy for her character.
The story was good enough to merit its Academy Award.
Princess Anne (Hepburn) is a teenager trotted about
Europe for speeches, ceremonies, etc. by her overscheduling
handlers.  Anne escapes her handlers and her constricting
life, soon meeting newspaper reporter Joe Bradley (Gregory
Peck).  Bradley, smelling a big story, enlists the help of
photographer Irving (Eddie Albert), then takes Anne on a
pleasure tour of Rome.  Many embarrassing, valuable photos
are surreptitiously taken of the Princess.  This leads to
star turns for Peck (Will he fall in love with her, and
not destroy her reputation by publishing his story?) and
Hepburn (Will she fall in love with him, and reject her
crown?).
The biggest surprise that this film had for me was
provided by Eddie Albert.  Later known as a competent
but unengaging straight man (e.g. "Green Acres"), here
his character is excitable and bohemian, and even sports
a beard suitable for a temperamental artist.  The
revelation is that Albert plays this character perfectly,
and it is a shame that middle age led to his casting
in less challenging roles.
Peck radiates self-confidence and star power, and
has the looks to make his role convincing as a love
interest for Hepburn.  While somewhat limited in his
emotional range, Peck can project indignation well.
His character also matches well with Hepburn's, as
his advantages in experience and cynicism are more
than offset by Hepburn's appealing innocence and
vulnerability.
Like nearly all comedies, "Roman Holiday" isn't
perfect.  We are to believe that Bradley can convince
his elderly Italian landlord to play soldier, that
Bradley and Irving are in the front of a large
contigent of an extremely well-behaved press, and
that Bradley (much less Irving) wouldn't publish
their career-making story.  Anne, after acting like
a child throughout, suddenly gains maturity at film's
end.
"Roman Holiday" was nominated for ten Academy Awards,
including Best Picture, Best Director (William Wyler),
Best B & W Cinematography (Frank Planer and Henry Alekan),
Best Screenplay (Ian McLellan Hunter and John Dighton),
and Best Supporting Actor (Albert).  Hepburn won
Best Actress, and Edith Head won for her costume.
Hunter was fronting for blacklisted Dalton Trumbo,
who received a posthumous Oscar in 1993.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
