Title
Review for Pokémon 3: The Movie (2001)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brandon Herring
"Pokemon 3: The Movie" has a lot of bad things in it. First of all it's a 
plot heavy mess that has bad voice talents, badly written script and 
fantastic animation. The first film came out the end of 1999 and was a huge 
hit grossing almost $90 million domestically. A sequel soon followed and even 
made $45 million. Warner has released their third movie based on the 
immensely popular video game and TV series and its a waste of time and 
celluloid.
This time Ash Ketchum and his friends are on their way to the Johto battles 
(which my little brother told me the new spinoff is "Pokemon: The Johto 
Journeys" so go figure) anyway he comes in contact with a young girl who's 
father has disappeared after trying to discover The Unown. They are small 
Pokemon with a powerful punch and have great psychic abilities. The Unown 
bring together their psychic abilities and create Entei a powerful legendary 
Pokemon who barriers young Molly's house and creates every wish she wants.
Now it's up to Ash and his friends to stop this Pokemon Entei and show him to 
be a good Pokemon rather than a bad one. Too bad really that this is a bad 
movie, surprisingly the first movie was entertaining and somewhat absorbing, 
the second was a piece of trash and this one is almost in between. It has 
some good qualities (animation, message in the end) but the flaws seem to 
overpower the goods.
I'm still not sure what the big thing is about Pokemon, they are ugly little 
animals who speak their own name for their language (besides Meowth, my 
personal favorite) and you don't understand what they are saying. My little 
brother just thought the movie was amazing, and I kept leaning over and 
asking him happened, or what Pokemon that was. His response was a big lecture 
of how this is that, and that is this...he sure did put me in my place. 
With the second and third movie being bad, I have a feeling Pokemon 4: The 
Movie might be a total bust as well. "Pokemon 3: The Movie" has some 
redeeming qualities for the kids, and the Pokemon fans will dig every minute 
of this film. For those parents and/or brothers and sisters who have to sit 
through this...bring a pillow.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring 4/11/01
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Brandon+Herring

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
The Pokémon marketing folks are Einstein-caliber geniuses.  First, they
hypnotize kids with flashing, seizure-inducing lights which turn them into
sticky little zombies that "Gotta Catch 'em All" (meaning collect the cards
for each Pokémon character, of which there are hundreds).  Then they rush a
cheaply made film into theatres every six months which introduces a handful
of new characters and means more "catching" for your brainwashed offspring.
But the smartest thing they may have done is to release three horrendously
bad films so close together.  This move has left critics wringing their
hands, as they have already used every possible creative way to say the
first two films sucked.  Lucky for you, I've scraped the bottom of the
barrel and still have a few left.  How bad is Pokémon 3?  It's
rub-hot-sauce-on-your-genitals bad. It's turn-your-head-and-cough bad.  It's
George-W.-Bush-is-our-President bad.
That said, Pokémon 3 is probably the best of the three Pokémon films  Sure,
that's kind of like debating whether Wrestlemania VI or Wrestlemania IX was
better, but hey - it's a step in the right direction.  Like the previous
two, it begins with what is, essentially, an unaired episode of the
television show.  This time it's "Pikachu and Pichu," where everyone's
favorite yellow squeak toy and all his pals take a trip to The Big City (a
name is never offered).  They get chased by a rabid Pokédog and saved by two
new characters, the Pichu brothers.  There's also some cheesy narration,
because without it, nobody would have a clue what was going on - as I'm sure
you all know, Pokémon don't talk.
The film proper, titled "Spell of the Unknown," is about a little girl named
Molly, whose father is a well-known hunter of legendary Pokémon.  One day,
he disappears when discovering some odd little Scrabble tiles called "The
Unown."  Molly tries to unlock the secret of The Unown, but instead ends up
having the strange tiles read her mind and build a fantasy world around her.
It's a pretty decent intro, but then Ash and the other Pokémon trainers show
up and bring with them a bunch of bad songs and more squeak toys than you
can shake a stick at.  Ash and company try to stop the legendary Pokémon
named Enteimon (also the producer of delicious baked goods available at fine
stores everywhere), who is the force responsible for creating Molly's crazy
new city.
Of course, there are numerous Pokémon battles, and you'll get to see your
favorite little critters, like Duckémon, Catémon, Squirrelémon, Batémon,
Rockémon and Bonémon.  And there are a slew of new characters, as well.  So
adults - get ready to open your wallets.  The best part of Pokémon 3 is
Ash's friend Brock, who doesn't open his eyes for the entire film.  At one
point, when the Pokégang meet a girl named Lisa, Brock tells her she's got a
cute Pokémon.  C'mon, Brock - she's no Judy Jetson.  And this is a kids'
film.  Please keep it in your pants.
