Title
Review for Savage Messiah (1972)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
I am partial to some film biographies of artists.  Some are overly creative
but I have always felt that this was good for the art form, as long as it
did not make the whole thing look stupid.
Ken Russell was, and still is, one of the masters of biographies. His young
days consisted of a series of BBC specials on the lives of various artists.
Some of them were exceptional, though  they have never hit the larger
screen, or their release as videos have been deemed to the vaults of the
tight lipped BBC conglomerate. ( Ditto for THE GOONS ).  Of special mention,
were one on Dante Gabriel Rossetti, and one on Isadora Duncan.  But the BBC
seems to not be that interested in releasing these things which have been
around for ages, and deserve to appear in video or dvd.
This very special, subtle, and funny film, is, a quiet film, much like
MAHLER, about a second rate artist during the early decade of this century.
While he was spending his time doing his sculptures and other projects, he
basically paid for his art by creating copies of original art works, which
some collectors and their agents were trading for obscene amounts of money.
As he becomes better known, he is eventually trapped by authorities, but
decides to go off to war, instead.  The story continues, and like the
furtive personality that the main character lives under, the film pulls off
the same on us.  It is how we find out what happened to him.  And an ensuing
display of his art, is a wonderful tribute to a man that deserved a lot
better, and is finally getting a bit of his due, were it not that he was
known to be one of the finest copy makers ever. If anything, like MAHLER,
this film is not an extravaganza waiting to explode as so many of the films
Ken Russell has done. This film is "quiet", subtle, and really smooth. It is
a real well made exercise in the life of an artist, few films of which can
bring it about so well.
There are some exceptional performances in this film, Dorothy Tutin, and a
young Helen Mirren come to mind off the bat, and they make this film a real
treat. It's worth mentioning that Dorothy Tutin added some of the soundtrack
music to this film, and if anything Tommy aside, this film has some
excellent use of music, which is one of Ken Russell's trademarks.  Worth
seeing anytime.  It is not boring at all.
