Title
Review for Trio, Das (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   It's easy to see why Gotz George is one of Germany's
most popular actors, though he is not well known in the U.S. 
With his blazing eyes and ruggedly handsome face, this sixty-
year-old might be equated with America's Robert Redford or
Warren Beatty, his expressions somehow reminding one of
Peter O'Toole.  In "The Trio," or "Das Trio" as the film is
called in the country of its production, George plays Zobel, a
homosexual pickpocket with the free-and-easy life style that
such a profession would evoke, except for one thing.  He is
envious of one younger man, Rodolf (Felix Eitner), whom he
has taken in as a partner in both trade and bed, but who has
eyes for Lizzie (Jeanette Hain)--who happens to be Zobel's
daughter. If this sounds like a movie with the makings of a
farce, a comedy, and a buddy movie, you'd be on the money. 
For a potential audience who may still not be aware that the
Germans can produce light and airy romps, this film could set
them straight (so to speak).
   The story opens on a carnival visited by Zobel, his
daughter by a heterosexual union, Lizzie, and Zobel's lover,
Karl (Christian Redl).  When a young thief, Rodolf, runs off
with Karl's purse, he is caught by the victims and humiliated
by being forced to strip to the waist.  Later, when the aging
Karl is hit by a car and near death, Lizzie finds out where
Rodolf lives and persuades him to join their merry group by
taking Karl's place.  After a crash course in pickpocketing, the
bisexual Rodolf proves to have a light hand and also an eye
for both of his partners.  The trio travel through parts of
Germany first via their mobile home, ultimately by
transcontinental train, successfully plying their trade until both
Lizzie and Zobel discover that they are being two-timed and
plot a course of action that alters their lives forever.
   Given the elements of farce, camaraderie, sentimental
drama and some basic looks at the new, prosperous and fun-
loving Germany, "The Trio" should prove to be an easy
crossover that could charm viewers of various carnal choices. 
One riotous scene takes place in the trailer as Zobel showers
with Rodolf, and Lizzie, about to catch them in the act, must
be persuaded to leave the quarters.  The scene quickly
reverses course: Lizzie and Rodolf then have to pretend to
Zobel that nothing is going on between them.  The film is
peppered with various incidents, giving the audience tips on
how to lift wallets and purses.
   The screenwriters, who include director Hermine
Huntgeburth, seem to have an obsession about age.  Twice
during the comedy, the performers refer to bystanders as "the
old lady."  The balding Karl, who wears a silly rug, is fearful
of being replaced by a younger man.  And the aging Zobel is
accused by his daughter Lizzie of harboring jealous and
vindictive thoughts because he fears he will no longer be able
to attract sexual partners.  "The Trio" has a cute coda, which
promises that the art of pickpocketing will be passed on to
future generations.
