Title
Review for He Got Game (1998)
Number of Reviews
25

Author
Ted Prigge
Writer/Director: Spike Lee
Starring: Denzel Washington, Ray Allen, Milla Jovovich, Rosario Dawson,
Zelda Harris, Jim Brown, Bill Nunn, Ned Beatty, John Turturro, Charles
Barkley, Larry Bird, Michael Jordon, John Thompson, John Wallace, John
Chaney
Young basketball player Jesus Shuttlesworth (Ray Allen) has been playing
basketball for as long as he can remember and now finds that he is the top
college draft pick in the U.S.  He's on the cover of numerous magazines, is
being badgered by every single big college university with a basketball
team (including Temple U - yea), and is being offered all sorts of pay offs
from everyone.  He's so good that he doesn't even need to go to college; he
could just go right on to the NBA.  Jesus finds himself at the crossroads
of his life, but when asked what he's going to do, he just says "I'm
weighing all my options."
Spike Lee's newest film (or joint), "He Got Game," is not so interested in
the game of basketball itself as it is in the drama of a person who is so
good that he finds that everyone he knows is only interested in him as a
basketball player.  His girlfriend, Lala (Rosario Dawson), pretends to like
him even though she's obviously fallen out of love from him, but is in it
because she gets a part of his money for being the "sweetheart."  Even his
uncle (Lee staple, Bill Nunn) is getting paranoid that he's not going to
give him a cut.  Except for his sister (Zelda Harris), who he's raised by
himself since he was a kid, there's only one other person who really cares
for him as a person.
Unfortunately, that person is his father, Jake (Denzel Washington, with a
pretty cool-looking afro, which surprisingly works for him), who has been
in jail for six years for murdering his mother in a fit of rage.  Sure, it
was an accident, but Jesus holds so much contempt for Jake that he has
convinced himself that he doesn't even have a father.  However, Jake is
given a second chance with him when the warden of Jake's prison (Ned
Beatty) gets orders from the governor to let Jake out so he can convince
Jake to go to the college the governor wants him to go to.  He has one
week, and if he does so, the governor may just shorten his sentence.
While this premise seems pretty forced, it's merely a bit of a stretch done
by Lee to show how important basketball is handled when compared with life.
 Sure, it's forced and no prison would let a criminal out into the real
world so he can convince an estranged son to go to a certain university. 
And why would they chose Jake?  Doesn't Jesus hate Jake?  Wouldn't he be
the last person they'd chose?  But hey, it's a movie: get over it.
Anyway, Jake is shuffled out of prison in secret, and is given two hard-ass
parole officers (one played by Jim Brown) who attach a bug to him so they
can see where he is at all times, give him a couple bucks, and toss him
into a cheap hotel while they go stay at a classier place.  Jake has a
limit of one week to talk to his son and get him to sign a contract for
this certain university.  And, of course, Jesus is not pleased to see him,
and no, Jake does not give up.
The great thing about this movie is how the drama between Jake and his son
is given a very realistic feel.  Jesus is still very pissed off at Jake,
and does not give in enough to let him get a lot of conversation in, but
knows deep down inside that it was an accident, creating an inner war.  He
knows that Jake is the only one who gives a shit about him, but just can't
come to forgive him for what he's done.
Meanwhile, Jesus is being shown all the perks of being a great basketball
player, getting lots of under the counter illegal deals, not only from
universities but also from his own potential agent.  He turns all of these
down, but as the film goes on, we sense that any time, he's going to give
in and take anything they offer him.
And while this is going on, Jake is desperately trying to find a way to
connect with his son.  But in the meantime, he finds he needs to help a
prostitute (Milla Jovovich, the fifth element from "The Fifth Element") who
lives next door to him who feels beaten down by not only her pimp, but
basically life.  This is probably the only weak link in the film, but it
does show a man who has definitely changed.
We see some of the past in flashbacks, where a heavily demanding Jake
forces his son to play basketball, almost causing him to detest it in the
process.  There are two reasons why we see these: a) because we want to be
able to understand the reason why Jesus is so pissed off at his father; and
b) so we can understand Jake's point of view.  What other films use
flashbacks so well, which not only educate us about the characters, but
take both sides on the stories?
This could all be handled like a TV movie starring Tori Spelling and that
guy who played Zach on "Saved by the Bell," but Lee gives the film so much
spirit and emotion that it works on multiple levels, none which insult us. 
We see a powerful, intelligent drama which might have seemed forced if done
by another director, but instead seems emotional because of Lee.  We also
see a biting satire on the sports world, which cares only about money and
talent, not the game itself.
Spike Lee obviously loves basketball.  What is the one image you think of
when you think of Lee?  It's either him hanging with Michael Jordon, or him
sitting in the front row of a Knick's game.  Lee shows his love for the
sport in the beginning, which is a wonderful montage of all sorts of people
playing basketball in all kinds of ways.  There's no professional players,
but there are lots of shots on people in inner-city courts playing in teams
or in doubles, and even a couple people shooting into an open-ended basket
nailed onto a wall.  All this is done to the music of Aaron Copland, which
underscores a lot of the film majestically.
The point that Lee is making in this film is that there is a line between
loving the game and playing it professionally.  Lee is not only attacking
college and professional basketball for being too into money than into the
real game, but also the parents who try to live through their children by
pushing them to do something they may not even enjoy.  I used to play tee
ball, and I probably would have liked it if the coaches were as well;
instead, they want to win, and they forget why they're playing in the first
place.
All this is done using Lee's incredible craftsmanship.  I've seen only a
few Lee films, but every one of them has blown me away by his use of great
camera and technical work, as well as the way he presents his topics.  He
always shows a great deal of love with them yet is still able to distance
himself from the story, telling it with passion but not so much passion
that it collapses.  Here, he's able to distance himself from one of his
biggest passions, and tell a story not so much about basketball, but the
love of basketball, and the way that human emotions are often muted in
favor of "greater" things.
The film's music is something that should also be noted.  I mentioned the
score, which from Aaron Copland ballets, but the film also features a whole
array of songs by Public Enemy, who have been featured in some of his
films, most notably "Do the Right Thing" (remember that big ass boom box
that Radio Raheem had?  or that dance Rosie Perez does?).  The songs work
nicely with the film, especially the song that features the Buffalo
Springfield riff, and all of them work in great contrast with the Copland
score.
The acting is another great thing, with Denzel Washington easily walking
away with the best performance in the film.  In Jake, he creates an
incredibly complex character, one that would seem impossible to play, but
is done with such ease by Denzel that it almost seems easy.  He's easy to
sympathize with, even after the flashback scenes, which are horrifying.
Ray Allen is also very good, although a bit wooden (hey, he's a basketball
player).  He shows some great emotion in a couple scenes, primarily a scene
where he sees his father for the first time in six years...in his
kitchen...with his sister.  Also good are Milla Jovovich, as the
hooker/friend of Jake's; Jim Brown, as a hot-headed parole officer; Ned
Beatty, as the warden of Attica; and John Turturro, in a one-scene
performance as the coach of a college basketball team which is interested
in gaining Jesus as one of their team members...VERY interested.  And look
for a wide assortment of cameos from people from the wide world of
basketball, including Dick Vitale, Michael Jordan (who gets the privilege
of saying the film's title), and even Temple Basketball coach, John Chaney
(did I even spell his name right?), who appeared four times in the film,
each time garnering loud applause by the audience.
The ending of the film, especially the climactic basketball match, is, yes,
anticlimactic, but still poetic.  It takes someone like Spike Lee to make
something like this cinematic, and I can't really think of many directors
who can give a film about basketball a feeling of originality, and even
emotion.  It's the best basketball film since "White Men Can't Jump," only
it's better.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Chris Loar
Call it "Spike Lee's LAST TEMPTATION OF CHRIST."  Or, rather, of Jesus --   
Jesus Shuttlesworth, Jesus of Coney Island, Brooklyn's hottest hoopster,   
1998's top NCAA prospect.  This Jesus, as the film opens, is experiencing   
the greatest temptations of his life -- making choices about where to go   
to college, whether to move directly to the pros, and how to balance what   
he needs to do for his family's sake versus what he'd like to get for   
himself.
Into this complex mixture of good and evil walks a complex man -- whether   
Jesus' savior or his Antichrist isn't immediately obvious.  This man is   
Jesus' father, Jake Shuttlesworth, played with perfect pitch by Denzel   
Washington.  Jake's out of prison, temporarily; he's been serving a   
fifteen year prison sentence, and he's just been offered a chance at a   
sort of redemption.  The governor of New York is a huge hoops fan   
himself, and he's offering Jake a very special deal:  if he can get Jesus   
to attend the governor's alma matter, he'll see if he can't reduce Jake's   
sentence a little.  Jake accepts the offer, naturally enough, but he   
doesn't seem very optimistic, and we soon see why -- he is, to say the   
least, estranged from his son.  We quickly learn that while Jesus wants   
to do the right thing, he's not at all sure that that includes getting   
his pop out of jail early.
This, in a nutshell, is the setup for Spike Lee's HE GOT GAME --   
basketball movie, father-son story, religious allegory, all in one.  It's   
a little contrived, yes, and a little predictable, certainly; but it is,   
nonetheless, a real pleasure to watch -- energetic, heartfelt, and   
engrossing.  We're immediately sucked in by Lee's obvious love for the   
visual energy of a basketball game; he holds our attention with his   
overall brisk pace and with Denzel Washington, who's never turned in a   
better performance.  He shows us Jake's contradictions and his   
complications; he's a man who wants the best for his son, but also   
desperately wants what's best for himself, and that inner struggle is   
what gives the film most of its emotional resonance.  (Washington's   
strong performance is more than enough to carry his costar, Ray Allen,   
who's strong on the court but could really use an acting coach.)  Lee   
also tosses in a couple of fine bit parts for Ned Beatty and John   
Turturro.
The film's plot isn't as easy to admire, and it has been criticized for   
being a bit rambling.  I'm not sure that's entirely fair; the criticism   
is, I think, due to the mistaken assumption that the film is, first and   
foremost, about a father-son relationship, or about basketball.  It   
isn't.  The game referred to in the title isn't just basketball -- it's   
also about the game of life, where all relationships can be tainted by   
the drive for power, or the love of money.  The film raises the question   
of whether any relationship -- even between a loving father and a loving   
son -- can ever be free from taint, and the answer seems to be no.  But   
Lee's script is nonetheless optimistic, suggesting that a contaminated,   
complicated relationship doesn't preclude real intimacy and caring.  He   
drives this point home with a seemingly disconnected subplot featuring   
Jake's relationship with a neighborhood prostitute, Dakota Burns.  Jake   
buys Dakota's time and favors, but the taint that implies isn't absolute   
 -- the somewhat unlikely couple manage to cultivate a genuinely caring   
relationship in spite of it.
There are, on the other hand, any number of very fair criticisms to be   
made of HE GOT GAME.  Washington's performance is so powerful, and the   
script so slanted in his direction, that the role of Jesus is   
overshadowed -- the script doesn't create a very convincing character,   
and Allen doesn't have the experience or skill to create one for us.  And   
Lee does make some unfortunate choices -- the film's epilogue has a   
syrupy tone that's reminiscent in an unpleasant way of the tacked-on   
conclusion of 1990's MO' BETTER BLUES, and his experiments with film   
stock and lighting might better have been left to Oliver Stone.
But the most serious criticism of the film has nothing to do with Lee's   
technique.  The unfortunate fact is that, while engrossing and enjoyable,   
the film isn't especially challenging or thought-provoking.  HE GOT GAME   
is a world apart from SHE'S GOTTA HAVE IT; Lee's early work, free from   
the demands of the mass market, was consistently challenging and   
stimulating.  GAME has a much more pre-digested feel.  It dissolves on   
the palate, light as a communion wafer; yet someone, it seems, has their   
eye on the collection plate.  No relationship is untainted, certainly,   
least of all a filmmaker's relationship to his audience; but it's still a   
small sin against cinema that the film isn't more challenging than it is.

Author
Jude Wanniski
I'm afraid Spike can do comedy ten times better than evoking
sympathy or tears. It certainly wasn't better than "Hoop 
Dreams." A pity considering how much potential his story-line
had -- the father (Jake Shuttlesworth) of the nation's top 
basketball prospect is given a secret furlow from Attica, so 
he can convince his son (Jesus Shuttlesworth) to go to the 
governor's alma mater.
I don't know why Spike underplayed it. Perhaps he's not hungry 
anymore. He's got the exposure. He's got the reputation. He's 
got the undivided attention of black movie-goers. Maybe he's 
got too many "yes men" around him now. Success has a way of 
filing down a person's sharp edges. 
Not much politically correct stuff in the movie. Interestingly,
Spike scripts in more subtle affection for Italians than they 
deserve. And the Hispano-black lead in the movie -- Jesus's 
girlfriend -- has the curious name "Lala Bonita." Funny, but 
kind of slap. Kind of like naming the lone blackman in a 
movie "Nappy Hamhock." _Boricua_ is thrown all over the flick 
as I guess the Puerto Ricuenos are beginning to shape 
black/inner city culture. And one of Jesus' gangsta friends 
is a very white looking Puerto Rican. Jesus' mother looks 
whiter than Lena Horne. 
I get the sense that Spike has turned the corner on his 
racial animus, if he ever had any. I know he disapproved of 
his father's second (white) wife. And then again maybe it was 
more complex than that. After all, I remember the racial "hype"
surrounding Spike Lee and "Do the Right Thing" and rap groups 
such as Public Enemy. 
Maybe I should have been suspicious when this film got a 
white-media 3+ stars. Traditionally, they used to show up on 
my TV screen to protest some of his best work -- "School Daze,"
"Do the Right Thing," "Jungle Fever" -- thereby elevating those
films to "must see" status. Hey, any black man causing 
consternation among the whitefolk, while producing good 
entertainment and yielding provocative racial dialogue is a 
"must see" in my book. Yet, there was nothing even redeemingly
risky in this venture.
The movie's failure all made sense to me by about 30 minutes
into the overdone Nike Ad. Think about the promo, all the 
cameos and the Public Enemy soundtrack, I understand what 
Spike Lee is into now -- making money off the presentation 
rather than the substance. His film had a quintessentially 
American/multi-cultural sheen to it, but jazz always seems to 
sneak into his movies. And whereas I've almost always found 
his movies having something in them for everybody, this 
effort fell short. Simply, it tried too hard.
I bet Spike hoped this film would end up being a "cross-over" 
bonanza. Yet, all it signalled to me is that he ready to 
"sell-out." Way too much Aaron Copeland in the soundtrack. 
Way too many slow-pans over meaningless pastoral settings. 
One wheat-field shot is too much! All the P.E. tracks used 
classic-rock riffs as the back-beat. The first scene, in fact, 
had a farm boy with corn-colored hair shooting a basketball. 
C'mon! Basketball might be American, but really, any more 
genuflecting to the whitefolk in a sport mostly dominated 
blacks is just a few steps above pan-handling.
As for the drama, Spike left all the dramatic material wrapped
up in its unopened box. Jesus remains the same as when he 
began, his father, virtually unchanged -- save his 70s 'fro 
that the furlow produces. Other characters remain the cardboard
cut-outs they are introduced as. I know Spike's been criticized
of this before -- no character development -- but at least in 
his earlier works, he used these cartoons for comic effect and 
some important social commentary. 
Perhaps there's a lesson drawn from his film and its artistic 
failure. In one scene, when an Italian agent tries to court 
Jake's son into jumping right into the NBA, Jesus says he's 
going to pick a "brother" as an agent. The agent quickly pulls 
out a wad of greenbacks and says something like "I'm white, 
you're black and the only thing that matters is green...this is
green." Well, now I know what Spike's grabbing for and you 
better believe it ain't the soul.
  -------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  Posted using Reference.COM                  http://WWW.Reference.COM 
  FREE Usenet and Mailing list archive, directory and clipping service 
  -------------------------------------------------------------------- 

Author
Paul B. Miller
        In the pre-release hype for "He Got Game," marketers made sure
that, by repeating the film's release date (May 1) over and over like
a mantra, it was engraved in our memory.  And yet a more appropriate
release date for the Spike Lee's new film would have been one month
before, on April 1, or the day after the NCAA Basketball Tournament
finals (Kentucky won again, in case you forgot). For without a doubt
one of the strongest sides of this solid but ultimately disappointing
film is its definitive commentary on the sleaze and hypocrisy of the
recruitment process in big-time college athletics.
Lee's portrait of Jesus Shuttlesworth, the most sought-after
high school basketball player ever, communicates a convincing moral
truism that all of us ordinary, anonymous people know or should know
already: that fame and stardom, those most envied and coveted of
attributes, are in many ways unenviable burdens, because you can no
longer be sure just who your friends are and just who is
gravy-training.  If you were Kobe Byrant, how complicated would it be
to go out and make a new friend?  Whom could you trust?
Jesus is in fact surrounded by Judahs, including his high
school coach, girlfriend, and uncle-guardian, who try to cash in on
his lucrative future.  He is left to fend for himself in a sea of
sharks, a feat requiring almost as much skill as on-court prowess.  In
one particular scene, an NBA agent tries to woo the him with a Rolex
and a Ferrari whose stereo system "costs as much as a small trailer
home.".  The real drama of the movie, however, revolves around a
certain irony: Jesus's father Jake (Denzel Washington) also wants to
profit off his son's talents.  If he can convince Jesus to attend Big
State University, the governor will cut short the time he is serving
in the state penitentiary (for having accidentally killed his wife,
Jesus's mother).  Is Jake a gravy-trainer like the rest?  Or is it a
father's prerogative, especially given his circumstances, to make such
a request of his son?
That dilemma unfolds brilliantly in the film, and Ray Allen's
performance and presence on the screen are a wonderful surprise.  His
voice and delivery qualify him as a bonafide talent. Director Spike
Lee deserves tremendous credit for both casting and directing here
(NBA stars Travis Best and Rick Fox also give credible performances).
And yet the film suffers from a certain unevenness.  The very least I
expected was unforgettable basketball scenes, and, granted, the
one-on-one match-ups between Father and Son (one flashback when the
father is twice the size of the son, one climactic scene when the son
is a head taller) are well done.  But the pick-up game depicted
towards the beginning of the film rather disappointing.  I have yet to
see a fictional "basketball movie" that successfully captured the real
rhythm of a full court game -- the moves, jump shots, steals, blocks,
dunks, and fast breaks.  While Lee assembles these elements in a
fast-moving sequence on a grandiose scale, with lavish cinematography
and the music of Aaron Copeland's "Hoe-Down," the scene suffers the
same misfortune as the cathedrals in Spain: that is, we are not
permitted enough visual distance to take in the entirety of the
spectacle.  Our vantage point is on the court, from within the lane,
and I somehow kept wishing I had a cheaper seat.  While other
reviewers have referred to Copeland's sound track as "unforgettable,"
I found the "Hoe-Down" sequence to be incongruous, the sounds coming
from the court drowning out the music and relegating it to the
background.  The "Appalachian Spring" introduction, accompanying
images of people playing basketball all over the country, is more
effective.
Those, however, are merely the quibbles of a reviewer who also
happens to be a basketball fanatic.  There are other weaknesses in the
film that are more serious. We all know that one of Spike Lee's
biggest problems as a director are the women in his films, and "He Got
Game" is no exception.  One of the potentially most interesting
aspects of the story is the relationship between Jake and his daughter
Mary (Zelda Harris), Jesus' younger sister.  Mary is a strong
character, whose relationship with her father is different from Jesus'
and whose independence adds to the complexity of the other characters.
Yet she dissapears almost entirely from the second half of the film in
favor of the manly one-on-one confrontation between Jesus and Jake.
Likewise, Jesus' Aunt Sally (Michele Shay) is a positive character,
one of the few who refuses to even discuss the idea of profiting off
her nephew, yet she too dissappears, never to be seen again, though
kowtowing Uncle Bubba (Bill Nunn) reappears in a new Lexus.  The other
women who frequent the film are, frankly, sluts and whores, from the
coeds at Tech University who like to sleep with basketball players, to
the bare-breasted sex-kittens whose services are hired to convince
Jesus to matriculate there.  Jesus's girlfriend Lala (Rosario Dawson)
doesn't fare much better.  Her self-serving financial motivation is
portrayed in a quasi-sympathetic light (there's no way her
relationship with Jesus will survive, why not make some money off
it?), but she also sleeps around behind his back, lies, and, in
another flashback, is shown to be the one entirely at fault for an
unwanted pregnancy.
But the episode that almost ruins the film, in my opinion,
involves the relationship between Jake and the (yet another!)
prostitute (Milla Jovich) whom he saves from the clutches of some evil
pimp.  Not only does she set aside her professional motives to
pleasure Jake free of charge, he, of course, practically reforms her
at the end.  Though the performances in this sub-plot are decent, how
can viewers possibly take such a preposterous cliche seriously?
In the end, we are left with a good film, but one with
serious faults.  I agree with Roger Ebert that the final scene is
"daring and original" but I am more wary of its effectiveness.  No
doubt "He Got Game" stands above "White Man Can't Jump," "Blue Chips,"
"Hoosiers," "Eddy," et. al, but "Hoop Dreams" retains the title as the
definitive basketball movie.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Touchstone Pictures
 Director: Spike Lee
 Writer: Spike Lee
 Cast: Denzel Washington, Ray Allen, Milla Jovovich, Rosario
Dawson, Hill Harper, Zelda Harris, Ned Beatty, Jim Brown
   Basketball is described in Spike Lee's latest movie as
"poetry in motion," but Lee attaches a cynical twist to that
notion.  We may root for our home team, but those of us
who were not born yesterday know that the game is not one
propelled exclusively by the fancy of an inspired muse but
one which is driven by the attraction of cold cash.  In "He Got
Game," just about everyone jumps through hoops to make up
for some lack: what is missing is not identification with a club
sporting your town on their shirts and jackets but the
avariciosu want of currency.  One guy wants money to buy
the latest Nike shoes, another for a Lexus, and a great
many can put the coin of the realm to good use to buy their
way out of the Coney Island projects.  In many cases, then,
the name of the game is not basketball.
   But for Jesus Shuttlesworth (Ray Allen), basketball is not
the means to an unrelated end but a purpose in itself.  In "He
Got Game," Allen--actually a pro basketball player with the
Milwaukee Bucks who can really act--plays a graduating high
school student in Spike Lee's native Brooklyn who has
received so many offers from colleges that he needs time to
consider his options.  Surprisingly enough, money does not
seem uppermost in his mind: this can be explained by his
disgust for the greed of those surrounding him.  Everyone
wants a piece of Jesus.  A slick sports agent for a pro team
shows him his Long Island home, which boasts a stable of
cars worth well over a million and a basketball court
built right into the dwelling that could have been used for four
bedrooms.  His girl friend Lala (Rosario Dawson), realizing
that she will lose Jesus when he goes off to college, cuts a
deal with an agent for her own financial gain.  His foster
father wants the lad to buy him a home in Long Island in
return for his paternal services over the years.  But the most
unusual exploitation comes from his own dad, Jake (Denzel
Washington), who is promised time off from his manslaughter
term in Attica if he can persuade his son to enroll in the
governor's favorite college.
   Despite the very natural desire of people to strive for their
own gain, it is ultimately Jesus's father who transcends selfish
advantage by breaking through to his deeply hostile son. 
After all, when you witness your mom's violent death at the
hands of your dad--even if your father did not desire her
demise--you are not going to take kindly to his influence.  To
Spike Lee's credit, the writer-director has his audience acutely
moved by Jake's plight, rooting for him to re-acquaint himself
with the antagonistic young man, while at the same time
indicating Jake's dark side in a series of flashbacks
throughout the 131-minute story.  Truth to tell what saves "He
Got Game" from a hackneyed albeit well-told narrative is
Lee's camerawork.  Coney Island, which forms the backdrop
to the account, has never looked so beautiful, with even the
freak show taking on the dimensions of a cultural institutions
and Nathan's hot dog emporium substituting for Lutece.  The
final image, Jake Shuttlesworth's coming full circle in his
relationship with Jesus, is priceless. 
   Though "He Got Game" is at heart a sentimental yarn about
the fragile bonds connecting father and son, and though Mr.
Lee appears to disapprove of the material base which
underlies both college and professional sports, the director
shows an affinity for the game of basketball.  Using slow-
motion photography, he does indeed prove that his hoop
dream is poetry in motion, as Malik Hassan Sayeed's camera
follows the orb on its recurrent expeditions to the basket. 
Denzel Washington, sporting a retro Afro above an expansive
breadth of facial hair, is not too convincing when playing
Jake's dark side, but when he turns on the nostalgia he
evokes compassion in all but the hardest of audience hearts. 
Ray Allen is surprisingly good as the movie's answer to
Michael Jordan and Rosario Dawson as girl friend Lala, Milla
Jovovich as the hooker who is saved by Jake, Ned Beatty as
Warden Wyatt and John Turturro in an uncredited role as a
big college coach provide a worthy ensemble.  The director
roasts whites and blacks alike for their avarice and brutality,
delightfully exaggerating the extent to which universities will
go to bring jocks to their campuses--even using bimbos to
feign instant infatuation with these alpha males.  Like the
others, Jake is out for himself, motivated by a need to get out
of Attica.  But he alone shows a real concern for his boy.  If
we are not for ourselves, who will be, writer Lee implies.  But
as the prophet Hillel continues, if I am not for others, what am
I?  Rated R.  Running time: 131 minutes.  (C) Harvey Karten
1998

Author
Michael Dequina
The tagline for He Got Game--"the father, the son, and the holy
game"--provides a very clear and accurate ordering of writer-director Spike
Lee's concerns in the film.  While the game of basketball is the film's
unifying subject, this uneven but engrossing drama is foremost an
exploration of a father-son relationship.
The father in question is Jake Shuttlesworth (Denzel Washington), a prison
inmate who is granted a temporary release to convince his son Jesus
(Milwaukee Bucks guard Ray Allen), high school senior and hoops superstar,
to attend the governor's university alma mater the following school year.
The task is not quite as easy as it sounds, for Jake's relationship with
his son became virtually nonexistent following the death of Jesus's mother
and Jake's imprisonment.  The issue of reconciliation is what drives He Got
Game, and Lee deftly escalates the emotional stakes by gradually revealing
Jake and Jesus's turbulent past and the tense circumstances that ultimately
led to their estrangement.
When staying with the driving father-son dynamic, He Got Game often
achieves moments of power, buoyed by a predictably strong performance by
Washington.  Allen is relaxed and assured in his acting debut, but his work
suffers away from Washington; when he is called on to carry scenes on his
own, he tends to stiffen up, and his line delivery comes off a bit flat.
As such, he is a slightly less-than-commanding presence during the
Jake-less scenes, in which Jesus deals with other pressures, such as his
sports-agent-pushing girlfriend Lala (Rosario Dawson) and Chick (Los
Angeles Laker forward Rick Fox), a baller from a prospective university,
who tempts Jesus with horny groupies.  Granted, the air of doubt works in
showing how vulnerable Jesus is to pressure, but it also diminishes
audience interest and involvement.
To be fair, Washington also suffers away from Allen, but this is because
of the comaparatively weak material he is saddled with.  Jake's unlikely
friendship with Dakota (Milla Jovovich), a prostitute who lives in the
apartment next door, is completely superfluous, not to mention
unconvincing; Lee offers no insight as to how or why Jake would develop any
feelings, deep or otherwise, for her.  Lacking in any payoff, and
showcasing an awful performance by Jovovich, this subplot just about begs
to be completely cut out.
He Got Game could have used a clearer focus, but what does come sharply
into view registers strongly: not just Jake and Jesus, but their and, above
all, Lee's passion for the game of basketball.  From the majestic, Aaron
Copland-scored opening shots of people of all ages and places shooting
hoops to the halftime cameos by various NBA stars (yes, including _him_,
who gets the honor of delivering the film's title line) to the late
glimpses of Jesus and Jake alone on different courts, Lee shows how easy it
is to fall under the sport's spell.  Audiences may leave He Got Game not
exactly loving the film, but it is quite possible that they could grow, to
quote the NBA's promotional slogan, "love this game."
mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mrbrown@ucla.edu
>My personal WWW siteshttp://welcome.to/mrbrown
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court: http://fly.to/michaeljordan
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak: http://fly.to/mj23
Personal Page: http://welcome.to/w3md
>Other WWW sites I work onhttp://www.HollywoodHotline.com
Albany Online: http://www.AlbanyOnline.com
Eyepiece Network: http://www.eyepiece.com
"I didn't know what to expect. It's like something you chase
 for so long, but then you don't know how to react when you
 get it.  I still don't know how to react."
--Michael Jordan, on winning his first NBA championship in 1991
...or, my thoughts after meeting him on November 21, 1997

Author
Alex Fung
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned.
    -------------------------------------------------------------
   The rhythmic, Buffalo Springfield-flavoured Public Enemy title track
   pervasive throughout Spike Lee's new film HE GOT GAME is quite a
   contrast to the explosively raw, ferocious "Fight The Power" which
   brilliantly opened the landmark DO THE RIGHT THING, but this is a
   markedly different sort of film.  It's not the equal of his 1989
   masterpiece -- few films are -- but HE GOT GAME is a splendidly
   entertaining piece of work, and probably the most accessible film in
   Mr. Lee's canon.  While it's primarily an intimate domestic drama
   focusing upon the tenuous relationship between estranged father and
   son, it's also a lamenting film which decries the corrupt world of
   amateur athletics.
   Exploitation of burgeoning athletic prospects isn't exactly a new
   theme, having been repeatedly addressed in numerous films of recent
   years, but what makes it so effective here is Mr. Lee's superb
   ability at creating a sense of community for his characters, which
   lends authenticity to the proceedings and makes the scenario all the
   more tragic -- while it's morbidly amusing to watch, what's
   disturbing about the scene where Uncle Bubba (Bill Nunn) greedily
   sinks his claws into top-rated high school basketball prospect Jesus
   Shuttlesworth (Ray Allen) is not the sheer unbridled parasitism of
   his gesture as much as it is the weary expression on Jesus' face,
   which immediately conveys the knowledge that such displays of greed
   are all too commonplace sights for him.
   Indeed, the film is as much about the loss of innocence as it is
   about the basketball experience.  We open with reverential scenes of
   the youth of America immersed in the joy of game, effectively backed
   by the evocative music of Aaron Copland -- hey, I'm not even a big
   fan of basketball, and yet I found it hypnotic and stirring -- and
   then watch as young Jesus progresses from an exuberant child who can
   triumphantly exclaim "Boo-yeah!" when beating his cousin on a video
   game to a jaded adolescent, pushed too hard by his father during his
   formative years and forced to support his family at a tender young
   age while required to keep a wary eye open for those who would
   befriend him for their own gain.  Pulled upon from all sides, Jesus
   is, through no fault of his own, dehumanized by those around him --
   he's a commodity, not a person.  (There's a sobering key scene late
   in the film where a character matter-of-factly explains to Jesus why
   he's being exploited -- it would almost make you despise the
   character, if it were not for the fact that in its own twisted way,
   it does make its odd sort of sense.)  To Jesus' dismay, even his
   young sister Mary (a splendid Zelda Harris) becomes temporarily
   corrupted by the greedy urchins hovering around him, seduced by
   dreams of wealth and prosperity.  Still, as a good filmmaker is wont
   to do, Mr. Lee conveys his message without preaching at the audience,
   expressed in an inventive and engaging manner.
   In fact, HE GOT GAME is hugely palatable for mainstream audiences
   principally due to the tempestuous relationship between father and
   son which serves as the heart of the film.  Jake Shuttlesworth
   (Denzel Washington), serving time for a crime which is only revealed
   at the mid-point of the film, is temporarily (and unofficially)
   released from jail to be sent on an unique mission; he's to try to
   persuade his son Jesus to sign on with Big State, the governor's alma
   mater, by weeks' end.  In return, Jake's promised the chance of early
   parole.  The only problem is that his relationship with his estranged
   son is in tatters, and Jesus, despite sorely lacking in guidance,
   nonetheless wants nothing to do with him.  Angrily shunned by his
   son, the scene where their paths first cross is shot in such a stark,
   unsensationalized manner that it's consequently fraught with genuine
   tension.  This doesn't play like melodrama; it has a verisimilitude
   of authenticity.
   There's been a good deal of press about certain preview screenings of
   the film which found audiences screaming aloud in disapproval of
   Jake's interracial love affair.  While I'm surprised that this
   innocuous little romantic angle has created so much controversy (Mr.
   Lee plays the race card much more provocatively in a conversation
   shared by two characters where they compare black and white women), I
   was also aghast when I saw this thread play out.  However, my
   consternation was with the superfluousness of this entire generic
   subplot, which is so potentless that it calls upon such familiar
   clichis as the good-hearted prostitute under the thumb of an abusive
   pimp.  It's true that Jake's been in jail for five-and-a-half years,
   but does he *really* need a love interest?  I found that it
   distracted from the reconciliatory thread between father and son with
   little gain in return.  Despite it all, model-turned-actress/folk
   singer Milla Jovovich fares well in her minor role, while Mr.
   Washington imbues Jake with shades of gentleness.
   Mr. Washington's such a charismatic actor that I've always wanted to
   see him play against type as an irredeemably nasty villain.  He of
   course doesn't here, nor does he really approach it, but it comes as
   no surprise that he's very good at layering darker aspects onto his
   character.  Mr. Washington is convincingly antagonistic when
   brutishly pushing and goading his young son, and does a solid job at
   depicting Jake's suppressed rage; we're incredulous to learn what
   crime had Jake committed, but a scene where he angrily blasts his
   basketball after a blow-up with Jesus dispels any doubts of a more
   volatile side of his character under the surface.  Still, Mr.
   Washington generates so much goodwill by his sheer amiable presence
   that we accept Jake completely.
   Mr. Lee is one of America's most important contemporary directors,
   and he's in top form with HE GOT GAME.  Always a spectacular visual
   storyteller, he employs his familiar bag of techniques (different
   film stocks, characters directly addressing the camera, insert shots,
   leaps between time frames, jump cuts, use of slow-motion, etc.)
   effectively throughout.  As with all of his films, this one has a
   great deal of heart -- at times it's extremely moving -- but I
   especially appreciated Mr. Lee's keen eye with the little touches;
   when Jesus tells his girlfriend Lala (Rosario Dawson) at one point
   that he loves her, you can just barely catch her momentarily
   flinching.
   The film's cast all turn in top-notch performances.  Mr. Washington
   demonstrates why he's one of our very best actors, while between this
   film and CROOKLYN, Ms. Harris clearly makes a case for herself as one
   of the top performers of her generation; she's terrific.  HE GOT GAME
   hinges on Mr. Allen in the pivotal role of Jesus, and the acting
   debut of the Milwaukee Bucks guard is legitimately superb, relaxed
   and convincing.  It's a remarkable turn, a genuine revelation.
   As good as the cast is, and as impressive as the contributions by
   cinematographer Malik Hassan Sayeed and editor Barry Alexander Brown
   may be, this is Mr. Lee's triumph.  Adeptly combining humour, drama,
   raw emotion and insight in affecting fashion, he once again
   demonstrates that as well as being one of the most controversial of
   directors, he's also one of the best.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"Unlike you, I'm tolerant of weirdness."
     - Jennifer Jason Leigh, CROOKED HEARTS

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
He Got Game (1998)
Denzel Washington, Ray Allen, Milla Jovovich, Rosario Dawson, Hill Harper.
 Written and directed by Spike Lee. 131 minutes.
R, 3 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
The tagline for Spike Lee's latest drama is "The Father, the Son and the 
Holy Game." The lead character's name is Jesus and they don't use the 
Spanish pronunciation. Although the story is set largely in impoverished 
areas, the Coney Island backdrops, packed with colorful storefronts, 
amusement park rides and acres of neon, give the film a romantic look of 
seedy grandeur. Aaron Copland's rich, melodramatic orchestral score is 
reminiscent of the music from films like "Rebel Without A Cause." Even 
the pop songs, by the reunited Public Enemy, are unusually somber and 
understated. It's clear that Lee intends this film to be far more than 
just another movie about sports and father/son conflicts. His goal is to 
make "He Got Game" a classic. 
Unfortunately, while Lee has crafted a film that looks and sounds 
terrific, he fails to make the central storyline as compelling. A week 
after seeing "He Got Game," the sounds and images still resonate in my 
memory, but the people don't. Populated with too many characters who are 
sketchy or unsympathetic, and burdened with a flat performance from first-
time actor Ray Allen, "He Got Game" narrowly misses making the all-
important human connection. The result is still a good film, but not the 
great one it could have been.
The story is straightforward enough. Jake Shuttlesworth (Denzel 
Washington,) serving a lengthy prison sentence for killing his wife, 
receives a offer from the warden. Jake's son Jesus (Allen) is the top 
high school basketball player in America and everyone wants a piece of 
what could be the next Michael Jordan. Resisting the lure of joining the 
NBA and gaining immediate wealth, the young athlete is determined to 
attend college, and has only a few days to choose from the hundreds of 
scholarships being offered him. The governor wants Jesus to attend his 
alma mater, Big State, and relays his proposition through the warden. 
Jake will be temporarily paroled, under the scrutiny of two officers. If 
he can convince his son to sign a letter of intent for Big State, Jake's 
sentence will be commuted. If not, it's back to the slammer for Dad. Of 
course, Jesus loathes Jake, so the task won't be an easy one.
"He Got Game" has two dominant themes; the exploitation of student 
athletes, and the estranged relationship between father and son. Both 
have been dealt with many times before, but if handled correctly, even 
the most well-worn themes can seem fresh. Of the two, Lee does better 
with the former than the latter. Jesus is virtually smothered by people 
who want to feed off his talent and suffers great stress from the 
pressure. While everyone from his uncle to his girlfriend angle for their 
piece of the pie, the media has already made the kid a star. Lee is a 
major basketball fan, and his commercials for sports shoes have made him 
richer than his movies, so he knows this world well. His portrait of 
sports stars as false gods is painted in broad strokes, but it works, 
thanks to Lee's great style. Highlights include a hilarious cameo from 
John Turturro as a college coach trying to woo the young man with an over-
the-top multimedia pitch, and a gaudy ESPN documentary called "Jesus of 
Coney Island." Subtle? No. Effective? Yes. To add authenticity, Lee 
peppers the film liberally with cameos from everybody from Reggie Miller 
to Michael Jordan.
The film's many basketball scenes are quite believable, because Lee hired 
the real deal to do the job. Jesus' high school teammates are played by 
Travis Best of the Pacers, John Wallace of the Raptors, Walter McCarty of 
the Celtics and Rick Fox of the Lakers. Unfortunately, Lee also cast a 
real basketball player in the lead role. Ray Allen of the Milwaukee Bucks 
plays Jesus and as an actor, well, Allen is a great ballplayer. 
Denzel Washington, who generally has trouble playing anyone other than a 
boy scout, is very effective as Jesus' father, a frustrated ballplayer 
who drove his son mercilessly, severely damaging the relationship with 
his boy long before the fateful incident with his wife. Washington gives 
a credible, layered performance that triumphs over the script's rough 
spots, even a superfluous subplot involving a battered hooker ("The Fifth 
Element's" Milla Jovovich,) but there's only so much he can do while 
working with an amateur. Allen's monotone performance lessens the impact 
of even the most dramatic scenes between father and son. 
The lack of well-rounded or sympathetic supporting players doesn't help 
the film, and casting Allen was a critical mistake, but not a fatal one. 
Despite its problems, "He Got Game" has tremendous style and a fair 
amount of substance. Not enough to make the film a classic, but more than 
enough to warrant a viewing. 

Author
Steve Kong
Sports movies are a hard genre to work with, especially if you don't want
to make a comedy or a family film - categories which most sports movies
fall into.  But, every once in a long while there comes a sports film that
is neither, and that really hits home.  The one that I remember most is
Field of Dreams.  I haven't seen a good sports film in a long time.
I'm certain that had He Got Game been done by any other writer/director it
would have failed, but in the hands of Spike Lee, He Got Game is one of the
best films of 1998 and will probably make my top 10 list.
Who's got game?  A kid named Jesus Shuttlesworth (Ray Allen), who's a
graduating senior at the real-life Lincoln high school on Coney Island.
Jesus is so good at basketball that every college wants him and every NBA
team wants him.  What is Jesus going to do?
Someone else has game also, though. Jake Shuttlesworth (Denzel Washington)
is the father of Jesus.  He's currently serving time in a prison with 15
years to go.  What landed Jake in prison?  He killed his wife.  With this
act, he split his whole family apart - turning Jesus into an embittered
young man who has taught himself to believe that he has no father.  With a
week to go before Jesus needs to decide about going to college or going
pro, the governor has a proposal for Jake.  He will try to reduce Jake's
sentence and help him get early parole if Jake will convince Jesus to go to
the governor's alma mater, Big State.
What Spike Lee does with He Got Game is amazing.  He slowly unravels a
story which on the surface looks and feels like a run-of-the-mill sports
film.  But underneath, he starts to reveal the pressure and events that
happen around a star basketball player ready to make "the most important
decision of his life."  Lee starts showing us that from sex, to money, to
new cars, the people around Jesus will try anything to convince him to do
what they want.  And with this, they also want a piece of what Jesus will
be making.
He Got Game relies directly on the relationship between the father and son.
 Onscreen this relationship lives, and lives only because of a brilliant
performance by Denzel Washington.  Washington puts his all onscreen and it
shows.  This time around, Washington is not playing an egghead - as in
Crimson Tide - or an everyday man - like in the forgettable but enjoyable
Fallen.  No, this time he plays a poor man with a lot of failings,
including the killing of his wife.  I walked in thinking that Washington
would play Jake as a hard-nosed embittered man, but my hunch turned out all
wrong.  The only embittered one was Jesus.  Washington plays Jake as a guy
who regrets most of the things that he has done in his life. 
The weak link in all of this is the stiff performance by Ray Allen.
Although Lee coerces Allen into a decent performance, it's not enough to
take He Got Game from a great film to an all-time great film.  It is a good
start for Allen, though, and I wish him well in his further acting jobs.
Spike Lee has always been a favourite writer and director of mine.  His Do
The Right Thing is one of my favourite films (and for those of you who
don't know me personally, my nickname is Mookie, which is the name of Lee's
character in Do The Right Thing.)  With He Got Game, Lee has one-upped
himself and this is now my favourite Spike Lee film.  Lee has a particular
style in the way that he shoots his films and this all shows in a wonderful
opening montage of people playing basketball across America.  This is one
of the best openings I've ever experienced and shows the love of basketball
that Lee has. 
What's interesting to note is that although He Got Game is about
basketball, there are no extended sequences of basketball in the movie.  We
only see a one-on-one game between Jake and Jesus.  We get some flashes of
basketball games, but the focus is never on the sport - Spike Lee uses it
to explore the things that go around the game.
Worth mentioning is the music by Aaron Copland, which is downright
American.  Copland's music along with Lee's imagery is wonderous.
Next to Ray Allen, there are two smaller weak links in He Got Game.  One is
a sub-plot about a prostitute (Milla Jovovich) and Jake.  And the other is
the awkward symbolic ending, which irked me the most.
He Got Game is a Don't Miss movie that never fails to entertain.  This film
is powerful, moving, and all the while it holds our attention with a
well-written relationship between a father and a son.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     HE GOT GAME, writer and director Spike Lee's indictment of the
pressure put on young athletes, starts with a beautifully choreographed
homage to the sheer joy of shooting hoops.  Filmed in slow motion by
Malik Hassan Sayeed, the camera caresses the ball in golden sunshine as
it spins high in the air on its way to the basket.  The players, who
live in poor environments in the country and in the ghetto, give it
their all even though most of them are playing solo.
     Easily the most striking choice Lee made for the film was that of
the score.  Heavy doses of Aaron Copeland music dominate the handsomely
photographed picture with smaller doses of rap music to contrast with
the classical.  Long after viewers have forgotten the storyline they'll
remember the film's sounds and sights.
     HE GOT GAME tells the story of the "Jesus of Coney Island."  In a
monotone performance lacking much depth, real-life basketball star Ray
Allen plays Jesus Shuttlesworth, the number one high school basketball
prospect in the nation.  With ESPN covering his personal life
reverentially as befits a sports god, the kid seems to have it all.
("Jesus is the best thing to happen to the game since tennis shoes,"
effuses one coach.)  And what he doesn't have people want to give to
him, albeit most of it illegally and with strings attached.  Jesus, who
appears at first as honest as his namesake, turns down all of the
lucrative, under-the-table offers.
     Slowly and deliberately the story makes us realize that there are
many rewards, from sex to "loans," that Jesus is more than happy to
accept as compensation.  This Jesus is tempted but isn't always strong
enough to refuse.
his girlfriend, the people around him are there for a piece of the
action.  They care about Jesus' money, but little for him as a person,
which only heightens his feeling of isolation.  (When Jesus asks for a
brother to be his agent, a fast-talking Italian-American, with a stable
of expensive racing cars to tempt him, offers a simple piece of advice:
"When making a business decision, the only color that matters is
green.")
     The movie's best performance is delivered by Denzel Washington in
the complex role of Jesus' father, Jake, who has killed his wife and now
languishes in prison until the governor releases him for a week.  The
condition for his brief time on the outside is that Jake must convince
Jesus to agree to go to the governor's alma mater, Big State.  If Jesus
signs with Big State, the governor will try to get Jake's sentenced
reduced.
     Since Jake killed his mother, the ever-cynical Jesus wants nothing
to do with him.  And he orders his sister, who lives in their apartment,
not to speak to their father, whom he considers just another "stranger."
Who is paying for their apartment and their expenses is one of the
questions that the story raises.
     Washington, playing a poor African-American rather than the well
educated, middle-class one that he normally plays, makes Jake into a
believably complicated individual, a likeable guy but one with many
faults.  One of the subplots has him helping an abused prostitute,
played by Milla Jovovich from FIFTH ELEMENT, who lives in the room next
to his in a fleabag hotel.  In flashbacks we see him drunk and verbally
abusing his young son on the basketball court.
     The movie has several problems other than Ray Allen's limited
acting ability.  The story has too many minor characters, including John
Turturro as a coach who uses prayer, multimedia glitz, and free girls to
attract Jesus to his college.  The film's female characters, with the
exception of Jesus' younger sister, exist only for sexual gratification
or temptation.
     Concluding with the same sense of magic with which it began, the
film manages to take the cliche of the big game that ends most sports
movies and give it a whole new spin.
     HE GOT GAME runs too long at 2:11.  It is rated R for sex, nudity,
violence, profanity, and brief drug usage and would be fine for older
teenagers.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Denzel Washington, Ray Allen, Rosario Dawson, Milla Jovovich, 
      Hill Harper, Zelda Harris, Jennifer Esposito, Bill Nunn, 
      Ned Beatty
Director: Spike Lee
Producers: John Kilik, Spike Lee
Screenplay: Spike Lee
Cinematography: Malik Hassan Sayeed
Music: Aaron Copland
U.S. Distributor: Touchstone Pictures
     Writer/director Spike Lee is known to be a huge basketball fan (to 
be specific, a New York Knicks fan).  Consequently, HE GOT GAME has been 
described as "Lee's basketball film."  Such a label is misleading.  Like 
the 1994 documentary, HOOP DREAMS, the basketball court is only an arena 
for a larger, deeper drama.  HOOSIERS is a basketball movie; HE GOT GAME 
is a story about life, relationships, and the pressures of fame.  Those 
in search of a film that ends with a championship match-up will be 
disappointed -- HE GOT GAME's only court action takes place in 
playgrounds and on the street.
     HE GOT GAME is ambitious in that it tells not one story, but two.  
In addition to exploring the fractured relationship between a father and 
son, Lee examines the ins-and-outs of the recruiting process, whereby 
under-the-table cash handouts and covert offers have become run-of-the-
mill.  In the world of "amateur" sports, the role of the actual game has 
been diminished; it's all about greed and pressure.  The focus in HE GOT 
GAME is on what transpires behind-the-scenes, not in front of the 
television cameras.
     The story opens with Jake Shuttleworth (Denzel Washington) serving 
a lengthy sentence in Attica for killing his wife.  Meanwhile, on the 
outside, his son, Jesus (Ray Allen), has become the top-rated high 
school basketball player in the country, and is being recruited by every 
major college.  In the words of one expert, he's "the best thing to 
happen to the game since the tennis shoe was invented."  The warden of 
Attica (Ned Beatty) comes to Jake with a deal:  convince Jesus to go to 
the governor's alma mater, Big State, and Jake's sentence will be 
reduced or commuted.  To allow Jake to make contact with his son, he is 
given one week of freedom.  There's a problem, though -- Jesus doesn't 
want to have anything to do with his father, and Jake's increasingly 
desperate attempts at a reconciliation run into a brick wall.
     The dynamic between Jake and Jesus is both believable and poignant, 
and it reminded me a little of the relationship at the core of IN THE 
NAME OF THE FATHER, where two emotional strangers come to understand 
each other.  The effectiveness of these scenes is due in large part to 
the always-reliable Denzel Washington, who successfully displays both 
sides of Jake -- the earnest, loving father and the man who ruthlessly 
pushed his son to succeed and accidentally killed his wife.  As Jesus, 
NBA player Ray Allen gives a less-convincing performance.  While he 
arguably does the best acting job of any basketball player to appear in 
a movie, there are times when Allen isn't the equal of the material.  
For example, note his stilted delivery during a conversation between 
Jesus and his sister, Mary (Zelda Harris), early in the film.
     The other aspect of HE GOT GAME is the high-pressure salesmanship 
designed to encourage Jesus to sign a letter of intent with a college or 
to hire an agent and go pro.  While there's something vaguely comical 
about many of these scenes, Lee conveys the strain that highly-touted, 
young athletes are under.  With surreptitious cash payments and all 
sorts of perks so readily available, it's understandable why some high-
schoolers make the choices and mistakes that they do.  In its depiction 
of this side of the sports business, HE GOT GAME makes an effective 
companion piece to HOOP DREAMS and BLUE CHIPS (which explored college 
recruiting from the coach's perspective).
     Beyond Washington and Allen, Lee has populated the film with a 
number of credible supporting performers.  Zelda Harris (the lead in 
CROOKLYN) is delightful as Jesus' little sister.  Rosario Dawson is 
convincing as Lala, Jesus' sexy girlfriend.  Bill Nunn and Hill Harper 
provide comic relief as Jesus' uncle and cousin, respectively.  And 
Milla Jovovich, best known for her work in THE FIFTH ELEMENT, is 
surprisingly sympathetic as a down-on-her-luck prostitute who connects 
with Jake during his week out of prison.  There are cameos from the 
likes of Charles Barkley, Larry Bird, Michael Jordan, Shaquille O'Neal, 
John Thompson, and Reggie Miller.
     Stylistically, HE GOT GAME is uneven.  From time-to-time, Lee and 
cinematographer Malik Hassan Sayeed employ certain camera tricks (much 
as they did in CLOCKERS), including warping the image and switching film 
stocks.  The intention is to draw the viewer deeper into the characters' 
psyches.  However, instead of pulling me in, this approach distanced me 
from the scene, making me aware that I was watching a movie.  I have 
never been overly fond of such "Oliver Stone-type" flourishes.  
     Ultimately, the material that comprises HE GOT GAME, while 
compelling and emotionally-satisfying, is not especially original.  In 
fact, this is essentially a familiar story told with consummate skill.  
While the father/son reunion gives the film its emotional core, the 
basketball recruiting sequences provide a cynical edge.  Narratively, 
however, HE GOT GAME is hurt by a contrived setup and a hokey, overly-
sentimental final scene. It's the stuff in between that makes this a 
worthwhile experience, which it surely is.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: May 1, 1998
Starring: Denzel Washington, Ray Allen, Rosario Dawson, Milla Jovovich,
Hill Harper, Zelda Harris, Jennifer Esposito, Bill Nunn, Ned Beatty
Directed by: Spike Lee
Distributed by: Buena Vista Pictures
MPAA Rating: R (sexuality, nudity, language, violence including a
beating) 
The genre of "basketball dramas" is indeed a narrow one, and very few
films fit the bill. Sports movies in general are hard to make, and most
gravitate towards family or comedy genres. It's good to see, then, that
Director Spike Lee has chosen to focus his movie away from the game
itself and towards the powerful character relationships that make this
movie the so very enjoyable product that it is. Here, basketball as a
sport is used only as an underlying and omnipresent motivation for the
entire cast, and the movie's players are stronger because of it. HE GOT
GAME is by far the most watchable, enjoyable, and well made film yet for
1998. 
The quandary that becomes the plot is an interesting one: Jake
Shuttlesworth (Denzel Washington) is a convicted murderer who is given a
mission from the state governor. If Jake can convince his son Jesus (Ray
Allen), the nation's number one high school basketball prospect, to play
for the guv's alma mater, then the governor will shorten Jake's sentence
considerably. Jake, who's looking at another fifteen years, jumps at the
chance - but it won't be easy for him. Jesus has already been scouted
and contacted by every major university with a basketball program, and
has even been offered a chance to skip college and make the jump
straight to a lucrative career in the pros. To top it off, Jake only has
a week until the deadline set by the NCAA for all athletes to declare
their intentions. 
As the movie progresses, Lee introduces a great deal of animosity
between Jake and Jesus, which only hinder's Jake's cause. Neither of the
two actors here are particularly strong, but they are realistic, which
makes their conflict believable and solid. The drama that plays out
between them becomes surprisingly deep and very dynamic: the movie
follows not one but two different stories that are very critical to each
other's believability. Lee masterfully helms the dual picture, creating
atmosphere by including some inspiring moments of photography (he uses
camera tricks similar to those in NIXON - varying speeds, angles,
lighting, and pacing). The picture is topped off by a fantastically
dynamic score, mixing the brass oriented strains of Aaron Copland's
music with the steady beat of Public Enemy. Written by Lee as well, the
script oscillates between moments of affable humor and solemn drama. 
The audience can get very in touch with this movie. Unlike most movies
which use the foregone edge of pop culture to seduce the teenage and
Generation X demographics, the existence of it in HE GOT GAME is so
inbred with the movie that it does not detract from the film's value.
Jesus, as he is being scouted, is drawn and repulsed by the moral
excesses of drugs, alcohol, sex, money, and other forms of materialism -
all illegal in some way. The movie touches on human emotions that are
deep in scope, as well as pop culture issues which are limited in
vision. HE GOT GAME is, as mentioned, a dynamic experience as well as
enjoyable and worthwhile one - and will most likely be among the top
films of 1998.
FINAL AWARD FOR "HE GOT GAME": 3.5 stars - a great movie.

Author
Omar Odeh

 It would be pointless for me not to admit at the outset that I have
always held great esteem for Spike Lee and his films. And just in case
I have left anyone in doubt, that means I find it extremely difficult
to provide objective evaluation in this regard. It is some thing I
have proven incapable of time and again, despite good advice on this
subject from Christian Metz.  Nonetheless I am going to try to make a
convincing and unbiased case for He Got Game as one of the best films
of the year. Lee is one fo the more prolific filmmaker's working today
having released virtually a film a year since his first feature.  This
is neither good nor bad, although it might be an indication of a type
of inferiority complex Lee has alluded to regarding the facility white
director's have in marshalling finacing. His trajectory over the years
has had peaks (Do The Right Thing, Mo' Better Blues) and valleys
(Clockers). I am still convinced that keeping faith after being denied
accolades for Do The Right Thing and Malcolm X at various venues (the
two films he considers to be his best) was not an easy task; something
that clearly showed in his filmmaking post-Malcolm X. With He Got
Game, however, Lee truly impresses as he once did.
    It has been implied that an important reference point for He Got
Game is Hoop Dreams. This comparison seems to miss the point. Lee's
film transcends both the situation as well as the shortcomings of the
latter film. (These are well treated in Cineaste Vol.  XXI, No.3) He
Got Game introduces viewers to Jesus Shuttlesworth, the number one
highschool basketball prospect. The film chronicles the decisions he
faces and the contradictions and hypocrisies people begin to contrive
in view of his potentially lucrative situation. The film is an essay
on the dignity and poise needed to go through circumstances such as
the ones Jesus is in. It is clearly not to relate in a realistic or
naturalistic way the pressures Jesus is under, or the cruelty of the
recruiting system. Nor is it as mundane a venture as simply
'fictionalizing Hoop Dreams'. Lee makes this clear from the opening
frames shot in slow motion, alluding to basketball as a heroic almost
spiritual experience. His intentions are reinforced by the scrrenplay
wahich proposes one of the most ludicrous setups in recent
memory. Clearly this is not a setting or situation that is meant to be
taken literally but rather a grotesque carricature designed to provoke
an interrogation by the viewer. For those still unconvinced, consider
the scenes in which Lee overtly undermines the narrative either
through his patented direct address scenes or the roll call
sequence. These scenes reaffirm an intention not to adress the
spectator through the narrative itself but through what this
hyperbolic scenario alludes to.
    The photography colludes perfectly to complement this
intention. Two things are made very clear. the first is that Lee has
gotten very comfortable shooting commercials, the second is that he
has somehow also maitianed his poise as a craftsman. The style of the
basketball scenes with multispeed photography and luminescent colours
presents the TV commercial aesthetic as a parodic device. The players
are a marketing tool before the first contract is even signed or the
first TV camera ever arrives. In shooting the basket ball scenes this
way the associations between what is happening on the court, in the
players minds (projecting themselves as sports celebrities) and in the
viewers' minds is collapsed. There is something almost sinister in
this depiction in marked contrast to those that graced the opening
titles.  Lee mixes styles to deliver such effects several times. The
light on the Milla Jovovich character is rarely motivated and almost
angelic despite some clear shortcomings of the character. The
high-contrast look to the team introduction sequence is yet another
example. There is nothing transparent or understated about the
camerawork, just as there is nothing naturalistic or 'real' about the
screenplay. It is a very apt marriage of style and content to make the
point that it is beneath the situations or events that the real
discussion is happening in this film. It is a very eleagant way to
give the material some weight; a difficult task in films that center
on sports.
    In fact much more than a 'sports film', He Got Game is truly
tragic.  The scenes between Jesus and his Sister, or The Sister and
the Father, ring with a certain intensity that I am not ashamed to
admit had me fighting back tears. This tragedy is woven into the very
texture of the film: In spite of any good fortune that may befall
Jesus Shuttlesworth, the cost at which it has come is truly horrific.
-- -Omar Odeh http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Theater/3920

Author
Marty Mapes
**1/2 (out of 4) When he's on his mark, Spike Lee is one of America's most
evocative directors. The look and sound of a well-made scene can make you
nostalgic for a time and place you've never experienced. 
DO THE RIGHT THING put the audience right in the Bedford-Stuyvesant
neighborhood of Brooklyn on the hottest day of summer in 1989.HE GOT GAME
puts us in Coney Island during a May weekend in 1998. Lee's decision to use
Aaron Copland music for the score to HE GOT GAME is unexpected, and the
results are surprisingly effective. The music takes the Coney Island story
and makes it representative of the whole nation. And why not? Basketball is
as American as George Washington, apple pie and Aaron Copland. The daring
decision proves that Lee's instincts are very good when it comes to evoking
a time and place. 
School's almost out. High School kids are thinking about graduation and
college. One kid in particular, Jesus Shuttlesworth (that's "Jee-zus", not
"Hay-soos", played pretty well by Ray Allen, an NBA athlete), has to decide
which of the many scholarships he will accept. The whole country is waiting
for his decision because he is the best high school basketballer in the
country. 
Shuttlesworth the elder (Denzel Washington) is in prison for the murder of
his wife. He is promised a quick parole if he can convince his son to sign
with the governor's alma mater. He's strapped to a radio transmitter and
released to find and convince his son. Jesus gave up on his father long ago
and wants nothing to do with him, making Shuttlesworth's task all the more
difficult. 
There are myriad relationships in HE GOT GAME, fraught with all sorts of
almost melodramatic conflict. No two people meet without having some sort of
deeper relationship. For this, Spike Lee should be praised. In lesser films,
characters share the screen but exist in different universes - they trade
dialogue but they don't really talk to each other. 
Not so in this film. For example, Shuttlesworth runs into some of Jesus'
friends. We know all of the characters on screen, but they have never met
each other. Everyone involved is motivated by the same objective - to do
what's best for Jesus - but they interact with a certain amount of hostility
and mistrust. Shuttlesworth suspects the youths of golddigging, and they
know of Jesus' hatred for his father. The characters are solid in their
integrity. Nobody is played up as "the bad guy" because each person is true
to what they know about Jesus. We may be frustrated that they can't
cooperate, but the characters are rightly jealous and mistrustful.  
However, the relationship that matters most in this film, that of Jesus and
his dad, feels contrived. The betrayed son and overbearing father are more
icons than characters. Some twist in their predictable relationship would
have made them more real, more human. A small deviation from the
stereotypical father-son conflict could have given the movie more
credibility, and could have even added an element of irony, which would have
helped a lot. Instead, we quickly recognize these archetypes and then,
having identified them, dismiss them. 
Relationships aside, some of the characters suffer from Spike Lee's
cynicism. Bill Nunn plays one such character. Nunn (who was great as the
sullen, stubborn Radio Raheem in DO THE RIGHT THING) is Jesus' golddigging
uncle, whose only apparent interest in the boy is the money he feels he is
owed for bringing up the Shuttlesworth children IN LOCO PARENTIS. The prison
warden (acting on behalf of the governor) is another. The warden and
governor manipulate and toy with Shuttlesworth for the apparent sole reason
that Lee's wants his filmed world to be cruel. 
If one insists on crediting these characters with motives, then they must be
unbelievably selfish or inexplicably evil. But these characters are not
handled as motivated people, they are handled as obstacles in the
Shuttlesworth environment. The presence of these two-dimensional characters
only draws attention to the fact that many of the other characters were much
better developed. It's an unfortunate aspect to a movie with lots of potential. 
One final comment is worth mentioning. Without giving anything away, I can
say that Lee made another daring but effective decision in making the final
scene mystical and metaphoric (with the added pomp of Copland's score). If I
had liked the body of the movie better, the ending would have been as
interesting and as perfect as the ending to 2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY or the
ending to BREAKING THE WAVES. The ending was still interesting and touching,
but because the movie wasn't as grand as it set out to be, the ending felt a
little self-indulgent on Lee's part. 
Spike Lee's DO THE RIGHT THING was excellent. Ever since then, his films
have captured some of that excellence in part, but never the quality of the
whole. HE GOT GAME is great for looking at a sense of time and place and at
the web of relationships that describes the community in the film, reasons
enough for setting this film above many others. But gaps in other
departments keep this Spike Lee Joint from being another masterpiece.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
David Sunga
Starring: Denzel Washington, Ray Allen, Rosario Dawson, Milla Jovovich,
Hill Harper
Ingredients: 
High school basketball player, father out of prison, temptation, trying
to reconnect with children. father/son relationship
Synopsis: 
Jesus Shuttlesworth (NBA Milwaukee Bucks star Ray Allen) is a lonely
high school basketball star who has never forgiven his father for the
accidental killing of his mother during an argument long ago. His
well-meaning father Jake Shuttlesworth (Denzel Washington) pressured
Jesus from birth to become a great ball player, alienating the child
through incessant, demanding training, before being jailed for the
murder and carted away. 
Years later the talented Jesus is about to graduate from high school,
and everyone in the world is out to exploit the kid's talent, from
college recruiters offering unofficial hookers, to agents offering
sports cars, fame, and the fast life. Even his girlfriend, uncle, and
coach cannot be trusted. Everyone wants to use Jesus as a vehicle for
self-enrichment. Jesus faces temptation and the risk of exploitation at
every turn.
One day the governor offers Jake the chance to get out of prison early
if he convinces Jesus to enroll at the governor's alma mater. He gives
Jake one week of supervised freedom to make it happen or go back to
jail. Jake knows it's exploitation, but this is the only opportunity for
him to try to reconnect with his alienated son. He takes the deal. 
A subplot involves Milla Jovovich as a jaded prostitute whom Jake
discovers in a seedy motel, and tries to aid.
Opinion: 
HE GOT GAME is not a sports action vehicle; it's a father/son film, a
good solid project by director Spike Lee. It's not often that we
moviegoers get to see a film about love (other than the lusty romantic
sort), but HE GOT GAME is about a father and son trying to reconnect,
and their love must break tough barriers. 
At the same time, another major theme of HE GOT GAME is exploitation. In
our society it is sometimes assumed that Hollywood and sports
celebrities who accumulate material wealth and fame have "got it made"
and are happy. But in HE GOT GAME the only love that counts is the one
that's real. To other people Jesus seems on the brink of stardom and
happiness, but Jesus may actually be on the brink of unhappiness - - of
discovering how much trusted people are using him for their own greedy
purposes. 
HE GOT GAME is part of an overall trend in 1990s film - - of the
emerging theme of the awareness of mass manipulation. In SCREAM the
movie characters know they are part of a film. In THE GAME and in DARK
CITY we see an overall theme of manipulation by unseen hands.  Next
month in Jim Carrey's THE TRUMAN SHOW (which is similar to DARK CITY
only it should be called BRIGHT CITY) we will again get to ponder the
theme of Hollywood manipulators manipulating characters and situations
like puppets for commercial gain. It's almost as if these days film is
looking inwards on its exploitive, voyeuristic, and commercialist
aspect. In HE GOT GAME, the glitz and glamour of stardom is shown to be
an empty, friendless "tears-of-a-clown" world - - a mind game where
greedy people manipulate each other for money. I predict this
interpretation will sharpen and continue in other films this year.
There are a few minor things that could have been done a little stronger
in HE GOT GAME: The music used Americana and fiddle in some parts of the
film but rap in other parts, whereas it might have been stronger if the
music was a consistent style. There also seem to be two distinct endings
to the film (a real ending followed by another, symbolic, ending) rather
than one. Finally, when Big Time Willie (a small time crook) rides Jesus
around in his convertible and gives him a long-winded rundown on the
various temptations of the inner city, Willie's speech seems contrived
for the audience rather than for Jesus. These three things could have
been sharper, but are still done sufficiently well.
For you basketball fans out there, there are also some interesting
cameos by familiar NBA faces: Shaq, Jordan, Pippen, Reggie Miller, and
coaches Rick Pitino (Celtics) and George Karl (Sonics). 
There is solid acting and cinematography in HE GOT GAME, and it delivers
an articulate viewpoint on our family values and on our society's
values. As Malone of the NBA's Utah Jazz would say, HE GOT GAME
delivers. 

Author
Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association'
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
Depending on your preference, critics have debated for quite awhile now
on what exactly Spike Lee's masterpiece is.  Perhaps he hasn't made it
yet but in my opinion he has.  It is without a doubt 1989's 'Do the
Right Thing'.  As much as I admired 'Malcolm X' from 1992, I found it to
be too long, too preachy and a film not to be understood by everyone but
it is still a landmark film from a historical perspective.  'Do the
Right Thing' was one of the best films from 1989 and should have
received a Best Picture nomination in place of the manipulative 'Dead
Poet's Society' and 'Do the Right Thing' is on the American Film
Institute's list as a nominee to be included as one of the top 100
movies in the first century of film (1896-1996).  The honor is scheduled
to be held sometime in June.
'Do the Right Thing', 'Malcolm X' and Lee's 1996 sleeper 'Get on the
Bus' all made my top 10 list in their respective years and another
stellar effort as writer and director is put forward by Lee in 'He Got
Game'.
Denzel Washington is Jake Shuttlesworth, a convict in Attica's maximum
security penitentiary, serving what is believed to be a 21 year sentence
after being convicted of murder in the accidental death of his wife in a
domestic dispute involving their young son, Jesus.  Yes, that is their
son's name, Jesus, pronounced the same way as the biblical figure but
Jesus is actually named after another basketball player with the same
name.  After a unique opening showing slow motion basketball drills by
young people all over the United States, the story opens at Attica where
the warden (Ned Beatty), has a meeting with Jake.  He tells Jake that
his son Jesus is the number one prospect in the entire U.S. and that if
Jake can convince his son to play basketball at the governor's old
school, that an early release for Jake may be possible.  Jake has served
six years and tells the warden he has 15 left.  Jake agrees and is
escorted by two state chaperones who keep tabs on Jake using an
electronically monitored homing device strapped to his ankle and rules
of protocol are strictly enforced in contacting them while he is out of
the slammer.  Jake then meets with his son after his daughter takes him
back home.  The son is played by real NBA player Ray Allen who does a
good job but who shouldn't quit his day job.
What struck me as being overtly professional is the way the film doesn't
try to throw too much at the audience and overwhelm them with all the
trappings of college life.  The seduction of money, cars, women and
other forms of pampering are not overbearing in the film as Lee makes
his point and then moves to another scene before we, the audience, can
get too angry at the degrading lengths to which schools will go to
secure a player and possibly destroy them with underhanded corruption.
Is there any other kind?  Also, Lee makes certain that the father/son
relationship never comes to a complete formation from a sentimental
stand point and this is an admirable quality which keeps the film from
becoming pretentious.  Be forewarned that 'He Got Game' is extremely
adult oriented and really isn't a film you can take your mother to see.
Regardless of that, it works as social commentary, entertainment and is
a film that makes its high moments believable and at times tragic.  It
maintains a smooth and even flow from start to finish.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Scott Renshaw
     As well-known as Spike Lee may be as a film-maker or spokesman for
African-American causes, he may be equally well-known as a basketball fan.
Most Americans first saw Lee's work in Nike commercials of the late 80s,
featuring Michael Jordan and Lee himself as SHE'S GOTTA HAVE IT character
Mars Blackmon.  Since then, Lee has become a much-lauded film director,
but he has also become a vocal court-side fixture at New York Knicks
games, moonlighting as director and narrator of Nike ads supporting
women's basketball.  Make no mistake, Spike loves his hoops.
     I can't help but feel that love clouded Lee's judgment as he put
together HE GOT GAME.  The story deals with the strained relationship
between convicted felon Jake Shuttlesworth (Denzel Washington) and his
teenage son Jesus (with the Biblical, not Spanish, pronunciation, and
played by Milwaukee Bucks guard Ray Allen).  As Jake finds himself out of
prison after nearly six years, he tries to re-connect with his son and
daughter (Zelda Harris), only to find Jake deeply embittered and unable to
forgive.  Jesus also happens to be the #1 high school basketball prospect
in the nation, which is the reason his father is on the streets again.
The governor wants Jesus to attend his alma mater Big State, and offers
Jake the prospect of early parole if he can persuade his son to sign a
letter of intent.  Unfortunately, Jake is competing with plenty of other
people -- Jake's uncle (Bill Nunn), his girlfriend (Rosaria Dawson),
agents, college coaches and various hangers-on -- who all hope Jesus will
show them the money if they show it to him first.
     The corrupt race to recruit top high school athletes isn't exactly
fresh subject matter, having already appeared in the 1994 film BLUE CHIPS.
Lee puts a humorous spin on some of the ridiculous excesses of the
process, but his real chance at originality would have been putting us
inside the head of the young men, most from impoverished backgrounds,
facing these dizzying attempts to influence.  That's somwhere Lee and
first-time actor Ray Allen never take us, allowing us to see the insanity
without allowing us to understand how Jesus really feels about it.  Allen
looks comfortable enough on screen, but his character is too passive, so
fundamentally decent he never seems fazed by anything.  Lee has a lot of
stuff he wants to show us; Jesus's role is more or less to absorb it all.
     As it turns out, Lee has so much to show that he keeps getting
sidetracked from the one undeniable strength of HE GOT GAME, the
relationship between Jake and Jesus.  Washington is typically impressive,
most notably in a pair of dynamic schoolyard sequences:  relentlessly
driving young Jesus to improve his game in a flashback, then competing
with Jesus in a one-on-one game.  Both sequences tear into the heart of
Jake's sense of his own lost opportunities, burning with the intense
competition between father and son and unspoken desires to return to
simpler times.
     If Lee had centered on that relationship, HE GOT GAME might have been
a truly memorable film.  Yet Lee keeps turning his attention elsewhere --
a strange sub-plot involving Jake's relationship with a young prostitute
(Milla Jovovich), pointless banter between Jake and his two parole
officers.  Mostly, however, he's distracted by basketball, blasting heroic
Aaron Copland compositions at every slow-motion image of schoolyard ball.
There's enough thematic material here for two films; Lee decides to make
them both simultaneously.  The resulting film feels scattershot, heavy on
interesting images and ideas but light on cohesiveness.  Somewhere in
there is an engrossing family drama, often relegated to the nosebleed
seats while Lee keeps pulling us courtside to watch his inner city story
with a basketball backdrop turn into a basketball story.

Author
Christopher Null
     If Spike Lee weren't so self-absorbed, he would probably be one of the
best filmmakers around today.  Instead, he gets caught up in camera tricks,
mood lighting, and abrupt editing in an apparent attempt to keep any
audience so confused trying to figure out what he is doing that they cannot
become emotionally involved in his films.
     HE GOT GAME, the latest Spike Lee joint features NBAer Ray Allen as
Jesus Shuttlesworth, the top high school basketball player in the country. 
As he is pondering his future after graduation, he is surrounded by friends
and family trying to help him with his decision without really looking out
for his own best interest.  Among those trying to help is his father, Jake,
played by Denzel Washington, who has been temporarily released from the
state penitentiary under orders to get Jesus to sign with the governor's
alma mater.
     Unlike most movies that star pro athletes, HE GOT GAME does not fail
because of Allen's acting shortcomings.  He, and the other pro basketball
players featured in the film, are surprisingly solid.  Instead, the film
comes up short primarily because Lee does not allow the audience to get
involved with the characters until the last half-hour of the film.  Lee's
obsession with technical gadgetry in this film represents a disturbing trend
in his work.  Where in earlier films like DO THE RIGHT THING and MALCOLM X,
his unconventional camera moves and effects only seemed to come in when we
least expected them to heighten the emotion, in more recent films like
CLOCKERS and HE GOT GAME, Lee's effects serve to keep us at arms length.
     Despite this apparent formalism through the majority of the film, HE
GOT GAME still contains a strong emotional power near the climax, when Lee
finally lets up on the effects.  Spike Lee is definitely a talented
filmmaker, but if his next project is going to continue this trend toward
formalism, I hope it's a music video.
-Christopher Null  /  null@sirius.com  /  Writer-Producer  / 
http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Wallace Baine
The main character's name is Jesus. The movie's tag line is `The father,
the son and the holy game.'
Allegories don't get more obvious than that, but despite the explicitness
-- or maybe even because of it -- Spike Lee's heartfelt `He Got Game'
transcends its sports-movie orientation to become a convincingly
unsentimental examination of a father's tough love of his gifted son. And
we're not talking about that Father or that son.
Lee's enthusiasm for basketball, specifically the New York Knicks, is in
fact more famous than any of his movies. `He Got Game' is easily one of the
most eloquent odes to hoops committed to film and if you figured Spike Lee
would be the last director on earth to fall for mytho-poetics, you
underestimate the depth of his love for this game. A picturesque opening
montage shuttles from farm boy to ghetto kid and several demographic shades
in between, all engaging in the primal slo-mo of the well-executed jump
shot. Lee's lovingly rendered shots of the ball's arc through the air
recalls the famous bone toss in `2001: A Space Odysessy.' Even the
bombastic opening score by John Williams is jarringly unlike Spike.
>From that aching beginning comes a penetrating story of dubious redemption
involving one Jake Shuttlesworth (Denzel Washington), an aging ex-hoopster
serving hard time in Attica for accidentally killing his wife in a domestic
dispute. On the outside, Jake's son Jesus (pronounced just like a certain
King of the Jews) has blossomed into the nation's most highly touted
high-school basketball player. A lanky forward with Jordan-like moves and a
killer instinct on the court, Jesus is struggling to stay real amidst the
swirl of attention from colleges, sports agents, the media and friends and
family of less-than-pure motives.
The warden of Attica offers Jake a deal. If he can convince his son to sign
with the governor's alma mater, a school called Big State, then Jake's
sentence will be shortened considerably. Problem is, Jesus has nursed a
murderous resentment against his father for the murder of his mother. With
one week left before the deadline to state his intentions for his future,
the last thing Jesus needs is to deal with a father he hasn't seen in six
years.
`He Got Game' is gimmicky. Spike Lee's celebrity in the world of big-time
basketball allows him to line up a number of heavyweights -- from college
coaches like Dean Smith and John Thompson to pro players like Reggie
Miller, Shaquille O'Neal and His Airness -- to sing the praises of Jesus in
a faux SportsCenter report. The young man's first name is exploited in any
number of hokey media puns (`Jesus Saves' trumpets Sports Illustrated).
Underneath the hokum, however, is a movie worth savoring. Holed up in a
foul, dingy hotel, Jake attempts to get the ear of his son while making
time with a battered white prostitute (Milla Jovovich) and keeping at bay
the two cantakerous parole officers assign to birddog him (one of whom is
the wonderfully gruff Jim Brown).
At some point, however, the story finds it teeth in the travails of Jesus,
played with understatement by real-life NBA star Ray Allen. Like his
namesake seeking righteousness in a cesspool of licentiousness, Jesus is
intent on playing by the rules even when he is surrounded by corrupted
people with their own agendas who see Jesus as a potential cash cow
including his coach, his girlfriend and even his uncle and legal guardian.
With only his kid sister and his loyal cousin Booger (wasn't that the
Apostle Paul's nickname?) to trust, Jesus navigates the money-changers,
keeping his intentions to himself. Jake's job is to convince his son that
he's not just trailing the golden goose like everyone else, which is going
to be tough since he's got his own agenda.
The difficult relationship between Jake and Jesus is revealed in fitful
flashback as we observe an unforgiving Jake pushing his son to exploit his
talents to the fullest. When the eventful showdown comes between father and
son, it comes on a basketball court. 
`He Got Game' certainly has it excesses and missteps, the chief among them
Jake's tryst with the hooker, a subplot that only adds length to the movie.
But Spike Lee's respect -- nay, worship -- of basketball is contagious and
his audacious metaphors give shape to a powerful story of a father's
efforts to save his son. And we all know a thing or two about that story.

Author
Matt Williams
Spike Lee tackles the subject of basketball in his new movie, He Got
Game. However, this isn't your traditional basketball movie (in fact,
aside from short clips, the game is only played once during the movie).
Instead, the film works best as a relationship drama...detailing the
estrangement between father and son.
Jake Shuttlesworth (Denzel Washington) has been imprisoned for the last
six years, when the warden (Ned Beatty) offers him a deal which could
grant him a pardon.  It seems that Jake's son, appropriately named Jesus
(Ray Allen), has become the country's top basketball prospect.  If Jake
can convince Jesus to enroll in the governor's alma mater, Big State,
the governor might find it in his heart to cut Jake's time in prison
short.
The problem is Jake and Jesus haven't been on talking terms since Jake
killed Jesus' mother.  Jesus has raised himself and his sister Mary
(Zelda Harris), and wants nothing further to do with his father.  Jake
has one week to reconcile with his son before the NCAA deadline...and it
won't be an easy task.
With the deadline looming, everyone wants a piece of Jesus.  His family,
his coach, his schoolmates, and even his girlfriend all have angles, and
there's seemingly no one that Jesus can trust.  It's not a good time for
a reconciliation.
The pressures of basketball have been explored several times before, but
He Got Game does an adequate job at showing the temptations and dangers
involved.  However the more interesting story here is the family
relationship between father and son.
But the film is easily sidetracked, offering up plenty of boring
subplots that add little to the story.  As a prime example, take Jake's
romantic involvement with Dakota (Milla Jovovich), a hooker with a heart
of gold. What does this add to the movie?  Another stereotypical
character and an unexploited chance for Denzel's acting skills (which
could have been put to better use by furthering the story).
Denzel Washington delivers the strong performance he is known for, but
the wildcard in the movie is Ray Allen.  He performs better than your
typical athlete-turned-actor, but (a fact which is particularly obvious
when he's paired up with someone of Denzel's caliber) his talents truly
reside on the court rather than the set.  Spike Lee would have done his
movie a favor if he hired an actor rather than an athlete.
The central plot of He Got Game, however, is still compelling enough to
recommend the movie purely on its own merits.  As a Spike Lee movie it
is a little disappointing.  It's not among his best work, but neither is
it down among his worst.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Homer Yen
"He Got Game" is the kind of unique movie that gives you a peek into a
world that few of us can ever be a part of.  It's real focus is on the
temptations that bombard Jesus Shuttlesworth (NBA star Ray Allen), who
has long endured a life of hardship but is on the verge of entering the
promised land.  Now, as the country's #1 high school player, he is
constantly being hounded by sports agents and college recruiters.  Jesus
is no longer just another person.  He has become a commodity, and the
trading environment is fierce and unscrupulous.  
The Governor, who is a huge college basketball fan, hopes that Jesus
will attend his alma mater, the fictional Big State.  The governor
offers a deal to Jake (Denzel Washington), Jesus' father, who is serving
time in jail.  Get him to go to his alma mater and Jake's sentence will
be reduced.  Jake is released for a week in order to persuade him.  But
Jesus hates his father, blaming him for the destruction of their family.
Jake is not only trying to convince Jesus to go to Big State, but also
wants to use his precious time to ask for his son's forgiveness and
impart a little advice as only a father can.  Much of this movie focuses
on Jake's poignant attempt to reconnect with his son and society.  He is
a simple man and looks for any glimmer of hope.  Jake also befriends an
abused prostitute (Milla Jovovich).  While this chance relationship may
clash with the rest of the film, it does allude to the tough choices
that we face in light of extraordinary circumstances.  He desperately
tries to reacquaint himself with his son, but Jesus is immersed in a
multitude of distractions.
Yet it's the other distractions that I found to be the most enjoyable
part of the film.  His high school coach bribes him.  The uncle who has
raised him buys a brand new Lexus leveraging Jesus' name.  The
girlfriend admits that high school relationships in general fail, and
pointedly asks why she shouldn't get anything for their time together.
A local Benz-driving, street hustler tells of the traps and pitfalls
that await those who approach fame and fortune too quickly.  There is a
terrific five-minute scene involving a fast-talking sports agent that
wants Jesus to turn professional under his tutelage.  The agent shows
off his collection of exotic cars and offers to give him a platinum and
diamond watch that costs more than a Corvette.  And there is also an
interesting sequence where Jesus is given a tour of a college complete
with parties, a glitzy presentation, and busty students who recruit
using their own unique methods.
He Got Game is partly a drama about a father that wants to reunite with
his son, but it's also a fascinating look into the competitive
recruitment process and about the transformation process that inevitably
accompanies impending fame and fortune.  The storytelling is insightful
and invigorating.  In the end, we learn that while we may become a
commodity to everyone else, we'll always remain a real person to our
parents, and this link to our humanity may be the most important thing
to have.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
With his latest film He Got Game, writer/director Spike Lee has crafted
a film that's both lovely and enjoyable to watch as his previous effort,
Girl 6.  Like Girl 6, Lee has chosen a subject typically worthy of an
eighty-five minute picture and fashioned it into a sweeping epic.
PssssstI'm joking.  He Got Game is a long, boring, meandering, dog of a
movie.  One might compare watching it to walking forty acres with a
mule, but I see it as more of pissing-a-kidney stone with a side order
of numb-ass.
The main story is simple enough to barely fill an after school special 
jailed Jake Shuttlesworth (Washington) gets a one week release from
prison to persuade his estranged son and top basketball recruit, Jesus
(NBA's Ray Allen), to attend the Governor's alma mater in an attempt to
win a chance at early parole.  Since Jake is in the big house for
killing Jesus' mom, his task seems a formidable one.
Among other prominent problems, Lee takes over two hours to lead the
viewer to the glaringly obvious one-on-one game between Jake and Jesus.
In fact, the two only have about four scenes together.  So what do you
fill the two hours with?  For starters, there is the completely
worthless sub-plot of Jake's romance with a fleabag whore (Jovovich).
There's also Jesus' relationship with plotting girlfriend, Lala (Rosario
Dawson).  But mostly there is a whole lot of Oliver Stone-style
flashbacks and editing, teamed with a nails-across-the-blackboard score
by Aaron Copeland.
On a positive note, Game features one of the most graphically hilarious
three-way sex scenes that I have ever viewed.  And there is a vomiting
scene, too.  But these are not nearly enough to make Game worthy of
renting, let alone shelling out green for.  Stay home and roll your
loose change instead.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director: Spike Lee
Cast: Denzel Washington, Ray Allen, Rosario Dawson, Milla Jovovich,
Hill Harper, Zelda Harris, Jennifer Esposito, Bill Nunn, Ned Beatty
Screenplay: Spike Lee
Producers: Jon Kilik, Spike Lee
Runtime: 131 min.
US Distribution: Buena Vista/Hollywood
Rated R: violence, sex, drugs, language
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
I think I've said this before (well, I know I've said this before)--I'm
not a sports person.  Sports talk doesn't interest me.  Professional
sports don't interest me.  Football, basketball, baseball -- these
things don't interest me.  I don't hate them, but sports alone can not
hold my attention.  I have the utmost respect for Spike Lee for creating
a film that has a lot to do with basketball and keeping me compelled and
interested through its entire length.
What one must realize when approaching He Got Game is that it's not
really about basketball:  it's about the complicated relationship
between a father and his son.  That's not, by a longshot, all there is
to this film -- Lee takes on a lot of subplots and themes, and the
result is a far-reaching and ambitious picture.  Though it is a
fascinating character study and often very powerful, the film seems to
overflow with messages at times, and Lee never quite finds the right
note for tone and atmosphere.  
The father mentioned above is Jake Shuttleworth (Denzel Washington). 
He's a convicted felon (finding out why is part of the film, so I can't
tell you) serving his sentence in prison; early in the film, he's
approached by the warden (Ned Beatty) with an offer -- he has one week
to convince his own son, Jesus (Ray Allen) to attend Big State
University.  Jesus is the nation's number one high school basketball
player, and he's expected to easily make it into the NBA, and perhaps
end up the greatest player of all time.  
It's a difficult time in Jesus' life, for he has many universities
pressuring him to sign into their program, and he's waiting until the
last possible second to make his decision.  He's also suddenly saddled
with a life of fame, though he still lives in the projects with his
sister, Mary (Zelda Harris).  Jake agrees to the job, and immediately
goes to see his children.  Mary is happy to see him, but Jesus won't
even acknowledge him as his father.  This is where the conflict arises.
The father/son relationship of He Got Game is the central theme, and
Lee handles this aspect of the film with detailed care and respect. 
Washington is superb here (as he always is), and manages to convey the
desperation of a man trapped in an impossible situation.  Midway through
the film, he meets a prostitute named Dakota (Milla Jovovich), whom he
seems to really care for, and this subplot helps to characterize him
further.  Lee and Washington both do a fantastic job creating this
fascinating man.
The other half of the relationship is portrayed effectively by Ray
Allen.  Allen does an excellent job playing a naive high school student
who is suddenly and inexplicably confronted with a chance at greatness. 
His reaction to his father is also very well done, and the scenes
between the two men are engaging -- they dynamics between the characters
work so well that it's impossible not to admire this film for these
scenes.  There are a lot of supporting characters (and a few cameos),
and all of them are colorful and interesting; Jovovich (last seen in The
Fifth Element) really stands out, as does young Zelda Harris.
As well as the central themes in He Got Game work, there just seems to
be a little too much padding, both in story and in execution.  The
cinematography Malik Hassen Sayeed is interesting, but he employs a lot
of strange tricks (fade-to-white is a common one) that are intended to
draw the viewer in, but instead they just distance us from what's
happening on screen.  Aaron Copland's musical score is fantastic, but it
doesn't always fit the mood of the film:  when Jake and Jesus have a
climactic one-on-one game, Copland's heavy strings and
classical-sounding themes made me too aware of the music, and the best
scores blend in and add to the overall image without being distracting.
There's also a lot of sex, and these scenes border on soft-porn
(example -- two college girls are waiting for Jesus when he goes to
visit a university, and . . . you know the rest).  And there's a long,
violent interlude during which a strange individual briefs Jesus on all
of the drugs and sex he'll be missing if he goes away to school.  I'm
not too certain why Lee wanted to be so explicit with the sex and
violence (there are several scenes like the ones described above), but
it seems to detract from what this film is really about.  
And what this film really is about is the relationship between Jake and
Jesus.  Jesus' hatred for his father is deep and potent, and, inversely,
Jake's love for his son is equally powerful -- every scene between the
two is electric and intense.  Spike Lee and his actors pull off this
central relationship so perfectly that the extras on the outside are
only minor detractors.  He Got Game, even in its strangest moments, is a
compelling and engrossing experience.

Author
Ben Hoffman
    ********************************************
Denzel Washington gives the performance of his life in this superb
film.   His speech, that of an inner city resident; his Afro and
beard; his one-on-one basketball playing with his son, and in every
scene throughout this excellent film, Washington is outstanding.  He
has always given fine performances in the many varied roles he has
played but this film takes him to new heights.
Jake Shuttlesworth (Washington) is in jail for having killed his
wife. In an argument with his young son when he threatens to punish
him, his wife tries to stop him.  When he shoves her away she
accidentally hits her head on the stove and dies.
Jake's used to teach his son everything he knew about basketball.
Jake played well but not quite well enough to be a pro.  When the
son, Jesus (Ray Allen who played as a guard for the Milwaukee Bucks
and in the NBA  Rookie All-Star game and who here makes his acting
debut) shows promise, he keeps after him, after him every moment,
toughening him, hoping the son will make it for the family, the only
way out of poverty or near poverty in a way that Jake has never able
to do..   Many blacks dream that same dream but of course a
minuscule number ever makes it big time.
HE GOT GAME is filled with The Right Stuff.   While Jake is in
prison, Warden Wyatt (Ned Beatty) offers him a deal:  The Governor,
a great basketball fan and an alumnus of Big State, is ready to
offer to commute Jake's sentence if he can get his number one-rated
son to sign a Letter Of Intent to go to Big State.    Gorgeous women
from various universities let Jesus know that they are ready to go
to bed with him if he signs up . . . and several already do. Agents
are ready to give him cars whose stereo system costs $35,000 and
there is more where that came from if he will allow them to manage
him. Poor Jesus, from a poverty family, has to use all his inner
strength to ward them off.   And then Jake appears to beg  him to go
to Big State, letting him know that if Jesus does not sign with Big
State, his father will be returned to jail.   HE GOT GAME lets us
know that basketball is Big Business.
Big Time Willie (Roger Guenveur Smith) does a bang up job with his
role as a gambler, pimp, and drug dealer as he tries to warn Jesus
(and the young blacks in the theater watching the movie)  about all
the temptations and why they should be strong and stay on the
straight and narrow.
Lastly, the film shows the problems blacks have with whites who
promise but who are not to be trusted.   HE GOT GAME covers a big
court.    The beautiful photography of the basketball does not keep
us from realizing this movie's ball is bouncing everywhere.  Music,
by Aaron Copland and others greatly enhance the film.
Jesus' "bodyguard" and friend is "Booger" (Hill Harper).  The
sister, Mary, whom Jesus looks after, is Zelda Harris.   Other
supporting  roles are played by Milla Jovich, Bill Nunn,  Jim Brown,
the lovely Rosario Dawson as Jesus' girlfriend, and Lonette McKee as
Jake's wife.

Author
David N. Butterworth
Spike Lee got game.  Ain't no two ways about it.  Should anyone
tell you otherwise, consider this for starters:
The music for Lee's latest film, "He Got Game," is by the late 20th
Century composer Aaron Copland, he of the sublimely obnoxious opus
"Appalachian Spring."  Now I've never liked Copland, especially
"Appalachian Spring."  But in "He Got Game," Copland works.  Majestically.
Even the snatches of "Appalachian Spring" on the soundtrack didn't cause me
any discomfort.  Not at all.  In fact, I loved it.  The brass; the
cacophony of sound--it just worked.  Coupled with prominent rap songs by
Public Enemy and "He Got Game" exhibits one of the most esoteric song
scores in recent memory.  Credit that to filmmaker Lee, the man with--among
other talents--game.
Lee's latest film takes two complex themes and expertly blends them
into what appears, on the surface, to be a relatively straightforward
story: if incarcerated felon Jake Shuttlesworth (Denzel Washington) can
convince his basketball-playing, high school hot-shot son to opt for the
Governor's alma mater, his stay in the state penitentiary will be
curtailed.  The themes, as presented, seem simple enough too: the high cost
of fame, and the even higher price of having accidentally destroyed
something you loved.
"He Got Game" reveals the surprising sadness of being wooed by both
slick professional agents and countless universities promising assurances
of the good life, and how that pressure can sometimes be too enormous a
burden to bear.  And with startling honesty, this profound difficulty is
contrasted with Shuttlesworth's own personal tragedy.
At the beginning of "He Got Game" it's not clear why convicted
Attica inmate Shuttlesworth is doing time,  And that's another strength of
Lee's film; the story details unfold with precise, revelatory specificity,
like pieces of a jigsaw puzzle snapping into place.
Washington, if not already, should be deigned a national treasure.
His work here is superlative, surpassing almost anything he's done before.
His portrayal of Jake, a loving, supportive family man at odds with his
son, is by turns sensitive, tough, and ultimately human.
The supporting performances in "He Got Game" are worthy of mention
too: Milla Jovovich ("The Fifth Element") as a strung-out Coney Island
hooker; Lonette McKee as Jake's wife, Martha; Zelda Harris as their
resilient daughter, Mary.  All are commendable.  And last but by no means
least, NBA star Ray Allen, a brilliant acting debut as Jesus Shuttlesworth,
the son torn by promise, prestige, and conflicting family loyalties.
Stylistically, Lee's film is a marvel, covering the court with a
variety of cinematic techniques: documentary-style commentary from famous
college hoop coaches (such as Temple's John Chaney); kinetic, solarized
jump-cut sequences that play like a Nike commercial; slow-motion basketball
montages that will make even a non-believer sit up and take notice--all
backed by Copland's blaring horns and harmonics.
I don't doubt for a minute that this accomplished director could
make even a game of cricket appear exciting.
"He Got Game" is, pure and simple, one slam dunk of a motion picture.
