Title
Review for When We Were Kings (1996)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     This year's Best Documentary is about rhythm.  The rhythm of the
blues.  The meter of soul.  The cadence of verse, fist, and dance.
Director Leon Gast journeyed to Africa in 1974, to film a festival of
music that was to accompany the championship contest between Muhammad
Ali and George Foreman.  The fight was postponed for six weeks, the
festival went ahead as scheduled, and Gast stuck around, becoming
increasingly interested in both the politics and the personalities
involved.  He shot some great concert footage and also pinned down the
fighters, the promoters, and, even, Zaire's dictator, President Mobutu
Sese Seko.  Two decades passed before Gast could finish his film.  To
the hundreds of hours of footage, he added interviews, including writers
George Plimpton and Norman Mailer, both of whom were originally
ringside.  (And both of whom get a little too much screen time.) The
result is an immensely entertaining time capsule that rocks with an
electrifying rhythm.  And it's funny!  From Ali's rhyming rants to
Mailer's description of Don King's hair, there's a hearty sense of humor
here.  In fact, all that's missing is a modern-day encounter with the
champs.  What we saw at the Academy Awards should've also happened in
this movie.
Mike Legeros - Movie Hell
legeros@pagesz.net - http://www.n-vision.com/hell/

Author
Ben Hoffman
     If ever a film deserved the commendation of "It packs a powerful
punch," this documentary about the great heavyweight champion Muhammad
Ali (nee Cassius Clay) is it.   This is one great film.  Well-told,
dramatic, exciting and with wonderful picturesque descriptions by such
knowledgeable celebrities as Spike Lee,  George Plimpton.and
especially. Norman Mailer.  Mailer's description of what is going on in
the ring is a classic and should be carved in stone.
     Except peripherally, the film does not cover much of Ali's early
life; the focus  here being  the "Rumble In The Jungle" of Africa in
1974 when Ali, believed to be over the hill at age 32, had signed to
fight the most formidable fighter of his day, George ForEman. The two
had been brought together in Africa to let the black Africans see their
heroes in action and Ali gave them that and more amid shouts of "ALI!
ALI!"
     Having lived through the years when Ali was in his prime, I should
have known more about him . . . but did not.   I had seen him on TV
talk shows  but this film was a revelation for me.    It made me check
out more about his life, learning that when he refused to register for
our ill-conceived (to say the least) Viet Nam War, he gave as his
reason "No Vietnamese ever called me "nigger.'"   That really tells it
all.  That really shows the strength in the man.   For standing up
tall, his title was taken away.
     Ali was handsome, had a boyish smile, had wit and charm . . . all
revealed in the film.   His battle with Forman, why it was fought, what
others thought about his taking on the champ, are all brilliantly
shown.  Do not tell me you do not like documentaries.  This one is a
must-see!   You've heard of "edge of the seat movies?"  This one will
pull the seat right out from under you.    Go, man, go!

Author
Brian Koller
The 1974 heavyweight championship fight between
George Foreman and Muhammad Ali is the subject of
this film, which won an Academy Award for Best
Documentary Feature.  A pair of famous journalists
who attended the fight, George Plimpton and Norman
Mailer, provide reminiscenses.  Their commentary
is fronted with archival footage of Ali, Foreman,
fight promoter Don King, performers at a concert
organized by King, dictator Mobuto, and Zaire
itself, where the fight was held.  There is also
narration by Spike Lee and Thomas Hauser.
Ali's brash, charismatic personality comes across
in numerous press conferences and interviews.
He was not only a great champion, but highly
entertaining as well.  Africans were quick to
embrace him over the menacing, sullen Foreman,
the reigning champion who had seemed invincible
after quick knockouts of Joe Frazier and Ken
Norton.  The press loved and respected Ali as well,
not only for his good-natured banter and boasting,
but for the values he represented and his
apt observations.  In those days, Foreman had
no resemblance to the amiable, loquacious
person that he would later become.
Promoter Don King is described as brilliant and
hard-working but 'completely amoral'.  Mobuto is
labelled as a murderous dictator, and is compared
to Joseph Stalin for his cult of personality.
Norman Mailer makes the from-left-field observation
that all dictators are ugly.
Before the fight, there was a major concert
in Zaire.  James Brown, B. B. King and The
Spinners were among the performers.  Footage from
this concert also makes it into the documentary.
The documentary succeeds in recreating the atmosphere
of the Ali-Foreman fighter.  It does seem padded,
however, and the series of film clips sometimes
lack a cohesion which is only partly provided by
the Plimpton-Mailer narration.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "I was a slave four hundred years ago, and I'm going back home to
fight among my brothers," proclaims a jubilant Muhammad Ali in 1974.
"We gonna rumble in the jungle."
     WHEN WE WERE KINGS is an engrossing documentary about the famous
"rumble in the jungle" between a massive punching machine by the name
of George Foreman and a smaller Muhammad Ali, who had recently come out
of retirement.  Most sports commentators thought Ali had no chance to
win and could be hurt badly.  No this isn't another ROCKY movie, this
is real life.
     Yes, I know you may hate boxing as much as I do, but it does not
matter.  This fight was more an entertainment extravaganza than a
sporting event.  Besides, Leon Gast's documentary skills turn what was,
according to the press kit, 300,000 feet of film into a compelling
picture even for those of us who have no interest in sports.
     Infamous boxing promoter and huckster Don King sets up the match
by promising both fighters a prize of five million dollars -- win or
lose.  There was a slight problem in that he didn't have ten million
dollars.  He solved this by staging the fight in Zaire.  He got its
totalitarian ruler, President Mobutu Sese Seko, to commit ten million
dollars of his country's precious resources to the fight.  One of the
many talking heads in the film said he thought Mobutu "looked like a
closet sadist" and he told stories of Mobutu locking up all of his
enemies before the fight to insure domestic tranquillity.  It worked.
     The story had extra meaning for me since I once met Muhammad Ali
when I was in college in the late 60s.  The only thing I remember is
that his fists were the size of small boulders.  I recall seeing them
and thinking, "oh, my god."  The film amply demonstrates that Foreman
was even larger and much more powerful than Ali ever was.
     Ali is certainly one of the most interesting sports figures of
this century.  He brought an energy and a poetic approach to boxing
that was unique.  You probably remember his many poems with "fly like a
butterfly, sting like a bee" being his most famous, but George Plimpton
claims one poetry world record for Ali.  After the end of Ali's address
to the Harvard graduating class, they asked Ali for a poem.  He thought
a minute and replied, "Me whee."  Plimpton claims that is even shorter
than the one "The Guinness Book of World Records" has listed as the
shortest, "Jesus wept."
     The documentary includes old black and white clips of Ali, known
then as Cassius Clay, as a young fighter.  He was full of energy and
high spirits.  As he so aptly put it then, "I'm young; I'm handsome;
I'm pretty and I can't possibly be beat."  He was so resolutely
confident and gregarious that he was an inspiration to kids.  Listening
to him, they must have been convinced that anything is possible if you
set your mind to it.  The documentary even has a public service TV spot
he filmed for the youth where he admonishes them, "Eat natural foods.
We must whop Mr. Tooth Decay."
     The show pulsates with energy thanks to the music.  Many of the
great entertainers of that era from James Brown to B. B. King went to
Zaire to see the bout.  They are interviewed, and their music is used
throughout the film.  Also interviewed are a host of other people from
Spike Lee to George Plimpton.  Planeloads of the glitterati went to
Zaire to watch the fighters train and then fight.  Some of the
interviews are contemporary to the fight and others are more recent.
     The film is full of surprises from the training to the fight
itself, but getting to know the legendary Ali is worth the price of the
movie ticket.  No one before or since has ever been like him.
Certainly, boxing was never more fun than when he was around.  Watching
him is a joy.
     Leon Gast's ability as a filmmaker is perhaps best demonstrated
when he manages to make the strategy and the execution of the fight
both lucid and interesting.  He does this through a series of
interviews that are done in voice-over during the fight.
     One tidbit that I found fascinating was the time of the big event,
three o'clock in the morning.  It had to be during prime time in
America for the broadcast revenues.
     An upbeat, absorbing film that kept my eyes riveted to the screen.
After the press screening, I talked with some of the people there.
Most were in shock, like I, that someone could take boxing and make it
so intriguing for those of us who abhor the sport.  Of course, the best
documentarians can do exactly that whether the subject is insects
(MICROCOSMOS), obscure musical instruments (THEREMIN: AN ELECTRONIC
ODYSSEY) or blood sports.  I left the screening feeling exhilarated
after having vicarious shared some time with an athletic legend and
utterly fascinating character.
     WHEN WE WERE KINGS runs about 1:30.  It was not rated at the time
of the screening, but I would guess it to be PG-13.  There is brief
nudity, but no sex or profanity.  The boxing sequences are not gory,
but boxing is inherently violent.  I think the movie would be fine for
kids say nine and up.  I recommend it to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Gramercy)
A documentary by Leon Gast.
Producers:  Taylor Hackford, Leon Gast, David Sonenberg.
MPAA Rating:  Not Rated (brief nudity, profanity, boxing violence)
Running Time:  90 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Twenty years removed from the events it chronicles, WHEN WE WERE
KINGS takes on an ironic resonance.  Leon Gast's documentary account of
the 1974 heavyweight championship fight between Muhammad Ali and George
Foreman in Kinshasa, Zaire ("The Rumble in the Jungle") offers a vision of
the two combatants worlds removed from the way we see them today:  the
brash, flashy Ali has become the frail man who lit the Olympic flame in
Atlanta, while the intimidating, taciturn Foreman has become a
self-deprecating teddy bear in commercials and sit-coms.  A study of two
figures from the glory days of boxing is only part of what WHEN WE WERE
KINGS tries to deliver, however, and it is only the chance to see Ali at
his verbal and physical finest which grips you while much of the film
drifts off on tangents.
     Part of Gast's focus in WHEN WE WERE KINGS involves the extraordinary
nature of the event itself.  Then-fledgling promoter Don King not only
managed to get $5 million for each fighter; he turned the fight into an
occasion for an all-out festival of Afro-centrism, bringing black American
performers like James Brown, B. B. King and the Spinners to Zaire for a
concert.  Ali, whose confrontational politics and conviction for draft
evasion had enraged mainstream Americans, was thrilled to be fighting in a
black country where he was viewed as a great hero.  Foreman, meanwhile,
could not understand why he was treated like the villain, or worse,
ignored entirely.  In fact, the few locals who greeted his plane were
surprised to discover that the heavyweight champion was black himself.
     Gast frequently moves back and forth between preparation for the
fight itself and peripheral events, but this technique ends up muddling
WHEN WE WERE KINGS about as often as it enriches it.  The musical clips
inserted throughout the film do little to build a mood, and there is a
randomness to their inclusion which makes it unclear where they fit
chronologically (especially considering the five week delay between the
originally-scheduled fight date and the actual fight caused by a sparring
injury to Foreman's eye).  That kind of incompleteness is common in WHEN
WE WERE KINGS, as Gast introduces a situation then fails to follow up on
it.  An air conditioning failure at the musicians' hotel has everyone in a
tizzy, but we never hear about it again; the anecdotes involving extreme
measures taken by Zaire's dictator Mobutu Sese Seko to clean up the
country for foreign press are interesting, but Gast doesn't tell us how
the delay affected those efforts.
     It also doesn't help that Gast can't quite decide whether WHEN WE
WERE KINGS is a piece of social history or a piece of sports history.  The
back story for the fight is fascinating, with the past-his-prime Ali
facing the younger, stronger Foreman no one believed he could beat, and
commentary by sports journalists Norman Mailer and George Plimpton
provides solid background for the context of the fight in the careers of
the two combatants.  Yet Gast appears to deal with the actual fight as a
necessary evil, or as padding to fill out a documentary about something
else which was struggling to make feature length.  It is indicative of how
little he understands the most important single aspect of the fight --
Ali's "Rope-a-Dope" tactic which allowed him to tire out Foreman, and
eventually knock him out in the 8th round -- that there is never a moment
in which anyone analyzes who developed the strategy, or why Ali went to it
only after a first round attempt at right hand leads was unsuccessful.
     WHEN WE WERE KINGS might be a few different documentaries crammed
into one film, but it still delights whenever Muhammad Ali is center
stage.  More than anything else, Gast wants the film to act as a memorial
to the charismatic Ali who never failed to provide a quote or a headline.
The portrait that emerges captures Ali at his cocky, trash-talking,
rhyme-spinning finest, but it also shows the deeply committed Muslim who
viewed his trip to Zaire as a kind of pilgrimage.  Ali in 1974 was one of
the world's greatest entertainers, love him or hate him, and WHEN WE WERE
KINGS offers another chance to see him when he was a king.  Leon Gast
should have known Ali was the best thing he had going for him, but often
it seems that the real fight in WHEN WE WERE KINGS is between Gast and his
material.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott
For more reviews, go to www.nuvo-online.com and click on "film."
Last fall, I had a brief encounter with Muhammad Ali at a political fund 
raiser in Indianapolis. Through dumb luck, I happened to be in the right 
place at the right time and was able to speak to Ali and his wife for a 
few moments. It was thrilling, of course, but I left feeling awful, and 
cried on the way home. The sight of this amazing man, legendary for his 
brilliant physical and verbal skills, left palsied and muzzled by 
Parkinson's syndrome was almost too tragic to watch. Ali has repeatedly 
made it clear that his mind remains sharp and he doesn't want to be 
pitied, but pity him I did. 
Over the months, I came to realize that I was wrong. Muhammad Ali is not 
tragic, he is as valiant as ever. Despite his affliction, he makes 
frequent public appearances for people and causes in which he believes, 
showing the same defiance towards Parkinson's syndrome that he has 
brandished at the many foes he has faced throughout his magnificent 
career. Ali remains an inspiration to all, the consummate hero.
"When We Were Kings," which just won an Oscar for Best Documentary, 
beautifully captures one of the highlights of Ali's career, 1974's 
"Rumble In The Jungle" with George Foreman in Zaire. The fight came 
during a period when Ali was one of America's most controversial figures. 
Having alienated some by joining the Black Muslim movement and dropping 
his birth name, Ali enraged many by refusing induction into the military 
on grounds of conscientious objection. He was dragged through the legal 
system and stripped of his boxing title, all at a time when his skills 
were at their peak. 
Then fight promoter Don King, only three years out of prison for 
manslaughter, organized the "Rumble In The Jungle," giving Ali the chance 
to regain the title from George Foreman. Foreman, now beloved for his 
warmth, rich humor and easygoing manner, was a far different man then. 
Fresh from a ghetto neighborhood in Houston, Foreman was a sullen 25 year 
old, a ferocious warrior who had destroyed Joe Frazier and Ken Norton, 
men who had previously defeated Ali. Foreman was the clear favorite going 
into the match. King promised each fighter $5 million, despite having no 
financing in place. The shady promoter eventually got the money from 
Mobutu Sese Seko, Zaire's ruthless, egomaniacal dictator, who viewed the 
fight as a public relations coup for his country and himself. In addition 
to the fight, King organized a three-day black music festival, featuring 
James Brown, B.B. King, the Spinners, Miriam Makeba, and the Crusaders. 
The fight and festival were promoted as a major display of racial pride; 
proud black men and women returning to the motherland to celebrate their 
heritage. 
All of the elements were in place for what proved to be a mesmerizing, 
often surreal, media circus. Leon Gast's documentary captures the event 
brilliantly, mixing the ‘74 footage with recent interviews from Norman 
Mailer, George Plimpton, Thomas Hauser (Ali's biographer) and Zaire 
artist Malik Bowens. Gast creates a real air of suspense, despite the 
fact that the outcome of the fight is well-known. Through sharp editing, 
he paints a fascinating multi-colored portrait of the event that succeeds 
on many levels. 
Ali's amazing poems and speeches are all there, delivered with a pure 
sense of euphoria. But Gast keeps the camera on Ali after his speeches 
wind down, with telling results. We see Ali groping for words, laughing 
at his own absurdity, and occassionally, you can see the fear and doubt 
in his eyes. 
The details of the event, and the circus surrounding it, are all there. 
Foreman's confusion over Ali receiving all of the attention despite the 
fact that *he* was the champion. The Americans arriving in Zaire dressed 
in traditional African clothing, only to be greeted by Zaireans nattily 
attired in business suits. Bad fashion and great music combine to capture 
a clear sense of ‘70's culture. Gast also presents the harsh racial and 
political realities of the time, using a light hand that allows the 
audience to consider those issues without onscreen editorializing.
And then, of course, there's the actual fight. Even those who are not 
sports fans will be mesmerized by Ali's brilliant strategy, underscored 
with excellent commentary. The fight is absolutely exhilarating to 
witness.
It took over 20 years of financial and legal battles for Gast to bring 
"When We Were Kings" to the screen, with outstanding results. Beyond 
creating an exceptional documentary, Gast reminds us of the majesty of 
Muhammad Ali, a man who was, and is, a hero for the ages.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: 10/96 (1 week limited); 2/14/97 (limited)
Running Length: 1:28
MPAA Classification: Not Rated (Boxing action)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Featuring Muhammad Ali, George Forman, Don King, James Brown, BB King, 
      President Mobuto Sese Seko, Spike Lee, Norman Mailer, 
      George Plimpton
Director: Leon Gast
Producers: David Sonenberg, Taylor Hackford, Leon Gast
Cinematography: Albert Maysles, Kevin Keating, Maryse Alberti, 
      Paul Goldsmith, Roderick Young
U.S. Distributor: Gramercy Pictures
     WHEN WE WERE KINGS, a documentary about the Muhammad Ali/George 
Forman heavyweight "Rumble in the Jungle" boxing match, is a wonderfully 
nostalgic, and occasionally insightful, window into the recent past.  By 
nature, however, it is not a motion picture of any particular depth, nor 
is it intended to be.  Although the film touches on issues of racism and 
nationalism as necessary background elements, it does not delve far 
beneath the surface.  Those who would criticize the film view this as a 
fault; I see it as a creative choice.  WHEN WE WERE KINGS does not take 
a political or philosophical stance, and, as a result, successfully does 
what it sets out to do.  
     While WHEN WE WERE KINGS is not a biography of Ali, it offers a 
great deal of insight into why the boxer was equally beloved and 
despised during his heyday.  It's easy to forget how controversial a 
figure Ali was in the '60s and '70s, when he constantly proclaimed 
himself "the greatest", refused to register for the draft, and said 
things like "Damn America.  I live in America, but Africa's my home."  
Age and Parkinson's Disease have softened the man's image, and, as Spike 
Lee comments, it's shocking to realize how few young people understand 
who Muhammed Ali was.
     Today, George Forman is one of America's best liked public figures, 
but that's the result of a lengthy personality makeover.  In 1974, when 
the "Rumble in the Jungle" took place, Forman was a taciturn, 
frightening individual.  To gain his heavyweight championship position, 
he had "destroyed" both Joe Frazier and Ken Norton in the ring.  He 
didn't boast that he would beat Ali, but almost everyone believed he 
would.  He was as close to invincible as a fighter could be.  
     From the early press conferences to the aftermath, WHEN WE WERE 
KINGS chronicles the meeting of these two titans.  At times, the 
structure is uneven, especially when the film goes on a tangent 
detailing the start of Don King's career, but the bulk of the material 
is engrossing.  Since most of the footage was shot in 1974 (with the 
exception of "talking head" interviews with Spike Lee, Norman Mailer, 
and George Plimpton), watching this film is like taking a little time 
trip.  Ali and Forman appear on-screen, but only as they did around the 
time of the fight.  No retrospective interviews with either are 
presented.
     WHEN WE WERE KINGS has several high points, including footage of 
Ali's press conference and coverage of the "Black Woodstock" event that 
was supposed to precede the fight (the music festival went off as 
scheduled, but the fight was postponed for more than a month).  
Unsurprisingly, however, the most involving portion of the film is the 
coverage of the match, which details exactly how Ali was able to use the 
now-famous "Rope-a-Dope" tactic to pull off what is probably boxing's 
greatest upset.  This match, which took place at 4 a.m. local time on 
October 30, 1974 in Kinshasa, Zaire, marked the point at which Ali's 
image began to change from that of anti-hero to that of hero.  For sheer 
dramatic impact, "The Rumble in the Jungle" exceeds even the best 
fictional boxing stories, including ROCKY.
     Leon Gast's film has a fascinating production history.  The primary 
footage was assembled on location in 1974, but a long series of problems 
and delays kept the project shelved until 1989, when Gast, along with 
director Taylor Hackford (AN OFFICER AND A GENTLEMAN, DELORES 
CLAIBORNE), began working to pare down hundreds of hours of film to a 
reasonable length.  The result is a dynamic look at one of the great 
moments in sports history, and an examination of how and why the 
participants were so important.  Through Gast's camera, we see the 
charisma of Ali and the menace of Forman, feel the energy of the crowd, 
and understand what an amazing fight the "Rumble in the Jungle" actually 
was.
     To use the old cliche, you don't have to be a sports fan to enjoy 
this motion picture.  All you need is an appreciation of recent history 
and a desire to learn more about an event that had far more importance 
in the world's eyes than any other heavyweight bout in the history of 
boxing.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: A perfect evocation of a defining moment in time for two men and
two nations.
I was just old enough to remember the adoration and respect that Muhammad
Ali commanded -- not just from blacks, but from everyone. He was an artist,
and boxing was his medium. He *was* The Greatest: he embodied his ambitions
perfectly. He had come out of exile, as it were, to fight a fresh young
contender (George Foreman), and he won.
WHEN WE WERE KINGS is a documentary -- one of the best ever made, quite
frankly -- that takes that moment in time, the "Rumble in the Jungle", and
makes it feel like it's happening to us now.
Most of the footage in WHEN WE WERE KINGS had been stranded in limbo for
decades, the victim of an ugly legal entanglement. Having it brought back to
the light of day is important, because there are so many people today --
black, white, young, old -- who either don't remember Ali's impact, or have
forgotten. The movie's power is in that it takes mere images of Ali and the
men who remembered him and were near him at the time and makes them feel as
though they are entering the room with us. In a curious way, this movie may
actually work better on TV than in a theater, because of the intimacy
factor.
The one thing that the movie makes clear, almost without trying: Ali
commanded respect just by being there. Even his speech had the rhythm of his
body and his movements: "I fought a rock. I punished a brick. I'm so bad I
make medicine sick!" In print, the words lose their life; hearing them come
out of his mouth, you understand how so many found him charismatic --
especially the Africans in Zaire, who saw in him a brother in arms.
George Foreman, on the other hand, couldn't have been more of an opposite.
When George Foreman arrived in Zaire, he was seen as an outsider in many
ways: he brought his dogs with him, which reminded the people of the
brutality under colonial rule. (Even more shocking: few in Africa knew he
was black until he arrived.) Foreman was a punishingly brutal fighter: when
he finished with a punching bag, there was a dent in it that could have held
water. (One rather cruelly apt joke, courtesy of Richard Pryor, summed up
his approach: "Foreman's got the most unique boxing style... None. The bell
ring, and he come out -- 'Which one the referee? 'Cos I 'mo *kill* the other
motherf___er.'")
In private, Ali sensed that others were certain he could not win -- he was,
after all, 33, while Foreman was young and fresh. But he was in it for the
challenge, not for the winning -- while Foreman approached the whole thing
as a fait accompli. The more you see of the two of them, the starker the
contrast: Ali was privately reflective and publicly brash; Foreman was
nearly subverbal everywhere.
The fight itself takes up very little of the movie's running time, and
that's an intelligent decision, because we instead get the context we need
to understand what happened. Foreman used up so much of his energy in trying
to punish Ali into instant submission, that Ali was able to unleash his
energy in reserve and KO Foreman almost at once. A frightening theory, but
everything we see supports it.
The most wonderful thing about the movie is how it makes everything it
discusses seem immediate and real. Documentaries tend to deal with the past
as a closed chapter, over and done. This one approaches a story of legendary
proportions like it's news. I can't think of a better way to do it.

Author
Peter Gloster
    Naturally, at the core of Leon Gast's "When We Were Kings" is the fight
itself, for what a fight it was. Thanks to the business savvy of Don King,
an ageing Muhammad Ali was pitted against the formidable hulk of heavyweight
champion George Foreman. Fans were treated to an 8 round battle of endurance
and strategy, as much as brute strength, that immediately entered boxing
lore. With the benefit of the first-hand recollections of that old ex-pug
Norman Mailer, this classic conflict is brought back to life.
   But "When We Were Kings" tackles issues that are harder to pin down than
the simple facts of a boxing match. Questions of political power and social
justice appear throughout this documentary. Gast could hardly choose
otherwise, considering the vocal, uncompromising politics of Muhammad  Ali.
A member of the controversial black separatist movement The Nation of Islam,
Ali opens Gast's film with a forceful swipe at the United States. When Ali
hollers "Damn America', the audience knows the imprecation is heartfelt; the
brutal yet casual way it is uttered leaves no doubt that Ali is speaking his
mind. His decision to buck the draft for Vietnam is defended with the same
admirable fury: "No Viet Cong ever called me Nigger", Ali reasons.
   Despite showcasing Ali's proud unequivocal politics, one of the most
impressive features of "When We Were Kings" is the subtle way in which the
documentary considers the difficulties inherent in the overarching
philosophy of black unity and black symbolism that Ali and his supporters
champion. Listening to the film's numerous commentators, it is clear that
the geographic location for this "Rumble in the Jungle" is etched more in
the imagination than anywhere you could place on a map. Spike Lee tells us
that the event was a pilgrimage, a "coming home" to Africa. Foreman reminds
us that Africa is the "cradle of civilisation". Fair enough, but this
homeland is a specific nation cursed with a less than inspiring reality. It
is the newly founded Zaire and it is ruled by President Mobutu, a brutal
dictator. While Ali respects Mobutu's ability to forge an independent
African state, Mailer notes that beneath the stadium in which the titans
battled lay hidden the Presidents well-stocked torture chambers. Mailer's
insights are lost on most of the film's commentators. George Plimpton
recalls that he always felt he was in the Congo, rather than the newly
christened Zaire. With admirable restraint, Gast quietly suggests that for
many the grandeur of myth and history all but obscured the reality of Zaire'
s squalid ruling elite.
   Mobutu is not the only dubious character to benefit from the heady
symbolism of black power. Don King, resplendent in yellow kaftan and at ease
with the "Messiah" label attributed to him by a loyal disciple, passes
himself off as the voice of a new black international solidarity.
Understandably, Foreman believes he has gotten a raw deal. He may be, as one
sympathiser notes, "blacker" than Ali, but he is denied the iconic status
shared by Ali, the thuggish Mobutu, and the tacky huckster Don King. Africa,
Zaire, inspirational leader or vicious dictator, all is left
undifferentiated, unconsidered, in this optimistic celebration of black
unity. Little wonder that the people of Zaire were shocked to find that
Ali's opponent wasn't white.
   Admittedly, these issues are only hinted at, rather than substantially
explored. The audience must consider the significance of these issues
themselves, in their own time. There is just too much to cover, too much
that is truly worthy of celebration, for a protracted political analysis to
be justified. The excitement of James Brown and B. B King in concert, for
instance. And of course there's always Ali to consider, as he shamelessly,
and hilariously, hams it up in front of the camera, shadow boxing and
uttering one inspired rhyme after another - "We gonna get it on coz we don't
get along!". Doubtlessly, considering the multi-faceted nature of the
extravaganza they chose to cover, the makers of "When We Were Kings" faced
numerous difficulties in deciding what issues, and what personalities, best
deserved their attention. Fortunately, by refusing to simplify their complex
subject matter, they have captured the richness and excitement of this
unique event.
