Title
Review for Canadian Bacon (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Ryan Ellis
give me a buzz on the ol' e-lines, iluvmick@hotmail.com
The late John Candy starred in quite a wide range of
comedies in his movie career. By that, I mean, he made some truly
funny comedies and some truly awful comedies. It seemed that he
was just hitting his stride with some fine performances in the
'90s when his excessive lifestyle did him in for good. With the
exception of the terrible "Wagons East", Candy had a string of
solid roles in the early part of this decade (in "JFK", "Only The
Lonely", and "Cool Runnings" among others) to establish himself
as a future Oscar contender. While "Canadian Bacon" was not
award-worthy, the corny little movie was entertaining--especially
if you're Canadian.
Candy (in his final film) stars as Bud Boomer, a dippy
sheriff from Niagara Falls, New York. His main desire is to goof
off with his friends. He also tends to believe whatever he sees
on television. He has grown up with an attitude about
Canada--that we Canucks are overly polite, too clean, and our
beer "sucks". That ironic comment (ironic because OUR beer is
much better than any U.S. brew!) at a hockey game in Canada
starts a massive brawl.
Meanwhile, the American President (Alan Alda) watches his
popularity rapidly dropping. His advisers tell him to start a
paper war with Canada (Operation: Canadian Bacon). The media feed
on this declaration of "war". Bud and his buddies believe the
propaganda and decide to invade Canada to aid the cause.
Believing that they're part of some sort of military strike
force, they break into the country (no difficult task) and start
doing horrible things--like littering. One member of Bud's
entourage, Honey (Rhea Perlman), gets trapped and subsequently
imprisoned by the Mounties. The scenes that develop with Stephen
Wright as the Mountie holding her hostage are among the funniest
in the entire film. Bud and company try to rescue Honey and,
thinking that the capital of Canada is in Toronto, arrive at the
C.N. Tower for the final crazy showdown.
With supporting roles filled by Kevin Pollack, Rip Torn, and
Dan Aykroyd, "Canadian Bacon" has no shortage of talent. The
jokes about Canada are funnier if you happen to be Canadian.
Perhaps the average American wouldn't understand that we don't
pronounce certain words (like "out") the same as they do. It's
also somewhat ironic that John Candy appeared as an American
hell-bent on destroying this country when he was, in reality, a
patriotic citizen of The Great White North. The movie doesn't
quite hit home because it relies too much on the same joke. If
talented director Michael Moore was going for a strong satire, he
didn't make the humour quite vicious enough (or even funny
enough) to work for the full 90 minutes. Still, it wouldn't be a
poor choice for the whole family to rent. It's harmless.
Without a doubt, John Candy was a wonderfully funny fellow.
He should be remembered for his kind heart and sense of humour.
It's too bad that his final comedies ("Wagon's East" and
"Canadian Bacon") weren't quite as good as, say, the sweet "Only
The Lonely". The charismatic actor left this world before he had
the opportunity to receive much recognition for his hard work.
Still, Candy would have wanted his fans to remember how he made
us laugh. Rent "Canadian Bacon" and I hope you'll get a chuckle
or two.
USELESS TRIVIA--John Candy, along with hockey great Wayne Gretzky
and former L.A. Kings owner Bruce McNall, purchased the Toronto
Argonauts CFL football club before the 1991 season. That powerful
trio sure did something right--the team won the Grey Cup in 1991.

