Title
Review for Dancemaker (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Artistic License Films
 Director:  Matthew Diamond
 Cast: Paul Taylor, Bettie De Jong, Ross Kramberg, Maureen
Mansfield, Kristi Egtvedt, Lisa Viola, Thomas Patrick, et al
   A visitor from Mars, seeking familiarity with the world's
customs, might be surprised to see that the viewers for
sporting events is entirely different from the audience for the
dance.  The dance may not have the excitement of
competition between opposing teams, but many pieces
involve the same type of conflict that you find in literature. 
More important, sporting events and the dance share the love
of physicality, allowing the performers to express themselves
not as talking heads but in corporeal work.  Apropos, when a
modern dance group visited a high-school auditorium about
15 years ago to put on a show, the performers were heckled
by some of the wise guys in the audience.  Two of the fellows
doing the taunting were called up to the stage by one of the
players--always a wise move because it's sure to reverse the
tide and get the teens to turn on their buddies.  They were
asked simply to stand for ten seconds on their tones and
move about for a couple of steps.  Of course they couldn't,
leading to pandemonium in the audience.  For the rest of the
concert, the halls were quiet, the dancers concluding their act
to tumultuous applause.
   One would like to report that some of these kids now in
their thirties, would turn up for the approaching concert of the
Paul Taylor Dance Company, which will be in New York's City
Center from March 2 through March 14 before moving out to
tour several locales in California.  Coinciding with the
Manhattan concerts will be the opening at the Film Forum of
the Oscar-nominated documentary, "Dancemaker," a fitting
tribute to Paul Taylor whom some consider to be the world's
finest choreographer.  Taylor, who in his more youthful days
once danced with Martha Graham, is today a tall and
distinguished-looking man, an inveterate gum chewer and,
surprisingly enough a smoker (as are some members of his
famous troupe).  The movie is directed by Matthew Diamond
who brings his own experience as a dancer to bear, filming
with the aim of showing what goes on backstage as the
performers rehearse, bond, gripe about their pains, but who
apparently have nothing evil to say about their teacher-
choreographer.  Diamond is nothing if not thoroughly informal
in his presentation, yet at the same time he presents to us an
intimate canvas upon which the steps are painted, the ideas
thrown back and forth.  We get an innermost look at the
financial side, at the need to raise funds from corporations,
because the fairly hefty prices that this world-famous group
can draw can still not begin to meet their costs.  
   As a documentary, "Dancemaker" follows the typical
pattern of the genre, alternating talking heads with actual
portrayals of selected dances--by both soloists and the
ensemble--all brought to a stunning conclusion by a Chorus-
Line style excerpt from a major feature.  While three of the
heads are dance critics, including the New York Times' expert
interpreter Anna Kisselgorf and New York Post critic Clive
Barnes, no one has anything but praise for Taylor and his
company.  Some of the audience for the work might hope for
a bit of criticism for the sake of credibility lest we consider the
movie a puff-piece for all its artistry.  (Even a recent film
about the life of Anne Frank focused to no small degree on
how the young Ms. Frank was anything by an angel.)  And
director Diamond seems throughout to pander to channel-
surfers in the audience, tempting us with wondrous, even
awesome looks at pieces like "Aureole" only to cut to yet
another talking head or fast-forwarding from one segment of
the dance to another.  Those of us who regretted that the
Broadway play "A Chorus Line" showed the young performers
in full uniform doing their thing for all too brief a time at the
show's conclusion will relate to this reproach.
   The technique that works best in the film is the introduction
of fragments of dances performed by Paul Taylor himself
during the early 1960s, comparing them with the same
dances executed today by members of the current troupe. 
Diamond goes back to the obligatory early days of the
choreographer, briefly touching on his parents' divorce but
affording no major insights into what made the boy choose
his profession.  He opens the movie with a fairly extended
piece of athleticism which looks to the untrained eye more
like a practice session of gymnasts for the Olympic games
but as the film progresses, we observe the construction of
particular steps and how these steps are coordinated with the
music, whether the music be of recent vintage or of 19th
century stock such as some overtures by Offenbach.  
   The most exciting dance, one with a strong message as
well, is the selection from the 1976 "Cloven Kingdom," a
romp of men wearing formal attire, holding their hands like
rabbit paws and switching from their upright positions to all
fours.  The obvious purport is that we are both highly
sophisticated, urban creatures and primitives not unlike
others in the animal kingdom.  Perhaps this, the most original
and striking part of the film, should have been used as its
finale rather than a more conventional piece which is an ode
to the tango, "Piazzolla Caldera."  
   Many are those who take part behind the stage to give the
company the reputation it deserves today, people like
rehearsal director Bettie De Jong and the company's
executive director (and fund raiser) Ross Kramberg. 
Ultimately the film affords us a solid portrayal of a unique
artist and may even lead diehard film fans to shell out for the
forthcoming live shows in New York and California of the Paul
Taylor Dance Company.
