Title
Review for States of Control (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Zack Winestine.
Cast: Jennifer Van Dyck, John Cunningham, Stephen Bogardus, Ellen Greene, 
Jennie Moreau.
1999 - 84 minutes.
Not Rated (equivalent of an R for profanity, nudity, and sex).
Opens 10/99 (limited release).
Reviewed July 21, 1999.
Zack Winestine's "States of Control" is a frustrating and disappointing film, 
and yet, I feel guilty writing such criticisms at this exact moment because 
for the first 70 minutes of this 84-minute indie drama, it was edging up to 
become a major contender on my top ten list of the year, come next January. 
The film is, next to Stanley Kubrick's masterpiece, "Eyes Wide Shut," one of 
the most provocative motion pictures I've seen in the last year, as it deals 
with a woman struggling to break free from the artificial materialism that 
the world around her has so stringently begun to depend on. 
Lisa (an eye-opening, perfectly-cast Jennifer Van Dyck) is an unsatisfied 
married woman in her early-30's who works at a small theater company in 
Manhattan. Her relationship with her husband, Abel (Stephen Bogardus), is 
seriously faltering, both for the passionless, controlled time they spend 
with one another, and because of Abel's impotency. Purposefully not sleeping 
and writing in her journal at all hours of the night about her internal 
struggle for spontaneity, Lisa's feelings are best identified by Paul (John 
Cunningham), a stern older man who steps in as the director of the company's 
latest play, and who is very truthful to Lisa about everything (he believes 
the novel she has spent years on is worthless; he constantly does not allow 
Lisa to talk about her past and he speaks none about his own because he 
believes it makes for boring conversation, etc.). Left alone at night for 
long periods of time while Abel is at work, and sexually starved herself, 
Lisa finally picks up enough courage to go into an adult video store and buy 
a porno flick, taking it home and watching it. Additonally, she is firmly 
against most technological advances and longs for the days when things could 
be more simple. While at a music shop with her friend, she states that it is 
getting more difficult to find records: "Once LPs came out, everything became 
background music."
"States of Control" is, indeed, a difficult film to identify. A truly offbeat 
character study of a woman, the movie obviously is anything but a big-studio 
picture, as it follows Lisa through a series of different vignettes and 
relationships, and relies on the excellent, often funny dialogue rather than 
big plot developments. Director Zack Winestine, making his first 35mm feature 
film, has written a multi-layered, engrossing screenplay and carries the 
camera well, too, as he paints a desolate, overly ordinary picture of New 
York City that mirrors the way Lisa's life will remain if she doesn't fight 
for the right to make her own decisions. In short, she is utterly sick of 
trying to make everyone else happy, and desperately wants to finally do what 
she wants to do.
The movie gains a lot of laughs from the on-target dialogue alone, such as 
when she is looking around in the adult video store. Aiding the help of a 
male customer on how he chooses which movie to get, she asks, "what do you 
look for in the films you buy? Is it a particular actor, or the story?" 
Another equally witty dialogue exchange is between Lisa and Paul when they 
are eating at a restaurant. After Lisa reveals she has written a mediocre 
novel, Paul asks if he could borrow it to read. "You won't like it," Lisa 
assures him, to which Paul quickly replies, "well, at least then we will have 
something in common." It is this sort of fine-spun dialogue that I delight in 
when I'm looking for a comedy, as opposed to non-stop physical comedy and 
gags (although, let it be known, I also absolutely love 1980's "Airplane!" 
and the whole "Naked Gun" series). 
As many supposedly liberating things that Lisa does in the course of the 
film, however, they only lead to disappointment and an even further need for 
self-fulfillment. Concerning the adult video she takes home to watch, she 
finds the experience anticlimactic. When a photographer friend takes her on 
one of her intimate shoots, Lisa can't go through with the sexually revealing 
things she is expected to do with the male model. A one-time affair with Paul 
ends with him not wanting to talk to her afterwards while they're in bed, 
even though Lisa has something important she wants to say. 
All of these failed attempts at freedom lead to the film's last fifteen 
minutes. Before this, it would be safe to say that I was loving every minute 
of the movie, only to be severely let down by the denouement. Predicting that 
the conclusion would stay on an even level with the rest of the movie, I 
expected something a bit less drastic to happen, shall we say, than what 
finally occurs. It would be unfair to give away the particulars of the 
ending, but it was extremely unconvincing, to say the least, and director 
Winestine's only major misstep. "States of Control," as a whole, is an 
astute, thought-provoking film, but the ending left me just as dissatisfied 
as Lisa is throughout the movie, in her journey to not follow by the rules of 
today's superficial society.
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
Michelangelo Antonioni's L'Avventura might have a hell of a time being
released in theaters today.  His trilogy of films starring the beautiful
actress Monica Vitti (expanded into a quartet if you include Red Desert)
contemplate the experience of a bored, frustrated woman in a heavily
industrialized society ruled by false ideals of consumerism and power. 
The end of the world was not an apocalyptic fire, but a deadening
malaise waking up in the dawn of the dead.  There's no exit, whittling
away the days with the distraction of fast food and shopping malls.
In 1960, L'Avventura was a box office smash despite its harsh critical
reception at Cannes, where frustrated critics misunderstood its
open-ended message for pure emptiness.  What they lacked the ability to
see was that very emptiness becoming the core message.  This can also be
said for Zack Winestine's challenging new film, States of Control, which
picks up right where Antonioni left off.  The times have changed, and
this heroine, Lisa (brilliantly played by Jennifer van Dyck, Series 7)
is not content to live a life of passive alienatation.  She's gonna blow
her superficial life apart and create something authentic and new, no
matter what the cost.
Lisa has fallen into routines, measuring out her days in teaspoons.  A
self-proclaimed failed novelist, she's stuck in a sheltered Manhattan
life coordinating mundane secretarial chores at an Off-Off-Broadway
Theater.  Her husband Abel (Stephen Bogardus, Love! Valour! Compassion!)
is an impotent bore who fails to challenge her sexually or
intellectually.  This is most notably felt in a funny-sad scene when he
attempts to tell an amusing anecdote about the "Great Chinese
Trombonists."  The gag falls flat, not achieving the desired response. 
The more they try to hold on to each other, the closer they come to
drowning.
Things quickly liven up.  Inspired by the anarchic musings of a jaded
theatre director (John Cunningham), Lisa performs a series of
experiments, some comical and others disturbing, to break through the
web of artificiality.  Her training consists of sleep deprivation,
sexual deviance, sampling pornography, smashing open a locked door with
her bare fist, and determining how long she can hold her finger in an
open light socket.  By pushing her body to the limit, she hopes to
achieve the ultimate transformation, whatever that is.
The coda of States of Control places Lisa on her own as the extraneous
parts of her life fade away, including her principles, her friends, even
her language.  Played entirely without dialogue, the climax is a
razor-edged adventure as Lisa embarks upon the final, explosive stage of
her growth.  Comparisons to the Unabomber abound, but Lisa's philosophy
comes closer to David Cronenberg's unsettling Videodrome mantra, "Long
live the New Flesh."
There's something borderline fascistic about Lisa's regime, made latent
in the fiercely dramatic sturm und drang of Richard Termini's classical
score, or the beautiful and startling images of clouds parting in the
sky.  Those mystical images of nature bring to mind Triumph of the Will
director Leni Reifenstahl, visually referenced throughout States of
Control.  Susan Starr's austere cinematography (in collaboration with
Winestine, an experienced director of photography himself) produces an
appropriately clinical God's Eye View, in the hollow valleys of New York
City skyscrapers or the cramped apartment space Lisa shares with Abel. 
Discomfort is the order of the day.
Anchored by a strong central performance by van Dyck, States of Control
is a hard, mercurial polemic that gets under the skin.  Winestine's
politically charged agenda sometimes gets the best of him in scenes that
seem more conceptual than dramatic.  Despite the occasionally academic
tone, there's no denying that Lisa's extremities cast an eerie spell.
Zack Winestine's formidable States of Control will not be for everyone,
but those who rise to the challenge can prepare themselves for a movie
rich with ideas in today's increasingly conservative marketplace. 
There's also a bleak humor in the lengths to which Lisa goes to achieve
her vision -- I mean, who wouldn't laugh at the notion of blowing shit
up and spending the rest of your life living in a cave?  Yeah, it's all
funny games until the rationality kicks in: something just broke.
Director: Zack Winestine 
Producers: Priscilla Guastavino, Joanne Pawlowski, Matt Janes
Writer: Zack Winestine 
Starring: Jennifer van Dyck, John Cunningham, Stephen Bogardus, Ellen
Greene
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
