Title
Review for Little Man Tate (1991)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dragan Antulov
One of the surest ways for the Hollywood actors to win the
"Oscars" is playing the characters burdened with some
terrible affliction. On the other hand, serious dramatic
movies about the opposite - talented people - are quite
rare. LITTLE MAN TATE, 1991 directorial debut by Jodie
Foster is one of such films.
The movie deals with Fred Tate (played by Adam Hann-Byrd),
eight-year old child prodigy who is blessed with high IQ and
many talents, like mathematics, music and painting. For his
single mother and cocktail waitress Dede (Jodie Foster),
Fred is normal child that is supposed to have normal
childhood like everybody else. But, his intelligence has
estranged him from the peers in school, and, finally, it
brings attention of Dr. Jane Grierson (Diane Wiest),
psychologist specialised for gifted children. She wants Fred
to join her summer camp for gifted children. Dede
reluctantly agrees, but soon the tension would erupt between
her and Dr. Grierson, who wants Fred to have special
education, away from his mother.
In many ways, LITTLE MAN TATE has a lot of autobiographic
elements for Jodie Foster. She, same as the protagonist in
the movie, was a child prodigy, becoming a huge film star at
the age of twelve. But, unlike many other child stars, she
was intelligent enough to know that stardom doesn't last
forever and she temporarily left Hollywood in order to
finish proper education. Her return later led to the
triumph, with two "Oscars" for THE ACCUSED and SILENCE OF
THE LAMBS. Enjoying the great respect as one of the most
mature stars in Hollywood, her directorial debut was
universally praised by the critics. Perhaps, they went
overboard with praises - film is good, but it is basically
television drama material, with rather simplistic plot that
deals with the struggle between the heart (childhood) and
mind (adulthood). Scott Frank's script takes the side of
heart, often portraying the intelligent children as
obnoxious ("Math Magician", brilliantly played by P.J.
Ochlan) or their mentors as emotional cripples who lack the
ability to enjoy the life. The acting, on the other hand is
superb - Jodie Foster has a rather low key performance,
overshadowed by young Adam Hann-Byrd and always reliable
Dianne Wiest. Many of the actors in short, but effective
scenes, manage to overcome the limitations of the weak
script. Foster as director, on the other hand, is quite
capable to make this film entertaining and touching despite
its flaws. In its time, Foster was praised for her debut.
Now she should be praised even more, because GOOD WILL
HUNTING, more recent and more acclaimed film dealing with
the same subject, really pales compared with LITTLE MAN
TATE.

Author
James Brundage
Starring Jodie Foster, Dianne Weist, Adam Hann-Byrd, and Harry Connick, Jr.
     It's been ages since I've seen this film.  I watched it on video when
it first came out, circa 1992 and barely remembered all of it.  I remembered
the little kid getting hit on the head with a globe by Harry Connick, Jr. I
completely forgot about Dianne Weist, and I had a vague memory of Jodie
Foster having something or other to do with it.  But, it was Sunday and I
was bored and it just so happened that The Movie Channel had it on so I
decided to sit back and watch it.  I had nothing better to do.
     Although I am already going senile at a very young age and cannot trust
much of any memories, I do remember thinking that Little Man Tate was a good
film.  I am glad to see that times have not changed that much.
     Little Man Tate follows child prodigy Fred Tate(Adam Hann-Byrd, whose
only other good role came in the form of Ang Lee's The Ice Storm) and
struggling mother Dede Tate(Jodie Foster).  Fred Tate seeks only to have
friends.  Dede Tate is driven by what her son wants.  The third force in
this movie is Jane Grierson (Dianne Weist), a former child prodigy who seeks
to enter into a maternal position as far as Fred is concerned and also to
make sure his intellectual needs are fulfilled.
     The movie is much more psychologically complex however, when you factor
in that Fred has ulcers due to worldly concerns and when you take into light
the director of the movie, Jodie Foster.
     We all know her as the recluse of cinema.  We also may know her as the
runner up for Princess Leia in the original Star Wars trilogy (ironically,
the person who has been often referred to as "the next Jodie Foster",
Natalie Portman, grabbed the female lead in the new Star Wars trilogy).
What most people are not familiar with is that she was in, to a degree, the
position that Fred Tate finds himself in during the film.
     Jodie Foster was able to read by 3, speak fluent French by 14,
graduated Valedictorian a year early from a Private Academy known as Lycee
Francais.  She was managed by her mother, a person who reportedly pushed her
to be in her famous/infamous role as a 13-year-old prostitute in Taxi Driver
while she just wanted to hang out with friends.  Do I sense a very similar
structure when Fred utters the voice-over "All I wanted was for someone to
eat lunch with me?"
     That point aside, the film in and of itself is a basic formula
character drama back when they still made them.  You have conflicts between
characters you care about a tiny bit, tears jerked from the majority of the
audience; tiny bits of comic support placed all over like chocolate jimmies
on Ice Cream.  You have errors here and there, nice cinematography, fine
performances and mediocre directing (yes, Jodie Foster does a better job
than most mainstream drama directors do).  You have some characters that you
wonder about the significance of, Freudian psychology, and events that don't
make any sense as far as the plot is concerned.
     Movies like this are significantly easier to grade with a rubric, such
as stars or letters or ranking out of ten, but I do not use any of these so
I will simply have to say that it is a basically mediocre film.  It is more
a film for people who like Jodie Foster than for people who want to see
actually good films.  It isn't worth spending money over but it isn't worth
skipping, so, using a very trite phrase: you decide.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Good acting, good direction, but a
     really bad screenplay and story trying to make us all thank
     our lucky stars that we are not geniuses.  This film insults
     the viewer's intelligence in specific and intelligence in
     general.  This is the most paranoid view of the highly
     intelligence since SIMON.  Rating: -1 (-4 to +4).
     Poor Pinocchio!  He was a wonderful magical puppet, but he knew it was
much better to be a real live boy.  Then there was Mr. Spock.  He seemed to
pride himself on his logical Vulcan side.  But every chance the writers get
they showed how much better it was to be human.  Kirk's eulogy also said
that of all souls Kirk had met, Spock's was the most human.  Being a normal
human must be the best thing in the whole universe.  And look.  We're all
human.  There are so many humans around, this just has to be Best of All
Possible Worlds.  And you and I are the best things to be.  Just normal
everyday people.  Oh boy!
     Fred Tate (played by Adam Hann-Byrd) is like one of the child geniuses
in CHILDREN OF THE DAMNED.  Daddy is nowhere to be found and Fred clearly
does not get his genius from his mother's side.  But at what looks like age
two he is already reading labels on dinnerware, much to the amazement of his
mother, Dede (played by Jodie Foster, who also directs).  By age seven he is
already brilliant in eight or nine different ways, including painting,
poetry, mathematics, and music.  When he is given a math problem he and the
audience see the numbers float by in a pretty blue stream.
     Fred is discovered by Jane Grierson (played by Dianne Wiest).  Grierson
heads a sort of institute that is funded in some way we never find out.  Its
opulence surely cannot all come from tuition.  Her institute seems to
collect dossiers on emerging child geniuses, screen them, and choose a
select few to be given all the resources they need to develop to their full
potential.  It seems to work sort of like the similar organization in THE
FURY.  One of the children from this sort of environment seriously tells an
interviewer, "I'm working on an experiment involving lasers, sulphuric acid,
and butterflies."  Oh, buy, that sure doesn't sound like much fun for the
butterflies, does it, boys and girls?  But then, we all knew that geniuses
develop things like H-bombs because they have lost the human touch.  Lucky
you and I still have it, huh?
     Well, as it turns out, Jane Grierson has her problems too.  She is a
genius, which means of course she eats funny things.  She likes macrobiotic
foods that make the normal side of Fred vomit.  She listens to genius music
by Mozart (but by the end credits we are back to people-oriented music like
Cole Porter).  And she does not know how to deal with people at all.  Fred
becomes the object of a tug-of-war between Dr. Grierson, who wants to
develop his genius, and his mother, who wants him to be more average.
     Oddly enough, just about everything I did not like was the script.
Except for her choice of material, Jodie Foster did a good job with the
film.  Dianne Wiest turned in a very good performance, as usual.  Like
Kathleen Quinlan, another actress I admire, Wiest seems to have an aura of
both vulnerability and courage.  It is as if she has been badly hurt but has
picked herself up and is carrying on.
     Adam Hann-Byrd really plays a young genius very well.  In spite of the
script not knowing how geniuses behave, Hann-Byrd really does seem bright.
Both Hann-Byrd and Wiest are more engaging than Foster.  Foster seems
satisfied to be the hero of the film and does not do much to steal scenes
from the other two.  Foster maintains our interest in the characters in
spite of the weak script.
