Title
Review for Rock, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Chad Polenz
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1996, R, 136 minutes [2 hours, 16 minutes]
[action]
starring: Nicholas Cage (Dr. Stanley Goodspeed), Sean Connery (John Patrick
Mason), Ed Harris (General Frank X. Hummel), John Spencer (FBI Director
Womack), produced by Jerry Bruckheimer, Don Simpson, written by David
Weisberg, Douglas S. Cook, Mark Rosner, directed by Michael Bay.
I had a difficult time trying to finalize my verdict of "The Rock." It's
completely over-the-top, but it knows this and makes no apologies. At times,
it shows signs of originality, but sometimes it seems like another exhausting
rip-off of a Schwarzenegger flick. I enjoyed it simply for the ride, but at
the same time I couldn't help being cynical.
The film uses all the standard elements for action thrillers involving the
government and terrorists: new weapons, government conspiracies, and a
futuristic, high-tech mood. A ballistic U.S. General, Frank X. Hummel
(Harris), has formed a militia of his friends and fellow Marines. His goal is
to compensate the families of soldiers who were killed during secret
government operatives. His team storms Alcatraz Island, holds 81 tourists
hostage, and threatens to use a powerful chemical weapon against the city of
San Francisco if he, his team, and the unhonored dead soldiers' families are
not paid millions of dollars.
Had the film's biggest flaw not been so obvious, perhaps the countless
other, smaller ones wouldn't have been as noticeable. Why would General
Hummel resort to terrorism to extort money? In this age of technology and
information (especially in the movies), wouldn't it be easier to steal money
through computers? But then again, this is a matter of war-related honor, and
no one can be more stern than insane militias with powerful weapons.
It's obvious someone is going to have to go in and stop Hummel, and the
modern action movie needs an odd couple to make for characterization and
comic relief. This is provided with the characters John Patrick Mason
(Connery) and Dr. Stanley Goodspeed (Cage). Mason is the only person to ever
have escaped Alcatraz, so the government needs his help to break in.
Goodspeed is an FBI scientist who is experienced with the chemical weapons
Hummel is armed with. Connery and Cage have some chemistry, with Cage as the
so-called common man and Connery as an even older Schwarzenegger or
Stallone-type character. Of course they constantly argue and threaten each
other, but always save the other's life when minutes before they would have
killed them.
But this is not a film about dialogue or characterization. It's an action
movie, and there is action here, lots of it. There are car chases that have
almost nothing to do with the plot; scenes in rooms full of gears, steam, and
fire that don't do anything other than pose a threat to the heroes. There's
lots of shootouts, fist fights, knife fights, people dangling from ledges, a
long-lost daughter, a pregnant fiancee... but mostly there's just shootouts
and fist fights. Not to mention the super suspenseful scenes where if the
character twitches, all are dead.
Despite all these gratuitous elements, I never found myself feeling bored.
At times I was a bit worn out by the action and the constant dragging and
milking of the story, but never bored. The stunts and special effects are
fantastic, but not necessarily impressive. For the most part, the dialogue
and storytelling style are easy to swallow, although sometimes it becomes so
trendy (a la Quentin Tarantino, James Cameron) it's distracting.
It's obvious "The Rock" doesn't want to be taken seriously, and for that
it's enjoyable. Then again, it's not as lighthearted as it should have been,
and thus it's difficult to appreciate it as quick fun. 
visit Chad'z movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
Paulo Sargaco
   This movie achieves a doubtfull feat, beeing at the same time 
predictable and a good thriller. The pregnancy annoucement is 
predictable, the change in the missil launch coordinates as well the 
general's (Ed Harris) attitude towards the whole mission are 
predictable, the major's final move is predictable and finally the 
'Mason's dead' scene is quite predictable indeed. But even though all 
these predictabilities exist Michael Bay manages to build a fairly 
interesting thriller ambiance while the movie's heroes, Goodspeed (Sean 
Connery) and Mason (Nicolas Cage), crawl under Alcatraz' tunnels. The 
characters are pretty well constructed and Michael Bay doesn't give in 
to the temptation of making Mason an 
even-though-he's-quite-old-he's-still-a-superman kind of guy and it's my 
opinion making Goodspeed a somewhat goofy and not that combat-fit FBI 
agent was a good bet. 
   Another proof of Bay's good sense is the not excessive amount of 
explosions used in the film, in fact, I would almost dare to say he used 
the exact amount. There were some not that credible scenes though but I 
suppose in movie of this kind it must be almost impossible not to have 
them. As examples we have the scene in wich Mason throws Cormak, FBI 
director (or whatever), out the terrace, holding him only whith the 
thinnest thread. The result would be that FBI would have to get a new 
director and the city would have a hell of a time scraping him from the 
pavement. The other scene is the one in which Cage's character is 
projected into the water by the explosion of the bombs thrown by the 
F-18s. If these bombs were intended to melt the VX stuff I gess poor 
Goodspeed would have turned into a very small amount of ashes scattered 
in the four winds. But I guess leavind dear pregnant Carla without a 
husband to help her raise the unborn child would be a very cruel option 
even though stuff like that happens all the time. But then, this is a 
movie.
   Another scene I would like to mention is the one in wich all the 
SEALs get killed. It is, in my opinion, very well achieved and leaves 
you with a cry of powerlessness stuck in your throat. It hurts even 
though you didn't really had the time to bond with the SEAL's charaters.
   Finally a small word for this movie's motivation. It seems north 
americans are starting to go sweet on these "The Internal Enemy" (or 
"They", if your prefer short terms) stories. It's only healthy to be a 
little paranoid about the next door neighbour.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Sean Connery, Nicolas Cage, Ed Harris, Michael Biehn, 
      William Forsythe, David Morse, John Spencer, John C. McGinley, 
      Bokeem Woodbine, Vanessa Marcil
Director: Michael Bay
Producers: Jerry Bruckheimer and Don Simpson
Screenplay: David Weisberg & Donald S. Cook and Mark Rosner
Cinematography: John Schwartzman
Music: Nick Glennie-Smith and Hans Zimmer
U.S. Distributor: Hollywood Pictures
     It seems that once every dozen-or-so years, Sean Connery has the 
urge to go back into Bondage.  After turning in his tuxedo and Aston 
Martin following 1971's DIAMONDS ARE FOREVER, Connery ventured into the 
acting market as a free agent.  His vow to "never again" play 007 held 
for a little over a decade.  Lured back by an enormous sum of money and 
the offer of limited creative control, Connery returned to Her Majesty's 
Secret Service in 1983, with the "unofficial" Bond entry, NEVER SAY 
NEVER AGAIN.  Now, in 1996's THE ROCK, the veteran actor has once more 
come home to the action genre.  Granted, his character is called John 
Mason, not James Bond, but Connery plays him exactly as he might portray 
a sixty-something version of the world-renowned British spy.  
     THE ROCK is the summer of 1996's first "traditional" action film.  
There are no tornadoes to chase or dragons to slay, and, while the plot 
certainly isn't Dostoevsky, it beats MISSION IMPOSSIBLE's swiss-cheese-
like storyline hands down.  There's some wry humor amidst all the 
wreckage from car chases and missile strikes, and a few of the 
characters are allowed to break through their stereotypical boundaries.  
Not surprisingly, the energy level is high, and there's plenty of 
action, ranking this film alongside BROKEN ARROW and EXECUTIVE DECISION 
among the year's best high-adrenaline offerings.  
     As is often the case with action films, a simple premise is the 
most effective.  Here, it's that a group of ex-Marines have stolen 15 VX 
gas rockets and are threatening to launch a lethal strike on the San 
Francisco Bay area if their demands aren't met.  Led by war hero and 
living legend, Brigadier General Frank Hummel (Ed Harris), the crack 
platoon has holed up on Alcatraz, where they're holding 81 civilians 
hostage.  The U.S. government responds by sending a troop of Navy SEALS 
on a secret raid, using the labyrinth of tunnels beneath the island as 
their entranceway.  Their guide is the only man ever to escape from the 
legendary prison:  ex-SAS operative, John Mason (Connery).  Also in the 
party is FBI agent Stanley Goodspeed (Nicolas Cage), an admitted 
"chemical superfreak" who has the knowledge and experience to defuse 
Hummel's rockets.
     The cast is first rate.  Nicolas Cage, last year's Best Actor Oscar 
winner, doesn't excel as an action hero, but he's a good enough 
performer to forge a likable character.  Ed Harris portrays a 
surprisingly sympathetic bad guy.  Unlike most villains in this sort of 
movie, his Hummel isn't greedy or mad -- just angry.  He's championing a 
cause ("this isn't about terrorism -- it's about justice"), and feels 
that drastic action is the only way to get people to listen to him.  
David Morse, who left an impression in last year's THE CROSSING GUARD, 
is Hummel's right-hand man.  John Spencer portrays the FBI director, 
Michael Biehn is the SEAL team leader, and Vanessa Marcil is Goodspeed's 
pregnant fiancee, who has been placed in harm's way.
     But the real standout is, of course, Connery.  Having lost none of 
his charisma with age, the veteran actor puts to use his mastery of 
mixing humor and action.  Just like Bond, Mason does all his shooting 
and battling with tongue in cheek.  Along the way, he develops a nice 
rapport with Goodspeed, with the two actors clicking in the best "buddy 
movie" fashion.
     THE ROCK's running time could have been trimmed.  There's no reason 
for it to last a bloated one-hundred thirty-five minutes (unless it's 
trying to rival the Bond films for length).  Much of the early, 
character-building material could have been shortened without damaging 
the complexity of the principal trio, and certain aspects of the script 
might have benefiting from a little tightening up.  Flaws aside, 
however, THE ROCK still represents a loud, fast-paced night's worth of 
entertainment.  There are all the expected shoot-outs, explosions, and 
death-defying stunts.  Director Michael Bay (BAD BOYS) doesn't break new 
ground, but he displays his command of the genre by keeping the familiar 
from becoming boring.  His steals from Quentin Tarantino (a master of 
theft in his own right) and others fit seamlessly into this movie.
     Producers Jerry Bruckheimer and the late Don Simpson have a highly-
successful resume that includes TOP GUN and CRIMSON TIDE.  THE ROCK will 
add more luster to that reputation.  Since TWISTER and MISSION 
IMPOSSIBLE are losing a fraction of their tremendous momentum, THE ROCK 
is poised to storm past them.  With Connery, Cage, Harris, and a host of 
harrowing action sequences, this is the kind of breath-stealing summer 
entertainment that audiences crave.  Although not as expertly-crafted as 
DIE HARD or SPEED, THE ROCK is exhausting in its own right -- and that's 
just one of several convincing reasons to see this film.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Christopher Null
     Long touted as the low-budget (in action movie terms) alternative to
this summer's Hollywood blockbusters, THE ROCK has been something of a
question mark among movie forecasters.  It doesn't have any real special
effects like TWISTER or INDEPENDENCE DAY.  It doesn't build on a 40
year-old history like MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE.  It doesn't even have any big
name action stars.
     What it *does* have is some of the best actors working in film today
(Nicolas Cage, Sean Connery, and Ed Harris), seasoned producers Jerry
Bruckheimer and the late Don Simpson (TOP GUN, for starters), BAD BOYS
director Michael Bay, and some relatively unknown screenwriters (David
Weisberg, Douglas S. Cook, and Mark Rosner), who all pull together to tell
one hell of a story -- and hands-down the best action flick of the
year-to-date.
     Based on the first 15 minutes of the film, I started off with some
severe doubts.  Poorly photographed and edited, the intro barely managed to
belch out the premise of the movie: that jaded General Francis X. Hummel
(Harris) and his gang of marine mutineers are taking over Alcatraz with 15
rockets full of V.X. nerve gas, holding the city of San Francisco hostage
until his demands are met.  (These demands are pretty stupid, involving
some cash and reparations for injury to the honor of dead marines.)  Well,
actually paying the money is never an option, so the FBI sends in a group
of Navy SEALS, plus biochemist Stanley Goodspeed (Cage) and hardened
criminal/Alcatraz escapee Patrick Mason (Connery).
     But after this 15 minute lull, THE ROCK explodes into an
incredibly-paced actioner that turns in one of the best entries of the
ever-growing DIE HARD genre.  The best part of the film is Cage and
Connery's chemistry -- the fact that they are such unlikely action heroes
makes them so very believable and so fun to watch.  The comedy in the film
also goes a long way -- something Bay is also good at, as he proved in BAD
BOYS.
     THE ROCK has one thing going for it that no other summer actioner
does, and that's believability.  It's just outrageous enough to make a
movie out of -- just real enough to make you wonder why it couldn't happen
tomorrow.  Plus, you get to see a guy's face melt off, which is always a
bonus.  (The production notes say that this V.X. stuff is *real*.)
     Minor quibbles aside (composer Nick Glennie-Smith ripping off his own
CRIMSON TIDE score and a huge 10-minute meaningless car chase), I highly
recommend action fans see THE ROCK when they finally wake up and realize
just how stupid MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE *really* is.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com
-Screenwriter-Producer  /  Novelist-Publisher
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and e-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     A large part of the idea and appeal of Batman in the early days
was that he was a sort of Dracula, the crime fighter.  After all, if
Dracula was so powerful, think what a crime-fighter he would make.
These days action films seem to be about terrorist plots and the kind
of monster that scares people is the psychological kind like Hannibal
Lector, and so is born a plot where someone with the deductive power of
a Hannibal Lector is an anti-terrorist.  (Okay, he is not exactly
Lector, just like Batman was not exactly Dracula, but Lector clearly is
much of the inspiration for the character.)
     General Francis X. Hummel (played by Ed Harris) is one of the most
respected and highly-decorated Marines this country has, but he also
has seen the government betray some of his closest comrades in arms.
Now he has planned and is executing a grandiose extortion scheme to see
justice done and to make a tidy profit for himself.  He is going to
grab some tourists visiting Alcatraz Island and hold them for ransom.
But that is just a part of the plot.  Just to sweeten the kitty, if he
and his men are paid nicely and on time they will refrain from shooting
some of the world's most deadly chemical agent over San Francisco,
thereby horribly killing everybody within the city limits.  A crack FBI
team is to be sent to Alcatraz to release the hostages and to nullify
the chemical weapon.  Chosen for the assignment is an FBI field agent
and chemical expert, the wise-cracking Stanley Goodspeed (Nicholas
Cage).  The team also needs to send an expert on the interior of
Alcatraz.  And, yes, it turns out they have one, but they do not want
anybody to know about him.  He is not an FBI agent; he is a prisoner
and the only man ever to have escaped from Alcatraz, lived, and gone
free.  But he has never had a trial and the government wants nobody
even to know that he exists.  Just the knowledge of why he is
imprisoned could have serious political implications.  His name is
Patrick Mason and if he does not already sound formidable enough, he is
played by Sean Connery!  (Oh, incidentally, as for escaping from the
Rock, there was someone who did escape from Alcatraz and made it to
shore alive.  He was, however, immediately arrested and at least
reportedly he is the only man to have ever made it to shore.)  If this
illegally imprisoned man Mason can be made to help the team that will
go to the island and try to disarm the missiles, they might have a
chance to succeed.  The problem is that Mason is himself a dangerous
weapon and who he really hates is the FBI.
     Nicholas Cage has a unique acting style.  It is hard to mistake
him for any other actor.  He seems to go back and forth between small
independent films and majors, letting the major films finance him while
he goes back and tries something a little different, like LEAVING LAS
VEGAS which netted him an Oscar.  I am unconvinced that he has real
acting range and most of the characters he plays seems to have the same
schmaltzy, half-awake feel.  Here he is playing an action hero, sort
of, and he brings to it much the same feel as his Ben from LEAVING LAS
VEGAS.  Connery is always fun to watch (dragonized or not) and so is Ed
Harris.  There is little in the roles here that any of them gives us
that we have not seen from him before with the exception that Cage has
not play this physical a role before.  This seems to be very much a
by-the-numbers sort of film.  This is Michael Bay's second major film
as director, the previous being BAD BOYS.
     The score is very, very Hans Zimmer, even for a Hans Zimmer score.
Zimmer is joined by Nick Glennie-Smith, but the style is all Zimmer.
If you have heard the music from BACKDRAFT and CRIMSON TIDE, you know
the score.  The pacing of THE ROCK is a little odd.  Not that there is
not always some action either going on or about to happen, but there is
a long section in the first half of the film that seems to forget about
Hummel's plot altogether and concentrate on whether the FBI can deal
with Mason or not.  Yes, there is action going on, but what is on the
mind of the viewer is the main threat from Hummel, and diverting to
long action scenes built around Mason seems a bad plot choice.  Now I
could be wrong about this, but I doubt that Alcatraz has somewhere in
its bowels a mine train and something else that looks like an amusement
park sky-ride.  And this strange furnace with the flame and the
stamping metal did not make a whole lot of sense to me either.  It was
a plot device needed to provide some suspense, but I for one would like
to know a little more about what the intended purpose of this
contraption was.  Alcatraz seems to have more weird rooms in its lower
levels than the Paris Opera House has in THE PHANTOM OF THE OPERA.
John Schwartzman's photography is heavy on colored filters and a smoky
look.
     In short, this is a summer action film that entertains for an
afternoon and then fades away.  Rate it a high +1 on the -4 to +4
scale.
     For those who were wondering after the film who is this Don
Simpson for whose memory THE ROCK is dedicated, he is the producer of
the film.  According to the Internet Movie Database he produced
FLASHDANCE (1983), THIEF OF HEARTS (1984), BEVERLY HILLS COP (1984),
TOP GUN (1986), BEVERLY HILLS COP II (1987), DAYS OF THUNDER (1990),
THE REF (1994), DANGEROUS MINDS (1995), CRIMSON TIDE (1995), BAD BOYS
(1995), and THE ROCK (1996).
     SPOILER... SPOILER... SPOILER... SPOILER... SPOILER... SPOILER...
     There is much toward the end of the film that leaves a sour taste
in one's mouth.  There were contrivances in the plot that just work too
blatantly to smooth off rough edges.  General Hummel was doing what he
thought was right and there certainly were those in the audience who
would probably have agreed.  He was certainly risking his life for a
principle.  The film would have taken some risks by having an
idealistic villain who was not just a fanatic and it would have been a
nice touch to leave the character that way.  But this was not a script
to take any such risks.  The script had to turn him around and make him
change sides at the end so that there was no chance that anybody would
be rooting for the bad guys.  The script had to make sure that by the
end of the film everyone the heroes were fighting were unquestionably
bad.  That makes the ending just a little too neat.  Having Goodspeed
stab himself in the heart (thank you, Mr. Tarantino), roll on the
floor, then drag himself up in a dramatic pose to wave flares at the
approaching planes was just a bit more overripe a climax than the film
needed.  All that was needed at that point was for a Great White Shark
to jump out of the water and start nipping at his toes while a tidal
wave bore down on him from the right.  And does anybody have any idea
how an injection in the heart can stop someone's skin from boiling
off???
     Oh, and by the way, Alcatraz was closed as a prison in 1963 so if
Mason had spent so long in there it would have had to have been well
prior to 1963.  Now for what was he imprisoned and what were the last
words of the film?

Author
Steve Kong
Many men have died behind enemy lines, and the US Government has chosen to 
forget them.  Well, this has to stop now, and General Francis X Hummel (Ed 
Harris) will do this.
Hummel along with a small group of Marines have taken over Alcatraz, and taken 
81 hostages.  The rescue of the hostages would be easy if not for the batch of 
rockets that the General has pointed at the San Francisco Bay Area.  The 
rockets aren't standard rockets either.  They are armed with the highly lethal 
VX gas.
The Pentagon has two solutions.  One is to bomb the island with bombs that 
will incinerate the deadly VX gas upon contact.  But this solution will also 
take the lives of all the hostages.  The second solution is to attempt a 
nighttime raid on the island with a small group of Navy Seals.  But no one 
knows how to get into the fortress island.  Except for the only man to ever 
escape the island, John Patrick Mason (Sean Connery).  Mason is imprisoned for 
stealing government secrets 30 years ago.  And if they get into the fortress 
island, can they disable the rockets?  Stanley Goodspeed (Nicolas Cage) is a 
chemical expert who specializes in deadly gases such as the VX gas.  Mason is 
let out of prison to help the SEAL team get on the island.  Goodspeed is going 
to the island to disable the rockets.
The driving force behind Goodspeed to disable all the rockets is the knowledge 
that his pregnant fiancee (the beautiful Vanessa Marcil) has flown into San 
Francisco and is now in danger of being killed.  Mason also has a driving 
force, and that is his daughter, for which he has met once in only 30 years, 
is also in San Francisco.  Hummel wants to get the attention of the US 
Government with one final try, and get them to honor the men that he has lost 
in his covert operations.
The Rock is a shined and polished action movie directed by Michael Bay (Bad 
Boys).  The movie takes no risks in trying to be original, what Bay does is 
polish everything and make the movie shine.  The actions consist of 
fistfights, car chases, guns fights, and people hanging from precarious 
places.  But what might sound like an increasingly boring string of action 
sequences turns out to be a roller coaster ride of action.  This is the case 
only because of the heavy camera work and heavy quick editing.  I admit the 
story is a little thin, but it is enough to create the background and push for 
all of the action.
Though the story is more or less a standard action driven type, the characters 
are not the typical characters.  Ed Harris' Hummel is not the typical 
wide-eyed crazy man who has his finger on a big red button ready to kill 
millions.  He has a conscious.  As an example, early on in the movie, before 
he takes the island hostage, he tells a class of children to get on a boat and 
off the island right away.  Cage's Goodspeed is not some 
hotshot-straight-firing tough FBI field agent.  Instead he is a self-described 
"chemical superfreak."  He is the character that goes through the most change 
through the movie.  Connery's Mason is a great character, but probably the 
weakest of the trio.  Other characters and actors that are worth mentioning 
are Vanessa Marcil, in her first big budget film, as Goodspeed's pregnant 
fiancee.  William Forsythe as Paxton a FBI agent.  And last, but not least, 
David Morse who gives a great performance as Major Tom Baxtor.
Mason and Goodspeed share most of their screen time together, often saving 
each other's life.  Their relationship on screen also makes for some funny 
scenes.  And it is with these types of scenes that make the movie stick 
together.  There is balance between action and humor.  Whenever I felt that 
the action was just about to wear me out, something humorous kicks in and I'm 
ready for more.
I only have one small complaint about The Rock.  That is the heavy camera work 
that I mentioned before.  Most of it works very well, but then there are times 
where it is just overused.  This is most evident in the car chase through the 
streets of San Francisco.  Though the sequence is the most enjoyable car chase 
sequence I've seen in a long while, it is marred by the hyper-kinetic camera 
work.
The Rock is an adrenaline rush, and should be seen no matter what.  The Rock 
is on my most watched and most loved film lists.  It is no Shakespeare, but it 
is two hours of pour entertainment.  So, go see it and get ready to be rocked.

Author
Michael Dequina
Put together two Oscar winners (Sean Connery and Nicolas Cage), an
Oscar nominee (Ed Harris), the slick producing team of Jerry Bruckheimer and
the late Don Simpson, a stylish action director (Michael Bay), Alcatraz, and
a bunch of explosives and you get... a major action hit, which The Rock is
sure to become this summer.
The somewhat preposterous plot has a group of renegade Marines, led
by General Francis X. Hummel (Harris), seizing control of the legendary
island prison, take its visitors hostage, and threatening to launch a deadly
biological weapon at the San Francisco bay area if the United States
Government does not give the families of dead Desert Storm vets millions in
government aid.  What does the government do?  Call in a force of Navy SEALs
(led by Michael Biehn), assisted by FBI biochemist Stanley Goodspeed (Cage)
and John Patrick Mason (Connery), an old prisoner who was the only person
ever to escape "the rock," to try to break into Alcatraz, thwart Hummel and
free the hostages.
Contrary to outward appearances, this project shares a number of
striking similarities with Bay's Bad Boys, and not just in terms of visual
style.  Both films open with a break-in; both feature an elaborate chase
sequence which ends with a circling shot of the hero(es) getting up off of
the street; both are essentially bickering buddy films; and in both one of
the heroes has to overcome a shortcoming that the other ridicules: in Bad
Boys, Martin Lawrence had to learn how to drive fast; in The Rock, Cage's
scientist character has to learn how to handle a combat situation.  Parts of
the film are also strongly reminiscent of Crimson Tide, with a little
Executive Decision and Outbreak thrown in.  But these similarities to other
films don't detract from the enjoyment of The Rock on its own terms, which
is not to say it's not without its problems.  While its opening 45 minutes
are far from boring, it takes that long for the plot to really get going,
i.e. for the "good guys" to begin their break into Alcatraz, when the film
really starts cooking.  Bay uses a lot of the flashy eye candy visuals he
brought to Bad Boys--lots of blue light, slow motion, quick camera moves and
editing.  But unlike his debut film, here his style comes dangerously close
to being at the expense of coherence.  It's one thing to use the "shaky
cam," but it's quite another to use it while it is fixed in a tight closeup
of something or someone; the resulting chaotic shot is more confusing than
visually arresting.  In spite of this, though, Bay really knows how to stage
exciting action scenes (the aforementioned chase scene, while using every
chase cliche in the book including the infamous fruit cart, is a real
standout) and large--very large--explosions and juggle them seamlessly with
the comedy, which David Weisberg, Douglas S. Cook, and Mark Rosner's lively
script surprisingly has a lot of.
In taking a dive into action, it would be easy to think that Cage
has sold out, abandoning his trademark quirky characters for a more
straightforward, mainstream action hero.  Happily, that's not the case.
Goodspeed is as much an oddball as Cage's usual roles, a neurotic, wimpy
Beatlemaniac who only very gradually toughens up; needless to say, Cage is
perfect in the role.  Connery proves he still is a credible action hero
after all these years though having his character being a former agent of
the British Secret Service seems a bit too gratuitous.  Harris adds layers
of complexity to a not very dimensional role, and Vanessa Marcil (my
favorite General Hospital star) manages to make a lasting impression as
Goodspeed's pregnant girlfriend Carla.  Those not so fortunate actingwise
are Biehn, who is wasted once again as the SEAL leader (isn't it time that
he be cast in a role deserving of his talent?), and William Forsythe's FBI
director is just a rehash of his police chief character in Virtuosity.
The Rock's ads urge you to "get ready to rock."  After seeing this
energetic action-packed ride that truly does "rock," I can't think of better
advice.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(Hollywood)
Directed by    Michael Bay
Written by     Douglas S. Cook, John Hensleigh, David Weisberg
Cast           Sean Connery, Nicholas Cage, Ed Harris, David 
               Morse, Michael Beihn, William Forsythe
MPAA Rating    "R" (presumably for language and violence)
Running Time   129 minutes
Reviewed at    General Cinemas at Pleasant Valley, Raleigh, NC (7JUN96)
     Now *this* is more like it.  Soaked in testosterone, star-powered by
a trio of A-list actors, and stylish steered by 24-year-old BAD BOYS
director Michael Bay, THE ROCK delivers the sort of all-out sensory
assault that this year's summer season has been in dire need of. 
Producers Don Simpson-- who died this spring and to whom the film is
dedicated to-- and Jerry Bruckheimer (TOP GUN, BEVERLY HILL COP) know that
nothing succeeds like excess.  They've pushed THE ROCK to be their
hardest, fastest, and loudest blockbuster yet.  The results are just that: 
big, bold, immensely entertaining, *and* of surprising depth.  A canny
combination of popular genres, THE ROCK is equal parts caper flick and
buddy pic, mixed with bits and pieces of political conspiracy and
secret-agent stuff.  All shaken, not stirred, of course.  (Imagine an
Oliver Stone-scripted DIE HARD sequel starring James Bond and you're
halfway there.)
     The plot introduces a disgruntled Marine general (Ed Harris) who has
devised an elaborate hostage scheme for getting money to the families of
servicemen who were disowned by the government after certain secret
missions.  He and a crack group of soldiers steal a set of gas-filled
rockets, infiltrate Alcatraz island in the San Francisco Bay, and threaten
mass death and destruction if their demands are not met.  The feds respond
by sending in a SEAL team accompanied by two peculiar characters:  an FBI
chemical weapons specialist (Nicholas Cage) who has more experience with a
guitar than a gun and a former Alcatraz inmate (Sean Connery) with a
rather unusual history.  One knows about rockets; the other knows about
"the Rock."  (Connery's character is a former British intelligence agent,
wink wink, who stole some of J. Edgar Hoover's secrets and has since been
held, without trial, in various maximum- security prisons for the last
thirty years.)
     Before they land on the island-- via underwater transport in a nod to
THUNDERBALL-- both Cage and Connery get their fair share of horseplay. 
Cage is at the center of a nifty bomb diffusion/poison gas sequence near
the beginning of the film, while Connery later performs an ingenious
escape from a high-rise penthouse.  (Oh, if only Pierce Brosnan were so
dashing.) Both Cage and Connery end up in a spectacular car chase, with
one in a "borrowed" Ferrari and the other driving a civilian (!) Humvie. 
The director films much of the chase in close-up, which allows us to see
such dizzying details as a row of parking meters that disintegrates into a
cloud of coins.  (He also knows when to pull back the camera.  Like when a
trolley car goes airborne.) By the time Cage and Connery get to the
island-- to play cat-and-mouse with the bad guys-- the more faint-hearted
viewers may find themselves already exhausted! 
     The strengths of THE ROCK are many:  the contrast between Cage's
mild-mannered intensity and Connery's quicker, more-unpredictable wit; Ed
Harris barking orders in his customarily clipped and no- nonsense fashion;
the furrowed brows of David Morse, Michael Biehn, and William Forsythe as
supporting players in the best boys-club cast since CRIMSON TIDE;
cinematographer John Schwartzman's gorgeous bronze and blue hues; and, of
course, director Michael Bay's remarkable use of quick-cutting.  (You can
probably count on two hands the number of shots that last longer than five
seconds.) The film's flashy, in-your-face-and-you-better-pay-attention
style of narrative may turn off some viewers.  Those who can't see the
subtle differences between "10" and "11" on a volume dial, for example,
may wish to skip this one.  THE ROCK roars and for obvious reasons.  Just
as we need the juice to gloss over the various preposterous plot points,
we also need the juice to ensure that *this* summer's thrill ride is more
exciting than last summer's.  And the summer before.  And the summer
before that one... 
--
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Michael Redman
Summer action films are an odd thing to review. The genre is so narrowly
focused (low on characterization, plot and just about everything else, big
only on the keeping-you-on-the-edge-of-your-seatness), that it's remarkably
rare for it to produce a truly great movie.
The season is usually filled with mediocre -- occasionally downright
horrendous -- offerings and the tendency is to compare: `At least this one
isn't as bad as that one.' 
"The Rock" is definitely different. Starting with wonderful casting and
featuring a mastery of the genre, the film strikes at the heart of summer
excitement with surgical precision. It is so well crafted that you'll be
holding your breath for over two hours and not notice its defects until after
the credits roll. Exactly as it should be.
Ed Harris is a renegade Brigadier General who leads a group of Marines first
in stealing enough deadly gas and rockets to destroy a major city, and then in
taking over Alcatraz along with 81 hostages so they can be in position to take
out the city by the bay. Their demands are on the noble side: money and
recognition for US servicemen killed during illegal military actions.
His very reluctant opponents are the makings of the best odd couple in years.
Stanley Goodspeed (Nicolas Cage) is a  bookish FBI bomb defuser and
self-described chemical `superfreak' drafted into the action hero role. Sean
Connery plays John Mason, a street-wise highly trained British ultra spy who
was in his heyday during the early sixties. (Wait a minute, you don't think he's...?)
Mason was arrested and jailed for 30 years without a trial for stealing
microfilm from J. Edgar Hoover revealing such major US secrets as who really
killed JFK and other nefarious truths. He comes into play here because he is
the only person ever to have escaped Alcatraz. Now he's going to lead the
anti-terrorist squad in.
Mason is exactly the role that Connery is best at: the grand old man still
capable of kicking butt with the best of them. Cage is his perfect foil who
goes by the rules but then loosens up with begrudging admiration for the convict.
Everything starts of with slam-bang action, then goes to big guns, then deadly
gas, then missiles, then more slam-bang, and more big guns and -- you get the
idea. There's not a moment to stop and smell the roses before they get blasted away.
And it's a good thing that you don't have that moment or else you would
realize that the plot is almost exactly the same as "Executive Action", that
some of the filmmaking is sloppy (exactly how many missiles did Cage disarm in
the morgue?) or that "Bad Boys" Michael Bay films the thing like a damned
music video.
But as I said, you never get the time to realize that and Harris, Connery and
Cage are so good that you don't want to and besides it's summer.
[This appeared in the 6/13/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
Steve Rhodes
     As in EXECUTIVE DECISION, we have another movie where part of the
entire country may die, but the President is basically AWOL and his
aides and the military brass handle all the decisions.  This film is
called THE ROCK and rather than wipe out a mass of humanity with
nuclear weapons, this time it is chemical weapons so lethal than a
teaspoon in the air kills everyone in an eight block radius.  To get
large audiences these days you must threaten the lives of hundreds of
thousands, a couple of dozen I guess is considered passe.
     In an extremely well cast movie we have Ed Harris playing the
major bad guy, U. S. Brigadier General Francis Xavier Hummel.  Of
course, it is our government and not him to blame.  As he explains it,
"The men in military special ops are selected to carry out illegal
operations throughout the world.   When they don't come home, their
families are told fairy tales about what happened and denied
compensation.  All my career I've choked on these lines.   Well, here
and now the lies stop."  Later he quotes Thomas Jefferson in justifying
his behavior saying, "The tree of liberty from time to time must be
watered by the blood of patriots."
     General Hummel turns a bunch of our soldiers into mercenaries.
They kill large numbers of people securing the chemical weapons called
V. X. nerve gas.  Once they have it, they take over Alcatraz.  While
holding 81 hostages there, they position four rockets to fire V. X.
over San Francisco unless they get $100,000,000 in 40 hours.  Like
Robin Hood, they are only going to keep part of loot and give the rest
to the relatives of soldiers who have died in other covert missions.
     The best part of the show is Nicolas Cage as Dr. Stanley
Goodspeed, a chemical and biological weapons expert, and Sean Connery
as John Patrick Mason, a non-person who once escaped from The Rock.
Mason was in the British secret service, but did something that caused
our government to incarcerate him for the rest of his life in total
secrecy.  The only problem is that he is an escape specialist and keeps
breaking out of the prisons where he is put.  They let him out of
prison so he can help them sneak into The Rock with a special forces
team.
     Before Goodspeed and Mason go to The Rock for the big rescue, they
have an excessively long car chase through the streets of San
Francisco.  In this highly derivative film the writers try for a small
twist by having it be a yellow Ferrari chasing a Hummer.  Among other
over the top special effects we have a cable car blown straight in the
air and fly over head.  The director (Michael Bay) looks like he had
too much money and wanted to spend it all.  As I was having fun, I kept
thinking of all of the great films made with small budgets that have
something to say and yet it is these, admittedly enjoyable, escapist
entertainment pictures that bring out the crowds.
     The script by Douglas S. Cook, John Hensleigh, and David Weisberg
is preposterous and overly dramatic, but funny.  Typical of the humor
is an interchange between an exhausted Goodspeed and Mason during one
of the action scenes.  Goodspeed asks, "You enjoying this?"  Mason
smiling says, "Well it's certainly better than my average day, reading
Shakespeare and avoiding gang rape in the washroom."  When they finally
get to Alcatraz, Mason starts droning on about the prison's past.  This
irritates Goodspeed who tells him, "I like history too.  Maybe when
this is over we can to the souvenir shop.  Right now I want to find
some rockets."  Finally, Mason explains his qualifications as, "I have
a unique knowledge of this prison facility.  I was formerly a guest
here."
     Beside the excellent acting by the three leads.  There are scores
and scores of good actors in minor roles, including, but not limited to
Commander Anderson (Michael Biehn), Eddie Paxton (William Forsythe),
Major Tom Baxter (David Morse), FBI Director Womack (John Spencer),
Captain Hendrix (John C.  Mcginley), Captain Darrow (Tony Todd),
Sergeant Crisp (Bokeem Woodbine), Special Agent Shepard (Danny Nucci),
and Captian Frye (Gregory Sporleder).
     The editing (Richard Francis-Bruce) is too choppy in the
beginning, but the cinematography (John Schwartzman) is striking
throughout.  The San Francisco scenes have lush, bright colors and the
Alcatraz ones are full of a warm radiance.  If anything, they make the
prison seem almost too pretty.  There are a few cute cinematographic
tricks.  The most dramatic is the quick cut to an extreme close up of a
spinning quarter.
     THE ROCK runs about 2 hours.  It is rated R.  There is a little
sex, no nudity, a fair amount of bad language, and lots of gory deaths.
It would fine for most teenagers.  As an action film, this movie
delivers the goods, but the best part is the acting.  This is a well
made piece of escapism that I recommend to you, but warn you not to
make the mistake of engaging your brain during the show.  Go with the
flow and you will enjoy it.  I give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
