Title
Review for Under the Skin (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
United Kingdom, 1997
U.S. Release Date: beginning 5/22/98 (limited)
Running Length: 1:25
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Sex, frontal nudity, frank sexual 
      discussion, profanity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Samantha Morton, Claire Rushbrook, Rita Tushingham, 
      Stuart Townsend, Christine Tremarco, Matthew Delamere, Mark Womack
Director: Carine Adler
Producer: Kate Ogborn
Screenplay: Carine Adler
Cinematography: Barry Ackroyd
Music: Ilona Sekacz
U.S. Distributor: Arrow Entertainment
     There are times when a performance can carry an entire motion 
picture, and UNDER THE SKIN is an example.  The subject matter, while 
not inherently uninteresting, doesn't break barriers or attempt anything 
radical.  The script is solid and effective, but not extraordinary.  The 
director, first time film maker Carine Adler, shows promise but lacks 
polish, in part because her verite approach bears a resemblance to the 
styles of Mike Leigh and Ken Loach (the cinematographer, Barry Ackroyd, 
is a longtime Loach collaborator).  But all of these things pale into 
insignificance in the light of UNDER THE SKIN's principal performance, a 
stunning debut by 20 year-old Samantha Morton.
     The film is an examination of unresolved grief, and the way it can 
erode a person's identity.  Iris (Morton) and Rose (Claire Rushbrook) 
are sisters.  Iris is the younger, wilder child; Rose, who is five years 
older, is happily married and pregnant.  The two of them are subtle 
rivals for the love and attention of their aging mother (Rita 
Tushingham), but, when Mum dies unexpectedly, it widens the gulf between 
the two girls rather than bringing them together.  Rose reacts to the 
tragedy as one might expect – she is sad and cries, then gets on with 
her life.  Iris, however, doesn't shed a tear and shows contempt for her 
sister's grief, but her personality starts to disintegrate.  She begins 
a search for something (comfort?  affection?  attention?) that throws 
her into a downward moral spiral of sex-and-alcohol binges.  
     Morton makes Iris real.  Every moment she's on screen, the actress 
forces us to accept Iris as a living, breathing individual.  This is a 
raw, riveting performance – deeply moving and free of artifice.  Morton 
handles the complete range of emotions expertly, from the subtle (watch 
the longing in her face as she observes a choir singing) to the overt (a 
wrenching breakdown).  In committing herself totally to this portrayal, 
she gives Adler everything she has, allowing herself to be captured on 
camera in a state of both physical and emotional nakedness.
     Morton is backed by a fine supporting cast.  Claire Rushbrook, who 
is perhaps best known for a role in Mike Leigh's SECRETS & LIES, 
fashions Rose into a three-dimensional individual.  The character has 
the difficult task of balancing anxiety for her sister with her own 
family concerns and sense of loss, so what seems like self-absorption is 
really a defense mechanism.  Rita Tushingham, a star from the '50s and 
'60s, has a small role as Iris and Rose's mother.  Stuart Townsend, one 
of the principals in SHOOTING FISH, is Tom, one of Iris' lovers.
     Adler's approach, which includes a lot of hand-held camera shots to 
achieve a documentary-like look, is effective in bringing out the best 
in Morton's performance.  UNDER THE SKIN is emotionally potent; we are 
not left on the outside looking in.  It's important to the director that 
viewers become absorbed in Iris' sordid world, and that we feel her 
despair and confusion.  There's a note of hope at the end that keeps us 
from leaving the theater in a suicidal funk.
     Before being picked up by Arrow Entertainment for a limited U.S. 
theatrical run (the distributor is too small to finance anything large), 
UNDER THE SKIN made its way around the festival circuit, playing to 
world-wide acclaim.  It won the 1997 Toronto Film Festival International 
Critics Award, the 1997 Edinburgh International Film Festival Michael 
Powell Award for Best British Feature, and was an official selection for 
the 1998 Sundance Film Festival.  While such a landslide of recognition 
doesn't always guarantee quality, this is a case when at least a portion 
of the accolades is deserved.  UNDER THE SKIN is a fine movie, and 
features one of the best debut performances of the year.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   "Under the Skin" is more likely than not to get under yours. 
The low-budget indie is by Carine Adler, known for TV scripts
for Britain's Channel Four and for the movie "Fever" starring
Katrin Cartlidge.  The picture features a thoroughly
professional use of hand-held camera with frequent jump
shots, sudden lunges, contrasting imagery of bright and clear
city with dank, dissolute back alleys, an understated sound
track of disco and classical music, and best of all a radiant
performance by the nineteen-year-old Samantha Morton in a
challenging role.
   Writer-director Adler forgoes the complexities of plot in favor
of a psychological study, but does not forget to throw in ample
suspense, unpredictability, and the ambiance of the English
city of Liverpool where it was shot.  Ms. Morton inhabits the
role of Iris, who resents the preference of her mother (Rita
Tushingham) for sister Rose (Claire Rushbrook) and, being
relatively ignored at home, she is lonely and hungry for
conversation from the men whom she meets.  When her mom
dies and is cremated mere weeks after being diagnosed with
an aggressive brain tumor, Iris seems unable to grieve, a
process which scripter Adler obviously believes is important
before a survivor can get on with her life.  Her incapacity to
feel sorrow leads her to nurse a steadily rising repressed
anger, which she takes out mostly via a series of desperate
sexual encounters--much to the regret of her pregnant, stable,
middle-class sister and her sister's reliable husband, Frank
(Mark Womack).
   The picture falters only when Adler recalls the mother in a
brief episode of magic realism, but the director more than
compensates for showing off Ms. Morton in a riveting
performance.  Her melancholy is so visceral that she may well
tempt the movie audience to call out with the most
understandable advice--that she stop her promiscuous
behavior and simply sit in her room until she can make her
peace with her anguish.  Such counsel, however, would
deprive us of surveying her episodes with a variety of men,
from her fairly boring boyfriend Gary (Matthew Delamere) who
would rather study than talk to her to the handsomest, Tom
(Stuart Townsend), who easily dispatches her to the ecstasy
she seeks, to one particular sleazeball who humiliates her
after repeating the words that should alert anyone in her right
mind, "Trust me."
   Doubtless it was Morton's performance that allowed this
movie to devour the competition from eighteen others at the
Edinburgh festival where it won the Michael Powell Award for
Best British Feature though it cost a mere one million dollars. 
The film is delightfully freighted with heavy sensuality, some
deadpan comedy, and a character whose loneliness should
strike a chord in all of us--as none in the audience is likely to
be a complete stranger to its anguish.  Not Rated.  Running
time: 85 minutes.  (C) Harvey Karten 1998
