Title
Review for Dream with the Fishes (1997)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
David N. Butterworth
When you know you're going to die, the food looks better but you can't
smell it.
That's just one of the many bittersweet observations about death in "Dream
With the Fishes," writer Finn Taylor's offbeat directorial debut.  An
official selection at this year's Sundance Film Festival, the film can
easily be described as "promising."  Viewers with little sympathy for
missed opportunities, however, are likely to be more interested in Finn's
*next* project.
"Dream With the Fishes" is pretty quirky.  Much of its quirkiness is drawn
from the fact that its lead characters, Terry (a nervous, voyeuristic dweeb
solidly played by David Arquette) and Nick (awkwardly realized by Brad
Hunt), are both close to death.  When Nick--who's dying of some unspecified
disease--first meets Terry, Terry is about to commit suicide by jumping off
a bridge.  Rather than talking him out of it, Nick suggests a less messy
but ultimately unsuccessful alternative, and their evolving friendship
leads to a bizarre pact: if Terry will help Nick live out his fantasies
before his time is up, Nick will return the favor by killing him.
Taylor could have gone on a shopping spree with this setup.  Instead, he
tries to balance the story with a combination of offbeat and serio-tragic
episodes.  The quirky ones work: the two engage in some late night nude
bowling with a couple of hookers, for example.  The script's more serious
turns, unfortunately, don't.  When Nick returns to his childhood home in
order to make good on his estranged relationship with his father, their
conversation deteriorates into embarrassing cro-magnon hijinks.  It's
obvious that Taylor is less comfortable with these scenes of domestic
reconciliation than he is with his characters doing--and talking
about--wacky things.
A lot of the ground is familiar or just plain stolen (including a lottery
sequence lifted straight out of a "Full House" episode).  A psychic down at
Fisherman's Wharf tells Nick "you will be given the job of protecting all
the fishes."  This results in him, off-camera, stealing a fish, just the
one fish, from the local aquarium and letting it loose in the sea--huh?.
Often Nick asks Terry about fulfilling *his* fantasies too, but the best
Terry can come up with is "all you can eat Cracker Smacks."  A strange
response from a man we've already witnessed spying on Nick's tattoo artist
girlfriend, Liz (Kathryn Erbe) and other sad women through binoculars.
Grainily photographed (at least in the beginning; for some reason the
graininess disappears about halfway through the film--perhaps this is what
the Sundance people mean by a "lean style"), "Dream With the Fishes" offers
a wonderful soundtrack of tunes by the likes of the Waterboys, Squirrel Nut
Zippers, and Sun Volt that, unlike many pre-packaged indie song scores,
actually fits the mood.  Taylor also employs the splendid Cathy Moriarty as
Nick's Aunt Elise, a faded dancing queen, but her presence is another
example of unrealized promise.
Auspicious is too strong a word to describe the director's first effort,
for "Dream With the Fishes" gets by less on what might have been and more
on its implicit assurances of what's to come.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Finn Taylor.
Cast: David Arquette, Brad Hunt, Kathryn Erbe, Cathy Moriarty, J.E. 
Freeman, Patrick McGaw, Anita Barone, Allyce Beasley, Timi Prulhiere.
1997 - 96 minutes.
Rated R (for nudity and profanity).
Reviewed October 30, 1998.
"Dream With the Fishes," the film debut of director Finn Taylor that 
premiered at Sundance, is a peculiar, unconventional little film, but 
one that is extremely well-written and carefully handled. 
At the start of the film, we meet Terry (David Arquette), a young man in 
his 20's who is a very lonely person, and spends his time acting as a 
peeping tom towards the people that live in the building beside his. One 
night during an attempted suicide, he meets Nick (Brad Hunt), one of his 
spying subjects, whom has a fatal disease and is going to die in a few 
weeks. It seems Terry is depressed because of the death of his wife in a 
car accident. Since one wants to die, and the other is definately going 
to, they form a sort of dysfunctional bond with each other, and proceed 
to live out some of their fantasies, such as nude bowling and taking 
acid. When they travel to Nick's hometown, they are greeted unfavorably 
by his father (J.E. Freeman), who wants nothing to do with him. Instead, 
they end up staying at the home of his Aunt Elise (Cathy Moriarty), an 
understanding former stripper. Soon, Nick's live-in girlfriend, Liz 
(Kathryn Erbe), who Terry secretly fantasizes about, catches up with 
them.
By the sound of, "Dream With the Fishes," it may seem like a film that 
might have very little story, and one that might meander, but that isn't 
the case at all, primarily due to Finn Taylor's smart, offbeat 
screenplay. But then again, this isn't really a "plot"-style film as 
much as it is a "character" film, and that is one of the great joys in 
watching it. The characters are all fascinating people, and it is fun to 
follow them through the film to see what happens next, which is mostly 
because of the fact that it is completely unpredictable. The most 
interesting character is Liz, who is obsessed with tatoos and on the 
surface is quite hard-edged, but slowly begins to hint that that might 
just be a facade to hide under. After all, she does very much care for 
Nick, and is sympathetic towards Terry's problems. Kathryn Erbe plays 
her wonderfully, and she is a talented actress who has been very good 
before in other films, particularly 1993's sweet slice-of-life, "Rich in 
Love." Also standing out is Cathy Moriarty, who almost always brings 
something special to every role she plays.
Aside from the performances and characters, another plus is the 
exuberant soundtrack, which includes an especially appropriate song, 
"Fisherman's Blues," by The Waterboys. 
With "Dream With the Fishes," Finn Taylor has proven himself to be an 
original director that is definately someone to look for in the future. 
He has a way with words, characters, and what is most surprising is how 
touching much of the film is without ever taking the easy route, and 
going for obviousness or predictable, maudlin melodrama. 
           - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
             Dustin
Putman's Film Haven >

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: David Arquette, Brad Hunt, Cathy Moriarty, Kathryn Erbe, 
      Patrick McGaw, J.E. Freeman, Allyce Beasley
Director: Finn Taylor
Producers: Johnny Wow and Mitchell Stein
Screenplay: Finn Taylor based on a story by Finn Taylor and 
      Jeffrey Brown
Cinematography: Barry Stone
Music: Tito Larriva
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Classics
     The first thing I thought of when I heard the title of this film 
was a line from THE GODFATHER:  "Luca Brasi sleeps with the fish."  
(Translation: Luca's dead.)  Granted, sleeping isn't the same thing as 
dreaming, but it's close enough.  However, although DREAM WITH THE 
FISHES deals with death and dying, those are just vehicles for other 
themes:  the difficulty of communicating in today's world and the fear 
of living.  
     It could be argued (fairly successfully, I think) that DREAM WITH 
THE FISHES doesn't do enough with its subject matter.  But, while it's 
true that there's a wealth of untapped material here, what is on screen 
is handled with the necessary aptitude to captivate an audience.  
Because the dialogue has a tendency to be trite, the characters are 
spottily-developed, and the acting is variable, DREAM WITH THE FISHES is 
not a great film.  Nevertheless, it is a good film, and it's hard to 
deny the simple power of the climax.  
     The movie opens in a strange fashion, with images of a man using a 
pair of binoculars to gaze through neighboring windows.  Moments later, 
the watcher, a reserved guy named Terry (David Arquette), and one of his 
objects, Nick (Brad Hunt), pass each other in a convenience store.  
Terry buys a bottle of booze that he takes with him to a nearby bridge, 
where he silently debates the virtues of jumping.  Nick, who has 
followed Terry, offers an alternative:  he'll trade a bottle of sleeping 
pills for Terry's watch.  But is Terry really ready to die?  Nick, on 
the other hand, doesn't have a choice in the matter.  He has a terminal 
disease and the doctors give him only a month to live.  So, rather than 
spending his last weeks in a hospital or with his concerned fiancee, Liz 
(Kathryn Erbe), Nick makes a pact with Terry and the two of them go on 
the road together, trying to determine which of them is better off:  a 
dying man who wants to live or a living man who wants to die. 
     First time director Finn Taylor successfully avoids the pitfall of 
skidding into melodrama.  DREAM WITH THE FISHES never goes for a 
"heartwrenching" payoff.  The characters are presented on their own 
terms, and they don't lose their abrasive sides simply to make us more 
comfortable with them.  The director also doesn't opt for the "arm's 
length" perspective -- we may not find either Terry or Nick appealing, 
but that doesn't prevent us from empathizing with them.  DREAM WITH THE 
FISHES isn't meant to be watched from a detached viewpoint any more than 
it's intended to provoke streams of tears.
     However, while the movie's approach, which shuns the nihilism of a 
SAVAGE NIGHTS and the mawkishness of a MY LIFE, is on-target, the tone 
is off.  The opening scenes are rife with the mistakes of a freshman 
film maker, and it shows.  For a while, Taylor doesn't seem to know 
where he's going and the actors don't have a solid handle on their 
characters.  Although David Arquette, Brad Hunt, and Kathryn Erbe 
gradually grow into their on-screen alter egos, the first third of the 
picture is marred by awkward, unconvincing performances.
     The good news is that as DREAM WITH THE FISHES progresses, it 
exhibits considerable improvement.  Actors like Cathy Moriarty (as 
Nick's aunt) and J.E. Freeman (as Nick's super-macho father) add a 
little color and flavor to the proceedings, and an interesting contrast 
is presented between Nick's dream woman and his real one.  We also learn 
that the tragedy of Terry's life isn't what we think it is.  He's the 
epitome of loneliness and isolation, cut off from the rest of humanity 
by his perception of himself and his inability to interact with others.  
Despite his constant assertion that he has no fantasies, we learn that 
his entire life is balanced on an intricate fabrication less stable than 
a house of cards.  While the ending offers hope, it remains carefully 
ambiguous, shunning an obvious Hollywood denouement.
     At times, DREAM WITH FISHES is dream-like.  The film's grainy look 
creates a gritty, down-to-earth mood.  There are no pastels or beautiful 
vistas here.  Irrespective of the heavy nature of the story, there are 
moments of sharp comedy (a cop's reaction to a dose of acid) and giddy 
exuberance (naked bowling).  However, DREAM WITH THE FISHES is still 
afflicted with the kind of quirkiness that has become a hallmark of 
Generation X films.  At least in this case, it seems better controlled 
than in many similar films about ennui.
     DREAM WITH THE FISHES is definitely flawed, and many of its faults 
are opaque, but the film possesses a compelling quality that can draw an 
audience into the story and make us care about the characters.  Taylor 
gets many of the details right and offers enough small surprises to make 
his directorial debut worthwhile.  This combined buddy movie/road movie 
veers off the interstate to follow a less commonly traveled course.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@mail.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Edwin Jahiel
DREAM WITH THE FISHES (1997) ** Written and directed by Finn Taylor.
Photography, Barry Stone. Editing, Rick Le Compte.Production design, Justin
McCartney. Music, Charles Raggio. Cast : David Arquette (Terry), Brad Hunt
(Nick), Kathryn Erbe (Liz), Cathy Moriarty (Aunt Elise), Patrick McGaw
(Don), J.E. Freeman (Nick's father). A Sony Pictures Classics release. 96
min. R (drugs, sex, language)
For Sony Pictures to put "Dream With the Fishes" in the "Classics" group
is a bit of a stretch. A small picture in budget and production values, it
is also small on ambitions. But it is a somewhat offbeat buddy movie,
perhaps bizarre for the 1990s but quite close to certain films of the
hippie days.
Scriptwriter and now first-time director Finn Taylor has concocted a
relatively brief encounter of two youngish men from different backgrounds.
Terry is a "suit," a sad-sack accountant-type (with my apologies to that
profession). We get no details or explanations about the man, his
character, or his life, but it is clear that unspecified insecurities,
sexual frustrations and such have made him very lonely. Whether a result of
those deep seated problems or of others, Terry has become a binocularized
voyeur. From his apartment he spies on the apartments across the street,
catching especially female nudity. It is joyless, unexciting voyeurism
rather than "Rear Window" curiosity or esthetic appreciation and
gratification.
Soon we meet Terry on the Golden Gate Bridge as he prepares to jump. By an
unlikely movie-coincidence, Nick, a stranger whose girl-friend Liz Terry
"voyeurizes" most, is around on the bridge.He talks him out of this manner
of suicide, suggesting with some black humor better ways. He takes him to
his place. Terry blurts out that the death of his wife in a car accident
had made his life meaningless. (It's not that simple but I'll keep mum).
After some unconvincing stuff involving Terry's watch, it is traded with
Nick for a bottle of sleeping pills. But after swallowing them, Terry
changes his mind. When his stomach is pumped he finds out that the pills
were multi-vitamins.
The undead Terry is furious at Nick. (Why? A good question since "practical
joke" aside, Terry had balked before suicide). He finds out that Nick has
an unnamed disease and only weeks to live. One thing leads to another.
Nick, wishing to fulfill his fantasies before he dies, proposes that Terry
bankroll him and join him in living life "on the edge." This will be good
for both men. The ultimate bonus is that Nick promises to kill Terry at the
end of their explorations.
The Kevorkianish pact is a done deal. It's all the more incredible as
earlier Terry apparently wanted to go on living. Or did I miss something?
It was perhaps the method (suicide-by-pills) he had rejected.
The two new companions embark on a small-scale series of desultory
wanderings that hardly deserve to be called a Micro-Odyssey. Early on, high
on acid, they go to what's like an amusement park. Unless you know San
Francisco and identify Fisherman's Wharf it could be anywhere.(The same
goes for all settings). The episode is a stoned variant of the old
boy-dates-girl and my oh my, aren't amusement parks fun! A fortune-teller
tells Nick : "In three weeks you'll be given the job of protecting the life
of all the fishes." Since "to be with the fishes" means -- at least in
gangster films-- that a victim was executed and thrown in the waters, the
expression is none too relevant here.
Life on the edge is a pathetic affair. It involves bowling in the nude
(with women); visiting Nick's Auntie, a retired stripper; seeing Nick's
alienated father; meeting an old failure of a pal; and other such
unexciting activities. They crest with Nick, nearing his end, trying to rob
a bank in the nude.
In my notes I often find the word "uninteresting." That's what all the
characters are. Realistic-naturalist--untheatrical acting can be a good
thing but loses its value when characters and situations lack interest.
The strongest element here is death, which was called "the ultimate
obscenity" by, I believe, writer Albert Camus. No matter to whom it comes,
death is death. In movies, audiences rejoice at the death of villains. In
movies at least, death becomes more affecting, pathetic or tragic when it
happens to heroic characters, good persons, innocent individual or masses,
or simply to interesting persons. And even with many negative types, there
can the sadness of those left behind. In "Dream" there's very little of all
this. We also sense that Nick will not be really missed, even by Liz whom
he marries on his death bed.
Terry alone will miss him. The finale combines an unlikely bit about
Terry's watch and the predictable conclusion that Nick's life-affirming
love of just being, will make a new, unsuicidal man of Terry. However, the
movie's moving side is that step-by-weird-step, true friendship has grown
between the two protagonists. Shown without sentimentality, this is the
film's main value.
Technically "Dream" is fuzzy. Whether deliberately, to go for a realistic
look in defiance of studio precision, or from amateurishness, I can't tell.
Camera movements can be jerky, colors often poor or washed out, the
lighting inadequate. Work like this one that strive for a semi-documentary
look (e.g. using just existing light), would be better off in black and
white that tolerates contrasts better. Yes, I know that, sadly, viewers
generally do not like black and white. But many connoisseurs do, and this
is a film that will be seen by art house, not mainstream, audiences.

Author
Kevin Patterson
DREAM WITH THE FISHES does not waste much time in planting itself firmly in
some pretty strange territory. It begins with Terry (David Arquette), a
neurotic voyeur, spying on Nick and Liz, the couple in an apartment across
from his. Nick is ignoring Liz, and when he heads out for the evening,
Terry goes to a liquor store, buys himself a bottle of booze, and prepares
to jump off the nearest bridge. He's interrupted by Nick, who stops by to
ask him for the time, then convinces him that jumping off a bridge is a bad
method of suicide, and finally offers to trade a bottle of sleeping pills
for Terry's wristwatch. Unbeknownst to Terry, Nick has given him vitamins
instead. When Terry realizes what's happened, he follows Nick again, this
time to read him off and get his watch back, only to find that Nick is in
the hospital, undergoing treatment for a terminal disease that will kill
him in another month.
Thus begins one of the weirdest setups for a buddy movie that I can recall.
The rest of the film is comparatively tame (but then again, what wouldn't
be?): Nick decides he'd rather not spend his last moments in a hospital,
and convinces Terry to help him escape so that the two of them can go on a
sort of last-chance road trip. They proceed to have numerous little odd
adventures, the most amusing of which involves Nick, high on LSD, deciding
to steal a fish from a nearby aquarium and set it loose in the sea, before
they run out of money and have nowhere to go but back to Nick's hometown.
There we are introduced to Nick's dysfunctional family, as well as his old
friends and a former girlfriend, while the perpetually timid Terry starts
to come out of his shell as he becomes more comfortable with Nick's various
acquaintances.
Both Nick and Terry live on fantasy rather than reality. For Nick, it is
the fantasy of omnipotence: he's the kind of guy who thinks he's always
right, that everyone would be a lot better off if they would just listen to
him, and that then he could have all the fun he wants and not have to worry
about the consequences. Nick's journey is not one of discovery but one of
denial, as he spends most of the film pulling stunts rather than thinking
about what his life has meant or resolving old conflicts. Terry's fantasy,
on the other hand, is that of withdrawal: his immediate response to any
uncomfortable situation is to remove himself from it. He prefers to live
vicariously through others, as a voyeur, rather than to make a life for
himself, and ultimately this fantasy has manifested itself through the
suicide attempt.
Writer/director Finn Taylor has found himself in something of a Catch-22
here: he knows these characters and their shallow, fantasy-prone tendencies
so well that the film itself risks becoming shallow and fantasy-prone.
Terry learns to enjoy life and realizes he doesn't want to kill himself,
but he owes most of his "discoveries" to Nick, who can't really be said to
be any more functional than Terry aside from not being suicidal. It's a
start, of course, but the events of DREAM WITH THE FISHES would really just
be a small step in Terry's development as a more functional and satisfied
person.
I am assuming that Taylor knows this and knows that his audience knows this
and does not intend for people to walk away thinking all is well for Terry.
Accordingly, I'd say DREAM WITH THE FISHES is a moderate success. It's a
simple story, nothing monumental, but it's a story that is told with skill
and consistency and stays true to itself and to its characters.
Send comments to ktpattersn@aol.com.
Film Reviews Page:
http://members.aol.com/KTPattersn/reviews.html

Author
Alex Fung
DREAM WITH THE FISHES (Sony Pictures Classics - 1997)
Starring David Arquette, Brad Hunt, Kathryn Erbe, Cathy Moriarty
Screenplay by Finn Taylor
Produced by Johnny Wow, Mitchell Stein
Directed by Finn Taylor
Running time: 97 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned. 
    -------------------------------------------------------------
It's rather easy to start tuning out after about twenty minutes of
Finn Taylor's first feature film, DREAM WITH THE FISHES, when the
plodding, tedious opening sequence finally pays off with a potentially
provocative setup.  Any hopeful expectations, however, are soon
vanquished as the film settles upon being an uninvolving
mismatched-buddy movie which is rarely as funny as it aspires to be
nor nearly as affecting as it eventually strives to be in the film's
latter half.
The film's central characters are Terry (David Arquette), a depressed,
lonely voyeur who claims to be despondent since the death of his wife
in an automobile accident, and Nick (Brad Hunt), a carefree young
street tough later revealed to be terminally ill.  Nick lives in the
apartment building across from Terry, who spies on the trysts between
Nick and girlfriend Liz (Kathryn Erbe) with his trusty set of
binoculars, but the two young men first formally meet at the Bay
Bridge where a half-drunk Terry precariously teeters upon the edge,
unconvincingly vowing suicide.  Nick casually asks for Terry's
wristwatch, and eventually cons Terry into a trade - the watch for a
bottle of pills.  Of course, Terry finds that the pills do not end up
having the presumed lethal effects, and he angrily sets out to find
Nick in order to retrieve his watch.  Learning of Nick's condition
(he only has a handful of weeks left), Terry's compassion kicks in,
and the two eventually come to a distinctly peculiar arrangement -
Terry will agree to bankroll the dying Nick's lifelong fantasies, and
Nick will fulfill Terry's death wish by killing him.
This is a promising premise, and Mr. Taylor's film could have gone any
number of ambitious ways from this point, but he instead chooses to
capitalise upon the obvious inversion of the characters (Terry is a
repessed, mournful character who wants to die, while Nick is a free
spirit with a joie de vivre who is dying but wants to live) and takes
the easy route out by turning DREAM WITH THE FISHES into a typical
lark where the two characters engage in a series of generally dull
exploits, and where the straight-laced character learns to enjoy and
ppreciate life when hooked up with a quirky character.  This is
by-the-numbers plotting, buddy movie/road movie redux.
However, DREAM WITH THE FISHES is most hampered not by its uninspired
storyline, but by the characters which carry the story - it helps in
such a film to have at least one of the protagonists be at least
somewhat empathetic, if not likeable.  Unfortunately, that is not the
case here, where both of the film's leading characters are thorougly
uninteresting and annoying, giving the audience very little to
sympathise with their respective plights, and even less reason to
want to follow their onscreen exploits.  Far from a romp, this fatal
flaw makes DREAM WITH FISHES more like a chore to endure than a
playful jaunt, and undermines the attempts at emotional resonance in
the latter stages of the film as the two men begin to bond.
Mr. Taylor's dialogue sporadically falls flat in DREAM WITH THE
FISHES - while attempting to capture a quirky and clever tone, it too
often comes across instead as hopelessly contrived (witness such
lines as "You should have asked something more interesting, like 'Do
you enjoy the pain?' - See, that's provocative, leaves room for
further questions.")  The film enjoys a few inspired moments - the
urn scene, a session of nude bowling, the policeman joining in on
Terry and Nick's acid trip - but unfortunatetely these instances are
few and far between, and for the most part the humour in DREAM WITH
THE FISHES registers more as attempts rather than actual successes.
This occurs particularly often during the film's opening sequence -
as Terry is wrestling the bedridden Nick for his watch in the
hospital, I'm realising that this is *intended* to be funny, although
nary a smile crept upon my lips - which is probably due to the
obvious fact that it's painfully clear to the audience from the outset
that Terry is going to be thwarted in his initial suicide attempts,
sapping any element of surprise or amusement from Nick's scheme of
tricking him; this is not a film which has the wherewithal to kill
off its leading star in the opening ten minutes.  The entire sequence
is, then, clearly an exercise for character exposition, with attempts
at humour terribly diminished by utter predictability.
Among the cast, coming off best is David Arquette, the current master
in the portrayal of meek, squirming, stammering fresh-faced characters
- he would have been terrific as the lead for George Huang's SWIMMING
WITH SHARKS - who gets to apply his adeptness for timidity as Terry.
Mr. Taylor ambitiously employs an interesting visual technique, where
the portions of the film set in an urban environment have been
processed to appear extremely grainy and heavily saturated, as
opposed to a bright, crisp look for the smalltown scenes.
The charge of DREAM WITH THE FISHES's protagonists being wholly
unempathetic is a bit of an odd one coming from me; I seem to have a
predilection for films with unlikeable characters, and indeed, in many
cases have I been in the minority, supporting films which have been
condemned as interminable due to the difficult, audience-unfriendly
nature of their characters. For DREAM WITH THE FISHES, though, I did
find myself on the flip side of coin, often hoping that the film
would quickly conclude, and that the Nick character would just hurry
up and die.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"At one point when berated and bloodied by her male military superior,
 Moore screams out a guttural invitation to him to enjoy partaking in the
 absorption of a certain anatomical member." - Dan Cox, VARIETY, on G.I. JANE

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Even by the standards of independent cinema, DREAM WITH THE FISHES is 
a tough film to categorize.  At times, writer/director Finn Taylor's debut
feature is edgy and tough-talking; at other times, it's a surreal odyssey;
at still other times, it's a sensitive drama of male bonding.  It's a
genuinely bizarre experience, something akin to watching BRIAN'S SONG as
it might be re-made by Abel Ferrara and Gus Van Sant.
     Genuinely bizarre film experiences are rare enough that DREAM WITH
THE FISHES should have been commendable on that count alone.  For the
first half hour or so, it is actually quite compelling, telling the story
of a depressive San Francisco executive named Terry (David Arquette) who
spends his evenings spying on the building across the street through his
rear window.  One night Terry prepares to end his life by jumping off the
Bay Bridge, but he is interrupted by Nick Ambrusio (Brad Hunt), a
small-time crook and scam artist.  When Terry's resolve to finishi himself
off falters, Nick offers him a strange bargain.  Nick, it turns out, has
only a few weeks to live, and wants to live out some of his life-long
fantasies.  If Terry will bankroll those fantasies, Nick will provide a
service:  he'll kill Terry himself at a time of Terry's choosing.
     Those introductory scenes between Nick and Terry are the best DREAM
WITH THE FISHES has to offer, maintaining a sense of mystery and a
dangerous tension between the characters.  Nick, the hustler (a sharp,
eye-catching performance by Hunt), seems to be working some kind of long
con; Terry, the miserable voyeur, could be unstable enough to be far more
trouble than Nick expects from a guy in a tie.  Along with Nick's
girlfriend Liz (Kathryn Erbe), they form a unsteady triangle which keeps
you watching and guessing.
     Then, of all the posible things he could do with the characters next,
Taylor does perhaps the least interesting:  he turns them into mis-matched
buddies.  Over their shared misery they begin a series of adventures
which, in no necessary order, include an acid trip at Fisherman's Wharf, a
round of naked bowling, a difficult reunion between Nick and his father
(J. E. Freeman), Terry winning the California lottery, and a naked bank
heist.  Nick the Hustler turns into Nick the Misunderstood Sensitive Guy
Who Had a Bad Childhood, while Terry the Miserable Voyeur turns into just
another Vaguely Unhappy Guy Who Needs Only to Loosen Up under the
tutelage of a Doomed Free Spirit.  All sense of invention, the life-blood
of independent film-making, dissolves into inevitable pathos.  
     Taylor could have taken the characters in DREAM WITH THE FISHES and
sent them off on a hyper-violent crime spree, or had them sit around for
ninety minutes comparing notes on generational angst.  It's a pleasant
surprise that he does neither, but his resolution to this story is neither
particularly pleasant nor particularly surprising.  If there's one way I
never expected DREAM WITH THE FISHES to end, it was with a life-affirming
scattering of ashes.  It's the ending to a made-for-Lifetime movie with a
testosterone twist.  
