Title
Review for Circle of Iron (1979)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Martial arts fantasy starring David Carradine as a blind wanderer who
carries a four-foot flute and dispenses koans to wannabee hero Jeff
Cooper.  Cooper, who plays a brash muscleman named Cord, is seeking
the path that will lead him to the Book of Enlightenment.  Naturally
there are trials along the way.  Oddball Kung Fu (or more accurately,
Kung Flute) movie has surprisingly little violence and disappointingly
little to offer in the way of martial arts.  As neither Carradine or
Cooper are sufficiently proficient fighters, their combat scenes
aren=92t terribly exciting - Carradine was obviously picked because of
his role in TV=92s KUNG FU; Cooper=92s trademark seems to be to strike
defensive poses with his hands as if he=92s preparing to make shadow
puppets.  Film has a low-rent atmosphere despite its technical polish,
but most striking feature is the careless mise-en-scene that permeates
the entire picture - most jarring for me was hearing an irrelevant
blast of Susato=92s Pavane Bataille inside a cave of monkey-men! 
Starting off in what appears to be a Tibetan monastary (with Roddy
MacDowell in a piece of miscasting worthy of the musical LOST
HORIZON), the film=92s first jolt comes upon utterance of Cooper=92s
booming, impossible American accent.  Playing the
barbarian-as-tourist, Cooper meets up not only with Carradine but also
a mixture of Mongols, Tartars, Berbers, and an elderly Hebrew couple
who seem to have strayed in from the biblical epic next door.
This total lack of unity (it was filmed in Israel, just to add to the
overall dislocation), while seen as CIRCLE OF IRON=92s greatest
liability, could also, however, be its biggest asset.  It really does
enforce the feeling of an alternate world.  It=92s as if the film-makers
were given a surplus of props and costumes and went to town with them
- even Carradine dresses up in four different roles.  Fortunately,
film doesn=92t take itself seriously, and Carradine has some good
one-liners.  I don=92t think it lives up to Bruce Lee=92s original story
concept however (he died before it went into production), and there=92s
never any real explanation about the true meaning of the quest for the
Book - just the pat pseudo-philosophical punchline you=92d come to
expect.  If anything, story lazily perpetuates the idea that those who
have Ultimate Knowledge also have the right to beat up anybody who
wants to ask them about it.
