Title
Review for Krippendorf's Tribe (1998)
Number of Reviews
13

Author
Jon Popick
Krippendorf's Tribe.  A movie about a guy who lies about stuff to get
free money.  It sounds like the plot for the new Pauly Shore movie (and
who decided to stop letting him make films?).  Unfortunately, it's the
latest vehicle for Richard Dreyfuss (Mr. Holland's Opus), who either
doesn't read his scripts anymore or saw Ace Ventura 2: When Nature
Callsand really really liked it.
Dreyfuss stars as James Krippendorf, a chaotic unkempt archeology
professor at an unnamed university.  As the film opens, we finds James
nodding off while watching home videos of a New Guinea trip that he took
with his wife and children.  It seems that he and his wife, who was also
an archeology professor, were in search of a `lost tribe' that has never
had contact with outsiders.  I remember reading about a tribe like this
in the seventh grade, and I was just as frigging bored then, too.
James wakes up from his flashback to a filthy cluttered home he shares
with his three kids.  Apparently, his wife has died and James has used
the grant money they had earned to keep the family afloat financially.
Talk about a great role model for all of those current (and future)
single fathers out there.
Things begin to spin out of control when Veronica (Elfman, Dharma &
Greg), an adoring former student who is now a new professor at the
university, pops in to remind James about his big lecture on the lost
tribe.  Big lecture!  Oh, no.  James has forgotten all about it and is
completely unprepared.  The humanity of it all!
Now, your average person in this situation might fib a little bit to get
out of a jam and hope that the problem just goes away, but not our
James.  He not only confirms his contact with the lost tribe, but also
makes up facts that are so astounding that he effectively turns the
archeological community on its collective ear.
Igniting the public's interest with his marvelous story, James is
pressured to produce video of the tribe.  Again, the average person
would probably be able to quickly sidestep this issue, but not our
James.  He actually decorates his back yard and dresses his kids up to
film a faux version of his fantasy tribe.  The tape generates more
excitement and James must make more phony tapes to quell the teaming
masses.
The ensuing scenes are predictable and, for the most part, boring.
James does get to dry hump his Father-in-law (Tom Poston, Newhart) while
dressed as the leader of the tribe.  Oh, yeah, and he somehow cons a
drunken Veronica into face paint and shags her rotten while filming the
entire event as a tribal mating ritual.  And there is a scene at the end
when James and Veronica have to keep switching in and out of the
tribesman costume that is very reminiscent of The Brady Bunch Halloween
episode where Peter has two dates and one thinks he's Frankenstein and
the other thinks thatoh, just forget it.
Dreyfuss tries to be hilariously over-the-top (as in Jim Carrey) and
Elfman seems wasted in an underdeveloped role.  The kids, led by Natasha
Lyonne (Everyone Says I Love You), are a predictable bunch: the eldest
is the mother figure, the middle one wants a dog and the youngest hasn't
spoken since Mom died.  And we never find out why she died either.  I
expected more from Todd Holland, who also directs the outstanding HBO
series, The Larry Sanders Show.
The truly amazing feat is that these archaeological experts are so
easily duped.  James would have needed an eight-camera shoot to pull off
the video that he presented to them.  They somehow don't seem to grasp
the idea of film editing.  Wrap that up with an ending so implausible
that it actually gave me diarrhea, and you've got yourself one fine
picture.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
KRIPPENDORF'S TRIBE (1998)  ** 1/2  Directed by Todd Holland. Screenplay,
Charlie Peters, based on the book by Frank Parkin.Photography,  Dean
Cundey. Editing, Jon Poll.  Production design, Scott Chambliss. Art
direction, Bill Rea.Costumes, Isis Mussend en. Music, Bruce Broughton.
Produced by Larry Brezner. Cast: Richard Dreyfuss (James Krippendorf),
Jenna Elfman (Veronica Micelli), Natasha Lyonne (Shelly),  Gregory Smith
(Mickey), Carl Michael Linder (Edmund),  Lily Tomlin (Prof. Allen), Stephen
Root (Gerald Adams),Doris Belack (President Porter), Julio Oscar Mechoso
(Simon Alonso),  Elaine Stritch (Grandma), Tom Poston (Grandpa), David
Ogden Stiers (Henry Spivey), et al. A Buena Vista release of a Touchstone
Picture. 93 min. PG-13.
"You who enter here, abandon all logic." Depending on a film's genre, lack
of logic can range from disastrous (in serious dramas), to annoying (in
action movies), to anodyne (in comedies), to fun (in farces). And
"Krippendorf's Tribe" is a farce as broad as the Titanic was long -- the
real ship, as the movie's is only 4/5ths to scale.
"KT" is the story of an academic and most imaginary fraud. Anthropologist
Professor Krippendorf (Hoffman) had received a $100,000 Proxmire Foundation
grant  to find a "lost" tribe in New Guinea. He, his wife -- also an
anthropologist -- and their three kids went on a field expedition, but it
came a-cropper.
Things get cinematically murky from here on out. Upon their return, Mrs. K
died (where, when, of what?). Apparently Prof.James Krippendorf claimed
that the expedition was a success but kept stalling with making the results
public. In reality, he fell apart professionally and personally, made a
mess of being a single father, and in the past two years has gone through
the rest of the grant money to raise his kids and buy stuff for the home.
He is broke and way behind with his mortgage payments.
The above is a relatively coherent decryption of the movie's messy --but
often funny -- exposition. It opens with a view of the K household in
disarray, furniture that looks partly like the outcome of Goodwill
(Industries) hunting, the Professor in a state of confusion and the kids
not respecting Papa.
Old Hollywood college movies were populated by overage students who danced,
sang, lit bonfires and apparently majored in ukulele. Nowadays, pictures on
Academe, in keeping with the times may stress research. So,when Veronica
Micelli (Jenna Elfman) persistently bangs on the Professor's door, she sets
the plot in motion. Veronica, whose height dwarfs Krippendorf's, was an
adoring student of his and is now a new Assistant Professor of Anthropology
at the University. She wants to collaborate with her idol --  a good way to
get fame, promotion and tenure. She also reminds him that he is giving a
lecture on his findings. In a matter of hours.
Krippendorf's panic,chaotic school office and his bluffing throughout his
lecture are as amusing as they are unlikely. Under pressure, the
invent-as-you-go scholar baptizes the imaginary tribe Shelmikedmu --
concocted from the names of his children -- and describes it by using his
own experiences as a single dad. His biggest "discovery" is that the
Shelmikedmu fathers alone raise their progeny and are respected.
So far, so bad for Prof. K. The worst news is that visual proof of his
success is expected of him. It's a nightmare. The professor must feel like
Kafka's K. With necessity being the mother of invention, he gathers his
children, builds a "New Guinea"" landscape in his yard (!), adds huts and
stuff (!) and disguises the kids as "natives" (!)  Then he films all this
like a pro, on 16 mm. no less (!).In record time (something like a few
hours) the film is shot, apparently developed at home, and edited with real
anthropological footage spliced in (!)
What follows is chaotic madness, fluff as credible as Mel Brooks
extravaganzas, the Three Stooges, The Marx Brothers or Monty Python. The
tangled web we weave whenever we deceive grows non-stop and exponentially.
At every step additional inventions are required, all  unbelievable, of
course. The tribe -- eventually including co-conspirator Veronica -- goes
through lightning-quick masquerades, transformations, and complications
which include a rival, suspicious and witchy colleague (Lily Tomlin, played
as a caricature) suddenly taking off for New Guinea so as to discredit
Krippendorf.
On the whole, the picture is entertaining, albeit uneven.  It creates in
the audience the gamut of reactions: big laughter, chuckles, smiles,
smirks. Shudders too, since this "Widowed...with Children" farce can be
just as tasteless as "Married... with children" and at times just as
unfunny.
Alfred Hitchcock's famous remark "It's only a movie" applies here. Set
aside your morals, as a precondition to having fun. Take "Krippendorf's
Tribe" solemnly and its heavy load of bathroom and sexual "humor" is
reprehensible, as is the spectacle of a dysfunctional family bonding
through major cheating.
What certainly is politically incorrect is not the showing of white people
in blackface, but the transparent and insensitive use of African-Americans
(and a South African) to impersonate "real" New Guineans. Couldn't the film
makers have gone the extra mile and somehow found natives of New Guinea?
Superfluously tacky too is a big banquet to honor donor Mrs. Proxmire on
her 100th birthday.The sight of her and of several guests connected to
intravenous machines is pure ageism -- not helped by an amazingly unfunny
question to the centenarian: "Was it you who died or your sister?"
"KT" is to a great extent a burlesque send-off of Academe. The script,
starting with the scandalous cheating on, or illegal use of grants, takes
aspects of academic life and pushes them to most outrageously absurd
levels. Cannily, it throws in the in-joke  (wasted on most viewers) of the
name Proxmire used for the grant and for a major campus building.
Wisconsin's great Senator William Proxmire served for 32 years, retiring in
1989. A devoted public servant, he created in 1975 his famous Golden Fleece
Award which,  each month,  singled out a "wasteful, ridiculous or ironic
use of the taxpayers' money." In 1985 he declared:"My own favorite was the
study to find out whether sunfish that drink tequila are more aggressive
than sunfish who drink gin." (See below for a sampling of other awards) *
Performances range from adequate to very good, the latter by the manic
Dreyfuss and his brood. In a work of pure fantasy the youngsters are smart,
imaginative, and deliver their lines more convincingly than in most
child-roles.Jenna Elfman is overdone. Save for the smallish role of Lily
Tomlin, the supporting cast have tiny parts
Photography (in Hawaii and California) is skillful. In another in-joke
which  only older or savvy viewers will appreciate, much of the musical
score nicely consists of exotic tunes, including the once-famous "Taboo" by
Margarita Lecuona ("Babalu"), a distant cousin of the admirable Ernesto
Lecuona, the Cuban composer of, among many songs, "Malaguena," "Siboney,"
and"Jungle Drums."
======================================
* Some other Golden Fleece Awards.
To the Department of the Army for spending $6,000 in 1981 to prepare a
17-page document that told the federal government how to buy a bottle of
Worcestershire sauce.
To the  Environmental Protection Agency for spending an extra $1 million to
$1.2 million in 1980 to preserve a Trenton, NJ sewer as an historical
monument.
To the Commerce Department for spending $20,000 in 1981 to construct an
800-foot limestone replica of the Great Wall of China in Bedford, Indiana.
To the NEH  for a $25,000 grant in 1977 to study why people cheat, lie and
act rudely on local Virginia tennis courts.
To the Office of Education for spending $219,592 in 1978 to develop a
curriculum to teach college students how to watch television.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Bob Bloom
 Krippendorf's Tribe  is an old-fashioned piece of fluff from Touchstone
Pictures, one of the Disney studio's subsidiaries.
 This is no coincidence, as the movie has that quaint kind of feeling as if
it were from the old Disney factory of the late 1950s or early '60s. Only,
to accommodate the '90s, this film adds a few profanities and a hint of
sex.
  Otherwise, 40 or 30 years ago, this comedy could have starred Fred
MacMurray or Dean Jones, instead of Richard Dreyfuss. And someone such as
Suzanne Pleshette could have played the Jenna Elfman role, while Annette,
Tommy Kirk or Kurt Russell and little "Moochie" would have nicely filled
the roles of the professor's children.
 The slight story is about ant anthropology professor who, after the death
of his wife-partner, goes through burn out. Instead of using his grant
money to find a lost tribe of aborigines in New Guinea, he spends the money
on food and to make house payments.
 Comes the day of his long-awaited lecture concerning the discovery of his
lost tribe, and poor Professor Krippendorf, at the prodding of a pushy
former student-turned-anthropologist (Elfman), pulls himself together long
enough to con his way through his talk in which he creates a fictitious
tribe, the Shelmikedmu, named after his children, Shelley, Mickey and
Edmund.
 The entire fluff snowballs, as things usually do in such comedies, until
the professor drafts his kids into being the "natives" he filmed on his
expedition by faking scenes in his own back yard.
 The rest, of course, is predictable, but that does not diminish the
movie's fun. Familiarity, in this case, does not breed contempt, but rather
a comfortable expectation of what's ahead.
  The performances are a bit over the top, especially those of Dreyfuss and
Lily Tomlin, who plays his academic rival.
  Elfman has an effervescent presence that carries over from her Dharma and
Greg  TV sitcom, only here she is more worldly and conniving than her
small-screen counterpart.
 Krippendorf's Tribe is a family film with several laughs and a few
misfires. It's a junk-food movie that can be easily digested without fear
of any after-effects.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Todd Holland
Writer: Charlie Peters (based on the book by Frank Parkin)
Starring: Richard Dreyfus, Jenna Elfman, Lily Tomlin, Natasha Lyonne,
Gregory Smith, Carl Michael Linder, David Ogden Stiers
"Krippendorf's Tribe" is a film that is funny some of the time, but for the
rest, we're left with a really weak one-note comedy which never goes
anywhere, and never enlightens past its outrageous premise.  It's a film
filled with some talented (and not-so-talented) actors who you can tell had
a good time making this film, but just because making a film is fun doesn't
mean the movie will be.  In the end, "Krippendorf's Tribe" is exactly what
was hinted at in the trailers: an occasionally witty film that never
reaches beyond its boundaries.
As you probably know from the trailers, "Krippendorf's Tribe" deals with
James Krippendorf (Richard Dreyfus), an anthropologist who was searching
for a lost tribe in New Guinea, but on his search his wife died, leaving
him to raise their three kids (played by Natasha Lyonne, Gregory Smith, and
Carl Michael Linder), and, of course, he didn't find the lost tribe.  His
days consist of him roaming around the house drearily and spewing out droll
one-liners (he picks up a carton of milk, reads the date, and says "April
3rd?!  I need a year!").
Unfortunately, his days of depressed slothness have rendered him ignorant
to the fact that he has to give a speech one night, and the day before
that, a perky assistant of his, Veronica Micelli (Jenna Elfman, from
"Dharma and Greg"), stops by, and tells him.  He tries to make up
something, but ends up lying through his teeth, naming the tribe
"Shelmikedmu," after his three kids names, and coming up with some bogus
practices, like the family unit is run by a single father.
But he needs proof.  So he begins filming false movies of rituals in his
back yard, using his three children, and, later on, including a drunken
Veronica, who, luckily for him, still has a crush on him.  Meanwhile, a
stuck-up colleague of his (Lily Tomlin) is out to prove him wrong, and
journeys with her assistant to New Guinea to track down the tribe herself. 
So James has to come up with even more lies to cover him, or he'll be going
to jail, or be sued, or, worse off, have his reputation tarnished.
Sounds funny?  I didn't think so either.  Most of the time, we get lame
jokes, and some really forced situations which we, the audience, are
expected to swallow.  The premise in itself does have some promise, though.
 In the hands of better filmmakers, this could have turned into something
that was brilliantly funny, maybe even a little satirical.  But this film
takes the easy way out: never really going anywhere that is interesting or
even intelligent, and never trying to go beyond what the trailers hint at. 
In fact, this film doesn't even really have an ending; it's almost a redo
of the beginning.
"Krippendorf's Tribe" is set up so that it moves in circles: we get a
problem set up, the problem apparently solved, then another problem set up.
 And James never changes at all.  This film is too lighthearted not to
bring him to a conclusion that perhaps his life is really not in the best
position, and maybe he should change it.  The only thing that changes is
his family's respect for him, but come on, how could they respect this guy?
 I mean, sure he's likable, but he's a baldfaced liar who never figures out
that lies are bringing him more and more dilemnas.  In fact, not only does
no one realize the error of their ways, but they get worse (one character
starts off being kinda likable, and ends up much worse off than she was
before).
It's too bad, because there are some geniuinely funny moments, mostly due
to the fact that the lead actors are actually good.  Just because it's a
bad comedy doesn't mean it doesn't have some good comic performances. 
Richard Dreyfus is not only a great actor, but a comic genius, and here we
get to see him doing what he does best: acting immensely stressed in
extremely tight situations.  He brings this film above what would be bad
comedy hell, and into something which we see just to see him.  He's
partnered up with Jenna Elfman, who's also a great comic actor in her own
respect, and the two have some really geniune comic chemistry.
Most of the supporting cast is wasted (most notably David Ogden Stiers, who
is brought in then suffled aside), but Lily Tomlin, though horribly
underwritten, is funny a couple times, and Natasha Lyonne, the narrating
daughter from "Everyone Says I Love You," hits the right notes as James
bitter daughter.
What's left is a film that I laughed at a couple times, but the rest of the
time was pretty cold towards.  If the film had gone somewhere other than in
circles, it may have been a good, fun comedy.  If it had expanded on its
themes, it may have even been a classic (I know that's a bit of a
stretch...).  But what we have is only marginally funny, and highly
forgettable.  But at least it has Richard Dreyfus, which was a start.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
David Sunga
Written by: Charlie Peters, from a novel by Frank Parkin
Starring: Richard Dreyfuss, Jenna Elfman, Lily Tomlin, Natasha Lyonne,
Gregory Smith, Carl Michael Lindner
Synopsis: 
In this comedy Anthropology Professor James Krippendorf (Richard
Dreyfuss) is disheveled, down on his luck, and badly in debt. His wife
has died, his children barely acknowledge him, and the demoralized
professor has already squandered grant money which was earmarked for
research on an undiscovered New Guinea tribe. 
When the day arrives when Krippendorf must give a speech on his research
on the lost tribe, instead of confessing that he has not found the
tribe, he tells a whopper. Fusing the names of his children (Shelly,
Mike, and Edmund), Krippendorf invents the 'Shelmikedmu' - - a
previously undiscovered New Guinea culture that lives in single-parent
homes. Shelmikedmu family units are supervised by the 'uta bagee' (Dad).
According to Krippendorf, the uta bagee must cook, clean, take care of a
dysfunctional family full of kids, romance new mates, and survive the
tribal version of divorce court.
The academic world is so intrigued by Krippendorf's tribe that soon they
pressure the professor for film footage. To keep the university and
creditors at bay Krippendorf and his kids soon find themselves creating
a studio in the backyard and wearing costumes in order to make fake film
footage. In the meantime, the fraud is also a good thing. After their
mother's death, the kids barely tolerated their father and each other.
But now the Krippendorf family is truly bonding.
Unfortunately, like the proverbial snowball rolling down a hill, the lie
keeps getting bigger and bigger. A skeptical academic rival (Lily
Tomlin) leaves for New Guinea determined to prove that the Shelmikedmu
don't exist. And when painted Shelmikedmu 'tribesmen' are spotted
running around in Krippendorf's backyard, it leads to guest spots on
talk shows for the 'chief 'of the tribe, an anthropology show on a cable
TV network, $100,000 in grant money, and the ever increasing possibility
that the hoax will be discovered. 
How long can the hoax last before it all falls apart?
Opinion:
Pretending to be a lost tribe leads to several humorous situations. The
professor and his romantic interest Professor Veronica Micelli (Jenna
Elfman) get to grunt and run around in disguise wearing penis sheaths
and body paint. He gets Micelli drunk, seduces her, and fools her into
donning a tribal costume in order to film the fake mating ritual.  She
gets revenge by making him eat live insect grubs on a national talk show
when he is disguised as the 'uta bagee.' Meanwhile the kids invent the
Shelmikedmu circumcision rite, steal goats, and chase a chicken. A
monkey farts. And so on.
The character changes are not done well. We don't know whether Veronica
Micelli is supposed to be a shameless self-promoter or one of the good
guys, but I suspect her character was meant to evolve from one to the
other. Similarly, the kids' evolution from dysfunctional family to
functional family is not portrayed clearly, and Professor Krippendorf
doesn't change at all throughout the story. Probably the original
intention of the screenplay was to have Krippendorf come to be a better
father, the kids evolve into a better family, and Micelli go from
self-promoter to gal hero, but it didn't play out that way. Basically
everything takes a back seat to the gags.
On the other hand, if laughs are what you are after, KRIPPENDORF'S TRIBE
delivers a lot of gags, and keeps them coming at a consistent rate until
the end. As a PG-rated sex farce, KRIPPENDORF'S TRIBE is watchable and
keeps an upbeat tempo.

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
The yet-to-be-released KRIPPENDORF'S TRIBE is being marketed as a family
comedy, but buyer beware. This movie can't make up its mind. Is it a family
comedy with vulgar references to both the male and female bodies,
menstruation, circumcision, and sex that would make any parents squirm at the
thought of having their child next to them? Or is it an adult comedy
approached with such immaturity that only adolescents will appreciate the
effort? Either way, "unbalanced" is the word to stamp on this hit and miss and
miss and miss effort.
The premise is catchy - Widowed anthropology professor James Krippendorf
(Richard Dreyfuss) has spent the past two years "getting over" the death of
his wife, neglecting key research and squandering grant money on personal
living expenses. Now it's time to show what he's achieved in those two years,
and he has absolutely nothing to show for it. With a fabricated tale of
studying a previously undiscovered tribe in New Guinea, Krippendorf petitions
for new funds while hiding the fact that the previous $100,000 grant was spent
on trips to McDonald's. But when his "discovery" becomes the latest craze
among colleagues, the professor finds he must do more than talk about the
tribe - he must create it. With the aid of his three children, the headstrong
teen Shelly (Natasha Lyonne of EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU), the slightly younger
Mickey (Gregory Smith), and the nine-year-old Edmund (Carl Michael Lindner),
the "Shelmikedmu" tribe (named from the first half of each child's name) is
born, and videos quickly produced in Krippendorf's backyard are passed off as
stunning documentary footage of the newly found New Guinea tribe.
Despite the professor's wishes, the buzz surrounding his discovery only grows,
due in greatest part to Veronica Micelli (Jenna Elfman), an overly vivacious
(and voluptuous) anthropologist who barges her way into the discovery and
basically deems herself Krippendorf's main assistant. Hungry for recognition,
Micelli sets up interviews, lectures, etc. in an effort to make this the
biggest sociological event in history, a sure fire way to go down in the
history books. Krippendorf, on the other hand, is seeing himself go down a
jail cell corridor, not in history books, and with each new lecture, he must
come up with something impressive to unleash about the tribe - mating habits,
domestic structure, etc. Thru fumbling improvisation, and often some quick
thinking from his oldest son, Krippendorf makes it thru each new lecture, but
only creates more and more interest in the highly unique tribe. On the
opposing end is Krippendorf's arch rival, Ruth Allen (Lily Tomlin), an
arrogant professor whose jealousy drives her on a mission to disprove the
existance of the non-existent tribe.
It's a cute idea, and approached with a more subtle (and mature) style,
KRIPPENDORF'S TRIBE could've been a real winner. Sadly, the mostly-misfired
toilet humor, overly comical musical score (by Bruce Broughton), and sugar
coated sentiments (all the key ingredients of a "family comedy") just aren't
the right tone for this film. Cut that crap out, add some razor sharp dialogue
and witty sociological perceptions and you've got a good start. At the state
it's in now, you've got something along the lines of MEDICINE MAN meets MRS.
DOUBTFIRE meets DUMB & DUMBER, and that's not a concoction anyone should be
overly anxious to try.
The overall product here is a highly forgettable cup of "average", with a few
laugh-out-loud moments and a great big gap in between them. Most of the
characters are surprisingly two-dimensional, and the only one who seems to
exhibit any real acting effort (Lyonne) seems to go greatly unappreciated.
Director Todd Holland has gone about making this film in all the wrong ways.
It's stuck in limbo between Disney family fare (JUNGLE 2 JUNGLE) and
potentially hilarious adult comedy (A FISH CALLED WANDA). It's this unbalanced
structure that really knocks it down a grade, and it's a brutal drop.
A strong warning to parents: forget the impression given by advertisements, do
you want to take your kids to a film that has a woman asking a man if he finds
her attractive merely because she's holding his penis? Yes, it's put that
bluntly! Just be warned - this is merely one example of the many shocking
subjects to be brought up in the film, and others might not be as tame.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Todd Holland
Cast:  Richard Dreyfuss, Jenna Elfman, Lily Tomlin, Rachel Winfree
Screenplay:  Charlie Peters
Producers:  
Runtime:  100 min.
US Distribution:  Touchstone Pictures
Rated PG-13:  Language, implied sex, adult themes 
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
I can imagine how good Krippendorf's Tribe must have looked on paper. 
It does not surprise me in the least that a group of extremely talented
actors, led by the great Richard Dreyfuss and a good director (Todd
Holland), all wanted to make this film.  In fact, it is only the
expertise by which this excruciatingly bad script has been executed that
keeps me from suggesting that you stay as far away from Krippendorf's
Tribe as possible.  In retrospect, I can imagine how bad this film could
have been.  I shudder at the possibilities of awfulness had it starred
an actor less able than Dreyfuss.
Dreyfuss plays James Krippendorf, an anthropologist who is granted
$100,000 by his university to find an undiscovered tribe in New Guinea. 
Halfway into his two-year expedition, his wife (apparently) dies.  I say
apparently because when or how she dies is never truly established. 
Later, we find out that much of the grant money was spent on big-screen
TVs and other such pleasures.  So, when Krippendorf finds out what
happens to professors who do not use their grant money wisely, he
decides to construct an elaborate lie.  
He makes his own tribe, using his three children as actors in a video. 
He simply makes up certain incredible facts about this tribe (which he
calls the Shelmickedmu).  Audiences at Krippendorf's lectures are amazed
by his findings that the Shelmickedmu practice circumcision.  And proof
that the typical family unit is led by a single father is truly amazing
to the anthropological community.  Like all films like this, the lie
becomes more and more complex, and the suspense is generated with us
wondering at what point it is all going to fall out from under our hero. 
Dreyfuss is a funny, talented man, and he is funny in this film.  He
has lots of positive energy and, unlike most comical actors, really
manages to play people like this realistically.  This film also requires
a lot of physical humor that I've never seen Dreyfuss perform, and he
does a great job.  Jenna Elfman, who plays Veronica Mecilli, a scientist
who wants in on Krippendorf's work, is also very funny and appealing
here.  And the kid actors are great, as well.
But we're talking about the script from hell.  This is one of those
stories that requires such extreme suspension of disbelief that they
might as well have established that the story just takes place in an
alternate universe where things like this can happen.  But the
ridiculousness of the story is not really what is so bad about it.  All
the cliches and the irritating plot devices could have easily been
overcome by Dreyfuss and crew.  No, the script is plagued with so many
clueless stereotypes and mean-spirited characters that I was in
disbelief as I watched.  Furthermore, the manor in which all of this
material is covered up is truly shameless.  
Take, for instance, the scene in which Krippendorf gets Veronica drunk
so he can tape them having sex.  They get all decked out in the tribe
getup, complete with paint to darken their skin.  Krippendorf does this
because he needs footage of the mating rituals of his tribe.  Now, I saw
this scene coming from a mile away, but I said to myself, "No, that
would be far too tasteless.  There's no way they'll do that...Oh God!" 
They did do it.  It's there.  I was almost more appalled by the fact
that this didn't bother the other audience members with whom I saw this
film.  I found it deplorable.  And when Krippendorf is forced to admit
that he did it, he simply apologizes without the slightest hint of
conviction in his voice.  
The film is filled with scenes like these.  They not only insult the
audience, but they insult the types of people that the film portrays. 
It would take some truly professional work to create videos convincing
enough to fool an entire community of scientists, yet Krippendorf does
it easily in an afternoon.  And watching Dreyfuss stumble over a
completely unprepared speech is funny and entertaining, but I think that
most members of the on-screen audience would be able to see that he is
making everything up as he goes.  If I were an anthropologist, this film
would insult me immensely.  
Moving right along, the film plays off every stereotype our culture has
ever learned regarding African tribes.  Sure, Dreyfuss dressing up like
a chief is really funny, and it allows for some entertaining scenes, but
the heart of this material is deeply clueless as to the themes and
thoughts that it provokes.  
It is because of Dreyfuss as an actor that I was able to watch this
film.  His character here is not a good subject for a film because he is
a shameless liar, and never once does he show any kind of penance for
what he does.  I suppose it was interesting to see the formula defied in
this case, but for the purposes of good taste, I would have expected
something.  No, this man sets a terrible example for his kids and
colleagues, and the writer of the film (Charlie Peters) didn't include a
single scene in which Krippendorf takes his kids aside and tells them
that what he is doing is very bad.  In fact, it's his eldest daughter
that frequently tells him that he is doing the wrong thing, and he
continually shrugs off her warnings.
I suppose it's important to admit that this is a funny film.  Dreyfuss
and Elfman, and many of the contrived and insulting scenes, add up to a
picture that is anything but boring.  And if you're less serious than I,
you probably will enjoy it.  I, however, can't get past these elements. 
Krippendorf's Tribe is being marketed as a family comedy, but this is
the kind of film that teaches the kids of our society faulty lessons
that they shouldn't be learning.  With a little more insight into its
story and themes, this could have been a good movie.

Author
Jamie Peck
KRIPPENDORF'S TRIBE
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
Dreyfuss plays James Krippendorf, a recently-widowed, esteemed anthropology 
professor stuck in a dire dilemma -- he's been providing therapy sessions, food 
and other necessities for his three kids with the grant money he was given to 
study an undiscovered tribe in New Guinea. When new faculty member Veronica 
Micelli (Jenna Elfman) shows up on Krippendorf's doorstep to remind him of a 
same-day lecture he's slated to give on his discoveries, he harriedly makes up a 
fictional tribe called the Shelmikedmu (a combination of his children's names). 
To cement his rather outlandish claims, he sets up a village in his backyard and 
films his sons and daughter dressed up and acting in alleged Shelmikedmu 
rituals. But a fellow anthropologist (Lily Tomlin) doubts Krippendorf's claims, 
and sets off to New Guinea to prove him wrong. 
Parents who take their little ones to see "Krippendorf's Tribe" expecting a nice 
little family movie -- what it's been marketed as -- will be in for an 
unpleasant awakening, because there are more than a few moments where the 
material pushes bawdy limits. In fact, take away all the menstruation, 
circumcision and sexual jokes, the conversation about a "neolithic dildo" and 
the frequent appearance of Krippendorf's penis sheath (part of his Shelmikedmu 
costume), and there's really not much substance left to chew on. Don't get me 
wrong; some of this stuff is funny in a "Dumb and Dumber" kind of way, but did 
"Krippendorf's Tribe" really have to go so low for laughs? 
For a while, Dreyfuss is likeable enough to get us past the fact that James 
Krippendorf is a cowardly jerk. Then, however, his character starts doing some 
pretty nasty, undefendable things that he never seems to have to answer for. 
"Krippendorf's Tribe" might leave a bad taste in your mouth, since it's message 
appears to be that lying is just fine if you can get away with it. Elfman, the 
adorable star of TV's "Dharma and Greg," fares just as well as Veronica; that 
is, she's a lot of fun until the movie turns her into an annoying shrew. Of all 
the cast, only Lily Tomlin offers a consistent performance, probably because she 
appears to be aware of the film's farcical tendencies and her role doesn't take 
a 180-degree turn. 
"Krippendorf's Tribe" isn't a bad movie, but it is a terribly misguided one. It 
gets off to a promising, comfortable start with a few good laughs as the story 
sets itself up. But things start to go downhill fast after Krippendorf gets 
Veronica drunk, dresses her up in Shelmikedmu duds and has wild sex with her 
solely for the purpose of getting some footage of the tribe's "mating rituals." 
We later learn that his actions are forgivable because she's really in love with 
him the whole time, but up until this cop-out, the whole situation comes across 
with undertones of rape. Last I checked, rape is no laughing matter. Neither is 
too much of "Krippendorf's Tribe." 

Author
Matt Williams
Krippendorf's Tribe is a formula comedy.  Done poorly, formulaic
comedies might seem to signify the downfall of American cinema.
However, every now and then, one emerges, like Krippendorf's Tribe, that
actually works.
Professor James Krippendorf (Richard Dreyfuss), the renowned
anthropologist, is in trouble.  His university gave him a hefty grant to
discover a lost tribe in New Guinea.  However, he found...nothing.  His
wife has recently died, and he has spent the remainder of the grant
money in raising his three kids: Shelly (Natasha Lyonne), Mickey
(Gregory Smith) and Edmund (Carl Michael Lidner).
Tonight, he is expected to lecture on his newfound tribe.  Rather than
break the news (and face the consequences of misusing his funds), he
invents a tribe: the Shelmikedmu (named after his kids).  However, one
lie begets another as he is not only required to deliver filmed proof of
the Shelmikedmu, but his research becomes a popular phenomenon.
Soon, Professor Krippendorf is caught up in an elaborate ruse in which
he films mockumentary footage starring his children as the Shelmikedmu
tribal members.  His efforts are hampered by the boasts of an over-eager
colleague, Veronica Micelli (Jenna Elfman), and the intense scrutiny of
a rival anthropologist, Ruth Allen (Lily Tomlin).
Krippendorf's Tribe does seem to require a little suspension of
disbelief. No one seems to question the way his field documentaries seem
to be shot with multiple cameras, or that his newly discovered tribesmen
have startlingly blue eyes.  Luckily, as the film builds momentum, that
suspension of disbelief is easy to come by.
Though there's some mild humor in the Krippendorf family trying to pass
themselves off as a lost tribe, the real humor of the film is in how
James gets trapped in his ever increasing snowball of lies. The double
meanings to many of the Shelmikedmu appearances are enjoyable, and the
comic timing required for some of the film's latter scenes is superb.
Richard Dreyfuss is terrific as the hapless professor who soon loses
control of his own imaginary tribe.  Jenna Elfman's position as a
romantic lead seems a bit forced at times, but she plays the part with
extreme affability.  Even the kids, who in films like this tend to be a
bit on the precocious side, are endearing and humorous.
Yes, the film does veer occasionally into some rather lowbrow humor, but
it has the best excuse of all:  it's funny.  It may not go down as an
all-time classic, but it certainly delivers what you expect from a
comedy: plenty of laughs.
- Matt Williams (matt@shreck.com)
Reviewer for Shreck's Cinema: http://www.shreck.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Richard Dreyfuss, Jenna Elfman, Lily Tomlin, Natasha Lyonne, 
      Gregory Smith, Carl Michael Linder, David Ogden Stiers
Director: Todd Holland
Producer: Larry Brezner
Screenplay: Charlie Peters based on the book by Frank Parkin
Cinematography: Dean Cundey
Music: Bruce Broughton
U.S. Distributor: Touchstone Pictures
     Even though I have the utmost respect for Richard Dreyfuss as an 
actor, his presence in a motion picture does not guarantee any 
particular level of quality.  Like everyone else, Dreyfuss has bills to 
pay, so he occasionally accepts big paychecks for prominent roles in bad 
movies.  Consequently, while his career highlights include JAWS, CLOSE 
ENCOUNTERS OF THE THIRD KIND, STAKEOUT, and TIN MEN, his resume is 
dotted with titles like MOON OVER PARADOR, LET IT RIDE, and now 
KRIPPENDORF'S TRIBE.
     Let me start out by saying that KRIPPENDORF'S TRIBE is occasionally 
funny (although never riotously so), but that's about its only asset.  
The best word to describe this film is "asinine."  The target audience 
would appear to be recent nursery school graduates if not for the 
numerous sexual innuendoes, which are aimed at someone going through 
puberty.  KRIPPENDORF'S TRIBE tries to be a zany, off-the-wall comedy, 
but the film makers have forgotten three important rules.  The first is 
that some minimal level of plot credibility has to exist.  The second is 
that viewers should be able to identify with, or at least care about, a 
character or two.  Finally, and most importantly, more than 5% of the 
jokes have to work.  
     Once upon a time, James Krippendorf (Dreyfuss) was a respected 
professor of anthropology at little Bounderby College.  He and his wife 
obtained a grant to seek out a "lost tribe" somewhere in the wilds of 
New Guinea, a goal which they never accomplished.  Shortly after their 
return from the failed trip, Krippendorf's wife died and he was left 
with the Herculean task of raising three children -- Shelly (Natasha 
Lyonne), Mickey (Gregory Smith), and Edmund (Carl Michael Linder) -- on 
his own.  Now, over a year later, the college wants to see the results 
of the money they gave Krippendorf (which he has spent not on research, 
but on things for his family), so they send a new member of their 
faculty, Professor Veronica Micelli (Jenna Elfman), to inform him that 
he has been scheduled to give a lecture on his findings.  When he 
arrives at the college for the momentous event, rather than telling the 
truth and risking being sent to jail for misappropriating school funds, 
he fabricates a tale about a mythical lost tribe, the "Shelmikedmu". To 
provide video footage, he films his children dressed in native garb.  
Soon, much to Krippendorf's surprise, the Shelmikedmu are a national 
phenomenon.  But one disaffected professor (Lily Tomlin) is determined 
to prove that the tribe is a fraud.
     The only way KRIPPENDORF'S TRIBE works is if you assume that all of 
the characters (not to mention the viewers) are dumber than dirt.  
Unfortunately, it's impossible to like or sympathize with a bunch of 
putzes like this.  Director Todd Holland completely fails to develop any 
character into something more substantial than a device to implement 
various dubious gags.  Meanwhile, attempts at satirizing the shallowness 
of American culture (i.e., how easily the public can be fooled into 
jumping on the bandwagon of the latest trend) come across as feeble and 
derivative. 
     The acting in underwhelming.  Dreyfuss has definitely not given his 
"all" to the role of James Krippendorf.  Alongside him, Jenna Elfman, 
the spunky co-star of TV's DHARMA AND GREG, radiates perkiness and 
little else.  This quality, while fine for a 22-minute television 
program, quickly becomes irritating in the arena of a feature-length 
movie.  No one in the supporting cast -- Lily Tomlin, David Ogden 
Stiers, Natasha Lyonne (Woody Allen's daughter in EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE 
YOU) -- excels.
     I know that a movie's in trouble when it's half the length of 
TITANIC, but seems much longer.  Most of what comes on screen is generic 
sit-com level material -- the kind of slop that people will absorb while 
dozing off in their favorite easy chair in front of the television set.  
If there's any upside, it's that I don't see much box-office support 
developing for this lame, ill-marketed miscue.  KRIPPENDORF'S TRIBE will 
quickly become extinct.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Michael Redman
Just when we think that we've evolved culturally from our tribal cousins,
we're reminded that the trappings of our customs are just overlays on
primitive rituals. The universality of humanity hasn't changed much in
thousands of years. Lucky for James Krippendorf.
Anthropology professor Krippendorf (Richard Dreyfuss) has been in New Guinea
researching a lost tribe for two years. At least he was supposed to have been.
After his wife died, he spent that time - and the $100,000 grant money - lying
around his house. Now he has to give a presentation documenting his findings
and he has nothing.
At the lecture to reveal all the strange mysteries he has supposedly
discovered, Krippendorf looks at his speech notes which consist of blank pages
and comes up with what he thinks is a brilliant scam.  Inventing the
Shelmikedmu (named after the first few letters of each of his children) people
on the spot, he talks about the uniqueness of the tribe. The family unit of
this culture consists of single fathers. He bases his extemporaneous talk on
his own family's interactions.
The ruse works well until the Shelmikedmu capture the imagination of academia
and the pop anthropology crowd. Krippendorf becomes an over-night celebrity,
sought after by high society and the press. He is forced to invent more and
more about the tribe and to produce his filmed documentaries.
Enlisting the help of his kids, Shelly (Natasha Lyonne), Mikey (Gregory Smith)
and Edmund (Carl Michael Lindner), he dresses them up as tribesmen and throws
together a New Guinea scene in his back yard complete with pigs and huts. At
first the children are reluctant to co-operate. Their relationship with their
father has gone down the tubes since their mother died. Young Edmund hasn't
spoken a word to dad in two years. Then they get into it and the family begins
to pull together for the first time since the tragedy.
Krippendorf is pushed towards the limelight by fellow anthropologist Veronica
Micelli (Jenna Elfman from television's "Dharma And Greg"). Dragged kicking
and screaming before the television cameras, he embellishes his lie with
"facts" and numerous films.
Not everyone is fooled though. Suspicious professor Ruth Allen (Lily Tomlin)
believes something is amiss and sets out to prove that the Shelmikedmu don't exist.
There are some truly hilarious bits in the film. When Mikey constructs a
Shelmikedmu set for his school pageant, the movie works well. Pulling a
miniature grass hut onto a stage, he tells of a ritual where the young virgin
is blessed with pig urine during the time of her first menses. As the parents
storm the stage, his classmate screams that she's not leaving the hut until
she is purified.
There are other scenes that are just as funny. During a lecture, Krippendorf
describes the early morning rituals of the teenage Shelmikedmu girl. As he
talks about how she goes to a small room near the sleeping area to an altar
and douses herself with potions and tonics, the film shows Shelly standing
before the bathroom mirror putting on her make-up.
Where the movie runs into problems is its inability to focus on a target
audience. It shuffles back and forth from being a smart comedy to bland
Disneyesque pap. We get scenes with decidedly adult situations. He is asked by
a woman if he only finds her attractive because she is holding his penis. He
and Veronica get drunk, dress in Shelmikedmu garb and jump into bed while he
secretly films the "mating ritual". Then there are scenes where the kids come
to the rescue as Shelly drives a car for the first time narrowly avoiding
slapstick accidents.
Richard Dreyfuss is always entertaining in his roles. Whether he's the fixated
alien-searcher from "Close Encounters Of The Third Kind" or the inventive
Krippendorf, there's something about him that makes you want to invite him
over for dinner. His friendliness and ability to think on his feet are refreshing.
Elfman is an odd one. Sometimes she is so goofy that you want to cringe. At
other times she has a lanky somewhat gawky energetic appeal. Whatever it is,
it's difficult to take your eyes off her. She holds her own on the screen and
just needs to figure out exactly what her own actually is.
Lily Tomlin is one of the most gifted comedians around, but here she is mostly
wasted. Not given much to do, she only shines in a few scenes.
The kids are...well, they're kids. Cute and occasionally engaging, the actors
do a credible job in their parts, but could have been replaced by any number
of other child actors and the film would have been unchanged.
Director Todd Holland ("The Larry Sanders Show") would have done better to
have jettisoned the child audience and gone for a comedy more on the edge. The
Shelmikedmu with their invented culture pulled together from authentic New
Guinea artifacts and rituals and stapled onto items from Pier One held more
promise than we got.
(Michael Redman has written this column for more years than he can remember
and is currently attempting to recuperate from the Wild Raccoons Party Mardi.
If you email him at Redman@bvoice.com, please do so quietly.)
[This appeared in the 2/26/98 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at redman@bvoice.com]
-- 
mailto:redman@bvoice.com
This week's film review at http://www.bvoice.com/
Film reviews archive at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Michael%20Redman

Author
James Sanford
        On the surface, ``Krippendorf's Tribe'' would appear to be a
perfectly harmless piece of family fun about an anthropologist's wacky
scheme to save his reputation by creating fake documentary footage of
a lost tribe. To this end, Professor James Krippendorf (Richard
Dreyfuss) decks his kids out in grass skirts and dark body paint and
constructs a grass hut in the back yard, where the youngsters perform
weird rituals for Dad's camera.  Krippendorf's clan - which he calls
the Shelmikedmu, a conglomeration of his children's first names -
inadvertently becomes the talk of the nation, even landing its own
series on cable's Primal Time network.
  Sounds innocuous enough. But in terms of raunchiness and
innuendo, ``Krippendorf's Tribe'' turns out to be almost as ribald as
an ``Inside Edition'' report on Monica Lewinsky. Jokes about
menstruation, circumcision, penis size and prehistorical marital aids
are sprinkled liberally throughout, and though most of this
half-hearted smuttiness is gasp-inducing rather than laugh-provoking,
all of it is certain to prompt questions from curious prepubescents.
  Charlie Peters' screenplay attempts to shoehorn some
sentimentality into the story early on, with Krippendorf trying to
adjust to his wife's death, only to throw that idea out the window
when the professor first gets his adorable publicist/ co-conspirator
(Jenna Elfman) drunk, then seduces her on-camera. Later on, in a
ghastly scene, the two almost suffocate a 100-year-old woman who
threatens to uncover the Shelmikedmu fraud.
  Welcome to what passes for family entertainment in 1998.
  ``Tribe'' manages to squander a considerable amount of
talent, including Elfman (of TV's ``Dharma and Greg'') in a shrill,
one-note part, and Lily Tomlin, straitjacketed into the dreary role of
Krippendorf's frigid, vindictive rival, Ruth Allen. Dreyfuss struggles
mightily to achieve the manic energy of Robin Williams in
``Mrs. Doubtfire'' and repeatedly comes up short.

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Krippendorf's Tribe (1998)
Richard Dreyfuss, Jenna Elfman, Lily Tomlin, Natasha Lyonne, Gregory 
Smith, Stephen Root, Elaine Stritch. Directed by Todd Holland.
PG-13, 2 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http:us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
In the press kit for "Krippendorf's Tribe," director Todd Holland states 
"I was attracted to the sort of journey that this family goes through. 
It's a family story with a lot of heart. They lose the glue of their 
existence when the mother dies but then, through some quite ridiculous 
and desperate actions, they start to see each other again." Apparently 
Todd has been sniffing the glue of their existence. "Krippendorf's Tribe" 
is a loud, rowdy farce that's occassionally funny, but "a family story 
with a lot of heart?" Give me a break. 
The film begins as James Krippendorf (Richard Dreyfuss) looks at video 
footage of his late wife. He stares wistfully at the screen, drinking in 
the images of three happy kids cavorting with their parents, a mom and 
pop anthropology team, and members of a cheerful New Guinea tribe. Those 
days are gone. Deeply depressed following the death of his wife, 
Krippendorf has spent the last two years hanging around the house, living 
off a grant to study an "undiscovered" tribe in New Guinea. His alienated 
kids co-exist with him, glowering in varying degrees of hostility. Then, 
overbearing anthropologist Veronica Micelli ("Dharma and Greg's" Jenna 
Elfman) pops up to inform Krippendorf that he must deliver a lecture 
about the tribe that evening. A panicked Krippendorf bluffs his way 
through the lecture, answering questions about the non-existent 
Shelmikedmu tribe, (the name is cobbled together from Shelly, Mike, and 
Edmund, the names of his kids) while senior anthropologist Ruth Allen 
(Lily Tomlin) looks on with suspicion. The Shelmikedmu capture the 
imaginations of academia, and Krippendorf races off to create film 
footage of the tribe, using his family as bogus natives.
So where is our "family film with a lot of heart" at this point? 
Following the loss of their mother, the kids have lived in a trashy home 
for two years, watching their father lay on the couch, living off stolen 
money. Faced with the possibility of being caught, he bullies the kids 
into helping him create an elaborate series of lies to cover his crime. 
Gosh, I'm tearing up just thinking about this family film with a lot of 
heart, and we haven't even got to the parts about ritual circumcision, 
menstruation, flatulence, pig urine, and eating bugs yet. 
Oddly enough, the bodily function jokes are actually pretty entertaining, 
providing most of the occasional laughs in a movie that's far more 
frantic than funny. The creation and presentation of the "ritual tribal 
circumcision" footage provides some amusement. Later, young Mike apes his 
father's behavior at a school pageant, causing a riot when he explains 
how the Shelmikedmu "purify menstruating young virgins with pig urine," 
using a real classmate and a real pig for his demonstration. The scene is 
gross, but genuinely funny.
The same can't be said for most of the film. Despite loads of gross-out 
gags, "Krippendorf's Tribe" just isn't funny enough. The cast spends a 
great deal of time racing about frantically, providing far too few laughs 
for all the fuss. Todd Holland produced and directed many episodes of one 
of the funniest programs on television, "The Larry Sanders Show," but he 
doesn't handle this material with the same skill. The film suffers from a 
rushed feeling, with too many characters and too little character 
development. Lily Tomlin's Ruth Allen is an example of great potential 
that is wasted. The smug, self-righteous anthropologist hurries off to 
New Guinea to prove that the Shelmikedmu aren't real. Stomping through 
the jungle barking orders at her tribal guides, Ruth begins to come alive 
as a comic creation, but the scenes are merely used as quick-cut 
throwaways, never allowed a chance to fully blossom. That's typical of 
the film, as Holland takes a simple story concept and tries to jam way 
too much into it. 
Instead, we get an overdose of Jenna Elfman's terminally-perky Veronica. 
The in-your-face opportunist is overdone and annoying, becoming funny 
only when she's mad. After spotting herself in one of Krippendorf's bogus 
documentaries, demonstrating the "mating patterns of the Shelmikedmu," 
she becomes enraged, enacting revenge on Krippendorf during a moderately 
amusing talk show segment. Richard Dreyfuss, by the way, handles the 
central role with his usual staccato gusto. 
Ultimately, one wonders who "Krippendorf's Tribe" was made for. Adult 
audiences will have little patience for the large gaps between laughs. 
Family audiences are unlikely to appreciate a feel-good comedy where the 
hero gets a woman drunk, then films her having sex with him so he can 
show it on TV to bolster his massive fraud. But there is an upside. On 
the way home, Mom and Dad can spend quality time with the kids, answering 
all of their questions about circumcision and menstruation. Have fun, 
folks!
