Title
Review for Kika (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
James Berardinelli
     Filmmaker Pedro Almodovar (WOMEN ON THE VERGE OF A NERVOUS
BREAKDOWN, TIE ME UP! TIE ME DOWN!) never does anything in a
conventional manner, and KIKA is no exception.  A black farce on sex,
violence, and the attraction held by both for the general public, KIKA
is one of those films that causes the MPAA to get nervous.  As a
result, this admittedly explicit motion picture was given an NC-17.
October Films, however, decided against cutting the print to get an R
or using the NC-17, and instead released KIKA without a rating.
     The title character of Kika (Veronica Forque) is a cosmetician who
is living with her boyfriend Ramon (Alex Casanovas) and sleeping with
his stepfather Nicholas (Peter Coyote).  Nicholas isn't the monogamous
type either, apparently, since he's carrying on with several women in
addition to Kika.  Meanwhile, he has agreed to do some writing for a
local reality-based trash TV show called TODAY'S WORST, which is
produced and hosted by Andrea "Scarface" (Victoria Abril, dressed up to
look like Robocop), Ramon's former psychotic lover.
     The real problem with KIKA is that, while it's moderately
entertaining and occasionally riotously funny, one of the first
thoughts after leaving the theater is likely to be along the lines of
"What was the point of that?"  As a satirical social commentary, the
film is surprisingly shallow, not to mention insensitive.  It's easy to
see how some viewers could be offended by the cavalier, jokey manner in
which rape and incest are portrayed.
     The plum role belongs to Victoria Abril, portraying a "journalist"
who makes Geraldo Rivera look like a serious TV newsman.  With a camera
mounted atop some sort of futuristic-looking headgear, she goes from
crime scene to crime scene, hoping to catch a murder or something
equally as juicy.  She also likes filming people having sex, being
raped, or confessing their crimes.  In fact, there's nothing she won't
do to get a confession on tape.  Anything to keep the ratings high.
Even Ramon, who can't stand Andrea, is glued to the set when the
program is on.
     This satire on tabloid TV and the public's fascination with it is
done with scalding insight and an indifference to political
correctness.  Almodovar has never worried about being accused of going
too far, and the viewer's reaction to KIKA may reflect how much
distance along this path they're willing to go with the
writer/director.
     The title character is a bit flighty, and more than a little
afraid of a commitment.  She has her deepest conversations with men
when they're dead.  For the first two-thirds of the movie, Kika lies at
the center of everything that's going on.  Then, unexpectedly and
unfortunately, she all-but-vanishes during the conclusion.  Removing
the main character from the climax is a strange way to structure a
movie.
     KIKA is too long, and the ending doesn't fit well with the
much-better first half.  By trying to tie all the disparate themes
and storylines together at the end, Almodovar creates a chaotic mess
that is never successfully untangled.  There are a number of dead
bodies, but no real sense of closure.
     There's no doubt that KIKA does exactly what Almodovar intended it
to.  From its moments of inspired comedy to its descent into bad taste,
the director's indelible signature is woven into the fabric of the
film.  This movie is likely to offend as many as it appeals to, and I
felt a little of the pull in both directions.  Ultimately, however,
Almodovar's central parody is strong enough to save this film from
floundering too much or too often.  It's daring and nasty, but rarely
brilliant.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Pedro Sena
If there is anything that is worth while checking out in Pedro Almodovar's
films, it is the superb cinematography.  Like his previous films, this one
is a treat to watch, not only in the color schemes that are quite
outrageous, but also for the really well thought out set designs.
The story, that is something else.  Despite its (rather) oddball storyline,
this film is fun to watch, because it is really hard to figure out what is
happening at any time, and what is this whole mess leading up to. And like
many of Almodovar's films, this film could be about many things, from a
surrealistic attack on the way that some television people can manipulate
situations to get the results they want, to a story of odd characters
who are usually scheming to get their way with the women.
Either way, the film is entertaining, although the famous situation
considering Kika's rape is actually boring, and taken to a bit of total
surrealistic exasperation.
But what is the film really about. The late Spanish master, Luis Bunuel,
would say that the film is always about the people, and what they do in
various situations when they happen.  If this is the case, the characters in
this film are quite unusual, and fun to keep track of.  The television
reporter, will stoop to anything to get A-1 material for her stories trying
hard to get the premium ratings that she wants.  At the same time,
the person she is trying to frame and set up, also happens to be the wrong
one to keep an eye on, as he is shifty, and is able to keep things going his
way, all the way to the end.
But in between, is a series of situations that are off the wall, and some
characters just seem to pop out of nowhere to surprise the viewer, and also
to jolt the thinking.  Who really is the maid.?  And what is the son
actually doing.?  And who is really setting up these things.?
Although, I do not find this film as much fun to watch, as say for example,
HI HEELS, still there is quite a bit of Almodovar here to keep us going. The
film is extremely color rich, and well lit, almost to the point of too much,
and the contrasts that are offered for the eyes, are quite a memorable
viewing.  But the rest of the film may just really be
a bit of a bore.  We are never really let into the characters to enjoy their
idiosyncratic ways. It almost comes off as a cartoon. But it is a Spanish
cartoon, and the attitudes are different, and sometimes, fun to watch.
Slow to develop, and at times just plain, compared to other Almodovar films,
KIKA, still stands as a fun film to watch, despite its occasional bad taste,
here and there.

Author
Frank Maloney
     KIKA is a Spanish film written and directed by Pedro Almodovar.  It
stars Veronica Forque, Victoria Abril, Peter Coyote, Alex Casanovas,
Rossy de Palma.  Rated NC-17--no one under 17 admitted because of sex
scenes, graphic rape scene.  English subtitles.
     KIKA represents a return to the earlier, more vital energy and
spirit of the older Almodovar films, the ones made before 1988's WOMEN
ON THE VERGE OF A NERVOUS BREAKDOWN (MUJERES AL BORDRE DE LA ATAQUE DE
NERVIOS) made him an international star director.  WOMEN ON THE VERGE
for all its style and wit is an experiment in artificiality, like the
deliberately unconvincing Madrid skyline as seen from the terrace of
Pepa's (Carmen Maura) apartment.  Or like the closing song, "Teatro
puro," WOMEN is pure theatricality, all style, in which life is a chic
joke made up of many little jokes.  KIKA, to some extent, shares these
qualities with WOMEN, but here the joke is a very dark one and
Almodovar returns to something like the anger of his earlier, pre-WOMEN
films, films like LAW OF DESIRE (1987) and WHAT HAVE I DONE TO DESERVE
THIS? (1985).
     And what symbolizes and encapsulates this dark, angry joke?
Television tabloid "news" shows and the end of privacy.  Victoria Abril
plays Andrea Scarface, the last word is exploitative, invasive, and
manipulative voyeurism, as host of "Today's Worst."  She hosts it
wearing dresses shredded, black, red, with artificial breasts exploding
through the bodices, like Morticia Addams after a bad experience with a
Cuisinart.  She even highlights with makeup the scar that gives her her
name.  In addition, she cruises around Madrid on a motorcycle and
wearing an outfit that makes her look like a Martian: her high-tech
leathers featuring camera lights for breasts (ever heard a woman's
breasts called headlights?) and topped off by a crash helmet with a
surmounting camcorder.  The video camera takes on a life and
personality of its own in one crucial scene and the question is where
is the human here--not the insensitive Andrea inside the suit, not the
suit with its buttons and controls, maybe the camcorder?  Abril is an
extraordinary actress with staggering powers of invention, who can be
sinister, funny, and pathetic at the same time.
     Kika herself is played with exhausting energy by Veronica Forque,
she of the hyperactive motormouth, a makeup artist who meets her future
husband, Ramon, when she's called upon to make up his presumably dead
corpse.  Ramon is played by Alex Casanovas in a typical Almodovar male
role--withdrawn, uncommunicative, secretive, a cipher.  It's the women
Almodovar loves to depict and explore in his films; men, he says, bore
him.  Kika gets to do a little growing up in the course of the film and
it is she who must suffer the now infamous rape of the film, infamous
because the scene is played for laughs.  She's scared, she's in danger,
she's mad at the rapist, a former porno star who's escaped from prison,
but she also wants him not to take all afternoon.  She has things to
do.  It's what comes afterwards that is the real rape in this case, the
police, the husband, and especially the helmeted camera of Andrea who
wants to interview the victim as she's comes out of the shower.  This
is the point that critics who condemn this film miss.  There is nothing
funny about this second rape.  It's far and away the more damaging and
leads directly to bloodshed and death.
     Also in the cast and complicating the story are Peter Coyote as
Ramon's stepfather and lover to just about ever women in the film,
Santiago Lajusticia, as the rapist, and Rossy de Palma, she of the
Picasso face, here playing Kika's lesbian maid and sister of the
rapist.  Almodovar is the consummate actors' director and he continues
to get the most astonishing performances out of his actors.
     KIKA has its faults.  At 120 minutes, it is too long to sustain
itself.  It should have concentrated more on Andrea Scarface and less
on Kika, a not very interesting person before her rape, as superficial
as her makeup.  Abril was supposedly given her choice of which
character to play.  She chose wisely.
     Nevertheless, I highly recommend KIKA to you.  It has the flash,
wit, and style of WOMEN ON THE VERGE, the standard for better or worse
by which all Almodovar films are judged, as well as the rage and
satiric bite of his earlier work.
