Title
Review for Night Moves (1975)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz

NIGHT MOVES (director: Arthur Penn; screenwriter: Alan Sharp;
cinematographer: Bruce Surtees; editor: Dede Allen; cast: Gene Hackman
(Harry Moseby), Jennifer Warren (Paula), Edward Binns (Joe Ziegler),
Susan Clark (Ellen Moseby), Janet Ward (Arlene Iverson), James Woods
(Quentin), John Crawford (Tom Iverson), Melanie Griffith (Delly
Grastner), Harris Yulin (Marty Heller), Anthony Costello (Marv Ellman);
Runtime: 99; Warner Bros.; 1975)
A seminal modern noir work from the 1970s, about an innocent and lost
soul making his way among liars and thieves, in this hauntingly
reflective piece on America in the post-Watergate period. This moody
tale done in a bland Technicolor is about an ex-pro football star and
now a small-time private investigator named Harry Moseby (Hackman), who
is obsessed with always trying to solve things, whether in business or
in his private life. Harry is shattered to learn that his wife Ellen is
cheating on him when he spots her outside a movie theater with her
lover, just after he has been hired by an aging, big chested, former
actress and sexually liberated divorcee, Arlene Iverson, to find her
wayward teenage daughter Delly Grastner (Melanie's screen debut), who
has runaway. Arlene is not interested in her daughter, but needs her
living with her because that's the way it's stipulated in her daughter's
trust fund.
Harry had searched his entire life to find his father, only, at last,
when he found him living in a rooming house in Baltimore, all he could
do is follow him into the park and watch from a distance as he read the
funnies, never even attempting to meet him.
Happy to get away from his home problems, he uses his job to forget
about his homelife, as he begins to track down Delly through her freaky
friend Quentin, an ace mechanic but a troubled individual, who was one
of Delly's many lovers, until he was jilted. He steers Harry to a film
location in New Mexico, where she was involved with a self-absorbed
stunt pilot, a stud named Marv Ellman. From Joe Ziegler, an older
stuntman on the set, he figures out that Delly probably went to the
Florida Keys to live with her stepfather Tom Iverson, who is running an
airplane charter service there.
At Tom's place, he becomes attracted to his mistress, Paula, a sad-eyed
and despondent but attractive woman, who seems to be just as much a
burnout as is Harry. Through her, he finds the nymphomaniac Delly living
in one of Tom's fishing cabins and talks the reluctant girl into going
back with him. But before they go back, Delly while diving finds a
crashed plane in the water and identifies it as Ellman, without telling
who it is to Harry. Without realizing it, Harry has stepped into a
murder cover-up.
Spoiler to follow: Skip to last paragraph if you don't want to know the
details of Harry's investigation.
Soon after Delly is returned to her L.A. home, she dies on a film
location while doing a stunt, one in which Joe Ziegler gets badly
injured, as he is in the same car. Harry has already been paid and the
case is over for him, but he can't let it go. He empathizes with Delly,
feeling they are both loners who can't fit into normal society and he
wants to know why she was killed. He suspects murder and that Quentin,
who is the mechanic on the movie set, rigged the car. Harry ignores his
own family situation and goes on his own to see Tom again. He soon
discovers there is a smuggling racket of pre-Colombian art taking place
that involves Tom and Paula, which they kept secret from him. When Tom
gets killed after a vicious assault on Harry, there is a terrific
surprise awaiting him when he finds out who the third smuggler is. All
the smugglers are killed in a horrible fashion, but Harry is left stuck
in the ocean, as his boat keeps going around in circles in the same spot
where he fought off the smuggler in an airplane who was attacking him.
This is the best film that Arthur Penn has done. The acting is
thoughtfully and purposefully carried out. The character study of the
Gene Hackman character, shows someone who has lost control of his life
and shows that all the knowledge he gains because of his curiosity and
persistence, still leaves him feeling like a lost soul. Hackman's
characterization of this is superb. This excellently scripted film by
Alan Sharp, captures the mood of the country at the time among many who
felt they survived Vietnam, the JFK assassination and the White House
scandal, but still feel weary and uncertain about the future, as it
seems as if no matter what they do or how smart they become, they are
still going around in circles. It is sort of like playing the grand
master in chess and you know what move to trap him, but you still screw
up somehow and lose.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Chuck Dowling
Cast: Gene Hackman, Susan Clark, Jennifer Warren, Harris Yulin, Kenneth
Mars, James Woods, Melanie Griffith, Dennis Dugan 
Written by: Alan Sharp 
Directed by: Arthur Penn 
Running Time: 75 minutes 
Harry Moseby (Gene Hackman) is an ex-football star turned private
detective.  After taking a case to find the daughter of a former
actress, he learns that his wife (Susan Clark) is having an affair, and
the film then tries (slightly unsuccessfully) to juggle both
storylines.  Unfortunately, the film derails midway through and has a
difficult time getting back on track.  Things do come together well at
the end, but becomes taxing getting to that point.  
The title seems to be a reference to chess, as Harry discusses several
"knight moves" while reenacting a famous chess match from years past. 
However, since this film is called "Night Moves" and not "Knight Moves"
then the title seems to denote some sort of double meaning.  Much of the
movie does take place at night however, so maybe that's what it's
referring to.  Aside from all that, the film is most notable for the
debut of Melanie Griffith, who plays the subject of Hackman's
investigation. 
I'd like to include some information directly from the film's original
VHS release box because I doubt it'll ever be seen again.  It's one of
those very old Warner clamshell boxes that has a lot of text on the back
of it pertaining to the film (two or three times that of one of today's
releases would have).  There's a quote from an interview with Gene
Hackman that states "Arthur Penn is a great director because he sees the
special human moment in a scene, outside the dialogue, outside the
scenery; he sees the human animal, he sees the life of the scene.  He's
especially good with people who have never made a picture before.  Both
Melanie Griffith and Jennifer Warren are making their first film with
him and he is really turning them on to the way film works."  The box
later states that "Harry isn't stupid - he's just a little slow". 
That's a odd statement to make, since it's not as if all this
information is presented to Harry and he just doesn't catch on.  He
catches on whenever any information is given to him.  [R]
Chuck Dowling - chuckd21@fdn.com
The Jacksonville Film Journal - http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/
