Title
Review for Drugstore Cowboy (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Chris Loar
_Drugstore Cowboy_ is an odd hybrid.  On the one hand, it's a
coming-of-age story about a man learning to put away childish
things; on the other, it's part of a genre of sorts that turns
drug addicts into tragic icons of failure and missed chances --
the romanticism of the beautiful loser, a revised and updated
style of noir.  And although this film has its failings, it is
on the whole a fine bit of filmmaking that explores the second
genre in terms of the first; that is to say, it tells the story
of a man learning to see through the romanticism of his own
drug noir tale, and coming to appreciate the pleasures and
satisfactions of an ordinary working stiff's life.
The film is told in flashback; the first things we hear and
see are the voice and face of Bob (Matt Dillon) being hauled
off in an ambulance.  Bob ruminates briefly, and then begins
the story of his days as the leader of a crew of junkies who
support their habit by knocking over drugstores, hoping to
score a bit of dilaudid among the stool softeners and
antidepressants.  His crew consists of his girlfriend/wife
(a convincing Kelly Lynch) and another rather waiflike 
couple, Rick (James LeGros) and Nadine (Heather Graham,
cute as a button).  Their setup is rather simple:  Bob 
robs the store while his three comrades create a diversions.
Things are going well until Heather brings down a hex on
the foursome by daring to mention dogs -- one of several
taboos enumerated by the rather superstitious Bob.  And
misfortune does indeed begin to befall the little band; the
heat (in the form of some hard-nosed detectives) begins 
closing in.  Bob's crew decides to take a little trip up
the coast until things cool down, and for a while they
enjoy some success hitting unsuspecting drugstores in 
smaller towns.  But bad luck really sets in when Nadine
makes the mistake of tossing a hat on a hotel bed -- 
the worst omen imaginable.  The events that follow are 
so horrific that Bob decides to go straight and before long
finds himself in a rehab clinic, settling into a drab but 
somehow satisfying routine of work.  And while the closing
sequences bring us back to the image of Bob being taken
to the hospital to be treated for wounds received at the
hands of some of his associates, we can still see him 
smiling a smile of maturity and grace.
The film succeeds in telling this fairly straightforward 
tale in a way that conveys the junkies' edgy experience
without lurching into some sort of cliched psychedelia.  
The truly psychedelic sequences, which could have easily 
come across as ham-handed, are salvaged by Van Sant's 
sense of humor and visual wit (look for a nice homage
to _The Wizard of Oz_).  Other sequences make very 
effective use of disorienting close-ups, which seem to
me to succeed in conveying the loss of proportion that 
our anti-heroes are experiencing.  And, on the whole, 
Van Sant uses his cast well; Kelly Lynch is particularly
convincing.  Dillon's work here is a little more problematic;
he really has a little too much energy and presence to make
a convincing junkie.  And we don't really see his character
descend into the pit of suffering through which he attains 
his salvation; he comes off as healthy and vigorous when he
is supposed to be reaching a personal low.  This makes his
transformation into a straight working guy rather 
anticlimactic; his new self is calmer, more self-assured, 
and mature, but not nearly so exciting.
But then, that may be precisely the point that Van Sant is
making.  Because of course an ordinary person's tale is
not particularly exciting; this is a drug noir film, and the
excitement is out there on the street, running from needle
to needle, not in the machine shop or the halfway house.
What's impressive about the film is the way it undermines
the very genre it initially seems to be a part of; our hero
matures, and comes to see the falsity of his own role as 
a beautiful loser, choosing instead to live as a normal
guy.  It's not an exciting role to choose, but it does
have one virtue -- it's real.
