Title
Review for Poor White Trash (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jon Popick
Last March, a film that poked fun at the slow-witted, backwoods folk of
a tiny upstate New York town was released to poor reviews and virtually
no audience.  Drowning Mona was a sloppy whodunit that tried too hard to
be quirky and instead came off as a dull Fargo copycat.
Conversely, Poor White Trash succeeds where Mona went horribly wrong. It
also deals with characters more likely to spit tobacco juice than
mouthwash, but instead of upstate New York, Trash is set in Sunrise,
Illinois.  The film opens with the bumpkin duo of Michael (Tony Denman,
G vs. E) and Lennie (Jacob Tierney, This is My Father) trying to steal
non-alcoholic beer from the local grocery (called The L'il Store).  One
blow-up doll and a burnt Chevy Vega later, the two have been nabbed by
the authorities, a move that could potentially threaten the future of
college-bound Michael.
Meanwhile, Michael's mother Linda (Sean Young, Ace Ventura: Pet
Detective) has just been fired from her nursing home job.  Times have
been hard for Linda (her husband, a one-eyed professional wrestler,
abandoned her and Michael), but the thought of her only son being turned
away from secondary learning (and, thusly, a ticket out of Sunrise) is
just too much for her to handle.  A plan is hatched to raise money to
hire Lennie's grandfather to represent the boys in court.
Their plan doesn't involve a bake sale or a car wash - rather a series
of trailer burglaries.  And Lennie's grandfather (William Devane, Space
Cowboys) turns out to be a shit-kickin' hillbilly with a strip-mall law
office (called `Ron Lake's Land o' Law'), a hot young wife (Jaime
Pressly, Jerry Springer's Ringmaster) and several impressive beer-can
sculptures.  Hilarity ensues, leading up to a big gunfight finale. M.
Emmet Walsh (Wild Wild West) even makes an appearance as the town
justice – like who else would you get to play a backwater judge?
Trash isn't filled with stars, nor is it particularly well-written or
evenly executed, but it's still a lot of fun to watch.  Unlike Mona, the
film doesn't take itself too seriously, a point driven home by
writer/director Michael Addis, who mocked his film's lack of complexity
in the Q&A session following the screening of this film at the Cleveland
International Film Festival.  Addis, who makes his directorial debut
here (he was an editor on Kounterfeit), presented the film with a goofy,
hyper smile and even thinks his film may have pissed off the locals in
Benton, Illinois, where the film was shot.
Addis, who played a cop in Trash and was a writer on The Man Show, even
poked fun at Sean Young, telling a story of how the actress truly
suffered for her art.  At one point, she rhetorically screamed, `Who do
I have to fuck to get off this film?'  When somebody replied, `Addis,'
Young said she'd stay on.  It's jokes like these that make Trash a
surprisingly funny film.
1:25 – NR but contains graphic violence, adult language and sexual
content

Author
James Brundage
What is it about semi-rural America that makes it so ripe for satirizing
American values?  It's a longstanding tradition of mockery, from the
Coen Brothers' Raising Arizona to Lynch's psychotic Blue Velvet and Twin
Peaks, to, finally, Michael Addis' Poor White Trash.
Poor White Trash concerns Michael Bronco (Tony Denman), a small-town boy
who wants nothing more than to be a psychologist.  He spends his
evenings talking about how his divorced mother's (Sean Young) anger
towards her ex is a shield for her fear of abandonment, and spends his
days raisin' hell with Ron Lake (William Devane).  One day, the hell
raisin' goes a little too far and the two find themselves in court,
where they are convicted but get a suspended sentence due to the
handiwork of the sleazy Lennie Lake (Jacob Tierney), a gold-toothed hick
of a lawyer with a beer-can garden (you really have to witness this
bizarre sight to believe it).  Thinking that all is fine, the group goes
off to celebrate, only to find out that Michael can't get into college
now that he's been convicted of a crime.
Furious, Michael's mother Linda embarks on a crime spree with Ron,
Michael, and Brian Ross (Jason London), a boy who used to beat up Ron
and Michael but now has convinced himself that he is in love with
Linda... all in an effort to afford the tuition of the University of the
Virgin Islands: the only place left that will take a student with a
criminal record other than trucker's school.
Needless to say, this is one really absurd, funny movie.
Cinematically, Poor White Trash is about as good as they come.  DP Peter
B. Kowalski (Whipped) gives the film a bright, surreal look, and set
designer Stacy Adamski and Jamie Colboth's creations (including the
beer-can garden, with its totem poll of Budweiser cans) are positively
mind-blowing.  The direction is fine, the script bitter, and the pacing
of the movie bouncily quick.  The only problem with Poor White Trash is
that the performances are just a little too over-the-top, even for an
over-the-top comedy like this.
Then again, most patrons of Poor White Trash likely won't look at the
film like movies of its ilk should be looked at.  Instead of viewing
this as the dark satire that it is, they'll simply view it as a black
comedy, a la Raising Arizona.  If that's the case, most people won't
give a damn that the actors have gotten a little too carried away with
the mania of Poor White Trash.  They'll just sit back and have fun.
Director: Michael Addis
Producer: Lorena David, Mark A. Roberts, Tony Urban
Writer: Michael Addis
Starring: Sean Young, William Devane, Brian Ross, Tony Denman, Jacob
Tierney, Jaime Pressley
http://www.poorwhitetrashmovie.com/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
