Title
Review for Nemesis 2: Nebula (1995)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Richard Scheib
USA. 1995. Director/Screenplay - Albert Pyun, Producers - Tom Karnowski 
& Gary Schmoeller, Photography - George Mooradian, Music - Tony 
Riparetti, Visual Effects - Design and Animation (Supervisors - Benta 
Garcia & Jay Mark Johnson), Special Effects - Guy Faria, Nebula and 
Makeup Effects - David Barton, Makeup Effects - Maurine Wirgler, Art 
Direction - Rob Bowen & Tracy Hennigan. Production Company - Imperial 
Entertainment/Filmwerks/Toga Productions.
Sue Price (Alex), Tina Cote (Emily), Chad Stahleski (Nebula), Tracy 
Davis (Sam), Earl White (Juna), Karen Studer (Zana), Shelton Baily 
(Tribal Chief)
Plot: In the 21st Century a perfected DNA child is created as the last 
hope against the cyborg dominated future. The child's mother flees with 
the child back through time to the East African desert in 1980. But the 
mother is killed by pursuing cyborgs and the child is taken and raised 
by a native tribe. But as she grows into womanhood, the child, Alex, 
sees the entire tribe slaughtered by a pursuing Nebula android. As the 
Nebula comes after her, she flees through the desert, coming to discover 
the super-human abilities inside herself as she fights for her life.
Albert Pyun is a prolific direct-to-video sf/action director. Almost all 
of Pyun's films - ‘Cyborg' (1989), ‘Knights' (1993), ‘Heatseeker' 
(1994), ‘Omega Doom' (1995) and this ongoing series of ‘Nemesis' films - 
feature kickboxing cyborgs and/or androids in post-holocaust or 
Cyberpunk settings. While Pyun's films brim with action their quality is 
generally not very good - it is characteristic of Pyun's films that he 
does not seem aware of the distinction between an android and a cyborg. 
The best of Pyun's films is the first ‘Nemesis' (1993) where Pyun fused 
his standard cyborg combat with a quite competent employment of 
Cyberpunk tropes. 
This is the first of three sequels to `Nemesis' (which all appear to 
have been shot back-to-back). None of these sequels have anything to do 
with the first ‘Nemesis' other than featuring the common theme of 
androids/cyborgs trying to take over society. ‘Nemesis 2' slips more 
into being a ‘Terminator' copy with a killer android coming back through 
time to pursue a heroine (although the look of the killer cyborg takes 
it closer in spirit to ‘Predator'). There is no more plot to the film 
than that - the entirety of the film is like one single action sequence 
without pause. There are times that one wishes there had been a little 
more in the way of plot - like explaining more about what the two girls 
are doing and what is the significance the gold coins they are hiding.
That said Pyun makes a quite competent action film out of it. It moves 
with pace and the Arizona locations (standing in for East Africa) are 
impressively photographed. Some of the stunts Pyun stages are quite 
breath-taking - like one where heroine Sue Price leaps from a building 
at the same time as shooting at a flaming cyborg falling alongside her 
and holding a corpse as a shield from its fire. Price is the latest of 
Pyun's would-be discoveries which he has taken from a 
kickboxing/body-building background - following the likes of Olivier 
Gruner, Kathy Long, Keith Cooke and Jean-Claude Van Damme. All of the 
aforementioned look impressively lithe and can throw a backkick with the 
same lissome grace that a dancer can pirouette - and cannot act worth a 
damn. Certainly Price has an asexuality and a body-builder's muscularity 
that looks convincingly super-human, and with golden-bronze skin, blonde 
dreadlocks and cool blue eyes, she looks visually striking.

