Title
Review for Point of No Return (1993)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Rick Klau
Director:     John Badham
Producer:     Art Linson
Starring:     Bridget Fonda, Gabriel Byrne, Dermot Mulroney
With:         Anne Bancroft and Harvey Keitel
Screenplay:   Robert Gechell and Alexandra Seros
Music by:     Hans Zimmer
Length:       1 hour 55 minutes.
Rated:        R. brief nudity, graphic violence, language.
Released by:  Warner Bros.
In brief:  Maggie (Bridget Fonda; SINGLE WHITE FEMALE) is a heroine
addict arrested for the murder of a police officer.  Recognizing her
potential, the government offers her a choice: serve her country or
die.  What follows is her training and eventual service.
     Based on Luc Besson's stylish NIKITA (released in the States as LA
FEMME NIKITA), POINT OF NO RETURN is surprisingly good.  While its
trailers and print ads profess to be a run-of-the-mill action flick,
the strength of the original and good performances by Fonda and
Mulroney earn POINT OF NO RETURN good marks.
     I first saw NIKITA two years ago at the Key theater in
Georgetown.  Anne Parillaud won the Cesar for Best Actress in her role
as Nikita, and Luc Besson won acclaim in France for his efforts.
Somewhat difficult to understand (from my point of view) were the
negative reviews NIKITA received when it was released in the summer of
1991.  The Washington Post complained that it lacked substance and
mistook style for content; The New York Times had similar comments.  I
have seen NIKITA several times since that summer and each viewing
brings only more appreciation for a wonderful film.
     But this is a review of POINT OF NO RETURN.  My initial fear as I
entered the theater Friday night was that this would Americanize the
plot without keeping the psychological crisis that the lead female
experiences.  Having seen several trailers on TV, I was already aware
that POINT OF NO RETURN copied some scenes verbatim from NIKITA ... it
seemed as if they had forsaken originality for expediency.
     The plot and indeed the direction borrows heavily from Besson,
although there are some notable departures.  In an interview, Badham
talked about Americanizing the characters - a gamble that in retrospect
paid off.  Even avid fans of NIKITA will feel as if they're seeing
another side of someone they're very familiar with.  Without taking
away from the story, Badham manages to add his own touch to the
characters (especially the part of Marco, Nikita's boyfriend and Bob,
her sadistic supervisor).  The net result is that Badham succeeds in
tweaking the story while maintaining the thoroughly believable
chemistry between the three principles.
     The action scenes are very well choreographed.  Fonda carries off
the rebel attitude that undergoes a remarkable transformation while
under the tutelage of Bob (Mulroney) and her instructor (Anne
Bancroft).  The only "improvement" on the original, I would argue, are
the scenes between Fonda and Bancroft: Bancroft acts as if the part
were written for her and Fonda seems to enjoy her "learning."
     Harvey Keitel, in the role of Victor the cleaner, is credible,
however he does not convey the same electricity that was present in the
original.  The role calls for a very intimidating persona; Keitel
manages the mental intimidation but fails to instill physical fear.
     The film does have its flaws, some technical and some artistic.
Washington, DC does not have a death penalty yet Maggie (Fonda) is
condemned to death after killing a DC cop.  Badham's direction is not
nearly as stylish as Besson's; often Badham mistakes a skewed camera
angle for "style" and is often blunt when subtlety would serve his
purpose better.  Studio politics obviously had a hand in the directing
as well: nowhere in the film are non-American cars obvious.  Especially
considering the environment that Maggie operates in, it's hard to
believe that her targets would be driving Chevy Cavaliers.  The product
advertising was unnecessary (even an AfterDark box next to a Macintosh
at one point) but did not distract from the film as a whole.
     Of the two, NIKITA is by far the better, if only because it was
original.  Instead of seeming like a cheap imitation, POINT OF NO
RETURN manages to come off like a decent copy.  It's certainly
enjoyable, although I would urge anyone who likes it to rent NIKITA as
soon as possible.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Maggie (Bridget Fonda) is a strung-out member of a gang bent on
robbing a drugstore to get their fixes.  Things go wrong, the cops show
up, and a fierce gunfight ensues.  In the aftermath, a police officer
finds Maggie cowering in a corner.  Without hesitation, she shoots him
in the head.  This earns her a death sentence which is commuted - on
condition that she agree to work for "The Government" in a secret
capacity as an assassin.  Her mentor in this new training is Bob
(Gabriel Byrne), who, after she shows uncooperative tendencies, informs
her that if she doesn't begin to apply herself, the result will be a
bullet through her brain.  Maggie gets the message and soon becomes one
of the most promising trainees.
     Let me begin by making it clear that I have no particular
prejudice for or against remakes, whether they be of American or
foreign films.  I generally try to judge the movie on its own merits as
well as making the inevitable comparisons to its precursor.  I liked
SOMMERSBY, for example, because it was an entertaining and enjoyable
story, despite the fact that it made some significant changes from THE
RETURN OF MARTIN GUERRE.  I disliked THE VANISHING, because it took a
taunt, effective ending and muted it Hollywood-style, leaving behind a
husk that was laughably absurd.
     POINT OF NO RETURN makes few changes from LA FEMME NIKITA.  In
fact, the American version is so close to the French that in many cases
it's more like a translation than a remake (camera angles and dialogue
are frequently identical).  Director John Badham (STAKEOUT) obviously
made a detailed study of the original before embarking on the remake.
While the details of the last caper are changed and the ending has been
slightly manicured, there are no wholesale alterations.  Through the
entire movie, up to and including the closing scenes, the spirit of the
original has been kept intact.  There are no Hollywood-induced
embellishments.  For the most part, POINT OF NO RETURN plays like LA
FEMME NIKITA in English.
     One of the reasons that POINT OF NO RETURN is so enjoyable is that
it's like none of the recent crop of thrillers, all of which seem to
involve some apparently-benign outside force infiltrating a home or
office.  POINT OF NO RETURN is fresh, featuring a script with a few
twists and turns (although no surprises for those who have seen NIKITA)
and a heroine who is at the same time sympathetic and murderous.
     While some of the direction and camerawork in POINT OF NO RETURN
are inferior to those of NIKITA, the casting of Bridget Fonda is an
excellent move.  Ms. Fonda brings more humanity and regret to Maggie
than Anne Parillaud does to Nikita.  Maggie is distraught at each
killing she participates in; it takes Nikita longer for the effects of
her job to wear her down.  That's not to say that Fonda is better in
the role, simply that the changes give the audience a slightly
different perspective on the character.
     Gabriel Byrne is adequate as Bob, but Dermot Mulroney is weak.  I
never bought the relationship between his J. P. and Maggie.  At its
best, it's contrived; at its worst, it's completely implausible.
Mulroney does nothing to flesh out his character.  He is, without a
doubt, the weak spot of POINT OF NO RETURN, even as Harvey Keitel's
deadpan performance as Victor the Cleaner is the high point.
     Because of the closeness of the two films, it's difficult to rate
POINT OF NO RETURN much differently than NIKITA.  Both tell a fun (if
completely implausible) story with lots of violence and action.  POINT
OF NO RETURN boasts Bridget Fonda's more-humanized assassin; NIKITA has
crisper direction and the decisive advantage of being "the original."
Those who have not seen the French version will enjoy the remake.
Those who watched - and liked - NIKITA will probably be pleasantly
surprised at the faithfulness of POINT OF NO RETURN to its
inspiration.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
David Pimmel
     Maggie (Bridget Fonda) is a very bad woman, killing a cop in a
drugstore robbery.  She is sentenced to death, but is rescued from this
fate by Bob (Gabriel Byrne).  He turns out to be a recruiter for a
covert government organization of assasins, who offers the choice of
join or die.  Always the pragmatist, Maggie joins up.  She is trained
to be a killer and then let out into the real world, to perform kills
on call.
     I have not seen NIKITA, the film this is based on.  So this review
is of the film POINT OF NO RETURN as a stand alone film.  I don't
really want to go into a debate about whether or not this film should
have been made or not.  I also don't want to argue about which is
better.  As a stand alone film, I would recomment this film with some
reservation.  It has several very strong aspects, but also several that
don't seem to work very well.
     Bridget Fonda's performance is definitely the highlight of the
film.  I really didn't like her in SINGLE WHITE FEMALE, but here I
think she taps into her genetic actor's roots.  Particularly in the
beginning, during her bad stage, her performance is very strong.  In
fact I thought that was the strongest part of the film.  After she was
fully trained and left the nest, I felt the quality of the film went
down.
     The primary reason for the drop was the Dermot Mulroney
character.  I found him to be an annoying bore who detracted from what
was interesting to me, the relationship between Bob abd Maggie.  He
also seemed like a plot gimmick to show Maggie what life could be like
if she weren't a professional assasin.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
POINT OF NO RETURN (1993) ** 1/2 .  Directed by John Badham. Written by
Robert Getchell and Alexandra Seros, based on "Nikita" by Luc Besson.
Cinematography, Michael Watkins. Editing, Frank Morriss. Production design,
Philip Harrison. Music, Hans Zimmer. Cast: Bridget Fonda, Gabriel Byrne,
Dermot Mulroney, Miguel Ferrer, Anne Bancroft, Olivia D'Abo, Harvey Keitel.
A Warners release. 108 min. Rated R (violence, language, adult situations).
>From almost its beginnings, Hollywood has remade more French films that
products of other nations. As is the rule, remakes of any sort suffer in
the process. Think of the current "Sommersby" and "The Vanishing."
"Point of No Return" however fares much better. For one thing, its 1990
modish French model was already filmed "a l'americaine" by movie junkie Luc
Besson. More importantly, "Point of No Return" is not, as its credits
state, simply "based" on "Nikita" ("La Femme Nikita" in this country). It
could, instead, be called the first fac-simile film of the FAX era, since
it is mostly a scene-by-scene copy of the original -- with some shifts to
transpose the story from France to the U.S.A.
In "Nikita," Anne Parillaud plays 19-year old Nikita, a member of a gang of
crazed, murderous junkies. In a stupor during a shootout with a SWAT team,
she blows out the brains of a cop and is condemned to life.
A mysterious government agency fakes her death and, for logic-defying
reasons, makes of the unwilling Nikita a political killing machine. Held
for a long time within a center of operations, she is trained in weaponry,
martial arts and other procedures. She is groomed and metamorphosed from
super-violent slattern to chic lady.  Given a new identity, Nikita is
molded into a lethal Jane Bond and let loose with Terminator assignments.
In quality "Point of No Return" is on a par with the original. Some parts
are a little better, others a little worse, yet most of its strengths and
weaknesses correspond to those of "Nikita."
Bridget Fonda (called Maggie) replaces Parillaud; Gabriel Byrne, as Bob, is
her Pygmalion-like control; Anne Bancroft plays her finishing-school
teacher; Dermot Mulroney plays J.P. who becomes Maggie's lover after her
release from the compound.
The first parts of both films are the strongest and the most alike: the
opening violence, the woman's defiance, her relationships with Bob and her
Miss Manners mentor, and the climactic "graduation exercise" in which
Nikita-Maggie, in a posh restaurant,  pumps bullets into a man and his
bodyguards.
It is in the restaurant sequence that some differences begin to emerge.
John Badham directs with extra energy the fracas, makes it longer and
deadlier than the French, and close to Westerns where the protagonist's aim
in unerring, while he/she remains unscathed. This adds to the disbelief,
but also to the pleasure of gun battle fanciers.
In the French film Nikita is headquartered in Paris. Her first assignment
has her helping with the termination of some unseen people in a Paris
hotel; her second is in Venice, Italy; her third, back in Paris.
"Point" relocates Maggie from Washington to Venice, California, the place
where more people glide than walk. This may be a cute conceit (one Venice
for another) but the facile Hollywood overuse of Venice, CA. (cf."Falling
Down") is a cliche in itself.
Maggie's first assignment however, in a Los Angeles hotel, is more graphic
and detailed. It includes a spectacular explosion that, I am sure, the
French film skipped not out of delicacy but because of its cost.
In "Point"'s Assignment Two, New Orleans replaces Venice (Italy). The plot
nicely folds in some actual Mardi Gras footage, while it can't resist a
short addition of kick-boxing. Hollywood won't leave well enough alone, but
no harm (to the film structure, that is) is really done.
In Assignment Three (Paris and California respectively) incredibility grows
exponentially in both versions. "Point" has a slight edge, as the French
episode was very confusedly plotted. On the other hand, California's
sunnier and airier setting diminishes the mood of "Nikita"'s somber Paris,
a tone also present earlier in the French Center's more realistic blend of
high-tech and grunginess.
In neither film does the intensive social training of the girl (such as
lessons on table etiquette, and for Maggie, also learning French and
improving her English) get sufficiently worked into the plot. But it is
amusing to have Bancroft enjoin her pupil : " Say  'I feel badly, not 'bad'
-- 'bad ' is an adjective. And remember to say ' It remains a  secret
between her and me, not she and I." Non-killers, note.
Bridget Fonda's Maggie, first monstrously wild, then tamed but sad, is
quite effective. And her parallel physical transformation -- bad skin,
yellow teeth and all -- into fashionable glamor, is a good illustration of
the movies' magic through makeup.
On the debit side, while Fonda is very good as a killer, she makes a pallid
"normal" person. In the interludes of her enjoying life and love, mixing
ravioli and sex (a vulgar addition), doing fun things with her boyfriend
in a bad, cliche montage of short scenes, yet desperately wanting to quit,
Maggie becomes insipid and the movie gets tedious along with her.
The original's romance and pathos were better in their understatement,
vulnerability and, oddly for a French film, in their sparser dialogue.
Worse yet, in "Point", Bob and J.B. are flat and colorless. J.B. especially
lacks the underplayed sensitivity of "Nikita"'s Marco. You win some, you
lose some.
In the opening sequence, film buffs will recognize character actor
(generally a villain) Geoffrey Lewis, as the gunned down drugstore owner.
They may deplore his very early demise.
If you liked "Nikita" and bought its outlandish premise, execution and
executions, and if you are intrigued by fine points of difference between
twins, "Point" is a quite watchable curiosity. First-timers too may find it
entertaining. It's essentially a mainstream fantasy-action film camouflaged
by soulful and stylish twists.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Sally Smith
Starring Bridget Fonda, Gabriel Byrne, Dermot Mulroney, Anne Bancroft,
         Harvey Keitel, and Miguel Ferrer
Directed by John Badham
Screenplay by Robert Getchell and Alexandra Seros (based on Luc 
              Besson's NIKITA)
Director of Photography Michael Watkins, ASC
Rated R for violence and language
     A lengthy disclaimer is in order here.  I never saw the French
film of which this is evidently a close remake.  While I have seen
several of director John Badham's movies, I have no great feelings
about them, either positive or negative. And I have never seen Bridget
Fonda in a film, nor do I recall seeing many of the other actors before
(I've seen Anne Bancroft, okay?). Nor am I a particularly big
aficionado of the action genre.
     That said, I will tell you that I was eagerly awaiting the release
of this film, simply because I am a great admirer of its director of
photography. I've been watching Michael's TV work for several years and
was anxious to see what he could do with a wide screen and a decent
budget.
     The plot: Bridget Fonda is Maggie, a drug addict who is given a
choice; either accept training as an assassin for an unnamed government
agency, or be executed for a murder she committed. Some choice. She's
trained in dirty work by Gabriel Byrne, and in the niceties of polite
society by Anne Bancroft, then sent out to complete her missions, which
are all quite nicely slam-bang (stunt coordinator Mic Rodgers did the
"Lethal Weapon" series). Things go well for a while, until Maggie falls
in love, develops a conscience, and decides she'd really rather not
kill people for a living.
     Fonda is very good at showing Maggie's transition from feral
street creature to human being with feelings. Byrne manages to be
somehow both cold-blooded and increasingly sympathetic, Bancroft is a
delight as the Miss Manners of the assassin set, Keitel is perfect in a
small but important role as Victor the Cleaner (he cleans up everything
and everyone after the other assassins), and Ferrer turns in another of
his patented Jack-Webb-with-PMS performances. Mulroney, alas, is more
than a little dumb as the love interest. Sharp-eyed viewers will spot
the director as a room service waiter; *really* sharp-eyed viewers will
spot the director of photography as one of the many guys with guns in
the final big shoot-out. Refreshingly, the computers in the movie
(mostly Macs) behave like *real* computers!
     What sets this film apart from others of the genre is that the
woman is the one with the heavy firepower. I'm reminded of the old
saying that Ginger Rogers did everything Fred Astaire did, only
backwards and wearing heels; well, here, Bridget Fonda does everything
Arnie, Sly et al do, only in a variety of tight, short dresses and
panty hose (I must admit that impressed *me*).  There is also a greater
emphasis on character development and emotional relationships than in
the average shoot'em-up.  There's actually less gratuitous violence
than I had been led to believe -- less, for example, than LETHAL WEAPON
3.  In other words, to get stereotypical and sexist here, it's a movie
with enough action for a guy, but enough story and emotion that his
girlfriend won't get bored either (my husband agrees with me on this).
     As to the reason I went in the first place, I was indeed well
pleased with the cinematography. It's lovely, stylish, atmospheric,
imaginative, and inventive (much of the opening sequence was shot in
Super 8 anamorphic, for example!), and I'm going to go see the movie
again just to *look* at it now that I won't be distracted by the plot.
It was ... well ... Really Neat.
     In conclusion, POINT OF NO RETURN offers some great action and
nice acting, good direction, effective use of music (score by Hans
Zimmer, many songs by Nina Simone), and awesome camera work. I can
recommend it.
