Title
Review for Strangers on a Train (1951)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Let's swap murders -- "Your wife, my father" -- the rich and
eccentric Bruno Antony proposes to tennis athlete Guy Haines, a
stranger he just met on a train in Hitchcock's 1951 taut thriller,
STRANGERS ON A TRAIN.  Who could catch us reasons Bruno since neither
of us would be suspected, and we'd get rid of the people who are
bothering us.
     Bruno, played wickedly by Robert Walker, is a diabolical type who
loves his mother, loathes his father, and once threatened to blow up
the White House -- just joking, of course.  He's also developed a way
"to smell a flower on the planet Mars."  Watch how menacing Robert
Walker can make Bruno with nothing more that a devious smile and a box
of popcorn he munches nonchalantly.
     Guy (Farley Granger), in contrast, is a rock solid citizen who
wants to marry a senator's daughter, Anne Morton (Ruth Roman), just as
soon as he gets rid of his entanglements with his current wife, Miriam,
a notorious flirt.
     Miriam, played like a oversexed schoolgirl by Laura Elliot, is
pregnant but probably not with Guy's baby.  We see her with two young
bucks in tow as she takes them both into the infamous Tunnel of Love at
the local carny.
     Hitchcock is a master at setting up scenes for maximum effect.
When Miriam, her two boyfriends and Bruno are shown inside the tunnel,
we see only their moving shadows.  And when the camera moves to outside
its entrance, we hear a scream from inside, which turns out to be
nothing more than Miriam yelling at one of her boyfriends with an "oh,
stop that," meaning don't do anything of the kind.  In another
beautifully composed sequence Miriam's glasses fall off when Bruno
begins to strangle her.  The rest of the murder is then filmed through
the reflection in her glasses lying in the grass.
     (So when does Hitchcock appear?  Ten minutes into the film.  Just
as in THE PARADINE CASE, it's at a train station, where he's carrying a
musical instrument case, but this time it's a bigger one, a bass.)
     As expected, Guy is aghast when Bruno actually commits his end of
the dastardly deeds they discussed; Guy wasn't serious.  But not to
worry, Guy has a rock solid alibi.  However, the alibi crumbles through
an unlucky break, and the story goes through a series of twists as
Bruno keeps bugging him to follow through on their deal, which Guy
never agreed to in the first place.
     Babs, played by Hitchcock's daughter Patricia, who looks strangely
like a younger Miriam, is great as Anne's precocious younger sister who
specializes in speaking the unspeakable.  She keeps pointing out how
and why her future brother-in-law is a prime suspect in his wife's
murder.
     Hitchcock's characters, as usual, feature an everyman, Guy in this
movie, wrapped up in a web he has trouble breaking.  Hitchcock has a
deft touch with his actors producing characters in predicaments that
are easy to empathize with.
     As Guy gets swept up in the story's whirlpool, Hitchcock uses some
classic and always effective thriller backdrops such an amusement park.
More imaginative is setting up a tennis match that doesn't look like it
will end soon enough as a way to ratchet up the tension.  And, finally,
a run-away merry-go-round provides the film's piece de resistance
vehicle for terror.
     STRANGERS ON A TRAIN runs 1:40.  It is rated PG for violence and
tension and would be fine for kids around nine and up.

Author
Brian Koller
"Strangers on a Train" is an outstanding crime drama, and
is perhaps Alfred Hitchcock's best film.  The story's focus
is on creating and extending dramatic tension, and Hitchcock
succeeds in this completely.
Farley Granger is a top tennis player, unsuccessfully seeking
to divorce promiscuous wife Laura Elliot to marry Ruth Roman,
who is the daughter of U.S. Senator Leo G. Carroll.
Granger accidentally meets Robert Walker on a train.
Walker is a charming but no-account son of a demanding wealthy
businessman.  Walker has the idea that they exchange murders:
Walker kills Elliot, while Granger kills the businessman.
Granger laughs off Walker as an eccentric, but soon Walker
kills Elliot, then demands that Granger kill his father, or
else.  Meanwhile, Granger is the prime suspect for the murder.
Hitchcock does all that he can to create suspense.
Many scenes, such as Elliot screaming in the tunnel of love,
Walker straining to retrieve a dropped cigarette lighter, or the
famous scene of an elderly man crawling under a wildly spinning
merry-go-round to shut it down, are used to promote
the tension.  A lengthy sequence has Granger having to
rush through a tennis match and escape police to confront
Walker.  Granger and fiancee Roman have many shots during these
scenes with anxious looks on their faces: the tension
that they are feeling is translated to the audience.
There is also the open question of whether Granger will
try to kill Walker's father.
There are two characters in this film that I really
liked.  Walker is a terrific villain: crazy but wily,
unpredictable, and he always has a clever line.
Walker did not live long to enjoy his success: he died
while the film was still playing in theaters.  I also liked
the Senator's youngest daughter (played by Patricia Hitchcock),
whose brash personality and similar appearance to Elliot
are cleverly used in the plot.
But even with a nearly perfect film a few flaws can be found.
Three separate characters, matronly ladies about sixty years
old, are given similar eccentric and excitable characters
(Walker's mother, Walker's demonstration victim at the party,
and the woman whose car is seized by policemen).  Also, in the
great merry-go-round climax, a policeman fires recklessly
into a crowd of people.  Give that man a desk job!
kollers@shell.mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Alfred Hitchcock
Writers: Raymond Chandler, Whitfield Cook, and Cenzi Ormonde (based on
the novel by Patricia Highsmith)
Starring: Farley Granger, Robert Walker, Ruth Roman, Leo G. Carroll,
Patricia Hitchcock, Marion Lorne, Howard St. John, Jonathan Hale, Robert
Gist, Laura Elliot
What's amazing about "Strangers on a Train" is not just how absolutely
thrilling it is after all these years, but also how deeply reflective it
is on humanity.  Here's a film which is a classic of the suspense genre,
one that has been copied, parodied, and rehashed ever since its initial
release.  But it's depiction of the murderous and agressive qualities in
man is what makes it even better, what makes it not only a popular film
commercially, but also critically.  Of all the films Hithcock made, this
is one of his absolute masterpieces.
Guy Haines (Farley Granger), a semi-famous and respectable tennis player
and his relationship with the off-kilter rich boy, Bruno Antony (Robert
Walker, who slightly resembled a young Robert Vaughn), is what the
film's focus is on.  Both are passengers on a train one day, and over
the course of a lunch, both open up to the two people they hate the
most: for Guy, it's his present wife, Miriam (Laura Elliot), whom he
wants to divorce so he can marry the daughter of a senator, Anne Morton
(Ruth Roman), but unfortunately she won't let him; for Bruno, it's his
fascist-like father (Jonathan Hale), who treats him horribly.  Bruno
comes up with an unthinkable plan for each to murder the other's object
of hatred because they have no other connection than a coincidental
meeting on a train, but Guy laughs it off, thinking of it as a joke.  A
couple nights later, Bruno stalks Miriam and her friends at a carnival,
and when no one is around, strangled Miriam to death.
Upon learning of this, Guy's initial reaction is to turn Bruno in, but
he has ran into a wall: he has no proof, and he's the chief suspect in
the murder.  In fact, the police have mapped out a way he could have
murdered her and still gotten back home when he did.  Meanwhile, Bruno
still wants Guy to murder his father, and when he refuses, he begins
slowly entering his life, stalking not only him, but his future family,
including the Miriam-looking sister of Anne, Barbara (Patricia Hitchcock
- yes, there's a relation; she's his daughter).
The finale of the film, which clocks in around 25 minutes, is one of the
most carefully constructed, intelligently and deftly tailored finales of
a film I've ever seen, ending in an outrageously visceral ending
involving an out-of-control merry-go-round, which is even more tense
when one discovers that the stunt involving the old man did not involve
any kind of special effects (it's probably the most dangerous stunt of
all time).  The ending is a perfect finish, with an afterthought
containing some extra suspense.
First off, the film is jam-packed with brilliant sequences, cool shots,
and various other suspense sequences that made Hitchcock famous.  The
first one is the beginning, which has no action or anything, but the
dialogue (co-written by none other than Raymond Chandler) is brilliant. 
In the scene, the two discuss the respective people who piss them off
the most, and then Bruno tries to get him to "switch murders."
Two other sequences include a party held by Anne's father (Leo G.
Carroll) where Bruno shows up and ends up in a discussion over how to
murder someone and not have to expound a lot of energy (winding up in a
demonstration how one strangles another); and a scene where Guy journeys
over to Bruno's mansion to kill his father.  Bruno's house is gigantic
and eerily gothic, and the cinematography in this sequence is some of
the creepiest I've ever seen.
But the best sequence, other than the finale, is the one where Bruno
stalks and murders Miriam.  Lasting about 10 minutes or so, it's a
masterpiece in montage, as Bruno has to make sure he follows her but has
to strangle her when none of her friends are around.  Unfortunately,
Bruno is hardly subtle about it, giving himself an eery presence with
his head held down and a hat darkening most of his face (as well as
those eyes he gives).  By the time he finally strangles Miriam to death
(effectively mirrored through her fallen glasses), it's not
anticlimactic but silently frightening.
One of the chief powers of this film lies in the character of Bruno,
who's one of the creepiest and most insane villains to ever grace any
screen.  Instead of being just a cold-hearted bastard, he almost seems
like a harmless little boy, with a gentle presence, resulting in
something which becomes a tad unerving.  Bruno is completely oblivious
to his lack of sanity, most notable in a scene after he kills Miriam
where he approaches and talks to Guy, who is, obviously, appalled at
what he did, but he acts like he did nothing wrong.  He also adds a
touch of homoeroticism, as he seems to attempt to seduce Guy in several
scenes.  Robert Walker's performance is one of the greatest in a
Hitchcock film, if not the best (an observation attributed to AMC host
Nick Clooney).  Unfortunately, Walker died shortly following this film
of "reaction to sedatives."  Too bad; he was just perfect in this film.
The power of this film, though, is its presentation of human beings as
having a murderous and violent nature.  A lot of the characters in this
film, most notably Guy, the one woman at the party, and, of course,
Bruno, who all present different stages of this ailment.  In one scene,
Guy fumes after a heated discussion with his wife that he wishes he
could strangle her, although we know he would never do it.  The woman
giggles along with Bruno in the party scene, but shows an active
interest in the world of murder, but again, she would never do it.  But
Bruno, who seems to have no morals, has no problem with it, and the
chief problem would be getting away with it (or having to do a lot of
work).  The truth is we humans have an interest in murder in general; it
just piques our interest.  Which is probably why Hollywood makes so many
films about them.
But above all, "Strangers on a Train" is a brilliant piece of suspense. 
Hitchcock is at his best with this film, giving us interesting
characters who we care about, a set-up which is fascinating, and
sequences which are intense.  The story, which has been copied many
times (most recently in DeVito's "Throw Momma From the Train"), is not
only a fascinating idea, but an intriguing reflection of our society. 
It's also one of Hitchcock's very best.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
