Title
Review for Cop & 1/2 (1993)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Berardinelli
     Devon (Norman D. Golden 2d) is an 8-year old who idolizes the
police.  When he witnesses a murder, he goes to his heros with a deal:
put him on the force for one day and he'll provide them with
information to ID the killer.  Although understandably reluctant at
first, the cops eventually decide to allow Devon to ride with crusty
veteran Nick McKenna (Burt Reynolds) for a day.  McKenna is horrified
at the thought--he doesn't get along well with kids--but his captain
makes it clear to him that his only other choice is to give up his
detective's badge and go back into uniform.
     It's been a long time since there's been a good cop/buddy film.
In fact, with each successive effort, the results get worse.  COP AND A
HALF, a miserably inept comedy, will do nothing to reverse the trend.
In fact, this movie is so bad that it comes perilously close to
straying into the territory of one of the all-time worst of the genre,
STOP! OR MY MOM WILL SHOOT.
     With Burt Reynolds' recent track record at the box office, you
have to be immediately suspicious about any movie that he's in.  He
plays the straight man here--a hardened cynic with a "bad marriage and
a bad back"--and while he does an acceptable job at it, his character
is too-frequently unpleasant.  That might be okay for a drama, but it's
disastrous for comedy.
     Norman D. Golden 2d, who plays the kid, has a terminal case of
cuteness.  He runs around spouting one-liners and singing the "Star
Spangled Banner" whenever he gets scared.  Initially, it seems like
he'll be a fresh presence in the film, but that wears thin about
halfway through.  This movie (and its heavy-handed director, Henry
Winkler) is so enamored with Devon that he starts to annoy the
audience.
     Plots for comedies are frequently idiotic (witness that of John
Cleese's masterpiece A FISH CALLED WANDA), but it is the duty of the
filmmakers to draw the viewers into their lunatic world.  COP AND A
HALF fails miserably and we're left watching a nonsensical story in
which we can't help but identify flaw after flaw.  Engrossing films
don't have this problem; boring ones do.
     The comedy is sporadic at best.  I laughed a couple of times, but
those certainly weren't full-bellied guffaws.  Only one scene sticks in
my mind as being remotely-clever--a sendup of SPARTACUS.  This will go
over the head of anyone who hasn't seen the Kurt Douglas classic (such
as the numerous children in the audience).  There are also a few
attempts to steal from HOME ALONE, but that stuff is so old by now that
it doesn't even cause a smile.
     COP AND A HALF is an amalgamation of unfunny comedy, flat
characters, and dull action sequences.  There is a long, boring chase
scene towards the end of the movie that could have--and should
have--been cut out altogether (except it would have rendered the
running time of the film to around an anemic 1:15).  It regurgitates
the worst of the thousands of similar such sequences that have gone
before it.  There's nothing new in this one, but then again why change
here what's pretty much true of the entire movie.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
