Title
Review for French Kiss (1995)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: wide release 5/5/95 
Running Length: 1:51 
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (Sexual innuendo, profanity) 
Starring: Meg Ryan, Kevin Kline, Timothy Hutton, Jean Reno, Susan Anbeh 
Director: Lawrence Kasdan 
Producers: Tim Bevan, Eric Fellner, Meg Ryan, and Kathryn F. Galan 
Screenplay: Adam Brooks  
Cinematography: Owen Roizman 
Music: James Newton Howard 
Released by Twentieth Century Fox 
     Another year, another Meg Ryan romantic comedy.  In 1994, it was 
I.Q.  In 1993, it was SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE.  In 1990, JOE VERSUS THE 
VOLCANO; in 1989, WHEN HARRY MET SALLY.  And the thing is, no matter how 
she wears her hair, she always plays basically the same
character--bubbly and energetic yet repressed.  That description fits
her latest on-screen personae, FRENCH KISS' Kate.  But the problem is
that having played the type so often, Ryan has gone on auto-pilot.  This
time around, the effervescence is flat and the likableness is forced.
Kate is champagne that has stood out too long. 
     Not so with the male lead in this Lawrence Kasdan-directed film.  
Kevin Kline, who won an Oscar as Otto in A FISH CALLED WANDA, brings the 
same degree of comic aptitude to Luc, a good-hearted scoundrel.  With a 
flair and enthusiasm that everyone else involved with this production 
seems to lack, Kline very nearly single-handedly saves this film.  
Almost, but not quite.  They say it takes two to tango, and with Meg 
Ryan's moves so much more mechanical than those of her partner, this 
pair engages in a decidedly clumsy dance.   
     The storyline takes the same old romantic comedy formula, bends it 
a little (but not too much -- Kasdan apparently doesn't want his 
audience to feel uncomfortable by facing new territory), and adds a few 
passages of decent dialogue.  There is one scene early in the film with 
Kate and Luc discussing kissing that's noteworthy for its sincerity and 
intelligence.  This isn't Kieslowski or Rohmer, but it's about the 
deepest one can reasonably expect from this type of motion picture. 
     As the curtain rises on FRENCH KISS, Kate is engaged to Charlie 
(played with absolutely no charisma by Timothy Hutton).  They're the 
perfect couple:  boring, adoring, and ready to settle down.  Then 
Charlie heads off to Paris, falls madly in love with a French beauty 
(Susan Anbeh, who looks great but doesn't do much real acting), and 
calls Kate to cancel the wedding.  Distraught and determined to win back 
her fiance, she overcomes her fear of flying, gets on a plane, and heads 
off to Europe.  Sitting next to her during the flight is Luc, an unkempt 
Frenchman with a stolen necklace in his pocket and a plan to use Kate to 
smuggle it through customs.  Of course, problems occur, the necklace 
gets lost, and Luc and Kate fall in love. 
     Lifeless performances by Ryan and Hutton aside, this movie might 
have been more endearing had it spent less time on the inane jewelry 
theft story and more time developing something other than a cliched 
relationship between the two leads.  FRENCH KISS isn't all bad -- it has 
its share of mild humor, and the scenery in Paris and Cannes is often 
more photogenic than the actors.  However, the delicate air of romance 
that often makes this sort of film worthwhile is absent.  FRENCH KISS 
does it by the numbers, not from the heart. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Director Lawrence Kasdan's latest movie is a romantic comedy
called FRENCH KISS.  The trademark of Kasdan's films (GRAND CANYON, BIG
CHILL, and BODY HEAT) are the people.  All of his actors have unique
and compelling personalities.  Moreover, his projects (GRAND CANYON,
WYATT EARP, and SILVERADO) frequently have an epic feel to them.  This
was one of his non-epic movies, but it certainly was populated with
some fascinating and quirky characters.  I want to confess up front
that GRAND CANYON was number one on my list in 1991 and BIG CHILL was
in 1983 so I am huge fan of Kasdan's body of work.
     FRENCH KISS tells the story of Kate (Meg Ryan) an American who is
in the process of renouncing her American citizenship so that she can
become a Canadian and marry her fiance, a Canadian doctor played by
Timothy Hutton.  She is deadly afraid of flying.  In an initial,
hilarious sequence, she fails a fear of flying school and refuses to
travel with the doctor to a conference in Paris.  While there, he meets
Juliet (Susan Anbeh), a French "goddess", and tells Kate he is leaving
her for Juliet.  Kate goes to Paris and on the plane sits next to Luc,
a French thief, played in a tour de force performance by Kevin Klein.
Most of the movie has Luc trying to help Kate get the doctor back.
There is also a significant subplot involving a stolen necklace and the
chase by a the policeman (Jean Reno) to get it back.
     The writing by Adam Brooks was quite funny.  The interchanges
between Kate and Luc were precious.  He was crude and she was innocent,
and the dialog was filled with them exchanging great one liners in a
natural fashion of a real conversation rather than that of two great
comics.  Brooks did add one scene which was a long sight gag with Kate
falling on a dessert cart and crawling on her knees to avoid being seen
by the doctor.  This piece of slapstick was pathetic and belonged, if
anywhere, in another movie.  I have no idea why the editor left it in.
     Kasdan's directing was in the style of the BIG CHILL but with more
comedy and less pretense about the need to deliver a message.  Granted,
there was a message in the movie, but it was subtle and tertiary to the
plot and the subplot.  My respect for Kasdan's craft continues.
     I frequently will think more of the writer or the director than
the actors in a movie because writers and directors are the unsung
heroes who are the determinates of whether a picture moves you or bores
you.  In FRENCH KISS, as good as the writing and the directing was, it
was ultimately the incredible performance by Kevin Kline that made the
movie.  He owned every scene he was in.  Every time he opened his mouth
you were wondering how he was going to deliver his next line and what
his body language would be.
     Kline is a versatile actor who has made the screen come alive in
many other films.  My two recent favorite roles of his were in DAVE and
in PRINCESS CARABOO - both of which I recommend highly.  [I got a
letter to the editor of Fortune Magazine about DAVE published so it
will always have a special place in my memory.] Kline as Luc was at the
top of his form.  There is no role of his, including his Academy Award
winning role in A FISH CALLED WANDA, that I liked better.  This film
has to be rated a must see for all of you Kevin Kline fans.
     I would go to see any film with Meg Ryan in it.  She is cute,
captivating, and intelligent yet always child-like and vulnerable.
>From her best film (WHEN A MAN LOVES A WOMAN) to her funniest (WHEN
HARRY MET SALLY) she has always dominated any picture she is in.  She
is like the sun and the other actors circle her.  In FRENCH KISS, she
is terrific and yet, her performance pales in comparison to Kline's.
This is his movie.
     In the year 1980, Timothy Hutton was brilliant in ORDINARY PEOPLE.
It has been straight down hill for him ever since.  He has been so bad
in many recent films, e.g., MADE IN HEAVEN, that they made my worst of
the year list.  He stays consistent and never bothers to act or show
any emotion in FRENCH KISS.  This is no easy feat since he is being
actively pursued by someone as cute as Ryan and as drop down dead
gorgeous as Anbeh.  Most men might suffer a major meltdown just being
in the same rooms with these two.  Hutton manages to be oblivious to
both.  Major control I suppose or ice water in his veins.
     The acting by the minor characters is good.  Reno plays the cop
with a fresh approach.  I especially liked the acting by Anbeh, who
takes a minor part with almost no lines, and manages to make the just
stand there and look beautiful role interesting.
     I wish I knew the names of the costume designers and the makeup
artists since I think they deserve special mention.  The costumes,
especially the evolution of the costumes and the makeup for the two
women leads was a key to the success of the film.  Watch how they make
Kate go from innocent and cute (sexiest belly button I have seen in a
long time) to gorgeous and how they take Juliet in just the opposite
direction.  You can see it in the clothes, the make up, and in Juliet's
later, stark hairdos.  Finally, notice the evolution of the doctor's
clothes.  They get more and more outrageous until he becomes a
caricature of an American playboy on the continent.
     The cinematography was striking without ever being traveloguesque.
The outside glow against the shadow of the bodies in the hotel was
beautiful.  If you notice the fade to black of the most of the scenes,
it fades fast at first but then lingers until only a dark shadow
against a black background remains reminiscent of a memory locked into
our subconsciousness.
     As someone who grew up in the 50s and 60s, I liked the double
meaning of the title.  When I was a young boy, a French Kiss was a
proscribed activity that you giggled about in the schoolyard and yet
anxiously and fervently awaited your first chance at it.
     FRENCH KISS runs just right at 1:50.  It is rated PG-13 for some
bad language, subdued sex, references to drugs, massive smoking by Luc,
and adult themes.  There were several boys in the 5-7 range when I was
there plus one 3 year old girl.  This was crazy for it surely bored
them all.  For the adult humor and romance, I would say kids older than
9 or 10 would like it.  I recommend it to you and award it ***.  For
comparison purposes, I should say that I prefer the other current
romantic comedy, While You Were Sleeping, over this one, although they
were close enough that I rated them the same.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Christopher Null
     Redeeming the genre from last week's dismal WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING,
Meg Ryan and Kevin Kline manage to deliver hilarious and surprisingly
touching performances in FRENCH KISS.  Ryan plays Kate, a seriously
neurotic woman who takes the phrase "obsessive-compulsive" to new lows. 
Charlie (Timothy Hutton) is Kate's fiancee, an up-and-coming doctor who,
when Kate is too afraid to board the airplane, takes a week-long business
trip to Paris alone.
     And there the games begin.  Charlie unexpectedly falls for a French
"goddess" and calls off his relationship with Kate.  Stunned, our heroine
becomes understandably obsessed with getting Charlie back, and the games
begin.  On her white-knuckled flight across the Atlantic, she encounters
Luc (Kevin Kline), a smarmy French con-man trying to go straight.  The two
couldn't be less alike, but an unlikely romance begins to sprout.
     FRENCH KISS actually manages to make a decent statement about love
and happiness, bringing to light the truth of the old adage, "There is no
substitute for experience."  The film is also believable despite its
outlandish main characters, whom Ryan and Kline portray with wonderful
emotion and with an amazing flair for comic timing.  Kline's antics are
simply hilarious to the point of absurdity.
     The film's ending is pretty obvious, but how they get there is full
of surprises, and it also made me remember:  love really can come from the
unlikeliest of places.

Author
Yamamoto
     Is there a law that says the road workers can only work on nice
smooth surface?  I mean every time they repave a road, they immediately
dig it up and do some stuff on it.  After which, you have an uneven
road with bunch of patches on it.  And if they come around to repave
the road again (after forever and few alignment adjustments), the whole
series of road work begins again (so you can never have a nice road).
     Speaking of missed cues, FRENCH KISS came out so I had to go check
it out.  It's about this woman who got dumped by her fiancee while he
went on a business trip to Paris.  And she's determined to get this
looser back for some reason.  Ahh, women -- I'll never understand their
reasonings.
     No nakkid boobs.  No bullets.  No dead bodies.  2 on the vomit
meter.  No moon shots.  What we got here are: airplane-fu, old folk's
home-fu, attack of killer telephone call-fu, little booze-fu,
tourist-fu, goddess-fu, attack of killer train food-fu, wine-fu and of
course a plant-fu.  Drive-in academy nomination for saying stuff like
"All men are bastards" and to Kevin Klein for saying stuff like "What
can I say?  I'm an asshole."  And to Jean from Professional for saying
stuff like "I owe him more than mere money".  One and a three quarters
star.  Shaggy Bob says check it out!
     Alien Alert!  Did ya hear about this woman accusing a Santa Clara
Deputy for raping her in a courthouse?  Apparently this occurred during
the middle of a day in a busy courthouse.  Hmmm.  Either way, we got
some sickos out there.

Author
Eric Grossman
     Lawrence Kasdan's FRENCH KISS starring Meg Ryan and Kevin Kline is
a charming romantic comedy that also doubles as a travelogue for
France.
     Ryan plays Kate, an obsessive-compulsive, lactose-intolerant woman
who is so terrified of flying,  she won't even accompany her
doctor-fiance, Charlie (Timothy Hutton), with whom she is madly in love,
to Paris.  "I get around the way God intended, a car" she says.
Charlie, who has a medical meeting, goes on by himself and then Kate's
worst nightmare happens, Charlie falls in love with a French beauty
named Juliette (Susan Anbeh).  Kate's phobia of flying is overwhelmed
by her fear of losing the man she loves and she journey's to France to
get him back.
     On the flight over, she meets Luc (Kevin Kline), a French thief
who feigns interest in helping her so that he can use her to smuggle a
valuable necklace into the country.  As Luc struggles to retrieve his
stolen property from Kate's bag, he begins to sympathize with her
plight and eventually, begins to fall in love with her himself.  At the
same time, Kate is falling for Luc and ultimately must decide which man
she really loves.
     FRENCH KISS is somewhat of a comeback for Kasdan whose last film,
WYATT EARP, starring Kevin Costner, was a certified bomb.  Although he
is a great writer and responsible for some of the most successful
screenplays of all time (THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK, RAIDERS OF THE LOST
ARK, THE BODYGUARD), Kasdan as a director (BODY HEAT, THE BIG CHILL)
has obtained many critical kudos but only a few hits at the box
office.  However, with the help of Adam Brooks' screenplay, Kasdan is
back on track with this film.
     A French person's worst nightmare, Ryan's Kate can be a real
whiner.  Despite this, the sweetness that caused audiences to fall in
love with her in TOP GUN and that made her a huge star in WHEN HARRY
MET SALLY is still there.  Kline, a superb actor with an equal gift for
drama and comedy (GRAND CANYON, A FISH CALLED WANDA) plays his
Frenchman with a delicate balance of humor, sleaziness, and warmth.
Most importantly, Ryan and Kline have chemistry.
     Hutton is fine as the not-so-nice-guy, Charlie, but the
scene-stealer is Jean Reno (LA FEMME NIKITA, THE PROFESSIONAL).  He
plays Jean-Paul, a French policeman who is both Luc's friend and
pursuer.  Reno has a wonderful face the overflows with character and
without a doubt, he has the finest accent in the film, mostly because
it's real!
     FRENCH KISS is a light, "feel-good" romp that slowly pins a smile
to your face.   Effective music and beautiful scenery are an added
bonus.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Lawrence Kasdan directing Meg Ryan and Kevin Kline in a romantic comedy?
Huh?  The director of WYATT EARP isn't exactly known for the breezy sort
of WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING fare.  He does better with the bittersweet--
films like GRAND CANYON and THE ACCIDENTAL TOURIST.  So, despite what
the ads say, it's not much of a surprise to find that FRENCH KISS plays
more serious than silly.
     The setup is this:  Meg Ryan is the French-hating, lactose-intolerant
Kate, who's flying to Paris to "win back" her fiance (Timothy Hutton).
Seated next to her is Luc (Kevin Kline), a swarthy, snide Frenchman who
has her frothing within the first five minutes of conversation.  They
bicker and banter, and later reunite for a picture-postcard adventure
that includes every cliche from a stolen necklace to an unctuous
concierge.
     The resulting humor is surprisingly strong, even if Kasdan's direction
doesn't have enough comic rhythm.  (Too many of the bits feel klunky and
heavier than they should.)  The character detail is impressive, which
helps, but the plot disappoints.  Ryan plays yet another neurotic woman,
who spends most of her screen time looking cute and acting exasperated.
     Kevin Kline has the stronger role.  His character is explored at length,
and undergoes a gradual transformation from obnoxious to sensitive.
It's a great portrayal that carries the film.  What *doesn't* work is
his inevitable romance with Ryan.  It feels forced.
