Title
Review for Trouble in Mind (1985)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Lon Ponschock
A film by Alan Rudolph
Music by Mark Isham
Stars Kris Kristofferson, Keith Carradine, Lori Singer, and Genevieve Bujold
     This is an old film (1985).  Alan Rudolph is a special director.
I've written about his films such as CHOOSE ME and the MODERNS and also
EQUINOX which is his most recent starring Mathew Modine.
     There's a quietness about an Alan Rudolph piece.  And his pictures
are often set out of time and place.  Here, for instance, the scene is
a place which is a major metropolitan area simply called Rain City.
The cars on the street are autos like the 1971 'Batmobile' sharkback
Buick and also one of the earliest Barracudas or 'back-a-rudas' as the
old commercial had it:  Cool stuff in other words.
     A new friend lent me a personal copy of this piece: a purchased
copy.  So I expected something special.
     Rain City, with all it's detail is just slightly skewed.  The
costumes are a bit different, the language is a bit different.  Oh yes,
and Divine is in this and she is a bit different as well.
     Kris Kristofferson (THE SAILOR WHO FELL FROM GRACE WITH THE SEA,
THE SILVER BEARS, MILLENNIUM) was never my favorite actor.  Let's face
it, I hate the somebitch.  Having said that, I can still recommend
TROUBLE IN MIND.  The story is a fairly simple tale of low life in the
big city.  But with light, sound and a wonderful score by Mark Isham
(QUIZ SHOW and THE BEAST, something that was barely released but the
music was broadcast as part of a new age prog. on public radio) Rain
City becomes a magical place... a place that cities always seem to be
to those who don't live in them I think.  But magical anyway.
     It's about low life, small time hoods and ex-cops--the stuff of
which most B-movies are made.  A few elements appear here which on a
single viewing didn't make sense: a Shinto ceremony, an enemy killed in
the style of a Vietnam jungle fight, a shoot-out which has the effect of
looking like a custard pie fight in a Mack Sennet comedy at the end.
     And through all this strangeness, these images out of the mind of
the director, comes that landscape of art deco and modern, almost campy
stylishness there is ...  cool stuff.
