Title
Review for UHF (1989)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Chris Casino
Cast: "Weird Al" Yankovic (George Newman), Victoria Jackson (Teri), 
Michael Richards (Stanley Spadowski), Kevin McCarthy (R.J. Fletcher), 
David Bowe (Bob), Fran Drescher (Pamela Finklestein), Stanley Brock
(Uncle Harvey), Sue Ann Langdon (Aunt Esther), Billy Barty (Noodles),
Gedde Wantanabe (Kuni).
I'm a huge "Weird Al" Yankovic fan. I love all his song
parodies, and I have since I was twelve. I have all his albums, and
I even had the priviledge of meeting him three years ago.
Does this have any influence over my review?
A little. But if there is a lousy song on one of his albums, I always
admit it. But this is a geniunely funny movie. Some of the critics
who complained about it said that there was no plot or point to it.
Guys, it was a parody from "Weird Al", what do you expect, Shakespeare?
George Newman (nicely played by Yankovic) and his buddy Bob are constantly
fired from jobs because of George's overactive imagination (which makes
for some nice parodies). He suddenly becomes the manager of a small
UHF station which he uses to create shows from his bizzare imagination.
The baddie of the film is R.J. Fletcher (McCarthy, well cast),
the owner of the rival station who kidnaps U62's franchise
player/janitor Stanley Spadowski (Richards, the movie's real hero)
so he can attempt to buy the station and tear it down.
While the story does suck, the majority of the parodies couldn't be
funnier and the fine cast tries their best. 
Viewed today as a cult classic, when first released it barely
made any movie because it was released beside a dozen
summer blockbusters. Although Al was happy with it (after all,
it got some of the best test scores since the original RoboCop),
this fact was a contributing factor to his not making any more
movies. It really is a shame, as I (and every other fan he has)
would really love to see him do more in the movie industry.

Author
Ken Kaufman
     Shall we start with the bad news?  The plot is cliched and holey; the bad
guys might as well be made of cardboard, and after the opening scene, the next
20-30 minutes fall dreadfully flat.
     But, in spite of all that, I would rate Weird Al Yankovic's new film, UHF,
a 7 on the ISIYVAHIT (Infamous-Send-In-Your-Vote-And-Have-It-Tabulated) 1-10
scale.  Why?
     Weird Al's strength is in the art of parody.  And the film is full of
satire that hits right on the mark; this turns the entire movie around.
Blockbuster movies, television shows, music videos, and of course some classic
commercials are targeted and nailed.
     Also included in the film are some of the world's oldest gags.  But in a
(perhaps inadvertent) fit of brilliance, UHF does a better job of telegraphing
them than Western Union could ever hope to, and in doing so, allows one to
revel for eons before the punch line is finally delivered.  Who cares if you
can guess what's in the closet?  It's still funny when they open the door.
     A couple things to watch for that I didn't catch until they were mentioned
in the closing credits:  A clip from that other classic, "Mars Needs Women,"
and a cameo appearance by Dr. Demento (listed in credits as "Man eating
whipped cream."
     No one is going to hand Yankovic an Oscar for his effort; this is hardly
great cinema.  However, if you go in looking for low-level laughs and some
wonderful satire on all sorts of modern pop-culture targets, you will have more
fun than you can wave a spatula at.
Ken Kaufman (kaufman@gmu90x.gmu.edu)

Author
Greg Goebel
     I always have a certain fear when I make recommendations for a movie.  I
fantasize that one day I'll be sitting at my computer, tapping away on the
keyboard, mumbling to myself, when suddenly I'll be snatched out of my chair by
two meaty hands and lifted up until my feet are dangling in the air (which is
even more frightening than it sounds, considering I'm six-foot-four), with my
nose pressed into the face of some pre-hominid who has a face like a Rottweiler
with a complexion problem.  I hear the voice of doom in my ears:  "ARE YOU DA
GUY WHO TOLD ME TO GO WASTE MY TIME AND MONEY ON DA STUPIDEST MOVIE I EVER SEEN
IN MINE LIFE?!"
     And I'll forthrightly answer:  "Well ...  no ...  I'm just sitting here
because he got a job in Piscataway and nobody's bothered to change the name
plates on the desk yet ..."
     Consider, for example, Weird Al Yankovic's new film, UHF.  Let me explain
what it is about first before I make any further comments on it ...
     George Newman (Weird Al hisself) is a chronic daydreamer who likes to
create perverse fantasies from popular cinematic scenarios -- which results in
some interesting footage for the viewer, but also gives him a problem with
holding down a job.  Fired from a long list of menial jobs, George is getting
ready to give up hope, when his gambler uncle wins a run-down UHF station,
Channel 62, in an idle game of cards.  He doesn't know what to do with it, of
course -- 62 is the worst station in the known Universe, and probably in most
parallel dimensions as well -- but George's lively aunt has an idea:  Let
George run the station!
     George is a little discouraged in his work at first, but after a few lucky
breaks, manages to bring Channel 62 to the top of the charts (with the help of
some slightly unconventional programming).  This draws the wrath of RJ
Fletcher, owner of Channel 8, the network affiliate station -- and RJ is immune
to cancer because everything in his body is malignant to begin with.
     Okay, 'nuff said, you got the idea.  Now for the comments:  UHF is a
thrown- together film, working on a low budget, with little in the way of
acting (Weird Al is certainly not Oscar material) or story (the plot is like a
watered-down version of Mel Brook's SILENT MOVIE).  However, the only important
criteria for judging a comedy is:  DID YOU LAUGH?  And the answer is: YES ...
sometimes.
     Make no mistake, UHF "dares to be stupid", and keeps it up from start to
finish; it's like Weird Al is taking blind shots at you in hopes of hitting
your funny bone -- and succeeding on occasion, though never to the point of
getting on a roll.  Still, when there are yuks, they're good ones.
     I liked this film, though I can't say I feel extremely enthusiastic about
it.  Will you like it?  The answer to that question is probably the same as the
answer to this one:  Do you enjoy reading a MAD magazine from cover to cover?
     And if I steered you wrong, don't come looking in Corvallis -- I'll be in
Piscataway ...

Author
John S. Travis
     Just saw UHF last night at a packed sneak preview at MIT.  I always wonder
if the free ticket and the rowdy crowd influences me at such previews, but I
truly enjoyed the film.  Of course it is really stupid but so was AIRPLANE, a
movie that you could easily compare UHF to.
     The movie was very funny with lots of sight gags, and it didn't stall very
often (in my humble opinion).  The beginning is very funny, with his parody of
Indy Jones, and of course one of the best moments had to be a song.  Weird Al's
version of "Money for Nothing" will leave you rolling, one of his best yet.
     Plot is simple: Weird Al takes over a loser TV station and makes it a
winner with such programs as "Wheel of Fish," "Wide World of Phlegm," and "The
Young and the Dyslexic."  Their star is the former janitor at the dreaded
Channel 8 which tries to put them out of business.  As in AIRPLANE, the plot is
a parody--"Just stand up and tell them ... .we're not going to take any dirty
floors!"
     Of course the crowd fave at MIT was the engineer!  And everyone went
berserk over a line which most others will think mildly amusing : "Congrats:
You just won a drink from the firehose."  Explanation: getting an education at
MIT is often likened to trying to drink from a firehose!
     Well, overall this was as good as AIRPLANE, but I'm sure a lot of people
won't like the silly type of humor, and might feel their 6 bucks wasted.  Who
cares!  It was free for me, and I laughed the whole night.

Author
Chad Polenz
UHF
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1989, PG-13, 97 minutes [1 hour, 37 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: "Weird Al" Yankovic (George Newman), Kevin McCarthy (R.J.
Fletcher), Michael Richards (Stanley Spadowski), David Bowe (Bob), written by
Al Yankovic, Jay Levey, produced by Gene Kirkwood, John Hyde, directed by Jay
Levey.
In the spirit of "The Naked Gun" and other such satirical movies, "UHF" is
another funny movie full of back-to-back parodies and sheer wackiness. The
only problem is sometimes you wonder why you laughed.
The film starts off with the typical buddy system. George (Yankovic) and Bob
(Bowe) are two slackers who can't get their act together and keep floating
from job to job. When George's uncle wins the deed to Channel 62, a UHF
television station, he lets George manage it because he has nothing else to
do. 
Since this a film about stupidity for the masses, Channel 62 becomes an
overnight success due to George's wacky ideas, especially when he gives
Stanley Spadowski (Richards), the station's janitor, his own TV show.
Richards is quite funny as Spadowski, a janitor who loves his mop with a
passion. When he is given his own television show the stations' ratings soar
and suddenly Channel 62 becomes the biggest station in town because of its
sheer wackiness. George brings in his friends to create their own shows like
"Wheel Of Fish," "Strip Solitaire," and "Fun With Dirt." 
Yankovic and Levey certainly have a knack for satire and zaniness, as they
do the correct thing by making everything in the film just as bizarre as
everything else. If anything, the film is just a live action cartoon in all
aspects, but a funny cartoon at that. Not only are the shows wacky, but so
are the commercials such as "Spatula City," and "Plots R Us." There's a good
sense of detail here, where as every little joke and gag have meaning and are
funny within their context.
The actual "plot" involves the efforts of R.J. Fletcher (McCarthy), the
general manager of a network affiliate, and his plans to sabotage Channel 62.
But because the film is so lighthearted, even Fletcher and his associates are
funny because of their whole "bad guy" persona is so overboard.
When George's uncle suddenly finds himself in debt he agrees to sell Channel
62 to Fletcher if George cannot come up with the money by a certain deadline.
The story from here starts to become a comedic adventure, with cliff hangers
and the like, but you can tell how it's going to turn out.
Although "UHF" is funny, it's far from a perfect film. Sometimes it becomes
more ridiculous than necessary, but at least it doesn't take itself too
seriously.
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and capsules.
Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
Randy Parker
        It's not often that I laugh so hard at a movie that my head hurts.
But that's just what happened to me at UHF, Weird Al Yankovic's big screen
debut.  UHF is a television parody a la AIRPLANE, and like AIRPLANE, the
movie is extraordinarily stupid.  But it's dumb in the best way a movie can
be dumb: it's so silly and outrageous it's hilarious.
        The movie stars Weird Al as George Newman, a world class nerd with
a hyperactive imagination, the type who fantasizes he's Indiana Jones and
who uses Hostess Twinkies as hot dog buns.  George is basically a loser;
his daydreams and smart-alec attitude perpetually prevent him from holding
onto a job for more than two weeks.  But George finally gets a chance to
funnel his creativity into something productive when his uncle wins Channel
62 in a poker game and makes him the General Manager of the struggling UHF
television station.
        George revives channel 62 with innovative programming: shows like
"Wheel of Fish" and movies like "Conan, the Librarian."  As the station's
ratings rise, it comes into competition with Channel 8, the leading VHF
network-affiliate.  As R.J. Fletcher--Channel 8's ill-natured, hard-nosed
owner--veteran stage and film actor Kevin McCarthy is flamboyantly sleazy;
he really hams it up with his snorts, grimaces, and scowls.
        UHF satirizes anything and everything to do with television,
including game shows, tabloid talk shows, children's shows, dizzy news
women, and movies--everything from RAMBO to CLOSE ENCOUNTERS.  The funniest
scene, the one that made my head spin, is a commercial for spatulas which
has to be seen to be believed.
        Like most movies in its genre, UHF is hit or miss.  For every gag
that works, at least one fizzles.  For instance, Weird Al's mock video of
"Money For Nothing" by Dire Straits is only mildly amusing and brings the
film to a grinding halt (although it does have some nifty computer
animation).  But the funniest bits in UHF are so hysterical that we can
forgive the ones that fail; we know another gut wrencher is on the way.
        In fact, UHF hits the mark often enough to make it the most
effective AIRPLANE-type movie since ... well, since AIRPLANE.  Much of the
credit goes to Weird Al's exceptionally inventive script and to the movie's
winsome cast.  Weird Al seems a little stiff at the beginning, but because
he's not afraid to look silly, he ultimately has a lot of fun with his
character.
        The real standout is Michael Richards as Stanley, the dim-witted
janitor who becomes the host of his own children's show: "Stanley
Spadowski's Playhouse."  Stanley's off-beat, mixed-up personality is a big
hit with the audience and makes him an over-night star.  He is an endearing
mixture of good-natured innocence, high-energy enthusiasm, and puppy-dog
cuteness.  And above all, he's a good janitor who adores his work.  Another
highlight is a vintage cameo by the incomparable Emo Philips.
        The cast also features Gedde Watanabe (the Chinese foreign-exchange
student in SIXTEEN CANDLES) as the Karate master who hosts the hit series,
"Wheel of Fish."  Also aboard for the ride is Fran Drescher, who plays
Pamela Finklestein, Channel 62's roving reporter.  Unfortunately, as Weird
Al's girlfriend, Victoria Jackson is wasted in a role that calls for
nothing but whimpering, whining, and sulking.  Her character is extraneous
and should have been either further integrated into the story or cut from
the script altogether.
        While UHF is not an absolute must-see, it's definitely the ticket
if you're looking for a wild and zany, whacked-out comedy.  The movie is
good enough to see in the theaters, but it may work even better on
television, the very medium at which it pokes fun.

Author
Matt Kristek
This is a good movie. Plan and simple. Not because 'Weird Al' Yankovic
plays George Newman, the lead role. It would have been just as great with
anybody in the lead role. However, despite what others may think,
Yankovic's acting is surprisingly convincing. He gets his point across.
I'm not going to give you a plot outline or anything like that. There's
plenty of reviews out there where you can find that out. Instead, I'm going
to tell you what I think should have been said in those reviews, but
wasn't.
The movie was cast perfectly, with the exception of Victoria Jackson as
Yankovic's girlfriend, but more on that later. Michael Richards (Kramer
from Seinfeld) gives (in my opinion) his best performance ever in this
movie as the lovable dim-witted janitor, Stenley Spadowski. Kevin McCarthy
(and his thugs) perfectly play the role of the villians, so much to a point
where you have to laugh. David Bowe (who I've never seen in anything else)
is Yankovic's friend Bob, and is quite cool. He can catch grape after grape
in his mouth from across the room. You have to respect that. And he can
act, too. Fran Dresher is the secretary/newscaster, who I've never been a
big fan of in the first place, actually isn't too bad in this movie. Other
great parts are the bum, the midget cameraman, George's uncle, the karate
teacher (Stupid!!! You so stuuuupid!!!!!) and a lot more. The only bad
thing about the cast (and the entire movie, I think), which I mentioned
earlier, is Victoria Jackson. She could never act. She was pretty
unconvincing. Oh well.
This movie is full of little gems that you just have to laugh at. For
instance, the bum and a blind guy are sitting on a bench, and the blind guy
has a Rubik's cube. He turns one side, hold it to the bum and asks, "Is
this it?" The bum responds, "Nope." He then turns it again, and the whole
process repeats. Little fun things like this are scattered everywhere in
this movie.
Not to imply that this movie doesn't have a plot. It does, and a good one
at that....I've never seen a plot like it. It's intricate and doesn't slow
down or have any holes in it.
Also scattered throughout the movie are little spoofs of television shows
and commercials that air on U-62, the TV station where it all goes down in
this movie. These, in my humble opinion, are the funniest things in the
movie. Shows like "Conan the Librarian" and "Town Talk," a talk show with a
neo-nazi, a klansman, a little girl, and an axe-welding maniac all in one
sitting. And many more other funnies like this, but I don't want to spoil
the surprises.
I highly recommend this movie. You'll love it. You'll love the characters,
you'll love the story, you'll love the humor.
