Title
Review for Into the Deep (1994)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Frankie Paiva
The thrill of the big picture, the awesome sound, and the cool 3-D glasses, the
crystal clear image, boring narrator, and 3-D images. All of these factors make
an IMAX movie. Now whether or not they make a good IMAX movie is debateable.
IMAX has never really been about great movies, I mean come on, no one actually
goes to the IMAX to see a movie that is critically acclaimed. It's all about
the entertainment value and quality, it's an event. Everyone goes because they
want to see a movie that's twice the size of what they normally see. Into The
Deep is a new 3-D IMAX movie that is anything but what I listed above, except
for the boring narrator. If is hasn't hit your town yet I suggest you avoid it.
This 35-minute film ventures down deep into the ocean to uncover a world that
is quite unknown to man. A beautiful kelp forest climbs to the surface in
startling 3-D, a lobster grows a new shell, squid mating season, these are just
some of the images that are presented. But for being a heavily-hyped 3-D film,
I didn't feel that the film really needed to be in 3-D at all. Nothing at all
stood out from the screen that often to make wearing those heavy and awkward
glasses worthwhile. As for the film itself, camera technique aside, it's easily
one of the more boring films you will ever see. The whole concept of
entertaining the audience is lost. Instead we get treated to the traditional
woman with an English/Austrailian accent narrating our journey. While I don't
recomend Into the Deep, I still think that some of the pictures in it are worth
seeing. The squid mating thing is cool and the millions of fish that surround
the camera crew in the end are neat as well. But it's too short (35 minutes is
relatively short for an IMAX movie) and it resolves itself rather quickly. One
minute we are learning about sea urchins and then they are wrapping it up
giving us some all humans are connected to the ocean junk. You can go see Into
The Deep, it's not up to me, but be warned, it gets ** stars and isn't
something that's worth the $7 you'll pay.
The Young-Uns: Besides a brief appearence of a 3-D shark that might scare some
younger children, some talk about a male fertilizing a female fish's eggs, and
a look at squid mating, this film isn't very troublesome in the way of
content.. Good Age 6 & Up
A Review by Frankie Paiva
The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer
E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com
Visit my website at http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic
