Title
Review for James and the Giant Peach (1996)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Paul Terry, Joanna Lumley, Miriam Margoyles, Pete Postlethwaite; 
      and the voices of Richard Dreyfuss, Susan Sarandon, Simon Callow, 
      David Thewlis, and Jane Leeves
Director: Henry Selick
Producers: Denise Di Novi and Tim Burton
Screenplay: Karey Kirkpatrick, Jonathan Roberts, and Steve Bloom based 
      on the book by Roald Dahl
Cinematography: Pete Kozachik and Hiro Narita
Music: Randy Newman
U.S. Distributor: Walt Disney Pictures
     Almost everything that was true of 1993's NIGHTMARE BEFORE 
CHRISTMAS holds for 1996's JAMES AND THE GIANT PEACH.  Based (rather 
faithfully) on Roald Dahl's children's story, this movie uses a 
combination of live-action sequences and stop-motion animation to tell 
the tale of a lonely boy, James (Paul Terry), who finds love during a 
bizarre, transatlantic voyage in the innards of a gargantuan peach.  His 
companions on the journey are a grasshopper, a centipede, a spider, an 
earthworm, a glow worm, and a ladybug.  In the hands of Henry Selick, 
who directed NIGHTMARE, this weird story has been transformed into a 
playful, visually arresting experience with more than a few allusions to 
THE WIZARD OF OZ.
     In this case, the destination isn't Oz, but New York City, which, 
as envisioned by Selick, is a magical, ethereal place.  The story takes 
place during an era when the Empire State Building is the world's 
tallest building, and JAMES AND THE GIANT PEACH becomes the second movie 
to place an overgrown object at its pinnacle.  Between England (where 
the story begins, with James suffering under the repressive thumbs of 
two ogre-like aunts) and New York, the peach, which is propelled by a 
flock of harnessed birds, has an ocean splashdown and takes a detour to 
frozen northern reaches.
     Obviously, the primary reason to see JAMES AND THE GIANT PEACH is 
for its visual splendor.  Selick's stop-motion animation is, in its own 
way, as impressive as the technological marvels of TOY STORY.  JAMES' 
creatures, which include insects, skeletons, birds, and a large-headed 
boy, are wonderfully exaggerated, but never grotesque.  The live-action 
sequences, which comprise over one-third of the running length, are 
filmed on intentionally-overstated sets that contribute to a surreal 
atmosphere not unlike the one visited by Jeunet and Caro in DELICATESSAN 
and THE CITY OF LOST CHILDREN.  Only when real actors and animated 
characters interact does the visual chicanery slip up.
     Of course, all but the youngest children (who could be frightened 
by certain scenes) will be delighted by the film, and, as was true of 
NIGHTMARE, the script is written to succeed on more than one level.  
There are some deliciously wicked lines that few youngsters will get.  
This crisp dialogue is delivered by the likes of Susan Sarandon (the 
spider), Simon Callow (the grasshopper), David Thewlis (the earthworm), 
and Richard Dreyfuss (the centipede), actors with effective vocal 
presences.
     Unfortunately, the film makers have decided to include several 
completely forgettable musical numbers penned by Randy Newman.  Not only 
are these totally superfluous, but there are times when they hurt the 
film's pacing.  I'd like to know who made the decision that every Disney 
animated film, no matter who's doing the animation, has to have a share 
of songs.  
     Dorothy, accompanied by a dog, a Scarecrow, a Tin Man, and a 
Cowardly Lion, followed the yellow brick road.  James, along with a pack 
of oversized bugs, follows his dreams.  Both reach their destinations, 
and, once there, discover that it's what they learned on the trip that 
really matters.  In the final analysis, JAMES AND THE GIANT PEACH is 
undemanding entertainment with a subtle message.  While the film isn't 
quite as accomplished as a TOY STORY or a BEAUTY AND THE BEAST, it's 
still worth a trip to the theater, especially for those who enjoy things 
that are a little unconventional.

Author
Alex Christensen
The pitch: "It'll be like _The_Nightmare_Before_Christmas_ meets 
_The_Muppets_Take_Manhattan_!"
        When Tim Burton's _The_Nightmare_Before_Christmas_ was released, 
critics raved and gushed, loving the wonderful music by Danny Elfman, the 
ingenious story by Tim Burton, and the intriguing, dark, visually 
stunning stop-motion of Henry Selick. It was compared with _The_Cabinet_ 
_of_Dr._Caligari_, _The_Wizard_of_Oz_, and other fantastic classics of the 
screen. Recent re-viewings certainly show that the film is holding up 
under this pressure, and is one of those films that so captures a wide 
audience's imagination that it is an "instant classic." (Disney writes 
this under the titles of all its animated features; it has not quite been 
true since _Aladdin_.)
        The point of this introduction is to dispel any notion among 
those who are interested in seeing _James_and_the_Giant_Peach_ that it is 
another wonderful concoction in which Elfman, Burton, and Selick put 
their heads together to create a modern classic. This is not to 
denigrate the film at all. But if anyone is expecting a film remotely 
similar to some idea of _Tim_Burton's_The_Nightmare_Before_Christmas_Part_ 
_II:_The_Revenge_, there is a large disappointment waiting at the theater.
        Some have referred to the film congratulating Burton on his dark, 
startling imagery, commenting on his trademark techniques and story 
features, and his unique vision. But with _James_, as with the horrendous 
summer disaster _Batman_Forever_, any credit or blame that is assignable to 
Burton is as a producer, not a director or creative consultant. The 
vision, the story, the style--all belong to Henry Selick, and he is due 
all the credit for the success of _James_.
        As you can probably tell from the title, if you have not already 
read the ubiquitous Roald Dahl book upon which this film is based, it is 
the story of a young boy, James Henry Trotter (Paul Terry), and his 
adventures with a giant peach. If you don't want more of a basic plot 
set-up than that, you should probably skip the next paragraph.
        James is trapped in a horrible life with his aunts Spiker (Joanna 
Lumley of the BBC's fabulous _Absolutely_Fabulous_ and former Bond girl) 
and Sponge (Miriam Margolyes) when he is approached by "The Old Man" 
(Pete Postlethwaite), who offers him a sack of magic squirmy things 
which, he promises, will change everything. James drops the sack, 
however, and the squirmy things work their magic on a bunch of garden 
bugs and a peach tree, which produces a giant-sized peach. Magically, 
James is transformed into a stop-motion character and enters the peach to 
find the giant-sized bugs, who become his fast friends by the time the 
peach rolls down the hill and their journey begins.
        Okay, no more spoilers, you can read on now. Excellent 
performances are given by nearly everyone in the film, though the 
live-action parts are the weakest and much of that is due to Lumley and 
Margolyes as the evil aunts. Paul Terry is a good actor, though, and he 
rescues the end of the movie with sheer enthusiasm. During the 
stop-motion middle of the film, the voices of the characters are provided 
by Susan Sarandon as Miss Spider, Simon Callow as Old Green Grasshopper, 
_Frasier_'s Glynis Johns as the Ladybug, David Thewlis as Earthworm, 
Richard Dreyfuss as Caterpillar and Margolyes as Glowworm. Sarandon, 
especially, adds a mystery and menace remarkable for a completely vocal 
performance. Dreyfuss is largely wasted. His awkward, loud Brooklyn 
accent could have been done better by any number of actors and come off 
as less annoying.
        There is the sense, as well, that this is a very abridged, 
musicalized version of Dahl's book, and this is true. It means that much 
of the delightful conversation from the book is cut, minimizing the 
characterization of the bugs and so a lot of the emotional impact. It's 
not a fatal flaw, but it is a flaw. Also, there is a storytelling 
incompleteness: there should probably have been one more big stop-motion 
adventure episode to "round out" the structure. If you have not read the 
book, you should probably see the film first and then appreciate how much 
richer the book is. If you have read the book, do not hold the movie to 
the book's strictures.
        But what really stuns about _James_ are the visuals. The landscape 
is totally believable during the stop-motion segments (the live-action 
sets are less so). Combining computer animation, blue-screen effects, 
stop-motion, and live-action, _James_ is sometimes blindingly 
good-looking. Where it falls down is in trying to make the live-action 
setting recall the stop-motion setting. Selick solves this problem by 
ignoring it, to the detriment of the film.
        _James_ ultimately is a success, but for reasons much different 
than those which made _Nightmare_ a success. While it is true that _James_ 
is much darker than the usual children's movie, it is nowhere near the 
dark vision of _Nightmare_. This film also succeeds largely in spite of 
its music, while _Nightmare_ was decidedly a musical. In the end, the two 
films are so dissimilar that too much comparison is pointless. This film 
is Selick's vision while _Nightmare_ was clearly Burton's.
        A couple of things to look for: one character from _The_Nightmare_ 
_Before_Christmas_ does briefly return, but it is not nearly as cheesy as 
that little sentence makes it sound. And stay after the credits: it's 
not hard since Randy Newman's catchiest tune of the movie, "Good News," 
is playing, and there is a short live-action bit at the end of the movie 
which, though not brilliant, is worth staying for since the ticket has 
already been bought.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Tim Burton makes two types of films.  One type has plots that are
concatenations of really odd scenes, strong on visual composition, but
without much story to glue the scenes together.  His other type of
films are the ones written by Caroline Thompson.  Thompson has a way of
sewing together weird images into a story that has emotional impact.
JAMES AND THE GIANT PEACH is an attempt to follow up the excellent THE
NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS with another weird animation piece.  Perhaps
this time Thompson was off directing her terrific adaptation of BLACK
BEAUTY.  Or perhaps producer Burton may have felt he did not need
Thompson's story since he was adapting a book by Roald Dahl and only
needed to turn it into a script.  In any case her hand is sorely missed
in this film of an animated boy and friends who seem to be magical
giant versions of garden "pests."
     Watching the film, the viewer is never quite sure where the plot
is going in this story with its plot turns that border on a psychedelic
dream with a slight fairy tale quality.  As the story opens, James is a
very contented and well-adjusted little live-action boy.  He is living
happily with his loving parents who promise to take him from England to
see New York City.  Then they are suddenly eaten by a mysterious
mystical rhinoceros.  James is forced to go live with his two aunts,
overly-painted grotesques who seem to hate children and garden pests
about equally.  James, on the other hand, rather likes spiders and
other creepy- crawlies.  His aunts feed him on fish heads and place him
in virtual slavery while they sit around each day admiring themselves
and finding ways to make James more miserable.  Luckily, however, a
mysterious man gives James some magical green glowing crocodile tongues
which when accidentally dropped cause a tree to sprout a peach the size
of a house.  (I'm really not making this up, you know!)  When the peach
opens a hole, James goes in and turns into an animated boy who meets
friends who are a spider, a centipede, a grasshopper, a ladybug, and a
worm.  When the peach gets loose and rolls into the sea, James is off
to try to find New York City with the enthusiastic animals he has met.
Along the way the crew has to fight dangers like mechanical sharks.
     Paul Terry has the title role (well, at least the first half of
the title) and is the main character, but being a child gets eighth
billing.  He gets his revenge by having absolutely no voice when called
on to sing, though he does just fine in the acting scenes.  Top billing
goes to major actors who voiced the animated creatures in the peach,
not that they are really there for anything but marquee value.  The
voices are Simon Callow as the erudite Grasshopper; Richard Dreyfuss as
the cigar-chomping, low-brow centipede; Jane Leeves as the Ladybug;
Susan Sarandon as the resourceful spider; and David Thewlis (of NAKED
and RESTORATION) as the Earthworm.  The writing gives none of these
creatures much personality beyond funny voices and only the most
threadbare of characterizations.  A little better characterization goes
to Joanna Lumley and Miriam Margolyes as the two aunts, though that is
perhaps because we get to see them in live-action.  Also a cameo role
goes to Jack Skellington, the main character of THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE
CHRISTMAS.
     The film does better with its visualization than it does with its
story, but those who were hoping for the detailed careful work of THE
NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS will be disappointed.  The animation in that
film was a genuine tour-de-force, with something interesting happening
in just about every corner of the screen in nearly every frame.  There
were a lot of throw-away humor and clever ideas in the animation that
is just missing from the animation scenes here.  The live-action scenes
have some very nice stylized sets.  Even in the animation scenes there
is a great variety of visual styles from scene to scene.  Be warned
there is a lot in this film that younger children may find frightening.
There is a lot that the adults in the audience will find unusual, but
much of it just does not quite work.  (Be aware there is one more
bizarre little final scene for those who sit though the credits.)
     The story of JAMES AND THE GIANT PEACH is unusual and creative,
often a stylistic plus, but here there just is not very much to chew on
in the story and nobody to really care about.  It is hard to imagine
that the loss that James suffers at the beginning of the film is in any
degree offset by what James gains in the course of the film.  The
story, which I am told varies a great deal from the book, just is not a
very good one.  I rate this film, on the basis of some of the more
interesting visuals, a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Producer Tim Burton and director Henry Selick team up again as
they did for 1993's THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS.  Their latest film
called JAMES AND THE GIANT PEACH features their claymation, as known as
stop-action, images that are their trademark.  This time their vision
is exuberant and only infrequently morose.  Here, as in THE WIZARD OF
OZ, the show begins and ends in a more traditional present.  Roald
Dahl's book as adapted by Steven Bloom, Karey Kirkpatrick, Dennis
Potter, and Jonathan Roberts has the start and end as live action parts
but with sets surreal and Dickensian.
     James Henry Trotter (voice and in person by Paul Terry) is a happy
English lad who lives an idyllic life with his parents by the seashore.
On day a rhinoceros eats his parents, and he is taken in by his wicked
Aunt Sponge (Miriam Margolyes) and Aunt Spiker (Joanna Lumley).  They
treat him miserably, but his salvation is a Giant Peach that grows in
their yard.  With a little advice from an old man played by Pete
Postlethwaite, he manages to use the peach to get to New York.
     One day he crawls inside the peach and is transformed into a
claymation figure.  Inside he meets a great bunch of bugs.  The
Grasshopper (voice by Simon Callow) is an intellectual, The Ladybug
(voice by Glynis Johns) is a sweet older lady, The Spider (voice by
Susan Sarandon) is reserved and misunderstood, The Earthworm (voice by
David Thewlis) feels like he is always being used, and the best one of
all, The Centipede (voice by Richard Dreyfuss), is laugh central.  At
first, James tells his new collection of friends, "I can't remember
what fun is for," but soon he is into the swing of things.
     At first the cinematography (Hiro Narita) is full of harsh and
garish colors of purple, rose, and steel blues.  As the jocular main
part of the film picks up, the cinematography (Pete Kozachik) makes an
abrupt transition and the colors switch to rich and lush oranges and
blues.
     The show is more than just fantastical sights like the giant
mechanical shark that attacks them.  It also has a plot and a clever
boy to guide it.  What would you do if a shark attached your giant
peach?  James and his companions figure out a way to lasso a flock of
seagulls.  Bet you didn't think of that one!  His secret is that, "When
I have a problem, my mom and dad taught me to look at it another way."
Amazing.  A show where parents are the good guys and even have advice
worth pondering and even remembering.
     The script is not only clever but funny.  When asked about his
alleged navigating knowledge as a world traveler, The Centipede
confesses his experience is not much, "but I did live between two pages
of The National Geographic."  Later he tells his fellow bugs, "Why
don't skeletons play music in church?  Because they got no organs."
     The show is full of musical numbers (Randy Newman), and this is
the weakest part of the film.  They are not especially good, and Paul
Terry's voice is wonderful as James, but too weak and harsh for
singing.  The musical numbers are quite slow and may bore some of the
more antsy kids in the audience.
     This movie may not make headlines among all of the adults, but I
predict it will among the kids.  As the reporter in the show says,
"Stop the presses.  I got a new front page.  Big Bugs in The Big
Apple."
     JAMES AND THE GIANT PEACH runs just 1:20.  It is rated PG for some
potentially scary images of charging rhinos and creepy skeletons.  I
was in a large audience and none of the kids seemed the least bit
scared; nevertheless, it could frighten kids under 5.  Jeffrey and his
friend Sam, both almost 7, both liked the film and were never scared.
Like the much better TOY STORY, this film is highly imaginative and
willing to take lots of risks.  It should inspire creativity and joy in
kids of all ages so I recommend it to everyone and award it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Scott Marcus
Cast: Joanna Lumley, Miriam Margolyes, Pete Postlewaithe, David
      Thewlis (voice), Simon Callow (voice), Glynis Johns (voice),
      Susan Sarandon (voice)
Writers: Roald Dahl (based on his book), Steven Bloom, Karey
      Kirkpatrick, Dennis Potter, Jonathan Roberts
Producers: Tim Burton, Denise Di Novi, Jake Eberts, John Engel, Brian
      Rosen, Henry Selick
Director: Henry Selick
Running Time: 80 minutes
Grade: C+
One word review: innocuous. As a children's movie, JAMES AND THE GIANT
PEACH works. It shouldn't be either too frightening or too complex for
even little kids to enjoy. For adults, however, the film is too
simplistic. Some of the animation sequences are striking, but the
story and the characters don't really develop enough to be interesting
to adults.
I wanted to like this movie, but the problem was that my expectations
were probably a little high. I went in expecting a film more akin to
THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS. The only thing in JAMES AND THE GIANT
PEACH that is close to being as good as in NIGHTMARE is the
stop-motion animation, and that is not enough to carry the entire
movie, especially since only about 1/2 the film is done this way.
JAMES AND THE GIANT PEACH is based on the children's story by
Roald Dahl. We see James, the progagonist, in both live-action and
animated versions. The story follows his escape from his nasty
aunts, Aunt Spiker (Joanna Lumley) and Aunt Sponge (Miriam Margolyes),
into a - what else - giant peach. He and his new friends - a bunch of
giant bugs - head off for New York. Their adventures on this journey
comprise the majority of the film.
The dark characterizations and satire that made NIGHTMARE work on an
adult level are not present in this film. Also, Randy Newman will
never be confused with Danny Elfman. The music in JAMES is too
schmaltzy, and doesn't have the edge that Elfman's score provided to
NIGHTMARE. The music is instantly forgettable, and adds nothing to the
film. On a positive note, Newman writes great elevator music.
All of Tim Burton's films have a darkness to them that makes them
interesting. This film lacks that vision, and seems to show us a
kinder, gentler Burton - a well-adjusted, but boring Burton.
The best sequence in the film takes place underwater, when events take
a dark turn. There's a character very reminiscent of Jack Skellington
(from NIGHTMARE), which is perhaps why I enjoyed this scene. If the
rest of the film had the same bite, it would have been a more
interesting experience.
My recommendation is to find a neighbor, baby sitter, or favorite aunt
to take the kiddies to see JAMES, while the adults stay home and watch
THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS on the VCR. Grade: C+.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Paul Terry, Joanna Lumley, Miriam Margoyles, Pete Postlethwaite;
and the voices of Richard Dreyfuss, Susan Sarandon, Simon Callow, David
Thewlis, and Jane Leeves Director: Henry Selick Producers: Denise Di
Novi and Tim Burton Screenplay: Karey Kirkpatrick, Jonathan Roberts, and
Steve Bloom based on the book by Roald Dahl
As a great fan of any Roald Dahl work and adaptation to screen, I was
greatly disappointed with the results of 'James', when compared to the
other recent adaptation of 'Matilda'. Perhaps the stick-like animated
figures used for the most part of this movie, was what I found the most
annoying and dissatisfying. One would expect Burton and Dahl to go hand
in hand, as one has a tendency to paint dark moodiness and quirkiness
into his characters and movies, whilst the other had an unhappy
childhood which is reflected in the penniless 'Charlie', the
disadvantaged 'Matilda' and the orphaned 'James'. However, this union is
not to be.
'The Nightmare Before Christmas' effects on 'James' elegantly highlights
Dahl's darker side, but somehow mutates that fine connection between
fantasy and reality which makes Dahl believable and likeable. The
cartoon stick figures have made this movie pure fantasy, and even a
child with the greatest imagination will have great difficulty putting
'James' into perspective when compared to 'Charlie' or 'Matilda'. Then
again this is one of Dahl's taller tales, I mean - giant, flying
rhinoceroses swallowing parents, flying to New York on a giant peach
pulled by 100 seagulls, and magical green crocodile tongues - really! I
have to admit that when I read the novel as a child, I believed every
word and remain to this day fascinated by the story of 'James'. Then
again a child's imagination is so much more creative and magical than
anything Hollywood could ever offer.
So I was disappointed by the look and portrayal of this story. 45
minutes into the movie I felt like ripping Mr Centipedes legs off, I
wanted to divide Earth Worm into quarters, there was an incredible urge
to grind Mrs Ladybug beneath my heels, followed by the desire to swat Mr
Grasshopper and to 'Mortein' Ms Spider. I couldn't remember so much
bickering aboard the crew of the Giant Peach. James looked anorexic and
anaemic, and I had an incredible urge to insert a peripheral venous
catheter and transfuse the poor lad with blood and parenteral nutrition.
Unwell,  I watched 'James' with a raging fever,
I had taken the day off to help the clouded mind recover,
Perhaps against my better judgement,
I thought 'James' would be the best medicine.
So my analysis may appear virally septic,
But I really did feel that 'James' would make me feel better,
Instead I needed peaceful slumber,
For watching this movie sure made me despise it.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
      Flying rhinos, enchanted crocodile tongues, and one very large
piece of fruit.  It's all business as usual for Roald Dahl, whose 1961
children's book has been brought to partially-animated life by director
Henry Selick (THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS) and producer Tim Burton
(same).  Book-ended by extended live-action segments, the pit of this
PEACH is a plum of a stop-motion story about a boy's adventure with
several human-sized insects.  (They are enlarged along with the peach.)
The animation is dazzling, the voices are well-cast, and the humor is
very droll.  (Says one bug of another, "he's committing pesticide!") Too
bad the story drags.  The ending is also a wash, and the songs, by Randy
Newman, sound like, well, songs by Randy Newman.  Of course, it's not
every day that we get to hear Richard Dreyfuss and Simon Callow
performing showtunes together!  (The former's musical range has
marginally improved since MR. HOLLAND'S ANUS.) Speaking of Freud, adults
should wholly enjoy the many darker aspects-- and psychological
possibilities-- of this story, even as they fidget, even as their kids
don't.
--
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Brian Koller
The Roald Dahl children's book comes to life in this
partly animated, partly live action feature.  This is a
Disney-funded movie with songs by Randy Newman and directed 
by Henry Selick.  It is strange and interesting, but 
doesn't quite deliver.
James is a typical little boy who has the ideal life
with his loving parents, who plan on taking him to
New York City to see the Empire State Building.  But
instead his parents are eaten by a rhino that
comes out of the clouds (I am not making this up)
and James is sent to live with his Aunts.
His Aunts are horrid step-parents who complete each
other's sentences, need makeovers badly, and delight
in their cruelty to James.  He spends his days doing
chores and sleeps in the attic, while his Aunts lazy
about.  For dinner he is given fish heads to eat.
After rescuing a spider, things look up for James
when he encounters a curious man who gives him green
glowy things he says are magic crocodile tongues.
Whatever, they sure jump around a lot, and James
can't catch any of them.  They find their way into
a peach, which soon grows to be the size of a house.
All of this is live-action.
The Aunts sell admission to see the giant peach,
treating the other neighborhood children as badly
as they do James.  Later, James takes a bite from
the peach.  A hole opens in the side of the peach.
James crawls in, and the movie becomes stop-motion
animated.
James meet the peach's other residents, an assortment
of bugs such as a centipede, a grasshopper, a worm
and a lady spider who serves as a mother figure to
James.  These bugs are bigger than James and can talk
(and, unfortunately, sing).  To escape the pesky
Aunts, the centipede frees the big peach from its
stem, and the peach rolls down the hill landing in
the Atlantic Ocean, on course to New York City.
A giant mechanical shark threatens the peach.  James
has the bright idea of using the worm to attract
seagulls, which the spider uses her web to anchor
to the peach.  The peach is now airborne and manages
to escape from the hungry shark, which in its stubborn
efforts to get the peach self-destructs.
James has a nifty little dream sequence that is the 
best part of the movie.  Too bad he wakes up.
The peach goes off course due to carelessness
on the part of the braggart centipede.  To redeem
himself, he jumps in the icy waters to retrieve a
compass.  I don't know how he knew there was a compass 
down there.  He must have read the script.
The compass is on a wrecked ship surrounded by skeletons
of the unlucky crew.  These skeletons spring to life to
attack the poor centipede.  The spider and James come
to the rescue, and all survive with the compass.
Back on course, the evil rhino comes out of the clouds
to get James and his peach.  James confronts him, saying
he doesn't exist, and the rhino goes away.  That was easy.
But the peach falls out of control, landing smack on
the Empire State building.
The Aunts re-appear, claiming their peach and wanting to
take James back to his attic.  James' bug friends come out
of the peach, and the lady spider spins a web around
the nasty old Aunts.  We next see what is left of the peach,
its giant pit, which is still home to the big bugs and
James, who sits on a porch regaling visiting children with 
tales of his adventures.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
