Title
Review for Flor de mi secreto, La (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Edwin Jahiel
A Woman on the Edge of a Nervous Breakdown
THE FLOWER OF MY SECRET (Spain, 1995) (La Flor de mi Secreto) *** 1/2 
Written & directed by Pedro Almodovar. Executive producer, Agustin 
Almodovar. Director of Production, Esther Garcia. Photography, Affonso 
Beato. Editing, Jose Salcedo. Music, Alberto Iglesias. Cast: Maria 
Paredes (Leo), Juan Echanove (Angel), Imanol Arias (Paco), Carmen Elias 
(Betty), Rossy De Palma (Rosa), Chus Lampreave (Mother), Joaquin Cortes 
(Antonio), Manuela Vargas (Blanca), et al. A Sony Classics release. In 
Spanish with subtitles. 100 minutes. Rated R. (some open but inoffensive 
sex talk). 
The nice thing about the "enfants terribles" of art is that when they 
keep the faith, they keep their youth and ebullience and can still be 
called "bad boys." Like Pedro Almodovar who was 44 when he made THE 
FLOWER OF MY SECRET. Happily for us, he stuck to his melodramatic style 
(partly inherited from Hollywood directors like Douglas Sirk and 
Vincente Minnelli), even heightened it, while not abandoning his special 
sense of humor.  
Melodrama is not always an easy term to define, or to distinguish from 
plain drama, tragicomedy or TV soapers. Beyond tricky and shifting 
parameters and classifications, melodrama is essentially like 
pornography: you can't apply rules to it, but you know it when you see 
it.
In some important respects, FLOWER does not follow the conventions of 
melodrama. Emotions are exaggerated, but not all that much, given the 
temperament of Latins; the characters are not stereotyped; there are no 
villains to be punished and no heroes who triumph. And while there are 
several players in the film, it is essentially a one-woman show.
The woman (Maria Paredes, who played the mother in HIGH HEELS and is 
perfect in her role here) is called Leo, short for Leocadia. (An unusual 
name. In case theatre buffs wonder, it is unconnected to the play 
LEOCADIA by Jean Anouilh). She is fortyish, attractive, and emotionally 
in a bad way. No, she is not crazy, but she misses her husband Paco, a 
high-ranking Army officer away at NATO Headquarters in Brussels. And she 
worries about her marriage-on-the-rocks.
It would be unfair to give away the plot and twists of the movie. Leo's 
predicament is built up gradually and brilliantly, through the people 
she comes in contact with and via events that may at first seem to be 
odd, mysterious or disconnected but in reality make a solid fabric for 
the story. There are many threads in FLOWER but they come together in 
plausible ways. There are several loose ends, but even when they seem 
absurd, they turn out to make make very good sense -- because they are 
the loose ends of  life, not those of a film's structure. 
Among them is the secret of Amanda Gris, a mysterious, best-selling 
authoress of romantic potboilers; Leo's serious literary ambitions; her 
meeting with Angel, the paunchy, simpatico cultural pages editor of "El 
Pais" (a real newspaper) who falls for her; the Leo-Angel meeting of 
minds in their love of feminist literature (almost all of it Anglo); 
their divergences on writer Amanda Gris; Leo's maid Blanca, a retired 
flamenco dancer who, at some point appears in a splendid, post-modern 
flamenco performance with her son Antonio; Antonio who finances the show 
in unorthodox ways that involve Leo;  Leo's sister Rosa with whom their 
aged mother lives in perpetual turmoil. 
(Rosa is played by the hatchet-faced actress who is a staple in 
Almodovar movies; the mother, by a versatile veteran actress of comedy 
who is excellent here and goes from tantrums to natural advice that 
helps Leo's sanity. Almodovar drew on his own mother for that part).  
There is also Leo's best female friend, a psychologist, and husband 
Paco, back on a short leave on his way to Bosnia. Surprises abound, not 
in set-piece style but in realistic, albeit highly emotional ways. 
Double-edged, funny as well as bittersweet sequences, such as Leo and 
too-tight boots or the opening scenes that deal with announcing the 
death of a son, then make a pitch for organ donation --yet fool you. 
(Don't ask). 
Almodovar does not cheat, but nor does he take us by the hand to guide 
us in the maze he has created. He ought to make a thriller some day, 
with his skills in suspense and surprise. Almodovar is openly gay, but 
in this film, if there are any hints of same-sex relations, they must be 
well hidden. On the other hand, the writer-director understands women 
remarkably well and with immense empathy and sympathy. He also 
understands the construction of films. The scenes play through to the 
end, yet retain their ability to surprise us with their mix of the 
contemporary Spanish zeitgeist, literary matters and personal problems.  
The production is first-rate, with top photography that runs from 
documentary-like objectivity to great symbolic shots, like those of the 
return of Paco seen through a number of small mirrors on the wall or 
those of the marital bed. Almodovar's usual garish-on-purpose colors 
have been much toned down, even made into pastels at times, in keeping 
with the mood.
There is a lot of drinking in the film, and even more conversation, so 
much of it that one needs a quick eye to catch the many elusive 
subtitles -- a small liability for non-Spanish speakers. I am all for 
subtitles, and I can get riled at the laziness of viewers who say "I 
can't see the movie for having to read it." In  FLOWER, however, this is 
sometimes justified, but it should not discourage one from seeing the 
film. It is not as outrageous or surreal as many other Almodovar 
pictures, not as mordant and provocative, so that you have to gear down 
to a warmer and more accessible yet rich psychological level. Even so, 
there are no dull moments or any bits you wish had been cut out.  

Author
James Berardinelli
Spain/France, 1995
U.S. Release Date: beginning 3/96 (limited)
Running Length: 1:42
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, sex, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.66:1
Cast: Marisa Paredes, Imanol Arias, Juan Enchanove, Chus Lampreave,
      Carmen Elias, Rossy De Palma, Manuela Vargas, Joaquin Cortes
Director: Pedro Almodovar
Producer: Augustin Almodovar
Screenplay: Pedro Almodovar
Cinematography: Affoso Beato
Music: Alberto Iglesias
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Classics
In Spanish with subtitles
     The words "A Film by Almodovar" conjure up images of the bizarre, 
the kinky, and the unapologetically unconventional.  Ever since his 1980 
debut, PEPI, LUCI, BOM, Almodovar has been lauded as Spain's golden boy 
film maker -- a director who will take any chance to obtain a desired 
result.  At times, he has been wildly successful (as in WOMEN ON THE 
VERGE OF A NERVOUS BREAKDOWN and TIE ME UP! TIE ME DOWN!).  On other 
occasions, things haven't gone nearly as well (KIKA).  But, through it 
all, Almodovar has never come close to conventionality -- until THE 
FLOWER OF MY SECRET, that is.
     First and foremost, barring the offbeat opening scene where two 
deadpan doctors explain to a woman that her son is brain-dead (we later 
learn that this is part of a training film, not an actual experience), 
THE FLOWER OF MY SECRET doesn't seem like Almodovar.  He treats his 
characters with an unexpected sensitivity, and his vicious, often-ribald 
sense of humor has been muted to the point of insignificance.  For the 
most part, THE FLOWER OF MY SECRET takes itself too seriously, which 
might have been okay if the primary story wasn't an example of dreary 
melodrama.
     Leo Macias (Marisa Parades) is a lonely author involved in a 
failing marriage.  Although she longs to write novels of substance and 
meaning, her income derives from popular, formula romances, which she 
pens under the pseudonym of Amanda Gris.  Meanwhile, her husband, Paco 
(Imanol Arias), has joined the NATO peacekeeping mission in Bosnia to 
flee the homefront wars that he and his wife regularly engage in.  When 
asked if he thinks there's any chance to save his union with Leo, Paco 
considers for a moment before replying, "None."
     Much of THE FLOWER OF MY SECRET concerns Leo's journey from a lost, 
frightened dependent to someone who can stand on her own.  It's not 
always an interesting trek, but there are rewards for those who stick 
with the story.  Chief among these is Almodovar's examination of Leo's 
dual identity.  As a romance writer, she is adored by thousands of fans, 
and her next novel is awaited with breathless anticipation.  But, as a 
"serious" person, she despises Amanda Gris, even going so far as to 
write a blistering critique of her own work (under a different 
pseudonym).  The Leo/Amanda schism is fascinating, but it's often 
reduced to a background subplot, and the resolution is dissatisfying.
     It's strange seeing an Almodovar film without the bright, energetic 
presence of Victoria Abril, who has graced his three previous outings.  
For THE FLOWER OF MY SECRET, the leading actress is another Almodovar 
regular, Marisa Paredes, who does an excellent job portraying Leo's 
longing, insecurity, and other neuroses.  In addition to Imanol Arias as 
Paco, Juan Enchanove (as Leo's prospective suitor), Rossy de Palma (as 
her sister), and Chus Lampreave (as her mother) provide solid support.  
     While it's a different experience to view an Almodovar movie that 
respects, and even shows affection for, its female lead, THE FLOWER OF 
MY SECRET is far from a standout effort.  It's bland as often as it is 
affecting, and presents little that's new or original.  This is just 
another story of a woman grappling for independence while looking for 
love.  THE FLOWER OF MY SECRET shows hints of what a kinder, gentler 
Almodovar has to offer the motion picture world, but, on the whole, I 
prefer the flamboyant attitude he previously exhibited.
