Title
Review for Baise-moi (2000)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Anyone who's constantly frustrated by the simulated sex scenes in
mainstream movies (wondering why, as adults, we're not permitted to see
more explicit sexual activity in R-rated and, frankly, NC-17 rated films)
should check out the controversial French film "Baise-Moi" (or "Rape Me,"
to give the film one of its less literal/more printable translations).  One
look and it'll be obvious why.  *That's* why they don't do it, you'll
quickly come to realize.
        "Baise-Moi" is unique in so much as it's a mainstream film peppered with
hardcore (i.e., non-simulated) sex scenes and (hopefully) simulated scenes
of extreme violence.  Well, mainstream in as much as you'll have to seek it
out at the artiest of the art theaters in town (in Philadelphia that's the
Roxy and only the Roxy and don't count on it playing there for long).
        It's an interesting but extremely unnerving film, unnerving in the sense
that at times it feels like you're watching a pornographic movie with a
plot thrown in to move the "action" along, rather than a "Thelma and
Louise"-inspired killing spree with occasional time-outs for graphic sex.
        The sex here is not only jarring in its explicitness but, if you'll pardon the
expression, it sticks out like a sore thumb.  It's not titillating
(because it's too distracting, in an oddly anachronistic way), and it
doesn't have much of a chance to be sexy, because the ultraviolence soon
comes down like a ton of bricks.
        The violence itself (aimed at both women and men, so don't go into this
thinking it's some feminist anthem) is pretty nasty, so much so that you
actually crave the sex scenes just to have something else to look at (until
they arrive that is, orchestrated to a thumpa-thumpa rock beat, and then
you're all distracted and non-titillated again).  It's a circle ... and a
very vicious one at that.
        Based (or maybe I should say "baised") on Virginie Despentes' "brutal,
savage novel," the film follows the explosive exploits of two women, Nadine
and Manu who, tired of being brutalized by society, go on a murderous
rampage.  And that's pretty much it.  Despentes' wound up co-directing the
film with French adult film actress Coralie Trinh Thi after the process of
casting the two leads dragged on forever (Karen Bach and Raffaela
Anderson--porn stars themselves--finally got the parts).  Both actresses
are comfortable on camera and create complex (if volatile) characters--not
something one might expect from their day jobs, necessarily.  And the
filmmakers, who share "a cutting edge sense of provocation," pull
everything together tightly and skillfully, as if they've done all this
before (they haven't).
        But the repetitious nature of the film drags it down: kiss kill, kiss
kill, for 80 long minutes.  You just sit there, waiting for the bodily
fluids to flow.  Shock me now, shock me later.  But yes I was shocked, a
little.  And I was disturbed, a little.  Because I haven't seen anything
quite like this *in context* before (and that's the key to the whole
"Baise-Moi" experience).
        It's unlikely that the film will loosen any standards of what is and isn't
considered acceptable in terms of sexual explicitness in the megaplexes.
If anything it'll further convince many to keep this stuff *out* of the
mainstream altogether (although Harvey Keitel is still probably pretty
safe).  "Baise-Moi" is most likely a one-off and in a lot of respects it's
probably best that way.
Got beef? Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Steve Rhodes
Some people like to smoke after sex, but Manu (Raffaëla Anderson) and 
Nadine (Karen Bach) like to kill people afterwards.  BAISE-MOI (RAPE 
ME), which has the dubious distinction of being literally banned in 
France, could be a strikingly effective public service announcement 
against the dangers of casual sex if it weren't for the fact that Manu 
and Nadine like to murder strangers, male and female, indiscriminately 
even if no sex whatsoever is involved.  The reactions to the film are 
likely to be as widely varied as at our screening in which one guy 
laughed constantly, apparently seeing the film as a humorous THELMA & 
LOUISE DO PORN, and another woman remarked to me afterwards that a film 
like this could ruin sex for you forever.  A hyperviolent film which 
features real, not simulated, sex, it does have its erotic moments, the 
shocking rape scene not being one of them.  "We're useless," one of the 
women says to the other.  "Where are the witty lines?"  Amen.
BAISE-MOI runs 1:17.  The film is in French with English subtitles.  It 
is not rated but would be NC-17 for graphic, real sex, graphic violence, 
drug usage and language.  It would be acceptable for college students 
and older.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
If somebody told me there was a non-porn film with more money shots than
Happiness, I just wouldn't believe them.  But that film does exist, and it's
called Baise-moi (depending on which circle you run in, the direct
translation of the title is either Rape Me or Fuck Me).  The film was tossed
out of the 1999 Toronto International Film Festival (only to return in 2000
with an edited rape scene) and was banned in its native France just three
days after it opened.
So what's the hubbub?  Baise-moi is equal parts Thelma and Louise, Natural
Born Killers and Cum Suckers From Outer Space IV.  It's about a
pornography-addicted hooker (who kills her uptight roommate) and a porn-star
rape victim (who kills her brother) who meet after missing the last train
one dark evening.  The two "ladies" hit the road, pick up random men, screw
the shit out them and then, depending on their overall level of sexual
gratification, torture and kill the gentlemen.  They're ruthless, they have
no regret, and since both actresses are porn stars in real life, the film is
full of gratuitous penetration shots that would rival those seen in a
triple-X feature if the digital video production wasn't so damn grainy.
Baise-moi was made to make viewers uncomfortable, and in that regard, the
film can be considered a success.  There isn't much happening artistically
here; it's just a lot of humping and killing.  I've been begging for more of
each in my diet of film, and now that I have them, I feel kind of nauseous.
1:27 - NR but contains graphic sex and violence, rape, language and drug use

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Remstar
 Director: Virginie Despentes, Coralie Trinh Thi
 Writer:  Virginie Despentes, Coralie Trinh Thi, novel by
Virginie Despentes
 Cast: Karen Bach, Rafaela Anderson, Delphine MacCarty,
Lisa Marshall, Estelle Isaac, Herve P. Gustave, Marc Rioufol,
Ouassini Embarek
   Girls are made of sugar and spice and everything nice.  Yeah,
right.  Anyone who still believes that should see "Baise-moi," a
hard-hitting, hard-core porn movie that was banned in France
and presumably did not make it to the Toronto Film Festival
because the appropriate Ontario board proscribed the pic there
as well.  "Baise-moi" cannot be called dull, no way, but like some
similar fare that can be called exciting to watch, it is pointless. 
The directors, Virginie Despentes (on whose novel the movie is
based) and Coralie Trinh Thi seem to want the audience to view
this as not simply shocking and disturbing or even as
empowering (to employ the much-abused hip terminology) but as
a dark parody of similar works such as (presumably) "Natural
Born Killers" and Catherine Breillat's recent French porn entry,
"Romance."  But satire has to stand on its own as a literate, witty
endeavor.  "Baise-moi" lacks clever repartee, rather
accommodating dialogue that comes across as improvised as
the entire picture is unstructured.
   "Baise-moi" translates officially as "Rape Me" but I'm sure
something is lost in translation unless Ms. Despentes and Ms.
Trinh Thi are pushing irony further than that envelope has been
pushed before.  The plot, really a series of random, loosely-
formed incidents of loveless sex and casual violence, centers on
two females, Manu (Raffaela Anderson) and Nadine (Karen
Bach)--France's answer to Thelma and Louise.  As both
performers are involved in the porn industry, they have no
problem, well, performing--nor do their well-endowed, seemingly
priapic male partners.  When Nadine, a street-wise prostitute who
is regularly pushed around by her clients and roommate, teams
up with Manu--who as a victim in a graphic rape scene which the
directors have refused to edit to please censors--team up, they
begin taking out their anger toward men while thinking nothing of
offing women who might supply them with money.  They shoot a
woman at an ATM after having wasted Nadine's roommate and
Manu's brother and, sexually excited rather than disgusted by
their acts, they take off on a spree of sex and murder. 
Sometimes they kill their male partners, sometimes not--it all
depends on how well the men do at satisfying them.  In the most
turbulent spectacle, they enter the Libertine (free sex) club, bash
a man's head a few times on the bar, and proceed to shoot all
the patrons, both men and women.  But the display that outdoes
all the others occurs when the last person alive in the club is
made to oink like a pig only to have a gun placed deep into his
butt before the trigger is pulled.
   I suppose you could justify the movie as a take-off on both pro-
feminist films and the whole genre of exploitation flicks such as
Russ Meye'rs "Faster, Pussycat! Kill! Kill!," but the cheap digital
video photography, the lack of wit, the presentation of people
about whom no one can really care (although Ms. Anderson is
kind of cute) make "Baise-moi" a curiosity worth seeing simply for
its daring but not at all for its resonance, humor, repartee, or
darkly satiric value.  One can imagine that given the rise of
female directors, we will get to see folks like Thelma and Louise,
Manu and Nadine, as proof that women can be as angry as men-
-that the concept of women as gentle, supportive, and anything
but macho is simply a fantasy of the males who have so far
dominated the fields of literature and film.  Let's hope that this
anger--which certainly deserves to emerge in the various art
forms--will be presented by others in a manner that in some way
can be called art.
Not Rated.  Running time: 73 minutes.  (C)2001,
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
