Title
Review for Commandments (1997)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Steve Rhodes
     So how many of the Ten Commandments have you violated today?
Harry Lucia (Anthony LaPaglia) brags that, "I break 5 or 6 commandments
every day before lunch."  But have you ever felt the need to break them
all?
     Who among us hasn't blamed God for some misfortune that has
befallen us.  In the movie COMMANDMENTS, Harry's brother-in-law Seth
Warner (Aidan Quinn) has had so much trouble lately with The Almighty
that Seth seems ready to file suit against Heaven, Inc.  Instead, he
devises a different punishment for God, the systematic breaking of
every one of his commandments.
     "I am not crazy," Seth tells us.  "I know the difference between
bad luck and divine inspiration."  Some of us have had bad days, but
Seth's problems are much more cataclysmic.
     One idyllic day, Seth and his wife Karen (Joanna Going) go to the
beach.  While Seth peacefully falls asleep on the sand, his wife goes
out for a swim.  When he awakens, his wife has vanished.
     After a search turns up nothing, Seth becomes a hermit in his home
while waiting for some sign from God as to whether Karen is alive.
Many weeks later, he gets a message of sorts when a tornado strikes his
brownstone but leaves all of the other homes in the neighborhood
unharmed.  When he returns to work, his boss fires him.  After being
struck by lightning, he gives up and turns on God.  He prepares a list
of all the commandments so he can check them off as he commits each
sin.
     Harry, whose frequent narration forms the story's glue, is an
investigative reporter.  When he tells his editor, Gordon Bloom (Jack
Gilpin), about Seth's plan, Bloom thinks it can get front page
coverage.  Afterall, the story has it all -- "death, sex, and God."
     Writer and director Daniel Taplitz's intelligent script starts as
a broadly written black comedy, but by the end he has subtly
transformed the story into a poignant drama.  His rich characters are
worth the audience's attention, and the compelling acting by the three
leads, Courteney Cox plays Harry's wife Rachel, draw us into the story.
Most plots are rehashes of some other story, but the COMMANDMENTS is
fresh and surprising throughout.
     Seth finds that some commandments are easy to break (idolatry),
some are hard (murder), and some are fun (adultery).  The way the
script sets up the circumstances, each becomes an interesting vignette.
Some, such as bearing false witness, are handled quite imaginatively.
     There is no mystery about whom Seth will commit adultery with.
The genuine chemistry that builds between Seth and Rachel becomes the
best subplot in the film.  ("Am I a commandment to be broken?" she
inquires when he starts coming on to her.  "Yes," he says.  But she
wants to know, "Is that all?"  He simply replies "No," and with that
settled, their love making can begin.)  Very erotic, but with almost no
nudity, their romance comes alive with just a few scenes.
     The show builds to its chief conundrum -- how will the hardest
commandment, murder, be broken.  I will give no hints.
     Harry, being the most likely murder target, is interviewed by his
editor.  "For the record," Gordon says, while pushing a microtape
recorder in Harry's face.  "If you were murdered, how would that make
you feel?"
     A strangely satisfying show, that has to be experienced to be
appreciated.  My wife and I view this as a little gem of a picture.
     COMMANDMENTS runs a very fast 1:26.  The film is rated R for
non-explicit sex, brief nudity, and a little violence.  COMMANDMENTS
would be fine for teenagers.  I recommend this funny and ultimately
touching story to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ben Hoffman
A story I've never heard before which should have given rise to a
unique film.  Instead. . . well, just bear with me.
Almost everything bad that can happen to a nice person such as Seth
(Aidan Quinn) does.  Seemingly, there is no reason for these bad things
to have occurred.  While he is on the beach, his beautiful wife goes
for a swim and drowns.  At work, (he is a doctor), he gets fired with
no explanation.  His house burns down and his dog is killed.  Wait! A
bit of luck you may think when Seth is told the dog survived.  More bad
luck: the dog has a broken leg.  NOW, Seth is really angry with God.
No more Mr. Nice Guy.
Seth wants to know why a supposedly just God is picking on him. Do not
try to tell him that this streak of daily bad luck is more than mere
coincidence.  How come good people have bad things happen to them? If
you think Seth is going to let God get away with that kind of behavior,
you do not know Seth.
Are you familiar with the Ten Commandments (a quick version of them
follows here)?  Seth is going to break every one of the Commandments
one at a time and let us see how God likes that!
Most of the above are easily handled by going into church, cursing,
ridiculing a statue of Jesus, etc.  But when Seth goes up on the roof
of his house to shout at God he gets hit by a bolt of lightning and
ends up in a hospital.  More bad luck.  More of God picking on him.
Seth's sister-in-law, Rachel, his deceased wife's sister (Courtney Cox)
invites him to stay at her house with her and husband, Harry (Anthony
LaPaglia), a pretty disgusting, crooked, weasel. No explanation of how
sweet Rachel came to marry a reprehensible character such as Harry.  So
far, so good.
Where, then, does the film fall apart and badly?  For one thing
(probably the most important reason) is that the dialogue is so badly
written as if by an amateur.  This in turn means that the actors, all
of whom have been seen in good films where they were very capable, are
here unable to act because they cannot mouth the words they are
supposed to say without appearing hammy, ridiculous.  (Seth,
brandishing a gun), "I have now reached the point in my life when I can
kill."  Goody!
Suffice it to say, Seth breaks all the 10 Commandments, including
number TEN, the latter with Rachel.  Rachel has been having trouble
with Harry's infidelity and anyhow, Seth IS/WAS her deceased sister's
husband and that is only one step away from going to bed with him.  Add
to that that the ending wanted by the director could only be achieved
through unbelievable contrivance . . .
All that good acting capability wasted.
Written and Directed by Daniel Taplitz

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Gramercy)
Starring:  Aidan Quinn, Courteney Cox, Anthony LaPaglia.
Screenplay:  Daniel Taplitz.
Producers:  Michael Chinich, Joe Medjuck, Daniel Goldberg.
Director:  Daniel Taplitz.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, adult themes, sexual situations)
Running Time:  87 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I wish more films would take on issues of faith and morality in the
modern world.  And I wish that film-makers would use COMMANDMENTS as a
blueprint on how _not_ to do it.  Writer/director Daniel Taplitz has
created a bizarre conglomeration of satire and soul-searching in this tale
of Seth Warner (Aidan Quinn), a man of faith who runs into a streak of bad
luck which usually inspires country-western lyrics:  his pregnant wife
drowns, his home is destroyed by a tornado, he loses his job and his dog
is crippled by a bolt of lightning.  Convinced that God has broken His
half of the covenant, Seth decides to break his, and sets out to turn
every "Thou shalt not" of the Ten Commandments into a "Thou shalt" (and
vice versa).  His wife's sister Rachel ("Friends"' Courteney Cox) wants to
help Seth; Rachel's selfish husband Harry (Anthony LaPaglia), who tends to
break a few Commandments of his own, thinks Seth is a lunatic.
     Thus begins a film which picks the wrong tone for every occasion.
Taplitz isn't interested in treating Seth's tragedies as genuinely tragic,
making it impossible to sympathize with him.  Composer Joseph Vitarelli
provides a score full of whimsical woodwinds, turning Seth's sacrilegious
mission into an amusing lark; Quinn's performance as Seth is all wild-eyed
fervor without any genuine pain.  The actual breaking of the Commandments
is almost treated as an afterthought, with one through five dispatched in
a five-minute montage.  The result is a character whose actions feel less
like the authentic responses of an anguished man than the machinations of
a high-concept movie plot.
     It's not even entirely clear that COMMANDMENTS is about Seth.
Corporate attorney Rachel is given a case which is supposed to soften a
hard heart we see no indication she has, while Harry gets his comeuppance
as part of Seth's "false witness."  Only Courteney Cox strikes a note of
reality in a solid performance; she is sane center around which too
equally troubled men revolve.  Even she can't force Taplitz to decide
whose story this is, or what we should have learned about dealing with the
struggles in our lives and our relationship with the infinite.  By the
time Seth makes a singularly Biblical reappearance late in the film, it
has become clear that Taplitz is aiming for a fantastical fable which
makes no connection with real human experience.  COMMANDMENTS is a bad
comedy which could have been a decent drama if Daniel Taplitz had had the
guts to take faith -- and the loss thereof -- at all seriously.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Aidan Quinn, Courteney Cox, Anthony LaPaglia, Louis Zorich, 
      Pamela Gray, Joanna Going, Kevin Dunn
Director: Daniel Taplitz
Producers: Michael Chinich, Daniel Goldberg, and Joe Medjuck
Screenplay: Daniel Taplitz
Cinematography: Slavomir Idziak
Music: Joseph Vitarelli
U.S. Distributor: Gramercy Pictures
     COMMANDMENTS, the first major feature from writer/director Daniel 
Taplitz, is a satire of faith, religion, and hypocrisy.  Strangely 
enough, it's also the most offbeat disaster movie to come along in years 
(note:  that's "disaster movie" not "movie disaster").  In fact, for the 
price of admission, we're treated to three different manifestations of 
Mother Nature's wrath:  a tornado (not up to TWISTER's visual effects), 
a violent thunderstorm (with associated lightning strike), and a 
hurricane (accompanied by Weather Channel graphics).  COMMANDMENTS even 
borrows VOLCANO's tag line -- "The Coast is Toast" -- during a key 
scene.  And there's a dog that makes it through the movie alive 
(although he loses a leg).
     Taplitz obviously intended this to be a black comedy, and, viewed 
as such, it's reasonably successful.  It is also potentially offensive 
to anyone who considers himself (or herself) a deeply religious person.  
COMMANDMENTS dares to call God "a raging psychotic" (and mean it) and 
postulates that the reason he allows suffering is that he's either a 
fraud or malevolent.  A few of the theological questions posed here are 
ones that fundamentalists tend to sidestep or talk around because they 
raise disturbing possibilities.  And some of the satire is as vicious as 
it is risky, which may alienate mainstream viewers. 
     The main character, Seth Warner (Aidan Quinn), was a nice, well-
adjusted True Believer -- until God chose him to live a '90s remake of 
the Book of Job.  Within a short time, he lost his wife and unborn 
child, his home, and his job.  When he demands an answer from the 
Almighty, he gets struck by lightning and ends up in the hospital.  
While convalescing there, he comes up with an audacious scheme to show 
his contempt for God.  He's going to break every one of the Ten 
Commandments.  When he confesses the plan to his brother-in-law, Harry 
(Anthony LaPaglia), it doesn't provoke much of a reaction.  It seems 
that Harry routinely breaks five or six commandments a day without much 
thought.  "Get back to me when you start breaking some really serious 
ones," he says.  Meanwhile, Harry's wife, Rachel (Courteney Cox), is far 
more sympathetic to Seth's circumstances, and it doesn't take long 
before she becomes his primary target for Commandment #7 ("Thou shalt 
not commit adultery").
     Give Taplitz credit for casting a pair of good-looking actors as 
the leads.  Aidan Quinn and Courtney Cox are appealing and attractive, 
and they work well together.  They also make it all-but-impossible to 
dislike Seth, despite his radical and potentially-unbalanced stance.  
COMMANDMENTS occasionally strays a little too far into the romance 
arena, but I suppose that's designed as a tonic for the cynical 
perspective embraced by large chunks of the film.  Anthony LaPaglia, on 
the other hand, does a good job in the thankless role as the grim 
unbeliever (who also happens to be the narrator).  
     As much as I appreciate COMMANDMENTS' mocking approach to certain 
aspects of religion, the movie's theology is confused and contradictory.  
(Some might argue that all religions are defined by these 
characteristics.)  In addition to satirizing belief systems, I think 
Taplitz is trying to say something positive about faith and God, 
although I'm not sure what.  That, no matter how many commandments you 
break, if you turn back to The Lord, you will be saved?  Perhaps.  That 
knowledge and understanding come through suffering?  Maybe.  That 
violating the Ten Commandments opens the Pearly Gates?  Unlikely, but 
not impossible.  COMMANDMENTS isn't at all clear about its real feelings 
about religion, and this creates some serious questions about what the 
movie's central message is.  
     Nevertheless, although the mixed signals detract from COMMANDMENTS' 
basic entertainment value, they don't doom the film.  It's still 
enjoyable in a strange, unorthodox sort of way, and it looks great. 
(Cinematographer Slavomir Idziak, Kieslowski's longtime collaborator, 
also worked on DECALOGUE, perhaps the most thought-provoking cinematic 
exploration of the Ten Commandments.)  While the script isn't a 
masterpiece of twists and surprises, not everything goes as expected, 
and the audience isn't quite as far ahead of the characters as it 
initially thinks.  For anyone who isn't easily offended and doesn't mind 
forthright irreverence, COMMANDMENTS is worth checking out -- at least 
you haven't already seen five movies like it already this year.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
