Title
Review for Dead Man on Campus (1998)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more movie reviews and screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Upon the realization that they are failing all of their classes, two
roommates try to find a third roomie who will kill himself, since the
school's charter automatically grants top grades to the roommates of any
student who succeeds in suicide.
CRITIQUE:
Despite this film's interesting premise and dark subject matter, this movie
sucks because it is unfunny, boring, and presents us with one of Tom Everett
Scott's worst acting performances. Add that to a completely unsuccessful
romance element, many lame and corny jokes, a long wait for the setup, and
an ending that takes all the blackness out of this "black comedy" (If you're
gonna create a black comedy, don't chicken out in the end-see VERY BAD
THINGS (8/10) for a perfect example), and you've got yourself a trite MTV
creation worthy of its own subject matter. I barely laughed at any gags,
found the bong element contrived and repetitive, and was horrified NOT to
find any gratuitous nudity tossed anywhere in this movie (If you're gonna
make a bad College comedy, at least slap in some free T&A shots for the kids
:). This one's not even worth the rental, fellas. Skip it altogether!
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
During auditions for THAT THING YOU DO!, Tom Everett Scott's first feature
film role, director Tom Hanks was opposed to hiring Tom because of the fact
that Scott could've passed for Hanks 15 years ago. It wasn't until Hanks'
wife Rita Wilson saw the audition tape, and decided he was cute, that Hanks
decided to risk hiring Scott.
The actor who played Scott Cooper in this film, Mark-Paul Gosselaar, is best
known for having played the character of Zack Morris on TV's "Saved by the
Bell". His parents are Dutch and named Hans and Paula.
And who would've guessed that this is director Alan Cohn's first shot at
directing a feature film?

Author
Susan Granger
Susan Granger's review of "DEAD MAN ON CAMPUS" (Paramount Pictures)
      This tongue-in-cheek glimpse of college life is timed for the
opening of classes and specifically aimed at its target audience -
which is over 18 (because of its R-rating) and under 30 (after which,
presumably, maturity beckons).  Given that window of view-ability,
this quirky story is built around a popular urban legend. Namely, the
obscure "dead man's clause" that goes: If your college roommate
commits suicide, you get straight A's for the semester.  Meet Tom
Everett Scott ("That Thing You Do!"), a former honor student on
scholarship, and Mark-Paul Gosselaar (TV's "Saved by the Bell), a
hard-core party animal. After a couple of months of drugs, drink, and
casual sex, they're flunking freshmen who realize that this obscure
loophole, buried in the college charter, may be their only hope of
staying in school. Forced to take desperate measures, they embark on a
bleak mission to recruit the most emotionally unstable people on
campus to agree to move in to their three-man dormitory suite and then
fervently hope that one of them will commit suicide so they can get
their automatic 4.0 grade average "as a consolation prize." The
candidates include a paranoid computer whiz (Randy Perlstein) who is
convinced Bill Gates wants to steal his brain, a dour British punk
rocker (Corey Page) with a death wish, and a manic, self-destructive
frat man (Lochlyn Munro) whose idea of chivalry is to unzip his fly
and offer his services after he accidentally sets a co-ed's hair on
fire. Directed by Alan Cohn from a satirical script concocted by a
quartet of screenwriters, the murderous mischief consists entirely of
one-liner drivel, bathroom humor, and boisterous, childish pranks. On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Dead Man on Campus" flunks with a
funereal 3. What else would you expect from a demented comedy about
suicide?

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: August 21, 1998
Starring: Tom Everett Scott, Mark-Paul Gosselaar, Poppy Montgomery,
Lochlyn Munro, Randy Pearlstein, Alyson Hannigan, Mari Morrow
Directed by: Alan Cohn
Distributed by: Paramount Pictures
MPAA Rating: R (drug use, language, crude sexual humor)
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/deadcampus.htm 
MTV, for quite some time, has been a component of entertainment media
that has almost subconsciously defined an entire generation of children.
Anyone too young to be considered a Gen-Xer and/or born post-1979 has
most likely, in some way, been influenced by those three letters. As of
late, though, MTV has come to symbolize the lack of direction its
namesake generation is famous for. Originally formed simply for the
purpose of playing music videos, standard programming now is a curious
mixture of pop-culture-isms and lackluster talk shows. Similar to the
pseudo-network, MTV movies are almost never complete or viable examples
of cinema. Their latest is no exception. 
On the positive side, DEAD MAN ON CAMPUS is the best feature to come out
of that certain studio yet, and with a bit of work, MTV might get its
act together. Note carefully that "best yet" isn't high praise when
considering the past features that MTV has sponsored: JOE'S APARTMENT
and BEAVIS AND BUTT-HEAD DO AMERICA. Similar to DEAD MAN ON CAMPUS,
these films are a strictly limited-audience fare. Unlike this summer's
other offbeat comedy, THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY, however, DEAD MAN
does not have a strong fan base to work with. Its audience will be made
up of those who do not have the intelligence to appreciate smarter
comedy, and even those will surely see limited appeal. 
The star of the show here is Tom Everett Scott, who plays Josh. Josh is
a likeable guy, attending Daleman College on a scholarship to their
six-year medical program. His intentions are honest until he meets up
with his roommate, Cooper (Mark-Paul Gosselaar). Cooper is a rich-kid
slacker who'll have nothing to do with going to class and everything to
do with getting high and getting laid. Through Cooper's antics, Josh
becomes distracted from his studies and eventually falls off his
"track." Then Cooper's dad shows up, and informs him that if Coop
doesn't get some higher grades, he'll have to come work for his old man
in the toilet-cleaning business. So Cooper and Josh happen upon an old
statute in the Daleman College handbook which says that if your roommate
commits suicide, you get straight-A's for your grief. Thus they set out
to find an appropriately depressed student to move into their room and
off himself before the end of the term. 
Tom Everett Scott, of AN AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN PARIS, does the best job
here, but that could be because he's got the most big screen experience
of the three principals. He's done fine work in most pictures he's been
in - even if the movies themselves weren't that great - and will most
likely mature to something even better. Poppy Montgomery also is
appropriately sexy here, but she plays Josh's terminally normal
girlfriend Rachel; one often wonders how someone so normal got into a
movie with weirdos Scott and Gosselaar. The humor that resounds from
their university escapades, as well, is decidedly sexual in nature and
not very smart. There's not much outright laughter and so what was an
interesting preview turned out to be a botched feature. Think twice
before seeing this one.
FINAL AWARD FOR "DEAD MAN ON CAMPUS": 2.0 stars - a fair movie.

Author
Greg King
DEAD MAN ON CAMPUS (M).  
(MTV/Paramount/UIP)
Director: Alan Cohn
Stars: Tom Everett Scott, Mark-Paul Gosselaar, Poppy Montgomery, Lochlyn 
Munro, Randy Pearlstein, 
Corey Page, Alyson Hannigan, Mari Morrow, Jason Segel, Dave Ruby
Running time: 94 minutes.
Thankfully, this unheralded but surprisingly enjoyable comedy
from the MTV channel eschews most of the clichés of the adolescent
school genre.  There's no psycho killer slashing his way through a
hunky cast.  There's no getting of wisdom through the pursuit of
academic excellence.  There's no discovering the pain of first love.
There's none of the jocks versus the nerds stuff.  There's not even
the down trodden loser who eventually becomes a hero by bringing glory
to his school through unlikely sporting prowess.  Hell, there's not a
whiff of football, basketball or even debating here.
Keen to pursue a medical career, honour student Josh (Tom
Everett Scott, from That Thing You Do and the appalling An American
Werewolf In Paris, etc) comes to Daleman College on a scholarship.
His room mates are anything but the studious types.  Kyle (Jason
Segel) is a repressed former Catholic boys' school graduate who
suddenly discovers the joys of sex and moves out.  Cooper (Mark-Paul
Gosselaar, from tv sitcom Saved By The Bell, etc) is a smooth scam
artist who plans to do anything but study during his college years.
Cooper quickly leads Josh into a routine of heavy partying, and his
grades quickly drop.
Faced with losing his scholarship, Josh needs to turn his
grades around.  Meanwhile, Cooper's father, a wealthy business man who
runs a toilet cleaning company, promises Cooper that if he doesn't
graduate he will learn the family business from the bottom up (so to
speak).  The pair find a hint of salvation through an arcane and
almost forgotten college by-law that guarantees passing grades to
students on compassionate grounds if their roommate suddenly dies.
The hunt is on for the pair to find the most neurotic,
potentially suicidal kid in school and move him into their room before
pushing him over the edge.  Intensive research uncovers three likely
prospects.  Cliff (Lochlyn Munro), a true party animal who lives
dangerously, but seems invulnerable; Buckley (Randy Pearlstein, from
The Cowboy Way, etc), a paranoid schizophrenic who believes everyone
is out to get him, especially computer billionaire Bill Gates; while
Matt (Aussie actor Corey Page, from Heartbreak High, etc), a depressed
heavy metal rocker, is not quite what he seems.
Dead Man On Campus takes its unusual premise from a famous
urban legend and milks it for laughs.  Given the subject matter,
there's plenty of potential for a wicked black comedy, but first time
feature director Alan Cohn keeps proceedings light and upbeat.  There
are plenty of funny moments throughout, and the film unfolds with lots
of slapstick humour and energy.  The pace picks up in the second half
during the frantic search for the perfect suicidal room mate.
 
Performances are more than adequate for this type of film,
although Gosselaar brings plenty of easy going charm to his role as
the scheming Cooper.  Scott also brings a manic energy to his role as
the increasingly frustrated and desperate Josh.
Produced under the auspices of MTV (other features include
Joe's Apartment and Beavis And Butthead Do America), Dead Man On
Campus boasts a solid soundtrack of cutting edge, contemporary
rockers.  Dead Man On Campus is not a cinematic masterpiece, nor does
it have pretensions towards having anything deep and meaningful to
say.  However, it offers plenty to satisfy and will certainly amuse
its targeted audience.

Author
Jamie Peck
DEAD MAN ON CAMPUS
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
The movie spins its story around a widely-known urban legend of sorts -- 
should your roommate kill himself during the semester, you'll get 
automatic straight-As for the grief and trauma. This "dead man's clause" 
(as it's called here) is spelled out in the charter -- yeah, right -- of 
the prestigious Daleman University, and it becomes the only way for 
mismatched freshmen dormies Josh (Tom Everett Scott), a diligent 
straight-arrow on scholarship, and Cooper (Mark-Paul Gosselaar), a 
blue-blooded, careless party boy, to stay in school once the former is 
lead astray by the latter. They begin a campus-wide search for the most 
suicidal person at Daleman, planning to move him in and push him over 
the edge as soon as possible. You know, so his death won't entirely be 
in vain.
"Dead Man" takes about half of its 92-minute running time before Josh 
and Cooper narrow their focus to a trio of fragile students and start 
the auditioning process. In a lesser film, waiting around for this to 
happen might have been painful postponement, but Scott and Gosselaar 
turn their typical odd couple pairing into something special for the 
stretch. Scott, whose ultra-charismatic work in "That Thing You Do!" is 
still one of this decade's most engaging debuts, is a joy to watch, 
gleaming with appeal in every scene. On the other hand, "Dead Man on 
Campus" could very well be Gosselaar's breakthrough. Here, he proves his 
acting chops go beyond his "Saved by the Bell" upbringing, and has a lot 
of fun with the debonair, jaunty Cooper. Love how he uses a martini 
shaker as a subtle comedic prop.
That's not to say the set-up couldn't have been prodded along at a 
faster clip, but, thanks to the antics of this harried pair, it is quite 
amusing. The following passages are even better, largely because of the 
potentially self-destructive candidates whom Josh and Cooper get to know 
and hate. Each one is a basket case in their own right, but newcomer 
Lochlyn Munro's perpetually-horny frat boy Cliff is easily the best -- 
and the scariest -- of the bunch. Munro's work here is one of those 
rare, everything-and-the-kitchen-sink performances that never grates, 
gets tired or works against him; his couch-humping scene and reaction 
when a lady friend catches her hair on fire are coarse delights, 
probably worth the price of admission alone.
The often pitch-black humor unfortunately gives way to a too-pat finale 
that cries out for a fiendish rewrite; it's nice, but niceness is one 
area this movie should have steered clear of. A romantic subplot between 
Josh and a pretty coed (Poppy Montgomery) provides the film with one of 
its most memorable moments -- repeated dialogue when Scott returns from 
an all-night bedroom romp -- but never really goes anywhere despite the 
two actors' sweet chemistry. Yet even miscellaneous imperfection is 
forgivable when the movie in question provides a good time, and such is 
the silly case here. "Dead Man on Campus" is by no means a classic or 
even remotely classy, but as crude little college flicks go, it pulls a 
solid grade-point-average without committing many crimes.

Author
Michael Dequina
_Dead_Man_on_Campus_ (R) * (out of ****)
While I am not fond of any writer's use of cheap, easy puns, I am not
completely above using them myself when the situation merits it (witness my
review of _Pecker_ from a couple of issues ago).  So here goes: the
juvenile, college-set black comedy _Dead_Man_on_Campus_ is dead on arrival.
Strait-laced med student Josh (Tom Everett Scott, who manages to remain
somewhat likable throughout)'s blemish-free academic record breaks out into
Fs, thanks to the influence of his ever-partying roommate, Cooper
(Mark-Paul Gosselaar), who introduces Josh to the sex- and booze-filled
nights that come with university life.  With the threat of losing an
academic scholarship (Josh) and a life cleaning toilets for his dad looming
(Cooper), what are two good-hearted slackers to do?  Easy--look for a
loophole, which they find in the form of an unbelievable rule in the school
charter that states that if a student's (or students') roommate commits
suicide, the surviving student(s) shall receive straight As.  So instead of
studying, Josh and Cooper attempt to seek out the most depressed student
out there, move him into their dorm room, and drive him to suicide before
the semester ends.
Director Alan Cohn and screenwriters Michael Traeger and Mike White
(working from a story by Anthony Abrams and Adam Larson Broder) take their
sweet time to build the head of steam that comes with Josh and Cooper's
diabolical plot.  Until then, the usual boring cliches of college life
(booze, sex, more booze) fill the time, which is made to feel longer by
_Saved_by_the_Bell_ alumnus Gosselaar's sitcom-bred mugging.  That said,
once Cohn and company do build some comic momentum, they mishandle it.  The
introduction of the manic, psychotic Cliff (Lochlyn Munro), a potential
roommate for Josh and Cooper, brings some demented life to the uninspired
proceedings before being hastily written out in favor of two less
interesting candidates: paranoid nerd Buckley (Randy Pearlstein) and
British death rocker Matt (Corey Page).  One wishes that Cliff would
reappear, but, as they say, be careful what you wish for.  Not
surprisingly, he does resurface, and it then becomes clear that this is a
character that is best taken in a small dose; almost immediately, his
extended boorish and sociopathic antics loses its novelty.
The same can be said about all of _Dead_Man_on_Campus_.  Whatever morbid
appeal the far-fetched premise has quickly evaporates, and the
self-absorbed characters, especially Cooper, pretty much grate from the
get-go.  _Dead_Man_ doesn't grow tiresome; it already _is_ once the clever
opening titles are through.  As it slogs along to a cheesy,
happy-for-all-parties conclusion, _Dead_Man_ lives up to its title and then
some--not only does the movie grow even more tired and die, it still
insists on going on... like a zombie.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
STARRING:   Tom Everett Scott, Mark-Paul Gosselaar, Poppy Montgomery
DIRECTOR:   Alan Cohn
WRITERS:    Anthony Abrams and Adam Larson Broder
RATED/YEAR: R/1998
        "Dead Man on Campus" is a dark comedy about the ancillary benefits
of college life: non-stop parties, free booze, and more sex than anyone
could possibly want.  Sound like your college days?  No?  Okay, okay.
"Dead Man on Campus" is a dark comedy about the stereotypes inherent in
college life, such as the belief that all higher-learning activities
revolve around the above items.  But considering the film is brought to
us by MTV, a network built around stereotypes and the lowest-common
denominator, that shouldn't be a surprise.  Thanks to their programming,
I've learned that all musicians, particularly women, are rail-thin and
gorgeous, something I honestly didn't know.
        Tom Everett Scott is Josh Miller, a smart, amiable guy from Iowa.
Bookworm Josh's GPA has earned him an academic scholarship to Daleman
University, a school whose medical studies department is unparalleled.
Josh, who honestly intends to make something of himself, knows that with
a great deal of hard work and studying, he can earn his medical degree
and make his family proud.
        His roommate Cooper (Mark-Paul Gosselaar), however, makes this
very difficult.  A rich kid who's at college only to procure the items
mentioned in this review's opening paragraph, Cooper turns goofing off
and procrastination into an art form.  He doesn't go to a single class,
but does learn a great deal about herbal recreation, much to Josh's
chagrin.
        It doesn't take long for the film to turn into a combination of
"The Odd Couple" and a buddy picture; although straight-arrow Josh is
initially turned off by his roomate's hell-raising antics, Cooper's
personality is infectuous.  Too infectous, perhaps; soon, Josh is spending
all of his time partying, getting high with his new friend, and having
staggering amounts of sex with the lovely Rachel (Poppy Montgomery).
        By the time midterms roll around, both boys know they're in
serious trouble: Josh is in danger of losing his scholarship, and Cooper's
dad may force him to leave school and come work in the family business, a
fate which Copper considers worse than death.  Sensible Josh suggests that
the two of them become study buddies and work extra-hard on their
schoolwork to make up for lost time.  Cooper, however, has a different
plan.
        It seems that Daleman University's charter contains a provision
which could save both of them, without forcing them to resort to anything
as vulgar as studying.  The rule: if any Daleman student commits suicide,
his or her roomates will be awarded straight A's, regardless of prior
academic standing.  Kinda like a consolation prize, to help the mourners
deal with their grief.  Cooper's plan: steal the University's psycho-
logical records, find a suicide-prone student, convince said student to
move in with the two of them, and gradually pressure him into killing
himself.
        The rest of the film deals with Josh and Cooper's attempts to
accomplish this lofty goal, as a succession of roommates, all of whom
are memorable and entertaining in their own way, file into their spare
room.  Fratboy Cliff (Lochlyn Munro) is such a wild-child that he nearly
kills himself accidentally several times over the course of the story;
Cooper suggests that if they can tolerate his presence just a while
longer, they might get lucky.  Computer geek Buckly (Randy Pearlstein) is
a conspiracy-theorist who believes that Microsoft's Bill Gates is out to
steal his brain.  But their best bet may be Matt (Corey Page), a
chronically-depressed punk musician who writes downbeat songs (with
titles like "Sperm"), and talks constantly about his vivid, recurring
dreams of putting a pistol in his mouth.
        The premise is morbid yet very funny; handled a different way,
the material could've transcended from merely "entertaining" to
"hysterical."  Although the film is being billed as black humor, I
dispute that label, since too much of the movie's emphasis is on
physical comedy.  While that's not neccessarily a problem, the story's
premise is amusing enough that it doesn't really need these forced
additions.  The movie works best when the humor comes from Josh and
Cooper's attempts to instigate suicidal thoughts into their roommates'
minds.  (Cooper, for example, volunteers for the school's suicide hotline.
As he's being trained on how to discourage callers from ending their
lives, he jots down the opposite of what his instructor is saying, to
give him new things to try out on his roomates.)  It would have been
interesting to see what someone like David Lynch, a director well-versed
in "dark," could've done with this material.
        The cast is quite good.  Tom Everett Scott, fresh from his
starring roles in "That Thing You Do" and "An American Werewolf in
Paris," is very likeable as Josh, and Mark-Paul Gosselaar (Saved by
the Bell)'s portrayal of Cooper is equally warm; while you wouldn't
neccessary want to live with him, he'd be good company on a Friday
night.  But both of their performances are eclipsed by their various
roommates'.  The depressed (but incredibly rude) Matt was my favorite, as
he moped sadly in his room, singing self-pitying songs on his guitar,
while Josh and Cooper passionnately urge him to end it all.
        But the ladies of the film, through no fault or their own, don't
fare nearly as well.  Josh's girlfriend Rachel feels so out of place here
that I strongly suspect her inclusion in the script was an afterthought.
It feels as though her presence is the result of a demographic study, which
revealed to the studio bosses that a love interest of some sort was needed to
hold the attention of female movie-goers; therefore, Rachel was invented, her
lines hurridly scribbed down on a napkin, then shoe-horned into the already
completed script.  Poppy Montgomery does an adequate job of portraying the
character, but she's given so little to do or say that the performance never
really catches fire.  Rachel's two friends Lucy and Kristin (Alyson Hannigan
and Mari Morrow, respectively) fare even worse; they're reduced to walk-on
parts, with an occasional bit of slapstick thrown in for good measure.
        There are some great moments in the film, and I laughed out loud
perhaps half-a-dozen times.  The opening credits sequence is one of the
most innovative that I've ever seen, the music is very catchy, and the
story's resolution is actually far more clever than I expected the movie
capable of being.  Nonetheless, the film is perhaps half an hour too long,
primarily in the opening scenes; hence, the story doesn't really get
rolling until we're nearly 45 minutes into it.  Still, this is a pleasant
enough diversion, with a fresh premise and some occasionally funny moments.
Seen with a large group of friends, this movie could be great fun.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please write
to the above address and ask to be put on my mailing list.
-----
  "Average Joe" Barlow * MiSTie #73097 * Writer/musician/aspiring filmmaker
       http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow jbarlow@earthling.net

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Dead Man on Campus (1998)
Tom Everett Scott, Mark-Paul Gosselaar, Lochlyn Munro, Poppy Montgomery, 
Randy Pearlstein, Corey Page, Allyson Hannigan, Mari Morrow, Dave Ruby, 
Mark Carapezza, Jeff T., Jason Segel, Linda Cardellini, Aeryk Egan. 
Screenplay by Michael Traeger and Mike White. Directed by Alan Cohn. 92 
minutes
Rated R, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com/film/
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
Every since "Animal House," almost every comedy set in a college features 
some John Belushi wannabe doing his best Bluto impression and failing 
miserably. They fail because it's impossible to capture the magic of the 
late comedian simply by mimicking his character's behavior. There was a 
special glint in Belushi's eyes, a distinctive quality in the timbre of 
his voice and a sense of danger in his every movement that enabled him to 
take the stock character of a frat-house wild man and elevate it into 
something classic. 
While Bluto's spot in the College Comedy Hall of Fame remains secure, 
it's time to make room for the new maniac in town. As Cliff, a hyper-
enthusiastic, frenzied psychopath just waiting to be diagnosed, Lochlyn 
Munro is scary, mesmerizing and flat-out hilarious. His performance alone 
is worth the price of admission to "Dead Man on Campus."    
Please don't mistake the raves for Munro's tour de force as an 
unqualified endorsement of the movie. While "Dead Man on Campus" has a 
number of funny scenes, it really only hits the bull's eye when Cliff is 
on screen. In between his relatively brief appearances, you'll spend a 
fair amount of time waiting for the film to stop spinning its wheels and 
to get moving. 
The premise for "Dead Man on Campus" springs from the urban legend that 
if a student kills himself during a semester, his surviving roommates 
will automatically receive straight-A's as compensation for their grief 
and trauma. When a pair of mismatched roomies realize their grades are 
beyond redemption, they hatch a desperate scheme to cash in on the "dead 
man's clause" by finding a suicidal roommate and doing what they can to 
push him over the edge.
Thomas Everett Scott ("That Thing You Do") plays Josh, a wholesome 
Indiana boy attending prestigious Daleman College on an academic 
scholarship. His devotion to scholastic excellence falters under the 
influence of new roommate Cooper (Mark-Paul Gosselaar from "Saved By the 
Bell"), a wealthy kid majoring in sex, drugs and rock and roll. 
The two work well together. Scott is an engaging actor and his 
introduction to the party life provides some smiles, particularly when he 
blissfully recounts his first sexual experience ("We just...did it! It 
was like 'Time for sex!'"). Playing a self-absorbed ladies-man, Gosselaar 
is appropriately smarmy, and there's a certain perverse pleasure watching 
"Saved By the Bell's" Zack holding a stethoscope inside his pants and 
happily announcing "I can hear my heartbeat through my penis!"
Still, the first half of the comedy is relatively slow going, until the 
boys finally reach a crisis point and begin their search for a suicidal 
roomie. They come up with three candidates. Buckley (Randy Pearlstein) is 
a frail, skittish paranoid who often threatens suicide while ranting 
about an elaborate conspiracy involving Kurt Cobain and Vince Foster 
(they're still alive, sequestered near Mount St. Helens) and Bill Gates, 
who is after Buckley's brain.
Basket-case number two is Matt (Corey Page), a glowering goth-rocker with 
a thick British accent who handily incorporates his suicide threats into 
his song lyrics. 
And then there's Cliff, a psycho for all seasons. Leaping about the room, 
periodically humping the couch like some crazed dog in heat, Lochlyn 
Munro totally throws himself into character. He was so convincing in his 
audition that director Alan Cohn initially resisted hiring him, fearful 
that maybe it wasn't just an act. 
Munro manages to make the insanely over-the-top character endearing 
rather than grating. When he accidentally sets a coed's hair on fire 
during a party, he has to be stopped from unzipping to put out the flames 
using his personal fire hose. Watching the young woman panic, he 
innocently states "I don't get it. Whenever I'm on fire, I remember to 
drop and roll." Cliff's coarse antics are completely tasteless and 
howlingly funny. Incidentally, stay through the closing credits or you'll 
miss a bonus Cliff moment.
If only the rest of the film could maintain the energy and crudeness of 
the Cliff scenes. The biggest problem with the bulk of "Dead Man on 
Campus" is that it's too damn tasteful. First-time feature director Cohn 
pulls his punches, tempering potentially riotous scenes with a peculiar 
restraint. Just weeks after the remarkably successful release of the 
gross-a-thon "There's Something About Mary," this is certainly the wrong 
time for timidity. And after all, this is a comedy about students trying 
to drive a person to his death, for Pete's Sake. Cohn flirts with genuine 
black comedy and occasionally scores, but too frequently constructs 
scenes that play like a UPN sitcom with extra swearing. 
Thank goodness Lochlyn Munro's Cliff was there to drag this movie back to 
the gutter where it belongs. It's easy to imagine John Belushi looking 
down from the heavens, nodding his approval. A successor to the throne 
has at long last arrived and the spirit of Bluto lives on.

Author
Matt Williams
Dead Man on Campus is a black comedy dealing with college life and a
rather gruesome, but fictitious, urban legend.  However, for a black
comedy, the humor here is well on the bland side, and definitely not
worth the price of tuition.
Josh (Tom Everett Scott) is a college freshman His roommate is Cooper
(Mark-Paul Gosselaar), a ne'er do well student who's more interested in
sex, drugs and alcohol than in books and classes.  When the two
roommates clash styles, Cooper prevails... at least until mid-semester.
Then the two students try to determine how to salvage their failing
grades and stay in school.
They pin their hopes on an old school legend.  If a student commits
suicide, his or her roommates will be given straight-As to compensate
for grief.  Since neither Josh nor Cooper want to be the sacrifice, they
decide to hunt out the most suicide-prone fellow student to be their
roommate.
Dead Man on Campus takes far too long to launch into this main plot
thread. To put it frankly, Josh and Cooper are rather boring.  It isn't
until their intended roommates/victims show up that things start to get
interesting.
One of those roommates in particular, a truly insane student named Cliff
(Lochlyn Munro), possesses an abundance of the energy which Dead Man on
Campus so desperately needs.  The film perks up when he's around, but
not enough for a complete redemption.
The biggest failing of Dead Man on Campus is the lack of a strong
central character.  Despite the "party" atmosphere, neither Tom Everett
Scott nor Mark-Paul Gosselaar seem to be people you'd like to hang out
around. Unfortunately, we're forced to for ninety minutes.  A more
personable actor, or a better written character, might have made that
stretch bearable.
In an unusual twist of fate (or perhaps a lack of ideas), there is
actually another movie dealing with the college roommate-suicide urban
legend coming out in a few months, Dead Man's Curve. It won't be hard to
have better success than Dead Man on Campus.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 600 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases
