Title
Review for Thief (1981)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
Director Michael Mann's moody crime film 'Thief' from 1981 is a film of such 
slick, original and invigorating visuals that it's hard to imagine the film
made any 
other way once you've seen the entire thing.  Also scripted by Mann from the 
book 'The Home Invaders' by Frank Hohimer, it has a flow of such natural 
dialogue to match the best crime scenes ever filmed and the characters are 
totally unsympathetic for an extra focus on reality.  It bothers me sometimes 
that motion pictures take a protagonist who chooses the wrong path in life and 
they are made out to be sympathetic. 
Mann, who has made other films such as 'The Last of the Mohicans' (1992) and 
a great companion piece to 'Thief' entitled 'Heat' from 1995 with Al Pacino and 
Robert De Niro and the force behind the 80's television series 'Miami Vice', 
chooses his camera angles carefully and uses tight editing and feisty
lighting in 
'Thief' that enhances the film's final outcome.
James Caan is a lifelong thief who has spent over a decade in prison and can't 
reform his ways after release.  His mentor (Willie Nelson in a two scene cameo) 
has taught him everything he knows about crime and Caan tries to obtain his 
release from prison when learning that Nelson is suffering from an eventually 
fatal respiratory condition.  Caan plans the greatest heist of his career
while in 
the employment of a slimy crime boss (Robert Prosky).  Caan works with a loyal 
partner (James Belushi) and marries a woman (Tuesday Weld) who doesn't 
seem too upset that her new husband is a criminal who may leave her anytime 
by being arrested, pursued or killed in the life he has chosen.  The
personality 
profile between Caan and Weld is nicely set up in a cafe sequence where they 
explain their lives to one another and decide to stay together. 
The film's basic message is survival and uses the old morality statement that 
there is no loyalty among thieves and the picture's original music score by 
Tangerine Dream and the arresting cinematography by Donald Thorin impact 
the story just as well as any academic thought the director ever had.
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm
