Title
Review for Price Above Rubies, A (1998)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Scott Renshaw
     At the 1998 Sundance Film Festival, writer/director Boaz Yakin
commented that A PRICE ABOVE RUBIES isn't so much specifically about life
in the Hasidic Jewish community as it is about "being an individual in any
society where conformity and tradition dominate."  The story could just as
easily have taken place in the Amish country, apparently, or in any other
highly conservative culture.  Why, our ambitious, determined heroine Sonia
Horowitz (Renee Zellweger) might have been Sonia Smith if the mood had
struck him, or Sonia Gomez.
     In a cinematic era of hot air and gimmickry, it's hard to fault a
film-maker when he's trying to tell a story _about_ something.
Unfortunately for Yakin, beginning with a theme doesn't work when the
cultural atmosphere is as crucial to a story as Hasidic Judaism is to A
PRICE ABOVE RUBIES.  The narrative follows wife and mother Sonia as she
struggles to express her passions -- for sexuality, for a career in the
jewelry business -- in a world where the highest passion is expected to be
reserved for God.  Though her husband Mendel (Glen Fitzgerald) is a decent
and holy man, she finds herself caught up in affairs with her
brother-in-law Sender (Christopher Eccleston) and a Puerto Rican artist
(Allen Payne), facing the unimaginable fate of complete exclusion from her
community.
     It's an intriguing story, told by Yakin with an aura of mysticism as
Sonia frequently converses with a mysterious homeless woman (Kathleen
Chalfant) and the spirit of her dead brother Yossi (Shelton Dane).  You
can feel the world shifting constantly within her, conveyed through the
naked emotionalism of Zellweger's performance.  The world around her,
however, never seems to be a real place of strictures and conventions.
It's a movie set with costumes and props, into which Sonia might just as
well have been dropped like an alien into a Spielbergian American suburb.
Yakin commits himself so thoroughly to making Sonia a genuinely complex
character that he doesn't take the time to fill in the background.
     It certainly doesn't help that some of the blind-to-a-fault casting
stretches credulity to the breaking point.  British actor Christopher
Eccleston chews on his New Yawk accent as though he were about to blow a
bubble with it, while creating a borderline melodramatic rendition of
manipulative villainy.  Zellweger, meanwhile, throws her heart and soul
into Sonia but can't quite turn rural Texan into New York Jew.  If you
want to distill what doesn't work in A PRICE ABOVE RUBIES into two words,
try to imagine Renee Zellweger convincingly uttering the magic words, "Oy
gevalt."
     A PRICE ABOVE RUBIES is the sort of sincere, well-meaning movie which
makes you feel vaguely guilty for not liking it more, since it is never
sincere and well-meaning in that ponderous, self-righteous way which
characterizes so many Hollywood "issue" dramas.  There are some wonderful
touches to enjoy, notably an insinuating score by Lesley Barber, which
complement Yakin's patient narrative development.  Sonia's story of
self-actualization is bound to resonate with some viewers, because it is
both heartfelt and honest.  But while Yakin manages to make the film feel
honest, he doesn't make it feel _true_.  Without the richness of a
fully-realized society as a foundation for character study, A PRICE ABOVE
RUBIES essentially offers solid actors in an under-stated tolerance
lecture.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
The following is a conversation between PLANET SICK-BOY and former
Israeli Prime Minister Golda Meir -
PSB -  `Sholem aleichem'
GM -  `Aleichem sholem'
PSB -  `Thank you for coming.  I understand that you have just seen the
new film, A Price Above Rubies.
GM -  `I could plotz from the excitement.  The last picture I saw was Up
in Smoke and I needed that like a hole in the head'
PSB -  `So, did you enjoy it?'
GM -  `Did I enjoy it.  Better you should ask another question'
PSB -  `Really?  You didn't like it at all?'
GM -  (under her breath) `A real able momzer, this one is'
PSB -  `I'm sorry, what was that?'
GM -  `Bubeleh, it was just wonderful.  I should live so long to see a
better picture.  Wait, I'm dead already'
PSB -  `Well, what didn't you like about it?'
GM -  `Again with the questions already'
PSB -  `Ok, let's just run through the basic story for the readers.
Sonia (Renee Zellweger, Jerry Maguire) and Mendel (Glenn Fitzgerald,
Flirting with Disaster), a young married couple with a new baby, move
from Monsey to Boro Park.  Much to the dismay of her friends and family,
Sonia begins to stray from her simple life as a devoted housewife and
sets out to experience the world on her own terms.  Occasionally, she
encounters and consoles in a bag lady, who Sonia thinks is the ghost of
her deceased Grandmother'
GM -  (under her breath) `This plosher can really knock a teapot.'
PSB -  `Please speak into the microphone so we don't miss anything'
GM -  `Speak into what?  Now he tells me'
PSB -  `So, were there certain parts of the story that you had a problem
with?'
GM -  `That's no charley.  Let's start with this director, a meshungener
putz.  A plague should seize him, may God prevent that'
PSB -  `But he also made the gritty urban drama Fresh with Tupac Shakur'
GM -  `And if his bubbe had wheels, she would be a buggy.  He is
definitely not an M.O.T.'
PSB -  `What's an M.O.T.?'
GM -  `Member of Our Tribe.  This nudnick don't know his toches from his
elbow'
PSB -  `What about the characters?'
GM -  `Let's start with the shikse Sonia.  She's too good for her
husband all of a sudden and decides to shtup her way into a job'
PSB -  `You mean when Sender (Christopher Eccleston, Jude) offers her a
job selling jewelry for him and he welcomes her aboard with a quick,
unceremonious hump?
GM -  `Mnyeh, enough with that.  What about her poor husband?'
PSB -  `Well, I guess that Sonia was turned off by Mendel's pre-futz
praying and the unemotional way he made love to her.  I guess you could
say that he was unlucky in love'
GM -  ` Just like the old saying about mazel'
PSB -  `What's that?'
GM -  `When a man has mazel, even his rooster lays eggs'
PSB -  `I'm not sure how that fits into our discussion, but…'
GM -  (interrupting) `Feh!  I'm telling you that Mendel has no eggs,
excuse the expression'
PSB -  `Errr, so it turns out that Sonia is quite an expert in buying
and selling jewelry and this skill allows her to meet Ramon (Allen
Payne, New Jack City), a young artist who creates his own adornments'
GM -  `And right into his bed she hops, this yente luftmensch'
PSB -  `You don't seem to identify with the Sonia character very much at
all'
GM -  `I was the Prime Minister of Israel, not a filthy
good-for-bobkes.  And just because she is a maven with the jewelry
doesn't mean she gets to make like a whore with the first shvartzeh she
finds.  Like a beet she should grow with her head in the ground'
PSB -  `And that is the basic moral of A Price Above Rubies.  Thank you,
Golda'

Author
James Sanford
A PRICE ABOVE RUBIES
Directed by Boaz Yakin
 The last time Hollywood appropriated New York's Orthodox Jewish community
as a backdrop for drama the result was the infamous "A Stranger Among Us,"
which featured the absurd sight of Melanie Griffith, practically the poster
girl for goyim, trying to pass herself off as a Hassidic to investigate a
murder. Despite the controversy it generated during its production, "A Price
Above Rubies" turns out to be a much more credible, albeit critical, look at
a secretive, low-key society. Writer-director Boaz Yakin has fashioned a
mostly compelling story of a woman's search for identity in a world
dominated largely by men, and Renee Zellweger, previously best known as the
sweet mom from "Jerry Maguire," delivers a quietly stunning performance in
the lead.
 "Rubies" centers around Sofia (Zellweger), who grew up in an Orthodox home
and married a great scholar, just as her parents wanted her to. But now,
after having a baby and moving to New York with her husband Mendel (Glenn
Fitzgerald), Sofia's starting to feel constrained and claims she's being
tormented by an "inner fire." "I don't even know where my body ends and my
soul begins," Sofia tells her Rebbe (John Randolph) after Mendel shames her
for her enthusiasm in bed and she unintentionally makes a pass at her stern
sister-in-law Rachel (Julianna Margulies). Using his sister-in-law's
confusion and her natural talent for determining the quality of jewels to
his own advantage, Mendel's less-reverent brother Sender (Christopher
Eccleston) seduces  Sofia, then puts her to work as a buyer for his jewelry
store. Sofia's affair doesn't bring her liberation or even the sexual
release she seems to be craving, but it does finally present her with the
opportunity to have some control over her own life.
 Zellweger has a face the camera adores and a low-key charm that makes Sofia
almost instantly recognizable, even though the culture she's a part of seems
quaint and foreign at first. Although "Rubies" veers perilously close to
melodrama in its last third, Zellweger's honesty keeps the movie on track.
Eccleston and Fitzgerald are both fine as the men Sofia is caught between,
and Margulies, in a surprisingly unsympathetic role, is suitably severe.
 Yakin, also previously looked into the world of ghetto youths in his smart
and insightful "Fresh," manages to blend a certain degree of mysticism into
his drama without turning it into incomprehensible nonsense. Most authors
wouldn't even dare to have Sofia plagued by visions of the ghost of her
beloved brother: In Yakin's hands, it seems perfectly logical. James Sanford

Author
Kevin W. Welch
The popular culture likes to think that community is good, family
is good, all those emotional things that keep people bound to
each other whether or not they want to be are good. If A Price
Above Rubies has a message, its a cautionary one. Be especially
careful of the ethnic group you are born into--it might bite you
hard.
Sophia is married to a young up-and-coming scholar and yeshiva
teacher; they are members of an otherwise unidentified Orthodox
sect in Brooklyn. Sophia's father was a gemologist who taught his
daughter a thing or two, but she has had to give that up until
her brother-in-law, who owns a jewelry store in Manhattan and a
smalller one with an elite clientele in the neighborhood, hires
her on as a buyer. He has a rather novel way of conducting a job
interview and Sophia and the brother-in-law are having an affair,
a one-sided affair conducted mostly on one desktop or another.
Sophia's marriage is barren of passion--she has to subordinate
her needs, especially her sexual needs to her husband, who is
quite aware that God is in the bedroom watching them have sex.
They have an infant son. Sophia wanted to name him Yossi, after
her brother who died when he was ten (and who is still very much
present). The husband instead names him after the Rebbe.
Everything the husband does seems calculted to ingratiate himself
to the Rebbe. The bright young scholar comes across as a brown
nosing careerist.
Sophia is a good buyer, one who can spot a composite jewel ten
yards away. She spots a gorgeous piece that she traces to a
jeweler named Ramon, who works as a jewelry clerk by day and as a
sculptor by night. She thinks he does the most beautiful work in
the world and she wants to take him on, for either her good or
for his. At this point, of course, everybody thinks she is having
an affair with Ramon and she loses everything, absolutely
everything. Such is the price of pursuing your muse.
The ethic of A Price Above Rubies is old-fashioned, in the sense
that 70s-era look-at-me-ism is old-fashioned. It's a
do-you-own-thing movie, where if you are in any sense a creative
person you will find that any number of sacrifices are justified
in the pursuit of who you are. Although I can strongly sympathize
with Sophia, who is almost a dictionary definition of repression,
I find that this message is out of place in the 90s where at
least part of the popular culture celebrates family and origins
and roots and responsibility and another part of the culture
celebrates license.  The movie has a quaint sensibility in its
stance of sacrifice in the pursuit of the self.
Overall, Rubies gives a close look at a deeply religious milieu
of the sort not often seen in recent movies. It looks at that
milieu respectfully, though with full awareness of the damage it
can inflict on nonconformist members. The plotting is a little
too formulaic and some of the characterizations are a little too
blunt and stereotyped (Juliana Margulies as the sister-in-law in
particular plays an authority figure with little depth). The
story relies a little too heavily on magic realism to get from
point to point--the vision of the dead Yossi in particular seems
like a crutch. Renee Zelwiger is good as Sophia, mixing just the
right blend of frustration and edgy competence that blossoms when
she gets a chance to show her stuff. The scholarly husband is a
cypher, however, and that seems to make the choices Sophia faces
too easy. With no sense of what she might be missing by leaving
the Orthodox community, the film has to resort to extremes to
show that her choice has costs. This is director Boaz Yakim's
second film. His first, Fresh, was a far different look at a far
different life and community. Fresh was one of the best films of
the 90s. A Price Above Rubies is just sophomore slump.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     A PRICE ABOVE RUBIES, a languid look at a woman's liberation from
the religious ties that bind her, features a nice performance by Renee
Zellweger from JERRY MAGUIRE in the underwritten role of Sonia.  Writer
and director Boaz Yakin takes us deep into a Hasidic Jewish community
in New York City, where he manages to disparage their faith without
finding any redeeming values.
     Religious ridicule is guaranteed to stir up people, and it did
during the movie's filming.  But if the protestors had seen the
finished product, perhaps they would have not been so upset.  Although
Yakin shows nothing beneficial in Hasidic doctrine, his movie drifts
along so slowly and predictably that few will be moved enough to care.
     There are, however, some interesting portions and the previously
mentioned nice performance, but only the one.  The excellent
Christopher Eccleston, who was so incredible as the star of JUDE, plays
Sender, Sonia's brother-in-law, who floats in and out of the story.
When there, he gets to say some outrageous lines ("Piety is the
standard by which we are judged, but it is the quality of our sins that
set us apart"), have a fast bit of illicit sex with Sonia up against
the nearest wall, and then disappear again.
     Sonia is married to the ultra pious Mendel (Glenn Fitzgerald),
whose biggest fear appears to be that Sonia might enjoy marital sex.
He interrupts his own foreplay with her to start praying.
     Sonia, it turns out is the daughter of one of the best gemologist
in the state.  Sender makes her the operator of his illegal "cash
business", in which he sells jewelry to the local Jewish community out
of a basement guarded by a fake wino.  This whole arrangement angers
Mendel, but being a classic wimp, he mainly complains and whines about
it.
     One of the story's better scenes has the men and boys arguing the
fine points of the Torah around the dinner table.  Fast paced and
smartly written it has the energy that the other parts of the film
badly lack.  It also shows clearly how the men and the women exist in
parallel communities much as the men and women do in GOODFELLAS.
     A major problem with the script is the abrupt change in Sonia's
character after she gets a job.  One minute the severely repressed
woman is having anxiety attacks so terrible that she appears in danger
of catching fire.  And the next she is a strong woman, being a
super-tough negotiator with the jewelry suppliers and having sex with
her employer on whatever table is convenient.
     The picture takes great pains to look authentic and to set a
serious tone, which makes the story's two apparitions - Sonia's dead
brother Yossi (Shelton Dane) and a mysterious beggar (Kathleen
Chalfant) - seem so out of place.  Yossi appears, for example, to
remind Sonia when she eats an egg roll with "pig" in it that she is
going to hell.  The beggar, who may or may not be real, makes even less
sense.
     The ending appears designed almost as an after thought, and it
fails to work on several levels.  With its coldly antiseptic tone, the
movie seems more interested in preaching awkwardly to the audience that
inviting it in.  Typical is Sonia's little homily in which she tells
us, "Sometimes I look at men and wonder how God could have created so
ugly a creature for women to cling to?"
     A PRICE ABOVE RUBIES runs 1:57.  It is rated R for sex, profanity,
and nudity and would be acceptable for older teenagers.

Author
Michael Dequina
A Price Above Rubies (R) * 1/2 (out of ****)
Renee Zellweger stars as Sonia, a young Jewish wife and mother frustrated
by the constraints of her Hasidic community in Brooklyn.  Her husband
(Glenn Fitzgerald) is a religious scholar whose all-in-a-day's-work
attitude on sex fails to tame the "fire" she feels within, as so she
confesses to the rebbe (after hearing her fiery confession, the rebbe
suddenly gets frisky with his pleasantly surprised wife--and dies the next
morning).  Sensing her frustration, her husband's brother (Christopher
Eccleston) gives her a job in his jewelry brokering business in exchange
for raw, passionless sex that just fans Sonia's still-burning flame.  On
the job, Sonia befriends Ramon (Allen Payne), a cool blast of hunky Puerto
Rican water who does his own jewelry designs when not working as a grunt in
an upscale jewelry store.  Can fire-taming be far be that far behind for
the ever-smoldering Sonia?
Just about everything in writer-director Boaz Yakin's rings false,
starting with the improbably cast Zellweger, who does an adequate enough
acting job but simply looks too WASPy for the role.  A better fit would
have been Julianna Margulies, who outshines Zellweger as Sonia's
take-no-crap sister-in-law.  Some of Sonia's baby steps toward liberation,
such as indulging in a non-kosher egg roll in Chinatown, come off as silly.
 Yakin attempts to spice up the proceedings with a touch of magical
realism--in the form of the recurring presence of Sonia's long-dead
brother's ghost--make the story feel even more trite than it already is.  
mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mrbrown@ucla.edu
>My personal WWW siteshttp://welcome.to/mrbrown
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court: http://fly.to/michaeljordan
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak: http://fly.to/mj23
Personal Page: http://welcome.to/w3md
>Other WWW sites I work onhttp://www.HollywoodHotline.com
Albany Online: http://www.AlbanyOnline.com
Eyepiece Network: http://www.eyepiece.com
"I didn't know what to expect. It's like something you chase
 for so long, but then you don't know how to react when you
 get it.  I still don't know how to react."
--Michael Jordan, on winning his first NBA championship in 1991
...or, my thoughts after meeting him on November 21, 1997

Author
James Brundage
Ok. When I reviewed Kundun, I reached the conclusion that I needed the raw
thrill of ripping a movie to shreds in my bare hands. As almost an answer to
my prayers, a movie comes along that can do just that... well, kindof. I
can't really rip *A Price Above Rubies*, since it wasn't actually a terrible
movie. Instead it was a movie that is, in my modern apotheosis of a negative
utopia, a rarity: a movie neither good nor bad, the place between substance
and shadow that does not quite reside in "The Twilight Zone".
So I am sitting down and now pondering which to write: the good review or
the bad review, each a definite possibility, and the decision is reached:
heads for good, tails for bad. But alas, the coins are upstairs and I am a
lazy bum. So I guess I write option C: the mediocre review. The movie really
wasn't either.
So we go into transcendence of both of the places...
1. A land of substance. On one hand, this was a film, like *Schindler's
List*, that demonstrated the difficulties of being Jewish. Like anything
Spike Lee turns out, it resounds as a fine ethnic film. It has metaphors, it
has symbolism, it has memories, hallucinations, dreams, all of which are
good points for the art film. It has plot, it has characters. It has a
people that you care about. A strong human element. And, it has my often
pick of Women's Lib, which, in this case, rubs off rather nicely. ++++.
2. A land of shadow. Of course there is the bad, and each point has a
counterpoint. The characters, although you care about them, happen to be
shades of gray. There are really no villains in this film about an Orthodox
Jewish woman who has a life out of control and a strong inner fire. There's
a boredom rate that insomniacs envy. There's a narrow target audience, and
an even smaller group of people that will come out smiling. And, to top it
off, there is something which *Schindler's List* gave off, but in a nicer
way: controversy. From Yiddish cursing to challenging a religion that has
been pretty much left alone by the film industry (if not aided) since WWII,
and a graphic display of all sorts of sin, it just leaves you seeing the
black, the white, and the gray. ----.
And that's what this film is: the black and the white and the gray. It's a
coin with three sides, and I'm sorry, but I don't have all the answers. I'm
not you. I liked it, but didn't love it. My advice for your decision: flip a
coin.
http://members.tripod.com/~criticsheaven/

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1998
U.S. Release Date: beginning 3/27/98 (limited)
Running Length: 1:57
MPAA Classification: R (Mild profanity, non-graphic sex)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Renee Zellweger, Christopher Eccleston, Glenn Fitzgerald, 
      Allen Payne, Julianna Margulies, Kathleen Chalfant, Shelton Dane
Director: Boaz Yakin
Producers: Lawrence Bender, Jon Penotti
Screenplay: Boaz Yakin
Cinematography: Adam Holender
Music: Lesley Barber
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
     A PRICE ABOVE RUBIES is writer/director Boaz Yakin's follow-up to 
his highly-regarded, tautly-paced 1994 picture, FRESH.  Sadly, little of 
the energy and intelligence of the earlier film is evident in this, an 
overwrought melodrama populated by stereotypes and featuring an 
improbable storyline that relies upon a string of coincidences.  
Ostensibly, A PRICE ABOVE RUBIES details the struggle of one woman to 
throw off the shackles of a conservative society, but the manner in 
which Yakin approaches this theme is preachy, pedantic, and predictable.  
     The woman is Sonia (Renee Zellweger) and the society is New York 
City's Hasidic Jewish community.  She is a good woman married to Sender 
(Christopher Eccleston), a highly-respected scholar.  From the 
beginning, Sonia is aware that there is something missing from her 
matrimonial union.  Everything that she finds erotic, he finds indecent.  
To him, sex is exclusively for procreation, not for quenching "the fire" 
that burns inside of his wife.  Any observer can see than Sonia is 
profoundly unhappy, but only her brother-in-law, Mendel (Glenn 
Fitzgerald), offers a solution.
     In addition to giving Sonia work procuring jewelry for his 
underground business, Mendel enters into a sexual relationship with her 
(that, apparently, is the price she pays for getting the job).  As 
unwanted as she finds his rough advances, Sonia is liberated through 
this act of unfaithfulness.  Mendel rationalizes his actions by saying 
that, while everyone sins, "it's the quality of our sins which sets us 
apart."  He obviously considers his violations to be somewhere in the 
upper echelon.  At any rate, as a result of the new facets of life shown 
to her by Mendel, Sonia begins to yearn for the kind of freedom that she 
cannot find within the Hasidic community.  Yet she realizes that if she 
attempts to leave Sender, she will lose everything.  Meanwhile, she 
finds herself battling an attraction to a promising young jewelry maker 
(Allen Payne), which further complicates her situation.  To help her 
with her difficult decisions, Sonia receives advice from two unusual 
agents:  a prophetic bag lady (Kathleen Chalfant) and the ghost of her 
brother (Shelton Dane), who died as a child.
     I needn't say which path Sonia chooses, because, like almost 
everything else in this movie, it's easily guessed.  One of the most 
disappointing aspects of A PRICE ABOVE RUBIES is its lack of originality 
– right down to the too-pat conclusion.  The premise has a great deal of 
potential, little of which is realized.  Instead of fashioning a gallery 
of interesting, multi-dimensional characters around Sonia, Yakin is 
content to plunder a bag of types.  Most of the individuals fall into 
the traditional, morally-upright, inflexible mold of those who stifle 
creativity in the name of conformity.  With the exceptions of Sonia, the 
old Rebbe (John Randolph), and his wife (Kim Hunter), no one within the 
community exhibits even the slightest trace of humanity. 
     That's only the tip of the proverbial iceberg, however.  One of the 
most potentially-fascinating elements of A PRICE ABOVE RUBIES is the 
opportunity it affords for an exploration of the Hasidic society.  What 
Yakin gives us, however, is disappointingly superficial, and rivals the 
banality offered by Sidney Lumet in A STRANGER AMONG US, a horribly 
misguided mystery about a murder investigation in the Hasidic community.  
Any film that attempts to delve beneath the surface of a closed society 
will face an inevitable likening to Peter Weir's WITNESS, which painted 
the Amish with a rich, varied brush.  A PRICE ABOVE RUBIES makes the 
not-dissimilar Hasidic people look cartoonish by comparison.
     Yakin's casting choices are also questionable.  While it's easy 
enough to accept Glenn Fitzgerald as a Hasidic bad boy and Julianna 
Margulies as a defender of the community, those two are only supporting 
players; the problems are with the leads.  Christopher Eccleston, who 
was impressive as the title character in 1996's JUDE, is flat and 
unconvincing as Sender.  There's no passion or power in this 
performance; it's a dull, lifeless rendering of a man who is supposed to 
be deeply devout.  I'm not suggesting that Eccleston should have gone 
down the route taken by Robert Duvall in THE APOSTLE, but a little more 
energy might have made Sender seem less like a writer's construct and 
more like an individual.
     The flaw in Renee Zellweger's performance is harder to define.  She 
is a talented actress who has shown range in her past roles (such as 
JERRY MAGUIRE and THE WHOLE WIDE WORLD), but she is miscast as Sonia.  
Despite imbuing her character with spirit and emotion, there's something 
fundamentally "off" in her attempts to portray a Hasidic woman.  
Regardless of how hard she tries, she doesn't fit the part.  There are 
numerous instances when Zellweger's intonations and accent are all 
wrong.  It's the little things that are problematic.
     A PRICE ABOVE RUBIES isn't a complete disaster.  Despite its 
obvious faults, the melodrama is never boring.  My reservations about 
Zellweger's performance don't alter the fact that Sonia is an appealing 
protagonist, and it's not hard to identify with her struggles.  Unlike 
many of the other characters in the film, she is well-developed, 
although certain facets of her personality are built through clichés.  
So, although A PRICE ABOVE RUBIES can be described as "watchable," it 
stands as a mediocre exploration of one woman's attempts to express her 
individuality in a closed society.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."
