Title
Review for Winterschläfer (1997)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Steve Rhodes
Look out Academy!  If writer/director Tom Tykwer ever comes out with a
film entitled THE GREATEST, it's a shoo-in to win the Oscar.
Last year, Tykwer burst onto the American scene to much acclaim with his
perfectly named RUN LOLA RUN, a movie which almost made my number one
choice for best movie of the year.  Exhilarating and exhausting,
watching it is like running a marathon and winning.  Three marathons to
be precise.
WINTER SLEEPERS, I am extremely sorry to report, is aptly named.
Viewing it is a perfect remedy for insomnia in winter or any other
season.  In RUN LOLA RUN, the dialog was fine but not particularly
important since it was the intensity of the action that carried the
movie.  WINTER SLEEPERS, on the other hand, has the actors babbling so
much drivel that it sometimes reminded me of the episodes of RBTV
(Really Bad TV) in the new picture, THE ADVENTURES OF ROCKY AND
BULLWINKLE.
The story is set in a snowy Bavarian landscape that is made palpably
cold and stunningly beautiful by Frank Griebe's cinematography.  The
interior sequences, however, are as dull and uninteresting as the
exterior ones are magnificent.
One day, a ski instructor, Marco (Heino Ferch), comes racing up in his
new car to see his girlfriend, Rebecca (Floriane Daniel).  He's so in
the grips of love that he leaves the keys in his car and the door wide
open.  After having sex, he falls asleep.  When he wakes up, he finds
that his car has been stolen.  This sets off a small chain of events
that establishes the miniscule structure of the story.
Staying awake is hard during WINTER SLEEPERS and, in retrospect, not
especially necessary.  It is now clear why this earlier work of Tykwer's
did not find a United States distributor when it was initially released.
If the movie has an audience it is probably among film students looking
to see how successful directors develop their craft.  Certainly there
are a few undeniably effective touches in WINTER SLEEPERS that later
show up spectacularly in RUN LOLA RUN.  But, if you're not a film
student, there are many better movies more worth your time.
WINTER SLEEPERS runs a long 2:02.  The film is in German with English
subtitles.  It is not rated but would be R for sex, accident violence
and language and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
 
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com ">http://www.InternetReviews.com> 

Author
Rachel Deahl
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Rachel Deahl.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/1a1a10a405cae1b3882568d7005fda96?OpenDocument
Movie Title  Wintersleepers (Winterschläfer)
Director:  Tom Tykwer
Producer:  Laurence Mark
Screenwriter:  Anne-Françoise Pyszora, Tom Tykwer
Stars:   Ulrich Matthes, Marie-Lou Sellem, Floriane Daniel, Heino Ferch
MPAA Rating: NR
Year of Release: 2000 (USA), 1997 (Germany)
 Sweeping shots of snowcapped mountains, displayed against a thumping
techno beat and cut in with introductory shots of various characters
(complete with their names appearing on screen) packing up to go
somewhere might give one the impression that Wintersleepers is about a
heist. The momentum builds like wildfire in these opening sequences as
the phrase 'Are you really leaving today' echoes throughout the various
departures happening across the board. This momentum quickly dies, as
does the hope for any bank robbing scenarios. What comes in its place is
a much slower film which lumbers along (painstakingly at times) to a
crisp, almost haunting close.
 Tom Tykwer, the German director who exploded onto the international
scene with Run Lola Run brings this odd story of mistaken identity and
deathly fate to the screen with an awkward, but in some ways rewarding,
slant.
 Set in a winter resort in Bavaria (the scenery is breathtaking), the
story follows the intertwining story of two roommates, their boyfriends
and the devastation wreaked by a fatal accident. Laura and Rebecca live
together in Rebecca's impressive winter bungalow, essentially sharing
the space with Laura's slovenly ski-instructor boyfriend, Marco. When
Marco's car is stolen by a drunken stranger (it has been left with the
keys in it), the result is a devastating crash which ensues on a nearby
road. When the drunken stranger hits a local farmer he flees the scene
of the crime, leaving the farmer devastated with his young daughter
thrown into a deep coma. The farmer is left with a vision of the
assailant-- a strange snake-like scar on the back of his head.
 The farmer then goes on a relentless search to find the man with the
scar, angry that he is being blamed for the accident and his daughter's
devastating state. When Rebecca begins to date the hit and run drunk
driver in question, Renee, much is uncovered about what precisely
happened during the crash and why it occurred as it did. Twyker follows
the intertwined lives of these characters as their actions directly
affect one another, unbeknownst to them.
 The film certainly meanders, winding down seemingly pointless. Much of
the film is spent exploring the antagonistic relationship of Laura and
Marco and one can't help but wonder why. However, Twyker manages to pull
these diverging storylines and characters together in the end for a
powerful finale. The more interesting aspects of the film, namely the
strange condition which plagues Renee, come together beautifully in the
end.
 Although it's at time difficult and even unenjoyable to watch,
Wintersleepers finally ruminates on such large issues as death, fate and
human nature. In some ways it brings to mind Atom Egoyan's masterful and
devastating The Sweet Hereafter. And while Wintersleepers is unable to
achieve the precision and direction The Sweet Hereafter maintains
throughout, it does finally leave you with a similar despair.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Michael Dequina
_Winter_Sleepers_(Winterschläfer)_ *** (out of ****)
The poster blares "from the director of _Run_Lola_Run_," but anyone
looking specifically for such an adrenaline rush would be advised to stay
away.  There are smatterings of director Tom Tykwer's flashy _Lola_ style
in this slow, two-hour-plus drama: the pulsing techno score; some
bravura, highly kinetic shots.  For the most part, though, this is a film
not about forward momentum but stagnant meditation.  _Winter_Sleepers_,
which predates _Lola_ by a year, is one of those "people intersected by
chance" films, but its less-than-sprawling canvas of five
characters--three of whom are already linked as the film opens--and
snow-drenched, resort town setting should give one an idea of how plot
comes secondary to atmosphere.  In fact, one of the threads is  rather
mundane: a translator named Rebecca (Floriane Daniel) is involved with
ski instructor Marco (Heino Ferch), a womanizer.  Despite some good
performances, this familiar bit of business is a little tedious, and it
predictably does not stop 'til one of them wises up.
Far more involving are the other two storylines.  Rebecca's housemate
Laura (Marie-Lou Sellem), a nurse and aspiring actress, falls into a
quiet relationship with René (Ulrich Matthes), a movie projectionist. 
Laura doesn't know that he is tragically linked to a farmer named Theo
(Josef Bierbichler) and his dying young daughter, whom Laura cares for at
the hospital.  Then again, neither is René aware of any connection, for a
years-ago injury has done irreparable damage to his short-term memory; to
compensate, he constantly takes photographs of his surroundings.  The
Laura/René and René/Theo threads don't resolve themselves in an easily
predictable fashion, which is why they make a more lasting impression
than Rebecca/Marco.  Actually, if it weren't for them, _Winter_Sleepers_
would've been a picturesque and well-acted near-miss instead of the
unconventionally affecting film that it is.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Akiva Gottlieb
A Review by Akiva Gottlieb
Anyone who saw last year's transcendent, action-packed "Run Lola Run" 
knows that German filmmaker Tom Tykwer is one of film's most exciting 
young auteurs. So it's a shame to note that excitement is what "Winter 
Sleepers", a film he made prior to "Lola" in 1997, is lacking most.
The film takes place in a German skiing village in the dead of winter. A 
pre-credit sequence introduces us to Rebecca (Floriane Daniel), a 
translator of romance novels, Marco (Heino Ferch), her ski-instructor 
boyfriend, Laura (Marie-Lou Sellem), a lonely nurse and fledgling 
actress, Rene (Ulrich Matthes), a lonely movie projectionist, and Theo 
(Josef Bierbichler), a farmer and loyal family man.
Being a Tom Tykwer film, "Winter Sleepers" is also an exploration of 
fate. One winter day, Rene steals a car belonging to Marco, and heads 
out on a slippery highway road. Theo is also driving down the road, with 
a horse in a trailer hitched onto his car. He is unaware that his young 
daughter is also in the trailer. When Theo swerves in order to not to 
crash into the projectionist in the stolen vehicle, his car and trailer 
flip over, leaving his daughter in critical condition. Theo is knocked 
unconscious, and Rene leaves the scene of the accident.
Meanwhile, Rebecca and Marco are contemplating the seriousness of their 
relationship. Rebecca is interested in little more than sex, and Marco 
is having an affair with another woman. Nevertheless, they move in 
together.
Laura and Theo, both lonely and single, also begin a relationship. He 
goes to see her in an awful community production of "A Streetcar Named 
Desire", and gives her free tickets to visit the local cinema. Like most 
of the film's characters, Theo begins as a less-than-admirable 
character, but we learn to understand his pressures, and when the film 
ends, he is a different person.
For the most part, "Winter Sleepers" is the polar opposite of "Run Lola 
Run". While its often unfair to compare two different films, it must be 
taken into consideration that "Lola" is 80 minutes long and fast-paced, 
while "Winter" runs a whopping 124 minutes at a slow pace. The film 
plays like an amateur "Sweet Hereafter", without the poetic grace or 
fine acting.
"Winter Sleepers" does not come without its merits. The mountain 
cinematography, by Frank Griebe, is both breathtaking and unpretentious, 
and the techno score (co-written by Tykwer) often gives the proceedings 
a temporary jolt of energy that is missing from the rest of the film.
Though you wouldn't know it from watching "Winter Sleepers", Tom Tykwer 
is responsible for what might be a new wave of German filmmaking. The 
newest German films, such as "Lola" and Katja Von Garnier's "Bandits", 
are kinetic, highly stylized and more than a bit of fun. Compared to 
those films, "Winter Sleepers" seems to be in hibernation.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 WinStar Cinema
 Director: Tom Tykwer
 Writer: Ton Tykwer, Anne-Francoise Pyszora
 Cast: Ulrich Matthes, Marie-Lou Sellem, Floriane Daniel,
Heino Ferch, Josepf Bierbichler, Laura Maori Tonke
   In his British web site "Inside Out Film," the critic who calls
himself The Wolf says of "Winter Sleepers" that "the
characters become servants of the plot and the plot contorts
itself into implausible shapes to accommodate them."  He
means this as a negative appraisal of the film but in doing so
he misses the point.  The most assured aspect of the story is
that Tom Tykwer and Francoise Pyszora--in adapting Anne-
Francoise Pyszora's novel "Expense of Spirit" to the screen--
mean quite deliberately to point out that what we do may
have little bearing on what happens to us.  Fate, not
individual will, dictates much of our lives, and the
oddest, most improbable coincidences have a way of getting
in the way of our intentions.  Or, as Robert Burns put stated
lyrically, "The best laid schemes of mice and men aft gang a-
gley."
   The setting could scarcely be better for working out the
strands of fate.  Imprison your characters in a closed area, a
cocoon if you will, so that there is a multiplicity of possibilities
that could either enhance or endanger their lives.  Tykwer
locates his people in a the German ski village of
Berchtesgaden (Hitler's favorite vacation spot, by the way), in
the dead of winter. The snow, wonderful to look at and, if
you're a sportsman, to ski in, can be disastrous as well
under particular circumstances.  Cinematographer Frank
Greibe has his work cut out as he photographs the
bleak and beautiful landscape of the village and also hones in
on the games people play inside their lodgings.  
   When movie projectionist Rene (Ulrich Matthes)
inadvertently finds himself outside a ski lodged owner by
Laura (Marie-Lou Sellem) which she shares with her best
friend Rebecca (Floriane Daniel), he discovers Rebecca in
flagrante with her boy friend du jour, the handsome, impulsive
and often childish Marco (Heino Ferch).  Capturing this
titillating scene in his camera, he steals Marco's car on a
whim, involving him in a terrible accident with a local farmer,
Theo (Josepf Bierbichler).  Unfortunately Theo's daughter has
stowed away in her dad's trailer and becomes comatose: yet
Rene walks away from the accident casually as though
overturned vehicles were to him a common and ordinary sight
on the German mountainside. 
   The injured Theo, who has spotted a snake-like scar on
Rene's neck, becomes obsessed with finding this hit-and-run
perpetrator, while Rene, spookily unconcerned with Theo's
fixation, goes about his life casually, becoming romantically
involved with the woman who coincidentally is the nurse of
Theo's stricken child.  More happenstance is to occur that will
intertwine strangers' lives in a deepening tragedy.
   Tom Tykwer's direction this time around is not as creative
as it was in his best-known and most sensational work, "Run,
Lola, Run," the most visually exciting foreign language movie
released last year in the States.  In that movie, which bore
the German title "Lola, Rennt," Tykwer's title character
receives a phone call from her boy friend, Manni, breathlessly
entreating her to come up with 100,000 deutschmarks within
twenty minutes or he will be killed by gangsters.  Tykwer runs
through three separate scenarios as though he were writing
and re-writing the screenplay.  In each case, a different
outcome prevails.  But again, fate is to govern the results.  
Since Tykwer is adapting another person's novel this time
around instead of controlling all aspects of the film, the
results are not as astonishing as before.  Instead, we are
treated to a  casually paced story line amid the snowy
mountain landscape that evokes the bleakness of Atom
Egoyan's "The Sweet Hereafter," also about a tragedy
affecting children amid an icy, elevated panorama.
   But like "Lola Rennt," "Winterschlafer" (its German title) is
stylized--with each principal character wearing a distinct color. 
The sensual blonde Rebecca fixates on her bloody finger in
the opening scene and wears red throughout.  The drab
movie projectionist, Rene, wears gray, while farmer Theo
wears earth colors to handsome Marco's blue.  "Winter
Sleepers" is a disappointment only to those who expect
Tykwer to duplicate his masterfully entertaining, fleet-of-foot
"Run Lola Run," but given the man's technique, his
photographer's facility with a camera (a stunt man is
photographed for thirteen takes executing a drop that would
terrify the divers at Acapulco's Le Quebrada), and his 20-
something characters' self-centered behavior within a
closeted scenario, this study in coincidence is nothing short
of compelling.
Not Rated.  Running Time: 124 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
