Title
Review for Prizzi's Honor (1985)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Walter Frith
Director John Huston who died in shortly after making this film was a master
of story telling.  There was always a hint of conservative ambience detailing
his films and for a man who started in the 1940's and made movies for over
four decades, he certainly was the right man for the very dark and off beat
mob comedy, 'Prizzi's Honor' (1985).  It ranks as a superlative look at a
fictional New York City crime family and is based on Richard Condon's best
selling novel.  
The film opens in charismatic style at a wedding and each of the main
characters is visually profiled.  There is the ever unpredictable Jack
Nicholson as a hit man for the Prizzi family and the other main characters in
the film include Kathleen Turner as the woman he would fall in love with and
who turns out to be more than he bargained for.  Others are William Hickey as
the family boss who personifies the devil in his gripping visual style of
acting. Lee Richardson and Robert Loggia as his sons, John Randolph as
Nicholson's father and best friend to Hickey and Anjelica Huston (daughter of
director Huston and winner of the Best Supporting Actress Oscar for this
film) as the Prizzi family's mafia princess and a former lover of Nicholson's
in the film.
Nicholson is love struck at the wedding as he glimpses Turner for the first
time and tries to track her down and they eventually consumate their
relationship by marrying and it turns out that while Nicholson is a slow
witted hit man, she's a quick witted hit woman!  This of course causes
problems in their relationship as she becomes embroiled in deceiving the
Prizzi family and is offered a contract to rub out Nicholson.  The outrageous
twists that this film offers are too numerous to mention and 'Prizzi's Honor'
also serves as a cleverly inter woven and well plotted film which never loses
its focus in the important moments and has one more goody up its sleeve just
when you think things are ready to settle down.
If you haven't seen 'Prizzi's Honor' it's real treat and is perfect for home
video viewing and is recommended for adult viewing for its mature theme.
It's one of Nicholson's most pleasantly menacing performances.
