Title
Review for Real McCoy, The (1993)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
A suave, cool, collected, rich, uptight bad guy = cliche. A clumsy criminal
oaf to add to the laughs = cliche. A bad guy who owns a wild animal = cliche.
A crooked, chauvinistic law enforcer type = cliche. At an intense moment, our
main character tries to get away, but the car has trouble starting = cliche.
Complaining about cliches = cliche.
Ok, ok. So we always hear about cliches. But if there was ever to be a prime
example, THE REAL MCCOY is it! Not one uttered word, not one frame of film,
not one character in this whole movie isn't a cut and paste example of
everything we've ever seen. They might as well use this as a training film:
"How to Make a Bank Robbery Film in the 90's".
Karen McCoy (Kim Basinger) is a bank robber who just got out on parole after
a six-year stay at the state prison. She wants to make things right and go
straight, especially with the fact that she has a six-year old son out there
who doesn't even know she's alive. Aware of McCoy's bank robbing expertise,
sniveling bad guy Jack Schmidt (Terence Stamp) uses the same six-year old to
coerce McCoy into returning to her past. He wants McCoy to pull off an
elaborate heist of 18+ million dollars at the same bank she got caught trying
to rob six years earlier, which, by the way, is somehow due to Schmidt. And
if she refuses? Who knows what he'll do to the kid. (Cue sinister laughter)
This movie is so pathetically pitiful that it's hard to know where to begin.
The aforementioned cliches are brutally abundant. I can't stress enough how
every single element, whether it be a character, the dialogue, a plot
"twist", etc., is so damn generic that you'll wonder if *anyone* is working
behind the scenes, let alone in front of the camera. Basinger is absolutely
vacant. And where do they get off trying to make us emotionally attached to
her? Here's someone that spent their time robbing banks, and now as she heads
onto the street, we're supposed to feel sorry for her. As she confronts her
son, who doesn't even know who she is, are we supposed to break into tears??
Especially when neither Basinger nor Zach English, who plays the kid, has any
depth or emotional-radiance whatsoever.
I suppose I should mention Val Kilmer. Yeah, that's right - he's in it! Quite
sadly too, seeing as how I can discuss everything about the movie and never
mention his name. And he got second billing! To be fair, I will admit that
Kilmer had potential in his role as the bumbling criminal wannabe J.T.
Barker. Unfortunately the script doesn't allow much room for improvement, and
when his character is used like bookends (he never shows up in the middle of
the film!), we have no time to appreciate what he might have brought to this
project.
THE REAL MCCOY just can't keep it's head above water, and soon, *very* soon,
sinks into a cliched mess of movie. The actors are like dummies being moved
about by an unenthusiastic puppeteer, and the dialogue, particularly
Schmidt's trite dialogue, falls like the Niagra. This is definitely one to
avoid, folks. THE REAL MCCOY is anything but!

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Kim Basinger, Val Kilmer, Terence Stamp.
Screenplay:  William Davies & William Osborne.
Director:  Russell Mulcahy.
     Some movies require you to turn off your brain in order to watch.
Then there are movies that require you to accept that everyone *in* the
movie has turned off *their* brains.  THE REAL MCCOY is both.  It's
charmless, molasses-slow and so full of genuinely stupid people that
the film commission of Atlanta, where THE REAL MCCOY is set, might well
consider some sort of ritual suicide for their complicity in this
humiliation.
     THE REAL MCCOY opens with bank robber Karen McCoy (Kim Basinger)
being arrested in the middle of a job.  Six years later, Karen is out
on parole and looking to stay straight.  She soon bumps into
J. T. Barker (Val Kilmer), a hapless would-be thief who idolizes Karen.
J. T. also has ties to Jack Schmidt (Terence Stamp), the man who blew
the whistle on Karen six years earlier for refusing to work with him.
Schmidt, who is in cahoots with Karen's sleazy parole officer (Gailard
Sartain), again wants Karen to help him stage a robbery.  This time he
has some leverage:  Karen's kidnapped son.  Just when she thought she
was out, they keep pulling her back *in.*
     Contrivances and sloppy plotting fly off the screen so fast and
furiously you have to duck to avoid being hit by them.  Leading the
list is the Jack Schmidt character, who through unexplained but
presumably foul mains is already extremely wealthy when our story
begins.  There is no reason given why he should need or want to get
involved in another crime, let alone why he would actually participate
in the break-in.  Karen's initial encounter with J. T. during a botched
convenience store hold-up also strains the limits of credibility.  It
would have been simple enough to have them somehow entangled at that
point, but instead they run into each other the next day because
they're leaving their parole officers at exactly the same moment.
Small world, eh?  Then there's the convenient car trouble during an
attempted escape, and pet tigers which, through the power of the Laws
of Bad Cinema, must inevitably confront someone who has blundered into
their cage.  However, the buffoon prize goes to the Atlanta police, who
come off like the Keystone Kops on a bad day.
     But the fun doesn't end there in the shambles of a script by
William Davies and William Osborne.  There is also the absence of a
single, solitary interesting character.  Karen is earnest and
single-minded in her motherly devotion, but lacking any kind of edge
which would make her a convincing criminal, and Basinger is not a
thespian adept at fleshing out flimsy material.  Schmidt is a flaccid
villain, the parole officer is a complete blank, and Karen's son and
ex-husband might as well be furniture.  Only Kilmer's J. T. is remotely
appealing, but his one potentially intriguing quality, his ineptitude,
is never developed.  In fact, Kilmer disappears during the middle of
the film, just when his admiration for Karen could have made for an
interesting sub-plot.
     I might have been more forgiving if the pacing had been more
appropriate to a caper comedy, but THE REAL MCCOY goes nowhere fast.
Various scenes of sneaking and skulking seem to take forever, and some
end with no reason evident why they didn't end up on the cutting room
floor.  Even the reasonably clever climactic break-in falls victim to
this syndrome, including a scene of one of the thieves drilling open a
vault which lasts (I kid you not) four minutes.  There is no tension in
the scene, just tedium.  Russell Mulcahy (HIGHLANDER) is a director
with some style, and indeed THE REAL MCCOY looks reasonably good, but
he completely stumbles in the editing room.
     There are so many big problems with THE REAL MCCOY that I'm
tempted to overlook the little ones.  Like Karen disarming one of
Schmidt's henchmen and throwing his gun into the middle of a park where
her son is playing.  Like a fountain crushed when a van runs into it
reappearing in one piece a few moments later.
     Tempted.  But I'm pretty good at resisting temptation.

Author
Jon A Webb
     I decided Kim Basinger must be taken more seriously as an actress
if she's smart enough to turn down BOXING HELENA, at the risk of her
personal fortune, so I went to see THE REAL MCCOY.  I hoped it would
be a ripoff of POINT OF NO RETURN.
     But it is not.  The problem is that it is not an action film, and
only vaguely a conventional film about a female cat burglar bank
robber.  Instead, the story revolves around Basinger's relationship
with her son -- it seems even famous bank robbers have sons, if they
are women.
     Sigh.  How I wish Hollywood would get out of this mold of having to
mix a little of conventional women's roles into every film they make
with a woman star.  POINT OF NO RETURN would have been better if
Bridget Fonda hadn't felt the draw of conventional relationships quite
so strongly (why couldn't she end up sophisticated and happy like James
Bond?), and this movie would have been better if the role Basinger's
son would play hadn't been so obvious. (Hint: She gets out of jail, and
wants to go straight.  Some bad guys want her to rob another bank.  She
loves her son.  So what do the bad guys do?)
     I thought the role for Basinger was actually pretty good,
though.  She gets to play a more three-dimensional character than she
has in any other recent film.  She reminds you of why she has become
famous; she really can act, though between this film and BOXING
HELENA, she's not getting offered roles that will take her any place.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Kim Basinger, Terence Stamp, Val Kilmer, Gailard Sartain, 
           Zach English
Director:  Russell Mulcahy
Producers:  Martin Bregman, Willie Baer, and Michael S. Bregman
Screenplay:  William Davies and William Osborne
Music:  Brad Fiedel
Released by Universal Pictures
     For six months, Karen McCoy (Kim Basinger) has been serving time
for a bungled bank robbery she committed for Jack Schmidt (Terence
Stamp).  Naturally, Karen isn't too fond of the man she blames for her
prison sentence, and he's mad that he didn't get the contents of the
vault.  Upon her release, she finds herself surrounded by corruption,
all of which is designed to get her back into the burglary market.  Her
parole officer (Gailard Sartain) is in Schmidt's employ and very soon
her son (Zach English) has been kidnapped.  Her only friend appears to
be Schmidt's cousin's son, J. T. Barker (Val Kilmer), who agrees to
help her out.
     At first, I wasn't sure if THE REAL MCCOY was supposed to be a
thriller, a drama, or a comedy.  Fortunately, it quickly became
apparent that it didn't matter: this film is too bad to be worth such
noble classifications.  With a plot that has no conception of reality
and a bunch of characters put together in uninspired fashion, THE REAL
MCCOY has little, if anything, to recommend it (unless you're desperate
to hear Terence Stamp's awful Southern accent).
     The interaction between Karen and her son is hideous.  I'd be
surprised if anyone bought these scenes, just as I'd find it hard to
believe that anyone sensed even the most remote indications of
chemistry between Basinger and Kilmer.  Put simply, these two are dull
together.  Maybe Val is still thinking about his role as Elvis in TRUE
ROMANCE.
     I'd like to know who convinced Kim Basinger that she could act.
More appropriately, perhaps, is who convinced production companies that
she could act.  Aside from not having an on-screen presence, she can't
deliver dialogue with any degree of credibility, has the range of a
potato skin, and isn't nearly as stunning to look at as her reputation
would indicate.
     Of course, the movie is bad enough that Basinger's lackluster
performance doesn't really hurt it.  Given a dumb script and plain
directing (by HIGHLANDER's Russell Mulcahy), THE REAL MCCOY can't
really be further sabotaged by the presence of a mediocre troupe of
actors.  It's sort of like spilling gasoline on an already
oil-encrusted garage floor.  Who's going to notice?
     There are a couple of mildly clever moments during the course of
the big break-in, but these are swamped by a plot that keeps getting
more and more ridiculous, and takes far too much time to get there.
Whatever minor incidents of entertainment are present, they're not
worth the price required to get to them.  The movie if the real thief:
not only will it cost you money, but it will steal your time as well.
     THE REAL MCCOY is filled with innumerable cliches.  After escaping
from the clutches of the bad guys, Karen and her son flee to their
hidden getaway car--which obviously fails to start right away.
Karen's ex-husband is, of course, a complete and total sleaze.  The
cops are all either interminably stupid or on the take.  And the list
goes on, except I can't reveal the most absurd of these without
spoiling the ending (as if it really makes any difference).
     Even Basinger fans (are there really such people?) will likely be
disappointed by this movie, which has even less to recommend it than
the rather putrid FATHER HOOD.  Lifelessness is the film's chief
characteristic, and that perhaps is being kind.  Far too many motion
pictures get filmed when they should be stopped at the planning stage,
and THE REAL MCCOY is firmly in that category.  If you want to see a
movie about burglars, you'll have a better time (or at least a few
laughs) watching the unredeemably campy HUDSON HAWK.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
