Title
Review for Crime and Punishment in Suburbia (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz
  CRIME & PUNISHMENT IN SUBURBIA (director: Rob Schmidt; screenwriter: Larry
Gross/inspired by Dostoyevsky's "Crime and Punishment"; cinematographer: Bobby
Bukowski; editor: Gabriel Wrye; cast: Michael Ironside (Fred Skolnik), Ellen
Barkin (Maggie Skolnik), Monica Keena (Roseanne Skolnik), Blake Shields
(Moznick), Vincent Kartheiser (Vincent), James DeBello (Jimmy), Jeffrey Wright
(Chris), Conchata Ferrell (Bella), Marshall R. Teague (Football Coach); Runtime:
100; United Artists; 2000) 
There's not one character in this film that I felt anything for even though, I'm
led to believe, I was supposed to. The film foolhardedly evokes Dostoyevsky's
"Crime and Punishment" as the inspiration behind this contemporary film about
teen-age angst, yet leaves one with little to remind them of that except for the
title. 
It's a disturbing film about a f*cked-up domestic situation set in the suburbs
of the West Coast and how in the emptiness of life there, violence moves from
the pop culture they are immersed in to their own lives becoming torn by chaos
and violence. It's a story about outsiders who use violence to get what they
want, as all the characters are severely dysfunctional and act goofy to make
sure we know how screwed-up they are at all times. The question asked in all
seriousness to sum up the film is too trivial to dignify with a serious response
as it states even when a good person kills a bad person, it's still a tragedy. I
don't see what's the big revelation about that, since I don't know of any sane
person who doesn't realize that killing someone is a pretty serious thing. My
other problem was I didn't know who was good, I just saw who was more
vulnerable. I think it's rather pretentious and arbitrary to think this piece of
pulp nonsense had caught the profound themes of the master Russian writer. What
it caught was a sleazy and exploitive look at a teen-age wasteland, and added
nothing relevant to our understanding of such empty lives. 
Dostoyevsky's Raskolnikov murdered an innocent old woman to test his theories
that superior human beings can act free of man-made rules. In this film, a sexy
cheerleader suffering from an unhappy home life, Roseanne Skolnik (Keena),
decides to kill her drunk, self-pitying, stepfather, Fred (Ironside), after he
molests her. That just has nothing to do with what Dostoyevsky was getting at,
it's just the typical trash seen in countless exploitive films. This unpleasant
script by Larry Gross, seems to be vacuous and more annoying than anything
intellectual it presents. It's a B-film that somehow thinks it could get over as
an art film for the disenfranchised. 
The other players in this domestic dispute are the embittered, whorish Ellen
Barkin as Maggie, an unhappy wife, married to wealthy man she's not attracted
to. She meets a black man who is a bartender (Jeffrey Wright), flaunts the
relationship in front of her husband, and since she found the body and has the
known motive for killing him and all the circumstantial evidence points to her,
she becomes the innocent one who goes to trial accused of the murder. The black
man is falsely called her pimp, as some kind of racial inference is made about
their mixed racial relationship. 
Perhaps the most unsatisfying character was the supposed hero of the messy film,
high school student Vincent (Vincent Kartheiser), the alienated loner freak who
can't fit in and follows Roseanne around taking pictures of her wherever she
goes. He's got some kind of sexual hangup on her and to prove his hipness as a
character out of a Camus novel, he tattoos the words "por nada" on his arm. He
also does the voiceover to explain his motivations for following her, saying he
wants to save her from hell. The more he spoke, the stupider he sounded.
Roseanne will come to him for support when her dull, sexually alive, bully,
football jock of a hunk Jimmy (DeBello), helps her on her request to kill Fred
by holding him down while she sticks him with a paring knife and when that
doesn't get the job done she uses her mother's electrical carving knife--the one
mom used in the opening scene for the family roast. When Jimmy no longer serves
her needs, she leaves the poor sexually frustrated chump hanging and goes to
Vincent for support. Vincent gives her cliché Oprah like self-help advice and
believe it or not, even without having sex with the twisted Vincent, Roseanne
proclaims in jail "What a strange path it took to find my heart." When she said
that, it came out of the blue and made absolutely no sense. I don't know what
she found, but if she calls what she found love--then she lost me. 
This is one twisted pic. Made all the worst because there's no fun in this
nonsense uncovered. But the subject matter here is ripe for a Steckler flick, as
it's a shame the film wasted so much good photography techniques and good
background music and some good acting improvisations on such an empty story. 
This film was released a year after the similar "American Beauty," even though
it was made earlier. It therefore also suffers from being thought of as a copy
of that film, even though it wasn't. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ 

Author
Julia Levin
If you're seeking enlightenment on what you think would be a modern
reverberation on the timeless Fyodor Dostoyevsky's masterpiece, don't be
misled by Crime and Punishment in Suburbia.  While the film opens with a
quotation from Crime and Punishment, which, I suppose, is intended to
lead us to a new interpretation of the book, that's the only (tenuous)
connection.  In the novel, the protagonist, Raskolnikov, rebels against
the morality imposed on him by a society and kills an innocent woman. 
He later discovers that the worst punishment for the murder was the one
his guilty conscience made him to endure.  And perhaps, if you
concentrate hard enough, the suffering Raskolnikov could conceivably
parallel that of a pudgy adolescent Roseanne (Monica Keena ex of
Dawson's Creek), one of the main characters in the movie.
Completed before American Beauty, this artificial little movie resembles
it in every way possible, mainly because it examines the very same set
of stereotypes about malfunctioning wealthy suburbanites.  Vincent
(Vincent Kartheiser), a sallow loner, follows Roseanne everywhere with
his camera.  Given the privilege to provide voice-over for most of the
film, we hope that he is the voice of wisdom, or at least revelation in
the story.  Far from it: His philosophy is one of a self-possessed New
Age spiritual guru who is convinced he can save Roseanne from hell she
is living in.  What Ricky was able to see with his lens in American
Beauty revealed the hidden layers of human behavior.  Vincent, by
comparison, as well as the whole ensemble of characters in Crime and
Punishment, goes through the plot's twists and turns without a single
coherent thought in his head.
The genre of the film is familiar -- using the suburbs as an emotional
terrain where the sense of unwholesomeness surrounds the surfaces of
people's life and threatens their seemingly secure shelters.  In
Roseanne's family, we have a complete set of obvious characters: a
psychopathic stepfather (Michael Ironside) with a face of a bulldog and
a penchant for heavy drinking, a frustrated and suffering mother (Ellen
Barkin), and a vacuous, popular little girl who dates a football player
(James DeBello).  What follows is supposed to be a tragedy of
revelations, in which a gloomy loner Vincent will help Roseanne
rediscover herself and alter her perception of the world forever. 
Supposed to be.
What attracted me the most in American Beauty was how punchy and
derisive -- yet humane -- the film was.  It carried a deep loss for the
human connection, a charge that gave the film its integrity, the weight
of reality.  The humorless Crime and Punishment substitutes this depth
with a slow motion camera, elaborate soundtrack, suggestive visual
themes, and a stupid voice over.
To completely befuddle us, the film switches from Vincent's voice over
to Roseanne's.  In a chillingly dispassionate voice, she narrates from
jail and says how much she enjoys her non-existence.  "I killed
somebody.  I was sorry.  It changed nothing."  When freed, she follows
Vincent as her savior and marvels, "What a strange path it took to find
my heart."  But first, you have had to believe that she even has one.
Director: Rob Schmidt
Producers: Pamela Koffler
Writer: Larry Gross
Starring: Monica Keena, Vincent Kartheiser, Ellen Barkin, Jeffrey
Wright, James DeBello, Michael Ironside
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
