Title
Review for Polish Wedding (1998)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Dennis Schwartz

 POLISH WEDDING (director/writer: Theresa Connelly; cinematographer:
 Guy Dufaux; editors: Curtiss Clayton/Suzanne Fenn; cast: Lena Olin
 (Jadzia Pzoniak), Gabriel Byrne (Bolek Pzoniak), Claire Danes (Hala
 Pzoniak), Adam Trese (Russell Schuster), Mili Avital (Sofie Pzoniak),
 Daniel Lapaine (Ziggi Pzoniak), Rade Serbedzija (Roman); Runtime: 110;
 Fox Searchlight Pictures/Lakeshore Entertainment; 1998)
This is a muddled human interest/comedy story about the travails of a
large Polish-American family living in a Detroit suburb (which looked
like the small Illinois hometown of the director, because that's where
it was filmed). It's an old-fashioned type of film, that has the main
characters talking in phony Polish accents and throwing out schmaltzy
dialogue at will, as it suffers so much from being poorly scripted. In
one ponderous scene, Lena Olin as Jadzia Pzoniak, a Polish-American
cleaning woman, tells her not-so-secret office boss lover Roman (Rade
Serbedzija): "There was a reason for marrying my husband, but I can't
remember what it is." There must have been a reason why neophyte
director/writer Theresa Connelly made this film into a nostalgia story
that wants to look like it was made in the 1950s, I just wish she
included that reason as part of the storytelling and dropped all those
clichés to explain every situation. In the realm of movies that try so
hard to please its audience, this one almost begs for audience approval,
but the only thing that should please the crowd is the sex appeal of the
beautiful looking ensemble cast.
In a low-income Detroit suburb, a hard working, easy-going baker, Bolek
(Gabriel Byrne), and his sexy wife Jadzia, live with their children,
four obedient sons and one strong-willed, attractive teenage daughter,
Hala (Claire Danes), along with a daughter-in-law and a grandchild who
is always crying, in two adjoining cramped single-family houses.
Mother and daughter are supposed to be mirror images of each other, each
with questionable values but a love for children. Mother sneaks out one
night a week pretending she's going to a meeting of the Polish Ladies'
Auxiliary, instead she goes to Roman, which is hard to understand why,
since there was no heat on screen between them.
Meanwhile, Hala sneaks out nightly through a basement window, and on one
of these outings is attracted by the young neighborhood policeman
Russell (Adam Trese), which soon leads to her pregnancy. The unrealistic
plot in this basically plotless film, is about how the family rallies
around her condition and the middle-aged matriarch marches her sons over
to Russell's house to force him to marry Hala. Jadzia is proud that she
married Bolek when she was 15 and pregnant, and she sees nothing wrong
with her daughter's pregnancy. In fact she loves children and wants more
grandchildren. In a moment of deep reflection, Jadzia says, "making life
and love" are her "religion." I'm sure there could have been some comedy
over this, but the film was so flat, it couldn't draw out the comedy or
any worthwhile observation about this zany situation. The situation
becomes even messier when Hala is chosen to impersonate the virgin in an
annual church procession and fails to tell the priest that she's no
longer a virgin.
To give the film a decidedly Polish flavor, the domineering mother is
shown as an excellent ethnic cook, making her own homemade pierogi,
duck's blood soup and keeping a cellar full of homemade pickles. It was
supposed to be a film of small moments and the farce was supposed to be
endearing, showing how a large, functioning ethnic family can struggle
with each other; but, in the end everything will turn out to be just
peachy, which will include a Polish wedding after all the obstacles to
the marriage are pushed aside. It didn't work for me, I got no warm and
fuzzy feeling for this working-class family. It was a film of many
vignettes, all coming together with the themes of family values, sex,
and religion, but none of the themes is brought to any fruition where it
could register with any credibility.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Fox Searchlight Films/Lakeshore Entertainment
 Director:  Theresa Connelly
 Writer:  Theresa Connelly
 Cast: Claire Daines, Gabriel Byrne, Lena Olin, Adam Trese,
Mili Avatal, Daniel Lapaine, Rade Serbedzija
   "I am a queen.  I have five children.  I have a home"  So
declares Jadzia Pzoniak (Lena Olin), the matriarch of a large
Polish-American family in Detroit, to which her not-so-secret
lover, Roman (Rade Serbedzija) retorts, "If you're a queen,
why are you here?"  Why indeed? After all, the Detroit
community photographed so well looks almost like the idyllic
Florida location of Peter Weir's "The Truman Story".  The
townspeople are simple, hardworking ethnics.  The members
of the extended Pzoniak family include a baker, two office
cleaners, and a cop.  The church, which dominates the
landscape, casts a forbidding gaze about the working-class
community as though to insure at least a patina of family
stability, celibacy for the young and unmarried, and innocence
for all.
   Novice writer-director Theresa Connelly punctures the
sylvan scenario through a roundelay of vignettes that reveal
the illusory nature of community.  Jadzia looks for love
because she married Bolek Pzoniak (Gabriel Byrne) not for
love but for obligation: hers was a shotgun wedding which
produced five healthy children, at least one of them is
destined to repeat the miscalculation of the matriarch.
   Connelly's "A Polish Wedding" tries to do for the Polish
culture living in America what John Patrick Shanley
accomplished for Italian-Americans in "Moonstruck."  Shanley,
an experienced playwright whose well-received film evoked its
tone through the influence of moonlight, involved a great
number of hilarious moments and madcap dialogue (as when
during the course of a family dinner Olympia Dukakis tells her
father-in-law "Feed one more bite of my food to your dogs,
old man, and I'll kick you 'til you're dead!").  Though
Connelly's film highlights the tense relationships among
parents, in-laws and children who try to carve out happiness
under the roof of their modest wooden home, the writer lacks
Shanley's edge.  Of the grudges the characters feel for others
in "A Polish Wedding," none is evoked by such rollicking
circumstances as that felt in "Moonstruck" by Nicolas Cage
toward Danny Aiello when Aiello made Cage look the wrong
way while slicing some bread and Cage lost his hand as a
result.
  That said, "A Polish Wedding" does have good ensemble
performances by some talented, quirky actors, with Gabriel
Byrne in the role of the laid-back baker who is aware of his
wife's nocturnal goings-on and simply sighs with resignation
and despondency;  Lena Olin as the sexy mom who meets
her lover in full military uniform, pretending frequent a meeting
of the Polish Ladies' Auxiliary; and Clair Danes as the
teenager, her mother's daughter, who climbs through windows
to meet her boyfriend like Alice progressing through the
looking glass in search of magic.
   Connelly is more eager to establish a nostalgic tone, to re-
create an American community that could have been found in
the 1930s or 1940s, than she is in advancing a plot.  To do
this she relies heavily on Luis Bacalov's Fellini-esque music
track and on a series of vignettes rather than a tightly-woven
narrative.  She sets up a flirtatious romance between young
Chala (Claire Danes) and a young cop who gets her
pregnant, Russell (Adam Trese), and as in most romantic
movies puts enough obstacles in their path to delay the
inevitable Polish wedding of the title.  Despite the fairy-tale
atmosphere of the entire story, credibility is created through
the remarkable similarity in appearance and behavior of
Jadzia and her daughter, the audience becoming as involved
with one liaison as with the other.  Given that the Pzoniak's
married son Ziggy's (Daniel Lapaine) baby cries constantly,
and that daughter-in-law Sofie (Mimi Avital) suffered a painful
birth, Sofie is determined to avoid having more children--
which sets up increasing frustration for grandchild-loving
Jadzia.
   The appealing actors take us through a few laughable
moments from time to time, particularly one in which the
entire Pzoniak family marches on the home of the man who
impregnated Chala, ultimately forcing him to marry in much
the way that Jadzia herself entered into a coerced union with
her unhappy husband, Bolek.  Yet this is not the tale of a
dysfunctional family but of one which has resigned itself to a
life of brief, joyful assignations only to recognize by the final
curtain that Dan Quayle may have been right.

Author
Susan Granger

Susan Granger's review of "POLISH WEDDING" (Fox Searchlight Pictures)
       Even with a stellar cast that includes Lena Olin, Gabriel
Byrne, and Claire Danes, first-time writer/director Theresa Connelly's
ridiculouscomedy quickly becomes a Polish joke. The story revolves
around the boisterous, working-class, immigrant Pzoniak family in
Detroit who are devoted to pickles, pierogi, the polka, and the
American dream. Papa (Gabriel Byrne) is a baker; Mama (Lena Olin) and
daughter-in-law (Mili Avital) workas cleaning women; and the three
grown sons drive an 18-wheeler. To their chagrin, the only daughter
(Claire Danes) is a reckless, pouty high-school drop-out - and
carelessly pregnant, despite the fact that she's playing Mother Mary
in the local church's Festival of the Virgin procession. Like her
mother, she's a lusty wench. Mama's into long-term adultery with a
successful businessman (Rade Serbedzija) who calls her his "queen"
andtheir trysts are consummated on the tile floor of the men's
bathroom where they cavort in soapy detergent.  These professed
Roman Catholics rationalize their wanton sexual behavior with their
passionate belief in "making love and life." Credit Ms. Connelly for
writing and directing earthy characters with whom she's familiar -
she grew up in the Polish-American Detroit suburb of Hamtramck - but
all the sticky, sweet, blue-collar melodrama doesn't add up to a
movie. Whenever there's a dramatic crisis withinthe family, Connelly
goes for inappropriate slapstick farce. So, on the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Polish Wedding" is a sappy 3. It's a wannabe
"Moonstruck" that is struck down.

Author
Michael Dequina
Polish Wedding (PG-13) * 1/2 (out of ****)
In this year's summer movie preview issue of _Entertainment_Weekly_,
Theresa Connelly described her writing-directing debut, _Polish_Wedding_,
as "a child that did not quite become the child I thought it would."  One
wonders what exactly she originally had in mind for this jumbled film, a
comedy-drama that appears doomed at its most basic elements.
The family at the center of _Polish_Wedding_ is the Pzoniaks, which
consists of mother Jadzia (Lena Olin), father Bolek (Gabriel Byrne), sole
daughter Hala (Claire Danes) and four sons of varying degrees of
facelessness.  It's a large family, but there's not a sympathetic one in
the whole bunch, certainly not in the primary trio.  Jadzia takes pride in
building and maintaining a home and family, but she's kind of a hypocrite
since she's carrying on an affair with a businessman Rade Serbedzija).  Her
excuse for her affair is neglect from Bolek, who is such a passive wimp
that one cannot connect with his sadness and frustration.  Also, how could
he possibly pay so little attention to the saucy, sexy Jadzia?  Hala is a
spoiled, self-centered high school dropout whose reckless sexual
experimentation predictably leads to pregnancy.
With such an unappealing set of characters, it's no surprise that
_Polish_Wedding_'s plot complications are far from involving.  Naturally,
Jadzia and Bolek would like Hala to marry the young cop, Russell Schuster
(Adam Trese), who fathered the child, but he refuses to make such a
commitment.  Ho-hum.  Another complication, involving the decidedly
un-virginal Hala being selected to crown a statue of the Virgin Mary, is
first played for laughs and then, inexplicably, as a Profound Statement in
the film's climax--which, ironically, is funnier than any of the film's
lame attempts at humor, such as a painfully labored slapstick attempt where
Jadzia leads her sons in a charge to beat up Russell.
That scene is but one in a number of writing miscues by Connelly.  The
Jadzia-Bolek conflict is resolved in an overly pat way not unfamiliar to
sitcom viewers.  The Hala-Russell conflict isn't resolved in as contrived a
manner, but their ultimate resolution will leave viewers wondering if they
had missed something.  And then there's some atrocious dialogue, which I am
sure was not supposed to be as ridiculous as they sound: "Look at all these
pickles.  Just looking at them gives me such great sadness."
As misguided as _Polish_Wedding_ is, the affair is something of a letdown,
considering the strong performances by Byrne, Danes, and especially the
fiery Olin.  They obviously believed in Connelly and her material--a faith
that audiences will be hard-pressed to share.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@ucla.edu  |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
