Title
Review for Swimming (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Murali Krishnan
Adolescence and young adulthood is a time when people often struggle
to find direction in their lives. It is a pivotal time when decisions
are made about what they want to do with their future. This film is
about a young woman who feels that she is treading water - that her
life is idling - and is searching for some type of escape.
Frankie (Lauren Ambrose) is longing to leave Myrtle Beach, South
Carolina just as the summer tourist season is about to begin. Her
parents had moved to Arizona, leaving the family restaurant to Frankie
and her married older brother, Neil (Josh Pais). Her days are spent
working in the restaurant, and her nights are spent generally hanging
out with her unrestrained best friend, Nicola (Jennifer Dundas Lowe),
who runs a small body piercing stand.
When drifter and siren Josee (Joelle Carter) shows up and gets hired
as a waitress in the restaurant, Frankie's world becomes unbalanced.
Frankie and Josee develop an instant liking towards each other,
whereas, Nicola openly antagonistic towards the alluring newcomer, who
Nicola feels uses her good looks to get what she wants. Frankie must
decide on what she wants from her life and she must come to grip with
how her new friendship is undermining an existing relationship.
The strength of the film is its characters. The primary focus is on
boyish Frankie, and Ambrose breaths life into the character, without
having the benefit of much dialog. The character is both homely and
attractive, and she is utterly likeable for her innocent charm, and
all these features are communicated nonverbally, because the character
is generally introverted and reticent. The role of Nicola is more
clearly defined, but Dundas Lowe is able to meet the challenge of
reflecting the character's energy with restraint, and not allowing the
it to become exaggerated.
The pace of the film is unhurried, so the viewer is steeped in
Frankie's world and is allowed to get close to the characters'
emotions. The plot is confidently translucent so that course that
events will take is never clearly apparent.
Another film may have used the assistance of voice-over narration to
allow the main character to directly express her inner thoughts to the
audience. However this film forgoes that crutch and undertakes the
more difficult task of nonverbal expression for this communication.
This is an indication of a solid script, skillful direction, and
accomplished acting. The story occasionally tries to do too much (like
a minor character with an imaginary friend) but its shortcomings are
dwarfed by its accomplishments.
Highly recommended. This is a slow, character-oriented drama primarily
about teenage angst. Although not perfect, the film should be
commended for its intelligent approach. It is a moving, enjoyable film
with likeable, well defined characters, and an engaging story.
