Title
Review for Ben (1972)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Douglas P Mosurak
starring: Lee Harcourt Montgomery, Joseph Campanella, Meredith Baxter,
Arthur O'Connell
recommendation: only if you're in the mood for "Family"-style sugarsap
and aren't afraid of rats
Hot off the heels of the 1971 drive in staple "Willard" comes an untidy
sequel, "Ben", which gets its wires crossed about 20 minutes into the
game.  It can't decide whether to be a horror film or a Quaalude-induced
melodrama about a sick little boy, so it tries to be both.  
The story opens with the closing scenes from "Willard", as Bruce
Davison's Willard Stiles must come to bear with the wrath of his trained
pet attack rat, Ben, and his legion of pet attack rats.  These scenes
are the best of the whole film, probably because they have little to do
with "Ben" itself.  Ben the rat has a very malevolent stare that's
almost comical, as he squeals his evil bidding.  As the townspeople look
on, two bumbling cops go into the house and are attacked by rats as they
open the floorboards in the basement.  The army of rats escape into the
backyards and sewers of the adjoining neighborhood houses.  It's here
that the movie takes a ridiculous turn and loses any effectiveness it
might have had.
It's here that we meet David Garrison (Lee Montgomery), a cutesy, Adam
Rich-looking young kid.  He lives with his older sister Eve (Meredith
Baxter, years before "Family Ties") and just-a-bit-too-old mother Beth
(Rosemary Murphy, who got shot between the eyes in director Phil
Karlson's next film, "Walking Tall").  David's got some sort of
unspecified heart condition, which causes his mother to dote incessantly
on him.  Apparently this ailment forbids him to have any friends either,
so he stays at home in his backyard workshop, where he builds extremely
complex marionettes and writes songs for piano and harmonica.  The
uncomfortable air that comes with his song numbers is one I wouldn't
wish on the unfortunate masses who saw any live-action Disney films of
the period.
Ben makes his appearance in David's workshop.  David feeds him and the
two seem to be able to communicate with one another, which explains why
David calls the rat by his given name.  Meanwhile, every night the horde
of rats emerges from the drainage system and ransacks a different
location in town.  It's kind of cool to see thousands of rats tearing
apart the cereal aisle in a supermarket, and pretty funny to see them
attack some ridiculously large women (and a stereotypically gay man) in
a health spa, but such moments are few and far between.
Cops Kirtland (Joseph Campanella) and Hatfield (Arthur O'Connell) know
what the town is up against, but are too busy being typical crusty cops
to catch up with the rat invasion.  As a result, they take everything
really slow, fumigating houses after a rat attack, and trying to get
everyone they know to believe that there is a problem.  David is aware
of what's happening though.  His child-like demeanor won't let him see
that Ben is a coldblooded killer, but merely his only friend (who he
kisses in the sewer, and holds close to the open scar on his chest from
his last operation).  When David has the rats attack a neighborhood
bully, the cops press him for answers, but he's all hush-hush about it.
It all ends up in the sewers by David's house, with his sister trying to
find him and avoid being attacked by the rats, while cops and sanitation
workers do battle with the enemy with flamethrowers and firehoses. 
These scenes are the most ridiculous in the film - countless reused
shots of rats fleeing the fire and Ben sitting above them all, while the
humans are overcome by dozens of rats clinging to them.
This movie is bad, bad, bad.  In "Willard", the same silly premise was
there, but the characters had a lot more going for them, and in turn the
revenge fantasies that played out were amusing and trashy fun.  Here, I
wasn't the least bit encouraged to feel pity for David; I just wanted to
smack him around some.  He's an annoying little shit, and when he breaks
into the depressing title song (which you'll recall was performed by
Michael Jackson and nominated for an Oscar), you'll be fumbling for the
fast-forward button.  It's virtually impossible to care about anyone
else in the film; there's about half a dimension to each character, so
by the time the cops share a male-bonding exercise at film's end with
their reporter friend, I was just scratching my head.  The rat effects
at the end are terrible; one shot looks like a bunch of burning oranges
rolling down a hill, and it's used over and over.
What promised to be a cheap, entertaining Saturday afternoon UHF-band
"Suspense Theater" style film just could not deliver.  After my hour and
a half with "Ben" dragged to a close, I wanted to devise a huge rat trap
and spap the cast in two.
