Title
Review for Body Shots (1999)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Scott Renshaw
BODY SHOTS
(New Line)
Starring:  Sean Patrick Flanery, Jerry O'Connell, Amanda Peet, Tara Reid,
Brad Rowe, Ron Livingston, Emily Procter, Sybil Temchen.
Screenplay:  David McKenna.
Producers:  Harry Colomby and Jennifer Keohane.
Director:  Michael Cristofer.
MPAA Rating:  R (sexual situations, profanity, nudity, adult themes,
violence)
Running Time:  98 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     BODY SHOTS opens with a profound quote attributed to 
"anonymous": "I'll give you a ride/On my jelly roll/But I won't give you
nothin'/From my soul."  That's about as succinct a summation as any for
this lugubrious, pretentious exercise in Gen Y navel-gazing that follows
eight single young Los Angelenos through a club-hopping Friday night and a
what-the-hell-happened Saturday morning.  Four guy pals -- Rick (Sean
Patrick Flanery), Mike (Jerry O'Connell), Shawn (Brad Rowe) and Trent (Ron
Livingston) -- meet up with four gal pals -- Jane (Amanda Peet), Sara
(Tara Reid), Whitney (Emily Procter) and Emma (Sybil Temchen) -- at a hot
nightspot, and begin pairing off in various combinations.  Accompanying
their dalliances are running talk-to-the-screen commentaries by the
characters on contemporary love and sex that make the "Confessional"
segments on "The Real World" look like revelations of zen wisdom.
     Those pseudo-profound asides -- spending long stretches on subjects
like oral sex technique under the winking guise of "telling it like it is" 
-- are plenty bad enough to make BODY SHOTS an irritating experience. It
becomes positively headache-inducing when director Michael Cristofer
starts dragging out each and every scene for all the slow-motion,
lingering pause significance it's worth.  Characters spin in blissful
kisses on the dance floor for minutes at a time, serenaded by the droning
observations of their friends; interminable silences are punctuated by
someone else's equally interminable silence.  It's one thing to make a
movie about life's painfully uncomfortable moments.  It's another to make
that movie panifully uncomfortable for the people watching it.
     Things go from very bad to even worse in the final half hour, which
is dedicated almost exclusively to a he-said/she-said date rape scenario
involving testosterone-beast professional football player Mike (who
apparently didn't get the memo that the Raiders had moved back to
Oakland) and the flirtatious Sara.  The jerky flashbacks show wildly
different versions of the same event, as Cristofer strains to give the 
tale RASHOMON-like credibility.  Then, strangely, the incident becomes
less about exploring lack of communication between sexual partners than
about lecturing on the treacherous combination of alcohol and raging
libidos; you half-expect someone to step out of character and tell you
where you can find literature on helping friends avoid binge 
beer-goggling.  Both Mike and Sara get to stare at the floor pensively as
they try to figure out exactly what they really remember, every passing
second of the violent rape Sara recounts feeling more exploitative because
there's no reason for us to care about the people involved.
     The reason there's no particular reason for us to care is that these
characters aren't really people.  The ad campaign for BODY SHOTS touts it
as one of those "movies that define every decade," but screenwriter David
McKenna makes his decade-defining generalizations by making his characters
single-trait generic -- Shawn is sensitive, Emma is sensitive in a
slightly different way, Whitney has a vaguely Southern accent.  Only Ron
Livingston, as the crew's resident eccentric, gets enough unique
personality to make a comic impression (which he does admirably in the
film's few worthwhile scenes).  The monotonous talking-head asides provide
the only insight BODY SHOTS has to offer into its characters, and then
McKenna uses the time to blow the lid off the fact that -- gasp -- there's
a sexual double-standard between men and women.  With its marathon sex
scenes and graphically trite narration, BODY SHOTS generally feels like
porn with delusions of social commentary.  Ultimately, it's just there to
give you a ride on its jelly roll, but it won't give you nothin' from its
soul.

Author
Murali Krishnan
The narrative concept of humankind's reactions to its impending
annihilation is not original. Numerous stories have been written that
explore the compelling question of how people deal with a world that
is ending. During the Cold War, this question was especially poignant
because it was felt that such a scenario could actually play out. This
made it a relevant question to explore at that time. Today the
zeitgeist is more optimistic, and the idea has become more abstract,
but no less compelling.
The story immediately posits that the end of the world will occur at
midnight of that day, and it follows several different characters in
their various methods of coping with the tumult. It is implied that
the destruction cannot be avoided. As would be expected, there are a
multitude of ways in which people deal with the issue of impending
destruction. On the lowest level, there will be those who see no
recourse for their action, so they indulge in nihilistic destruction.
This is the least interesting dimension of human reaction, because it
is simply pandering to the basest elements. None of the main
characters take this approach.
The story is a composite of many characters and subplots, but the
primary character is apparently Patrick Wheeler (Don McKellar), a
young man not unfamiliar with loss. He indulges his parents by
attending a dinner with his family that is played as a holiday
reunion. It is a pathetic attempt to reawaken the warm memories of the
past, and Patrick is barely able to conceal his cynicism. The approach
of his parents is a melancholy resignation to their demise, which
perhaps is to be expected of those already in the later years of their
lives.
One subplot follows Craig (Callum Keith Rennie), a friend of Patrick's
whose final desire is to complete his collection. Another of Patrick's
acquaintances fulfills his life-long desire to perform his music
publicly. The president of the gas company takes it upon himself to
call each of his customers personally and thank them for their
patronage. This provides a common thread as his calls touch each of
the characters presented. Another subplot follows Sandra (Sandra Oh),
a young woman who has decided along with her husband that they will
kill each other at the final moment rather than passively allow
themselves to be taken.
The setup used in this story is often the kernel for a science fiction
or action narrative, by having the characters devise a plan for saving
themselves. This approach is dismissed by not even entertaining the
possibility that destruction can be avoided. The primary concern of
the film is its characters. It examines how each individual reacts
differently, and how the composite describes the human condition. The
feel of the film is like that of a scientific experiment where normal
characters have a disruptive influence injected into their existence,
and the viewers are observing their reactions in order to understand
them at a deeper level.
Highly recommended. The film clearly sets out to examine the specific
elements of its premise that deal with introspective human drama.
Although there may have been opportunities to explore many aspects of
the given scenario, the film limits itself to those dimensions that
are the most compelling

Author
Ron Small
Starring: Jerry O' Connell, Tara Reid, Amanda Peet, Ron Livingston, Brad Rowe,
Sean Patrick Flannery, Sybil Temchen, Emily Procter
Pre-Review Note: Seeing as the only concern of BODY SHOTS is "sex", I will be
forced to refer to that particular act innumerable times throughout the
duration of this review. Because of this, I will try to vary word descriptions
of "sex" (meaning if you are offended by pejorative terms, and\or your name is
Jerry Falwell, you are kindly invited to hit the X up on the left corner of
your screen), so if there happens to be a word you come across and cannot
comprehend, fret not, it's most likely just another way of referring to "sex".
I think we'd all agree that any word used incessantly becomes a bit monotonous
so I hope you appreciate my attempt to liven up what could potentially be a
very boring review. Though not as boring as the movie which makes Steve Forbes
flat tax plan seem as lively as watching a naked Mathew Mconaughy play the
bongos while high on god knows what. 
BODY SHOTS is a film so frightened of coitus that scenes of copulation are
filmed ominously, in the way you'd normally expect to see a violent attack.
It's about people who think about screwing, seek it out, and talk about it.
These are things we all do, sometimes. The characters in this film spend every
waking moment pondering the simplicities of sexual acts. Their lives center
around the next sexual encounter, but they seemed depressed. It's as if fucking
is all they have to look forward to after a busy workweek.
At its core BODY SHOTS is a message movie, the kind of thing I could picture
really progressive church groups showing to middle schoolers in order to turn
them off coition. Michael Cristoffer (who directed GIA, another film that
treated bumping uglies as if it where evil) is a moralist with nothing new to
say. His characters don't communicate anything of interest to each other, so
Cristoffer gives them an opportunity to let out their inner thoughts by
speaking directly into the camera. They voice simplistic platitudes like "I
like to come" or "sex without love equals violence". Huh? And yes that is as
complex as this movie's observations get. The characters are stupid and
shallow, with not one registering as anything more.
The plot concerns vapid over sexed twentysomethings on an all night hunt for
carnal pleasure, then the after math (the morning after) of such events. We
meet the characters as they speak directly to us, confiding in us with their
idiotic ruminations on intimacy. I would normally go into the characters and
the actors who play them, giving you the pros and cons, but for this film I
cannot. I'm not trying to be clever or witty, but I honestly hardly remember
anything that would set them apart from the others. With the exception of Trent
(played by Ron Livingston as a bargain basement Patrick Bateman), the rest fade
into each other-- a patchwork of fake breasts, defined abs, pearly white teeth,
and creamy, flawless skin. I vaguely recall Brad Rowe as the sensitive one,
only because his character gets the worst lines ("sex without love equals
violence").
In between all the confessionals, Cristoffer films everything like a headache
commercial, with blurry slo mos and dramatic head turning. The fact that this
director at one point won a Pulitzer Prize completely baffles me. This film is
made without one iota of intelligence or insight into the generation that its
tag line claims to be defining. If BODY SHOTS is meant to say that all
twentysometyhings are idiotic and f**k-obsessed, fine, I don't have any problem
with a film that tries to persuade me to think a certain way, but Cristoffer
only gives us one side. Additionally that one side isn't even entertaining; the
characters indulge in buggery without an ounce of sexiness. Or realism. One
sexual encounter takes place outside a club on a chain link fence between the
two most sensitive characters. They suddenly have vigorous intercourse with
each other for no apparent reason (other than that they both happen to be
standing next to each other…alas, if it could only be that easy…kidding of
course), then, not only isn't it erotic, it isn't real. It doesn't feel like an
authentic sexual encounter. Every f**k scene in this film (and there are many)
is treated in the same unsexy manner. BODY SHOTS makes fornication dirtier than
the most scummy porno film. It shows us none of the pleasure that should go
along with it, and most of all, it fails to show us why its characters love
making it so much if they seem to hate the act of actually doing it.
The resulting search for nookie (and you can take that cookie…) over one
night leaves us with several tedious plot lines to follow. The main concern is
much ado over a rape that may or may not have occurred. The film shows us two
separate versions of the possible rape (one where it is consensual the other
where it is not) and in both versions the young actress playing the possible
victim gets her shirt torn off. This is a topic that could be interestingly
explored if done intelligently, and if memory serves me I can't think of one
film that has done so, and yes I saw THE ACCUSED which may be one of the most
overrated movies of the 80's next to WALL STREET. Unfortunately nobody gives us
reason to care, not the writer, the director or the actors nearly all of whom
seem to have wandered off the set of a noxious 90210 spin off.
Paul Thomas Anderson approached BOOGIE NIGHTS in a manner similar to what
Cristoffer does here, though BOOGIE NIGHTS succeeded. It was similarly
moralistic, but it gave us two different viewpoints; it showed us how the
lifestyle of porn enticed its characters, and it showed us the possible
fall-out of such a decision. The characters in BOOGIE NIGHTS were as idiotic as
the characters are here, but Anderson seemed to care about them. He gave them
heart. Cristoffer gives them nothing but raging hormones. He preaches to us, by
using his characters to preach to us. This is not the way to get any message
across. Why not just direct a public service announcement on the perils of
hittin' skins? Cristofer kind of does that, though without an ounce of insight,
and with a helping of leering exploitation.
http://www.geocities.com/incongruity98   Reeling  (Ron Small)

Author
Chuck Dowling
Cast: Don McKellar, Sandra Oh, David Cronenberg, Genevičve Bujold, Tracy
Wright, Sarah Polley, Callum Keith Rennie 
Written and Directed by: Don McKellar 
Running Time: 96 minutes 
Well I'll be damned... the Canadians CAN make a good movie. 
The world is coming to an end.  We don't know why or how, but apparently
there is no way to stop it.  The world has had this information for
months, as most of the rioting and other assorted chaos has passed and
governments have shut down operations.  Yet for a handful of Toronto
citizens, life goes on.  They aren't going crazy or attacking people in
the streets.  Instead they are simply preparing themselves for the
end... some engaging in activities they've always wanted to do, some
gathering with family and friends, and others just seeking to be alone. 
These people's lives however all intersect during their final six hours. 
Writer-director-star Don McKellar has crafted a highly unique and
emotional film.  All of the main characters are compelling as they try
and do whatever it is they need to do on their last night on Earth. 
Craig (Callum Keith Rennie) tries to fulfill all his sexual fantasies, a
gas company employee (David Cronenberg) calls every customer letting
them know the gas will be flowing until the very end and thanks them for
their business, and Patrick (McKellar) just wants to be by himself but
isn't having much success.  Even minor characters keep popping up where
you least expect them to, tying everyone even closer.  
Things seemed a little hokey towards the beginning of the film, but
ultimately everything comes together nicely (although it's not a happy
film... some moments are understandably gut-wrenching).  The story is
enhanced by some unexpected humor and very realistic performances,
particularly from Sandra Oh, whose character is just trying to get home
to her husband before the end. 
I have absolutely no problem that the reason for the end of the world is
never given, nor does it bother me that the world is ending at exactly
12 midnight (in Toronto anyway).  But I do wonder why the sun never
sets.  Come midnight, the sun is still shining brightly.  Maybe the sun
is crashing into the earth... who knows.  Also, it's comforting to know
that in mankind's final moments on the planet, people will still gang up
on the street for the sheer purpose of pushing over a car or a bus
(that's not a shot at this film mind you... I know people are just
stupid and truly would be out in the street tipping over cars). 
Last Night is available on DVD from Universal Home Video.  It contains
the film in fullscreen format and includes the original theatrical
trailer.  [R]
Reviewed by Chuck Dowling - chuckd21@fdn.com
AOL Instant Messenger: FilmJax
The Jacksonville Film Journal - http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Michael Cristofer.
Cast: Amanda Peet, Sean Patrick Flanery, Tara Reid, Jerry O'Connell, Ron 
Livingston, Brad Rowe, Emily Proctor, Sybil Temchen.
1999 - 99 minutes
Rated R (for violence, profanity, sex-related talk, sex, nudity, and a rape).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, October 23, 1999.
"There are movies that define every decade," declares the official poster for 
Michael Cristofer's youthful look at sex and love in the '90s, "Body Shots." 
The marketing team at its studio, New Line Cinemas, sure got that right, 
because "Body Shots" is one of those "serious"-minded films about a group of 
self-absorbed twentysomethings--call it yet another entry in this decade's 
self-made genre of "Gen-X Whiners."
The movie opens with Rick (Sean Patrick Flanery) waking up in the bed of Jane 
(Amanda Peet). After a club night full of alcohol, they can't quite remember 
what went on, and then Rick asks if she has any Tylenol. They abruptly are 
disturbed by a knock on the door at 4:35 a.m., which is coming from Jane's 
friend, Sara (Tara Reid). Bleeding from the forehead and with a busted lip, 
she claims that Michael (Jerry O'Connell), a hotshot football player, raped 
her. Turning back the clock by about twenty hours, we meet all eight major 
characters, which also include stripper-by-night Whitney (Emily Proctor), 
lonely Emma (Sybil Temchen), straight-arrow Shawn (Brad Rowe), and dorky, 
kinky Trent (Ron Livingston), as they talk into the camera, 
pseudo-documentary style, about whatever is on their minds (read: sex, sex, 
and more sex). As night falls on their shallow lives in L.A., all eight 
arrive at a night club for some dancing, drinks, and fun, and each one ends 
up coming into sexual contact with another before the night is over. Midway 
through, the morning after comes around, and the picture quickly takes a 
sharp turn for the worst, as it turns into a sort of made-for-TV "message" 
movie on date rape, but with a hint of explicit sex for good measure.
For its opening half-hour, "Body Shots" was an enthralling, sexually frank 
film that got much of its interest from its inventive style, in which the 
characters talk to the camera in whatever setting they tend to be in, as if 
it is what is going on in their heads. The discussions on such topics as oral 
sex, love, and the importance of a meaningful relationship, seemed to be 
setting itself up for a meaningful motion picture that captured the realism 
of a certain spectrum of twentysomethings.
That's when things began to severely irritate me. The confessions to the 
camera suddenly became outrageously inane ("Sex without love equals 
violence," says Shawn in pure "Afterschool Special" mode), the plotting grew 
repetitive and too stylish for its own good, and the characters began to 
unveil themselves to be alarmingly shallow individuals who turn out not to 
hold any insight whatsoever into people of the so-called X and Y generations. 
That's when the matter of the rape arises, at around the 50-minute mark. Sara 
goes to the hospital to be treated, and presses charges on Michael. Through 
an annoying, pointless plot device that is akin to Kurosawa's "Rashomon," 
Michael tells his side of what happened between Sara and himself the night 
before, and flashbacks ensue. Then it's Sara's turn to tell the "truth," and 
we visually see what happened from her point-of-view. Before the trial even 
begins, Sara, Michael, and their six friends around them question if maybe 
their memories were foggy from being drunk. After all, Michael can't quite 
recall what happened, now that he thinks about it, and there was that one 
isolated incident from the past where Sara had a blackout from alcohol 
poisoning. This "He-Said/She Said" turn-of-events doesn't work for a second, 
since we as an audience know that alcohol was definitely part of the 
equation, and whatever did happen only occurred because they immaturely 
brought it upon themselves. Because of this, the resolution is an inevitable 
disappointment, and the pair of drug-out flashbacks completely 
inconsequential.
In the performance department, first-time feature film director Michael 
Cristofer (HBO's "Gia") has acquired a slew of promising and talented young 
Hollywood players who have got to be more intelligent than the vapid 
characters they inhabit. Faring most effectively are Tara Reid ("American 
Pie"), who handles a few difficult scenes with impressive aplomb; Brad Rowe 
("Billy's Hollywood Screen Kiss"), as the somewhat introverted one who 
nonetheless has a rough sexual encounter with Emma; and Sybil Temchen, as 
Emma, who plays the only one written with any sort of believability or care.
"Body Shots" would like--no, make that love--to stand as an important film 
for the '90s generation, but it makes so many fatal missteps along the way 
that, by the last twenty minutes, it was literally a struggle to watch the 
remainder of the film. Clumsy and self-important, "Body Shots" forces you to 
spend 99 minutes with a group of people you wouldn't be able to stand in 
real-life, much less on a movie screen in a theater. The pits.

Author
Christopher Null
     Again, Hollywood has taken creative marketing to new heights with
BODY SHOTS.  Judging by the trailers, the ads, even the tagline (`There
are movies that define every decade!'), one would be led to believe that
BODY SHOTS is an incisive drama/comedy about twentysomething
relationships, emphasis on the comedy.
     You know it from the start, when a battered Sara (Reid) comes
careening through the streets of L.A., obviously post-rape.  Nothing
starts a movie off quite like a rape aftermath, but in flashback, the
film starts to look up.  The next half hour tells us about the night
before, when four guys and four girls go to a downtown club, all looking
to hook up for the night.
     Some of them do, and some don't.  And one of these entanglements
ends up badly.  At first, Livingston alone provides comic relief as a
semi-lovable loser who shows up in golfing regalia and can't get in the
club.  But on The Day After, BODY SHOTS quickly degenerates into a Movie
of the Week that would play better on Lifetime, with a he said/she said
legal war that is never resolved.
     While BODY SHOTS has its moments, by and large it's a poor entry
into the genre.  Its `clever' photography and self-referential nonsense
gets old, quickly.  The speeches given directly to camera are silly and
unrealistic:  No one acts like this.  Even the title doesn't make
sense.  There are no body shots in the movie.  (The title was recently
changed from the trademark-challenged JELLO SHOTS, and there is no Jello
in the movie, either.)
     Eight Very Beautiful People acting ugly?  Count me out.  Check out
SWINGERS or GO, which are far better treatments of the same theme.
Director: Michael Cristofer
Producer: Harry Colomby, Jennifer Keohane
Writer: David McKenna
Starring: Sean Patrick Flanery, Jerry O'Connell, Amanda Peet, Tara Reid,
Ron Livingston, Emily Procter, Brad Rowe, Sybil Temchen
Christopher Null - null@filmcritic.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
The tagline to this film is "There are movies that define every decade..."
which in my opinion, refers to either THE BREAKFAST CLUB or WALL STREET from
the 80s, and yet unclear as to which movie from the 90s. FIGHT CLUB perhaps?
One thing IS for sure and that is the fact that BODY SHOTS isn't that film!
Creating this false sense of expectation sure isn't going to help this
film's success either. Wake up, fellas, execs don't decide which film
defines a decade...audiences do that!
PLOT:
Four single horny twenty-something guys prepare to go out to a nightclub in
order to hook up with four twenty-something single young horny females. They
drink, they meet, they dance and they f*ck. Some of the drinking, partying
and sex is cool and fun, and some of the drinking, partying and sex is not
cool and not fun. An accusation of date-rape is the center of the film's
second half.
CRITIQUE:
This film seemed to have two levels of entertainment. One part of the film
was about a bunch of guys and girls talking about sex like it was bubble
gum, while the second part of the film essentially turned into an ugly
date-rape situation, in which everyone is asked to figure out which half of
the "he said/she said" scenario they are more comfortable believing. Or then
again, as Roger Ebert mentioned in his review, this film is probably less
about date-rape than it is about alcoholism. I tend to agree. Everyone in
this film drinks...and I mean drinks! It's obvious by the end of this film
that alcohol played a large part in the night of every one of these "kids",
and that sex and alcohol could provide for a lethal combination. But does
all this make for an interesting movie? Not really. I thought the actors
were all okay, although not a one stood out of the pack. Actually, I take
that back.
Mr. Ron Livingston was the highlight of this film with his hip doofus
character sprinkling the movie with much needed humor from time to time. The
screenplay did also provide for some interesting insight into the different
perspectives on sex from both sides of the fence, with at least one
engaging, yet overlong, deliberation about blowjobs sure to keep most guys
interested for at least that little while. Other than that, most of the
characters were kinda boring, each with their particular "way of thinking",
and the direction of the film was needlessly over-stylized with several
slo-motion shots and views of the city feeling out of place in a
character-based story. The film also offered direct interaction with many of
the characters, as each one spoke to the camera every now and again. This
seemed like a good idea, but once again, the lack of charm or spark from
most of the actors, and the director's camera trickery, just seemed to take
away from anything which may have come from this addition. All in all, an
over-stylized TV Movie of the Week for those folks who actually don't enjoy
watching the classics like GO and SWINGERS over and over again. Luckily for
me...I am not one of those people. And if you're really in the mood for a
picture of rich, snooty kids who like to take drugs and f*ck the world,
check out LESS THAN ZERO...now there's a good movie!
PS: Note to studio. If you want to label a film as one that will "define a
decade", how about you make sure that all of the twenty-something characters
to which we're all supposed to be able to relate, don't drive Mercedes
Benz's, live in beach houses and have just signed $5Million contracts to
play for the Oakland Raiders. I'm sitting in the theatre in a Tee and
Bermudas with nachos running down my face, and somehow, I don't see myself
in the same boat as these rich brats. But I digress. Burp!
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
This film was originally titled JELLO SHOTS, but was forced to change its
moniker when the JELLO company threatened to sue. Considering the
transgressions that occur after most of the characters in this film drink
these "jello shots"- I can't say that I blame them. The film also went
through two other titles including LAST NIGHT and THE NIGHT BEFORE.
Strangely enough, the screenwriter of this film, David McKenna, is the same
fellow who wrote one of 1998's Best Pictures, AMERICAN HISTORY X starring Ed
Norton as a skinhead. This was only his second produced screenplay. His
third is entitled GET CARTER and is set to star Sylvester Stallone.
This is director Michael Cristofer's motion picture directing debut. He
previously wrote and directed the TV movie GIA starring Angelina Jolie. He
also wrote the screenplays for such films as THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK, THE
BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES and MR. JONES.
Actor Sean Patrick Flanery is a triathlete with a black belt in karate.
Jerry O'Connell's real name is Jeremiah O'Connell. He starred in his first
film, STAND BY ME, at the age of 11. After that film, Jerry went back to
school and did not become a full time actor until he graduated from college,
although he did appear in several things along the way.
Actress Tara Reid began her career on TV in such shows as "Saved by the
Bell: The New Class" and "Days of our Lives".
Actress Amanda Peet has also made her share of TV appearances including one
on "Seinfeld", in which she played a character named "Linette" in the
episode called "The Summer of George".

Author
Steve Rhodes
BODY SHOTS, directed by Michael Cristofer and written by David McKenna,
is perhaps the shallowest movie of the year.  Starring a bevy of buff
beauties, male and female, the film appears to pay them by the
obscenity.  Like a porn movie stripped of most of its images, the film
features characters who talk incessantly and obsessively about orgasms
and oral sex.
Some sex is acted out, but mainly the characters appear to enjoy talking
about sex more than doing it.  With so many ludicrous scenes, it's hard
to pick an example.  The one in the shower is  representative.  As guys
with rippling muscles shower, one talks on his cell phone and bathes at
the same time.  Screaming to his girlfriend, so all his buds can hear,
he uses foul language to describe his sexual intentions.
Before the first line in the movie is spoken, the director has one
character urinate on a closed toilet seat and another vomit.  Shortly
thereafter a girl comes in claiming she's been raped.  The operative
word here is "claimed," but we'll get to that later.  The movie proceeds
to flashback and work its way up to the alleged rape.
Starring Sean Patrick Flanery, Jerry O'Connell, Amanda Peet, Tara Reid,
Ron Livingston, Emily Procter, Brad Rowe and Sybil Temchen, the movie
features interchangeable actors and actresses.  They should be required
to wear numbers so we can tell them apart.  Only Livingston from OFFICE
SPACE manages to give his character any uniqueness.
Every scene in the film rings false.  One character, for example, who
has a desk among a sea of desks, plays a loud porn video on his office
PC.  Women talk about taking a class where an instructor teaches them
improved oral sex skills.  Another woman claims that oral sex isn't sex
and neither is sex in a foreign country with a stranger.
The dialog is so ridiculous that it might be laughably bad if the actors
would slow down long enough to let us enjoy its stupidity.  "So, are you
an aspiring actress?" a guy says in a come-on line to a gal he meets at
a noisy disco.  "You're a director?" she inquires.  "Right," he shoots
back.  "I'm available for sex," she quickly assures him.  Later at the
disco, another woman confesses, "Sometimes you don't want to be in
control.  Sometimes you want to lose control."
The movie reveals to men how women can tell a real gentleman from a
fake.  Real gentlemen order appetizers at restaurants.
It tries to be a message movie as well as a sexual titillation film.
"Sex without love equals violence," one guy repeats like it's his
mantra.  Actually, the characters don't think any deeper than their
sexual urges, which they share with us ad nauseam.
Eventually the hyperactive movie does get to the "rape."  Slowing to a
crawl, the story examines in laborious detail the two participants' view
of what happened.  Is it true, as the Oakland Raiders football star
claims, that it was just consensual sex?  Or is the blonde bombshell
telling the truth that it was date rape?  The movie argues that in such
situations the truth is not knowable.  The ending does at least bring
out some emotions from the cast, but it is shamelessly manipulative and
not credible.
BODY SHOTS runs 1:42.  It is rated R for strong sexual content including
graphic sex-related dialogue, language, violence and scenes of alcohol
abuse.  Think of it as NC-17 and don't let your teens go unless they are
older and mature.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
