Title
Review for Another Day in Paradise (1998)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   "Bonnie and Clyde" meets "Kids" in Larry Clark's second
tension-filled work which, like his widely acclaimed "Kids"
seems so realistic that it's almost cinema verite.  Clark
presents violence as it actually is: sudden, hard-hitting, brutal,
vicious.  There's nothing stylized about its ferocity and save
for one slo-mo scene of a teenage hoodlum entering the site
of a major heist, the whole account builds up steam almost
without letup.  "Another Day in Paradise," a title which is, of
course, ironic, features the inimitable James Woods as (what
else?) an off-the-wall, live-for-the-moment desperado who
seems to bask in the glories of living on the edge despite his
frequent roof-pounding, gut-wrenching expressions of
grievance.  This time around, instead of chasing vampires,
he pursues money and jewels and though he says "sorry"
before shooting one of his victims in the head, he appears to
have been born without the slightest appreciation of guilt.  
   As the charismatic "Uncle" Mel, though, he is not without
charm, a lighter side, a motormouth who takes a couple of
kids half his age under his wing and acts as mentor to them. 
"Another Day in Paradise" pairs James Woods with Melanie
Griffith, the latter in the role of his stylish, maternal girl friend
who is unable to have kids of her own and who assumes a
motherly role toward two youngsters who come into her life;
Bobbie (Vincent Kartheiser) and Rosie (Natasha Gregson
Wagner).
   The movie is a natural for director Clark who published the
book "Tulsa" in 1971, a tome made up of photos he took of
himself and some outlaw friends between the years 1962
and 1971.  After publishing four books and holding 50 one-
person exhibits at galleries like the Museum of Modern Art
and the Whitney, Clark directed the instant classic, "Kids" in
'95 which, like his current film, is done in a cinema verite
style--and is a look at aimless New York City teens focusing
on Telly, who deflowers virgins, and Jennie, who faces the
consequences of one encounter with Telly.  As with "Kids"
and "Tulsa," Clark is again nonjudgmental, simply
highlighting two teenagers who are like stray dogs, abused
since they were young who pair off and find comfort, even
love, in each other's arms.  
   Based on an unpublished prison manuscript by Eddie Little,
"Another Day in Paradise" opens on the two young people
making love, after which the hyperactive Bobbie runs off to
the site of his latest petty heist, a storehouse of vending
machines which he tears open to steal the quarters.
Severely injured by a sadistic security guard, he takes refuge
with the exciting uncle of a drug buddy, Mel (James Woods)
who patches him up with a shot of heroin and prepares him
for the big time.  Together with Sid (Melanie Griffith) and
Rosie (Natasha Gregson Wagner), the newly-charged
criminals execute robberies, one of which turns out
disastrous.  The real fun of the movie rests in the activities of
the foursome between jobs, and Clark is superb in capturing
the exhilaration the young people feel when they are treated
like royalty--taken on shopping sprees, plied with champagne,
and introduced to one of the mid-west's emporiums for blues. 
During these scenes you're likely to discount the shady side
and think of Sid and Mel as the sorts of parents you wish you
had. They're super cool, they show high regard for their
charges, they give them a sense of responsibility, however
perverted.  
   While Clark is not trying to lay a morality tale on us, he
does show the other side of the outlaw trade.  When Mel
turns from a fun guy to a somber, wrath-of-God malefactor,
the ambiance takes a turn away from the pleasure of the high
life to show the steep price that often must be paid.  While
Woods plays exactly to type--a male Judy Davis but far more
dangerous--he shows us that even when crime pays, the
criminal's lot is, on the whole, not a happy one.  
   The relatively unknown Vincent Kartheiser teams up
fortuitously with Natasha Gregson Wagner (the daughter of
Natalie Wood) providing gut-wrenching chemistry.  "Another
Day in Paradise" has witty dialogue for Woods, fine ensemble
acting by Griffith, Kartheiser and Wagner, and best of all a
relentless mood of anxiety and excitement.  During its first
half you agree with Rosie when she calls Bobbie "the best
thing that ever happened to me" and with Sid when she
names Mel "the best boyfriend I ever had."  Later on you
want to advise them to get out more often.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: The overly familiar story of a gang of criminals hitting
the road.  After initial success mistakes and internal tensions take
their toll.  The moral is, of course, that crime does not pay.  What
makes this one worthwhile is the fact that James Woods just sizzles.
Also starring Melanie Griffith.  Rating: 7 (0 to 10), low +2 (-4 to +4)
   - Larry Clark, director of KIDS directs a script by Christopher
     Landon and Stephen Chin, based on the book by Eddie Little.
   - There is little variation in James Woods's screen persona, but he
     does it so well.
   - Mel (James Woods), Sid (Melanie Griffith), Bobby (Vincent
     Kartheiser) and Rosie (Natasha Gregson Wagner).  Uncredited role
     for Lou Diamond Philips as Jules.
   - Bobby and Rosie are junkies.  Bobby supports them with smalltime
     crime like robbing cigarette machines.  When Bobby is almost
     killed Mel saves his life, then realizes he would be useful for an
     upcoming robbery.  Mel decides to mentor Bobby and Rosie.  He
     tells Bobby that a professional thief does not have risks.  He has
     everything planned out.
   - Melanie Griffith plays a likeable gun moll.
   - Echoes of THE ASPHALT JUNGLE and of THEY LIVE BY NIGHT, among
     others.
   - Opens with bloody robbery.  Some scenes are very, very violent.
   - Mel is dictatorial and gets angry fast.  Also can be winning.
   - Mel sets up drug deals with uneven results.
   - Early on the gang is successful and the times are good, but it
     cannot last, and it quickly becomes clear that this is not much of
     a life anyone would want.
   - Woods has a very powerful screen presence.
   - This sort of story is very familiar.  It has been done many times
     before.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
ANOTHER DAY IN PARADISE (director: Larry Clark; cast: James Woods (Mel),
Melanie Griffith (Sid), Vincent Kartheiser (Bobbie),  Natasha Wagner
(Rosie), James Otis (Reverend), Lou Diamond Phillips (Jules), Brent
Briscoe (Nazi drug dealer), 1998)
This is a story about two sleazy drug addicted couples: the older
couple, the criminal pros, represented by the middle-aged Mel (James
Woods) and Sid (Melanie Griffith); and, the younger couple, being broken
into the bigger crime game by the old pros, are the teenagers, Bobbie
(Vincent Kartheiser) and Rosie (Natasha Wagner, yes, she is the daughter
of Natalie Wood). These are not pleasant characters, they are sad and
funny; they are pathetic and desperate, but they are definetly not cute
or pleasant, and cannot even remotely be thought of as nice
people.Therefore what happens to them, is not a primary concern of ours,
except we might hope that there is a chance that the youngsters can be
saved from their messed up start to life. Violence will become the norm
for them from the film's gory opening till the end of their little
escapade into the world of drug trafficking and heists. This romp, down
this tawdry road, fits the acting style of  James Woods to a tee, it
seems as if he was born to play these over-the-top, quirky, offbeat
roles. And since, it shouldn't be that difficult to figure out, that
this film is glued to its brutally violent story line, directed by a
director who relishes sleaze, like some have pangs for Twinkies, you
should have a pretty good idea where this road movie is going to take
you (Clark's previous movie was in the same gritty cinema verite style,
KIDS). It is even suggested by Sid in her more comic than gangsterish
voice, as she plays with the younger couple, that we are in for a
"Bonnie and Clyde" thing, and she was right, to a certain extent. This
is the 90s version of that infamous couple's story, just needing a bit
more violence and some drugs to tell its tale.
The film opens with Bobbie leaving his girl's bed to break into some
warehouse to steal quarters from a vending machine, a security guard
catches him in the act and clubs the kid around, almost killing him, the
kid pulls a knife on him and slits his belly open. The next shot we see,
is of Mel hunched over the kid's bed, treating his life-threatening
wounds and shooting him up with some H. One of the kids watching this
performance even thinks Mel might be a doctor, but  Mel shoots back,
"That he's just a junkie and a good thief."  The next thing we know, is
that Mel comes on really friendly to the kid he treated, calling
himself  "Uncle Mel", inviting the kid and his girl into his crime
organization, telling him that he will teach him everything, he will
elevate him in criminology and become for him a junkie role model and a
sort of surrogate father figure. The kid very intelligently asks, why me
? And Mel tells him, he can't take his sister's kid into the
organization, (he's the one that brought Mel in to treat Bobbie) because
his sister would kill him for making her son a professional criminal,
and besides, he tells the kid, you're small, you're just right for the
heist job I have planned for a drug clinic, where you hide in a vent.
What comes next is a learning experience for the young couple, as the
kids are treated as if they were full blown junkie grown-ups by their
new surrogate parents, treated to champagne and new clothes and lots of
dope, but the initial thrill of being a hood begins to change for these
druggies, who basically would be content just to make love and sniff
some drugs, but are now heavily involved on a trip that is too much for
them to really handle. As some of their deals turn real violent. The one
with some Nazi type motorcycle drug dealers, starts off as comical in a
sick way, as we hear some bad ethnic jokes and watch the deal these two
gangs have turn rotten, marred by Bobbie and Mel nearly getting killed.
After that mishap, the kids want to get out, but "Uncle Mel" has other
plans, while Sid takes a maternal interest in the youngsters, sharing
Rosie's joy in her pregnancy, while trying to stop feeling sorry for
herself that she can't have children with Mel.
Realizing that this crime scene might not really be for them, the kids
ask to leave, but Mel says one more job, but this is a job that doesn't
smell right to Bobbie, as he is starting to regain some feelings about
who he is. The job Mel has in mind is set up by this flaming fag, Jules
(Lou Diamond Phillips), who the kid instantly detests. As expected, the
job turns violently wrong, and things get grave for the two couples.
This hard-assed film is based on a prison work by Eddie Little. It is
only fun to watch in between heists, when the couples interact, with Mel
leading the witless wit by being a charming teacher and an unrepentful
gangster, with no sense of guilt about killing someone or having any
reflections on his sordid life. Melanie is comical in her own right, as
the gun moll with a golden heart, who would do anything for her man, but
betray her "adopted" son, Bobbie. The kids are druggie misfits, who find
comfort in their love and deformities. Their humor comes in small
charges of underlying truths, as they tag along mainly for the ride into
big time crime, still too naive to comprehend their total situation.
The problem with the film, despite its authentically-acted
characterization, is what can you make out of it that makes sense.
Fortunately, we are given one glimmer of hope in Bobbie, of all people,
who is last seen running through the cornfields with a wad of money on
him, enough to dope himself up for awhile or for him to get his act
together and make something of himself. From what we can gather, after
getting a full dose of him in the film, we can only surmise that the kid
had better get himself straightened out, because a life of crime is not
something that he has a natural affinity for. Since the film can't
possibly give us much to say about Bobbie other than conveying he is the
only one of the four characters who might have a chance of surviving and
living to be sixty, we can only hope that this kid with the angelic
face, can somehow make it on his own.
I recently saw James Woods on the Charlie Rose PBS show, where he talked
about his love for this film and belief in it, praising its
independently directed efforts and sort of castigating the movie
industry (Whenever I hear the term "movie industry", I can only think in
terms of business not art) for not promoting this film and others like
it that are honest efforts, refusing to make formula type of commercial
films. I can only concur with him, just wishing that an independent film
doesn't necessarily have to be youth orientated or about drugs or
violence or sex to sell itself. There are so many other themes out there
that have not been so thoroughly explored as these themes have been, and
therefore for me to really get on the bandwagon of a film such as this,
I just want to see something different already. I am inundated up to my
tired eyeballs watching films with the same themes, differing only in
the nuances and styles of their story, so that their originality comes
intermeshed with one another, causing me to sometimes mistake one film
for another. And I think, that is the most critical thing that I can say
about this often funny, mostly bleak, derivative film, that was credibly
but not compellingly acted, in reality, leaving no visual impact on me,
it was too much like feeding on junk food and then going home and
realizing that you were not eating a healthy meal and, besides, the
enjoyment of it wasn't that great to begin with.
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
James Woods, perhaps Hollywood's best relief pitcher, saves yet another
otherwise mediocre movie in ANOTHER DAY IN PARADISE.  With his
mesmerizing blend of incendiary emotions and fascinating charisma, Woods
adds a dazzling spark of life to any project he undertakes.
Director Larry Clark, whose first movie was the highly controversial
KIDS, directs his second, ANOTHER DAY IN PARADISE, as an updated and
less romanticized road picture a la BONNIE AND CLYDE.  With large doses
of realistic gore and with one heroin induced high after another, the
film likes to push the cinematic envelope as far as possible while
avoiding the dreaded NC-17 rating, which it probably deserves.
Vincent Kartheiser plays a drug addict and lowlife hood named Bobbie.
When we first meet Bobbie, he is high on speed.  In a rage, he is
cracking open vending machines with a big screwdriver, which, when he is
caught, he uses to impale the guard through the heart.
As Bobbie's girlfriend, Rosie, Natasha Gregson Wagner spends most of the
movie whining and cooing and asking him to get high with her and come to
bed.  Wagner, who has the most underwritten role, does little visible
acting.
After the vending machine debacle, "Uncle" Mel (James Woods) comes to
administer some heroin to Bobbie to help him with his sore ribs and
other ailments.  In return, he proposes that Bobbie join him in a life
of big-time crime.
Mel owns a big, shiny black Cadillac, the land yacht of choice from the
time when the story is set, the early 1970s.  A proud member of the
criminal fast lane, Mel thinks he is invincible and, hence, has much to
teach up-and-coming crooks like Bobbie.
Melanie Griffith plays Mel's girlfriend, Sid, whose heavy makeup and
expensive but tacky clothes still don't hide the thick aging lines in
her face.  Besides wanting to look a decade younger than her age, Sid
pines for a baby.  Mel, of course, being a serious, career professional,
pooh-poohs Sid's desire for family bliss.
Most of the movie has these two Bonnie and Clyde couples -- the veterans
and the apprentices -- engaging in a variety of crimes.  Almost like
commercial breaks, we cut to episodes of them shooting up heroin outside
of and during work hours.  If heroin were legal, these might be confused
with paid product placements.
The predictable script by Stephen Chin and Christopher B. Landon, based
on the book by Eddie Little, telegraphs most of its punches.  If a job
looks too easy, you can be sure it will go awry and in the obvious way.
The enjoyment of the picture comes back to James Woods's compelling
acting.  In one delicious scene, Mel sells drugs to two California
"surfer dudes," who try to bargain down the price.  Bad idea.  Drawing
two six-guns, Western-style from their hidden place between the sofa
cushions, he almost scares the kids to death.  Bullets would have been
superfluous.
ANOTHER DAY IN PARADISE skirts various movie genres (including crime
drama, comedy, character study and drug abuse) without ever developing
any of them with enough depth to allow them to gel.  What we are left
with is another wonderful performance by James Woods and little more.
ANOTHER DAY IN PARADISE runs 1:39.  It is rated R for pervasive heroin
and other drug abuse, strong violence, profanity, sex, and nudity and
would be questionable for anyone less than college age.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Matt Prigge
Writers: Christopher B. Landon and Stephen Chin (based on the novel by 
Eddie Little)
Starring: James Woods, Melanie Griffith, Vincent Kartheiser, Natasha 
Gregson Wagner, James Otis, Paul Hipp, Brent Briscoe, Lou Diamond 
Phillips
"Another Day in Paradise" is without a doubt a major improvement over 
Larry Clark's previous film, "Kids." But, then again, most anything 
could be an improvement over that annoyingly condescending and naive 
"message movie." One thing that did strike me as great about both of 
these films, though, and maybe the one major assett Clark has as a 
filmmaker, is his photography. It's gritty and painfully realistic. 
"Kids," for all the crap that it was, was at least well-shot, and it'd 
be easy that, if you didn't recognize some of the actors in later films 
(like Chloe Seveigny - the other major redeeming thing about that movie, 
by the way) or are stupid enough to think that a filmmaker could 
actually capture kids like this via cinema verite, you'd think it is 
actually cinema verite after all.
The opening shot of "Another Day in Paradise" is especially nice. It's 
grainy with low-lighting and a lack of edits that is refreshing from a 
lot of film, and it has a non-judgmental and observant serenity that was 
lacking sorely from that other movie (as it shall henceforth be named, 
at least in the confines of this review). The fact that it's just of one 
of our main characters getting up out of bed is nicer. And with a 
wonderful soul song playing on the soundtrack, this film was off to a 
good start for me. No pretentious message-making. Hopefully no silly 
excuse for a plot. Just looking at these people and allowing them to 
live, for Christ's sake. Even when this character, a guy in his late 
teens named Bobby (Vincent Kartheiser), put his clothes on, hid a knife 
in his pants, and robbed a couple vending machines, only to be attacked 
by a guard, Clark thankfully doesn't become judgemental.
The fight between he and the guard has a marvelous immediacy, with 
sloppy camera movements, and idiosyncratic touches by the characters. 
The guard wails on him real good, causing blood to pour from his mouth 
and all over, but Bobby manages to stick his knife in him, disabling 
him, and trying to run away with broken bones, desperately trying to 
hold onto the bag filled with quarters. The opening of that other movie, 
though is like this: the lead guy convinces a girl to sleep with him, 
but it has such a forced, staged, and worst of all, condescending feel 
that it's disengaging. There, Clark was trying to force something down 
the audience's throat, trying to stir waves instead of being true to his 
characters. Here, it's as if he learned something. We know what Bobby's 
doing is wrong, but it's not played out that way. This is, after all, 
how Bobby survives in life.
So far, so good, right? With or without the ridiculously condescending 
title (Funny. It wouldn't be like that for any other director, would 
it?), I was expecting a film that was as good as these opening moments. 
But soon a plot is introduced, and the potentiality of expanding on the 
characters and deepening them is abandoned for a hackney plot about 
low-level thieving, that, I think, is supposed to be a testament to how 
parents' behavior passes on to their children. A couple more characters 
are introduced: Rosie (Natasha Gregson Wagner), Bobby's coke-snorting 
girlfriend; and Uncle Mel (James Woods), a middle-aged thief/drug addict 
who at first heals Bobby's wounds, then takes him under his wing for a 
series of planned low-level robberies and drug deals. Bobby quickly 
agrees, and they all hop into a car with Mel's long-time girlfriend, Sid 
(Melanie Griffith). They party a bit. Then they rob a drug store, 
planning to sell the dope to others. Things go awry. As soon as they 
feel like a close-knit family, they all fall apart. Ho hum. Clark's 
opening of weird realism is instead traded in for a cliche-ridden plot, 
and characters who are either one-dimensional or never even bothered 
with.
For instance, the relationship between Mel and Sid is somewhat 
interesting, with a boring beginning and later hints of a pot boiling 
over, but there's very little interest in the relationship of Bobby and 
Rosie. In fact, only one scene between them is at all very good, and 
that's their final one, a scene that seems so improvisational that it's 
like one huge breath of air. Everything is pretty much saved for the 
end, with Sid finally gaining some complexity, as minute as it is, but 
with Bobby switching from admiration for Mel to contempt. But none of 
this feels real, at least not as real as Clark is capable of showing. 
His direction is right, full of daring realism, but the screenplay 
nearly ignores the human element, and it plays like a freakish 
collaboration between neo-realism and cliched robbers story, like Elmore 
Leonard without the wit or insight. Even Clark makes a few mistakes: a 
would-be harrowing shootout in a motel (featuring Brent Briscoe, who's 
all about shootouts this year, what with "A Simple Plan") feels fake and 
totally un-Clark-like (I can't believe he included such an 
audience-pleasing shot of Griffith with a shotgun underneath a bed, 
leveling an assailant a la Albert Finney in "Miller's Crossing").
The soul soundtrack is a nice touch, though: it's like it's filling in 
the emotions of the characters, and the pain that they are afraid to 
show (would work better if the characters were more complex to begin 
with). Only in one instance does the music feel wrong: in a later scene 
of such emotional intensity, what is best needed is just the sounds of 
human pain and the ambiance of the room. No sad music. Just crying and 
despearate pleading. And it's especially sad because it could have been 
the one scene that really deepens the character and shows his true 
emotions (the fact that it's ruined by something that is so often one of 
the best aspects of the movie is ironic, eh?).
The acting, for the most part, is mediocre, especially Kartheiser as the 
one-note Bobby, who's only endearing in one section of the film, and 
Wagner, who once again, is annoying enough to show that she's no Natalie 
Wood. Or even a Robert Wagner, for that matter. Griffith, though, is 
actually good. Every now and then the woman pulls off a performance 
which shows off the good aspects of her talent (remember, we all liked 
her in "Working Girl," didn't we?), and maybe with at least acceptable 
turns in "Celebrity" and "Lolita," she may have a great performance in 
her. And Lou Diamond Philips has a funny, uncredited role as a 
flamboyantly gay criminal mastermind.
But if anyone makes this movie even somewhat good, it's James Woods, who 
infuses the film with so much energy and vitality that he almost 
single-handedly makes it work by sheer force of will. Although hampered 
with several ridiculously cliched lines, he manages to make them as 
unpainful to listen to as possible, and brings depth to his character 
that the screenplay doesn't manage to add. Beaten down by life but 
furiously trying to find the holy grail of criminals, the last big 
score, he's the symbol of down by law tragedy. Even his more 
over-the-top moments seem genuine. Brilliant guy, that Woods. There were 
other things I admired, as well. I liked some of the more strange and 
quirky foibles and moments it had, like how Rosie does coke because 
she's afraid of needles; how the gun dealer was a seriously good 
Christian, who preached the word of god as he sold his weapons; and the 
excitement with which Woods enters every single heist that you just know 
he'll never make it big. It's the criminal tragedy...almost.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
