Title
Review for Stagecoach (1939)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
"Stagecoach" is an outstanding early Western, directed by
John Ford and featuring John Wayne, who was escaping from
an endless series of "B" Westerns.  While there is plenty
of drama, the characters are diverse and well-defined,
and their relationship is the heart of the film.
The plot has a stagecoach that must make it across a
vast prarie dominated by hostile indians.  The coach is
loaded with passengers of various social classes, who have
to get along with each other in tight and tense quarters.
John Wayne plays an escaped prisoner seeking revenge
on the man who killed his father and brother.  Claire Trevor
is an apparent prostitute, and is shunned by the other 
passengers.  John Carradine is a notorious gambler who
is risking his life to serve as escort for proud Louise Platt,
who is travelling to meet her officer husband.  There is
also an alcoholic doctor (Thomas Mitchell, who won 
Best Supporting Actor), a hapless liquor salesman, and an 
aging banker who is skipping town with the embezzled deposits.  
Almost forgot comic relief Andy Devine, whose trademark of 
talking off key led to a long and successful career.  The 
doctor and salesman have an entertaining friendship, with 
the doctor guzzling the "samples" despite the salesman's 
wimpy complaints. The poor salesman is also constantly mistaken 
for a reverend, and no one can get his name right.
It is interesting that the married Platt avoids Trevor, 
but basks in the attention given to her by gambler Carradine.
The moral of the film is that you cannot judge a person's
character by their social position.  Wayne, Trevor,
Carradine and the doctor all come through at the right time.
Meanwhile, the honorable bank president is actually
an ill-tempered crook.
One obvious weakness of the film is a needless musical 
number.  Mexicans are referred to as lazy and portrayed 
as horse thieves, while the indians are savage marauders.
"Stagecoach" was probably the best Western movie ever at
the time of its release, although subsequent films such
as "Red River" (1948) have surpassed it.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
