Title
Review for Earth (1998)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Sridhar Prasad
EARTH
A film by Deepa Mehta
Starring: Aamir Khan, Nandita Das, and Rahul Khanna
Written by Deepa Mehta
Based on the book "Cracking India" by Bapsi Sidhwa
In Hindi, Urdu, Parsi, and Punjabi, with English subtitles
    Early on in Deepa Mehta's fourth feature film "Earth", the viewer
quickly gets a sense of the dichotomy between the serious and the humorous,
and the disastrous complications that the combination of the two can have
when a little child is listening to a discussion about the partition of
India, controlled by the British Empire, into two separate nations, India,
dominated by Hindus, and Pakistan, dominated by Muslims.  There is a quiet
sense of foreboding within any historical film about what will happen next,
and "Earth" is no exception.  History cannot be changed with an event as
catastrophic as the partition of India, where millions of people died in the
greatest migration of people in history.
    Mehta cannot ignore that, yet she makes a curious decision that provides
mixed results in making her narrator a naďve young child named Lenny (Maia
Sethna).  Lenny's Hindu nanny Shanta (Das) takes Lenny around the streets of
Lahore before partition.  They become part of a group of friends, who
include Hasan the Muslim masseur (Khanna), Sher Singh the Sikh (Gulshan
Grover), Muslim Imam Din (Khalbushan Khalbanda), and Muslim Dil Nawaz
(Khan), the Ice Candy Man.  These group of friends endlessly debate religion
and politics along with the effects that partition will have on that area.
    During the course of the film, we find that most of this group is trying
to pursue Shanta, the main suitors being Dil Nawaz and Hasan.  We also see
all of this through the eyes of a child who is losing her best friend to one
of these men.  This story is set against the backdrop of an India about to
split into two pieces, both of which will be forever damned into hatred.
Both suitors are initially peace loving, rational people who urge their
friends to stick together despite the religious turmoil that is boiling in
Lahore, the setting of the story (and the present day capital of Pakistan).
We see the love between Hasan and Shanta bloom, but the story takes a sharp
turn into the surreal when Dil Nawaz, played by the loveable, affable Indian
superstar Aamir Khan, finds that his sisters have been slaughtered, along
with hundreds of other Muslims, on a train from India to Pakistan.
    It is here that the narrative turns into the serious tragedy that the
story is fated to have.  Certainly, Lenny plays a part in this.  She crudely
asks Dil Nawaz if he saw his sisters in the train dead, not realizing the
power of her words.  She is unable to see his transition into a cold,
heartless man who is filled with hate and revenge.  She is still the naďve
young girl, stuck in a world which is increasingly violent.  Mehta makes her
greatest claim for peace through the eyes of this young girl who is fated to
be shattered by the end of this story.
    After partition and independence, riots and violence explodes throughout
Lahore, and Mehta is unflinching in showing the sheer totality of
destruction that religion and nationalism can have.  The portrait of the
world becomes bleak and depressing because modern day viewers know that the
situation never goes back to normal: it is still bleak and depressing.
    Mehta's filmmaking is sometimes shaky, and her pacing is uneven, but her
greatest power is to let the actors do their own jobs.  The film works
mostly because of two mammoth performances.  As Shanta, Das is superb,
showing the love she feels for Hasan, the affection for Dil Nawaz, and the
incredulousness of a bystander whose beloved city is being destroyed.  The
true revelation, however, is Khan, who is absolutely astonishing.  He
cements his reputation as one of India's greatest actors with his brutally
honest performance of a young man who is kind, generous, and affable, but
also a man who is forced into a life of rage and revenge.  Khan is not the
main character in the story, but he is an engaging, fiercely dominating
screen presence, overshadowing everyone else on screen and becoming, in
essence, the face of hate.  Khan is both engaging, funny, romantic,
vengeful, and cold all within the same movie, and his transition is nothing
but genius.  Mehta's greatest accomplishment is personalizing hate into the
face of Khan, and the effect is devastating.
    Former MTV VJ Khanna is good as Hasan, but is mostly a bystander and has
mostly a static job.  He does well with it, however, and makes a promising
debut as an actor.  The supporting performances are uniformly outstanding,
highlighting a unique cast which is supremely talented in bringing this
story to screen.  Mehta has a superb talent for shooting her films, and this
is no exception: she paints beautiful landscapes of Lahore, with gorgeous
renderings of 1947.  The other critical component for success is the superb
score by A.R. Rahman, India's foremost music composer, who writes a gorgeous
and searing score, all combining for a flawed but ultimately stunning film
that sears at the soul long after the film is over.  "Earth" is not a
perfect film, but it is a great one, and it deserves to be seen, recognized,
and mulled over for years to come.  This is a terrific accomplishment.

Author
David Sunga
Written by: Deepa Mehta, based on the book CRACKING INDIA by Bapsi Sidhwa
Starring: Maaia Sethna, Nandita Das, Aamir Khan, Rahul Khanna
Synopsis: 
EARTH is a coming of age story and a love story set in 1947, in India, just
as the British colonialists are about to pull out and divide the greater
territory of India into mostly Muslim Pakistan and mostly Hindu India. The
story is seen through the eyes of Lenny (Maaia Sethna), a pampered, 8-year
old rich girl who initially has no idea what is happening. Lenny follows
around her beautiful nanny Shanta (Nandita Das), who is being wooed by a
group of male friends and suitors of differing religions and ethnicities,
since their city is initially a multicultural mosaic of Hindus, Muslims,
Parsees, and Sikhs. 
The upcoming partition of the territory gives rise to a creeping ethnic
tension, and soon the good-natured ribbing of the past gives way to
overpowering forces of chaos and strife. Through it all, Lenny sticks by
Shanta, who comes to symbolize colonial India itself: torn by competing
lovers and visions, lusted after by good men and evil men alike. 
Opinion:
You've seen epic-type love stories: LAST OF THE MOHICANS; TITANIC; WEST
SIDE STORY; et cetera. EARTH is one of the better ones. On the minus side,
the deliberate plate-breaking scene seems a little precocious for an
8-year-old kid (to be metaphorically pondering separatist movements), and
maybe 10 minutes of extra scenery can be edited. But there are a heck of a
lot more positives. 
Canadian/Indian director Deepa Mehta does a brilliant job resurrecting the
look and the inflamed passions of 1947. EARTH is visually spectacular and
haunting, with good music, scenery and acting. Its themes of true love,
chaos, and racial strife resonate as strongly today in 1999 as they do in
the movie setting of 50 years ago. EARTH the kind of movie you see, think
about, and see again, because it's an excellent love story and because
there are no easy answers.
One theme of EARTH is the idea of multiculturalism as a personal, moral
decision. As an example, these days it's considered okay to encourage
people to prepare for high tech culture: i.e. to study English, math, and
computers, and get rewarded with big money scholarships and high-paying
jobs. There are people who prefer alternate culture in the form of low tech
lifestyles and hobbies, but it's unethical to persecute them. We no longer
stomp to their doors carrying torches and hatchets, to hustle them to
draconian internment camps and relocation centers, imprison their leaders
for "reeducation," torture their spokesmen, rape their women, burn or
confiscate their homes, or declare them enemies of national unity until
they conform to high tech culture. 1947 or 1999, no matter what country we
live in or how it is partitioned, we all have a moral choice whether to
live together and actively encourage common culture and standards yet
tolerate multiculture (majority rule, minority rights); or, on the other
hand, to create a common culture through the ruthless and deliberate
extermination of rival culture on our turf, i.e. through ethnic cleansing,
genocide, intimidation, and repression. 
Does passionate, individual true love conquer all, or do big, epic forces
get in the way? See the movie. Then get the video and watch it back to back
with SAVING PRIVATE RYAN. Powerful film, recalling a powerful and relevant
era enable us to openly discuss human nature and hopefully avoid repeating
mistakes of the past.
Copyright Š 1999 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Greg King
The second film in Indian director Deepa Mehta's elements
trilogy, the powerful drama Earth follows her widely acclaimed Fire.
Based on Bapsi Sidhwa's semi-autobiographical novel Cracking India,
this powerful drama is set against the background of the partition of
India in 1947, when 250 years of British rule was cast aside amid
terrible bloodshed.  Long-standing friendships were also cast aside.
Brutal atrocities, inspired by fanatics on either side of the
religious divide, were committed.
The film largely unfolds from the perspective of eleven year
old Lenny (newcomer Maia Sethna), crippled with childhood polio and
raised in Lahore by her affluent, supposedly neutral parents.  Lenny
nonetheless watches as her family is gradually affected by the British
decision to pull out of India, and her friends are destroyed by the
spreading tide of senseless violence and religious hatred.  Lenny's
nanny is Shanta (Nandita Das), a beautiful young Hindu woman who moves
easily amongst her friends of different religious persuasions.
Earth initially unfolds at a leisurely pace, although the
tension surrounding the upcoming partition is palpable in the
conversations in the marketplace and in Lenny's home.  Earth is a
story of innocence lost, but it's also a story of sweeping political
and historical significance.  Its powerful themes of religious
intolerance and senseless violence are still quite relevant today,
especially given recent events in central Europe.
Earth is a powerful enough drama as it is, but the always
controversial Mehta also manages to work in a love affair between a
Hindu and a Muslim which further inflames the tension of this
tumultuous time, and leads to the film's devastating climax.  Given
the subject matter, Mehta directs with remarkable restraint, which
makes some of the atrocities even more horrible.
However, Mehta also beautifully captures the colour, the
passion, the music and rich culture of India that was partially
destroyed.  Giles Nuttgens' cinematography is rich and beautiful,
while A R Rahman's evocative and haunting music further enriches the
film.
Indian cinema normally comprises largely of vapid musicals and
banal comedies, and hard hitting and politically sensitive dramas such
as Earth are indeed rare.

Author
Atul Khare
It is impossible to review Earth without giving some background into
the events that precipitated one of the worst holocausts that mankind
has seen. It was 1947, and Britain, ravaged by World War II was faced
with the unimaginable: The sun was finally setting on the empire, and
the new labour prime minister, Atlee, had decided to relinquish the
treasured Jewel in the Crown, India. Lord Mountbatten, the last Viceroy
to India, was assigned the task of overseeing this onerous task. It was
decided that the British raj would be vivisected into two separate
entities along religious lines: India and Pakistan and what resulted
was one of the largest migrations that history has witnessed. Twelve
million  Hindus, Sikhs and Moslems crossed the borders of the
northwestern part of the Indian subcontinent, and an estimated one
million lost their lives in the massacre that ensued.
Deepa Mehta's powerful new film, Earth (Hindi / Urdu with English
subtitles), is the second installment of a trilogy, the previous one
being the acclaimed Fire. The movie is based on the novel "Cracking
India" by Bapsi Sidhwa, and is set in Lahore in late 1947. It is
narrated mainly from the viewpoint of its eight year old protagonist,
Lenny, played by newcomer, Maia Sethna. Lenny's parents are Pharsees --
a fire worshipping community that traces its origins to Persia -- and
are therefore "neutral", in sense that they do not belong to the either
of the three communities involved in the conflict. Lenny's Hindu Ayah
(nanny) Shanta, played by the duskily beautiful Nandita Das, has
suitors from all communities, notably, Ice Candy Wala (ice candy man)
Dil Nawaz, played by Bollywood matinee idol Aamir Khan, and Molish Man
(the masseur) Hasan,  played by newcomer Rahul Khanna.
The fact that the three communities existed in an atmosphere of
cordial brotherhood is well captured by the depiction of the kite
flying spring festival. Hindus, Sikhs, and Muslims, intermingle with
one another and their relationships are so cordial that they even makes
jokes about dietary choices.
However, when the partition is announced,  the same people who had
coexisted in a peaceful brotherhood for centuries now realize the
prospect of usurping each other's land and property in the name of
religion. The mutual mistrust that had been festering below the surface
only adds fuel to the fire, and frenzied mobs from all communities
engage in acts of unspeakable savagery.  In one of the best and most
harrowing scenes in the film, an anxious crowd awaits a belated train
of Moslem refugees from Gurdaspur on the Indian side of the border. A
pall of gloom falls as the train ominously chugs into the station,
and...
Reprisals follow,  terror grips the region, and a mass exodus -- Hindus
and Sikhs to India and Moslems to Pakistan begins. Others, who have no
choice decide to convert to a different religion, or face the
inevitable.
We watch in horror as the ten year old daughter of a sweeper is married
off to an old dwarf to convert the family to Christianity. All this in
an atmosphere of gaiety replete with song and dance, and as a character
in the film comments, "Fear makes all of us to abandon reason". Another
character converts to Islam to save himself, and in one of the most
excruciating scenes in the film, is forced to show "proof" of his
religious identity by a mob baying for blood.
The cast in earth is uniformly good, and Nandita Das and Maia Sethna
are outstanding in their roles.  IMO, it a must see film for anyone
interested in the history of the Indian subcontinent, but be warned
that it isn't an easy movie to watch,  and the ending is devastating.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Indian writer/director Deepa Mehta, as she showed in her previous movie
(FIRE), knows how to construct a film with great visual panache.  Her
downfall is that her stories and her actors remain at the level of soap
operas -- lovely to look at but lacking much substance.
EARTH, her latest film, is set in 1947 against the backdrop of the end
of the British Empire on the Indian subcontinent.  As the story opens,
young adult friends are smiling, laughing and joking with one another.
This will soon end as the various factions (Hindus, Muslims and Sikhs)
begin to fight turf battles over the land.
Told from the eyes of an eight-year-old Parsee girl nicknamed Lenny-baby
(Maaia Sethna), the story begins with her nanny, Shanta (Nandita Das),
flirting with her two boyfriends, Dil Navaz (Aamir Khan) and Hasan
(Rahul Khanna).
It is a happy time.  Typical of the fluffy dialog is a gorgeous scene
during a spring festival as colorful kites dot the heavens.  "Treat it
like a lover," Hasan tells Shanta, his arms around her as he guides her
kite string with his strong, masculine hands.  "Woo it.  When it acts
difficult, let it go."
The tranquility of the movie's first half dissolves into civil unrest in
the second half.  Most of the action consists of mobs storming up and
down streets as they shout insults and slogans.  The violence, which
happens mainly off-screen, is described by witnesses and victims.  One
boy, who hid under naked bodies, says that when he last saw his mother,
she was nude and hung by her hair to a ceiling fan.
Mehta's downfall is that she continues to be more of a visual stylist
than a story teller.  Most scenes are handsome, but few contain much
significant content.  The film's beauty ends up working against itself
as the people become cartoons in something like a children's story of an
historical event.  When bad things happen, they seem distant and unreal
so that the events pack little emotional wallop.
EARTH runs 1:44.  The film is in English as well as Hindi, Urdu, Parsee
and Punjabi with English subtitles.  It is not rated but might be PG-13
for language and violence.  It would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

EARTH (director/writer: Deepa Mehta; screenwriter: adapted from Bapsi
Sidhwa's semi-autobiographical novel "Cracking India"; cinematographer:
Giles Nuttgens; editor: Barry Farrell; cast: Nandita Das (Shanta ),
Aamir Khan (Dil Navaz), Rahul Khanna (Hasan), Maia Sethna (Lenny-Baby
Sethna), Kitu Gidwani (Bunty Sethna), Kulbushan Kharbanda (Imam Din),
Gulshan Grover (Singh), Arif Zakari (Rustom Sethna), Pavan Malhotra
(Butcher), Raghubir Yadav (Hariya/ Himmat Ali), 1998-India/Can.)
For Ms. Deepa Mehta -- Fire is the first film of her trilogy on the
elements, this her second, and Water, to be filmed later, will be her
third. She is the India-born, now living in Canada, director of this
sweeping panoramic film about the Partition of India in 1947, which
resulted in the greatest migration of people ever, 12 million, plus the
slaughter of one million on all sides as a result of the conflict. The
Partition was decided unilaterally by the British- with India, whose
majority is Hindus, and Pakistan, whose majority is Muslims, becoming
separate countries. It is seen through the naive eyes of a crippled
(polio-afflicted) 8-year-old girl, Lenny-Baby (Maia), living in Lahore,
who represents the book's author, Bapsi Sidhwa, as a child.
She hears the arguments over the partition in her house over dinner, as
an arrogant British official gets into a fight over how India will miss
the British who kept all the different religions from killing each
other, as he argues with a fanatical Sikh (a religion which combines
tenets of both Hinduism and Islam). Then the ominous signs of the
near-future come up again, when Lenny-Baby is in the park (Queens
Gardens) where a multireligious group of Shanta's friends meet daily and
discuss the current issues. The group of friends, include Hasan the
Muslim masseur (Khanna), Sher Singh the Sikh (Gulshan Grover), Muslim
Imam Din (Khalbushan Khalbanda), and Muslim Dil Nawaz (Khan), the Ice
Candy Man.Their discussions about independence and British withdrawal
from the region, brings about a growing tension among them, as Shanta,
who is apolitical, wishes that they do not discuss their heated
differences when she is present.
The film offers a powerful history lesson of how religion is used as an
excuse to grab land and vent violence against another people in the name
of nationalism, as each side got trapped in the war fever, with Muslim
against Hindu-Sikh, with each side guilty of massacring, kidnapping, and
raping each other. The hope of India remaining peaceful is viewed best
through the eyes of a Parsee family, the upper-class madame of the
house, the gentle Bunty (Kitu), and her practical-minded husband, Rustom
(Arif), and their precocious daughter Lenny, as the family tries to
bring all sides together. Lenny's nanny is the warmly pretty Hindu girl,
Shanta (Nandita Das), who has attracted all the men in her group, but is
being actively pursued by two handsome Muslim young men, Hasan, an
inventor of a product made from fish oil that can grow hair on bald
people, and Dil Navaz, someone who is a voice of reason in the Muslim
community. Lenny-Baby tags along with Shanta, whom she considers to be
her best friend, and is, at first, fascinated watching the rascal-like
Dil try to win Shanta over and then becoming more concerned that she
will lose her best friend to the earnest, soft-spoken Hasan, whom she
sees Shanta falling in love with.
The Parsees who are descended from Muslims, fled Persia in the ninth
century to migrate to India, and have been an insignificant part of the
India population ever since their arrival. They aim to remain neutral in
all the conflicts, to emulate the Swiss during WW11. They believe they
can be invisible, spreading sweetness to the land like sugar placed in
the middle of a glass of milk. Besides, they realize it is the only way
they can survive in this country.
The story picks up steam with independence acclaimed as a great day by
the politicians, but in a Lahore, Pakistan, train station (the Lahore
scenes were filmed in New Delhi as the Pakistani government never got
around to granting the filmmaker permission to shoot there), Dil is
anxiously waiting for his sisters to arrive from just across the border
in Gurdaspur, India. The train pulls in late and when Dil looks on
board, the carnage is horrifying as everyone is brutally murdered, with
his sisters breasts removed and placed in gunnysacks filled with the
severed breasts of other Muslim women. This experience shatters Dil's
faith in a peaceful solution and a hatred grows within him. There is one
last hope, as he tells Shanta, that his love for her is stronger than
any hatred, and only she can prevent him from joining the cause of
inflicting a violent upheaval against his outnumbered neighbors, by
marrying him. But she chooses the more gentle Hasan, whom she plans to
marry and live with in India, as he tells her that he will convert to
Hinduism for her.
Lahore's Hindu section is burnt to the ground and total violence becomes
the rule of the day, after the train incident. The gardener (Yadav) in
the Parsee household converts to being a Muslim rather than being
persecuted. A 10- year- old sweeper's daughter is married off to an old
dwarf so that the Hindu family can convert to Christianity, as Lenny's
mother comments, amidst the surreal gaiety of the wedding replete with
song and dance, "Fear makes all of us to abandon reason." There is
danger for everyone in Lahore who isn't a Muslim or isn't active in the
Muslim cause, even the neutrality of the Parsee's home is compromised
and Shanta comes under danger from betrayal.
The problem with the film is twofold; one, is that all these tragic
events are translated through the childish eyes of Lenny, who cannot
grasp everything that is happening, she just doesn't have the maturity
to do that. Because of that, the story has too much of a childish flavor
to it and is simplified to a point that touches on being too fine. The
tragic historical statistics speak for themselves and it is unnecessary
to be hammered over the head by repeatedly seeing the events unfold
through the eyes of an innocent child. The horror is already a given and
doesn't have to be reinforced by Lenny throwing a dish on the floor and
then asking her mother, if a country could be broken into pieces like
that. It was an unneeded artifice, that tended to spoil the flow of the
film's dramatics. The other problem, with this otherwise splendid
history lesson and tragic love story, is that all the movie's metaphors
are used as if they were merely to amplify the historical tale. The
character's lives were reduced in scope and they seemed to be milked for
the benefit of making the story fit into the historical text.
Earth is based on a semiautobiographical novel by Bapsi Sidhwa, called
"Cracking India." It is stunningly photographed, using reds and purples
to express the blood-curdling scenes of Lahore under siege and a glowing
yellow for the warm household scenes and a brownish amber to catch the
vast beauty of the countryside. It is noteworthy for exploring in detail
the destruction of innocence and the arbitrary splitting up of the
earth, and how everyone gets caught up in the emotional frenzy of hatred
and how difficult it is to just do what is right. This is an on-going
conflict that still threatens the earth today, and with both Pakistan
and India armed with atomic weapons, which only makes their religious
conflict more perilous.
There was a certain power the film had, that could not be denied.
Nandita Das as Shanta, is the heart of the picture. Her performance is
breathtaking, as she slowly finds love with Hasan, remains friendly with
Dil Nawaz, and generously serves the Sethna family and is the human face
we remember about the violence and the betrayal taking place in Lahore.
Her performance was very moving and gave life to this epic film. But,
Aamir Khan as Dil Nawaz, a very popular actor in India, is the force
behind the film. His masterful performance, changing from an endearing
and helpful figure, to one who embraces violence, was what put a human
face of evil on this melodrama and saved the film from being thought of
as mostly a metaphorical historical exercise.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   One of the great songs that came out of the sixties is Tom
Lehrer's "Who's Next," which opens thus: "First we got the
bomb, and that was good/ 'Cause we love peace and
motherhood/ Then Russia got the bomb, but that's okay/
'Cause the balance of power's maintained that way/ Who's
next."  Lehrer runs down the powers that have procured
nuclear capability: France, China, and some speculations
including Monaco and Alabama, but failed to mention India
and Pakistan which have both manufactured nuclear
weapons since.  Both powers on the Asian subcontinent
recently tested some of their nuclear wares, causing
commentators to fear an arms race between those two
hostile nations.  In the movie "Earth," Deepa Mehta takes us
to the root of the animosity, doing so with only a small degree
of didacticism for those in the audience whose familiarity with
the period is scant.  What makes "Earth" so intriguing, nay,
riveting, is the way a romantic West Side Story line is
seamlessly infused into a tale of violence situated in the
Eastern Hemisphere and filmed in New Delhi.
   The film's production notes imply that writer-director Deepa
Mehta holds the British largely responsible for the deaths of
one million Hindus, Muslims and Sikhs following the partition
of the Indian subcontinent in August 1947.  She gives the
impression that if the retreating British government simply left
the former colony alone, the various groups would have found
a way to live side by side as they had done by centuries.  
Only when the imperial government decided against the
wishes of such notables as Mahatma Gandhi to split the
predominantly Muslim area in the north (which became
Pakistan) from the mainly Hindu peoples in India, the huge
religious cliques became determined to snatch what land they
could for themselves.  Mehta makes her viewpoint vivid by
organizing his principals to represent the involved sects.  The
stunning Shanta (Nandita Das), a servant in the home of the
wealthy Parsee, Bunty Sethna (Kitu Gidwani), is a Hindu
whose lover of choice is the Muslim Hasan (Rahul Khanna). 
Dil Navaz aka the Ice Candy Man (Aamir Khan), a drop-dead
handsome suitor, is competing for Shanta's hand.  The
actions are viewed through the eyes of eight-year-old Lenny
(Maia Sethna), a Parsee whose semi-autobiographical book
"Cracking India" is the basis of Deepa Mehta's screenplay.  
   As the British prepare to disband in August 1947, they
announce their partition plans just two days in advance, a
scheme which almost immediately leads to raging hostilities
by people who had lived together as friends and neighbors
for centuries.  Sikhs are accused of being the battle arm of
Hindus and become thereby the enemy of the Muslims.  As
Hindus and Muslims alternately demonstrate loudly through
the streets of Pakistan's largest city, Lahore, violence erupts. 
A Hindu tenement in the city is set afire while Muslim
"firemen" pour oil, not water, onto the blaze.  When a train
arrives from the city of Gurdaspur crammed with the dead
bodies of Muslims killed by Hindus, the handsome and
heretofore charming Ice Candy Man vows revenge for the
brutal slaying of his sisters--a pledge that would lead to a
Romeo-and-Juliet style tragedy toward the conclusion of
Mehta's epic tale.
   While the battle scenes are brief, sporadic and filmed with
no great effort to emulate the grand design of Steven
Spielberg's "Saving Private Ryan," the emphasis is on the
growing romance between Shanta and the peace-loving and
sincere Hassan.  In a climactic scene, the Hindu and Muslim
principals are witnessed in the act of love by the already
fuming Ice Candy Man, a display that greatly inflames his
already venomous soul.
   While "Earth" has far more in common with the genius of
Satyajit Ray's output than with the current, fluffy turnout of
the Bombay film industry, Mehta throws in a delightful
segment of song and dance led by Shanta--in the tradition of
hundreds of throwaway Indian commercial films.  But
whereas the South Asian country's traditional cinema coyly
shuns even the appearance of kissing, Mehta is not shy
about displaying the act of love, albeit with body parts
discreetly hidden.  
   It's a stretch to say that "Earth" combines the classic theme
of Shakespeare's famous star-crossed lovers with, say, the
combative drama of Henry V.  Yet by weaving romance with
politics so intriguingly, Mehta vividly shows the profound
effect that global and national politics can have on as
personal a tale as an ill-fated attachment between two loving
people.  As India and Pakistan face off this very year in the
ongoing conflict over the status of Kashmir, even
provocatively waving their nuclear arsenals at one another,
we in the audience cannot help thinking of scores of struggles
caused simply because two or more peoples with different
cultures suddenly decide they cannot live together peacefully. 
Never mind what they tell you in high school that Hindus hate
Muslims for eating cows and Muslims reciprocate against the
pork-eating Hindus.  Conflicting dietary restrictions are not the
point.  The essence is that the Creator did not make us all
alike in appearance, cultural values, and modes of religious
veneration.  This should not be a problem under normal
conditions, and even during periods of stress individuals of
different backgrounds can form profound romantic
attachments.  But when political, economic or social changes
threaten to upset stability, watch out.  No other movie to date
this year brings this concept home as well as this one, a
picture that is thrillingly down to "Earth."

Author
Ross Anthony
"Earth" tells (in Hindi mixed with English) the story of the 1947
partitioning of India as seen through the eyes of a little girl named Lenny.
Lenny's Nanny, the beautiful Hindu Shanta, hangs with a hip,
religiously-mixed bunch of friends who try fruitlessly to hold their
friendship above their various affiliations as the British pull out after
200 years of rule.
Painting in a yellowish stroke the passion of life, love and death; the film
is accented with romance and courtship amidst tragic religion-based
massacring.
Though this particular dispute between Eastern religious factions occurred
half a century ago on the other side of the planet, it certainly colors an
all too familiar picture. Not short on cute proverbs and parables, the film
itself, teaches the saddest of lessons.
Slightly on the over-dramatic side (acting and camera direction), much of
the spoken English may be difficult to decipher. But, the pace is strong,
images warm and deep, and story powerful.
"Earth" is the second film in director Mehta's trilogy: Fire, Earth and
Water.
Earth. Based on "Cracking India" by Bapsi Sidhwa. Not Rated.
Starring Aamir Khan, Nandita Das, Maia Sethna, Rahul Kjanna, Kitu Gidwani.
Director/Screenwriter Deepa Mehta
Produced by Deepa Mehta at Cracking Earth.
Released by Zeitgeist.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
David Dalgleish
        EARTH is a harsh, unconsoling drama about the time when India
gained independence from Britain and the ensuing turmoil that engulfed the
subcontinent.  People who supposedly loved the same land and the same God
found themselves in bitter conflict, as the country divided into factions
fighting in the streets: Indian and Pakistani; Muslim, Hindu, Sikh, Parsee.
        The story takes place in Lahore, which was Indian before Partition,
and Pakistani afterward, regardless of what its citizens might call
themselves.  The action is seen through the eyes of Lenny (Maaia Sethna), a
young Parsee girl, but it is really about her nanny, Shanta.  Shanta has a
small circle of male admirers.  Two of the men are suitors: Hasan (Rahul
Khanna), a Hindu, and Dil Navaz (Aamir Khan), a Muslim.  The others--Sikh,
Hindu, Muslim--are older; some are married; but all appreciate Shanta, who
is played by the stirringly beautiful Nandita Das.  (She also starred in
Deepa Mehta's previous film, FIRE, the first part of a thematic trilogy
which will conclude with WATER.)
        In an early scene, the men are sitting in a park talking with
Shanta and Lenny; political tension in the country is growing as the day of
independence nears.  One of the men remarks, jokingly, that their little
group is probably one of the last places in the city where the different
religions can still get along.  He is wrong: the men make barbed little
comments to each other, spoken like jokes, but with an undercurrent of
fanaticism.  The tenor of these exchanges grows darker and more bitter as
the movie progresses.  It is easy to perceive, in these squabbles, the
trajectory which ends in mass violence and slaughter.
        The group around Shanta represents, in a sense, a united India, and
Shanta herself the ideal motherland--one which all love, which inspires
Hindu, Muslim, and Sikh to live peacably together.  But the circle around
Shanta is sundered, as is the State.  A Sikh is persecuted, hides, then
flees.  Another man is murdered.  The group of friends will not meet again.
The movie is rife with images of breakage and destruction: a plate
shattered on the floor, a stuffed toy torn apart by an upset child, and,
most brutally, when the tension escalates into violence, a man is held
down, tied between two cars, and ripped in half by the opposing movement of
the vehicles.  It is a visceral and effective metaphor for a country which
is being destroyed just as painfully.
        The crux of EARTH's plot is the transformation undergone by Dil
Navaz.  His sisters are killed in brutal fashion, by Hindus, because they
are Muslim.  Dil Navaz seeks solace from Shanta, and asks in desperation
that she marry him.  But she loves Hasan, and tenderly refuses Dil Navaz's
offer.  The combination of familial anguish and romantic rejection twists
inside him, and it is easy to see how he is seduced by the growing mob
mentality: the Muslim cause gives him a motive to vent his anger and hate.
Despite the things he later does, it is to the credit of EARTH that it does
not simply denounce Dil Navaz and those like him, but shows how
circumstances can make decent enough men do monstrous things.
        The conclusion--the consequence of Dil Navaz's transformation--is
rather abrupt.  The story EARTH tells does not end.  It just stops.   It is
an appropriate finish: giving us closure would have imparted, at least on
an aesthetic level, a sense of resolution, of satisfaction.  But there was
no resolution for India and Pakistan--they have been at war, on a small or
large scale, for decades.  Since the personal dramas in EARTH mirror the
political struggles of a nation, it is only right that those dramas should
have no terminus.  There is no healing to be had, no closure, on any level
(despite the needless, tacked-on ending, with voice-over narration from
Lenny as an adult, framing the story).
        EARTH is, in some ways, an unexceptional movie.  It does not
reinvent the wheel, following instead the standard pattern of historical
dramas.  But Deepa Mehta's directon is assured, and the issues she
addresses run deep.  EARTH does for India what movies like Zhang Yimou's TO
LIVE and Tian Zhuangzhuang's THE BLUE KITE did for China: they show us the
agonies endured by unremarkable people who had the bad luck to be caught up
and smashed in the crucible of history.  Such films strike me as inherently
valuable, even when flawed.  They may be biased or inaccurate, but they
bear the weight of human hardship, and this confers on them a nobility and
gravity which other, more inventive films, often lack.
        It is notable that all three movies were banned in their native
countries: the events shown may have happened decades ago, but they still
touch a nerve.  The issues tackled in EARTH have a particular urgency in
light of the nuclear test bombings that took place last year.  In the near
future, India and Pakistan may launch nuclear missiles at each other.  At
the time of the tests I had some understanding of the reasons why this
might happen; after seeing EARTH, I have a much, much better understanding.
                Subjective Camera (subjective.freeservers.com)
        Movie Reviews by David Dalgleish (daviddalgleish@yahoo.com)
