Title
Review for Star Trek: Generations (1994)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Jeffrey Graebner
     Over the past 27 years, "Star Trek" has grown into a phenomenon
that is essentially unmatched in the entertainment world.  Gene
Roddenberry's original idea has now spawned four TV series (with a
fifth starting next year) and seven theatrical motion pictures.  There
are also numerous books and other merchandising.  All of this history
makes STAR TREK: GENERATIONS a tricky film to review.  It needs to be
discussed in terms of its own merits as a film while also looking at
how it fits into the entire "Star Trek" universe.
     This seventh film in the series is the first to feature the cast
of "Star Trek: The Next Generation" lead by Captain Jean-Luc Picard
(Patrick Stewart).  From the original "Star Trek" (and the six previous
films), Captain James T. Kirk (William Shatner) has a supporting role
while Scotty (James Doohan) and Chekov (Walter Koenig) make cameo
appearances early in the film.  All of the "Next Generation" cast
members that were still with the show at the end of its seven-season
run appear in the film.
     The principal villain in the film is Soran (Malcolm McDowell) a
madman who is struggling to return to the mysterious "Nexus," a place
where fantasies become reality.  The entrance is a strange "ribbon"
that travels through space.  Attempts to fly a ship into the Nexus
simply result in the ship being destroyed.  Soran's plan is to alter
the course of the ribbon to allow him to jump into it from the surface
of a planet.  This is accomplished by causing stars to collapse thus
generating gravitational fields that will require the ribbon to change
its course.  Picard and his crew discover his plan and must stop him
before he wipes out an entire civilization.
     This plot is rather ridiculous, but the biggest problem is that it
is also the most confusing plot that has yet been used in a "Star Trek"
movie.  In addition, there are several secondary subplots going on. The
film would have been helped a great deal if the script had been
simplified.  The screenplay is by Ronald D. Moore and Brannon Braga
from a story by Moore, Braga and producer Rick Berman.  All three came
directly from "Star Trek: The Next Generation" and the film includes
some of the same weaknesses that plagued the last few seasons of that
series.
     The single biggest problem that has been inherited from the series
is the cheat of solving problems by having the characters using
invented technical jargon and unexplained gadgets.  The earlier movies
did all use a lot of invented science, but it was always *explained* in
clear terms within the world of the film.  It was always clear what the
equipment or terms were and what they would do.  That isn't true during
many parts of STAR TREK: GENERATIONS.  Even the central phenomenon of
the "Nexus" is never particularly well explained.
     The script also suffers from a lack of focus.  The movie includes
several subplots that are not really that closely tied into the main
plot.  The most notable of these involves the android Data (Brent
Spiner) adjustment to a new chip that allows him to experience
emotions.  This subplot provides some of the film's best scenes (and
much of its comic relief) as well as the most significant character
development.  The writers never quite manage to tie it in with the rest
of the film, though.  This subplot is very good, but it seems to be
coming from a different movie.
     A subplot involving the Duras sisters, a pair of renegate Klingons
who were originally introduced on the TV series, is integrated a little
better.  It was kind of a shame that they insisted on including
villainous Klingons in this film.  They could have easily been replaced
by Romulans or some other Federation enemy without undermining the fact
that one of the biggest differences between the original series and
"The Next Generation" is the fact that Klingons are now *allies* of the
Federation.  The only hint of this fact in the film is the presense of
Worf (Michael Dorn) on the Enterprise bridge crew.
     Despite the film's script problems, there are some aspects of the
film that are *extremely* good.  The film's biggest asset is a cast who
know their characters well and who clearly work well together.  The
"Next Generation" cast members have built up seven years worth of
familiarity and chemistry all of which clearly shines through in the
film.  Some of the cast members are severely underutilized
(particularly Gates McFadden as Dr. Crusher, who is barely in the
movie), but with the exception of the fourth film (still the best of the
series), all of the "Star Trek" movies have tended to concentrate on
certain cast members to the exclusion of others.  It is very difficult
to give a lot of screen time to every member of such a large cast.
     Scotty and Chekov make their appearances during the film's opening
sequence in which they join Kirk in the dedication of the Enterprise-B
(The ship that was decommissioned at the end of STAR TREK VI: THE
UNDISCOVERED COUNTRY was the Enterprise-A while the ship flown by the
"Next Generation" cast is the Enterprise-D.)  This sequence exists
primarily to set up Kirk's entry into the Nexus so he can later emerge
in the "Next Generation" time frame.  Still, it was a nice touch to
include a couple of the other members of the original cast and they do
have some good scenes together.  It is rather obvious that the scenes
were originally written for Mr. Spock and Dr.  McCoy, though.  They
even have Chekov helping out in sick bay at one point.
     Kirk's presense in the film is clearly intended to ease the
transition of the movies from the old cast to the new.  I'm not
convinced that was entirely necessary (the new cast has had seven TV
seasons to build an audience), but the scenes between Kirk and Picard
are generally enjoyable.  It is nice to see these two characters
meeting face to face.  Over the years, "Star Trek" fans have spent a
lot of time discussing the significant *differences* between Kirk and
Picard, but this film actually concentrates more on the
*similarities*.  The two characters are more alike than one might
think.  It is a bit unfortunate that none of the scenes of Kirk and
Picard together are on the bridge of a Starship.  They missed the
opportunity to allow some first hand comparisons of the two captains'
different ways of commanding a ship.
     The technical aspects of the film are competent, but not always
spectacular.  At times, the TV origins of producer Berman and director
David Carson are noticeable.  The movie is filmed in Panavision, but the
whole frame is rarely used.  Industrial Light and Magic has provided
some very competent special effects for the film, but only two
sequences really allow them to shine.  The first is a wonderful scene
in a Stellar Cartography room on the Enterprise. This really shows off
some of ILM's computer graphics skills.  The second great special
effects sequence can't be described without giving away a key plot
point, but viewers will know it when they see it.
     For the score, Dennis McCarthy has a larger orchestra to work with
than he did for his TV scores, but it still doesn't sound significantly
different.  McCarthy's score isn't horrible, but it is rather bland.
The "Star Trek" film scores have all had a tough time living up to the
tremendous scores that Jerry Goldsmith wrote for the first and fifth
films and James Horner wrote for the second and third.  Like Leonard
Rosenman's score for STAR TREK IV and Cliff Eidelman's score for STAR
TREK VI, McCarthy's work simply doesn't stack up.  The score lacks a
distinctive main theme and McCarthy also repeats Eidelman's mistake of
failing to open the film with Alexander Courage's famous fanfare.
McCarthy (or possibly Carson) also made the very odd choice of leaving
one key fight scene completely unscored.  That sequence was
*desperately* in need of some music.
     While there are some major problems with STAR TREK:  GENERATIONS,
the film certainly does have enough going for it that it is sure to
please even the most casual fans of the series.  As a regular viewer of
"Star Trek: The Next Generation," it is very difficult for me to say
how the film will play for those that are unfamiliar with the TV show.
The film doesn't take much time to re-introduce the characters (many
long-time "Star Trek" fans were probably somewhat put off by the fact
that STAR TREK: THE MOTION PICTURE *did* spend a lot of time
re-establishing the characters).  The actors all know their characters
well, though, and I suspect that even non-fans may be able to catch
up.
     This is a good first effort for the "Next Generation" cast and
crew and it demonstrates that the new cast certainly can carry
themselves on the big screen.  I look forward to additional films
featuring this cast, but I hope that Berman and co. will be smart
enough to concentrate on their current TV series and to pass the
feature films on to people who are more comfortable with that medium.
     There are two key sequences towards the end of STAR TREK:
GENERATIONS that need to be discussed, but which cannot be mentioned
without giving away key plot points.  As a result, I *strongly* suggest
that readers who have not yet seen the film stop reading here.  The
following paragraphs will reveal two major developments that occur in
the film:
     The destruction of the Enterprise-D provides the film's most
spectacular special effects sequence and was also a surprisingly bold
move.  Even though this isn't the first time that the Enterprise has
been destroyed in a Star Trek movie (the original Enterprise was
destroyed in STAR TREK III: THE SEARCH FOR SPOCK), this marks the first
time that the ship has actually been destroyed by enemy fire.  In the
past, the ship has seemed largely indestructible and it was great to
see them show that *not* to be the case.
     Most importantly, the destruction of the Enterprise-D will allow
for the upcoming films to separate themselves more from the TV series.
The next movie will have to introduce an all-new ship providing endless
new possibilities.
     Of course, the other key plot "surprise" is the death of Captain
Kirk (although this is probably one of the worst kept secrets in the
history of movies).  I wasn't really pleased by the way that this was
handled.  Kirk is certainly the type of character that needs a big
heroic death, but this one really wasn't right for him.  STAR TREK:
GENERATIONS shows Kirk dying on a distant planet in another time to
save an unshown race of people.  The character really needed to die in
defense of *his* ship and *his* crew.  This death is very unsatisfying
and surprisingly unmoving.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     There are two kinds of "Star Trek" fans.  There is the kind who
like action and special effects and the kind who like a well-thought-
out science fiction idea.  The most popular "Star Trek" films are the
ones aimed at audiences who want to turn off their minds and just have
a roller-coaster ride.  In a small unofficial poll the best-liked "Star
Trek" film is STAR TREK II: THE WRATH OF KHAN.  That film is built
around a completely absurd plot device called the "Genesis Effect" that
seemed to create and instantly evolve life on barren planets, moving
suns in place as needed.  The film did have good action and special
effects, however, and many of the fans were not troubled by the film
being built around a poorly-conceived premise.  STAR TREK GENERATIONS
should please the people who liked WRATH OF KHAN and should irritate
the set of fans who were irritated at that film.  This time the story
is built around something called the "Nexus."  This thing is described
as a scientific phenomenon, but as used in the film it is pure pixie
and fairy dust.
     As the film opens, Captain Kirk and other members of the Corpulent
Space Corps are guests aboard a brand new Enterprise under the
fledgling Captain Harriman.  The ship is not really provisioned to
travel, but then this maiden voyage is intended only as a three-hour
cruise.  We all know, however, that the Enterprise's enterprises never
run smoothly.  This Enterprise is unexpectedly called to a rescue
mission.  Things do not go well for Harriman and most embarrassing of
all for the new captain is that old Captain Kirk is, for the first time
in his career, sort of killed.  Unfortunately, Spock is not along to
help Kirk through that trying first death.  Meanwhile, 78 years later,
the Next Generation crew is involved with a similar rescue.  Curiously,
they seem to rescue one of the same people that the earlier Enterprise
rescued.  He is one Dr. Soran (played by Malcolm McDowell), an inhuman
non-human with his own plans for the weird temporal phenomenon that
chews planets, attacks Starships Enterprise, and especially likes to
suck up captains.
     This is a film with a plot that goes in for quantity rather than
quality.  One film that is less than two hours long involves two
Enterprise crews, renegade Klingons, enemy Romulans, an interstellar
temporal thingee, a sailing ship, Jean-Luc Picard's family, a Christmas
tree with odd ornaments, a new chip that greatly modifies Data, two
different Enterprises on the brink of destruction, Captain Kirk's long
lost love, some very funny-looking eggs, and a mad scientist.  That is
just a bit too much for everything to gel.  What works the best are the
acting--which most of these people can do in their sleep--and those
special-effects action sequences.  The space battle scenes are always
impressive on the big screen, though hardly original.  One sequence
involving the Enterprise and the planet Veridian III actually is
breath-taking.  Not all the visuals work out so well, however.  When
blown up to ten feet across, Data's make-up looks not enough like the
covering of a machine and way too much like clown's greasepaint.  But
in general the look is more polished than the script deserved.  To have
so many nice special effects lavished on the film and yet to have such
a poorly thought-out script is a very negative indication of the
filmmakers' opinion of their audience.  Unfortunately the "Star Trek"
people probably do know their audience only too well.
     This film is a triumph of style over substance.  It is far more an
exercise in sci-fi than science fiction.  I give it a high -1 on the -4
to +4 scale.  I have to be honest and say that I walked out of the
theater thinking this film was at least decent, but as the film started
to gel in my mind and I realized some of the gaping holes in what I had
seen, I realized this script had far too many problems to get near a
camera.
     SPOILER SPOILER SPOILER SPOILER SPOILER SPOILER
     I would like to say a little more about why this thing called the
Nexus has no place in a science fiction film.  The Nexus seems to have
attributes usually ascribed only to Heaven.  It is a physical
phenomenon that seems to pluck people out of our universe and somehow
plop each person right into the best of all possible parallel universes
for that person.  There the castaway has things like a ready-made
family.  Picard has a wife and children who are not at all surprised to
see him suddenly appear.  Kirk, who has been in the Nexus for 78 years,
seems to have just arrived.  Kirk and Picard apparently manage to
escape the Nexus only by wishing to be elsewhere.  (Perhaps they
clicked their heels together and said "There's no place like
Veridian.")  The concept is great for fantasy fans but has little to do
with physics or any other science.  It is an idea full of
contradictions that seems to have been contrived only to give Soran a
motive for his crimes--so it is a nice place to be--and to have Kirk
and Picard come together in time--so it is a temporal phenomenon.  Room
is certainly left for a sequel since the interstellar transtemporal
space ribbon is still zapping around out there were no one has gone
before.  Of course leaving room for a sequel in a "Star Trek" film is
redundant.
     Besides the foolishness of the main premise--and the fact that 47
people are pulled out of the heaven-like Nexus and 78 years later the
Federation seems to have forgotten that the Nexus exists--there are
other problems in the script.  In one sequence Picard is crawling only
very slowly through the hole in the rocks and is fired upon.  There is
no way he could have moved fast enough to get out of the way of the
explosion, yet he sustains not even a scratch.  A rocket fired from
Veridian III to its sun seems to hit its target in seconds.  In fact,
based on timing we see, the filmmakers apparently thought the sun wasa
small ball less than a mile overhead--this is a giant step backward in
cosmology.  The bug in Geordi LaForge's glasses is still broadcasting.
Will he ever discover it?  All these touches seem speak more of the
first draft of a script than of a finished product.  To have so many
people working on the film and not to have anyone asking basic
questions like "how do the captains get from the Nexus back to Veridian
III?" indicates to me a very cynical attitude of the Star Trek
organization--and this is the product of an organization, not just a
few script-writers--toward science fiction fans.  They have taken the
attitude that their audience cares about visuals and not intelligence
or even the basics of continuity in scriptwriting.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Patrick Stewart, Malcolm McDowell, William Shatner,
Jonathan Frakes, Brent Spiner.
Screenplay:  Ronald D. Moore and Brannon Braga.
Director:  David Carson.
     Whether or not I would be considered a Trekker probably depends on
whom you would ask.  I have been a fan of both the original series and
its recently retired follow-up, as well as the even- numbered entries
in the film series.  However, I have never been one of those folks who
store away Trek minutiae and get into debates over the relative merits
of Spock vs. Data.  Somewhere along the line, the "Star Trek" film series
began to seem more and more directed at those in the latter category,
and STAR TREK: GENERATIONS may be the natural conclusion of this
direction.  Its production values may be high, but the writing is
frequently appalling, and instead of a script has a collection of
references, in-jokes and ill-defined characters.
     GENERATIONS opens in the late 23rd Century, where members of the
original Enterprise crew, including Captain James T. Kirk (William
Shatner), are present for the christening of the latest ship to bear
that name.  No sooner is it out on its maiden voyage than a distress
signal brings them to the Nexus, a mysterious ribbon of energy.  Among
those rescued from the Nexus is long-lived alien Dr. Soran (Malcolm
McDowell), but he is none-too-pleased at being back in the real world.
Seventy-eight years later, Soran is still trying to get back to the
Nexus, and again encounters an Enterprise, this one led by Captain
Jean-Luc Picard (Patrick Stewart).  Soran's plan involves destroying a
star with an inhabited planet, and the only hope for saving 230 million
people is the historic meeting of two Enterprise captains.
     I don't think it is an insult to fans of "Star Trek" to suggest that
to a certain extent, the particulars of a plot are not really the most
important elements in a "Trek" film.  It's about a chance to visit with
old friends, and if they are involved in a truly interesting story it
can be considered gravy.  But even that interpretation assumes that
characterization has to be consistent, and in GENERATIONS that just
doesn't happen.  Data (Brent Spiner) is particularly victimized by this
sloppy writing.  In the film's major sub-plot, Data decides to use a
chip which will give him human emotions, a chip he has had in his
possession for over a year.  What is his motivation for taking this
drastic and perhaps dangerous step?  He doesn't get a joke.  Once the
chip is in place, Spiner gets to have a lot of fun with Data's new
emotions, but the point is that he's no longer the Data we know.  If
the rest of the "Next Generation" cast fares any better, it's only
because they're on the screen so little that they're simply window
dressing.
     But then again, this story isn't really about the new crew.  It's
about Kirk and Picard, the cowboy and the politician, sharing the
screen.  The huge surprise is that William Shatner blows Patrick
Stewart away.  Perhaps because he knows this is his last go-round in
the part that made him a legend, Shatner looks like he's having the
time of his life; Stewart, on the other hand, borders on the
deferrential, and is saddled with the same lackluster motivations as
everyone else in the cast.  Stewart's edginess is indicative of what
may be a very bad sign for Paramount's hopes to turn the new cast into
the same kind of franchise the original cast was:  these are clearly
the Not Ready for Big Screen Players.  By contrast, the prologue which
features Scotty (James Doohan) and Chekhov (Walter Koenig) is the
highlight of the film.  These characters have become part of the
popular mythology, and when they take over the Enterprise in a moment
of distress, it's a moment of high energy.  Only thirty years of
history can create a moment like that, and that's time this new crew
doesn't have.
     It certainly doesn't help that the plot they are stuck in is so
convoluted and badly constructed that you need to leave a trail of
bread crumbs to find your way out again.  It's also loaded with little
gags all aimed at those who are familiar enough with the series to turn
to all their friends in a shared nudge of recognition.  I wonder
whether anyone who is coming in cold to the "Trek" universe at this point
would be anything but baffled and bored by what is going on.  And what
a waste of Malcolm McDowell, who could have been a great monomanical
villain but should have been given a much more compelling reason for
his obsession.
     There are plenty of details both scientific and of continuity to
pick at, but to do so would be to ignore GENERATIONS' major flaws.
However, I would like to make one recommendation:  seatbelts.  Not just
for the Enterprise crew, although you'd think by the 24th Century space
travel wouldn't involve rolling around on the floor during a battle.
No, I think the audience might need them more.  This journey is one
bumpy ride.

Author
J. Young
[Note: this has spoilers.  If you don't want to read spoilers, don't read this.
Followups directed to rec.arts.sf.movies.  -Moderator]
Director: David Carson.  Writers: Ronald D.  Moore & Brannon Braga.
Starring: Patrick Stewart, William Shatner, Malcolm McDowell, Jonathan
          Frakes, Brent Spiner, LeVar Burton, Michael Dorn, Gates 
          McFadden, Marina Sirtis, Whoopi Goldberg, Walter Koenig,
          James Doohan, Alan Ruck
A Paramount Pictures Release
     The screening was held on September 13, 1994, on the Paramount
lot.  It was a research screening used to gauge audience reaction to
the film prior to its release.
     Research screenings are common practice in Hollywood, and are used
by virtually all of the studios for all major films.  The studio
contracts out to a market research firm, in Paramount's case National
Research Group (AKA: Movie View), to conduct the screening and compile
data based on the reaction cards filled out by the recruited audience.
The studio then uses this information to determine which scenes could
use tightening or re-editing, and which demographic groups they can
best market the film towards.  And in some cases, they decide that
certain scenes will require changes that they have no footage for,
requiring them to go back out for additional filming.  And believe it
or not, this happens all the time.  A famous example is FATAL
ATTRACTION.  After the test screening they decided to reshoot the
ending, and the film went on to become a mega-hit.  (And more recently,
they even went back and added the original FATAL ATTRACTION ending
onto the video release.)
     So about a week before the scheduled GENERATIONS screening, they
started sending out movie recruiters (usually aspiring actors or
screenwriters) to various movie theaters around Los Angeles to recruit
their audience.  They approach a potential recruit and ask them if they
would like to attend the screening, and if so they take down certain
information (occupation, age, name, phone number).  The recruit is then
given a colored pass (good for two) and told to be sure to arrive early
as more passes are given out than there are seats (also the recruiters
are paid on commission--so if you don't get in, they don't get paid for
your pass).
     But this was a "Star Trek" screening and word soon got out to
fans.  Everyone wanted to go and I even know of some that started
photocopying passes for friends (which is very easy since they're just
printed on normal colored paper).  So by the time the screening came
around, *MANY* more passes were in the hands of fans than there were
available seats.  Realizing the potential for a riot, my group arrived
a little before 6:00 PM, even though the screening wasn't scheduled
until 7:30 PM--but even then, there were already about 70 people ahead
of us in line.  At about 6:30 PM there were so many people that they
started stopping cars at the gate and turning them back (a mini-traffic
jam developed on Melrose).
     While we waited in line, they came around and re-asked everyone
their occupation, age, name and phone number.  Then someone else came
around and asked us how many "Star Trek" movies we'd seen (you had to
have seen at least three).  Then yet another person came around looking
for people (only twenty) to stay afterwards for a focus group to talk
with the execs about the film.  How they chose these people is a
mystery to us.  (They chose two friends of ours, but none from our
immediate group.)
     At around 7:15 PM, they started letting us into the Paramount
Screening Theater (about the size of a medium movie theater).  The last
three rows of seats were taped off (reserved for the execs) but the
rest of the theater was general seating.  So everyone rushed for the
best seats they could grab.
     After everyone was seated, the moderator (Andy Fielder) went to
the front of the theater and made some announcements.  First, he told
us that we were the very first audience to see STAR TREK GENERATIONS
which garnered much applause.  Then he gave us the usual research
screening speech: "This film is a work-in-progress.  You may see some
scratches on the print.  There aren't any credits on the film yet.
Some special effects are in a temporary state, as is the musical
score.  Please stay seated after the screening to fill out your
reaction cards."  Then the lights went down and the film began:
     A bottle flies through space, tumbling end over end.  It finally
crashes against the hull of the Enterprise NCC-1701-B spilling out
champagne.  They are launching the newest Enterprise, commanded by the
"green" Captain John Harriman (Alan Ruck of "Ferris Bueller's Day Off")
and an "even greener" crew.  The news media is on board as are Kirk,
Scotty and Chekov.  This is a very funny scene with Kirk continually
eyeing the Captain's chair while he is forced to sit off to the side.
     As soon as they leave spacedock, they pick up a distress signal.
And although they are ill-equipped to handle emergencies, they are of
course the only ship in the quadrant.  They find the distressed ship
which is caught in some kind of energy ribbon that's ripping it apart.
The new Capt. chokes and Kirk takes command.  The Enterprise beams as
many people over as it can and ends up getting caught in the energy
ribbon itself.  Among the people beamed over is Soran (Malcolm
McDowell) and Guinan.  They determine to escape from the ribbon they
will have to create some kind of blast, but of course this ship has no
photon torpedoes yet.  So someone has to go below decks to manually
reconfigure the deflectors.  It's Kirk that goes (all by himself) and
successfully manages to get the ship thrown free of the energy ribbon.
In the process though, part of the hull is ripped away, and Kirk is
seemingly killed (presumably sucked out into space, but we never see a
body).
     All of a sudden we're on an old sailing ship on the high seas
(named Enterprise) with the "Next Generation" crew.  [This scene seemed a
bit long, and kind of "stiff" compared to the prior scene with the old
crew.]  It's a Holodeck simulation, where they're performing a kind of
ritualistic initiation for Worf who's receiving a promotion.  Worf is
on a wooden plank where he has to jump up and grab a hat without
falling into the water (apparently no one has been able to do this
before).  Surprisingly, Worf does it though and is very proud of
himself.  Riker isn't happy with this and says "Computer, remove
plank."  Worf is dropped overboard into the water.  Riker says "Oops, I
meant retract plank."  Everyone laughs, while Worf flails around in the
water.  This prompts Data to ask "Is that funny?"  He is told that it
is and so he pushes Crusher overboard.  Data is then told that that was
NOT funny.  Picard gets some kind of distressing personal message and
returns to the ship.  Soon after, they are all asked to return to the
ship.
     They have received a distress call from a distant Observatory and
set their course for it.  Picard seems disturbed by the personal
message he received and retreats to his Ready Room.  Riker questions
Picard but is rebuffed.  Meanwhile, Data decides he needs to know what
is and isn't funny and that will require emotions.  So Data has Geordi
install his emotion chip.
     They soon arrive at the Observatory and find dead bodies (some
Romulan) and a very alive Soran.  They take Soran back who tells them
that he has to talk to the Captain.
     Data and Geordi arrive in Ten Forward where Data tries one of
Guinan's new drinks.  He experiences his first emotion--disgust.  At a
nearby table sits Soran.  Picard enters and they talk.  Soran explains
that he has to continue his experiments immediately or years of
valuable work will be lost.  Soran looks in Picard's eyes and seems to
hypnotically convince Picard to agree to "see what he can do" against
his wishes.
     They find trace elements of Trilithium (an explosive of mass
destruction associated with the Romulans) on board the Observatory.
Geordi and Data beam over to investigate.  Data is laughing, getting
the punch lines to jokes told years ago.  They find a secret chamber
and start to investigate further.  While Geordi continues to work, Data
keeps making dumb jokes and laughing at them (like making a Tricorder
"talk").  [This is actually very funny.  Brent Spiner is great!]  This
very quickly starts getting on Geordi's nerves though and he tries to
get Data to concentrate on what they're doing.  It's no use though as
Data is laughing hysterically, having seemingly lost all control.  It's
the emotion chip.  Then in a kind of eerie special effect, Data's whole
face starts contorting and he collapses to the ground.  Just then,
Soran appears asking what's going on.  Geordi fills him in, when Soran
produces a weapon and stuns Geordi.  Data cowers on the ground in great
fear, pleading with Soran not to kill him.  [It was actually very
unnerving to see Data showing fear.]  Soran turns to the computer and
types some commands, launching a missile towards the system's star.
     Meanwhile, Troi confronts Picard about his moody behavior.  He
tells her that the message he received earlier was informing him that
his brother and nephew had died in a fire.  Picard thought of his
nephew as his surrogate son, and someone who would carry on the Picard
name.  He looks at their pictures in an old photo album.
     The Enterprise picks up the missile launch from the Observatory
and sends Riker and Worf over to investigate.  The missile hits the
star, exploding it and sending out an immense shockwave.  Just then, a
Klingon Bird of Prey decloaks off the Observatory.  Riker and Worf
battle it out with Soran but Data is too afraid to help.  Soran grabs
Geordi and beams out to the Klingon ship.
     Back on the Enterprise, they soon discover that piloting the
Klingon Bird of Prey are the Klingon sisters, Lursa and B'etor, and
that Geordi is their hostage.  The ship cloaks and is gone.  The
Enterprise high tails it out of there to escape the shockwave.
     After his strange behavior, they decide to remove Data's emotion
chip, but find that it's become permanently fused to his systems.
Meanwhile, they investigate Soran's background and find the Guinan
connection.  Picard goes to Guinan and asks for her help.  She tells
him about the energy ribbon (called the Nexus) and explains that it's a
place where all of your greatest wishes come true.  And once you've
been there, you will do anything to get back (because of some powerful,
almost drug-like, pull).  She should know, she was once there with
Soran.  So Soran is trying to return to the Nexus, but why did he blow
up a star?
     Picard goes to Stellar Cartography with Data.  [This is a really
great new department we've never seen before, with nice special
effects.]  They locate the energy ribbon's position.  But Data is
feeling guilty about not saving Geordi, and nearly has an emotional
breakdown.  He asks to be relieved from duty, but Picard refuses and
basically tells him to deal with it.  Data manages to compose himself
and they soon discover the significance of the star's destruction.
Soran is destroying stars to gravitationally alter the course of the
energy ribbon.  The ribbon will come very close to a planet in the
Veridian system, and if Soran destroys that star, the ribbon will
actually touch the planet.  This of course will destroy every planet in
that system, killing millions of Veridians.  They set course for the
Veridian system.
     On the Klingon ship, Soran has removed Geordi's visor, and is
torturing him while interrogating him about his knowledge of
Trilithium.  He doesn't get much out of him.  They arrive at Veridian
III and soon after so does the Enterprise.  Picard hails them, even
though the Bird of Prey is cloaked and Picard doesn't really know if
they're actually there.  Soran gets an idea and alters Geordi's visor.
He then beams down to the planet's surface.  Picard asks the sisters to
let him talk with Soran, but they tell him he is already on the
planet.  In between cracking jokes, Data tries to scan the planet, but
there is too much distortion.  Picard asks the sisters to beam him down
to the planet in trade for Geordi.  (Surprisingly, Riker doesn't
object.)  They agree, and Geordi is returned to the Enterprise while
Picard arrives on the planet (without his weapon or communicator).
     The location where Picard has materialized on the planet is a vast
lifeless desert.  [Actually, the Valley of Fire, 80 miles north of Las
Vegas.]  Soran is on a nearby mountaintop, amidst a huge construction
of girders and scaffolding housing a large missile.  Separating Picard
from Soran and the missile is a massive force field.  Picard tries to
talk Soran out of his plans of mass destruction in that calm,
reasonable, Picard way--but it's no use.  Soran continues to ready his
missile, while Picard searches for some way around the force field.
Eventually, Picard locates a small hole in the rocks tunneling beneath
the base of the force field.  He starts digging to enlarge the hole.
     Meanwhile, the Klingon sisters have hooked up a monitor and are
successfully receiving the video signal from Geordi's visor on the
Enterprise--what he sees, they see.  (Why the Enterprise wouldn't block
unauthorized transmissions from within the ship, I don't know.)  They
sit and wait, watching the monitor.  They soon become frustrated
because Geordi seems to be going everywhere but Engineering.
Eventually he does, and the Klingons get what they've been after--the
security code for the Enterprise's shield modulation, conveniently
displayed right on the panel.  (Some security.)  They remodulate their
torpedoes and fire on the Enterprise.  The torpedoes pass right through
the shields, and FURIOUSLY BLAST against the Enterprise's hull.  There
is much destruction.  The Enterprise tries to fight back, but can't
penetrate the Klingon shields.  The Enterprise is hit again.  More
destruction.
     Amidst all the buffeting, Riker questions Worf about possible
weaknesses in these particular Bird of Prey ships.  They find one,
which forces the Bird of Prey to cloak, thereby temporarily dropping
its shields.  They implement it and fire on the Bird of Prey--it's
destroyed.  The Klingon sisters are presumably killed.
     The Enterprise has experienced much damage throughout the ship.
Geordi is in Engineering trying to contain a coolant leak.  He is
unsuccessful, and there will be a warp core breach in five
minutes--nothing can be done.  Riker orders an immediate evacuation to
the saucer section.  Chaos reigns throughout the ship as everyone
rushes down corridors.  Everybody makes it in time.  (They must have
regular drills for this sort of thing.) The Enterprise goes to saucer
separation, but the warp core explodes too close and sends the saucer
section careening toward's the planet's atmosphere.  Data is at the
helm, they can't pull out of it.  The planet rushes up at them on the
viewscreen.  Data sees this and exclaims "Oh shit!" [Hands down, the
best line in the whole movie.  The audience went wild.]
     Back on the planet, Picard is still uncovering the rocks from the
hole beneath the force field.  Soran climbs up towards the top of the
mountain.  Picard wriggles through the hole.  He's almost through, but
Soran sees him and fires at the rocks.  There is a cloud of smoke as
the rocks come crashing down.  Picard isn't anywhere to be seen.  (Is
he dead?  Of course not.  Only one Captain's death per film.) Soran
continues to climb.
     The saucer section is out of control and heading toward's the
planet's surface.  They put power to the thrusters to try to glide in,
instead of crash.  In the end, they kind of do both--taking out a whole
forest in the process.  (This was one of the effects that wasn't done.
There were huge cables pulling the saucer along, so it looked kind of
odd.)
     Soran is almost at the top of the mountain.  Suddenly, Picard
appears and they fight.  Picard gets in some good ones, but Soran
manages to knock him down and launch the missile.  The star explodes.
Here comes the energy ribbon.  Picard and Soran are gone.
     Picard is in the Nexus.  It's Christmas, and Picard has a wife and
a family.  (Presumably, this is Picard's greatest wish.)  He seems
extremely content, almost glowing with joy.  They exchange presents.
Picard receives an antique sextant.  All of a sudden, the 23rd century
Guinan appears.  She explains the Nexus and that she is an "echo."
(Apparently everyone who enters the Nexus, leaves an "echo" behind.)
She further explains that Picard can go anywhere he wants--to the past
or the future.  (In this Christmas setting, you start to wonder if
Patrick Stewart is going to break into his one-man version of "A
Christmas Carol".) Picard decides that he wants to leave and stop
Soran.  Guinan tells him that he could use some help and she knows just
the person, "He just got here, too."
     Picard is now by a remote cabin in the woods.  Kirk is there,
chopping wood.  Picard recognizes him and tries to talk.  But Kirk is
preoccupied with everything else, but Picard.  Kirk runs inside the
cabin to check on his breakfast.  Picard follows him, and tries to
explain things again.  Just then, Kirk's old love, Antonia, calls to
him from the bedroom.  This makes Kirk realize that this is his past,
the last day that he spent with Antonia before going back to
Starfleet.  (Presumably this is Kirk's greatest memory.  Not commanding
the Enterprise, or being with his friends, or with Carol Marcus, or
with his son.  Hmmm.)  Kirk explains that after the Enterprise B had
the hull breach, he found himself here, chopping wood.  Picard tells
him that history recorded that Kirk died that day, saving the
Enterprise B.  Picard then tries to convince Kirk to go back with him
to stop Soran.  Kirk doesn't want to go, he's decided that he wants to
stay here with Antonia.
     Kirk takes the prepared breakfast and heads to the bedroom.
Picard follows him and all of a sudden they're both standing in a barn
filled with horses.  Kirk recalls that this is another memory from his
past and jumps on a horse and rides off.  Picard grabs another horse
and follows him.  Kirk is riding fast and is seemingly exhilarated by
all of this.  Kirk jumps a ravine and then comes to a stop.  Picard
catches up with him and Kirk explains that he wasn't scared jumping
that ravine for the first time in his life.  Kirk decides it's because
none of this is real, and Kirk can't truly be Kirk unless there's real
danger involved.  Antonia is in the distance, beckoning to Kirk.  But
he decides she's not real either, and Kirk can't truly be Kirk unless
there's real sex involved.  Eventually, Picard convinces Kirk to go
back with him.
     Back on the planet, Soran is on the mountaintop again.  He fires
at Picard wriggling through the hole again.  The saucer section is
crashing again.
     Suddenly, Kirk appears next to Soran and they begin to fight.
Picard goes to the missile launching platform's control panel and tries
to prevent the launch.  Soran pulls his weapon, but Kirk knocks him out
and the weapon falls to the ground.  Picard accidentally makes the
launching platform become cloaked and he can't see what he's doing.
Kirk finds Soran's remote control and decloaks the platform.
Unbeknownst to them, Soran awakes and recovers his weapon.  He aims and
shoots Kirk in the back.
     Soran runs to the top of the mountain, but Picard harmlessly
launches the missile into the desert.  The star doesn't explode.  Here
comes the energy ribbon.  It misses the planet.  Soran is obsessed and
tries to jump at it.  Picard goes to the wounded Kirk, lying on the
ground.  Soran freaks out and rushes at them.  Picard grabs the weapon
and fires at Soran, killing him.  Picard lies and tells Kirk that he's
going to be okay.  Kirk seemingly dies in Picard's arms.  (Note: In
preventing Soran and himself from ever entering the Nexus, Picard
should now actually be caught in an endless time paradox.  Oh well.)
     We see Picard placing rocks on a grave.  (Is it Kirk's?  Is it
Soran's?) Then Picard places Kirk's Insignia Badge on the grave.  It
must be Kirk's grave, but we never actually see the body buried.
Picard walks through the desert.  He is soon rescued by a
shuttlecraft.  (How they found him, I don't know.)
     Picard and crew are at the saucer section crash site, salvaging
what they can while shuttlecrafts evacuate crew members to an orbiting
rescue ship.  The Enterprise and the saucer section are completely
destroyed.  Data finds his cat Spot in the rubble of his quarters,
shaken but alive.  Picard and Riker are in the Ready Room sifting
through the mess.  There is a blackened hole where Picard's fish
aquarium once was--apparently they gave their lives.  Picard finds his
photo album and they exit to the bridge.  Riker looks at the Captain's
chair and laments that he was hoping to get a crack at it someday.
Picard tells him that he still might as he's sure there will be another
ship called Enterprise.  (NCC-1701-E?)  They beam off to the rescue
ship.
     When the screening ended, the lights came up and they promptly
passed out reaction cards and pencils to everyone.  It asked questions
like: How would you rate the film?  What would you tell your friends
about the film?  Which scenes did you like the most?  Which scenes did
you like the least?  What did you think of the ending? etc.  We filled
them out, turned them in, and were promptly ushered out of the
theater.  Unless you were one of the twenty people that were chosen to
stay afterwards for the focus group.  They were seated at the front of
the theater, where their names were written on small stickers to be
worn on their chests.  Then the moderator proceeded to lead them in a
discussion of various aspects of the film, while the execs sat in back
and listened.  Additionally, the discussion was tape recorded for
future reference.  The moderator asked leading questions, forcing the
discussion in specific directions.  After they were done, they gave
each focus group member ten dollars and thanked them for their time.
     Overall, I enjoyed the movie, and from the reaction of the
audience, it would seem they did too.  It was a very "Star Trek"
audience.  I spoke with people in line beforehand, and the majority of
them seemed to be "Star Trek" fans.  Additionally, I saw a lot of the
reaction cards people were filling out around me, and they were pretty
favorable.
     Some things that I noticed people complaining about on their cards
were that Kirk was killed and additionally how he was killed (shot in
the back).  Also, people were upset that they DESTROYED the
Enterprise.  Other than that, I think most other quibbles were minor.
As they explained at the beginning of the screening, the special
effects and score were temporary in-progress versions.  So everyone
knew not to complain about them.
     I wish some things were different in places, but a movie can't be
everything to everybody.  For example, I felt that some of the best
scenes were with the original cast at the beginning of the film, and I
wanted them to have more than twelve minutes of screen time.  But this
was supposed to be a Next Generation movie, so you have to accept that
Picard, Riker and Data are going to dominate the movie.
     As for the current reshoots that we've all read about, I believe
they're probably just minor changes and/or pickup shots.  I could be
wrong, but I think they probably want to make Kirk's death more heroic
than in the version that we saw.  I base this on some friends of mine
who were two of the people chosen to stay after for the focus group.
They told me that the moderator's questions kept focusing on the
ending.  How did they feel about it when Kirk was killed?  What about
the way he was killed?  The way they pose leading questions means they
felt that these aspects of the film were questionable before they even
screened the film and definitely before they read the reaction cards.
They told me that the general consensus of the group was that Kirk's
death could have been more heroic, especially considering the status
Kirk has with the fans of the show.  Basically, it could have been
better.  But my gut feeling is they're not going to reverse it and let
Kirk live, there are already enough devices in the film (e.g. the
Nexus) to easily bring him back in future films if they want to.

Author
Lewis Butler
     The seventh film in the "Star Trek" series is the first to
introduce the cast of the wildly successful "Next Generation" series to
the silver screen.  As a transitional film between the original series'
cast (TOS) and the new (TNG) it does it job adequately, but not
spectacularly.  The scenes with Captain Kirk (William Shatner) feel
forced and unnecessary, as if they were a late addition to the script
to give Bill another paycheck.  The inclusion of Kirk coupled with the
absence of Spock (Leonard Nimoy) makes these portions of the movie feel
even more out of place.
     Other than Kirk, the plot is good, jumping from one climax to
another in a dizzying spiral, before crashing back to earth with a long
interlude featuring Kirk and Picard (Patrick Stewart).  The resolution
is predictable, but not childish.
     The effects work is outstanding, especially a long sequence
showing a starship crash-landing on a planets surface.  I saw the film
in a DTS equipped theater and the total effect was nothing short of
stunning.
     There are numerous references to TNG episodes, including a rather
humorous resolution to Data's "emotion chip" and an appearance by two
Klingon villains.
     The movie is no STAR TREK II: THE WRATH OF KHAN or STAR TREK IV:
THE VOYAGE HOME but it will satisfy most "Star Trek" fans while
establishing a credible baseline for future films featuring only the
"Next Generation" cast.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: David Carson
Writers: Donald D. Moore and Brannon Braga
Starring: Patrick Stewart, William Shatner, Malcolm McDowell, Jonathan
Frakes, LeVar Burton, Michael Dorn, Gates McFadden, Marina Sirtis, James
Doohan, Walter Koenig, Alan Ruck
Not being a trekkie, but possessing the ability to enjoy "Star Trek"
shows or movies (in moderation), I can't say that I was at all pumped to
see this.  And rightfully so.  Sure, it has come up with an interesting
way to pass the torch from TV show to TV show, but there's really
nothing else there unless you're a Spock-ears-wearing,
live-long-and-prosper saluting, die hard Trekkie.  For the rest of us,
we have to put up with hokey melodrama, and a pretty weak plot.
"Generations" introduces us film-wise to the crew of "Star Trek: the
Next Generation," which wasn't a BAD show, but hardly was as cool as the
original series.  Sure, we have some cool characters: Captain Jean-Luc
Picard (Patrick Stewart), Data (Brent Spiner), and...um...Will Wheaton
was cool for the first couple seasons.  But there's no other instances
of cool supporting characters, other than the blind Jordi (LeVar Burton,
who we all grew up with watching him on "Reading Rainbow"), and the
quiet Commander Ryker (Jonathan Frakes).
The film basically has the cool idea of teaming up the current Captain
Picard and the old and dead Captain Kirk (William Shatner), but that's
all it has.  There's a plot that is poorly constructed just to get these
two together in the end, and even that's not really worth watching the
rest for.  The plot deals with a crazy, obsessive man named Dr. Tolian
Soran (Malcolm McDowell - inspired casting, by the way), who wants to
get himself back inside a thing called the Nexus, which is this kind of
heavenly body that is kind of like paradise or something, but he was in
it before and has been waiting 78 years to get back in (not being a
trekkie, I don't know how a man could not age a bit in 78 years).
The Enterprise stumbles upon him when a lab he was working at was
attacked by Romulans (some sort of bad guys, I dunno), and he survived. 
They soon find out he's really working for the Klingons (DUH!), but that
he's really in it for himself.  He wants to get inside the nexus by
destroying a star, which will send the nexus sweeping through a planet
he'll be on, thus sucking him in...and subsequently destroying the
planet.  Eventually, it comes down to a big one-on-one fight between
Picard and Soran, and soon enough both are inside the nexus, and Picard
has stumbled upon Kirk, who was killed in the opening sequence by
it...sorta.
The film's height is at the end, although it's kind of anti-climactic. 
The only thing that saves it is the acting by both actors, as they have
good chemistry.  They are pitted together in a hokey sequence, one which
never really pays off.  
The beginning is cool, with members of the old crew showing up.  We, of
course, have Kirk, but we also have James Doohan and Walter Keonig...and
Sulu's daughter (I guess George Takei was too busy).  Note: no Spock,
Bones, or Uhura.  It's one of the only satisfying parts of the film,
even if Alan Ruck has a pretty unfunny role.
Of course, there's some little unnecessary subplots, like one dealing
with the android Data who has an emotion chip implanted inside him. 
Instead of being intelligent or anything, it just goes for some really
cheap laughs, as in one scene where he keeps making bad jokes.  This is
never explored in any kind of depth, and is pretty much annoying.
I personally like the "Star Trek" movies...okay, I like the even ones. 
They posess a kind of cool-ness to them, and never got overly corny or
anything.  They had depth to them, and they never became blatanly trying
to make some kind of cheap point.  This one has Picard discussing his
nephew wanting to go into Starfleet, but it stands apart from the rest
of the film instead of meshing along with it.  When he gets to this
nexus, and finds he has an artificial family, it's not as moving as it
should be, although the acting by Stewart saves it all.
Another cool thing about the older "Star Trek" is that they could be
pretty funny without being stupid.  "Star Trek IV" is a prime example of
this, which used its gimmick of Spock trying to assimilate into society
hilariously (I never thought I'd hear Spock utter the word "dumbass"). 
But most humor in this is corny, and just bad.  Brent Spiner's a funny
guy, but the writing for his character is so awful in some scenes that
it gets embarassing.  And a scene towards the beginning, taking place on
an artificial boat is just...ugh.
Then there's the nexus, which is supposed to be a place of absolute
bliss, but instead shows stuff that its inhabitants either never had or
once had, but lost.  It's supposed to be a place where you'd never want
to leave, yet Picard and Kirk do, all due to a really simple way of
thinking.  If it were so tempting, it'd be impossible to leave it.
There are some plusses to the messed-up story, though.  There are
certain exciting and awesome scenes, like the beginning, end, and when
the nexus sweeps through the one planet towards the middle (creating one
of the most gorgeous shots in "Star Trek" history).  The dialogue
between Kirk and Picard is pretty intelligent, and witty and all.  And
Stewart is, of course, awesome, as usual.  Oh, and Malcolm McDowell
makes a fantastic villain, even if he's too under-written.
"Star Trek: Generations" thankfully isn't horrible and un-watchable, but
it's so messed up, confused, and cheap that even the sight of Picard and
Kirk fighting together can't save it.  I really wish it could have,
'cause casting McDowell as the villain is purely inspired casting, and
it's such a shame he has to go to waste.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Patrick Stewart, William Shatner, Jonathan Frakes,
          Brent Spiner, Malcolm McDowell, LeVar Burton, Michael Dorn, 
          Marina Sirtis, Gates McFadden, Whoopi Goldberg, James Doohan,
          Walter Koenig 
Director: David Carson 
Producer: Rick Berman 
Screenplay: Ronald D. Moore & Brannon Braga based on a story by 
            Rick Berman & Ronald D. Moore & Brannon Braga 
Cinematography: John A. Alonzo 
Music: Dennis McCarthy 
Released by Paramount Pictures 
     Despite a reasonably original story line, familiar characters,
first rate special effects, and the hallmark meeting between Captains
Kirk (William Shatner) and Picard (Patrick Stewart), there's something
fundamentally dissatisfying about this, the seventh "Star Trek" feature
film.  The problem is that while STAR TREK: GENERATIONS is undeniably a
major motion picture, too often it seems like little more than an
over-budgeted, double-length episode of the "Next Generation"
television series.  The vestiges of the intangible "Star Trek" magic
which has survived for more than twenty-five years, and weathered six
feature films (the last two of which have been lackluster), are laid to
rest here.  If the spirit of the series is ever again to boldly go, it
will have to rise, phoenix-like, from the ashes.
     STAR TREK: GENERATIONS opens in the twenty third century with the
christening of the USS Enterprise "B".  On hand for the event are three
living legends:  Captain James T. Kirk, Captain Montgomery Scott (James
Doohan), and Commander Pavel Chekov (Walter Koenig).  As so often
happens in the "Star Trek" universe, a ceremonial maiden voyage turns
into a rescue mission, with the Enterprise the only ship within range
to aid refugees trapped by a mysterious--and deadly--energy ribbon.
Kirk, assisted by his two old friends, manages to save nearly fifty
lives, but not before the section of the ship where he's working is
destroyed.  No body is found, but the celebrated Starfleet officer is
presumed dead.  In actuality, however, he has been sucked into the
"Nexus", a place where time has no meaning and where fantasies become
reality.
     Seventy-eight years later, the crew of the Enterprise "D" are
engaged in a rescue mission of their own: saving scientists in an
observatory ravaged by a Romulan attack.  One of the survivors, a
Dr. Soran (Malcolm McDowell), is a long-lived alien who exhibits
certain irrational tendencies.  Driven by an obsessive need to enter
the "Nexus", and willing to take any action necessary to accomplish
that aim, Soran turns against Captain Picard, placing in jeopardy not
only the Enterprise "D", but an entire populated planet.
     It's difficult to say how the general public will react to this
film.  Unlike the previous sequels, GENERATIONS is largely inaccessible
to non-"Trek" aficionados.  However, with its focus on character
development over action, it should prove enjoyable for those
well-acquainted with the voyages of any Enterprise.  One of
GENERATIONS' strengths is its willingness to take chances with the
familiar "Star Trek" mythos.  This movie spends as much time tearing
down old bridges as building new ones.
     There are problems, however, several of which are too obvious to
ignore.  First time feature director David Carson's inexperience is at
times evident.  His film is inconsistently paced, with a few space
battle/action scenes sprinkled liberally throughout an otherwise talky,
protracted story.  A combat sequence between the USS Enterprise "D" and
a Klingon ship lacks any semblance of tension.  Looking back at the
ship-to-ship duels of movies 2, 3, and 6, there was a flair and
buildup that is noticeably absent here.  The battles in GENERATIONS are
hurried, and the viewer appears to be watching rather than
participating, with little opportunity to savor the moment.
     Equally unimpressive is Carson's handling of a certain
highly-emotional moment that figures prominently in the climax.  Again,
perhaps he's rushing things, but those of us in the audience recognize
that the scene should be far more affecting than it actually is.  The
ending of STAR TREK II: THE WRATH OF KHAN, which featured Spock's
death, was wrenching.  By comparison, GENERATIONS' last moments are
flat.
     Malcolm McDowell plays the latest--and probably the weakest--"Star
Trek" film villain.  Following in the footsteps of Ricardo Montalban's
Khan, Christopher Lloyd's Kruge, and Christopher Plummer's Chang,
McDowell can't quite live up to the scenery-chewing nastiness of his
predecessors.  This is precisely because McDowell's Soran is too
restrained--"Trek" bad guys tend to be at their best when hamming it
up.
     The centerpiece of GENERATIONS is the much-anticipated meeting
between Kirk and Picard, which completes the old crew-to-new crew
transition begun in STAR TREK VI.  Shatner wears Kirk like a
comfortable garment, and somehow the film seems more alive when he's on
screen.  Stewart, the consummate professional, is undeniably the better
actor, but his presence isn't as arresting.  Even Brent Spiner, despite
a wonderful, often-comic performance as Lt. Commander Data, can't fill
the gap left when Kirk isn't around.
     One thing made obvious by this picture is that the "Star Trek"
movies are in desperate need of musical continuity.  Dennis McCarthy is
the fifth composer in seven films, and his score is perhaps the most
bland of all.  Except during certain key moments when the Alexander
Courage signature tune is used, most of GENERATIONS' unmemorable music
fades into the dimly-lit background.
     Lovers of frantically-paced science fiction may find GENERATIONS
too static, and fans of the original series will likely be disappointed
by the limited screen time accorded Kirk, Scotty, and Chekov (not to
mention the absence of Spock, Bones, Sulu, and Uhura) Mostly,
GENERATIONS spends its running length searching for--and never
completely finding--its niche.
     If there is an eighth "Star Trek" film, and GENERATIONS isn't the
series' epitaph, perhaps eliminating the burden of mixing characters
from different eras will permit a less-erratic plot line.  Either way,
however, "Star Trek" will never be the same.  Age and a few too many
bad stories may have robbed Kirk and company of their vitality, but
nothing can take away their mystique--and that is the quality which
will sorely be missed.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Dragan Antulov
>From time to time almost everyone experiences peculiar
feeling of being born too early or too late. The author of
this review is reminded of such phenomenon any time he
thinks about STAR TREK phenomenon. I was too young to watch
original series of STAR TREK. Afterwards, certain
unpleasantness in this part of the world prevented me and
most of my generation from enjoying STAR TREK: THE NEW
GENERATION and STAR TREK: DEEP SPACE NINE. As a result, the
only incarnation of Roddenberry's universe I have complete
insight belongs to STAR TREK: VOYAGER and STAR TREK movies.
That probably explains why I wasn't particularly
enthusiastic about STAR TREK: GENERATIONS, 1994 film by
David Carson - project that was supposed to pass the torch
from one generation of STAR TREK crew to another.
Plot begins in 23rd Century when legendary Starfleet Captain
James T. Kirk (played by William Shatner) joins the crew of
Enterprise B on their maiden voyage. But this routine affair
turns into disaster because Enterprise B gets involved into
rescue of two ships, endangered by mysterious energy ribbon
called Nexus. Some of the passengers are saved, but Kirk
disappears. 78 years later, crew of Enterprise D, led by
Captain Jean-Luc Picard (played by Patrick Stewart), must
also deal with Nexus, but their efforts are complicated by
gang of renegade Klingons and activities of Dr. Soran
(played by Malcolm McDowell), evil scientists whose plans
include destruction of entire solar systems. Soran's schemes
also cause interesting shifts in time-space continuum that
would bring Picard and Kirk together.
Being the seventh film in STAR TREK movie series,
GENERATIONS is another example of "odd numbers" malady that
plagues this particular franchise. Screenplay by Ronald D.
Moore is burdened with the need to depict "passing of the
torch" between two generations of STAR TREK, so the film
gets stuffed with references to the past glory of ST:TOS and
ST:TNG - Romulans, Klingons, Borg etc. Unfortunately, many
of those references are completely lost to those viewers who
lack proper "trekkie" credentials and who are forced to
watch rather uninspired and cliche-infested plot (including
the mother all bad SF cliches - mad scientist, played by
tragically typecast Malcolm McDowell) and heavy-handed
attempts of humour. Luckily, the acting is more than
satisfactory, especially in the scenes that combine talents
and charismas of William Shatner and Patrick Stewart. The
last appearance of Shatner as Kirk is probably one of the
most memorable moments in STAR TREK history and even those
viewers who were never fans of the original series could
feel its effect. But this sentimental dimension can't ascend
GENERATIONS from the levels of Hollywood's mediocrity and
this film is one of those pieces of cinema that can be
enjoyed and appreciated only in its proper context.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Jon A. Webb
     STAR TREK: GENERATIONS is a real dog, without the excuses of the
other two dog "Star Trek" films: I (the first, apparently they didn't
know what they were doing) and V (directed by Shatner.)
     Who directed this film?  It is very Shatner-esque.  Captain Kirk
gets to show off his fighting skills, and even Picard seems to prefer
combat given the choice.  (He can go anywhere in the universe in time or
space, and he picks the one place that will allow him to have a fight
with another old guy.  Come on, please.)
     Another Shatner-esque touch: Picard and Kirk get to go to some
place that sounds great, and it turns out to be fake snow, dumb holiday
scenes complete with a Tiny Tim substitute, and K-Mart style holiday
clothes.  (Remember how the visit with "God" in "The Undiscovered
Country" turned out to be really stupid?) No wonder they don't mind
leaving.
     Most of the original Star Trek cast are sensibly absent from this
turkey.  Only Kirk, Scotty, and Chekov show up.
     So many familiar plot devices are screwed up that you wonder how
they're going to make another movie.  I won't give away the plot, such
as it is, by revealing any of this, but I suppose Star Trek VIII will
dedicate itself to undoing the damage done by its predecessor, like
Star Trek III. I just hope they don't resurrect you-know-who.
     "All Good Things..." is a far better film.  I wonder why the same
people who could make a good film like that could not get their act
together well enough to put together a film that would appeal to anyone
other than a Trekkie.
     There's really nothing to recommend in this film.  All the TNG
actors seem to be under the influence of either very bad direction or
some kind of depressants.  Perhaps they don't want to show up the
acting skills of their inferior counterparts from TOS.
     I have an idea.  Maybe Shatner got a clause in his contract
guaranteeing him a certain type of direction, and no acting any better
than his, in exchange for doing this film.  That could explain it.
