Title
Review for Georgia (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Steve Rhodes
     GEORGIA tells the story of two sisters who love each other deeply.
One, Georgia (Mare Winningham), is an unambitious but highly successful
singer.  The other, Sadie (Jennifer Jason Leigh), is an extremely
ambitious but mediocre and unsuccessful singer whose specialty is
singing her sisters songs - badly.  Moreover, Georgia is very domestic.
She loves to cook at the farmhouse where her happy family lives.  Sadie
is single, unhappy, and has a life threatening obsession with drinking.
     When the movie opens Sadie has a bottle of whiskey that she is
guzzling down while being a maid at a cheap motel.  When she is invited
to Georgia's Norman Rockwell farmhouse, Sadie starts off each morning
drinking from mini-bottles in the kitchen.  She stays so wiped out she
can hardly stand up and her emotions are out of control.  Nevertheless,
the love the sisters have for each other shines through this adversity.
Georgia ask Sadie, "What are you drinking?", and Sadie replies, "You
know me.  Whatever is cheap or free."
     Sadie is an awful singer with a scratchy and irritating voice.
She makes up some songs with lyrics including "Take me back" song ten
times in a row like a Chinese water torture.  During her first long
song, people started piling out of my audience and heading to the lobby
for refills.  There is one long songfest that she has towards the end
that made me want to jump up and scream "Cut!" to the editor (Elizabeth
King).
     Eventually, a clean cut kid named Axel (Max Perlich) who is
delivering her groceries falls in love with Sadie.  He and Georgia's
husband Jake (Ted Levine) are excellent in minor but important roles.
There is a scene in the kitchen where Jake is talking with Sadie about
his marital problems over the years that is one of the best scenes of
the movie.  This part reminded me of part of one of my favorite movies,
THE BIG CHILL.
     Sadie has a fatalistic view of the world.  She tells her audience
at a concert that, "In the dark we're all scared.  We're all scared and
there are more of us all the time."  In her tragic life she is being
wasted away by drinking.  She may also be a bulimic.  Georgia tells
her, "I want to know what you do locked away in that bathroom for half
an hour."  She keeps getting frailer and frailer throughout the movie.
Toward the end, I was ready to cry she was so sad.
     And yet, this movie is not a downer.  At its heart and soul it is
about intense sisterly love.  Georgia is embarrassed by Sadie but bites
her tongue, and offers Sadie, literally, the clothes off her back.
Sadie in turn worships the ground that Georgia walks on.
     Jennifer Jason Leigh's performance is riveting.  She is an actress
who really gets into her roles, and it shows.  She is a thin woman who
made a point of losing even more weight for the part.  My only
criticism of her acting is that when Sadie is sober her mannerism do
not change.  Mare Winningham has a hard role to shine in, but she is up
to it.  The chemistry between the two of them is genuine and
believable.  Even some of the very minor characters like that of
Sadie's bandleader Bobby (John Doe) and of the heroin wiped out drummer
Herman (John C. Reilly) are compelling.
     The costumes (Carol Oditz) and the make-up play a vital part.
Sadie's heavy black eye make-up gives her both a wasted and a trendy
look.  Her clothes, especially some of the rags she wears toward the
end, help establish her character.  The script (Barbara Turner) is
written smart and insightful.  I thought I had the ending figured out,
but I didn't.  Finally, much credit has to go to the highly controlled
directing by Ulu Grosbard.
     GEORGIA runs 1:53.  It is correctly rated R for heavy alcohol and
drug abuse, bad language, some nudity, and a little sex.  It is a very
serious show that would be appropriate only for mature teenagers.  This
movie is filled with riveting performances, and I recommend it to you.
It gets *** from me.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Christopher Null
     It may be a movie about family rivalry in the music world, but this
ain't The Judds.  With the amount of dysfunctionality in GEORGIA, The
Jackson Five is a little more like it.
     GEORGIA (Mare Winningham) is the older of two singing sisters, one of
those talented ultra-folky types with a huge following and who sings songs
with choruses like "No more haaaaaard tiiiiiiimes."  Sadie (Jennifer Jason
Leigh) is the pariah of the family (and is much more interesting)--a
strung-out heroin addict with a voice more reminiscent of Johnny Rotten
than Joan Baez and who has a penchant for hacking up cover songs.  As
Sadie puts it, "I sing."  Well, sort of.
     Sadie can't keep a steady gig (not even the local bowling alley), so
she grudgingly turns to sister Georgia for help.  As the perennial black
sheep of the family, Sadie makes a mess of everything--from crashing her
sister's performances to impulsively marrying her sole groupie (Max
Perlich)--and finally ends up in a much-needed detox center.
     While GEORGIA starts strong, hinting at what could have been a
cathartic showdown between the two sisters, the film whimpers off into
lifeless boredom after about half an hour.  The melodramatics here are
shameful, not because they're over-emotional, but because they're just
dull.  In fact, during the big sob story confessionals and soliloquies the
sisters repeatedly engage in, I just quit listening.
     Pieces of the movie are fun and/or funny, and, while I'm probably
disturbed in thinking this, when Sadie spoils Georgia's shows, it's a lot
better than watching another boring old folk singer croon.  Sadie's big
finish is an 8 1/2-minute (note to director: *bad* idea) rendition of Van
Morrison's "Take Me Back" in front of 2000 listeners.  This is supposed to
show us the bared and tortured soul of Sadie, but instead it reveals
merely that those movie theater seats are damn uncomfortable.
     So unless you're just dying to hear Velvet Underground tunes played
(badly) at bar mitzvahs, I'd recommend keeping this GEORGIA off your mind.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (reviews)  /  http://cca2.carrington.com/emporium/
-Screenwriter / Novelist / Publisher
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(Miramax)
Directed by    Ulu Grosband
Written by     Barbara Turner
Cast           Jennifer Jason Leigh, Mare Winningham, Ted Levine
MPAA Rating    "R" (presumably for language, nudity, drug use, etc.)
Running Time   113 minutes
Reviewed at    The Colony Twin, Raleigh, NC (10FEB96)
     Mare Winningham and Jennifer Jason Leigh play two singing sisters,
one stable and quite successful, the other addicted to gross self-
destruction.  Guess which one Leigh plays.  Director Ulu Grosband's
uncomfortable drama has been winning praise ever since Cannes and the
Montreal World Film Festival, where, at the latter, it was inexplicably
awarded two top awards.  As written by Barbara Turner (Leigh's Mom),
GEORGIA fancies itself as a musical "tough love" tale; a story where the
"better" half truly loves and, thus, must tolerate the "less-fortunate"
one.  Bullshit.  Everyone in this movie-- including the *very* good
Winningham-- tolerates Leigh's behavior, never once forcing her to help
herself.  That's fine, I guess, for those legions of people who enjoy
watching this sort of spiraling self-abuse.  They are probably the same
ones who thought that Leigh was *fabulous* in MRS. PARKER AND THE
VICIOUS CIRCLE.  Me, I fell asleep.
--
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
MOVIE HELL is on the Web!  http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>
