Title
Review for Hakachu no torima (1966)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
After the collapse of a collective farm in Japan in the 1960s, one of
the collective members becomes a thief, murderer, and serial rapist who
terrorizes the nation.  He is protected from the police by two women,
who have complex relationships with the rapist and each other.  An
interesting psychological crime story.
Japan (English subtitles), black-and-white, 1966, 100 minutes.
Director: Nagisa Oshima.
     This is a stylish film from Nagisa Oshima, who later became famous
(or should I say infamous?) for the films IN THE REALM OF THE SENSES
and EMPIRE OF PASSION.  The story concerns Eisuke, a member of a farming
collective that went bankrupt.  It begins when he visits a young woman,
another former collective member, who is working in a city.  He rapes
her, and kills her employer (also a woman).  The police arrive and
interrogate the surviving woman.  She deliberately misleads them while
she contacts the rapist's wife, who is another former collective member.
     The story of the events at the collective farm, and the somewhat
sordid relationships that existed between Eisuke (the rapist), Genji
(the collective leader), and the two women is told in flashbacks that
are interwoven with current events.  The woman who was raped wants to
talk with the rapist's wife before turning him in to the police.
However, the wife does not answer the letters of inquiry.  The story
continues as the police learn a little about Eisuke, but don't yet have
his full name or photo....
     This is a well-written story, and is relatively interesting.  It is
also quite stylish in some respects.  The editing is extremely good and
very smooth.  One aspect that is interesting at first, then becomes a
distraction in the film, is the use of extreme close-up scenes.
Frankly, close-ups of sweating eyebrows and chins lose their "novelty"
very quickly!
     The primary focus in the film is on the relationships between the
two women and the two men who were in the collective.  They are rather
sordid relationships; there is much talk of suicide when the collective
fails, and one must wonder why the rapist's wife loves him so, even
though he treats her very badly.  It is interesting that both women
protect the rapist from the police, even though they were jealous rivals
in the past, and they both consider him to be a beast.  The film
ultimately makes some interesting comments on the nature of compulsive
criminals, and their motivation, though I cannot say more on that
without revealing the ending.
     Comparing this film to IN THE REALM OF THE SENSES, it is clear that
both films focus on compulsion.  VIOLENCE deals with compulsive criminal
behavior, REALM with compulsive sexual behavior.
     The film is well-made, and will generally hold your interest.  Fans
of crime drama, particularly those with a psychological slant, will find
the film worth considering.  Also, fans of the director's later films
might find it interesting too.
Distribution: Screened at the Pacific Film Archive in Berkeley, CA.  The
print was from the Archive's collection of Japanese films.  The owner of
the film copyright is Kino International.
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU
