Title
Review for Lilies of the Field (1963)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark O'Hara
Search the Archives at http://www.movie-page.com
"Lilies of the Field" was a small, good novel made into a small, good movie.
Think of the book and film versions of Glendon Swarthout's "Bless the Beasts 
and Children," or even Charles Portis' "True Grit."  These are not major 
works of twentieth-century literature, but they are solid and typically 
American in their strong, independent characters and distinctive human 
interaction.  Ralph Nelson's film takes William E. Barrett's book and turns 
it into a plain, intriguing tale.
Homer Smith (Sidney Poitier), the novel tells us, is and ex-GI.  (The movie 
is sparer than the book in this area, telling us very little about his 
background;  we know only that he is Southern Baptist, and that he is 
traveling in his station wagon/home through the American Southwest.)  
Stopping at a desolate mission in the desert, Homer asks a nun for water for 
his overheating car.  Moments later he examines his skinny wallet and 
decides to do a few chores for the nuns, before he moves on to whatever city 
happens to come next.
But a few chores turn into a hot and cold relationship of several months' 
duration.  Mother Maria (Lilia Skala) puts off Homer's requests for payment, 
but looks heavenward gratefully for the "big, strong man He has sent" to 
build a chapel in the convent compound.  At first reluctant to undertake 
this daunting task, Homer tangles with a big-time builder named Ashton, in 
town, and ends up driving Ashton's bulldozers two days a week.  So some cash 
is coming in while Homer struggles with constructing a modest adobe church 
in the torrid sun - that is, until he runs out of bricks.
Sidney Poitier is masterful as Homer Smith; this is one of the roles that 
Poitier will be remembered for.  His subtle humor fills the plot, even 
becoming hilarious at times.  In one scene Homer is teaching the German nuns 
English, and he cannot help himself from modeling for them some Southern 
black dialect: Instead of "I stand up," he grins as the sisters follow his 
"Ah stands up, y'all"!  Homer is so likable because he is good-natured, but 
Poitier lends texture to his character mainly through his interaction with 
his foil, the Mother Superior who will not thank him for all of his labors.  
Watch for strong muscial scenes from Poitier as well, in which he 
intermingles his own religious background with the nun's East Germany 
Catholicism.
Lilia Skala is appropriately stern and commanding as Mother Maria.  We know 
the sisters have come a long way, even over the Berlin Wall, to get to this 
inherited property in the American desert.  The broken English spoken by her 
and her charges serves to endear the nuns to us.  They are all humble but 
fiercely devoted people.
As Juan, Stanley Adams does nice work.  Although his accent and diction 
smack of falseness - this man seems to want to revert to a Bronx twang - 
Adams musters a rascally nonchalance that bonds him with Homer.  Juan also 
functions as a template for the modern age:  Catholic-born, this agnostic 
now serves meals in his restaurant while the traveling priest says mass for 
the people who have come from far and wide.
Dan Frazer does well as Father Murphy, the priest whose prayers for a 
massive cathedral were answered with a trailer with bald tires.  And 
director Ralph Nelson ( who made many films beside this one, notably 
"Requiem for a Heavyweight," "Father Goose" and "Charly) acquits himself 
well as Mr. Ashton, the slightly racist builder who employs Homer and who is 
the victim of Mother Maria's constant pleas for donations.
Jerry Goldsmith's score lends light-hearted fun to many scenes.  The 
segueways are particularly interesting, with folksy harmonica swipes 
accompanying Homer's station wagon on the dusty hills.
If you are looking for a small but thought-provoking work, a film that 
covers tolerance and faith and friendship through its exploration of a most 
unlikely relationship, watch "Lilies of the Field."

