Title
Review for Cure, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Scott Renshaw
     There is a scene in THE CURE in which two boys face down a trio
of taunting bullies.  One of the boys has AIDS; the other boy, who
earlier in the film had been afraid of catching the disease, is now
his best friend.  The newly-enlightened boy lectures the bullies
about how the disease could have happened to anyone, and the
chastened bullies walk away.  You might not be surprised to find
such a scene in a movie like THE CURE, but you probably would be
surprised to find it only twenty minutes into the film.  While it is
exceptionally well-acted, THE CURE rambles on for far too long
without a sense of purpose, like an attempt to stretch an
"Afterschool Special" into a feature film.
     Brad Renfro plays Erik, a young loner coping with the absence
of his father and an alcoholic mother (Diana Scarwid).  His new
neighbor is Dexter (Joseph Mazzello), a boy who contracted the AIDS
virus from a blood transfusion, and his mother (Annabella Sciorra).
Although Erik is initially confrontational, the two boys without any
other friends soon develop a close friendship.  Among the activities
they share is an attempt of their own to find a cure for the fatal
disease, and when Erik sees an article in a tabloid newspaper about
a "miracle cure" found in Louisiana, he becomes determined to get it
for Dexter.  Leaving their home in Minnesota, Erik and Dexter travel
south in an attempt to find the key to saving Dexter's life.
     To THE CURE's credit, the most important thing about it, the
relationship between Erik and Dexter, is also the best thing about
it.  Brad Renfro, who made an impressive debut in THE CLIENT, has
the more dynamic role of Erik, the cocky inveterate liar.  There is
an edge to his acting which is uncommon in younger actors who
generally seem to eager to have the audience adore them, and he uses
that to his advantage as the troubled young man in need of a friend.
Mazzello is more than equal to him, granting Erik his tall tales and
half-baked explanations like only young best friends do.  Their
rapport is genuine and very touching, and complemented by the fine
supporting work of Diana Scarwid and Annabella Sciorra as their
mothers.  Sciorra in particular has some great moments as she
becomes a kind of surrogate mother to Erik.
     What sabotages the emotional impact of their friendship is THE
CURE's clumsy and episodic story arc.  By the time the
aforementioned scene between Erik, Dexter and the three bullies
occurs, everyone in the story who is really going to do any changing
has already changed.  There is nothing to do with them but send them
off on a series of adventures, some of which are mildly interesting
but don't really have a dramatic purpose.  While Erik and Dexter are
well-acted and sympathetic characters, at a certain point it becomes
clear that all we are really going to be doing for the rest of THE
CURE's running time is waiting for Dexter to die.
     And what a wait it is.  There is manipulation, and then there
is what THE CURE traffics in, a lingering conclusion in the hospital
which attempts to pull the tears out of you with an industrial
strength vacuum cleaner.  It seems as though screenwriter Robert
Kuhn had an idea for a drama about AIDS and a drama about two
friends on a journey, but neither one was long enough independently
to turn into a feature.  The problem is that THE CURE says nothing
new about AIDS, and bails out on the potentially intriguing
connection of absent fathers between the two boys.  We never learn
anything about where Dexter's father is, and the anticipated meeting
between Erik and his father in New Orleans never materializes.  It's
a shame, because director Peter Horton (TV's "thirtysomething") has
a deft touch with much of the film's potentially pathos-inducing
material.  But when you're playing the AIDS card, you had better
have a really strong hand.  THE CURE has one solid pair of aces, and
a lot of spaces.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     In reviewing the film, I must preface it with the statement that I
believe AIDS is a plague about which I feel very strongly.  So when I
say that I felt the film should have been entitled, THE CURE (OR HUCK
FINN HAS AIDS) you will be aware that I am not being funny about AIDS
but rather about the film.
     Dexter (Joseph Mazzello) is an eleven-year-old who has contracted
AIDS during a blood transfusion.  All the kids shun him him and many
call him "homo."  It seemed to me that how he caught the AIDS could
have been explained by Linda, (Dexter's mother, Annabella Sciorra) and
that would have stopped the harassing but of course, then there would
not have been a film.
     Dexter does find a sympathetic friend, Erik (Brad Renfro), also
eleven years old. When he hears of a "cure" down south the two friends
take off on a raft on the Mississippi (a la Huck Finn) and go seek the
doctor who is claiming he has a cure.  That part of the film and the
people they encounter reminded me of Mark Twain's masterpiece.
     Unlike the excellent LORENZO'S OIL, with the passionate Susan
Sarandon and Nick Nolte fighting the doctors, doing there own research
and keeping the film alive and us on edge, this fails on all counts.
Well intentioned, certainly.  Box office?  I doubt it.  Too sad and not
enough excitement.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: wide release 4/21/95
Running Length: 1:38
MPAA Classification: PG-13 (AIDS themes, language)
     Forget cancer.  That life-stealer, which has fueled tear-jerkers
from TERMS OF ENDEARMENT to MY LIFE, is passe, its position usurped by
AIDS.  Apparently, PHILADELPHIA was just the tip of the iceberg, and,
if THE CURE is any indication, the American movie-going population may
be on the verge of a deluge.  One problem immediately comes to mind,
however--how the grueling ordeal of the victim can be made palatable
for mass market audiences.  THE CURE offers a possibility, and it's not
a pleasant one, for, as presented in this film, the bane of AIDS offers
a noble, sanitized death.  The Hollywood portrait of suffering here is
in stark contrast to the gut-wrenching reality of SILVERLAKE LIFE:  THE
VIEW FROM HERE, Peter Friedman and Tom Joslin's 1993 documentary about
living with and dying from AIDS.
     If you're looking for a watered-down AIDS movie that goes for the
easy way out every time, THE CURE is perfect.  It's the kind of
production that would be at home as a TV after school special.  In the
most pedantic and obvious fashion possible, it ticks off all the
appropriate truths:  people shouldn't be reviled because they have
AIDS, AIDS is not an airborne contagion, you don't have to be gay to
get AIDS, and some gay people are even "nice."  Of course, these are
all valid messages for a motion picture to disseminate to a
largely-ignorant public, but THE CURE presents them in a preachy and
awkward manner.  Good intentions combined with poor execution don't add
up to much.
     The story centers around two neighboring boys:  Erik (Brad Renfro
of THE CLIENT), a loner with a self-absorbed, often-drunk mother (Diana
Scarwid), and Dexter (Joseph Mazzello of JURASSIC PARK and
SHADOWLANDS), an AIDS victim whose only friend is his loving mom
(Anabella Sciorra).  After a few conversations through a fence, Erik
and Dexter meet face-to- face, the former having to overcome a fear of
getting physically close to someone in Dexter's condition.  However,
following this first meeting, it doesn't take long for the two to
become pals, and their growing friendship leads Erik to help Dexter
begin a search for a cure to rid him of the scourge threatening to
claim his life.
     In general, the script, which has a tendency to paint everything
with broad strokes in black and white, is not well-written.  While
there are several scenes that are wonderfully insightful (such as an
incident when Erik and Dexter covertly flip through an issue of
PLAYBOY, then come into contact with two "real" women), these represent
high points in a screenplay that often relies upon coincidence,
contrivance, and manipulation.  The ultimate goal of THE CURE is to
wring a few tears from everyone in the audience, and it tries
everything in pursuit of that aim.
     Character development proceeds along predictable, and not
especially deep, lines.  These aren't real people; they've been lifted
from stock.  Does anyone doubt that Erik and Dexter are destined to be
good friends?  Can anyone not see that Dexter's mom will develop
maternal feelings for her son's only buddy?  Is there any doubt that
Erik's mother, the personification of AIDS-paranoia, homophobia, and
alcoholism all-in-one, is actually a reincarnation of the Wicked
Witch?  In fact, actress Diana Scarwid drips so much meanness that she
comes across as laughably absurd.
     I found one scene in THE CURE somewhat alarming, and possibly a
little irresponsible.  In an instance when Erik and Dexter are menaced
by a knife-wielding bully, the AIDS-infected child calmly slices his
own hand, brandishes the open wound, and intones, "My blood is like
poison." This particular method of fighting back gets the job done--the
man runs away--but it also potentially reinforces several negative
stereotypes about AIDS and AIDS victims.  Is the single camera shot of
cuts on the attacker's arm enough to clue the audience in that
blood-to-blood contact is necessary for a possible transmission?  Or
will the less-enlightened viewer come away thinking that a drop of HIV+
blood is deadly even if it touches only unbroken skin?
     There were plenty of wet eyes at the screening of THE CURE I
attended, which indicates that the movie was accomplishing something.
It does this, however, through shameless and intrusive manipulation
that is less concerned about emotional honesty than pulling strings.
Had the characters been more than thinly-sketched types and had the
story contained a few more of those "special" moments of bonding
between the two children, THE CURE might have been a heartwarming,
heartbreaking tale.  As it is, this film left me longing for another
viewing of SILVERLAKE LIFE or, failing that, PHILADELPHIA.  Both
present the same themes as THE CURE, but in a manner that is both
poignant and effective.
-James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
