Title
Review for Änglagĺrd (1992)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Scott Renshaw
In Swedish, with English subtitles
Starring:  Helena Bergstrom, Rikard Wolff, Sven Wolter.
Screenplay/Director:  Colin Nutley.
     When I think of Swedish films, comedy does not exactly spring to
mind.  The central figure is of course Ingmar Bergman, whose imagistic
and introspective works have given me a somewhat grim picture of
Swedish cinema, and of Sweden in general.  Now it appears that I must
change my perception.  The impetus for that change is HOUSE OF ANGELS,
a bright and lively comedy that takes on moral hypocrisy and
provincialism with delightful results.
     HOUSE OF ANGELS is set in a small Swedish farming village where
Erik Zander (Per Oscarsson), a reclusive landowner, has just passed
away.  Among the many citizens less than devastated by his passing is
Axel Flogfalt (Sven Wolter), a wealthy mill owner who covets the timber
on Erik's land.  He believes Erik has died without an heir, and that he
will be able to obtain the land when it goes up for public auction.
Enter Fanny (Helena Bergstrom), who arrives on a motorcycle with
leather-clad companion Zac (Rikard Wolff) and shocks the community by
announcing that she's Erik's granddaughter.  Fanny and Zac, flamboyant
Berlin cabaret performers, then take up residence on the Zander farm,
Anglagaard, much to the consternation of the town's stuffy populace.
     Writer/director Colin Nutley does a fantastic job of establishing
the hidden peccadillos of the town's citizens.  Before Erik's death, a
ghoulish Axel tells his son that he looks forward to the benefit he
stands to gain from the event.  Axel's nephew Per-Ove, who runs the
town grocery store, sits in the back room watching American porno films
between customers; his stock girl Eva is carrying on a roadside affair
with Axel's rakish son Morten.  The framework of these little sins
makes their response to Fanny's open sexuality and exuberance all the
more laughable.  Axel's uptight wife Ruth assumes that Zac must be a
drug user because of his appearance, and that the interlopers from the
big city will ruin their wholesome community.  Nutley crafts a tale
about a particular intolerance which transcends the particular and
addresses the universal foolishness of such narrow-mindedness.
     The film is at its best when it deals with the direct interactions
between Fanny and the town's citizens.  She slowly begins to win over
the more even-tempered folk, including the young priest Father Henning
and two shy elderly brothers.  The latter in particular is a hilarious
scene, as Fanny and Zac try to explain to the two perplexed men the
exact nature of their sometimes bawdy performances.  There is also an
intense but comic confrontation between Fanny and Ruth, where the
threatened matron ticks off the terrible vices Fanny will perpetrate on
the small town ("I've seen it all on TV!" she cries).  HOUSE OF ANGELS
is full of such scenes, and most of them sparkle.  Make special note of
the wonderful montage following Fanny's decision to give the town
gossips something *really* worth gossipping about.
     HOUSE OF ANGELS certainly isn't a perfect film.  Bergstrom is
lovely as Fanny, but she's not quite as fully developed a character as
she could be, especially concerning why she's so eager to stay at
Anglagaard.  The film also suffers from some choppy editing in the
final half hour, and singularly unimpressive translations in some of
the subtitles.  However, none of this should keep you away from HOUSE
OF ANGELS.  The photography of the Swedish countryside is beautiful,
and the interiors are almost as impressive.  It's also a film with a
fantastic ensemble cast; there truly is not a bad performance to be
found.  The most memorable for me:  Reine Brynolfsson as the
introverted Gottfrid, whom Fanny draws out of his shell into a warm
friendship.
     HOUSE OF ANGELS was an Academy Award nominee for Best Foreign
Language Film last year, and it appears to have been a richly deserved
honor.  It's reminiscent of Bill Forsyth's LOCAL HERO, with a slight
moralist twist.  It could take some searching to find it near you, but
it will be well worth the effort.
     On the Renshaw scale of 0 to 10 rounds of "Auld Lang Syne" (you'll
have to see it to understand):  9.

Author
James Berardinelli
     As you drive around the United States, you can immediately
identify what type of community you're riding through by the houses you
see and the people outside of them.  Conformity is a staple of society,
and those who refuse to fit in almost inevitably become the targets for
all sorts of unreasonable persecution.  Obviously, this isn't the case
for just one country.  As the current worldwide news headlines point
out, it's a universal truth, and Colin Nutley's HOUSE OF ANGELS
provides another viewpoint of the price of conforming, or refusing to
do so.
     HOUSE OF ANGELS begins in a small farming community somewhere in
Sweden, where a local citizen is about to meet his death in an
automobile accident.  At his funeral, his sole surviving relative
arrives--a long- lost granddaughter by the name of Fanny (Helena
Bergstrom).  She is accompanied by gay companion Zac (Rikard Wolff),
who's the perfect picture of a biker: leather jacket, sunglasses, and
five o'clock shadow.  The pair are from Berlin, and have big city
conventions that don't exactly fit in the small town setting, so when
they move into the dead man's house, the residents of the village
become uneasy.  The women are afraid that Fanny will steal away their
menfolk, and the men are uncertain what to make of their new neighbor.
Only one person has a clear goal.  Axel (Sven Wollter), the local
bigshot, wants Fanny out so he can buy up her land.
     Things aren't always what they seem--a point that HOUSE OF ANGELS
is adept at illustrating.  The script is peppered with such instances,
the most obvious of which relates to the two central characters.  Fanny
and Zac look like the wild, drug-addicted deviants that the townspeople
believe them to be, but few are willing to get to know the pair well
enough to test their preconceived convictions.  Once the label is
affixed, nothing Fanny can do will remove it.  Eventually, she decides
to give people what they expect, but this leads only to her own
disillusionment.
     The small town/big city conflict is played out with conformity as
the principal weapon.  Too many of the villagers don't want something
new or different in their midst, and so are threatened by what Fanny
and Zac represent.  Rather than concede the potential value in such
diversity, they attempt to squash it.  The local vicar's pleas for
understanding fall on deaf ears as a group of women led by Axel's wife
Rut (Viveka Seldahl) confront Fanny and tell her plainly that she isn't
wanted.
     Before her grandfather's death, Fanny hadn't been to the village.
Indeed, she never met the man who willed her his estate.  Her mother
died when she was eleven, and she never knew her father's identity.  By
coming to the place where her mother became pregnant, Fanny is given
the opportunity to explore her roots.  Finding her father isn't of
paramount importance, since she already recognizes what the audience
comes to learn: it's who you are, not who your parents were, that
makes the difference.
     Given the nature of the subject matter, clumsy handling could
easily turn every character into a caricature.  There's the gay biker,
the shrewish housewife, the aging bachelors, the plotting rich man, and
the randy young carpenter.  Credit director Colin Nutley for rigorously
avoiding the stereotype pitfalls.  His attention to detail has caused
the population of HOUSE OF ANGELS' village to be comprised of
carefully- constructed individuals.  The cast also deserves
recognition; there's not one of them that isn't up to the task of
playing a unique part.
     HOUSE OF ANGELS is an excellent example of how a film that is
basically lighthearted in spirit can be used to probe deeper, more
intense issues without becoming preachy or overbearing.  There's a
priest in this film, but the movie isn't given to sermonizing.  The
picture's sense of fun rarely flags, nor does the inner core of drama
that underlies each scene.  HOUSE OF ANGELS has a lot to say, and the
best thing is that the audience enjoys every word that's spoken.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
