Title
Review for Under Suspicion (2000)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Susan Granger
  Powerhouse performances propel this tense, gripping
psychological thriller set amidst the carnivalesque festival of San
Sebastian in Puerto Rico.  Morgan Freeman plays a local police chief
who summons a prominent tax attorney - that's Gene Hackman - to his
office for an interrogation prior to a gala fund-raising party that
the attorney is hosting at a posh hotel across the street. There have
been a series of grisly murders of young girls in the precinct and,
for reasons that later become clear, Freeman suspects that Hackman is
involved in the sordid scandal. But why Hackman, who lives in a
magnificent villa with a sultry trophy-wife (Monica Bellucci) whom he
describes as "a beautiful woman who moves through life unchallenged"?
Yet, as Hackman nervously flicks his fancy cigarette lighter, there's
something suspicious about him, as a cocky young detective (Thomas
Jane) repeatedly points out. And the ultra-courteous Freeman, who
would like to be the next superintendent, cleverly reads the
desperation in Hackman's body language, maintaining that he's only
trying to clarify some details. Adapted by screenwriters Peter Iliff
and Tom Provost from Claude Miller's French cult classic, "Garde a
Vue" ("The Inquisitor"), and directed by Stephen Hopkins ("Lost in
Space," "The Ghost and the Darkness"), the character-driven
crime-mystery unfolds, revealing how both men have painful pasts
filled with secrets and lies. "You peel my onion down to the nub,"
admits Hackman. But the tedious repetition of the cross-questioning
and the too-frequent flashbacks detract from the narrative, diluting
its impact as the plot takes a dangerous, tortured twist. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Under Suspicion" is a disturbing 6,
as deceptive as the costumes of the San Sebastian street carnival.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews, screensavers, trailers & more, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Can Morgan Freeman ever give a bad acting performance? Or what about Gene
Hackman for that matter? Two solid thespians starring in a film that's been
mulling around in Hackman's mind since he saw the original French version
back in 1981, this movie was finally produced when Freeman's own production
company took a shot at it. I was one of the many members of a packed opening
night house at the Montreal Film Festival as this movie presented itself to
one of its first preview audiences.
PLOT:
A rich lawyer with a very pretty young wife is called in to answer some
questions about two local teenage girl murders by a detective with a slight
suspicion about the man. It isn't long before the brash attorney tumbles
over a few lies and consequently leads his inquisitors to further suspect
his guilt. The cat and mouse game between the cop and suspect, with
flashbacks, is what fills our time with the dueling duo.
CRITIQUE:
A slow-moving yet engaging mystery starring two great actors at the top of
their form, keeps you guessing throughout, but ultimately may lose many fans
with its unorthodox ending. I personally do not mind movies that ask the
viewer to "think" a little after the roll of the credits, but this one
actually threw me for a little bit of a loop. In fact, I'm still sort of
vague on the exact outcome of the characters in this film, but despite that,
still enjoyed the ride and would actually be willing to see it again, just
to certify my theories about its conclusion. Unfortunately, I saw the movie
by myself so I wasn't able to discuss it with anyone either. So that is one
thing about the movie that you should know right off the bat. If you only
like films that close things up nice and tidy, then you might as well skip
this ambiguous puppy. But if you enjoy films like 12 ANGRY MEN, in which the
viewer is asked to discover things as it moves along, changing their mind
throughout and ultimately passing their own judgment before the final
decision comes down, then this is just your kind of mystery. The film
could've been cut by about 15 minutes or so, with some scenes dragging on
somewhat, but ultimately the superior performances by the two leads is what
kept me interested throughout.
I also credit director Hopkins with some beautiful shots of the city during
its opening credits, and an extremely unique perspective on the flashback
sequences, in which the person being told the flashback actually joins the
speaker in their own retelling. Very well done and certainly an original
idea which lent an interesting new perspective to the goings-on of the past.
Extremely stylized flashbacks as well. Hopkins goes nuts with the camera
work. Oh yeah, and let me not forget to mention the stunning beauty of
newcomer Monica Bellucci, an Italian actress, who radiates on the screen,
and actually holds her own alongside the big boys. The film is really a
difficult one to rate because it's one of those movies that didn't leave me
feeling "complete" when I walked out. But looking back, I was quite "into
it" while I was there, and the reasoning behind the ending is just now
beginning to sink into my psyche, so let's just say that it may take a
little while to fully appreciate.
Will you like it? Not sure. Does any of this sound interesting to you? If
so, then I suggest you go see it and decide for yourself. There are some
definite things that I could tell you though: the mystery in the film is a
good one, the movie is slow and long but tends to hold your interest, and as
I mentioned earlier, the performances are strong, but the ending...initially
unsatisfying. In the end, I think that if you like a good murder mystery,
you may enjoy unraveling this one, despite the lack of real action or
thrills.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Lead stars Gene Hackman and Morgan Freeman are also the executive producers
on this project. Hackman has wanted to remake this film since he saw the
original French film in 1981, and finally got the opportunity when Freeman's
own production company, Revelations Entertainment, backed the project.
Morgan Freeman has been nominated for an Oscar on three occasions, but never
won.
Gene Hackman has been nominated for an Oscar on five occasions and won
twice. Once for Best Actor in 1972 for THE FRENCH CONNECTION and another one
as Best Supporting Actor in 1992's UNFORGIVEN.
This film is a remake of the 1981 French film called GARDE A VUE, which
itself was based on the novel "Brainwash" by John Wainwright. This film was
initially entitled THIRD DEGREE.
This movie was filmed entirely on location in Puerto Rico.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Lions Gate Films/Revelations Entertainment
 Director: Stephen Hopkins
 Writer:  W. Peter Iliff, Tom Provost, based on the movie
"Garde A' Vue" by Claude Miller, Jean Herman and Michel
Audiard from the book "Brainwash" by John Wainwright.
 Cast: Morgan Freeman, Gene Hackman, Thomas Jane,
Monica Bellucci, Nydia Caro, Miguel Angel Suarez, Pablo
Cunqueiro
   Move over, Inspector Javert.  You spent your whole career
tracking down the innocent Jean Valjean in Victor Hugo's
"Les Miserables," but for sheer fanaticism you have nothing
on Captain Victor Benezet, a San Juan cop with political
ambitions in Stephen Hopkins's tense, involving and adult
picture "Under Suspicion."  This detective thriller with
Hitchcockian undertones is of the sort that could be effective
on the live stage, as most of the action takes place within the
local police precinct, but Hopkins--exploiting a taut screenplay
by W. Peter Iliff and Tom Provost--has opened up the
operation to establish the exciting ambience of Puerto Rico
during its San Sebastian carnival.
   The film is the result of Gene Hackman's relentless search
for backing to remake the French film, "Garde A' Vue" which
he had seen some twenty years ago, finally hitting pay dirt
when Morgan Freeman's production company, Revelations
Entertainment, backed the project.  Claude Miller's 1981
picture, written by Michel Audiard and Jean Herman, featured
Michel Serrault in the role of a rich and envied notary married
to the beautiful and noble but impoverished Chantal (Romy
Schneider) who coldly ignores him, and is held on New
Year's Eve by Inspector Antoine Gallien (Lino Ventura) as a
suspect in the rape-murder of two young girls.  As in that
original version, the crime itself becomes merely a
background for an intricate verbal chess game between a cop
and a lawyer who, we learn, have quite a bit in common
except that the policeman is of a different race and not
as wealthy as the celebrated tax lawyer he interrogates.
   On the stage, the story would hold and audience simply by
the discipline and tenseness of the inquiry--a long night's
journey into day pitting Capt. Victor Benezet (Morgan
Freeman) against the rich and powerful attorney, Henry
Hearst, who, he becomes convinced, is guilty of raping and
killing two 13-year-old girls--particularly after confirming that
his prisoner is telling a heap of lies.  The combination of first-
rate acting by the two pros and the trenchant screenplay lead
us in the audience to realize that the real issue is the fight-to-
the-death of two strong protagonists, the police captain
determined to wear down his opponent, the lawyer incensed
that he is being held on what he repeatedly calls a ludicrous
charge.
   Hanging over the proceedings is the complex relationship
between the 57-year-old Henry Hearst and his astonishingly
beautiful and sophisticated 30-ish wife, Isabella (Monica
Bellucci).  Hearst, a photographer by avocation who
maintains that he is building an archive of the island's
chronology, in fact has his eyes on a subject with quite a bit
less history: 13-year-old girls.  His regard for them,
particularly for his adorable niece Camille, is a source of
regular provocation to his lovely wife, who like the women in
Aristophanes' "Lysistrata" has been by locking him out of the
bedroom.  Increasingly depressed, desperate for attention
and affection, and most of all self-destructive, Hearst seeks
out the company of low-class street hookers despite his
ability to afford services of the highest-price escort services. 
Putting two and two together, Capt. Benezet--a former
colleague of his prisoner with whom he is on a first-name
basis--is convinced of the lawyer's guilt, and while he uses
his brain to break the man down, he must at the same time
restrain the young, callow and handsome detective who
assists in the questioning, Felix Owens (Thomas Jane).
   We have to suspend judgment a bit in watching this film
and do so happily given the tension that the production
affords us.  In real life, a smart and rich tax attorney would
abide by the adage that a man who acts as his own lawyer
has a fool for a client.  No way would Hearst be willing to
expose so many of his family problems to a captain who is
out to nail him regardless of the cordiality the two had known
in the past.  That done, we can enjoy the cat-and-mouse
game while taking in the fun and games of the revelers
outside doing a modest imitation of Rio's annual Mardi Gras. 
Although Benezet's questioning takes place wholly within the
immediate vicinity of the police station, Hopkins has a stylish
way of putting Benezet imaginatively next to Hearst in the
outdoor scenes when, of course, the cop is nowhere near the
accused in and around the neighborhood of La Perla where a
murder had taken place.
   One wonders why Hackman needed to wait for a score of
years to get this film produced given its mastery of the
techniques of detective thrillers.  Could the studios really
have believed that "Under Suspicion" would be incapable of
attracting a large audience simply because the picture
substitutes explosive men for exploding building and features
neither car crashes nor invisible men?
Rated R.  Running time: 110 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
