Title
Review for Musíme si pomáhat (2000)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Robin Clifford
Another comedy about the Holocaust? It took some the film-going populace a
while to accept the popularity of Roberto Benigni's heartwarming tale about
a father and son in a Nazi concentration camp in "Life Is Beautiful." Now,
Czech filmmakers Jan Hrebejk and Petr Jarchovsky take a similar theme and
go the black comedy route in a story about a couple in a small, occupied
town who make the dangerous decision to hide an escaped Jewish prisoner in
"Divided We Fall."
Josef (Boleslav Polivka) and Marie Cizek (Anna Siskova) are a childless
couple who are trying to live a normal life in the face of his sterility
and the occupation of their small town by the German army. One night, Josef
meets the son, David Weiner (Csonger Kassai), of his former, Jewish
employer and learns that the young man is the sole survivor of his family.
He escaped from a concentration camp and returned home to collect some
hidden jewelry before trying to escape his own certain death.
Josef makes the snap decision to hide the frightened refugee, opening
himself and Marie up to danger as they try to balance their humanitarian
deed with survival under the Nazis. Complicating matters are the frequent,
unexpected visits by Josef's former colleague and, now, Nazi collaborator,
Horst Prohazka (Jaroslav Dusek), a slimy toady who openly lusts after
Marie. The couple must maintain a semblance of normalcy to keep their
secret hidden and Josef decides to go to work for Horst to cover their
tracks.
This doesn't sound like comedy and "Divided We Fall" is far from being a
ha-ha funny film, but the dark humor the filmmakers inject into this
survival tale help to take the edge off the subject dourness. Think of this
as the reverse of "The Diary of Anne Frank," where the focus is on the
couple hiding the refugee. David is symbolic in several ways: as a friend
and neighbor in need; as the child the couple could never have; and, he is
the Christ-figure as he "sacrifices" himself to father a child with Marie,
an act that will, in the end, save them all.
While Boleslav Polivka and Anna Siskova are fine as the couple, and Csonger
Kassai looks the part of the repressed, innocent Jew, there is one perf
that surpasses them all. Jaroslav Dusek stands out as Horst, the oily,
overbearing Nazi collaborator who hitches his future on the tail of the
conquerors. With his severely clipped moustache and the little hair he has
on his balding pate combed over, a la Adolph himself, and his pudgy body,
he personifies the collaborating bureaucrat - he is, at once, menacing and
comical. His is an outstanding perf.
The look of the film, with slight sepia overtones, is in keeping with the
period it depicts. The budget is obviously small and the filmmakers make do
with limited use of props and costumes - there are no marching hordes or
massive air raids shown here. Sets and costume are simple and to the point.
"Divide We Fall" doesn't have the impact of "Life Is Beautiful" or the
power of "The Diary of Anne Frank." It is an interesting character study
and gives us a glimpse into the limbo world of an occupied town during war,
but it never grabs your heart like those other movies. I give it a C+.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
A recent Oscar nominee for Best Foreign Language Film, Divided We Fall is
set in a small town in German-occupied Czechoslovakia during the latter
stages of World War II.  It's based on a true story about hiding a Jewish
man from the Nazis and features characters saying things like "You wouldn't
believe what abnormal times do to normal people," and "There is nowhere dark
enough for us to hide."  From that description, you'd think Divided would be
a drop-dead-serious drama, but director Jan Hrebejk's style and use of music
almost makes light of his characters' various predicaments and close calls.
Parts are very funny, but not over the top like Life is Beautiful.
Divided opens audaciously, introducing the audience to the film's three main
male characters in quick, almost random snippets of their lives (it takes
about six minutes to encapsulate six years).  We first see Jewish warehouse
owner David (Csongor Kassai) and two of his employees - Josef (Bolek
Polívka) and Horst (Jaroslav Dusek) - goofing around in 1937.  Then, two
years later, David takes up residence in Josef's home after the Nazis kick
him out of his giant villa.  Two years after that, David is on the run
again, bidding farewell to Josef and his wife Marie (Anna Sisková) as he
looks for a safer city to call home.  Finally, in 1943, a gaunt,
unhealthy-looking David returns after escaping from a Polish concentration
camp.  David's family has been wiped out by the Nazis, and he has nowhere to
stay.
The opening does an amazing job of showing David (think Will & Grace's Sean
Hayes, only less funny, if that's at all possible), formerly a wealthy,
well-respected member of the community, becoming hunted and despised as he
creeps around in the city's shadows like a stray pet.  He is spotted by
Josef (think a Beetlejuice-era Alec Baldwin), who reluctantly agrees to take
David in, cramming him, Anne Frank-style, into a cramped room smaller than a
prison cell.
To make matters worse, the perpetually nervous Josef (he shits himself in
one scene) and his buddy Horst have taken jobs helping the Nazis impound
property from their Jewish neighbors as they're dragged off to concentration
camps.  If the soldiers ever discovered Josef and Marie here hiding a Jew
right under their noses, the two would be instantly executed.  Horst, who is
much more into the whole Nazi thing, has his suspicions, and frequently
stops by to offer the couple illegal contraband and, occasionally, to hit on
Marie.  And with her husband gone during the day, Marie begins to bond with
the ailing David.
It takes almost 90 minutes to get to the payoff in Divided, and when it
happens, it's pretty uncomfortable and finds the middle ground between
comedy and genocide.  Along the way, there's drama (including the most
graphic rabbit-skinning since Roger & Me) and comedy (including a scene
where Horst tries to teach Josef how to keep a relaxed, expressionless face
like a Nazi).  There are a dozen different ways it could end, and 11 of them
are tragic.  Just when you think you've got it all figured out, Petr
Jarchovsky's script throws Option 13 at you.  The film is based on his
novel, but he actually wrote the screenplay first and later decided to make
it into a book because he couldn't afford the movie route.
Divided is, at times, hauntingly photographed by Jan Malir who, along with
Hrebejk, expertly manipulates the frames-per-second rate of some of the
film's more intense scenes.  The result is a deliciously dark composition
that isn't seen much outside of Nine Inch Nails music videos.  It also
appeared that Hrbejk (who never played first base for the Twins)
superimposed Marie's face over that of the Virgin Mother in a portrait
hanging in the couple's living room.  A nice touch by a promising director.
1:57 - PG-13 for some violence and sexual content

Author
Steve Rhodes
Jan Hrebejk's DIVIDED WE FALL (MUSÍME SI POMÁHAT), a LIFE IS BEAUTIFUL 
LITE tale, has trouble deciding on its tone.  Long serious moments are 
punctuated by whimsical, light-hearted music, suggesting that we should 
be laughing, although at what isn't apparent.  The settings are 
authentic, but the acting comes across fairly flat.  
As the credits roll, the movie opens in 1937 in a field in which men are 
urinating together.  Then a minute later, it skips to 1939 with men 
loading boxes at a warehouse.  This brief scene is aborted in order to 
skip to another inconsequential episode in 1941.  As the story jumps 
again to 1943 and the credits are still showing, you being to calculate 
that the story will end sometime in the twenty-third century.  Actually, 
it turns out that the movie is set during the ending of World War II.  
The purpose in this bizarre beginning is never quite clear.  One 
supposes that it must have been an attempt at a lightning fast 
introduction of the characters.
Josef and Marie Cizek (Bolek Polívka and Anna Sisková) are a Czech 
couple who end up hiding a Jew, David Wiener (Csongor Kassai), in their 
secret room.  Childless, they talk unconvincingly about how pleased they 
are that they can't bring a child into the crazy world in which they 
live.  Horst Prohaska (Jaroslav Dusek), a gregarious and obnoxious Nazi 
collaborator, likes to pop in unannounced on his old friend Josef so 
that he can ogle his wife.  This causes Josef and Marie to squabble 
about the importance of David's staying hidden in his room.
Horst tries to teach Josef the art of blank facial expressions in order 
to keep of out of trouble with the Nazi authorities.  The problem with 
the movie is that too many of the characters seem to have mastered this 
statuesque lack of expression.  The result is a movie that has little 
impact, save a few nice moments here and there.
DIVIDED WE FALL runs 2:00.  The film is in Czech and German with English 
subtitles.  It is rated PG-13 for some violence and sexual content and 
would be acceptable for kids around 12 and up.
The film opens nationwide in the United States on Friday, June 15, 2001.  
In the Silicon Valley, it will be showing at the Camera Cinemas.
Web: ">http://www.InternetReviews.com>
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com

Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Jonathan F. Richards
Divided We Fall, the Czech film that contended against hopeless odds with
Crouching Tiger for last year's Foreign Language Film award, has been linked
more conspicuously with an earlier foreign Oscar-winner, Life Is Beautiful. 
Both, it has been said, are movies that turn the warming light of comedy onto
the darkness of Nazi atrocities during WWII.  
The previews for Divided play up its comic aspect, but in truth, the Czech
film has only the most passing kinship with its Italian predecessor.  Roberto
Benigni's movie used an overtly comic persona to establish a celebration of life
that was able to push itself poignantly and resiliently up through the cracks in
the pavement of Nazi horror.  Jan Hrebejk's, in contrast, is about real people
and real situations, into which a certain amount of humor naturally flows, even
under the circumstance of Germany's wartime occupation of Czechoslovakia.  
In a series of short scenes during the opening credits, Hrebejk runs us
through the years leading up to the occupation.  In the first, three men are out
for a pleasant drive.  They are David (Csongor Kassai), the son of a local
Jewish industrialist; Josef (Boleslav Polivka), a management employee; and 
Horst (Jaroslav Dusek), the company chauffeur.  The scene shifts forward a
couple of years to 1939, and the Jewish family is being evicted from its estate
by the Nazis, who have also confiscated the factory.  Next it's 1941, and David
and his family are being taken from the apartment of Josef and his wife Marie
(Anna Siskova), where they've boarded for a couple of years, to be sent to a
concentration camp.  And then the action moves ahead two more years, to a gaunt
and harrowed David escaping from the camp and returning to seek shelter in his
old home town.
Nobody tries very hard to be funny in Divided.  And when occasionally
farcical situations arise in the course of events, as in a scene where David
cowers in terror under Marie's bedclothes while she wards off the amorous
advances of the Nazi collaborator Horst, terror easily balances the farce. 
There is nothing very funny about a life-or-death situation when the outcome
hangs in the balance.  
But Hrebejk's approach is that life, even under terrible circumstances,
maintains an aspect of the human comedy.  People are funny, whether
intentionally or inadvertently.  Josef has a quiet sense of humor when he's not
cracking under the strain of the terrible risk he's running in sheltering David.
 Horst has no sense of humor  with a straight face he instructs Josef in how to
keep a straight face so as not to let the Germans know what he's thinking.  
Divided is illuminated by wonderful performances.  Horst is a repulsive
opportunistic boor, and yet Dusek plays him with a humanity that makes him real
and justifies plot turns at the end.  Kassai gives David's hunted terror the
support of a quiet strength and dignity.  Siskova makes the beautiful Maria a
woman of practicality, uncertainty, and decency.  And Polivka, one of his
country's leading stage, television, and screen stars, brings tremendous depth
to his role as Josef, a character he based in part on his father, who lost
everything in the war, but `despite being half-broken and unhappy still retained
a gentlemanly type of humor.'  
`You wouldn't believe what abnormal times can do to normal people,' Josef
remarks apologetically to David.  Divided is about normal people in abnormal
times that bring out the best and the worst in them.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Sony Pictures Classics
 Director: Jan Hrebejk
 Writer: Petr Jarchovsky based on his novel
 Cast: Boleslav Polivka, Csongor Kassai, Jaroslav Dusek,
Anna Siskova, Jiri Pecha, Martin Huba, Simona Stasova,
Vladimir Marek, Jiri Kodet, Richard Tesarik
   Let's say a crisis erupted in parts of America.  The KKK
goes wild and in one town is determined to lynch every
African-American it can find.  White homeowners are warned
to turn in every Black man they can find and, of course, to
refuse to shelter any who ask for protection.  Those
homeowners who defy the rule will themselves be strung up.  A
breathless, confused, and frightened Black man turns up at
your doorstep asking you to hide him.  You have an available
room.  What would you do?
   A similar situation actually faced Europeans during the
period of World War II 1939-1945, a time that Nazi
stormtroopers and their collaborators moved to sweep towns
in occupied Europe clear of Jews.  Some good people took
the ultimate risk and hid those who implored them to do so.
(The people who did so at the risk of their lives are
celebrated in Israel to this day, called "Righteous Among the
Nations"). Others helped in a similar way but demanded
money in return.  The majority refused to do so, because they 
took part in the anti-Semitism that was Europe's affliction for 
centuries or because they simply feared for their lives.
   "Divided We Fall," a work first produced for Czech TV
by Jan Hrebejk based on Petr Jarchovsky's novel and
screenplay, is based on a true event that took place within
one family during the German occupation of 
Czechoslovakia.  What is astounding about this film is
that while it mines territory similar to that excavated by "The
Diary of Anne Frank," the two-hour production is peppered
with wit and humor during this most trying of times--waggery
that fits right into the story rather than being shoehorned in
as Roberto Benigni did with his fine but often forced "Life is
Beautiful."  Here is a film loaded with ironies, twists, and
surprises which can easily keep the audience heads spinning. 
The photography is superb, particularly for a TV-produced
work.  In one case, for example, cameraman Jan Malir points
his lens down on an evil doctor (who sterilized one hundred
gypsies) at such an angle that the man look like a forties
incarnation of Nosferatu. At several points, when humor takes
a back seat to rising tension, Malir resorts to slo-mo
photography to simulate a sudden, dramatic turn of events.
   The story centers on Josef (Boleslav Polivka) and his wife
Marie (Anna Siskova), a childless couple living in a small
Czechoslovakian town during the Nazi occupation of their
country.  When a Jewish neighbor whom they had always
liked, David Wiener (Csongor Kassai), suddenly shows up,
emaciated after having escaped from the Theressenstadt
concentration camp just before he was to be shipped to a
death camp in Poland, Josef (reluctantly) and Marie (with
more enthusiasm), give him shelter.  They stash him in a
small room Anne-Frank style, warning him not to leave the
place except for a few moments at night for fear that not only
David but also Josef, Marie, and in fact every resident of the
block would be shot.  
   The bulk of the movie's humor is evoked by a neighbor,
Horst (Jaroslav Dusek), whose pencil-thin mustache and
enthusiastic "heils" mark him as a collaborator of the
occupying Germans.  Since he is attracted to Josef's wife
Marie, he is a frequent, unannounced visitor to the table,
supplying the couple with food confiscated from the departed
Jews--a man who is slowly suspecting the big family secret. 
The boorish, motor-mouthed Horst cracks his knuckles
insistently, and in one instance attacks Marie when he
virtually forces her to take a ride with him.  But Horst will
supply one of the story's two great twists, the other occurring
when a novel solution is found to Marie's inability to bear
children.
   Brimming with tension, wit, humor, surprise, a taut plot, and
a stirring panorama of what happened when a small town is
within the power of a brutal subjugation, "Divided We Fall"--in
the expert hands of the director who had previous dished out
a box office success "Cosy Dens"--brings to vivid life the
tribulations and even the joys of normal people whose
loyalties are tested in abnormal times.  "Divided We Fall" is
the excellent choice of the Academy, among the five
nominees for best foreign-language movie of the year 2000.
Not Yet Rated.  Running time: 123 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz
Josef Cizek (Boleslav Polivka) is saddened when the Jewish Weiner family,
who provided employment to his Czech town, are ejected from their homes by
the Nazis and sent to a camp.  Josef must also endure visits from Horst
Prohazka (Jaroslav Dusek), a German he befriended and employed before the
war who obviously has romantic inclinations towards Josef's wife Marie 
(Anna Siskova).  When David Weiner escapes and returns to his hometown,
the Cizeks hide him in their storeroom and try to keep Horst off guard in
the 2000 Best Foreign Language Film nominee "Divided We Fall."
Roberto Benigni started a trend with "Life Is Beautiful."  While "Divided We
Fall" doesn't provide as many laughs as the Benigni film, it's more comical
than tragic and lays on the sentiment with a more cynical touch.  Director
Jan Hrebejk has crafted a humanistic story about 'what abnormal times can do to
normal people.'
Everyone in their town knows that Josef and Marie are childless through no
choice of their own.  The onset of WWII and the dissolution of the Weiner
factory has made Josef content to eat, smoke and lay on his couch while
Marie busies herself dusting the tapestry of her namesake, the Virgin Mother,
which hangs above it.
Horst, sporting a Hitler-like moustache, brings forbidden delicacies to his
former boss and his pretty wife.  Josef had befriended Horst when his fellow
Czechs didn't exactly welcome the German, and now that the tide has turned in
Horst's favor, must endure his prodding to come and join him working for the
SS Officer (Vladimir Marek) who's taken over the Weiner villa.
When David Weiner (Csongor Kassai) becomes their hidden secret, Josef and
Marie must play increasingly dangerous games to keep Horst's suspicions at
bay, until, at last, Marie concocts a false pregnancy which the sterile Josef
insists she make real with the assistance of David.
While Hrebejk's biblical references and baby making slapstick become somewhat 
labored, his gentle comedy nonetheless stands true to his title, where no man 
is condemned merely by the side history doles out for him.  Hrebejk is 
particularly blessed by a stellar performance from Dusek, whose initially 
coarse Horst is redeemed by the subtle complexities the actor brings to the 
man.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
Jan Hrebejk's DIVIDED WE FALL (MUSÍME SI POMÁHAT), a LIFE IS BEAUTIFUL LITE
tale, has trouble deciding on its tone.  Long serious moments are punctuated by
whimsical, light-hearted music, suggesting that we should be laughing, although
at what isn't apparent.  The settings are authentic, but the acting comes across
fairly flat.  
As the credits roll, the movie opens in 1937 in a field in which men are
urinating together.  Then a minute later, it skips to 1939 with men loading
boxes at a warehouse.  This brief scene is aborted in order to skip to another
inconsequential episode in 1941.  As the story jumps again to 1943 and the
credits are still showing, you being to calculate that the story will end
sometime in the twenty-third century.  Actually, it turns out that the movie is
set during the ending of World War II.  The purpose in this bizarre beginning is
never quite clear.  One supposes that it must have been an attempt at a
lightning fast introduction of the characters.
Josef and Marie Cizek (Bolek Polívka and Anna Sisková) are a Czech couple who
end up hiding a Jew, David Wiener (Csongor Kassai), in their secret room. 
Childless, they talk unconvincingly about how pleased they are that they can't
bring a child into the crazy world in which they live.  Horst Prohaska (Jaroslav
Dusek), a gregarious and obnoxious Nazi collaborator, likes to pop in
unannounced on his old friend Josef so that he can ogle his wife.  This causes
Josef and Marie to squabble about the importance of David's staying hidden in
his room.
Horst tries to teach Josef the art of blank facial expressions in order to keep
of out of trouble with the Nazi authorities.  The problem with the movie is that
too many of the characters seem to have mastered this statuesque lack of
expression.  The result is a movie that has little impact, save a few nice
moments here and there.
DIVIDED WE FALL runs 2:00.  The film is in Czech and German with English
subtitles.  It is rated PG-13 for some violence and sexual content and would be
acceptable for kids around 12 and up.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
