Title
Review for Nothing Personal (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ben Hoffman
In Ireland, it's referred to as "the troubles."  And what a terrible
euphemism it has been and continues to be.  By this time, with a half
dozen films dealing with the subject of the Catholic IRA and the
Protestant paramilitary  (both of whom believe in the same god, Jesus),
it would seem that every moviegoer would know everything there is to
know about that small piece of North Ireland territory.  Each movie
seems to have tackled a different aspect of "the troubles" but NOTHING
PERSONAL" explains somewhat better what iS going on.
The recent, THE DEVIL'S OWN,  NAME OF THE FATHER, MOTHER'S SON, to name
but a few, have touched on the consequences but not on the root cause.
This film, while not pointing a finger, does do some enlightening.
Kenny (James Frain), Protestant and Liam (John Lynch), Catholic, were
childhood friends.  No longer;  When a pub frequented by Protestants
is blown up, all hell breaks loose.  Like the gangs in the U.S. who
hold their "turf" so dear they will kill to keep others off it, the
Catholics and Protestants have their own.  A piece of jagged metal
separates the two neighborhoods but the metal is only symbolic; a new
increased hatred is on the loose..  Anyone found wandering in the
other's part is fair game.  "Nothing personal;" that is just how it
is.  Cooler heads such as Leonard's (Michael Gambon) of the Protestant
faction arranges a truce with the local IRA leader but nothing can
stop the crazed, fanatic Kenny gang from seeking revenge.
Liam's son is missing, apparently having wandered into the enemy sector
so Liam has to find him before anyone gets shot.  But Liam gets caught
by the Kenny gang and held and beaten while being questioned.  And the
internecine war goes on with seemingly no end in sight.
A very tense film packed with powerful emotions.

Author
James Berardinelli
United Kingdom, 1995
U.S. Release Date: 5/97 (limited)
Running Length: 1:25
MPAA Classification: No MPAA Rating (Violence, profanity, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Ian Hart, John Lynch, James Frain, Michael Gambon, Gary Lydon, 
      Jeni Courtney, Maria Doyle Kennedy
Director: Thaddeus O'Sullivan
Producers: Tracey Seaward, Jonathan Cavendish
Screenplay: Daniel Mornin, based on his novel, ALL OUR FAULT
Cinematography: Dick Pope
Music: Philip Appleby
U.S. Distributor: Trimark Pictures
     Over the last few years, a flood of motion pictures about the 
political turmoil in Northern Ireland has reached these shores.  There 
have been big-budget Hollywood productions (THE DEVIL'S OWN), would-be 
historical epics (MICHAEL COLLINS), and smaller, more intimate tales 
(SOME MOTHER'S SON).  Cinematographer-turned-director Thaddeus 
O'Sullivan's contribution, NOTHING PERSONAL, belongs in the last 
category.  And, although it doesn't really offer any new information or 
a unique perspective on the ongoing conflict, the film presents yet 
another example of the pointlessness and pain of violence as a means to 
end a religious war.
     NOTHING PERSONAL, much like IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER, begins with 
an IRA bomb blast destroying a pub.  The time frame -- the middle '70s -
- is the same.  Only the location is different -- this is Belfast, not 
Guildford.  However, where IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER used Ireland's 
troubles as a backdrop for a compelling story about family and justice, 
NOTHING PERSONAL makes the religious strife its centerpiece.  O'Sullivan 
goes to great pains to show the violence and hatred on both sides, 
effectively de-politicizing the movie.  If balance was the only criteria 
for a good film about Ireland, NOTHING PERSONAL would get top marks.
     Unfortunately, in his pursuit of even-handedness, O'Sullivan fails 
to create more than a few worthwhile characters.  The atmosphere, thick 
with claustrophobia, paranoia, and a pervasive sense of impending doom, 
is potent in a way that the protagonists aren't.  Most of the men in 
NOTHING PERSONAL represent different faces of unintelligent bigotry.  
There's Ginger (Ian Hart), a borderline psycho who enjoys killing 
Catholics; Kenny (James Frain), the leader of a militant anti-IRA group; 
Eddie (Gary Lydon), Kenny's right-hand man; Tommy (Ruaidhri Conroy), a 
17-year old recruit to the cause; and Leonard (Michael Gambon), Kenny's 
politically-savvy commander.  None of these individuals are nearly as 
interesting as their cause.  The characters who capture our attention 
are those without a strong political allegiance:  Liam (John Lynch), a 
Catholic who is mistaken for an IRA member; Ann (Maria Doyle Kennedy), 
Kenny's estranged wife; and Kathleen (Jeni Courtney), Liam's young, 
headstrong daughter.
     While NOTHING PERSONAL might have been more focused had it 
concentrated on fewer individuals, O'Sullivan elected to try to cram in 
everyone's story.  As a result, the motion picture is frequently 
confusing (occasionally bordering on chaotic), and Liam, who represents 
the emotional center, is only on-screen for about a third of the running 
time.  And, while there is power in the way NOTHING PERSONAL is 
resolved, there's also something about the ending that seems inevitable, 
obligatory, and more than a little manipulative.
     The most telling point addressed by O'Sullivan's film is how a 
legacy of violence and bloodshed is passed down from generation to 
generation.  NOTHING PERSONAL has its share of young faces -- in 
addition to Tommy and Kathleen, there's Kathleen's brother, and a teen 
IRA sympathizer named Michael.  Events during the course of this film 
shape their futures and give us little confidence that there will be a 
peaceful, reasonable end to the conflict.  
     Even if their characters aren't all that well-developed, several of 
the leads give memorable performances -- notably Ian Hart (HOLLOW REED), 
whose Ginger is a portrait of uncurbed aggression; James Frain, who 
injects an aspect of humanity into Kenny; and the ever-effective Michael 
Gambon.  John Lynch, who is no stranger to films with this background 
(he was in both IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER and MOTHER'S SON) has a few 
effective moments as one of the film's innocents.  And Jeni Courtney, 
who was so impressive in John Sayles' THE SECRET OF ROAN INISH, steals 
every one of the too-few scenes she's in.
     Explorations of violence -- its causes, its meaning, and its 
effects -- are difficult to present on film because they're so easy to 
get wrong.  With NOTHING PERSONAL, Catholic director O'Sullivan, along 
with his Protestant screenwriter, Daniel Mornin, has ventured into that 
uncertain territory.  And, while the result is not an unqualified 
success, there's no denying that O'Sullivan's message comes across loud-
and-clear, and NOTHING PERSONAL presents at least one image that will 
not quickly be forgotten.  Too bad there couldn't be more.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
