Title
Review for Devi (1960)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Murali Krishnan
(Dialog in Bengali, English subtitles)
This film is also known by the English title "The Goddess".
Religious devotion can be a double-edged sword. Kalikinkar (Chhabi
Biswas) is a widower whose two sons and their families live with
him. His younger son, Umaprasad (Soumitra Chatterjee), is away at
college, but Umaprasad's young wife, Doyamoyee (Sharmila Tagore),
remains at home. Doyamoyee is well liked by everyone, especially
Kalikinkar, who appreciates the efforts she goes through to attend
to his needs. Kalikinkar has spent years in fervent devotion to the
mother goddess Kali, and it is his main solace in his old age. The
balance of the household is disturbed when Kalikinkar suddenly
receives a vision that his daughter-in-law is an incarnation of
Kali. Kalikinkar replaces the stone idol in the prayer room with
Doyamoyee, and she spends practically the entire day sitting as the
object of extended worship sessions which attract people from the
local area who also start believing Kalikinkar's vision.
Not everyone is convinced of Doyamoyee's holiness. The rational
Umaprasad is horrified when he discovers what has happened, because
he know that Doyamoyee will not protest the wishes of his father
and will allow herself to be imprisoned by her respected elders.
Umaprasad's older brother, Taraprasad (Purnendu Mukherjee), goes
along mainly because he always agrees with his father. Taraprasad's
wife, Harasundari (Karuna Bannerjee), is not educated like Umaprasad,
but like him she does not understand how people can come to such
a fantastic conclusion based on the whim of one man.
This story by Prabhat Mukherjee deals with a topic that is universal
to the human condition. It describes events that occur in India, as
well as in other parts of the world within different faiths. Strong
faith, which can be a crutch to the weak, has the danger of being
destructive when it eclipses rationality. Human beings, in the grip
of devotion, will often see reality as they want to see it. They
will interpret coincidences as convenient proofs of their delusional
charade. Although they may be well-intentioned, their actions can
trigger grave consequences.
Satyajit Ray effectively presents the goddess in her duality. On
one hand she is a benevolent mother figure depicted as the smiling,
fair-skinned Durga who brings comfort to her followers. On the
other, she is a fierce and destructive force, depicted as the pitch
black Kali wearing a necklace of skulls, which can destroy those who
come too close to her. By mixing the various images of the goddess
with the cautionary story, Ray is able to show the thin line between
security and obsessiveness that is straddled by faith.
Although the film is well crafted and the story is meaningful, the
main criticism is that the point made is obvious and is not quite
enough to sustain a full feature film. The problem is not that the
film does anything wrong, but rather, it does not cover enough
ground. The main assertion of the story is of the dangers of blind
faith, how it will consume those who are obsessed, and how it will
be mitigated by rationality. In taking such an patent stance, the
film misses making a salient statement.
Tagore gives an excellent performance as Doyamoyee, who is the
only character with depth. Because she is exceptionally loving
and generous as the young bride, it is easy to understand why
she is so adored. She is bewildered but compliant as the object
of worship. She is initially doubtful of her holiness, but she
wishes to go along with what is asked of her, so her young mind
is willing to accept the indulgence. Although Chatterjee and Biswas
give believable performances as Umaprasad and Kalikinkar, those
characters are narrowly drawn and never progress beyond the expected
character types.
Recommended. This film tells a powerful story, but it is simple in
ocus. It is well crafted and engrossingly intense, but the direction
in which it travels is never beyond what would be expected.
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.
