Title
Review for Song jia huang chao (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
David Dalgleish
"Love is a kind of revolution, and revolution is a kind of love."
        Who were the Soong sisters?  I can tell you quite a lot about them 
after watching Mabel Cheung's biopic.  They were born around the turn 
of the century, in China, the daughters of Charlie Soong, a friend and 
ally of Dr. Sun Yat-Sen when he founded the Republic of China.  
Ai-Ling, the eldest, married the wealthiest man in China.  Ching-Ling 
married Sun Yat-Sen and continued his legacy after his death.  
May-Ling, the youngest, married Kai-Shek Chiang, who became the leader 
of the Nationalist Party.  They're all dead now.
        Their fortunes were inextricably bound up in the colossal political 
and military struggles that have beset China throughout this century.  
I do not particularly believe in the idea of fate, but this film gave 
me pause, because it shows three women who seemed destined to "live in 
interesting times," as the proverb would have it, from the moment of 
their birth onward.  Their story begged to be made into an epic, and 
an epic is what THE SOONG SISTERS is, in the best sense of the word.  
It's got it all: majestic cinematography, multiple stories played out 
against a vast backdrop, breathless narrative momentum, and great 
stars.  
        The stars include two of Hong Kong's leading women: Maggie Cheung 
(IRMA VEP, CHINESE BOX) plays Ching-Ling and Ai-Ling is played by 
Michelle Khan (aka Michelle Yeoh, of SUPERCOP and TOMORROW NEVER 
DIES).  THE PILLOW BOOK's Vivian Wu is May-Ling.  None of the 
performances are outstanding, but each actress brings the necessary 
charisma and presence to the part.  They look the way famous women 
should look in a big-budget, glossy epic.
        But who were these famous women, really?  What were they like, in 
their everyday lives?  That I can't tell you, because THE SOONG 
SISTERS isn't interested in that.  It is interested in these women as 
vital figures in China's tempestuous 20th century upheavals, and as 
representatives of the extraordinary, frightening, operatic emotions 
that can occur in any country at war with itself. The film uses 
Ai-Ling, Ching-Ling, and May-Ling as focal points to show us over five 
decades of Chinese history, from the beginning of this century till 
after the "liberation" by the People's Army, and to give us some sense 
of what it might have been like to live through such times.
        If any of this sounds like FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE to you, well, it 
does to me too.  The structure and intentions of both films are 
remarkably similar; THE SOONG SISTERS plays, to some extent, like a 
Hong Kong remake of Chen Kaige's masterpiece.  Both movies are 
visually superb, both are emotionally-charged melodramas, both use a 
triad of conflicting characters as the central focus of hugely 
ambitious narratives, and both films ran into trouble with the Chinese 
censors (18 minutes were cut from SISTERS for this reason).
        But there are telling differences.  In FAREWELL, history is the 
backdrop to a personal story: namely, the loyalties and conflicts that 
divide the two opera singers and the prostitute who marries one of 
them.  In SISTERS, history is both the backdrop and the personal 
story, because the three sisters are all involved in the making of 
history.  This difference, ultimately, is what makes SISTERS the 
lesser of the two movies.  The personal, intimate details of their 
lives are sacrificed in favour of extravagant gestures; the sisters 
seem to interact only at moments of intense emotion: in love and in 
war, during death-bed scenes, angry confrontations, tearful farewells.  
This is immensely pleasing on the level of story and spectacle, but in 
the end I would have preferred less excess and more subtlety.
Ai-Ling is a pragmatist, Ching-Ling a pro-Communist idealist, and 
May-Ling an important player in the Nationalist Party, and these three 
traits essentially define each character: they become types, not 
individuals.  I can't say I blame the filmmakers for treating the 
sisters in this light, because their story is so astounding, so 
larger-than-life, that these women, for all that they are modern, 
historical figures, take on the potency of myth.  Besides, while each 
sister may be one-dimensional, when you put them together you have 
three dimensions--which is one more than you need to make a movie.
        Some Chinese reviewers feel that the movie sacrifices the 
complexities of Chinese history in favour of reductive simplicities.  
I imagine they are right; I'm not really qualified to comment, since 
all I know of Chinese history is probably reductive simplicities.  But 
to accuse THE SOONG SISTERS of trivializing Chinese history by giving 
it the Hollywood treatment ignores a significant distinction: in 
Hollywood movies, fate is usually an ally of the hero, while in most 
Chinese movies (certainly in this one) fate is the enemy, implacable 
and omnipotent.  The sisters may be shown as one-dimensional 
romanticized types, but they're still ultimately treated no 
differently from many Chinese people, famous and obscure, in this 
century--victims of an unkind destiny they could neither choose nor 
avoid.

Author
JONATHAN RICHARDS
"Once upon a time in China there were three sisters. One loved money, 
one loved power, and the third loved her country."
     With this legend, over black-and-white footage of three little 
girls on swings, begins the historical drama of one of modern China's 
most fascinating families, in an epic film directed by Mabel Cheung from 
a screenplay by her partner Alex Law.  The quote lays out several things 
for us - the locus of the movie's heart, the tone of its telling, and 
the source of some of its problems.
    The Soong sisters were the daughters of Charlie Soong (Jiang Wen), 
an American-educated Chinese missionary end entrepreneur.  All three 
were sent to the States to college.  The eldest, Ai-ling (Michelle 
Yeoh), married a wealthy Chinese financier (Niu Zhen-Hua); the middle 
sister, Ching-ling (Maggie Cheung), married her father's friend Dr. Sun 
Yat-Sen (Winston Chao), the revolutionary "Father of Modern China"; the 
youngest, May-ling (Vivian Wu) married Sun's protE9g=E9 and successor, =
Chiang Kai-Shek (Wu Hsing Kuo).
      The size and sweep of this movie is impressive, and its historical 
lessons, though they may be simplistic, impart information about an 
extraordinary 20th century family of which most of us are sadly 
ignorant.  Hong Kong filmmaker Mabel Cheung takes on the difficult job 
of weaving a huge amount of information into a movie, under the 
Herculean restraints of co-production with the mainland Chinese and its 
heavy burdens of ideological censorship.  The film was first released 
with 18 minutes (mostly dealing with Chiang Kai-Shek) cut by China; that 
footage has been restored here.
     Ms. Cheung handles her arduous task with style and grandeur, but 
also with the clichE9s and trivialities that so often come with this =
kind of historical reduction.  She's best on the grand scale: there are 
images that are stunning in their visual and emotional impact.  But 
ultimately the characters, despite some excellent performances, remain 
stifled by the movie's inevitable shorthand.  There are some 
inconsistencies in the telling, and some lapses in judgment. 
     The story's conscience, narrator, and central figure is Mme. Sun, 
the passionate idealist ("loved her country" ) who seized the 
ideological banner of revolution at her husband's untimely death, and 
forged China's relationship with the USSR.  Maggie Cheung is very good, 
as is Michelle Yeoh (Crouching Tiger) as the financier ("loved money").  
Perhaps best of all is Wu's steely Chiang.  The Soong Sisters is digest 
history, too truncated even at 2-1/2 hours, but it's worth wading 
through for the education it provides.
