Title
Review for Color of Night (1994)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Jason Langlois
     This is an eminently predictable film, with nothing much to redeem
it.  I'd suggest waiting for it to come out on video, or even not
watching it at all.
     The premise is a simple (and of late, often used) one.  Bruce
Willis plays a New York psychotherapist who has a patient commit
suicide before his eyes.  Faced with a lawsuit, and his own emotional
troubles stemming from the incident (he can no longer see the color
red--I suspect the backers of this film won't have this problem), he
resigns his practice and travels to Los Angeles after bidding farewell
to his elderly mentor.  There, he finds himself drawn into an ersatz
thriller.
   Arriving in LA, he meets with a college chum who is also a successful 
psychotherapist, and sits in with a Monday support group.  In 
conversation with this friend (played by Scott Bakula, late of "Quantum 
Leap") the next day, he finds out that someone from the group has been 
making death threats against his friend.  Sure enough, later that 
evening, the friend is horribly murdered in his office.
     Introduce the blustering cop (Ruben Blades), the mysterious and
gorgeous young woman (Jane March), and the collection of potential
killers.  While it is hard to point to the direct similarities to
FINAL ANALYSIS, watching this film constantly made me think of it.
Fondly.  (Yes, that's how bad this movie is.)  Bruce Willis' character
takes over his friend's practice, and also becomes an amateur sleuth
trying to figure out which of the disturbed patients could have killed
his friend.  Along the way, he gets to enjoy a few "steamy" sex scenes
with Jane March (yawn), before the grand, bloody, violent finale
(yawn).
     Are there any virtues in this film?  Brad Dourif's portrayal of an
Obsessive-Compulsive is fun to watch.  Ruben Blades is also effective
as the police detective (I kept wanting the film to be about him).
They aren't, however, worth the price of this film.  It's not the
acting, but the writing, that is the death knell of this movie.
     From the audience response, this movie does have some appeal.  The
appeal seems to center on the rare one-liner that Bruce manages to put
in, and the enjoyment Ruben Blades' character brings to the screen.
Really, skip this film.  If you have to watch it, make it on video and
you'll be much happier.  For complete happiness, just avoid seeing it
at all.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     COLOR OF NIGHT is an instant candidate for all Worst Movies of
1994 lists.  It stars Bruce Willis and Jane March.
     It is a mess of a movie.  If you are so adventurous as to pay your
money to see it, perhaps you can figure it out; I could not.  A typical
scene has Bruce Willis as a psychiatrist listening to a group of
patients in a circle talking about all of their bizarre problems.  They
ask him his credentials.  He says "I went to college".
     Mainly Bruce Willis stares at the other people and seems to be
thinking what ever possessed me to agree to be in this movie.  Why
didn't I ask to read the script first?
     The putative director was Richard Rush.  The preposterous
gibberish they speak was written by Matthew Chapman and Billy Ray.  The
dialog was so ridiculous that it made you wonder if this was supposed
to be a parody of a bad movie.
     COLOR OF NIGHT is rated R, but I think it is not suitable for
anyone of any age.  It lasts for 2 hours and 3 minutes, if anyone could
stay through it all.  I certainly could not, but I feel confident that
I missed nothing by not staying till the bitter end.  I give it
absolutely no stars at all!
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Richard Rush
Writers: Matthew Chapman and Billy Ray
Starring: Bruce Willis, Jane March, Reuben Blades, Lesley Ann Warren, 
Lance Henrikson, Brad Douriff, Kevin J. O'Connor, Scott Bakula, Eriq La 
Salle
This film isn't even good enough to mock in one sitting like Ed Wood's 
"Plan 9 From Outer Space."  That's how bad it is (I'm not saying it's as 
bad as that classic, but this is a contender for the worst film of the 
90s).  But still, if you're watching it on your VCR and you have your 
thumb on the fast-forwarding button, you'll have a great time mocking 
this utter piece of dogcrap.
I saw this on one of those free previews we get, and luckily (ahem!) I 
got to see the director's cut.  My question is: Which 20 minutes of crap 
WASN'T in the film?  This is film is so awful that you could take 
any 20 minutes out and it would make it better no matter what.  The plot 
doesn't matter.  The mystery isn't even worth thinking about.  The 
lesbian scene isn't really worth anything (disappointing for perverts 
and useless to anything the film is about).  I mean, this film is only 
good for an MST3K episode - but one where they edit a lot out to make it 
somewhat watchable.  Or at least THEY have a fast-forwarding button.  
This one would do these guys in if shown in its entirety.
The "plot," or whatever we want to call it, centers around a 
psychiatrist (Bruce Willis) who looses his Freudian faith after one of 
his patients jumps out the window of his office near the top of a large 
building (a cool shot - best since "The Hudsucker Proxy" - but not 
really worth the time it takes to see it since the rest of the movie 
blows).  He looses the ability to see red (which has no effect on any 
aspect of the story, but it's there for the title) and moves to L.A. to 
shack up with his psychiatrist friend (Scott Bakula), who hosts a Monday 
Evening Group Therapy session and has a Type A personality.  Then he's 
murdered in a ridiculous scene where he's stabbed about 30 times of so. 
 We see everything.  I think I got the point after the second stabbing 
that he's gonna die.
Bruce takes over the group 'cause something points to one of the members 
of the Monday Group doing it.  In this group, we get nuts who give nuts 
a bad name: Lesley Ann Warren is typecast as an oversexed Black Widdow 
type who's hanging out with this younger chick who makes her happy (heh 
heh - let's guess what happens betwixt these two, eh?); Lance Henrikson 
is some old guy who can't get over his wife's death or something; Kevin 
O'Connor is some freaky-ass artist who's big problem seems to be that he 
can't act to save his life; Brad Douriff, a once-Oscar nominee, is a 
lawyer who autistically counts everything and gives us neurotics a bad 
name; and then there's some guy who doesn't even look like a guy who 
never talks.  Let's guess which one's the rotten apple, ok?
Also in on the "story" are a Chicana stereotype renegade police officer 
of some type (Reuben Blades, who gives overactors a bad name) and a 
semi-attractive woman who shows up out of nowhere and ends up having 
"steamy sex" with Bruce, giving him a chance to show off his little 
pecker in a pool scene.  They have sex for about 10 minutes straight for 
some reason and it's not very erotic, in fact very nauseating.
The film goes on literally FOREVER!!!  It's like a non-stop crapfest for 
2 hours and 20 minutes.  You don't care about anyone but Bruce 'cause 
he's Bruce and that's it.  There's a billion unnecessary scenes, which 
if cut would make this film about 5 minutes long.  There's a billion 
scenes of nothing but talking but not saying anything (Did I mention how 
horrible the script is?  One of them wrote "Volcano," that's how bad it 
is).  He talks to each of them and the story stays still.  Woody Allen 
said in "Annie Hall" that a relationship is like a shark; it has to 
constantly be moving or it just dies.  Well, I'd like to apply this 
thinking to film - it always has to be in constant motion.  And what we 
have in the case of "Color of Night" is a dead shark.  The story goes 
nowhere and just wastes time.  At least "Plan 9 From Outer Space" moved 
a bit.
To waste more time and to get some horny teenagers to like this, we get 
a totally unnecessary lesbian relationship between Lesley Ann Warren and 
this girl-friend of hers.  They have an anti-climactic and barely 
satisfying "lesbian scene" which ends in what's supposed to be a twist 
but turns out to be as anti-climactic as the rest of the film.
The acting's horrible.  The script is crap.  And the direction - oh my 
god!!  Richard Rush, the director, made "The Stunt Man" 14 years 
earlier, a film I've yet to see but has been pretty much unanimously 
hailed as a masterpiece of celluloid.  What in the hell was he on when 
he made this?  Did he actually look at it afterwards and say, "Cut. 
Print. Let's eat."  If I were him, I would have done what Woody Allen 
did when he saw the first final product of "September": throw it the 
hell out.  Of course, Woody started over.  I would've thrown it out and 
made a whole other film.
So, basically this is a worthless film, right?  Well, I guess the one 
positive note is the suicide scene.  Yes, it's anti-climactic, but it's 
cool to see her fall.  And I guess you could say it's consitstent: it's 
crap the whole way through.  And I can give it a bonus point for using 
the nailgun as a weapon - although it was already used in "Lethal Weapon 
2."
So, pretty much, this film is devoid of any goodness and is destined to 
be looked on and cherished as a masterpiece in pure shit and to be 
re-issued as one of the great horrible films of all time.  Good job, 
Rush!
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/hills/8335/

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Bruce Willis, Jane March, Ruben Blades, Lesley Ann
Warren, Brad Dourif, Scott Bakula.
Screenplay:  Matthew Chapman and Billy Ray.
Director:  Richard Rush.
     Director Richard Rush made his last film in 1980, a sly thriller
called THE STUNT MAN which was one of the year's critical favorites.
He waited nearly fifteen years before making his next film, COLOR OF
NIGHT.  And it looks like he may have to wait another fifteen years
before anyone *lets* him direct again.  COLOR OF NIGHT is just awful in
every conceivable way, lurching between tedium and wretched excess for
an excruciating two hours, and giving Bruce Willis his second
consecutive appearance in a first-degree bomb (following NORTH).
     Willis plays Bill Capa, a New York psychologist who is traumatized
when one of his patients commits suicide during a session.  He decides
to take a vacation in Los Angeles, and visits old college buddy Bob
Moore (Scott Bakula), himself a successful therapist.  When Moore is
murdered, evidence suggests someone in his Monday night therapy group,
which Capa takes over.  Soon, however, it appears that Capa may also be
the target of intended foul play.  He is also the target of attentions
from a young woman named Rose (Jane March) who seems to have a number
of secrets.
     If it were not for my personal code of ethics, I would reveal
every plot twist in COLOR OF NIGHT, since they are probably the only
thing which will keep anyone watching until the bitter end.  On the
other hand, I'm not even sure it's necessary.  COLOR OF NIGHT is so
sledgehammer-subtle that it would surprise me if anyone couldn't figure
out the identity of the killer in the first scene in which the
individual appears.  The attempts to turn the other characters into
suspects are so inept that I began to suspect that screenwriters
Matthew Chapman and Billy Ray were like those deeply troubled criminals
who *want* everyone to know exactly who did it.  Sadly, it's just one
of the many ways they treat the audience like it's made up of morons.
In one sequence, the killer uses a car to push another car off the top
level of a parking garage, endowed with a supernatural foreknowledge of
exactly where Willis is going to be walking below.  Then there are more
basic matters of stupidity, such as the condition from which the film
takes its title, Willis' inability to see red after the death of his
patient.  It has absolutely no bearing on the story, is sloppily
presented through occasional perspective shots, and is just another
example of the offensively simplistic psychology employed by the
screenwriters.
     The main question is whether the true criminals are the writers or
the actors.  With so much scenery chewing going on, they must have been
able to save a fortune on catering.  But who was the most abysmal?
Ruben Blades as the loose cannon detective who appears to be in dire
need of therapy himself?  Lesley Ann Warren as the
kleptomaniac/sexaholic refugee from a Tennessee Williams play?  Brad
Dourif (best-unknown as the voice of Chucky in the CHILD'S PLAY films)
as the obsessive-compulsive lawyer doing his impression of Dustin
Hoffman in RAIN MAN ("Yeah, definitely 58 books, definitely 58")?
COLOR OF NIGHT may have set back the cause of group therapy 30 years
with this collection of twitchy banshees.  And watching over them all
is the ever-smirking Willis, who even when he is supposed to be
radiating understanding looks like he's about to put on a pair of
shades and break into the Seagram's Wine Cooler jingle.  The whole
bunch should have their SAG privileges suspended.
     COLOR OF NIGHT was the subject of a much-publicized battle with
the MPAA over explicit sex scenes which threatened to earn it an NC-17
rating, but don't be duped.  COLOR OF NIGHT is about as sexy as a lump
of cold mashed potatoes, and less aesthetically pleasing.  It's also
extremely violent, particularly in the last fifteen minutes which
includes some intensely unpleasant business with a nail gun.  In 1980
Richard Rush clearly knew how to make a good movie.  I guess directing
isn't exactly like riding a bike.  Or in this case, like driving a
garbage truck.

Author
Pedro Sena
One sometimes wonders if these things are made for the art form, or for the
sake of making a few dollars.  It may help a superstar and his bank
deposits, but what does it do to the others.?
It is a story about a shrink whose patient, one day, takes things in her own
hands and busts through the umpteenth floor window.  Depressed and feeling
very much responsible the doctor ( Willis )
decides to take a break.  He visits a friend in the other coast, who is also
a shrink.  And he gets sucked into another shrink-fest.
This new group is the same as all others, except that this one has a
Hollywood flavor to things.  The bisexual actress, the homosexual whoohoo,
and the rest.  Amidst them is a young girl that by being
quiet and subtle ends up involved with the psychiatrist.
As it turns out, Rose is not quite a patient, but a plant for the plans of a
maniac person, whose desires are a bit more on the sick side than anything
else.  In the doctor's therapy rooms, Rose is  dressed differently and
unrecognizable, though the new doctor has gotten an inkling for what is
going on.
The doctor is starting to have a good time with  Rose, and the film spends
its best moments behind the lens, watching this man making out with a girl
that looks no older than a teenager.  With plenty of gratuitous nakedness
thrown in to ensure that Bruce Willis enthusiasts get excited.
The story is actually very good, were it not that the film has to bring it
to a thankless and ugly end.  Do all love stories and affairs that are
satisfying have to be this way.???  In Hollywood one would think the answer
is yes.
See it only if you are interested in nakedness.... otherwise let it sit as a
waste... sad, because Jane March is not bad in it.... but then, who is going
to see this for her acting.?

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Woof!  Too bad that LEAP OF FAITH was the title of a 1992 comedy
starring Steve Martin and Debra Winger, because that's what's required
to watch this incredulous howler starring Bruce Willis as--of all
things--a psychologist.  Not since the Reagan Administration has there
been an acting stretch of such magnitude!  Alas, Mickey Rourke, we
hardly knew ye.
     Story opens with a campy kick--Willis is treating a patient who
abruptly steps out of the window to take the best flying leap since
Charles Durning dove in THE HUDSUCKER PROXY.  She goes splat, he goes
ugh, and his character spends the rest of the film colorblind.
Really.  The good doctor then moves to sunny L.A., where he rooms with
an old college chum (Scott Bakula), a therapist who's getting death
threats from someone in his Monday evening group.
     Buddy bites it in the second reel (no surprise there) and Willis
agrees to take over both the group and the death threats.  For his
troubles as Therapy Man, Willis gets to share some cut-from-NC17 love
scenes with THE LOVER's Jane March while dodging nails, cars, and
rattlesnakes.
     COLOR OF NIGHT is the worst movie of the year.  Period.  Forget
NORTH, CLIFFORD, or, heaven help us, even ON DEADLY GROUND.  Here is a
movie misfire so audaciously awful that you can't help but wonder how
the actors all kept straight faces while filming.
     For starters, the "group" is a collection of mixed nuts better
suited to Bob Newhart than Bruce Willis.  These are realistic
portrayals of the mentally unhealthy?  Playing a prissy
obsessive/compulsive, CUCKOOS NEST alumni Brad Dourif, alone, may set
the psychology profession back ten years.
     The plot's a wreck with laughable dialogue, pointless POV shifts,
and the one Big Secret solvable in the first fifteen minutes.  Director
Richard Rush, who once helmed FREEBIE AND THE BEAN, doesn't seem to
mind.  Unfazed by the nincompoop plot and cuckoo characterizations, he
overfills the film with enough canny camera shots and zany set-pieces
to make the effort almost worth watching.  His token freeway chase is
OK, but the director has more fun with a vertiginous ending ala (most
recently) FATAL ANALYSIS.
     Acting credits are across-the-board awful.  Willis can be forgiven
because he's filming DIE HARD 3 as we speak.  But what about Ruben
Blades insulting presence as The Cop?  Or Lesley Ann Warren's
stereotypical sex addict?  Or Worst Offender Jane March as a
mystery-girl-who's-no-real-mystery?  Shudder.
     BOTTOM LINE:  How they all kept straight faces, I'll never know.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Bruce Willis, Jane March, Leslie Ann Warren, Ruben Blades, 
          Scott Bakula, Brad Dourif, Lance Henriksen 
Director:  Richard Rush 
Producers:  Buzz Feitshans and David Matalon 
Screenplay:  Matthew Chapman and Billy Ray 
Cinematography:  Dietrich Lohmann 
Music:  Dominic Frontiere 
Released by Hollywood Pictures 
     Where's John McClane when you need him?  If nothing else, the main
character from the two DIE HARD films would have livened up proceedings
in this pathetically inept psychological thriller.  Bruce Willis is in
desperate need of something to revive his gasping career, and I can
guarantee that COLOR OF NIGHT's Dr. Bill Capa isn't going to be the
actor's panacea.
     Jane March, taking on her first big Hollywood role, doesn't appear
clothed any more often here than during her previous screen credit, THE
LOVER.  Admittedly, she is a very alluring woman, but this particular
motion picture needs more than her exotic sexuality to save it--a
whole lot more, in fact.
     By nature, thrillers rely heavily upon their plots, and it's in
that area that COLOR OF NIGHT displays its greatest weakness.  The
storyline is routine and the so-called "twists" are obvious enough to
be guessed far in advance of their revelation.  This rather unfortunate
situation leads the audience to believe that the on-screen characters,
who are far behind the viewers in their deductions, are stupid.
     Bill Capa (Willis) was a thriving New York psychologist before one
of his more disturbed patients threw herself out his office window and
splattered all over the sidewalk below.  Unable to continue seeing
patients, Bill heads west to Los Angeles to spend time with his fellow
shrink and old college chum, Bob Moore (Scott Bakula).  It turns out to
be as much business as pleasure, though, as Bob asks him to sit in on
the infamous "Monday night group session."  There, Bill is introduced
to several interesting cases, including Sandra (Leslie Ann Warren), a
woman obsessed with sex; Buck (Lance Henriksen), a bitter, aging man
who can't get past the deaths of his wife and daughter; and Clark (Brad
Dourif), a lawyer suffering from an obsessive-compulsive disorder.
(Note that COLOR OF NIGHT isn't particularly sympathetic towards any
character with psychological problems.)
     When Bob is murdered several days later, Bill believes the guilty
party to be a member of this group, although the police detective in
charge of the case, Lt. Martinez (Ruben Blades), suspects him.
Beginning with Bob's murder, things get progressively worse for the
visiting doctor, culminating in his car being rear-ended.  However,
when he gets a look at the driver, a hauntingly beautiful young woman
named Rose (Jane March), he starts to believe that maybe things aren't
as bad as they seem.  That is, until he opens his mailbox and a
rattlesnake pops out.
     The most interesting elements of COLOR OF NIGHT deal with the
characters' psychological dysfunctions, subjects which are given the
most perfunctory treatment allowed by the needs of the script.  What
we're left with is a big-budget exploitation film that suffers from
awful directing.  Usually it's the actors who go over-the-top, but this
time that fault can be ascribed to the people behind the camera.
Someone involved with this production certainly fell in love with slow
motion shots.
     It would be nice to say that somewhere amidst this massive
overdramatization, there's something to redeem the film, but about the
best I can say is that the dialogue between Capa and Martinez is honed
to a fine edge.  Those who stick through COLOR OF NIGHT to the end are
in for a rather unpleasant surprise.  It would be nice if it was
possible to believe that the final ten minutes represent a clever
parody of the norms of the genre, but that would be giving COLOR OF
NIGHT too much credit.  It takes itself distressingly seriously, which
is something few viewers will be able to do.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Raymond Johnston
     COLOR OF NIGHT is yet another derivative serial killer film.  If
you have seen PSYCHO, THE HEARSE, and TOOL BOX MURDERS there is
absolutely nothing new here.  What is unusual is the fact that a truly
fine cast including Bruce Willis, Ruben Blades, Brad Dourif, and Lesley
Anne Warren are trapped trying their best to breath life into the
stillborn double entendres and tired plot cliches of the hackneyed
"mystery." Even action star Lance Henriksen is left with nothing to do
but talk in the endless and very unconvincing group therapy sessions
that make up the bulk of the film.  Willis, as the psychologist, does
the same happy-go-lucky smart aleck tough guy turn he has become famous
for.  The problem is that a psychologist should be sensitive and
understanding, at least professionally.  Blades, Dourif, Warren, and
Henriksen are thinly written cardboard characters.  Blades, who in real
life has a degree from Harvard, does another hot tempered, dim witted
Chicano stereotype.  Dourif, who is awesome in Wise Blood, plays a
obsessive neurotic who keeps counting everything throughout the film.
Some of this is supposed to be funny, but seeing a decent actor in
truly bad make-up given so little to make a character from is merely
sad.
    The only actor who can count this film as a career plus is Jane
March, whose last film was The Lover.  Her character has some depth and
she really does shine on the screen.  The few scenes of her with Willis
are the only ones in the film worth watching, although she is in
relatively little of the film as a character named Rose.
    Much of the plot, however relies on a transparent gimmick that is
poorly executed.  The obviousness of this gimmick destroys any sense of
mystery early on.  One simply waits for the characters on screen to
notice what is painfully apparent.
    Disney, who owns the company that released this film, has cut the
film to an R rating.  No amount of additional scenes, however, could
make COLOR OF NIGHT into a good film.

Author
Dragan Antulov
When I was little boy, I wanted to grow up and become
psychiatrist. It looked like a really attractive profession
to me - you earn money by doing nothing, just sitting and
listening to complete strangers while they confess the most
intimate details of their lives. However, even such life can
have some bad sides - some psychiatrists may become wanted
war criminals, and some, like Robert Capa, protagonist of
1994 thriller COLOR OF NIGHT, may happen to see their
patients jumping to their deaths through his own office
window. Capa (played by Bruce Willis) is shaken by
experience, so he needs some help from his old friend and
colleague Bob Moore (Scott Bakula) who lives in California.
However, after repeated death threats, Bob gets killed and
Capa, advised by police Lt. Sanchez (Ruben Blades), decides
to find the killer among the picturesque members of Bob's
therapy group. When he isn't solving the mystery, Capa is
engaged in passionate love affair with mysterious and sexy
girl name Rose (Jane March). In the meantime, the killer
begins stalking and targetting Capa too.
Many people actually despise this film, and they probably
have a lot of good reasons. First problem is in the
disorganised screenplay by Matthew Chapman and Billy Ray,
which is strange and not very successful mix of Agatha
Christie-like "whodunnit" thriller, and psychological drama.
Another is terrible miscasting of Bruce Willis who has some
serious problems in convincing the audience that he is
actually intellectual. Then, there is a bunch of awfully
stereotyped minor characters that serve as collective comic
relief. The plot is, of course, formulaic and totally
predictable, with the obligatory and not very thrilling
climatic showdown in abandoned warehouse. And, finally, many
film-lovers were disappointed to see Richard Rush, very
talented director of 1970s, engaged in this typical
Hollywood garbage, far bellow high standards of that golden
era.
However, what saves this film from total failure are the
actors. Brad Dourif and Lesley Ann Warren are charming as
the members of Capa's support group, same as Ruben Blades as
Chicano detective. Finally, Jane March looks really
attractive and although her allegedly steamy sex scenes with
Willis (the ones that caused some rating controversy)
definitely aren't worth the hype, she is at least good thing
to see. And finally, some elements of the screenplay, like
the lesbian relationship, have certain trash quality that
would give this film certain aura of "it's so bad that is
good" guilty pleasure. Anyway, with more of two hours of
length (with extra twenty minutes in integral version) this
film can be hard to watch for those expecting high quality
entertainment. Those more relaxed and equipped with the
benefits of VCR technology, might enjoy it a little bit
more.
