Title
Review for Foxfire (1996)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
"Firefox" is a drama about five teenage girls who become
close friends but get into trouble with authority figures.  
Though critically ignored and maligned, it is actually an
excellent film.  I liked the cinematography, the characters,
and even the eroticism.
The plot of "Firefox" has an odious high school biology 
teacher sexually harassing several of his students.
Led by teenaged drifter Legs (then-unknown Angelina Jolie), 
five girls become involved in an after school altercation 
with the teacher.  He gets his, but the girls are expelled.  
They begin hanging together in an abandoned house, but Jolie's 
hostile attitudes towards men and authority disrupts their 
lives and friendships.
Critical reaction to "Foxfire" is all over the map, and evenly
spread between condemnation, hesitation, and praise.  Common
themes for criticism include the lesbian character Legs, a
lengthy frontal nudity scene considered gratitious, a few
male characters who are complete jerks, and the similarity 
of the film's plot to any number of other films.
My only criticism is the abandoned house: how could such
a lovely house, surrounded by woods, remain empty and open.
It is a plot contrivance to give the young women a private
hangout.
Too much is made of the lesbian themes of the movie.  Of the
five girls, only Legs is a lesbian.  Maddy has a boyfriend, 
Violet is promiscuous, Rita is shy but fantasizes about men, while 
druggie Goldie is asexual.  Jolie's character has an unresolved
anger towards men, perhaps because of a troubled relationship
with her own father.  The film's occasional homoeroticism
is limited to Legs, and whatever interest is returned to her
by the other girls is from friendship.
There are two male characters in "Foxfire" that are jerks:
the predatory teacher, and a jock who for some reason wants
to revenge that teacher's downfall.  The teacher character
is too interesting to be a stereotype, while the hateful jock
helps provide needed tension in the film.  I don't have problems
with either character.  There is also Goldie's father, who 
attempts toughlove to reform his troubled daughter.  He clearly 
cares for her, and in the end you feel sorry for him.
One theme that I liked about the movie is that reckless
behaviour has negative consequences.  A teacher is assaulted;
those responsible are expelled.  Stop signs and red lights
are run; the car gets flipped.  They break into a school;
they unintentionally start a fire.  A student experiments
with drugs; she becomes a heroin addict.
I liked cinematography as well.  The close-ups all seem
appropriate, and the camera follows the action nicely.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1996
U.S. Release Date: 8/23/96 (wide)
Running Length: 1:40
MPAA Classification: R (Language, nudity, violence, mature themes)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Hedy Burress, Angeline Jolie, Jenny Lewis, Sarah Rosenberg, 
      Jenny Shimizu, John Diehl, Richard Beymer, Peter Facinelli, 
      Cathy Moriarty 
Director: Annette Haywood-Carter
Producers: Jeffrey Lurie, John Bard Manulis, and John P. Marsh
Screenplay: Elizabeth White based on the novel by Joyce Carol Oats
Cinematography: Tom Sigel
Music: Michael Columbier
U.S. Distributor: The Samuel Goldwyn Company
     There have been so many male bonding films over the years that it 
seems only fair that we're finally being exposed to the female versions.  
Unfortunately, like their other-gender counterparts, these tend towards 
cliched melodrama rather than something more insightful and character-
driven.  FOXFIRE, which is about five teenage girls taking a walk on the 
wild side, has its share of incisive, intelligent moments, but the film 
as a whole is undermined by a silly plot and the bland characterization 
of secondary players.  Therefore, what could have been a younger version 
of last year's little-seen LIVE NUDE GIRLS devolves into something just 
a little loftier than an exploitation flick.
     In '80s and '90s male bonding movies (there are so many out there, 
you can take your pick), the guys usually get together, have a few 
beers, and talk about girls.  If the director has been influenced by 
Quentin Tarantino, maybe they go on a crime spree, but, mostly, they 
just sort of pal around, doing "guy things."  If we're to believe 
FOXFIRE, when gals congregate, they engage in slightly more esoteric 
rituals, like taking their shirts off and tattooing their breasts. 
     It has been said that every same-sex bonding picture has a 
homoerotic undercurrent. This may not always be true, but there's no 
doubt about the lesbian leanings in FOXFIRE.  The film never crosses the 
line from the unspoken to the acted-upon, but there are enough longing 
looks and pregnant pauses to make the reality of the situation apparent 
to even the most oblivious viewer.  However, the issue of lesbianism in 
never confronted head-on, so we aren't given the opportunity to judge 
whether its inclusion would have made FOXFIRE a better motion picture.
     FOXFIRE, which is based on the novel by Joyce Carol Oats, has 
undergone significant modernization to change the setting from the '50s 
to the '90s, but the theme of female empowerment is still at the 
forefront.  The movie opens in a Portland, Oregon high school, where a 
nasty biology teacher (John Diehl) is tormenting a young female student, 
Rita (Jenny Lewis), because she won't dissect her frog.  He assigns her 
to detention, where, as it's known, he sexually molests girls.  Later 
that day, when Rita shows up for her after-school punishment, she's not 
alone.  With her are four others:  Maddy (Hedy Burress), a "good" 
student with a promising future; Violet (Sarah Rosenberg), one of the 
teacher's past victims; Goldie (Jenny Shimizu), an exotic-looking girl 
with a drug problem; and Legs (Angeline Jolie), a mysterious drifter who 
has just arrived in town.  Led by Legs, the girls make sure the teacher 
won't be engaging in any more sexual harassment -- they leave him beaten 
and bloody.  The next day, as a group, they are called into the 
principal's office and suspended.  That's when the fun -- which includes 
a variety of criminal acts -- begins.
     The best scenes in FOXFIRE are those where the five protagonists 
sit together and talk.  There's a ring of truth to some of their 
conversations, and, during these moments, the Foxfire girls attain a 
multi-dimensional level that they don't have for much of the rest of the 
film.  There are a number of weak plot developments, including the 
opening stuff with the biology teacher, and the climactic sequence, 
which involves guns and a kidnapping.  Had FOXFIRE eliminated some of 
the melodrama and remained low-key, it would have been a more enjoyable 
experience.
     Angeline Jolie's Legs is a rebel with a cause.  With her wild 
nature and troubled past, she provides the spark that impels her four 
friends to turn their backs on conventions.  As in HACKERS, Jolie's 
combination of sensuality and toughness makes for a beguiling portrayal.  
The other members of the quintet are variations of familiar types.  
Maddy, from whose point-of-view the story is told, is the girl-next-door 
with the supportive mother.  Rita is the ineffectual virgin.  Violet is 
the sexually promiscuous one.  And Goldie is the pot-head with the 
dysfunctional family.  The young actresses do solid, if unspectacular, 
jobs.  With few exceptions, the supporting characters are unpleasant and 
one-dimensional -- unsympathetic adults and bullying boys.
     With its themes of revenge and empowerment, FOXFIRE is big on 
payback; unfortunately, there's not quite enough here to recompense 
those who sit in the audience for its hundred-minute running time.  It's 
not as bad as some of the other drek being released on this sad weekend, 
but even such faint praise doesn't earn it a recommendation.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
