Title
Review for American in Paris, An (1951)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
AN AMERICAN IN PARIS (1951)
Not Rated; running time 114 minutes
Genre: Musical
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0043278
Written by: Alan Jay Lerner
Directed by: Vincente Minnelli
Music by: George Gershwin, Ira Gershwin
Choreography by: Gene Kelly
Cast: Gene Kelly, Leslie Caron, Oscar Levant, Georges Guetary,
Nina Foch
DVD standard features (region 1): "Pan And Scan" (non-widescreen);
theatrical trailer; scene access.  Languages & Subtitles: English, French
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2001
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsamerparis.html
As my boy Len in MEMENTO might say, memory's a tricky thing.  Take AN
AMERICAN IN PARIS, for instance.  I distinctly remember thinking, as a
young girl brimming with newly-discovered hormones, that There Could
Never Be Anything Finer, Period, than the image of Gene Kelly struttin'
on screen in a skin-tight leotard.  I distinctly remember this, because
at the sight of Monsieur Kelly doing that strut, I was sure of two
things: one, that one day I'd be Mrs. Gene Kelly, and he'd take me out
of Detroit and into his graceful arms (I'd figure out what to do with
Leslie Caron later, my passion-enflamed heart reckoned); and two, that I
had just witnessed what was undoubtedly The Greatest Musical Ever.
Period.
So why, some 25 or so years later, do I feel somewhat let down by the
movie I just watched?
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
Ex-GI Jerry Mulligan (Gene Kelly) did what any red-blooded American boy
would do after World War II came to a close: he stayed in Paris, to
pursue a career in painting.  His "career", to the point of the opening
of the film [Kelly's first scene, hinting at the graceful athleticism of
a dancer's everyday movement, never ceases to pull me in], consisted of,
mostly, Starving.  He shared such a fate with his best bud, Adam Cook
(Oscar Levant, who I've come to adore almost as much as I love Kelly), a
gifted curmudgeon of a concert pianist who just might be the world's
oldest child prodigy.  Adam, a self-effacing chainsmoker, is also best
buds with the somewhat more successful French music hall star Henri
Baurel (Georges Guetary), an older man who took in young Lise Bouvier
(Leslie Caron) during The Resistance, and in a Woody Hall-ian move, fell
in love with Lise and asked her to marry him.
One problem: once carefree bachelor Jerry laid eyes on Lise, he was
hooked.  Actually, two problems: Jerry's new arts patron, the worldly -
and jealous - Milo (as in, "Venus de") Roberts, wants Jerry for herself.
And on tomorrow's installment of All My Bold And Beautiful Children...
The Upshot:
It's difficult to pin down, but whether it was the relative poor quality
of the DVD itself, or the cringeworthy moments in this movie (see "The
Numbers" below for a couple examples), I honestly have to say that my
childhood Greatest Ever assessment was a bit off.  To be sure, AN
AMERICAN IN PARIS has its moments of absolute brilliance, and I'd easily
put it up against most of the dreck passing for movies these days; but
there was an...emptiness of plot here that just failed to reach the
sustained high notes of a SINGIN' IN THE RAIN or a WEST SIDE STORY, for
instance.  Maybe it was just the idealistic memory I had of that tight
jumper Kelly wore out, but I certainly remembered "Paris" being a little
brighter, a little more dazzling, in my youth.
On the other hand, there's still a lil' sum'n sum'n about AN AMERICAN IN
PARIS that raises it above your standard Boy Meets Girl Let's Dance
musical plot; something a bit hard-edged that makes "Paris" more kin to
the more socially-relevant "West Side" than Kelly's fluffier "Rain".
That "something", I posit, is Oscar Levant.  Yes, "Paris" has plenty of
hokey numbers, like many of its predecessors.  Yes, "Paris" has a
musical-standard Dame In Waiting in the person of the smoky and
underused Nina Foch, and a Charming Ingenue (well, to an extent) in the
magnificent Leslie Caron.  Yes, "Paris" has great Gershwin standards,
and in Minnelli, a director who knew how to make a musical just the way
movie audiences used to want them to be made.  And oh yes, "Paris" has
Kelly showing off all his charms in that skin-tight leotard...ahem.  But
what "Paris" also has that few of the more lighthearted musicals haven't
got, was Oscar the grouch, all-too-briefly snarking his way through AN
AMERICAN IN PARIS like he owned the joint.
And the cool thing about my owning AN AMERICAN IN PARIS on DVD, is that
through the magic of being able to watch selected scenes, I can pretend
that Levant did indeed at least hold a lease on the joint.
  "Oom-pa-pa By Straus"
   Cringe moment #1; Georges Guetary started off rubbing me the
   wrong way [shouldn't it be illegal for a French guy to attempt
   German?] and never recovers.  Next!
  "I Got Rhythm"
   Ahhh...much better.  I've always loved this number; Gene Kelly
   seemed to work so well with those kids, as if he were a dancing
   version of ER's Dr. Ross.  It's funny, though, that he used
   American to teach French kids, English.  Hooked On Ebonics, Jerry?
  "Tra-La-La"
   Cringe moment #2.  I like an almost-shirtless Kelly like the next
   hot-blooded Chick; but lord, that man really couldn't sing, as he
   proved with that misbegotten high note at the end.  Minnelli
   must've directed him to pretend that someone yanked his testicles
   at that moment.
  "Our Love Is Here To Stay"
   The most sensuous, romantic song and dance pairing I can ever
   recall seeing on film.  Some swoon over Astaire And Rogers; but
   Kelly and Caron, in this beautiful scene, are what Does It for me.
  "Stairway To Paradise"
   I love this number, if only because it always makes me to do my
   impression of Henri Tha Playa President.  I'll try to remember
   to do it for Oprah, next time I see her.
  "3rd Movement: Concerto In F"
   Adam's manifesto, and a brief glimpse into the genius of serious
   pianist Oscar Levant.  A few years ago, I remember seeing a PBS
   documentary on Levant which went into detail about what a
   tormented soul he was.  I don't think I've ever been sadder
   about the life of a celebrity than I was after watching that
   documentary.  But even in my sadness, I came away with a deeper
   appreciation for his work in "Paris".
  "S'wonderful"
   Giving my boy Guetary a break for a minute, I liked this
   threesome piece with him, Kelly, and Levant.  By this point, it
   seemed as if Kelly was repeating some taps, but Levant's
   humorous expressions help make this number a winner.
   "An American In Paris"
   If I ever lost my memory ala "Memento's" Leonard, I'd make sure
   to have "you absolutely love the 'An American In Paris' ballet
   number" tattooed across my body.  It'd most def be worth it.
   This 17-minute ballet (which includes Kelly in the skin-tight
   leotard I keep drooling over) is what ultimately caused me to go
   ga-ga over all things Gene Kelly.  Hey, sue me for having a rich
   fantasy life.
Some of the background "noise" may have been a wee bit disheartening to
see, but the heart of a Gene Kelly musical - the singing and dancing -
still stand the test of time in AN AMERICAN IN PARIS.
DVD Thingies:
The lack of gee whiz techie stuff, only added to my slight malaise about
the film in general.  Sure, oldies captured digitally are treasured more
for their innards than for what some technical genius can add to layers
of DVD; and sure, the film still stands on its own merits.  But it's
discomforting to see a wee pretend-Gene Kelly flinching around the
screen like he was on crack, in the bottom corner of the menu.  The
background music's worse, and the butt-ugly menu titles (which were
supposed to imply a painter's pallet), were worse than that.  It was
nothing short of depressing, I swear.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
Though my memory of some details about AN AMERICAN IN PARIS may have
been romanticized a bit more than the reality of watching it as an adult
proved out, even at thirtysomething, I still fantasize about the cutie
in the skin-tight leotard.  oh, swoon. Oh yeah; Caron's not so bad,
either.  And as much as I dug Donald O'Connor in that other Greatest
Ever Kelly Musical, Oscar the grouch has him beat by a country mile.

Author
Jude Wanniski
Number Three of Ten Movies That Shook Wanniski
Memo To- Website browsers, fans & clients
From- Jude Wanniski http://www.polyconomics.com
Re- Ten movies that helped shape my life: #3
One at a time, in the weeks ahead, I'll list here the ten films
 that most shaped my life. These are not my favorite films. They
 are the movies I've seen that have had the greatest influence 
on my thinking, my character, my life. Some are favorites that 
I enjoy watching over and over again, which you can tell as you
 read each entry. Try to think of your own experiences with film
s and how they influenced the course of your life. It makes life
 more interesting to be aware, as you live it, to know how 
things such as books and films and magazine articles alter your
 path in significant ways. Sometime last year the Sunday NYTimes
 "Arts and Leisure" section had a piece on how difficult it is 
to think of a movie that may have changed history. The only 
movie they could think of was a silent film by D.W. Griffith, 
Birth of a Nation, which had a scene about the KuKluxKlan that 
the author believes changed national thinking about the KKK. 
How silly. Each of the ten films listed here changed my history,
 and if I had not seen them, I would not have helped change 
history in the ways that I have. Films don't move masses. They 
move individuals who move masses.
3. "An American in Paris." (1951) There is no motion picture 
I've watched more than this MGM classic musical, easily a 
hundred times without exaggeration. Gene Kelly and Leslie 
Caron in a love story that made me dizzy when I first saw it 
in raging adolescence (15). The music is George Gershwin, my 
entry point to classical music. If I had to have one movie on a
 desert island, this would be it. It is flawless. There is no 
scene in it that is less than the others, no number I can 
decide is my favorite of all. Oscar Levant is priceless in a 
supporting role. George Guetary's "I'll Build a Stairway to 
Paradise," stoked my raging adolescence with every step. Gene 
Kelly plays a GI who stayed in Paris after the war to learn how
 to paint. When he sees Leslie Caron in a smoky nightclub, he is
 hit by the old lightning bolt, and pursues her until the 
movie's glorious finish. When she asks why, if he says he is 
such a great artist, he is not famous, he asks her to be 
patient. "Civilization," he says, "has a natural resistance to 
improving itself." In the years that followed, whenever I've 
been discouraged about my progress in moving the world in the 
direction I wish it to go, I think of that line and why it must
 be so. 
  -------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  Posted using Reference.COM                  http://WWW.Reference.COM 
  FREE Usenet and Mailing list archive, directory and clipping service 
  -------------------------------------------------------------------- 

Author
Brian Koller
I don't understand it, myself.  Since "Singin' in the Rain" is
the greatest musical of all time, how come "An American in
Paris", made just the year prior, and also featuring Gene
Kelly, is not nearly as good?  How can a film that has
received so much acclaim over the years be such a letdown?
I have often criticized films that have too much action
and not enough content.  The same criticism can sometimes
be applied to art films; in this case, too much ballet
and not enough content.
"An American in Paris" does have a plot.  A love story,
of course, that thinly winds its way through numerous
lengthy production numbers.  An ex-GI painter (Gene Kelly)
is living (and struggling) in Paris.  A wealthy socialite
(Nina Foch) promotes his career, but seems more
interested in his body.  Kelly falls for chipmunk-cheeked
Leslie Caron, who is engaged to stage performer Georges
Guetary.  Unemployed pianist Oscar Levant is the laconic
mutual friend of Kelly and Guetary.
Undoubtedly, Kelly was an outstanding actor, dancer, and
choreographer.  But perhaps the envelope was pushed too
far in "An American in Paris".  Comparing with two Kelly
vehicles that I admire, "Singin' in the Rain" and "Take
Me Out to the Ball Game", both had better storylines,
and better supporting casts.
It is possible that since I don't have knowledge of European
culture, that I can't appreciate songs about German composers,
and lacking an understanding of ballet, I can't appreciate
eighteen minute ballet sequences.  But I enjoyed the
production numbers from the aforementioned Kelly vehicles.
The magic doesn't work here, perhaps because the numbers
fill up most of the movie, perhaps because Caron is only
perfunctory, or perhaps Donald O'Connor and even Frank Sinatra
are missed.  Perhaps because Guetary sings like Al Jolson,
while Levant appears about to fall asleep.
In any event, "An American in Paris" received more Oscars
than any other Kelly vehicle.  Awards were won for Best
Picture, Best Art Direction, Best Cinematography, Best Costume
Design, Best Music and somehow even Best Writing.  There
were no nominations for acting, but Vincente Minnelli was
up for Best Director.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
