Title
Review for My Dog Skip (2000)
Number of Reviews
16

Author
Steve Rhodes
How about this for a concept? An autobiographical story about a boy and
his dog that doesn't have any special effects, no talking animals and no
promotional toy tie-ins.  Jay Russell's MY DOG SKIP is just a good,
old-fashioned, heart-warming story that is so genuine and touching that
it should appeal to people of all ages, even those with no kids.
"My fondest memories are of my childhood days back in Yazoo,
Mississippi," Willie Morris explains to us in voice-over in the
introduction.  Set during the summer of 1942, as WW II rages, the story
concerns 9-year-old Willie (Frankie Muniz from "Malcolm in the Middle"),
a scrawny kid with a small mouth and beady eyes, who gets picked on by
the local bullies.
On his birthday, Willie receives Skip, a precious, terrier puppy, as a
gift from his mother (Diane Lane), but his father (Kevin Bacon) doesn't
approve.  His father lost his leg in the Spanish Civil war.  He's a good
dad but a cautious one, who appears to still be suffering from unspoken
war wounds.
The sweetest little dog imaginable, Skip is a lovable pup who's full of
energy.  The director finds lots of adorable things for the canine to do
without ever letting the story turn schmaltzy.  Typical of the inspired
staging is the delightful, time-lapse visual of Skip as he is growing up
until he is finally big enough to jump up and drink from the family's
white porcelain toilet bowl.
"The dog of your boyhood teaches you a great deal," Willie tells us of
Skip.  "You could talk to him better than you could talk to most human
beings."  Skip is truly Willie's best friend, the most loyal of loyal
companions.
"Like all dogs, Skip was color blind," Willie says of the dog's
companionship with races on both sides of the track in the typically
segregated, Southern town.  The movie is filled with touching subplots
from one about racism to one about the disgraced town hero, Dink Jenkins
(Luke Wilson).  Dink, a star high-school athlete, worshiped by the
locals, especially the young boys, is emotionally scarred by the war.
The movie is filled with wonderfully poetic narration by Harry Connick,
Jr., as the voice of the adult Willie.  "Why in childhood and youth do
we wish time to pass quickly, and as an adult we wish just the
opposite?" he asks.  "All the lessons you learn in childhood kind of
come in waves," he tells us.  And this was the summer that Willie
learned quite a few.  Many of the episodes are quite humorous, and all
are honest and genuine.
The warmly nostalgic picture is filmed in radiantly inviting colors and
filled with richly evocative music.
As a viewer, you will vicariously get to enjoy Skip's friendship.  And
if you find yourself both applauding and crying during the picture, as I
did, don't be surprised.  Actually, if you don't cry, you'll probably
want to get a check-up.
The film joyously reminds us all of just how wonderful life can be.  The
good-spirited picture will likely bring back many fond memories of your
childhood.  I too had a terrier, although mine was half cocker spaniel.
Willie describes himself as an only child with an only dog, which was
exactly my situation as well.  There are other similarities, but I can't
mention them without giving away key plot points.  I relived my
childhood while watching the film.  What more could you ask for?
MY DOG SKIP runs 1:35.  It is rated PG for some violent content and mild
language.  The film would be fine for all ages, including people without
kids at all.  Be warned, however, that some of the tragedies in the
picture may briefly frighten impressionable kids under around 8.
My son Jeffrey, age 10, absolutely adored the movie.  He gave it ****
and said that it should win an Oscar.  He liked everything about the
movie, and he loved Skip.  Jeffrey's buddy Nickolas, age 10, gave the
picture ***, saying it was funny and had a good plot.  And, of course,
he too thought Skip was terrific.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
My Dog Skip (2000)
Frankie Muniz, Diane Lane, Luke Wilson, Kevin Bacon, Caitlin Wachs,
Bradley Coryell, Daylan Honeycutt, Cody Linley and Harry Connick Jr.
Written by Gail Gilchriest, based on the book by Willie Morris. Directed
by Jay Russell. 95 minutes
PG, 2.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Edward+Johnson-Ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to
ejohnsonott@prodigy.net or e-mail ejohnsonott-subscribe@onelist.com with
the word "subscribe" in the subject line.
At one point in "My Dog Skip," the narrator states that his beloved pet
appeared to be "possessed of a wisdom as old as time itself." A wisdom
as old as time itself? Excuse me, but aren't we talking about an animal
known for licking its balls (not that there's anything wrong with that)
and eating poo? Hey, if Skip is so damn smart, why didn't he write his
own life story? The lack of opposable thumbs may have been a factor, but
I suspect the main reason was because the pooch was busy learning to
balance just right so that he could drink out of the toilet.
"My Dog Skip" is a classic example of Hollywood overkill. Based on
Willie Morris' memoir of growing up in Yazoo City, Mississippi during
World War II, the film takes a series of nostalgic vignettes and trusses
them up in schmaltzy music and overwrought drama. As if that wasn't
enough, we must suffer though a cheesy voice-over narrative that adds
absolutely nothing to the production, although it does occasionally
provide a few unintended laughs.
For example, as we watch the dog trotting through various neighborhoods
in the segregated town, the narrator informs us that Skip was
"colorblind" and above the overt racism of the era. Oh, give me a break.
He was foraging for food, pure and simple. Taking a dog that views his
town as a giant buffet and painting him as a four-legged ambassador for
the Rainbow Coalition is just plain stupid.
There is a nice little "boy and his dog" story beneath all the bullshit,
anchored by two appealing performers. "Malcolm in the Middle" star
Frankie Muniz plays Willie Morris and the young actor is as unaffected
and genuine here as he is on TV. Moose, the terrier best known as Eddie
on "Frasier," is one of several dogs portraying the adorable Skip.
Together, they serve as a welcome antidote to the more turgid elements
of the production.
What's odd and annoying about "My Dog Skip" is how the filmmakers take a
can't-miss premise and gunk it up. As anyone who has ever seen "Frasier"
will attest, Moose can do every trick in the book. That's all well and
good, but the mixture of bittersweet realism and a dog who is more
physically adroit than most of the cast members doesn't really gel. It's
hard to focus on painful truths when poochie is leaping around like one
of the Flying Wallendas.
Most of the pathos, incidentally, is not contained in Morris' book. A
subplot about Willie's next door neighbor, Dink Jenkins (Luke Wilson), a
popular jock disgraced during his military service, is made up, as is
the business about Willie's father, Jack (Kevin Bacon), being embittered
over losing a leg in the Spanish Civil War.
While the period details are dead on, attempts to make everything look
like an animated Norman Rockwell painting get a bit strained, with most
of the children resembling extras from an "Our Gang" comedy. Check out
the smallest of the three neighborhood bullies in the film. The powers
that be decided he would look cuter, or more authentic, or something,
with dirt on his face, so the poor kid spends the entire movie with
various smudges around his mouth, while his pals remain relatively
clean. Weird. Very weird.
But the most maddening part of the film is unquestionably the narrative.
In the weighty observations of the full-grown Willie (Harry Connick
Jr.), everything is poignant and each incident marks another step in his
ridiculously measured coming of age. "At that moment I stopped being a
child and became a boy," he intones. What? At the moment I heard that, I
stopped being a critic and became an irritated man checking his watch.
Despite its many problems, I still enjoyed "My Dog Skip," thanks almost
completely to the considerable charm of Frankie Muniz and the various
canines playing Skip. But oh, how much better this film could have been
if Gail Gilchriest, the writer who adapted Morris' memoir, had shown up
for work and said, "Folks, I'm afraid we're going to have to stick to
the book after all. Why? Well, because my dog ate the screenplay."

Author
Lars Lindahl
Review by Lars Lindahl (larsattacks@mail.com)
"My Dog Skip" (2000) **1/2 (out of four)
Starring Frankie Muniz, Dinae Lane, Kevin Bacon, Luke
Wilson,Peter Crombie, Clint Howard, and the voice of
Harry Connick Jr.
Two young boys fail to become friends due to racism in
their hometown. A father, injured during the Spanish
Civil War, fears that his son may live the same life
as him and thus becomes overprotective. A recent high
school graduate is sent off to fight Hitler but comes
back an alcoholic trying to drink his troubled
experiences away. These examples and many more are all
introduced in My Dog Skip, then you never hear about
them again. Instead director Jay Russell takes the
easy way out and makes a simple movie about a boy and
his dog. Sure the terrier is cute and you feel good
once the movie ends, but this could have been much
much more. Introducing these subplots must have been
Russell's idea of playing a joke on the audience. He
holds them out like carrots in front of a donkey but
he never rewards you by completely developing them. 
For a film that takes place in Mississippi during the
second World War, My Dog Skip does not take enough
advantage of the time and place it is set in.
The movie should entertain young viewers though.
Although they might not understand any of the World
War two references, they will surely enjoy the
charismatic little dog that stars in the film. As for
adults, the movie may recreate some nostalgic moments
for them and the dialogue isn't too amateur like other
child flicks. I wasn't disappointed with My Dog Skip,
except, like its dog, it's too small of a movie to
stand out from others with similar plots. This should
sound familiar a nine year old boy, Will, (Frankie
Muniz), scrawny and friendless, is the target for your
average cliched school bullies. However, once he
receives a dog for his birthday, Will's confidence
soars allowing him to get the girl, friends, and
respect from everyone in his hometown of Yazoo,
Mississippi. But can he and his dog stay out of
trouble?
I'll be honest, it was difficult seeing the titular
character of Malcolm in the Middle, Frankie Muniz, 
playing another character in another time period. To
be honest, his performance as Will was not very
convincing. The southern accent Muniz uses seems fake
and at times he lacks any emotion (no nine year old
would have a blank look on his face if a drunk looter
through an empty beer bottle at him). Muniz has shown
extraordinary talent on his television show but he
seems to lack it in this role. Other actors are wasted
in My Dog Skip. Kevin Bacon and Diane Lane, as Will's
parents, are wonderful but rarely used. Luke Wilson,
playing the athletic Dink Jenkins, Will's idol living
next door, is never given complete closure. The real
star here is the dog, who instantly captured the
hearts of every member of the audience.
My Dog Skip is a very small movie. There is nothing
extravagant here but it still should be fun to watch.
If only Russell had dug deeper into the plot and made
it a little more specific. He had so many chances to
do this, with so many different subplots asking to be
developed. Oh well. 

Author
Mark O'Hara
Jay Russell's MY DOG SKIP is a charming small film for family members of all 
ages, but it is no HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
We see images of Mark Twain's masterwork in several segments of SKIP.  It 
appears behind the opening credits, in shots of period objects - furnishings 
from kids' rooms of the 1920's and '30's.  Then the protagonist Willie 
Morris (Frankie Muniz) receives a hardback copy from his grandfather.  
Mostly the filmmaker crafts images that are supposed to be from a lost age 
in America - shots you might find in a catalog from a Norman Rockwell show.  
In one sequence, Willie and his Becky Thatcher-like friend Rivers Applewhite 
(Caitlin Wachs) tramp along a path, and later they paddle down a sleepy 
creek in a canoe.  It doesn't matter that the film is set during the Second 
World War, almost 60 years after HUCK FINN was published.  Russell is out to 
evoke a mood of nostalgia, an emotional tone of innocence mixed with 
virtually any genuine American ethic you can think of: hard work, 
independence, freedom, and so on.
The only problem is, these elements combine to create a batch of clichés, 
and they end up taking undue attention from the plot elements that are 
trying their hardest to hang together as a story.  Even the set decoration 
is overdone, from the vintage baseball and football gear to the product 
advertisements cluttering the main street or painted on brick walls.  The 
actors playing the parents of Willie's hero, next-door neighbor Dink Jenkins 
(Luke Wilson), are shown pausing (a real Rockwell moment) after they hang a 
small service banner from the porch ceiling.  (Weren't these star flags hung 
in windows, by the way?)  It may have been more appropriate to suggest a 
hint of the '40's, instead of flavoring the film so strongly.
The coming-of-age story is good enough.  Loner Willie's only guests at his 
birthday party are elderly relatives and his own parents.  Against her 
husband's wishes, Mrs. Morris (Diane Lane) gives Willie a dog, an "only dog" 
for an only child.  What follows is a series of episodes typical of growing 
up stories.  We watch Willie in various stages of happiness and sadness in 
the town of Yazoo, Mississippi.  At times both Willie and his pooch fall 
into jeopardy - scenes mainly involving a couple of bootleggers hiding their 
hooch in a cemetery.  These scenes are also reminiscent of Twain: Tom Sawyer 
this time.  And the head bootlegger Junior might be compared to either Injun 
Joe or Huck's Pap.
The boy-and-his-dog story is engaging.  Frankie Muniz (from the television 
series "Malcolm in the Middle") is a pleasant discovery, his face expressive 
and boyish enough to play a few years younger than his actual age.  Muniz 
has a way of crinkling his smallish mouth to show anger or frustration, and 
he's also convincing in his onscreen crying.
His dog - the title character - is played by the Jack Russell terrier Moose, 
who also portrays the rascally Eddie on the t.v. show "Frasier."  Excepting 
the brief shots in which you can see Moose staring off-camera at his 
trainer, this dog is wonderfully photogenic and clever.  And he seems to 
have a true bond with Willie.  He's the reason the film tips the scales more 
toward success than failure.
Willie has three enemies that become friends, and unfortunately these boys 
do not act their roles as comfortably as many other child actors would.  
Perhaps this is also a result of stereotypical characterization:  the dim 
follower, the dirty towheaded sidekick, the suspender-wearing, loutish 
bully.  None of these young actors can match Muniz's air of ease.
As Willie's father, Kevin Bacon tries valiantly to be a gruff but loving 
presence.  His character lost his lower leg in combat in the Spanish Civil 
War, and now rides out his work life as an accountant, hiding his injury 
behind a desk.  A small snag is that Bacon is not as old as the character 
he's playing, and he does not display a convincing Mississippi accent.  
(Most characters don't, if you want the truth, with the possible exception 
of Rivers.)
It's admirable that one of the film's agendas is to promote tolerance.  
Willie talks briefly with an African-American boy, who brags about a black 
athlete named Waldo Grace in the same way Willie brags about Dink Jenkins.  
We see blacks occupying the balcony seats in the town movie palace, and 
black families sitting around their part of town; at the end we even spot 
Willie and his friends watching Grace pitch and hit the horsehide at the 
Negro ball ground.
MY DOG SKIP is a mixed bag of pleasures and conventions.  I would recommend 
it for both children and adults, though adults may find a few of its minutes 
taken up by sentimentality.  It's worthwhile for its PG rating as well: my 
11 year-old daughter liked the scenes featuring Willie and Rivers (or should 
I say Huck and Becky, or even Forrest and Jenny?)


Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "MY DOG SKIP" (Warner Bros.)
Every once in awhile, you get to see a movie you don't know
anything about and, when it's over, you want to make sure everyone
else does know about it. That's the way I feel about My Dog Skip.
Narrated by Harry Connick Jr., it's a childhood memoir, going back to
the small Mississippi town of Yazoo in the '40s during World War II,
tracing the coming-of-age of young Willie (Frankie Muniz of TV's
Malcolm in the Middle), a scrawny, shy, awkward boy, eager to learn
about the world. Willie lives with his stern but well-meaning dad
(Kevin Bacon), who lost a leg during the Spanish Civil War, and
good-hearted mom (Diane Lane) and dog Skip, a Jack Russell
terrier. It's Skip who enables Willie to stand up to the neighborhood
bullies, speak with confidence to the prettiest girl in school
(Caitlin Wachs), spend a stormy night in Greenwood Cemetery on a dare,
even explore the colored section of his segregated town because dogs,
"being smarter than people," perceive no boundaries. But, above all,
Skip forges his connection with Dink (Luke Wilson), his neighbor and
the local sports hero, who goes overseas to fight Hitler and comes
back disgraced and emotionally wounded.  Part of an autobiographical
novel by the late Willie Morris, a legendary literary figure from the
'60s who edited Harper's magazine, it's been adapted for the screen by
Gail Gilchriest and directed by Jay Russell as a haunting, delicately
etched, character-driven, old-fashioned, anecdotal story that mixes
humor, menace, and pathos, evoking the timeless relationship between a
boy and his loyal, loving dog. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
My Dog Skip is a, scruffy, engaging 8.  It's a wistful, warm and wise
movie that you and your whole family will love.

Author
Mac VerStandig
---A copy of this review can be found at
http://www.moviereviews.org/my_dog_skip.htm ---
For melodrama lovers still weeping the death of Bambi's mother, My Dog
Skip is the perfect film. Ditto parents looking for wholesome and
oftentimes cute material for their kids. But for those seeking popcorn
entertainment, adult fare or typical March trash, the last word of the
title should serve as a subliminal hint.
"My fondest memories are from my childhood days," explains Willie
Morris (Frankie Muniz of television's Malcolm in the Middle). Those
days began with a lonely nine-years-old Willie seeing his 20-something
best friend (Luke Wilson) depart to join American soldiers overseas in
World War Two. They would end with his best friend being the dog who
lends his name to the film's title and Willie's popularity among local
youth being far greater than anyone could have imagined. In-between he
would have fights with his "stern and overbearing" father, befriend
the cutest girl in town, uncover an illegal bootlegging operation and
witness a member of Bambi's type take one in the chest. Through all of
this, he would grow up.
Willie Morris penned the autobiographical book that became this
movie. After those days of French invasions, childhood crushes and
good ol' Skip, Morris became an accomplished author and served as
editor of Harper's Magazine for seven years. He passed away in August,
1999 - just months before the premiere of My Dog Skip.
The plot of the film is reminiscent of both Forrest Gump and Dennis
the Menace. As an unpopular only child against a background setting of
real events, Morris seems a lot like Gump; his girlfriend is equally
suggestive of Jenny. But the suburban life with nest-door neighbors
and sling-shots leads you to wonder why he doesn't have that one
strand of hair aimed at Ra.
Frankie Muniz seems to be the hottest new kid actor in Hollywood with
Malcolm in the Middle garnering both critical and popular
acclaim. Unfortunately, this overly-sentimental role proves a tad
heavy for the relatively inexperienced star and the result is numerous
emotional scenes losing their oomph because of his obvious
confusion. On a brighter note, however, Kevin Bacon (the center of the
movie universe) and Diane Lane (recently in the under-appreciated A
Walk on the Moon) turn in grade-A performances as our protagonist's
parents.
In wake of the overly-violent Pokémon and mediocre-at-best Tigger
Movie, My Dog Skips proves to be the first film since Toy Story 2 that
the tots can see without objection. This movie doesn't have as much to
offer on multiple levels as the November hit and is a less cheery
piece - but it is a genuine family film and those are hard to come by
these days.

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Frankie Muniz, Luke Wilson, Kevin Bacon, Diane Lane. Directed
by Jay Russell. Rated PG.
Boy-and-his-dog tales are one of the oldest staples in Hollywood. From
Lassie to Old Yeller to Shiloh, they've defined the "family movie" and
captured the hearts of generations. My Dog Skip, the latest in the
genre, is one of the best films of its kind. It's remarkable because it
doesn't patronize or condescend -- this is truly a family movie, not a
kids' movie. With its distinctive, unsentimental tone, it's a moving
experience that never descends into melodrama and hokum. My dog's name
is Phil. He's a cocker spaniel. While not the trained movie pet Skip
is, he's a hell of a dog. This movie made me realize how much I value
my pet -- my friend, my companion.
Before he found fame on the popular new tv show Malcolm in the Middle,
young Frankie Muniz played Willie, a boy growing up in 1940's Missouri.
He's not very social; all the kids at school make fun of him and the
bullies cruelly taunt him. He doesn't have any friends his age; his
birthday party invitation list consists of his parents and
grandparents. His only companion is neighbor Dick Jenkins (Luke
Wilson), an athlete whom all the kids in the town look up to.
That all changes when, for his birthday, Willie's mom (Diane Lane)
gives him a puppy. Willie names the terrier Skip but his dad (Kevin
Bacon) thinks that he is not ready for a dog and tries to take Skip
away. Mom and Skip win out in the end, however, and Willie gets to keep
the dog. The two quickly become best companions and with Skip's help,
Willie wins the friendship of the people who made fun of him most
vigorously as well as the affections of the prettiest girl in school.
There is also a subplot about moonshiners who, for some reason, hide
their booze in an old cemetery crypt. It does little except create
vital conflicts for the dynamic duo of Willie and Skip to deal with.
There's so little lip service paid to these scenes that the movie all
but acknowledges the subplot as a mere plot device, thereby making it
especially convenient for us to ignore it. My Dog Skip tackles the age-
old concept of a dog being a boy's best friend but it takes it one step
further: Skip isn't merely Willie's friend, he's his key to society.
The dog opens up new possibilities for him, helps him make friends,
enjoy childhood. This isn't necessarily a case of a boy moving up in
the world simply because of possessions either: once he's in he stays
in with character, heart and compassion. While the dog is given its
fair due, by the end of the film most of the emphasis has been placed
on the human. We really feel that Willie has been changed forever. And
we see why.
Muniz is a wonderful actor mainly because of his penchant for
downplaying crucial scenes. He's a real kid rather than a movie kid and
anyone who's ever been in his situation can identify with him. He
doesn't come off as a phony. Kevin Bacon does come off as a bit of a
phony -- too thoughtless at first (sometimes, puffing his cigar, he
seems genuinely malevolent) and then becoming a caring father too
quickly. But I suppose this is what the character would seem like to a
grown man remembering his childhood.
The end of the film brought tears to my eyes because it hits the nail
squarely on the head. If a pet has the more of an influence on a
person's life than most of the humans, it does not mean that he is
antisocial. As anyone who has ever had a dog knows, a canine is often
the most steadfast, loyal friend you'll have. They can change your
life, mend your heart, listen to your troubles and lift your spirits.
My Dog Skip is about a dog that taught a troubled young boy how to
live.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

MY DOG SKIP (director: Jay Russell; screenwriters:  Willie Morris
(book)/Gail Gilchriest; cinematographer: James L. Carter; editor: Harvey
Rosenstock/Gary Winter; cast: Frankie Muniz (Willie Morris), Diane Lane
(Ellen Morris), Luke Wilson (Dink Jenkins), Kevin Bacon (Jack Morris),
Caitlin Wachs (Rivers Applewhite), Bradley Coryell (Big Boy Wilkinson),
Daylan Honeycutt (Henjie Henick), Cody Linley (Spit McGee),  Harry
Connick Jr. (Narrator); Runtime: 95; Warner Brothers; 2000)
An affectionate and tender family film about a shy boy who gets an
exuberant Jack Russell Terrier puppy for his birthday and it changes his
life for the better. It's a decidedly corny and manipulative
coming-of-age film that never quite grabbed my attention, but it was
sure pleasant enough in a surface way, telling an old-fashioned story
that carefully skirts any controversy. This memoir of Willie Morris's
childhood in the segregatated small town of Yazoo City, Mississippi, is
set during the years of WW11, with the film beginning in the summer of
1942.
It is a human experience drama about childhood innocence that touches on
many little things the author reminisces about without him saying much
about them, except showing how he still remembers his pet with the
greatest fondness after all these years and speaks of his small-town as
an ideal place for a child to grow up in. Willie Morris survived his
bookish childhood to win a Rhodes scholarship to Oxford University and
became the youngest editor of Harper's magazine and a distinguished
award-winning writer. He gives a lot of credit to his dog Skip for
surviving those awkward and lonely childhood years when three schoolboy
bullies picked on him unmercifully, as his dog became his best and most
steadfast friend, opening his eyes to things he couldn't see by himself.
Harry Connick Jr. does the voiceover in his scratchy voice, exuding in
nostalgia for a period of time when life was slower than it is today.
When kids freely played among themselves and the streets were relatively
safe places.
Willie Morris (Muniz) is a geeky kid who is small for his age and is
overprotected by his embittered and standoffish father (Bacon), who lost
a leg during the Spanish Civil War and has lost a piece of his heart
along with that wound, and is only able to offer tough love. He says he
took a job as an accountant so he would be sitting at work and people
wouldn't notice that he walks with a limp. Willie's attractive mom
(Lane) is outgoing and is the one who insisted that Willie needed a dog
as a pet and gave him that present on his 9th birthday despite the
objections of his father, who didn't think he was old enough to handle a
dog.
The coming-of-age messages in this film are presented in a low-key
manner, as they reflect on a number of things seen through the childish
eyes of Willie, such as the pains of war, the disappointments of hero
worship, the importance of friendship and loyalty, the thrill of puppy
love, the necessity for community pride, the need for parental love and
racial tolerance, and his overall fond memories of childhood.
Willie is upset to learn that his next-door neighbor and his only friend
- star athlete and pride of the town Dink Jenkins (Luke Wilson) - is
leaving to fight in the European war as a private in the U.S. Army.
Skip helps the befuddled Willie forget about his loneliness by his
uncondiotional love. He also helps him make friends and to see things in
his color blind way, as the dog ambles all over town, including the
colored section where Willie never went before. Just about everyone in
town gets to know him through the dog. He will meet the prettiest girl
in school, River Applewhite (Caitlin Wachs), who takes a liking to Skip
and therefore starts a friendship with him, and even the bullies will
stop bothering him after they come into contact with Skip.
When Dink returns to town - not as a war hero, but as a drunk and is
rumored to be a coward, he is shunned by everybody in town. But Willie
still likes him and remains loyal to him because Dink stood by him in
his time of need.
There is also an ill-advised episode that seemed contrived, with the
town meanies, a couple of moonshiners, who Willie and Skip come across
in a cemetery and are threatened by them to not squeal about their
hiding place where they keep their booze in a crypt. Skip while running
away from Willie, accidently manages to get locked in the crypt and is
nearly killed by them for busting up all their liquor bottles. All of
Willie's new friends ride around town in their bikes looking for Skip
and find him in critical condition. In a formulaic scene using every
ounce of its energy to tear at the viewer's heart, Skip wakes up after a
life-saving operation, as an immense relief comes over the face of
Willie.
The film should be enjoyed by children of all ages, as the dog steals
the picture with his antics and spinning tricks and playful ways. Adults
might be taken in by a sense of nostalgia, about seeing an idealized
childhood they might have had or wished for. Those who grew up having a
dog as a pet, should respond with approval about how much fun it was to
have a dog. For the film to be better received, it would have needed
more drama. But, as it is, it is good enough as a plain old-fashioned
story about the love affair between an introspective youngster and his
loving dog.
Muniz made for an appealing youngster, Skip stole every scene he was in,
and the understated and elegant performances by both Bacon and Lane,
gave the film some life. If you're in the mood for a lighthearted
boy-dog story and are not looking for anything deeper than that, then
"My Dog Skip" will jump right up on your lap and lick your face.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Michael Dequina
        "Boy and his dog" movies always seem to fly over my head.  Perhaps it's
because I've never been much of a pet person, or more likely it's because
in pandering to everyone from the tykes to the old folks, the cutesiness
is often cloying and the sentimentality is almost always syrupy. 
_My_Dog_Skip_, based on Willie Morris' beloved World War II-era-set 1995
memoir, is guilty of committing both those crimes.  However, while this
family film often follows the traditional mechanics of its genre, the
emotions it elicits feel far from manufactured.
        That isn't necessarily the case in the early stages of _My_Dog_Skip_,
which traces young Willie's (Frankie Muniz) relationship with the titular
canine, whom he receives as a 9th birthday gift from his mother (Diane
Lane).  With the departure of his next-door neighbor and idol, celebrated
former high school athlete Dink Jenkins (Luke Wilson), for military duty,
Skip (whose full name is "Skipper") quickly becomes Willie's new best
friend.  Unsurprisingly, the development of their relationship comes
complete with all the usual precious scenes of Skip trying to drink out
of a toilet and charming the pants off the locals in Yazoo, Mississippi.
        _Skip_ the film takes a longer while to charm its audience, and while
that sounds like a knock, it's actually a compliment.  Despite some
moments of melodrama (such as Dink's slow-mo departure, bombastically
scored by William Ross), director Jay Russell works at a low key, subtly
planting the emotional seeds that come to full blossom by the film's
conclusion, which packs a profoundly poignant punch.  The film's
effectiveness is every bit as much his collaborators' doing as it is his
own.  Although some of the situations he's placed in are cloying, Muniz
never falls into the trap himself; he's remarkably assured
and--crucially--real for child actor.  Ably supporting him are Lane,
Wilson, and, as his war veteran father, Kevin Bacon.  And while a number
of the film's failings fall squarely on her work, scripter Gail
Gilchriest must also be commended, in particular for some lovely passages
of voiceover narration, nicely read by Harry Connick, Jr.
        _My_Dog_Skip_ is a nice film, and its unabashed sentimentality is
certain to lead some viewers to call it too nice.  But that's what makes
it an ideal family entertainment: harmless to the kids, while offering
something deep and valuable for the adults.  _My_Dog_Skip_ is a touching
film with its heart in the right place in a day and age when so many
movies don't have one at all.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
My Dog Skip (2000) 
Rated PG; running time 95 minutes
Genre: Family Drama 
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0156812 
Official site: http://www.mydogskip.com/  
Written by: Gail Gilchriest (based on the book by Willie Morris)
Directed by: Jay Russell
Starring: Frankie Muniz, Diane Lane, Luke Wilson, Kevin Bacon, 
Caitlin Wachs, Bradley Coryell, Daylan Honeycutt, Cody Linley
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsmydogskip.html
"Beyond The Mat" was the only movie I had planned on seeing this 
weekend; Diva had already reviewed "Erin Brockovich" (and I had no 
desire to see that one), I thought "Final Destination" would be too 
scary for me (ObHa: Ha!), and I had seen most of the other flicks 
showing at my local cineplex.  But because a friend suggested I go see 
it when I get a chance, and because I got to the theater too early for 
"Beyond", I found myself watching "My Dog Skip" in the interim.  I think 
I'll go back to sleeping in late on the weekend.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
Willie Morris (Frankie Muniz), a young boy growing up in Yazoo, 
Mississippi in the 1940s, was the only child of Jack (Kevin Bacon) and 
Ellen Morris (Diane Lane); befriended only by an adult neighbor, Dink 
Jenkins (Luke Wilson), and picked-on by Big Boy Wilkinson (Bradley 
Coryell), Henjie Henick (Daylan Honeycutt) and Spit McGee (Cody Linley), 
Will was a very lonely boy once Dink went off to the Army during World 
War II--until Skip (Moose), a Jack Russell Terrier, came into his life.
The Upshot:
Some books just don't translate well into movies; this one, like "Wonder 
Boys" before it, is one of those movies.  The evidence that "proves" "My 
Dog Skip" is a piece meant to be read more than watched, comes from the 
necessity of the narration by Harry Connick Jr.; as written, if it 
weren't for that narration, the viewer wouldn't have the foggiest about 
what was going on.  Far too many times, we were told, not shown, the 
motivations and actions of the characters; while this is to be expected 
of the dog--after all, he couldn't speak for himself--hearing Connick 
(as Adult Will) tell us over and over again that "Skip made me what I 
am!  He helped me Grow! and Learn! and I kept Learning!" quickly got on 
my last nerve.
It didn't help that bits and pieces of this movie (based on a true 
story) felt like deja vu.  We've seen the Picked-On Boy Battling 
Neighborhood Bullies ("The Boy Who Could Fly"), The Picked-On Boy 
Getting The Girl ("Forrest Gump"),  the Picked-On Boy Getting Over On 
Adult Bad Guys ("Home Alone")--you get the picture.  And the adult 
situations that we've not seen dealt with maturely before in a 
children's story--mainly, how returning vets deal with the effects of 
war--were given such short shrift in lieu of the dog's story [yes, I've 
seen the title.  Still.], they may as well have not been addressed at 
all.  True story or not, if the filming of this story had improved on 
those things we've already seen, or given a new twist to them, it 
wouldn't have been nearly the issue it was with me; but this treatment 
just left me bored, waiting for something to Happen.  It never did.
The movie did have its charms, though.  Muniz looked like he stepped 
right out of a Norman Rockwell painting, and his Southern accent was one 
of the few that stuck around throughout the entire flick; as Rivers 
Applewhite (what a name!), Caitlin Wachs was a very cute partner to 
Muniz;  and the "Show And Tell" scene brought back fond grade school 
memories for me.  Oh, I did so love show and tell...sigh
The one thing that didn't work in its favor was the dog itself.  The 
"actor", Moose, is a regular on the TV series "Frasier"; I love the 
series, but don't care for the dog nor his character there, "Eddie".  
Likewise here in the movie, his "cute" factor quickly wore off, and all 
the poor kiddies drawn in by the cute commercials and trailers, saw 
everything that might possibly get their attention happen in the first 
20 minutes or so; the rest was a rather trite trip down Nostalgia Lane 
for the oldsters amongst us.
I'd hate to think that, for a movie revolving around an animal to be any 
good, said animal would need to be either animated or voiced by a human; 
scoff if you will, but Harry Connick's narration in the place of Danny 
DeVito's voiceover as a dog in "Look Who's Talking Now", isn't much of a 
bargain.  Uh, on second thought...
The "Black Factor"  [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]:
A truly missed opportunity for this movie the came with handling the 
issue--hinted at in the film, but not really addressed--of segregation.  
We saw images on screen of Blacks being made to sit in the balcony at 
the local movie house, and Blacks playing ball separately from Whites, 
but other than a few "Colored people can't do so and so"'s here and 
there, it was as if the viewer was supposed to infer, from past 
knowledge, that there were racial problems in Will's life that he 
probably eventually came to grips with.  But perhaps that's best, after 
all; I guess I should be happy that he wasn't made out to be the Civil 
Rights Crusader like his counterpart in "Crazy In Alabama", but, still.  
But boyo, Will sure did Learn from that dog of his, yessiree bob!
Bammer's Bottom Line: 
I'm sure this was a pretty sweet book.  But as a movie, it just doesn't 
cut it; the kids in the audience were bored after the puppy grew up--and 
most of the adults had already fallen asleep well before then. "A dog" 
pretty much sums it up. 
"My Dog Skip" (rating: yellowlight): 
In dog years, that's seven yellowlights.

Author
Ross Anthony
Sweet and schmaltzy, 1940's small town America. Formulaic, aside from an
abrupt slap in the face that comes out of left field to solidify this
endearing tale (or is that tail?).
A warm homey opening sequence brings us gently to Harry Connick Jr's first
word, "Memories" which breaks the dawn into a mellifluous yarn of a young
boy desperately in need of a best friend. Though Connick never appears in
picture, his voice shapes and buffs its glossy finish.
Like "October Sky," our young boy is parented by a stern (but underlyingly
loving) father and a strong demonstrative mother. Kevin Bacon finds his part
a bit awkward at first, leaving one hoping a Jon Voight or Christopher
Walken would have taken the role, but eventually Bacon hobbles up to the
call. (Don't get me wrong, I like Bacon ... it's just that he looks less
like a stern parent than he does an innocent kid.)
The mother also, is almost too beautiful, but does well with an undemanding,
standard role. Frankie Muniz, as the nine-year-old Willie Morris, is
charming. And Skip, well, everyone will leave the theater wanting to take
him home.
Very good, but a bit slow in the first half coupled with Bacon's shaky
start, I contemplated giving this picture a "B+." But, admittedly the
charming mutt and ensemble succeeded at choking me up more than just once
while cajoling an impressive round of applause from the handful of paying
customers at its conclusion. So, I rounded up! If you've got a 5 to 10 year
old, take a family trip to see this wholesome story.
My Dog Skip. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG.
Starring Frankie Muniz, Diane Lane, Kevin Bacon, Luke Wilson, Caitlin Wachs.
Directed by Jay Russell.
Screenplay by Gail Gilchriest (based on the book by Willie Morris).
Produced by Jay Russell, John Lee Hancock, Andrew A. Kosove, Broderick
Johnson at Alcon/Warner Bros.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Warner Bros./ Alcon Entertainment
 Director: Jay Russell
 Writer: Gail Gilchriest, book by Willie Morris
 Cast: Frankie Muniz, Diane Lane, Luke Wilson, Kevin Bacon,
Caitlin Wachs, Bradley Coryell, Daylan Honeycutt, Cody
Linley, Harry Connick Jr.
   The 1940s have often been considered a more innocent
age than our own, but of course those were years of global
disaster.  World War II, the most cataclysmic of all conflicts,
caused the deaths of at least a half million Americans, with
the Holocaust forming the backdrop as the most devastating
event of the century, if not of all time.
   Ironically, though, for those who stayed at home protected
by the two oceans, the forties was a period made for Norman
Rockwell's paintings of a bucolic America, one in which a
single breadwinner was enough to support a family in decent
comfort allowing parents to spend Sundays watching the little
ones play Little League ball in the clean, country air. 
Segregation of the races was a fact of life that seemed to be
endured in the south by those kept down by racial laws, and
small-time harmony was taken for granted.  Such is the ideal
time for dog stories, of which the great "Lassie Come Home"-
-like Babe Ruth's home run record--seemed unbeatable (and
still is).
   Jay Russell's new period piece, "My Dog Skip," features a
Jack Russell terrier (actually six were used in the movie) who
is not only a joy to watch but who acts principally as a
catalyst to bring a shy nine-year-old boy into well-adjusted
young adulthood.  Based on Willie Morris's actual memoirs as
a young lad in Yazoo, Mississippi and filmed on location in
Yazoo and other spots in the state that appear untouched by
time, "My Dog Skip" is made for the kids but will please those
old enough to remember that tokens of life during a simpler
time.  Television was not to enter American homes for
another few years, and a nine-year-old did not call his
buddies on a cell phone to arrange a meeting.  Dog leashes
appeared to be as rare as a lock on the front door and
canines of all sizes wandered about the sylvan hamlets as
though they were furry people out for a stroll--occasionally
dropping into the local butcher shops to pick up a slice of
bologna.  It's no wonder that Willie Morris, who at the age of
nineteen left Yazoo to attend Oxford University on
scholarship and become the youngest editor ever at Harper's
magazine, returned to his roots some years before dying in
1999 at the age of 64.
   Willie (Frankie Muniz), a kid showing off the most
expressive eyes since Jim Carrey's imitation of Andy
Kaufman in "Man on the Moon," is an outsider.  An only child
where five kids per family was the norm, he was not good at
sports, and his shyness led only to his being bullied by a
gang of three led by Big Boy Wilkinson (Bradley Coryell). 
Unable to approach the prettiest girl in town, Rivers
Applewhite (Caitlin Wachs), he could have gone through life
as a drudge in some office--unloved, unsung, unknown--had
his mother (Diane Lane) not presented him with a Jack
Russell Terrier for his birthday.  Though Willie father, Jack
(Kevin Bacon) did not approve (for unconvincing reasons),
the overprotective dad--who lost a leg in the Spanish Civil
War--relents.
   In a movie which wisely uses the book simply as a take-off
point for key steps in Willie's rites of passage, we see the lad
lose some regard for his ball-playing hero, Dink (Luke
Wilson), who went AWOL from his army outfit while gaining
the respect of the bully boys and the affection of the adorable
Caitlin.  Not surprisingly, it is the furry little creature who
brings him out of his funk--romping about the town, leaping
gaily on trees, chasing his tail, and in the picture's iconic
moment, figuring a way to leap onto the toilet seat to fetch a
drink.
   No dog person can sit through this homespun, relaxed
picture without shedding a tear as poor Skip is hit with a
shovel by a couple of (cartoonish) moonshiners, his life
hanging in the balance in the vet's office as the tearful Willie
says silent prayers for his canine friend on the operating
table.  The charming, largely unpretentious, and thoroughly
sweet movie is marred only by Harry Connick Jr's incessant
and affected narration, not unlike the pseudo-philosophic
nonsense on the soundtrack of "The Thin Red Line."  Surely
scripter Gail Gilchriest could have fashioned some dialogue
to make this rendering wholly unnecessary.  
Rated PG.  Running Time: 90 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
James Brundage
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member James Brundage.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/60e74e041ca9cd6b8625626f0062219f/d36db9c5bb0cb6db88256920000ccab7?OpenDocument
        The wise man once said "You can't run through the gauntlet of PACs
without getting somebody on their high horse."  Political Action
Committees -- groups that watch Hollywood second only to watching
Washington -- are so numerous in this jolly land of political
correctness in which we all reside, that nobody ever makes anything
without annoying some PAC.  It is like the Strait of Messia of
politics... sail your ship there, and without the guidance of a goddess,
your Argonauts shall fall into Poseidon's watery deep.
        Nobody survives the gauntlet... no one, that is, except for the
filmmakers of My Dog Skip.
        My Dog Skip is your standard kiddy fare -- trite message, half-decent
acting, something dealing with an animal thrown in, and messages that
hit you like the ten ton anvil falling on a Loony Toons character --
with one massive distinction... My Dog Skip prompts no political
reaction at all.  Try as you might, no PAC can find fault with the film.
        Although standard family values and conservative viewpoints are lauded
throughout My Dog Skip's utterly wholesome, WWII setting, no knee-jerk
liberal reactions are possible.  The SPCA will be utterly pleased that
all animal violence is both off screen and admitted as a terrible
thing.  The NAACP will be pleased that a civil rights subplot was thrown
in.  Women's Rights groups will be pleased that, although the father is
described as "overbearing" the mother still ends up being the one who
does the plumbing while the father cooks the meals.  And, in the brief
moment that hunters are featured, they get to bring down their game and
be characterized as villains at the same time.
        That being said, My Dog Skip still manages to pull a few family-related
heartstrings.  The film is a collection of a few positive life-lesson
subplots (kid gets dog, kid gets friends, kid gets girlfriends), each of
which are so kitschy that (combined with Harry Connick Jr.'s soft
narration) they manage to pull the emotional purse strings enough to get
little kids misty-eyed, and the adults get misty-eyed out of sympathy.
        Yet My Dog Skip, in its attempt to run the PAC gauntlet and please its
target audience at the same time, ends up being a totally forgettable
cinematic effort.  The characters' names slip into the data stream of
memory so quickly that they are revealed as nothing more than archetypes
as you recollect the film (he was the kid, he was the dad, it was the
dog).  The events of the movie take a little longer to leave you, but
they won't clutter it up for too long.
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Christian Pyle
"My Dog Skip" is based on the autobiographical tribute of journalist
Willie Morris to his boyhood pet.  Harry Connick Jr. proves the
narrative voice of the elder Morris looking back nostalgically to a
time when he lost his innocence in Yazoo, Mississippi, during World
War II.  Frankie Muniz, the star of TV's "Malcolm in the Middle,"
plays the nine-year-old Willie, a shy, small ch ld who is ostracized
by his peers.  His only friend is his teenage neighbor Dink Jenkins
(Luke Wilson), a high school sports star who's just joined the service
and is about to go overseas.  Realizing that Willie will be lonely
without Dink, Ellen Morris (Diane Lane) buys Willie a dog for his
birthday against the wishes of her husband Jack (Kevin Bacon).  Jack
seems stern and the elder Morris tells us that Jack lost "a piece of
his heart" in the Spanish Civil War along with a leg, but we learn
that Jack resists the dog because it inevitably bring the pain of loss
to Willie.  Willie loves his Jack Russell terrier Skip (Enzo and Moose
of TV's "Frasier") from the start, and Skip soon makes substantial
improvements in Willie's life.
The bullies who torment him become his posse, and the prettiest girl
in chool, Rivers Applewhite (Caitlin Wachs), starts to think he's hot
stuff.  There's a strong "Tom Sawyer" motif in this story.  (Oddly,
though, the director keeps showing us the cover of "Huckleberry
Finn.")  Like Tom, Willie is well-versed in tales of adventure and
leads his friends into mock exploits.  The bullies-turned-friends are
a collective Huck Finn, and Rivers is Becky Thatcher. There are even
some scary bootleggers who stand in for Injun Joe.
The Yazoo of "My Dog Skip" is misted over with the nostalgia common in
memoirs of childhood created after many decades.  (Witness, for
example, Franco Zeffirelli's recreation of his youth in fascist Italy
in "Tea with Musso ini.")  This Yazoo is more realistic than Mayberry
because it allows for the re lities of segregation and war, but it
still rings false.  Even worse, the sappy "Wonder Years"-style
voiceover commentary robs crucial scenes of their sweetness by droning
on and on about the significance of the events.
The saving grace of "Skip" are the performances of Frankie Muniz and
Kevin Bacon.  Muniz does a fine job approximating the accent and
mannerisms of a boy in a small Southern town in the 1940's.  Bacon
gives the best performance of his career.  When the Connick voiceover
introduces Jack Morris, one expects him to be mean and abusive.
However, Jack turns out to be a loving father, and Bacon reveals how
the outward bitterness shields his sensitivity.  He also manages well
with the awkward gait of a one-legged character.  Expect an Oscar
nomination for Bacon.
Bottom Line:  Strong performances keep "Skip" from drowning in its cloying
nostalgia.
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review:
http://www.madreview.com/main.html

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Roger Ebert talks about going into MY DOG SKIP expecting it to be
just another animal film and being won over by it.  It reminded him of
his dog when he was growing up.  I have to say my experience was just
the opposite.  I admit I happen to like a good sentimental animal story
and particularly a dog story.  Growing up I also had a dog, Sam, whom I
loved very much.  And before, during, and after my experience of
growing up with Sam I thoroughly enjoyed dog films.  Not just the big
famous ones like OLD YELLER, but I still get misty over GOODBYE MY LADY
and the 1959 A DOG OF FLANDERS.  More recently I enjoyed SHILOH.  And
it was in this vein that I went into MY DOG SKIP actually expecting to
like it, even if other people would think me silly.
     Quite to my surprise, in spite of expectation and good reviews, it
is not a good dog story.  And for one very important reason.  For a dog
film to work, the dog has to be believable.  I consider a dog to be a
very intelligent animal, but not like Skip.  Skip does things that I
cannot believe any dog would do.  In one scene, Skip's master Willie is
supposed to be playing football, but freezes up when the ball falls at
his feet.  Sizing up the situation, Skip the wonder dog runs forward,
picks of the football in his teeth and jumps into Willie's arms.  Also,
several times in the film Skip plays matchmaker, getting his young
master together with a cute little girl.  A dog is an intelligent
animal, but it is too hard to believe he is that intelligent.  Too
often when we should be drawn into the story we feel the presence of
Skip's trainer just out of camera reach.
     Growing up in Yazoo, Mississippi, in 1942 is not easy for Willie
Morris (Frankie Muniz).  Willis is something of a loner anyway, picked
on by the local bullies.  Willie does not make friends easily.  His
closest friend was his next doors neighbor, Dink Jenkins (Luke Wilson)
a local sports hero.  But Luke went off to war and Willie is lonely and
virtually friendless.  Willie cannot think of a single friend his own
age to invite to his birthday party.  And Willie desperately needs
friends.  Willie's father Jack (Kevin Bacon) seems to have lost any
human warmth he had along with a leg in the Spanish Civil War.
Willie's loving mother Ellen (Diane Lane) sees her son's loneliness and
wants to get the boy a dog.  But Jack absolutely refuses.
     Of course, we know that eventually Willie will get his dog, but
what is unexpected is how having Skip changes Willie's life so
completely.  Through the dog's ministrations Willie proves himself and
befriends the local bully who formerly preyed on him.  Skip also
arranges to have the prettiest girl in school spread a fondness from
Skip to Willie.
     The film chronicles Willie's adventures with Skip.  Seeing a
newsreel about the Canine Corps, Willie becomes obsessed with giving
his best friend away to the military effort.  (Somehow this seems
unlikely but possible.)  In another subplot, Dink returns from the war
somewhat less a hero than he had been in local sports.  Skip will in
his way also help Dink.  The film frequently repeats an anti-violence
message as warfare and hunting are shown to have as ugly a side as is
possible to show in a family film.
     Frankie Muniz as Willie Morris has to hold the film together as
much or more than Haley Joel Osment did in THE SIXTH SENSE.  He has an
expressive face without the exaggeration that a Macaulay Culkin.  Diane
Lane is a little idealized as a mother, but less so than the dog.
Kevin Bacon seems a little young for fatherly roles.  William Ross's
score is sentimental and pleasant, though in one action scene seems a
little too close to John Williams's style.
     Perhaps some leeway is acceptable for sentimentality, but this
film was a little too hard to believe at face value.  This is an
acceptable dog story but not one of the best.  I rate it 6 on the 0 to
10 scale and a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Jamey Hughton
There is a fine detectable line separating a children's movie from a
family movie. In a film aimed squarely at the younger crowd, there are
usually goofy physical antics, wisecracking sidekicks and strained
moralizing extracted from obvious universal issues. Sometimes this
formula supplies harmless entertainment, but the family movie experience
is always more gratifying when the filmmakers have envisioned no
particular target audience or age group. `My Dog Skip', a gentle and
cuddly boy-and-his-dog story, is a heartwarming tale of love and
sacrifice that will appeal to audiences young and old. For flustered
adults seeking redemption from another 90-minute live-action opus with
cartoonish villains and immature gags, `My Dog Skip' is the perfect
antidote.
One of the trailers at the movie advertised - God help us - `Pokemon:
The Movie 2000'. The original `Pokemon' grossed roughly $80 million at
the North American box office, and for what? Don't sink your money into
that inane animated cult. While viewing the trailer for the sequel, the
strict kid movie' siren went off in my head. I could already picture
the parents being dragged unwillingly to the cineplex to satisfy their
7-year old Pikachu fan. `My Dog Skip' is not this type of movie, and in
that sense, it is somewhat of a wonderful rarity: a film that is special
and rewarding for movie-goers of all ages.
I'm not a particularly avid fan of the TV hit `Malcolm in the Middle'. I
have caught the show on a few occasions, but I haven't allowed it enough
air-time to grow on me. The reason I'm babbling about `Malcolm' is
because that primetime success serves as a showcase for the young,
talented protagonist of `My Dog Skip': Frankie Muniz. Muniz, a charming,
innocent stringbean of a boy, seems to be making his bid for childhood
stardom by displaying his surprising range. Here, Muniz plays
mischievous 11-year old Willie Morris, a lonely boy living in
Mississippi via 1942. Unable to make appropriate friends with kids his
age, Willie looks up to his neighbor and personal idle Dink Jenkins
(Luke Wilson), a star baseball player who promises to teach Willie the
secret to a great curve ball. When Dink is called away on overseas war
duty, Willie's mother (Diane Lane) opts for a four-legged adoption into
the family - that of a terrier named Skipper. Despite the initial
objection of Willie's strict but caring father (Kevin Bacon), a war
veteran himself, Skip is granted shelter under the Morris' roof and
becomes quite attached to young Willie.
`My Dog Skip' is a sweet, touching adaptation of a novel by Willie
Morris himself, who shared with the world his tender childhood
experiences... including how Skip helped him to overcome his fears and
evolve emotionally into a young man. Director Jay Russell has crafted a
magical film that embodies the essence of childhood and captures the
special nature of raising a pet that you hold dear. Sure, the narration
(by Harry Connick Jr.) is occasionally plodding and unnecessary, not to
mention laced with distracting corniness. And the script has a tendency
to delve too deeply into its subjects to a point where the message
becomes preachy and sentimental. These are still minor drawbacks in a
superb family film... one that seems to be honey-coated with warmth and
inviting innocence.
I was surprised at how effective `My Dog Skip' was. It tugs at your
heartstrings gently, paying close attention not to venture into blatant
dramatic territory that insults the viewer's intelligence. Over time,
the soft, heartwarming approach grows powerful - resembling somewhat of
a strategically played game of emotional chess. I don't give in to
dramatics very often, but I admit I was getting a trifle misty-eyed
during `My Dog Skip'. The wonderfully honest performances only help to
enforce the subtle power the film contains. Bacon and Lane are both
terrific. Luke Wilson was a pleasant surprise, for in a rare dramatic
performance, he excels at everything that he usually accomplishes in a
comedy. There is a lot of honest discovery channeled through the
character of Dink Jenkins, who, in cinematic form, is a well-realized
addition to Morris' childhood adventures.
Frankie Muniz is the heart of `My Dog Skip', offering a thoroughly
convincing portrait of a lonely small-town boy with eyes aglow with
alarm and innocence. I'm looking forward to seeing him in future
projects. Concentrating on the present, Jay Russell's `My Dog Skip'
submits an early bid for family film of the year. Sure, it will likely
be toppled by a show-stopping Disney picture, but I'll hold a place in
my heart for this little wonder. `My Dog Skip' is something to wag your
tail about.
Your Comments Appreciated!  movieviews@hotmail.com
