Title
Review for Map of the Human Heart (1992)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Pedro Sena
I have seen three Vincent Ward films, and while this one is the cleanest of
them all ( looks like he had a slight budget for a change ), it really isn't
up to par of the previous two, although it has interesting bits and pieces.
It is the story of an eskimo boy, who grows up to become a sad man, drunk in
his shoes.  In between are all the adventures he goes through, and the one
love in his life, whom he wanted, but could not keep.
His inability to stay with his loved one causing him to go to the drink,
which eventually leads him to his end.  In between the film has its nice
touches, the young man making love to the woman atop a weather balloon, and
some other unusual bits which make the film very enjoyable.
THE VIGIL, dealt almost with unseen forces that one could not change.  THE
NAVIGATOR dealt with an ability to hold faith in the harshest of conditions.
MAP OF THE HUMAN HEART deals with people's abilities to stay within their
own desire and love.  The girl Arik ( Jason Scott Lee ) loves, happens to
like him, but she ( Anne Galipeau ) is concerned with her Indian background
and the acceptance of their mixed relationship in a white world.  And even
though his ability to be crazy and courageous gets to win her for periods of
time that appear to be coincidental ( the story indicates that there will
always be a kharmic connection between these two -- thus they will
always meet regardless of where ), but in actuality are each person's
choices at the time.
It is a nice film, but it is rather sad and brutal on the cross cultured
opinions that most people have about each other.  And it really explains why
many cultures, even the eskimo, is probably going to face extinction in the
future.... ( we need food, not books... )
 3 1/2 GIBLOONS

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  This could have been a story about
     racism, it could have been a film with historical scope, it
     could have been a film about courage in wartime or an anti-
     war movie, it might have been about an engaging love triangle
     story, it might have been a study of contrasting cultures,
     but in trying to be all those things this murky film is not
     enough of any of them.  (Warning: this review tells more plot
     than I usually do as the film is otherwise difficult to
     describe.  For most readers I don't believe I will be
     damaging the enjoyment of the film.)  Rating: 0 (-4 to +4).
     With THE NAVIGATOR, New Zealand director Vincent Ward showed he had an
unusual photographic style, some interesting ideas, and an occasional
mystical impulse.  They all worked fairly well in that small film.  MAP OF
THE HUMAN HEART is a big film, but Louis Nowra's screenplay from Ward's own
story assumes it is bigger than it actually is and that Ward's direction can
deliver more than it actually can.
     Avik (played by Robert Joamie as a child and Jason Scott Lee as an
adult) is an Inuit--or as he says, an Eskimo--who meets a cartographer and
tells him his life story.  As a boy in 1931, his life was changed when
another cartographer, Walter Russell (played by Patrick Bergin) came to his
people's land to survey for maps.  Russell is impressed with the boy's
curiosity and deeply affected when he discovers that the boy has
tuberculosis.  Russell arranges to take to take the boy to a Montreal
Catholic hospital and school, flying the boy in the open biplane the
cartographer came in.  One taste of flying and the young Inuit is hooked for
life.
     At the hospital Avik is traumatized by all the scientific equipment.
He is mistreated by the nuns, who are portrayed as extremely bigoted against
Protestants and "half-breeds."  Avik forms a close relationship with
Albertine (played by Annie Galipeau as a child and Anne Parillaud as an
adult).  He is half white, half Inuit; she is half white, half Indian.  They
are torn apart by the nuns.  In 1941 events draw Avik into the RAF and he,
Russell, and Albertine will cross paths again.
     This is a film with at least two or three very memorable scenes--one
over the Albert Hall, one involving a barrage balloon, and a horrifying
sequence set in Germany--but it still leaves loose ends and is unsatisfying.
Patrick Bergin's last scene comes totally out of left field and seems to
belong more to a surrealistic satire.  The scenes of air warfare are of a
unique style that perhaps gives them the feel of real Army-Air Force World
War II documentaries: the scenes are murky and more than once scenes seemed
out of focus.
     This was a film I was anxious to see and tried very hard to enjoy, but
I have to say that it really did not work for me.  This British-Australian-
French-Canadian-Japanese co-production is a hodge-podge of too little of too
much.  I give it a 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  4/23/93 (limited distribution)
Running Length:  1:52
Rated:  R (Mature themes, sexual situations, nudity, language,
        violence)
     Avik (Jason Scott Lee) is a young Eskimo boy living with his tribe
in the Canadian Arctic.  One day in 1931, Walter (Patrick Bergin)
arrives there as the head of a British mapping expedition.  He
befriends Avik and, when the boy becomes gravely ill, flies him back to
Montreal for treatment.  There, Avik meets Albertine (Anne Parillaud).
After their initial encounters as adversaries, the two become fast
friends.  Eventually, they are separated, but Avik vows never to forget
her.  Over a decade later, during his stint as a bomber pilot during
the second world war, the two meet again.
     MAP OF THE HUMAN HEART is a sentimental love story with a
generally downbeat tone.  The story is framed around a series of
coincidences, not all of which are believable, but many of which can be
overlooked.  There is a certain epic sweep to this film which many
"dramatic romances" lack.  The emotional impact of MAP OF THE HUMAN
HEART, while existing, is minor.  The characters remain too distanced
from the audience.
     The most obvious problem with MAP OF THE HUMAN HEART is its
editing.  Of all the films I've seen in recent years, only the
Salkinds' Christopher Columbus movie rivals this for cutting room
butchering.  In this case, the final product is so disjointed that at
times the transitions (or lack thereof) are laughably absurd.  The
original European version of this movie is significantly longer.  While
the overall quality of that picture may not be better than the one
distributed by Miramax, it certainly must flow better.
     Character interaction is marginal.  I think the editing impacted
on this, as it did on just about everything else.  We see skeletons of
relationships, but none--not even the central one between Avik and
Albertine--is developed satisfactorily.  Especially weak is the
interaction between Avik and Walter.  For MAP OF THE HUMAN HEART to
really work, we have to be able to accept that there is a deep and
abiding love between these two, a sort of father/son relationship.
Unfortunately, we see little evidence of this.
     Early in the movie, there is an aspect of the production that I
found irritating--all the more so because it is unnecessary.  During
the scenes when Albertine is a young girl, her lines have been dubbed
by Anne Parillaud.  There's no rhyme or reason for this, and the
dubbing is not so well done that it isn't noticeable.  As minor a point
as this is, I found it distracting.
     In general, the movie seems to be full of half-realized themes and
ideas.  Questions of identity are touched on, but the subject is never
pursued to its conclusion.  Cut short is a potentially-powerful scene
where a member of a bomber crew is forced to experience firsthand the
devastation he has wrought.  Even truncated as it is, this scene still
packs a punch.
     One thing that can't be denied, and that not even the editing can
take away, is how beautifully this movie has been filmed.  The shots of
dozens of gigantic bombers drifting over a flaming Dresden is as
effective as any similar scene in another war picture, and the brief
aerial battles are the equal of those from MEMPHIS BELLE.
     Unfortunately, while the shots from the outside of the planes
during the bombing raids are excellent, the interior ones are not.
Hardly any of the dialogue is intelligible and it's difficult to figure
out what's happening.  While I can appreciate the director's desire to
capture the "feeling" of such a chaotic environment, it isn't a good
idea to do so at the price of utterly confounding the audience.
     The acting is as uneven as everything else in the movie.  The
child actors who take up much of the early screen time are merely
passable, and their adult counterparts aren't much better.  Anne
Parillaud is especially disappointing, as she overacts her way through
the part (much in the same way that she did in INNOCENT BLOOD, a movie
where over-the-top was demanded).  Patrick Bergin goes in the other
direction, appearing distressingly unemotional.  Jason Scott Lee,
perhaps the most consistent of the major participants, exudes very
little charisma in this role.  John Cusack, who gets billing for a
cameo appearance, is on screen for a total of about four minutes.
     Overall, MAP OF THE HUMAN HEART is a mixed bag.  None of its
elements works all the time, but neither is it a complete failure.  The
romance alone doesn't have the emotional power to recommend the film,
but WW2 buffs may find in this production a mildly entertaining
diversion.  MAP OF THE HUMAN HEART is sometimes sappy and silly, and
often poorly-transitioned, but at least it generally isn't boring.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
