Title
Review for Blowup (1966)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
Michelangelo Antonioni has been around quite a long time, and though he does
not appear to do many films anymore ( I don't know if he is still alive
today ), the majority of his work pretty much ended with the film ZABRISKIE
POINT.
Antonioni's style, from his earlier work, and specially vivid in BLOW UP is
that of a person looking through a key-hole, something which he has alluded
to many times.  It is his curiosity as to 'what else is there,  that we
can't see" that defines his films.  BLOW UP is that and more.
It is the story ( more an event, really ) of a London modeling photographer
who spends his time working models for the many magazines he works.  And on
occasion, this photographer gets more than what he bargains for, or  is
intent on getting anyway.  The shoots with the models usually end up in a
veritable orgy, with the camera clicking away.  And one day, during a
stroll, he is simply shooting to his heart's content.  When he finds a
particular negative which stands out, he proceeds to make a larger
print of the negative.  Lo and behold, there is a small detail which catches
his curiosity.  Just a few feet from the people he has caught on the camera
is a detail which he has to investigate.  And it turns out
it was the detail of a woman, who was killed.  And the scene he caught may
have been the continuation of that event or not.
And the film develops the idea, with the photographer ever more intrigued by
the event.
Perhaps, what makes Antonioni, a good film maker is that his camera is a
very active subject.  There is always a hint of more to come, or happen, and
adds to our curiosity.  As a story itself, almost all of
his films are simple, which may hint that the story itself is not as
important as a single detail which misleads us away from the main thread,
and adds another.  And at times, these are not resolved.
Aside from that, these films are good to watch, because they really are the
windows into what created a 'mod' generation in the 60's, of which  film may
very well have been the defining form.  If not, at least it
showed others another way of living, since the films around this time, with
the French new wave ( Godard and Truffaut ) were exposing newer styles of
filming and story telling.  Godard even went so far as to make sure that he
never told a story, just caught moments of action, and played little
perception games with the camera, which at times were annoying, but always
refreshing, in that we could never really predict what would happen.  This
type of feeling is very prevalent on Antonioni, even in Federico Fellini,
and the majority of the well known film makers of the time, aside from
Hollywood, which stuck with the technical developments more than the art, or
literature, of film itself.
