Title
Review for On connaît la chanson (1997)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Vincent Merlaud
Directed by Alain Resnais
Written by Jean-Pierre Bacri and Agnes Jaoui
With Pierre Arditi,  Sabine Azema, Jean-Pierre Bacri, Andre Dussolier,
Agnes Jaoui and Lambert Wilson
Let's put it this way: Alain Resnais's latest experimentation opens
with Wehrmacht officers discussing the fate of Paris. The year is
1944, and von Cholitz, officer in command at the time, explains why he
will not destroy Paris. A little music is heard, and the character
goes on singing with Josephine Baker's voice "J'ai deux amours, mon
pays et Paris". Then it goes forwards to 1997, with Camille's gloved
hand showing tourists in the Rue de Rivoli where the former scene took
place.
It's known to everyone that ever since his first shorts with
Chris. Marker, Alain Resnais has never got tired of movie-making
experimentations, from the structural bizarreness of L'annee derniere
a Marienbad to his precedent twin-films Smoking and No smoking, where
duality of life was fully explored (it should be noticed that although
Resnais seems open to any new idea in the film-making field, he has
been working with the same technical crew and actors for an
eternity). What surprised me on this occasion is how well received the
film is in his own country, where audiences usually madly laughs
whenever a character starts singing. On connait la chanson is however
not a musical, which might explain these overwhelming reactions - this
is so far Resnais' most profitable feature. In fact, dialogues are
often interrupted with verses, if not whole choruses, from popular
songs - I should accurately write chansons- taken in a wide scope
including Charles Aznavour, France Gall and Dalida. They are sung by
their original interpretes, while actors on the screen only articulate
lyrics. Afterthe acclimatation of the first sung lines, this strange
process stops being odd and one can get really convinced that for
instance Alain Delon becomes Jean Pierre Bacri - a proof of this
occurs later on with Jane Birkin, to whom it has been allowed to sing
her own "Quoi" with her own voice.
Used by any other filmaker, this implied distanciation would probably
kill any aspect of realism and turn the film into avant-garde
drama. Thanks to a clever script and a fine dialogue, On connait la
chanson is a major achievement. Most of the viewers will probably not
consider the film's characters as total strangers, the sung lines
actually building a kind of over- conversation revealing people's
weakness and fears: far from being an optimistic work of art - as were
Arthur Freed's musicals - On connait la chanson could indeed be
regarded as the ultimate film about depression.
Apparently: Camille (A.J.), the guide from the first comtemporary
scene, believes she'll be happy when her doctor-thesis is
finished. She helps her sister Odile (S.A.) looking for a new
appartement and fells in love with Marc (L.W.), from the real estate
agency - she saw him crying and thinks he is a very sensitive
man. Camille is secretely loved by Simon (A.D.), a radio- plays writer
who often attends her guided-tours and annoys her. Odile still loves
her husband Claude (P.A.) and saw his look-alike in a car kissing
another woman. Nicolas (J.-P. B.) does not love anybody and is seen by
Odile accompanied by numerous gorgeous women. Marc sells Odile a vast
appartement with a view on Montmartre.
But these men and women are suffering much but ignore what from.
Diseases, misunderstandings, lies contaminating lives. Claude lies to
his wife - he does not love her anymore. Marc lied to his client: a
new construction will hide the Sacre-Coeur. Simon lied to his beloved
- he works for the real-estate agency too and Marc is his
boss. Nicolas lies to himself: his londonian wife will not come back
to him. False interpretation of facts : Odile refuses to believe her
eyes when she caught her husband on the act with his mistress. Nicolas
is a limousine-chauffeur and therefore drives rich and beautiful
women. Marc had a cold and did not missed his ex-girlfriend. Marc is
indeed very arrogant, and particulry rude towards his employee
Simon. Camille, the youngest and the perhaps the most deceived of all,
fell in love with the wrong man and falls in a deep depression as soon
as her thesis is ended up. In the end, singing becomes a way of lying
as well, but characters may finally not only be invaded by the same
fatalism: what they have in common and sometimes sing together are
indentical human feelings. Same old song that we all know. As for Mon
oncle d'Amerique and La vie est un roman, On connait la chanson ends
in a joyous mood, an uncertain form of melancoly.

Author
Dennis Schwartz
 SAME OLD SONG (On Connaît la Chanson) (director: Alain Resnais;
 screenwriters: Jean-Pierre Bacri/Agnes Jaoui; cinematographer: Renato
 Berta; editor: Hervé de Luze; cast: Pierre Arditi (Claude), Sabine
 Azéma (Odile Lalande), Jean-Pierre Bacri (Nicolas), André Dussollier
 (Simon), Agnes Jaoui (Camille), Lambert Wilson (Marc Duveyrier), Jane
 Birkin (Jane), Jean-Paul Roussillon (Father of sisters); Runtime: 122;
 Artistic License/Arena Films; 1997-France/Switzerland/UK)
Renown surrealist director, the 77-year-old Frenchman Alain Resnais
(Hiroshima, Mon Amour/Last Year at Marienbad/Mélo), has created a
lighthearted musical played as an homage to Britisher Dennis Potter and
his Pennies from Heaven (1978 TV serial, 1981 movie) and The Singing
Detective (1986). The film follows Potter's gimmicky style of having the
characters jump into lip-synched old or contemporary French pop songs to
express their private thoughts. He also follows the kind of sweet and
colorful musicals his fellow countryman Jacques Demy loved to direct,
such as "The Umbrellas of Cherbourg" and"The Young Girls of Rochefort."
The tale has Resnais's unique touches as a director to go along with his
homage. It is a satire about class differences and falling in love with
the wrong person, and that there is a song in everyone's heart for every
occasion. What hinders this production is that the stars are not
portraying particularly engaging characters, the songs are not memorable
and stand little chance of being recognized by an American audience (the
exceptions might be the Edith Piaf and Maurice Chevalier numbers), and
the farce seems more banal than daring. Yet it is not without its
striking moments and charms, such as when Jane Birkin does a cameo and
sings one of her own songs. Also, the glossy amberlike photography added
a very French romantic feeling to the story, while the mood of Paris as
being a place for love to flourish above all else, which has always been
embellished in movie lore, comes through with flying colors. It also
does a good job of showing you the way Paris is in the 1990s and in the
way ordinary people exist there.
It tells the romantic story of six Parisians who become intertwined with
each other in their ordinary lives as they search for happiness. They
are the attractive sisters Odile (Sabine Azéma) and Camille (Agnes
Jaoui), with the older businesswoman Odile married and decidedly set on
a bourgeois life of material comforts. She is married to the glum and
laconic Claude (Pierre Arditi). She once went out with a businessman,
Nicolas (Jean-Pierre Bacri), who left her 8-years ago and now shows up
in Paris and asks her help to find someone to rent a flat for his
family. Simon (Andre Dussolier) works as a real-estate salesman and is
trying to find Nicolas a flat, in his spare time he writes radio plays.
Simon's boss is the much younger, unscrupulous and arrogant Marc
Duveyrier (Lambert Wilson), who inherited the firm from his father and
is the real-estate agent selling a more luxurious and larger flat with a
better view to Odile, but fails to tell her that a building project is
going up soon that will block her view.
Screenwriters and actors Jean-Pierre Bacri and Agnes Jaoui wrote
themselves the best parts. Jaoui's Camille is a university scholar
finishing up a Ph.D. in history, using for her thesis the study of 'the
yeomen in the year 1000 at Lake Paladru.' She works as a tour guide in
the meantime and suffers from panic attacks, even though she appears to
have outwardly perfect self-control. On her tours for the last four
years has been the much older Simon, pretending to be doing research for
his plays but really attracted to her, but not having the nerve to tell
her this. To his dismay, he finds out she is dating his mean-spirited
but handsome boss, whom she meets when looking at her sister's new place
and seeing him crying but not realizing that it was from a cold, not
because he's so sensitive.
Bacri as the classy Nicolas, turns out to be now working as a chauffeur.
He is a hypochondriac with a history of depression who visits many
doctors, until he finds one who tells him there is nothing wrong with
him. Odile still pines for him, but he's married, telling her he expects
his wife to arrive shortly.
Love is 'the same old song' that makes the world go 'round, even when
all the characters are liars and not exactly open to what their true
motives are. Everything comes together in a bourgeois housewarming party
for Odile's place, as the characters reveal their true feelings and all
their deceptions and neurotic impulses are either uncovered or about to
be. There's not a lot of bite to this satirical musical, but Resnais has
never made a bad film and is one of the best current French directors,
if not the best. This film is not one his great ones, but it still has
enough pep in its light touches to be interesting. It not only has an
odd way for the characters to break into song but -- some males even
sing in a female voice while some females sing in a male voice. It is
also interesting in the way it examines its characters' behavior as
being similar in business as in love.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
