Title
Review for Terminator, The (1984)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Sean Siska
THE TERMINATOR (1984)
108 min.   R
Directed by James Cameron
Written by James Cameron and Gale Anne Hurd
With Acknowledgement to the Works of Harlan Ellison
Starring Arnold Schwarzenegger  Michael Biehn  Linda Hamilton
James Cmaeron's breakthrough feature was the first of his films to 
showcase his obsession with technology and more specfically technology run
amok. For those of you who do not know the plot: in 2029 machines have
engineered a nuclear for the expressed purpose of wiping out the human
race. Human survivors are systematically hunted down and destroyed.
However, some humans are fighting back led by the heroic John Connor. To
stop Connor, the machines send a Terminator (Arnold Schwarzenegger) back
to 1984 to murder Connor's mother, Sara (Linda Hamilton), and thus prevent
Connor from ever being born. In response, the humans send a protector,
Kyle Reese, played by Michael Biehn.
Images of machines and of humans' reliance on machines
dominate the film. Even though the characters know that the benign
oil drillers of 1984 will become the ruthless hunter killers of 2029,
humans continue to use the machines. In the climax of STAR WARS, Luke
relies on the Force alone--his own spiritual power--to destroy the Death
Star. In THE TERMINATOR, however, Sara must use another machine--a giant
hydraulic press--to vanquish her enemy. Cameron seems to be implying that
this reliance on technology is inescapable--and he's not happy about it.
Unabated technological growth brings about THE TERMINATOR's other
obsession: the apocalypse. We have plenty of imagery regarding armageddon:
thousands of human skulls line the streets of future LA. Children watch
the flames in a burning television. When the Terminator arrives in 1984 an
almost Biblical lightning storm precedes him. 
Even though the "future is not set," there is no doubt about where
the world is headed at the end of the movie: the machines will rise and
the humans will have to struggle for their very existence. All Sara can do
is await it. (Cameron doesn't wimp out like he does in TERMINATOR 2)
The end of the world is the human race's own fault, too. After all
it is the humans that created in the evil machines in the first place.
Back in 1984, when the Cold War was still in full effect, the film must
have been seen as a very apt metaphor for nuclear war (another obsession
of Cameron's). 
These days, one can read a criticism of machine-like behavior in
humans. True, humanizing touches are put into Paul Winfield's and Lance
Henriksen's detective characters, but the Terminator is also able to move
through the city undetected. Cameron also draw parallels between the
mechanical efficiency between the Terminator and Reese when they first
arrive in 1984 LA.
From a technical standpoint THE TERMINATOR is very well done.
Arnold Schwarzenegger is a perfect antagonist--unstoppable, merciless,
obdurate. We are not meant to empathize with this ultimate killing machine
as we are in some of Schwarzenegger's later works (eg, COMMANDO), but fear
him.
Cameron and Hurd's script basically depicts a one hour and
forty-five minute chase, taking a few moments here and there to explain
time travel and develop the romantic subplot. While we do see the
hackneyed dialogue Cameron is now so well known for, there is also
considerable suspense especially for the first time viewer who may
be unsure of Kyle Reese's intentions.
Cameron directs the film at a rapid, kinetic pace. Either the
camera is moving or something within the frame is moving--usually
both occurs. The violence is not particularly graphic (TEMPLE OF DOOM's
heart-pull scene outgrosses THE TERMINATOR's), but it is brutally staged
making it that much more effective.
For a low budget film, THE TERMINATOR's special effects and art
direction (especially in 2029 LA) are remarkably well done. Special
mention should be made of the stop motion effects work at the end of the
film depicting the Terminator Endoskeleton. It is some of the best stop
motion I have ever seen.
One thing that doesn't hold up after all the years, however, is
Linda Hamilton's hairdo.

Author
Jun Yan
Writer: James Cameron with Gale Ann Hurd
Director: James Cameron
Producer: Gale Ann Hurd
Actors: Linda Hamilton, Arnold Schwartzennegger, Michael Beihn
        One of the most popular films of all time, "The Terminator" is
does not look too old for being made in 1984 except for Linda Hamilton's
funky haircut.  After watching it for the 6th or 7th time today, I feel it
deserves a review.  
        Sarah Connor is just a waitress living in Los Angeles who cannot
be more ordinary.  She has the same problem everyone else has in this
world.  Then why would a ruthless killing machine from the future -- the
terminator, go through every imaginable trouble just to exectute, or
terminate, her?  And why would another man who claims to be a soldier
from the same place as the terminator, give up his own life just to
protect her?  Soon we learn that the future is doomed and the only hope
for mankind, John Connor, is the unconceived, unborn child of Sarah.  So
the race is on between Kyle Reece, seagent of the underground army led by
John Connor in the war against the evil machines and computers, and T101,
played by Arnold, the never quitting machine that would just not give up
his assignment.  
        Unlike the more technically refined sequal T2, this original
Terminator has the crude look of a smaller and more personal film.  What
still amazes me now is the enormous ability of Jim Cameron to mix strong
emotions and mood with breath-taking action sequences.  Repeatly, scenes
are set to contrast the huge and oppressing image of machines and the
fragile and desperate humans struggling for survival.  He preys on our
fear for the dominance of computers and machines and the feeling of
alienation in a technological world.  The idea is not terribly original,
but he does it in a sincere and unpretentious way that is convincing.  
        What about this movie that pushes all the right buttons in me to
make me jump?  I think it's the sense of the end of the world, the sadness
of the inevitability of the doomed future that one can fight but cannot
change.  As if one is told in absolute certainty the s/he is to die of
this kind of death with no escape.  And no matter how hard we try to avoid
it and seem to succeed, we know deep down it's coming and unstopable.
It's  a primal fear in us for death, symbolically. 
        The writers and director stress the frailty of humans, both in
Kyle Reece and Sarah Conor, in sharp contrast to the indestructable
terminator -- you just can't kill it.  The sight of the burnt down machine
chasing Sarah in the factory is a nightmare that is as effective as any
horror movie.  The vulnerability in our main characters are both physical
and emotional.  That makes the audience identify with them and be repulsed
by the might powerful machine.  I am particularly fascinated by the
writers' constructing of the psychological state of Reece, given an
entirely imaginary world in which he grew up.  It is just so darn rare
for a thriller to even remotely *care* about its characters.
        And the romance developed in the middle of all the intense car
chase and gun blasts is, believe it or not, more heart-throbbing to me
than most movies that try too hard to be romantic.  Because we care about
the couple and we follow them through their life-and-death journy, it's
natural that they generate a tender feeling toward each other since the
world is gonna end anyway.  I hope this explains the big soft feeling
stuck in my throat every time I watch the part where he said, "I came
through time for you, Sarah.  I love you,  I always have."  
        A couple words on casting.  I don't know who thought of casting
Arnold as the terminator.  His physical appearance fits perfectly in the
role of a cold-blooded, undefeatable killing machine and came through as
absolutely chilling and terrifying.  I'm afraid this caused type-casting
for Arnold to prevent him from his future comedies just like Rambo ruined
Stallone's chance of doing Ellery Quinn.  Michael Biehn, as much as I like
him, is truly not very good at acting.  However, he has the look of a
desperate and damaged man, a man in pain and hurt, more emotionally than
physically.  Simply the look is enough.  It's no surprise that Cameron
later casted him as the psychotic villain in "The Abyss."  Linda Hamilton,
with her "lion"-style haircut, successfully leads us down the path of
Sarah Connor's transformation.  In the end, we are convinced that she is
capable of being a "legend" mother.  And all this makes her astonishing
appearance in this sequal natural and less strange.  It is interesting to
see her evolve from screaming and being saved (which is not at all
unnatural after building up her normal life) to fighting to save both
herself and her lover in the final confrontation sequence.  
        I am a true believer in smaller and more personal movies.  It's so
ironic to see Jim Cameron going bigger and bigger while becoming less and
less engaging and personal.  Too much technology, the power of big
corporations and alienation of human emotions and feelings are the things
he condemned in both Terminator, yet I find him sliding down the same
slope. "The Terminator" is probably the smallest, crudest, least perfect
in special effects, yet it still is my very favorite.  

Author
Raghava S. Setlur
I never liked Arnold S.  We even had a bastardization of his
difficult last name.  His movies were, how shall I put it, mentally
negligible.  When this movie came out back in 1988 in my hometown of
Bangalore, India,  I politely declined the invitation from some of my
friends.  But as weeks went by, one day when there was nothing else
to do, and all the other movies I wanted to see were seen, I grudgingly
went to see this flick.  Let me tell you somethin'.  I loved it man, I
loved it.
Arnie was perfect in this movie.  All that bad press about being as
stoical as a robot really pays off here.  The story, visuals, action,
colors and the effects blend together successfullly, capped by
some eerie music.
Anyway the premise of this movie is this: In the future, there will
be a nuclear war against, get this, computers and humans.  Most of the
humans die but a few enterprising souls survive the holocaust.  I
never did get how they did.  Probably it is a crime to watch movies on
basic cable.  You don't know what they leave out.  How did the
computers survive.  There might be more than a few technical glitches
in terms of the effects of nuclear explosions on power supply could
be intricate.  This and some other questions do come up, inevitably in
any science fiction or time travel movie.  Another one would be that
the man from the future explains that only living things could get
through the time machine, so he could not bring his custom made
ray gun or his best suit, but came in his birthday suit instead.  Pray
tell me how hair and nail which are dead tissue survived the arduous
journey.  The terminator itself, or a cyborg has a metallic
skeleton.  Would it survive, I wonder? Maybe, just maybe, there is some
simple explanation to all this.
The Hollywood way of portraying easy sex.  Linda  Hamilton eagerly
goes to bed with the man from the future immediately after he says
that she was the only woman he wanted.  Very accomodating.  That was
not the typical blind date.  There are many instances of such
inexplicable actions in  Hollywood movies that tends to carry
the notion of the loose American women to all parts of the world.  My
idea of American women was formed from the American movies.
These are some nitpickings in an otherwise perfect movie.  It has
good story to tell and paces it well, making it very entertaining
and edgy along the way.  Critics who have a bias against action/
sf genre (Gene Siskel comes readily to mind) and keep complaining that
every picture is a genre picture should see this one.  It is much,
much better than those weary drama movies that they keep harping about.
The concept of existence and different realities is similar to
back to the future movies, but is stronger.  The mind boggles at the
complexities of all this.
The machines want to kill off the humans' leader's mother before he
was born.  They rig up a time travel device back to the present.  And
send a death dealing machine with human features and outer tissues.
Fortunately for us, a human soldier manages to follow.
The terminator's mission, it will accept it, for Christ's
sake, it is a machine is to go back to 1984, kill the mother of the
child who will one day become the ruler of men in the war against
machines in a post apocalyptic world.  Here name is Connor, Sarah
Connor.  The city: L.A.  You will have no team and no, yes I mean no,
point man.  You will also have no clothes.  But that is a minor
inconvenience.
One of the things I liked about the killing and the mayhem is that
the terminator cannot be argued or cajoled with.  It does not sit
around making small talk and giving away secrets (Bond movies) but just
says " I'll be back."  Which it does.  Then promptly goes about doing
its business of killing.  If you wanna shoot, shoot, don't talk.  The
lack of dialogue and emotion actually works in Arnold's favor since
that is how a terminator is supposed to act.  And he is the bad
guy.  Nowadays he plays the good guy which is less interesting.  One of
the mistakes the sequel made.  This is vastly superior to  T2, which
had the mental institution thing that left an unpleasant taste in
the mouth.  The only thing that T2 did better was its special effects.
But that is another review.
The way everything fits into place is pleasant to see.  Of course
there are the usual shootings and car chases but it seems more relevant
than most other pictures as the terminator tries to kill every Sarah
Connor in the phone book.  The screenplay writers are to be
congratulated.  The production values are good and the direction
very sure footed and stylized.  There are some neat tricks and ideas
which makes it a pleasure to watch this movie.  The terminator can
learn the accent and inotation of every person it hears.  With a
computer screen that pops up occasionally to process data for it.  Dogs
can detect terminators and start barking at them.  Why? No idea.
When you have this wacky idea that somebody in a large American
city is picking names from the phone book and shooting them, it is
surprising that no one has used motif in real life.  We have
letter bombers and  Zodiac killers, so somebody might still use it.
The rest of the movie deals with the Terminator trying to kill the
Connor woman and the man from the future trying to save her.  The
special effects are ground breaking and the story is inventive till
the end.  The last 15 minutes with arnold coming out of the fire like a
phoenix minus his human persona and chasing the two people is
spooky.  This is great special effects with the skeleton like robot
running around.  You still get the feeling it is  Arnold  S. even
though you don't see him on the screen.  Mission: Impossible.  Even
for the terminator.  I enthusiastically recommend this movie to
anyone who has not seen it.  A classic.  A near perfect score of: 3.9 /
4.0

Author
Dragan Antulov
Science fiction fans are seldom satisfied with the way their
favourite genre is used in films, especially those produced
in Hollywood. More often than not filmmakers totally forget
the meaning of "science" in the term "science fiction", and
such films ignore basic scientific facts, as well as
elementary logic. This is especially the case with time
travel films. Screenwriters of such films are more than
eager to embrace the concept of time travel (which is rather
controversial in the realm of established science), but they
seldom pay attention to some mind-boggling issues associated
with it, like Grandfather Paradox. Fortunately, there are
few filmmakers ready to approach time travel with these
problems in mind. One of them was young Canadian director
James Cameron. In 1984 he co-wrote and directed THE
TEMINATOR, low-budget science fiction film that would launch
one of the most spectacular careers in modern Hollywood and
also become one of the most influential films of its time.
Script for THE TERMINATOR, written by Cameron and his
producer Gale Anne Hurd, was based on the original
screenplay by Harlan Ellison (fact established after serious
litigation). The plot begins in Los Angeles 2029 AD. The
world was ravaged by nuclear holocaust and the surviving
humans are fighting desperate war against sentient machines.
>From this world two time travellers arrive to Los Angeles in
1984. The first one is Terminator (played by Arnold
Schwarzenegger), human looking but deadly and seemingly
indestructible cyborg. His mission is to kill Sarah Connor
(played by Linda Hamilton), future mother of John Connor,
charismatic leader of human resistance. Another time
traveller is Kyle Reese (played by Michael Biehn), Connor's
soldier from the future, and his mission is to protect the
mother of his commander. When he finds Sarah Connor, she
doesn't believe his story, but all her suspicions are swept
away when the unstoppable, remorseless and invulnerable
killer starts chasing them across streets of Los Angeles.
Today most people think of James Cameron as Hollywood's
greatest and most successful megalomaniac whose trademark is
big budget of his movies. In 1984 the budget for his
groundbreaking film was quite low, even for the standards of
the time. However, even in such conditions, Cameron's talent
of superb filmmaker became more than evident. Few filmmakers
are able to achieve things Cameron had done with THE
TERMINATOR - to create successful combination of interesting
and thought-provoking science fiction, powerful human drama
and action-packed thrillride.
Unlike most of the other time travel movies, THE TERMINATOR
takes time travel quite seriously and the Grandfather
Paradox here builds the plot instead of destroying its
plausibility. In this film the future is set and the
characters are aware than that they can't escape it; instead
of trying to change their destiny, they fight to preserve
it, no matter how ugly and depressing it might be in the
end. The atmosphere of impending doom could be sensed
throughout the film. Cameron, obviously inspired by the
heightened Cold War tensions of Reagan years, and worried
about possibility of sophisticated and automated weapons
systems running out of control, uses these fears to build
the vision of future apocalypse, which is even more
frightening, because it shares many elements with the world
of 1984. Low budget, which forced Cameron to shoot this film
at night and in the back alleys of Los Angeles, actually
helps this film. In this dark, cold and unforgiving world of
1984 Los Angeles we could see glimpses of 2029 - bums in the
street, which are not very different from the surviving
post-holocaust humans, or robot factories that probably use
the same technology of future killing machines. This was
good opportunity for Cameron to establish his trademark -
ambivalent portrayal of technology. While he obviously
admires efficiency of machines and their obvious superiority
over frail humans, Cameron in this film also shows
frightening consequences of technology running amok and
turning their former human masters into slaves.
Thing that separates THE TERMINATOR from most of the other
science fiction films is not just technical superiority or
intelligent message. Cameron also brings very strong human
dimension to this film. Characters in this film aren't
cardboard or stereotypical - in relatively short amounts of
time, before the action sets in, we meet them as
three-dimensional, convincing human being and later we
sympathise with their plight. This is the technique that
would serve Cameron very well in his later films like ALIENS
or THE ABYSS. For that he had to rely on very good actors.
Although the first actor associated with this film happens
to be Arnold Schwarzenegger, his non-human character of
Terminator is convincing more because of his frightening
physical appearance. Schwarzenegger's one-liners (including
his trademark phrase "I'll be back"), spoken in robotic
monotone and with heavy Austrian accent, didn't require much
of the acting ability. On the other hand, such ability was
perfectly demonstrated by two other leads. Linda Hamilton
was excellent choice for the role of Sarah Connor; not very
attractive in a physical sense, she is quite convincing as
an average woman caught in nightmarish situation. Her slow
evolution from clueless and helpless damsel in distress to
tough feminist role model in wonderful to watch. Michael
Biehn, one of the most underused actors of modern Hollywood,
is also great as her heroic and vulnerable partner; the
audience can sense the pain and anguish on his troubled
face. Finally, Cameron relies on the services of very
capable character actors Lance Henriksen and Paul Winfield
as police detectives; their roles as voices of reason and
"normalcy" actually are the closest equivalent of comic
relief in this grim tale.
Engaging story, superb acting and moviemaking craftsmanship
- all that ensured that THE TERMINATOR remains as one of the
best films of 1980s. Unfortunately, the reputation of this
film was later influenced by its more expensive, more
spectacular, better-hyped but ultimately inferior 1991
sequel. Compared with it, THE TERMINATOR looks rather cheap,
at first glance almost indistinguishable from the hundreds
of its own C-grade rip-offs made in late 1980s. Person that
could be responsible for such impression is Brad Fiedel,
author of musical score, which is hardly impressive except
the main theme. This unimpressive musical score, however, is
hardly the reason to view THE TERMINATOR as less than
excellent piece of science fiction cinema.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
