Title
Review for Bull Durham (1988)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Andrew Hicks
        "Baseball is my religion," Susan Sarandon announces at the 
beginning of BULL DURHAM. And apparently, her form of 
communion is torrid sex with one minor league baseball player a year. 
The movie follows the minor league Durham Bulls (whoever named 
the movie was apparently cixelsyd... excuse me, dyslexic), more 
specifically, Sarandon's two prospects for the gigolo position. The first 
prospect is young Tim Robbins, the impulsive pitcher who "f*cks like 
he pitches." (At 95 miles an hour?) The other prospect is aging catcher 
Kevin Costner, who has been busted down to A-ball from the big 
leagues.
        Touch choice, eh? The elimination round comes as 
Sarandon invites them both back to her place -- and wouldn't 
_that_ be the threesome from hell! Costner storms out after learning what the arrangement is all about, leaving Sarandon to tie Robbins to 
her bed and read poetry to him all night. You see, it's not all sex, she 
also teaches her young charges the rules and secrets of life. They 
acquire the essential knowledge of life through wild, animal sex, 
which leads to the obvious question -- why don't the state 
universities offer this kind of program?!
        Costner is assigned by the team manager to do much the 
same thing with Robbins in a non-sexual way. So, over the course of 
the movie, Robbins hones his talent into major league-quality pitching 
with advice from Costner and Sarandon. According to BULL 
DURHAM, the way to succeed in baseball is to wear garter belts under 
your uniform and learn to breathe through your eyelids like the Mayan 
Indians. You didn't hear it from me, but that's also the key to 
succeeding in the movie-reviewing business.
        BULL DURHAM has an intriguing premise, mixing 
America's two favorite pastimes, and follows through with it for the 
first half of the movie, but gets off track around the five-inning mark, 
when Robbins gets on a winning streak and decided to quit slipping 
Sarandon the screwball every night, a duty we all know Costner will 
take up sooner or later. He does, of course, in a sex scene none of us 
ever wanted to see. Still, the film has its moments, comedic and 
dramatic, and is worth watching for its big-league talent. No 
rookies here, baby.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     BULL DURHAM is a kind of comedy we don't see much of any more.  There
are a lot of comedies being made now, but most seem to be of a formula.
Take one or more comics established by being on SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE, SECOND
CITY, etc., and add a script full of jokes you would have to be blind AND
deaf to miss--by definition subtlety means someone might miss a gag.  The
comedies you get then are films like the horribly unfunny SPIES LIKE US,
DRAGNET, and DR. DETROIT.  BULL DURHAM is more like the comedies they made
most of the time in the 1940s and 1950s.  What humor it has is derived from
the interaction of believable personalities in believable situations.  The
only thing keeping BULL DURHAM from being a throwback to the subtler
comedies of the 1940s is several fairly explicit sex scenes.
     BULL DURHAM tells the story of one season in the life of a minor league
ball team, the Durham Bulls.  The team has, among others, a pitcher, Nuke
Laloosh (played by Tim Robbins), who has a hundred-horsepower pitching arm
and a nine-volt brain; a catcher, Crash Davis (well-played by Kevin
Costner); and two groupies.  One groupie is the owner's daughter (played by
Jenny Robertson) and the other, Annie Savoy (played by Susan Sarandon), is
an odd fan who has turned baseball into a sort of religion and has sort of
become a team institution.  Crash has been hired not just to catch, but also
to keep Nuke out of trouble as the big, dumb super-pitcher is groomed for
the majors.  His job is complicated by the attentions of Ms. Savoy, who is
indecisive whether it is the pitcher or the catcher she wants to sleep with.
     BULL DURHAM gives us some tantalizing views of the characters of the
team members and especially the managers, but unfortunately these characters
are never filled out.  Most of the story deals with Sarandon's character
who--for someone with no more status with the team than "fan"--is never far
from the action.  Some of the action she generates herself by tying ball
players to beds and reading to them poetry by Blake and Whitman.  And though
Costner's character is a bit stereotypical--the embittered veteran player--
he plays the role well.  With a rating of +1 on the -4 to +4 scale, it
brings to four the number of sports films I have liked.  (THE NATURAL got a
+3 from me, and IT HAPPENS EVERY SPRING and HOOSIERS got +1s.)

Author
Ralph Benner
     There are other sports more boring than baseball but I can't think
of one I hate more. It has everything to do with having grown up in a
family that lived baseball every waking moment of every hour, 365 days a
year: The McLains, the most (in)famous being ex-Detroit Tigers pitcher-now
ex-con Denny McLain, the first pitcher since Dizzy Dean to win thirty
games in a single season. Unmercifully teased throughout my youth that my
intense dislike for the game had everything to do with my ineptitude -- so
incompetent even as a batboy that I was once replaced by a pair of twin
girls -- I always knew what my family refused to admit, that I wasn't and
didn't want to be athletically inclined, and while Denny and his brother
often tried to shame me out of my shortcomings, I was content to sit in
the bleachers, secretly praying for rain, hoping that during the
interminable games my Hitachi radio's batteries would hold out to hear for
the umpteenth time "Please Love Me Forever" or "Quarter to Three." I
maintained my hatred even when Denny was well on his way to Cooperstown,
instead of where he'll end up -- the Hall of Shame. (Though inexcusable,
this explains why Ken Burns omits Denny from that eighteen hour
error-filled snoozer "Baseball"; assembling footage of the 1968 World
Series, Burns gives the viewers the impression that the St. Louis
Cardinals were victorious, instead of the Tigers.)
     The mindless jock fanaticism of baseball got to me early on: too
many people actually took this g.d. game seriously. How I remember the
sheer insanity of the fights -- usually between parents -- that ensued
when Denny "lost" a Little League or Babe Ruth game. Hearing those
screamfests and recriminations never made much sense to me and even way
back then -- in the late 50s and early 60s -- I realized that this
"healthy" All-American pastime was corrupt and, worse, victimizing. My
fears were confirmed not only when Denny's father died prematurely at 36
from a stress-related heart attack but also when Denny signed on with the
Chicago White Sox and later with the Tigers: the extent to which
illegality -- gambling, prostitution, underworld fixes --  coexisted
cavalierly with pro ball didn't shock as much as confirm to me the whole
rot of big moneyed sports. BULL DURHAM doesn't explicitly examine the
underbelly of celebrity sociopathology -- all we really have to do is
recall goofus Pete Rose, womanizer Steve Garvey or read Denny's lie-filled
apologia "Strikeout" for a re-confirmation (or note that once again
Denny's been indicted for fraudulent business activities) -- but the movie
more than implies that obsession for "the show" stunts the mind and
inhibits spiritual growth. Considering the realities of baseball as I
perceive them, BULL DURHAM is of course too clever by half: I challenge
anyone anywhere to name players in one or any of the major or bush league
teams who could tell us who Susan Sontag is, much less what her books
might be about. Granted, this name-dropping doesn't hurt the movie -- for
baseball haters, it's pure revel -- but it tells you that
director-screenwriter Ron Shelton has one eye on the bleachers of the
bored and the other on the mound. Not to say anything about the bed: BULL
DURHAM is an insistently sexy movie, with a tantalizing, if not
over-emphasis on crotches: the men's have a big screen fullness and
leading lady Susan Sarandon is quite eager to expose hers. It's refreshing
and honest: Shelton not only has his own oral fixation, he also knows what
baseball really is -- an oral sport. This is the only movie about baseball
I can think of (or could tolerate) that hits a grand slam without needing
to be in a stadium. Not too shabby for a director making his debut.
     Kevin Costner couldn't have been photographed in a more
seductively tired way -- it's a minor triumph all by itself. He physically
encapsulates what we often see in failed or retired sports figures -- that
they seem quasi-boozed fatigued, not necessarily from the ever-handy
Miller's but from their sport of choice having nearly beaten out
everything inside them. This specific performance could be interpreted as
an early Mickey Mantle warning about how sport suppresses adulthood in
bozo athletes, how the child in them never grows up. If it's not a
warning, it's because Costner's Crash is that rarity -- a thinking man's
athlete who recognizes the trap. This is also the first time Costner
merges with his movie character as if he belonged, something we can't say
about his puniness in the silly frenzy of NO WAY OUT, his fractured
boy-man in the overblown SILVERADO or UNTOUCHABLES, his hogging-the-camera
stuff in the tanned romantic twaddle of DANCES WITH WOLVES, the bad hair
day martyrdom in THE BODYGUARD, the worthless WYATT BURP. There's an
obligatory cliche that Crash has to utter -- "I want to find me"  -- and
when we've heard other actors attempt to justify something similar, we've
been embarrassed for them, like we are when we read the throwaway quotes
by nude centerfolds in Playboy, but Costner delivers the line with an
exhausted conviction that bares what's dangerously empty-headed in sports:
that too often athletics strive to become record-setting icons not because
of who they are or what they really want to be but because of what others
want of them, like Denny living out his own parents' dream, which turned
into a nightmare. 
     When not jingle-jangling silver jewelry, Susan Sarandon's Annie
Savoy is reciting Blake and Whitman; but she's not just an over-dressed,
hot-to-trot poetess -- she's also a baseball groupie-coach as the Queen
Bee of Triple A ball who literally builds shrines to the sport. She's a
fire hazard too: just how long could those candles be allowed to burn so
close to walls that are most likely covered with combustible, if not toxic
wallpaper? But here's the greater concern: Sarandon almost didn't get to
play her. "I had to grovel to get that part," Sarandon told Bruce Newman
in a N.Y. Times Times News Service interview. "The studio had a list of
people who they preferred, and I was not on it." Those others were
actresses who refused to audition for Annie, so when Shelton asked
Sarandon, who didn't yet know she wasn't even on the list, to move beyond
the humiliation of having to read, she dressed herself up in what becomes
one of the movie's bright teases -- a "showy red and white striped" number
as invitation. Happily, Sarandon got Annie, and even more happily, she's
been decaffed, so we won't have to go through the feminist jitters, yet,
despite how wonderful she is -- and it's a performance that gets better
each time you see it -- I have to say that I've met very few women like
her Annie. Except in television, where Annie might (and should) end up as
a sportscaster. Maybe this is the reason she didn't earn Academy Award
recognition -- "I was shattered when I didn't even get a nomination. I
wept for days," she told Newman -- because, despite their enormous
likability, Costner's Crash is almost atypical of sports and Annie surely
is; they're too intelligently conceived, which, for a baseball audience,
is a major turnoff. But I have met plenty of the other kind, the young
bimbos whose only aims are to latch on to athletes on the rise. Denny
married one. In "Strikeout" he calls her a saint. That's code for
vacuousness; in baseball, it's contagious.
