Title
Review for Krasnaya palatka (1971)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
     General Umberto Nobile (Peter Finch), an explorer whose airship,
the ITALIA, crashed during a 1928 expedition across the Arctic, is
visited 40 years later by spirits from his past who have gathered to
judge him.  These include Hardy Krueger as a mercenary pilot, Sean
Connery as Roald Amundsen, and Claudia Cardinale, who looks as if she
just dropped by on her way back from the hairdressers (Connery gets top
billing but appears in only three scenes).  This lengthy pre-credits
sequence serves as a framing device for what is essentially a
based-on-fact adventure tale that comprises the bulk of the movie.
Film concludes with spirits - who are by now recognisable as key
characters in the story - delivering their verdict upon Nobile.
     Watching this film I can't help think that the producers must have
fought the temptation to release two versions - one as it stands, and
the other with all the present-day footage removed.  This latter cut
would certainly concentrate more on the dramatic survival scenes.  But
the film-makers seem to want to re-open the file on Nobile's story; to
exonerate him somehow by presenting perspectives of history as seen
then-and-now.  Flashback structure seems ill-fitting because events
from the past are not told exclusively from Finch's viewpoint, placing
viewers in the position of accepting the spirits of the present , who
are surely providing him with the full story, as real and not merely
conjurations of his guilty subconscious.  Why go to all the trouble of
providing newsreel archives and authentic locations to establish a
realistic atmosphere just to undermine its credibility with a fantasy
framework?  Fortunately, the arctic landscapes are all too real, and a
good anchor back to the world of fact: they are vast, beautiful, and
foreboding, where human figures are reduced to black dots on the ice.
     Film works best when it shows men grappling against the elements
     with barely-adequate technology.  The scenes with the icebreaker,
airplanes, and airship are all convincingly recreated - the initial
crash makes for a gripping sequence.  Strongest feature of any
true-life survival film is that there can be no calculated script
decisions over who will live and who will die, so (unless you've read
up on your history) there's no sure way to know the outcome.  Film's
eccentric atmosphere will likewise keep you offguard.  Movie buffs may
find it quirky to see Krueger and Finch playing a scene together inside
airship wreckage in the middle of the Arctic only six years after they
were similarly stuck in the middle of the desert in THE FLIGHT OF THE
PHOENIX.  Question to consider: If Nobile's expedition had been a
success, would anybody have bothered to make a film about it?
