Title
Review for Ghostbusters II (1989)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jeff Meyer
     Summing up tag for GHOSTBUSTERS II: "A kinder, gentler Ghostbusters."  And
to borrow from PR rhetoric, I mean that in the best sense of the term.  I found
GHOSTBUSTERS II to be an enjoyable, humorous and ultimately entertaining film.
It does have a different emphasis than its predecessor, and that seems to be
garnering it a good deal of criticism, but I thought that GHOSTBUSTERS II's new
outlook worked very well for it, particularly as a sequel.
     Let me back up a bit: I've always looked at GHOSTBUSTERS as another
production model on the Bill Murray (star)/Harold Ramis (writer)/Ivan Reitman
(director) assembly line, a combination of talents who've mixed up some
particularly funny films.  (STRIPES and GHOSTBUSTERS are the prominent
examples.)  With GHOSTBUSTERS, they hit a chord from the best of the Marx
Brothers movies: characters who were absolutely wacko, but who you were
cheering for at the same time.  The opera scene at the end of A NIGHT AT THE
OPERA; The Boys vs.  Zuhl.  You're laughing at them, and with them, and at the
same time, you're going "rah-rah" with the rabbis and priests and NYC residents
outside.  (Well, I was...)
     GHOSTBUSTERS II concentrates a dollop more on the characters it introduced
in the first film, not a bad thing for a sequel; its lower intensity results
in a lower major-guffaw hit ratio than its predecessor, but it's a trade that I
was willing to accept.  The Boys have a comfortable feel around them this time
out; if they don't build the story up for as many full-tilt laughs as before,
it's because they're getting laughs through the intricacies and foibles of
their characters.  Ray's cheery optimism (and his enjoyment of Peter's
schemes), Igon's cold amusement and his little experiments, and Venkeman's Game
Show Host personality are all played around with more -- less amplitude, but
more fine-tuning.  And they all parody their mock-heroic image throughout.
("Suck up your guts, boys; The Ghostbusters are here.")  Peter's character
(Bill Murray) has probably the most work done to it: he's actually coming
around to the idea of a relationship with Dana Barret (Sigourney Weaver), and
her son.  Murray's played this type of character through many films (and even
more SNL sketches), and it's pleasant to see it developed along the lines it is
here.  And finally, the Ghostbusters are up against someone rotten enough (and
defending someone good enough) that you want to cheer a bit for them.  That's
perhaps the biggest difference between the two films: GHOSTBUSTERS is more of a
"laugh blow-out" movie, while GHOSTBUSTERS II had me leaving the theater
feeling good.  Amused, too -- there were a lot of jokes I was laughing at
during the screening I went to that the audience didn't seem to be reacting too
-- but mostly a blanket smile.
     Murray and Weaver are particularly good; Murray's scenes with the baby
were better than the entire length of THREE MEN AND A BABY.  They all react
well together.  Ramis was fine, Aykroyd a bit muted; Ernie Hudson looked about
5 years younger.  I was never crazy about Rick Moranis's character, and I
thought it didn't change much from the previous film.  And I was a bit
disappointed that Annie Potts's character wasn't still hooked up with Igon; I
thought they played off one another well.  The fellow playing the art director
was OK -- I think Billy Crystal's Fernando was really demanded for that part.
Finally, Cheech Martin has a tiny role, but he has one of the best lines in the
film.
     Recommendation: If you don't mind the satiric edge of GHOSTBUSTERS
slightly dulled by more attention to the characters, then see it.  Not a
Totally Excellent film, but quite good and fully entertaining.

Author
Jamey Hughton
MOVIE VIEWS by Jamey Hughton:  http://Welcome.to/MovieViews
Ghostbusters still stands the test of time. The original is one of my
favorite films, mainly because: a) the jokes never get old; b) the
special effects and story-line remain interesting; and c) Bill Murray
delivers one of the finest comedic performances ever caught on the
silver screen. Ghostbusters II, the long-awaited continuation released
five years afterward, has been dismissed as yet another sequel that
didn't live up to the original. But how could it? It must have been an
incredibly difficult task when Dan Aykroyd and Harold Ramis reunited and
attempted to duplicate the success of their first script. Ghostbusters
II is devoid of most of the clever details that made the first such a
complete joy, but it still manages to entertain with an amiable charm.
The four Ghostbusters - Peter Venkman (Bill Murray), Ray Stanz (Dan
Aykroyd), Egon Spengler (Harold Ramis) and Winston Zeddemore (Ernie
Hudson) - have separated, and chosen their individual paths. Peter,
although attaining his sarcastic and bitter tone, now hosts a cheesy and
low-rent TV series entitled `World of the Psychic'. Ray, when not
working at his Occult book shop, assists Winston in entertaining kids at
birthday parties (even though the groups yearn for He-Man). Egon
conducts tests involving human emotions and the effects of stress. The
group is reunited when Dana Barrett (Sigourney Weaver), the possessed
apartment dweller from the first, asks them to investigate a strange
occurrence involving her 8-month old baby and a runaway carriage.
They discover, after some illegal drilling, that a huge river of slime
is flowing under the city. Not only that, but there is also a demonic
painting at the city museum containing a deceased Carpathian god who
wants to join the party. The Ghostbusters once again team up, with the
help of their prickly secretary Janine Melnitz (Annie Potts) and taxing
accountant Louis Tully (Rick Moranis), to save New York and attempt to
cause less damage than their first heroic stand.
Ghostbusters II is not particularly well-written. Things that were
clever and engaging in the first film seem occasionally forced and silly
when attempted here. With most of the fresh ghostbusting gags used up,
there is a lot of squandered opportunities. However, there are still
some funny lines scattered about. Murray still manages to shine even in
the absence of great material, and the film is single-handedly saved by
the performances. I enjoyed the directions chosen for Moranis'
character, and Peter MacNicol is very funny as an eccentric art guru who
works at the museum.
Those who enjoyed the original may be disappointed by the sequel's
apparent lack of freshness. Ramis and Aykroyd have attempted to rehash
the finale from the first, replacing the Stay-Puft Marshmallow Man (a
classic) with the Statue of Liberty walking through the streets of New
York. Of course, little in Ghostbusters II ever reaches the brilliance
of the film that preceded it, but most of the paranormal hijinks succeed
in entertaining the viewer. The plot is pretty ridiculous (mood slime?)
and poorly assembled, but not everything here is a total bust. Some of
the banter between Ray and Egon is even quirkier than in Ghostbusters,
as when they tie everything together:
Ray - Do you think there is some relation between this Vigo character
and the slime?
Egon - Is the atomic weight of Cobalt 58.9? (If you're confused, that
means `yes'.)
It is a lesser sequel, that's definite, but it remains an entertaining
alternative. There are surely worse things to do then revisit this story
of a group of paranormal exterminators and their adventures in
ghostbusting. It certainly doesn't make you loathe the entire existence
of Ghostbusters, but encourages you to appreciate the original even
more, while reviving some great childhood memories in the process.
MOVIE VIEWS by Jamey Hughton:  http://Welcome.to/MovieViews
.......................
