Title
Review for Betty Ford Story, The (1987) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
Like Rodney Dangerfield, made-for-television movies
get no respect.  It is true that most of them aren't
particularly good, but the same can be said for most
films that play in theatres.  TV movies have smaller
budgets, less stellar casts, are less promoted and
less lauded.  When the AFI top 100 list was published
last year, no TV movies made the cut.  The very idea
was unthinkable.
But there have been many excellent television movies
over the years.  Promotion and quality do not go
hand in hand, and great scripts and acting are not
limited to the big screen.  For example, take
'The Betty Ford Story'.  The script is excellent,
and Gena Rowlands won both an Emmy and a Golden Globe
for her performance as the former First Lady.
Due to the short time limitations of a television
movie, the plot moves quickly through ten years
of Betty Ford's life.  The story begins with
husband Gerald ascending the Presidency upon
Nixon's resignation.  Betty soon provides a sharp
contrast to previous First Lady's: she expresses
political opinions, campaigns aggressively for
her husband, and for her own agenda (including the
ill-fated Equal Rights Amendment).
Betty is plagued with health problems.  She
develops breast cancer, and has to have a masectomy.
She has advanced arthritis, which requires strong
pain killers to continue an active schedule.
Gradually she becomes addicted to both pills
and alcohol, which consumes her life after Ford
loses the 1976 election to Carter.  Fortunately,
a family intervention saves her life and gives
her a new mission: founding her self-named clinic.
Gerald Ford was ridiculed in the media for stupidity
and physical clumsiness, but those traits are
absent in Josef Sommer's credible portrayal.
His political ambitions sometimes conflict with
Betty's needs, and he is a classic enabler when
it comes to her addictions, but otherwise he's a
great guy.  Their children look like Ken and Barbie,
but their dialogue is first rate: covering the
bases from family teasing to concern over their
troubled mother.  But this is Rowlands' movie,
and her portrayal of the plucky First Lady is
well deserving of her awards.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
