Title
Review for Absolution (1981)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Richard Burton is a great actor who had misfortune of being
associated with well-known films that didn't turned out to
be worthy of his talent. Those who want to see Burton at his
best should look among the lesser-known films he made in his
native Britain in the last stages of his career. ABSOLUTION,
1978 thriller directed by Anthony Page, is one of such
examples.
The plot takes place in English boarding school that is
being run by Catholic priest. One of them is Father Goddard
(played by Richard Burton), teacher who insist on the
strictest forms of discipline and can't stand any trace of
independent thought. Because of that he is despised by the
most of the pupils, and that even includes his favourite
student Stansfield (played by Dominic Guard). When
free-thinking hippie vagrant Blakey (played by Billy
Connolly) arrives near the school in search of work, he is
soon befriended by Stansfiled who sees a new and better role
model in him. After a while, Blakey and Stansfield decide to
pull a practical joke on Father Goddard by staging a fake
murder. Stansfiled tells about the murder in confession,
knowing that Father Goddard won't be able to do anything
about it. However, what began as a prank would soon turn
into real nightmare.
Anthony Shaffer's script is based on stage play, but this is
more of an asset than liability for this particular
thriller. Unlike modern-day thrillers that usually rely on
exotic set-ups, ABSOLUTION takes place in isolated yet
realistic setting, and the real source of tension is within
the characters. Shaffer never takes sides and until the very
end audience is left to sympathise with different
characters, never quite certain who among them is a good or
bad. Because of that constant uncertainty, the atmosphere of
the film is very dark and unusually bitter ending comes as
something quite natural. The ending of ABSOLUTION also
represents something which is quite rare in modern Hollywood
thrillers - it is both unexpected, yet very believable and
fits within the context of the story. The acting in this
film is superb, with Richard Burton allowing audience both
to despise and sympathise with his rigid character. Billy
Conolly is also very impressive as his carefree and often
larger- than-life opposite. Their younger colleagues Dominic
Guard and David Bradley are also very good in their roles.
Unfortunately, Anthony Page's direction is best-suited for
this film, because he employs shock tactics in the film that
would have benefited more from more subtle approach. Musical
score by Stanley Myers (of DEER HUNTER fame) is also rather
unimpressive. However, despite these flaws and despite the
fact that it might prove too disturbing for some of the more
sensitive viewers, ABSOLUTION is nevertheless powerful and
thought-provoking film that would leave long lasting
impression on those who see it.
Review written on September 30th 2001
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
