Title
Review for Wyatt Earp (1994)
Number of Reviews
10

Author
Steve Rhodes
     WYATT EARP is an epic of a movie made on a grand scale.  It covers
the life of Wyatt Earp from when he was about 12 years old until 17
years after the gun fight which wasn't at, but was near, the OK Corral.
     Kevin Costner plays Wyatt Earp from age 20 on.  Dennis Quad plays
Doc Holiday, Gene Hackman is Wyatt's father, Michael Madsen is one of
Wyatt's many brothers, and there are zillions of other stars you will
recognize playing other brothers, wives, Mastersons, marshals, bad
guys, etc.  The credits go on for longer than the cartoons they used to
play when I was a kid.  I know that seriously dates me.
     This is a classic Lawrence Kasdan movie.  He produced, directed,
and wrote it.  Kasdan likes important films that make statements.  His
best two were Grand Canyon and The Big Chill.  Here he makes a movie
full of sweeping grandeur and absolutely wonderful dramatic music
(James Newton Howard) that never stops.  The cinematography (Owen
Roizman) is a delight.  The lighting for every scene is carefully
chosen from the night scenes in the jail to the light pouring into the
dark saloon in the afternoon to the sunsets.  Much money and time was
spent on the set design (Ida Random) so that the look was exactly as
Kasdan envisioned it.  DeMille would have the loved it.
     Costner is always interesting to watch, and he is in this movie.
He plays Wyatt as an assertive killer but a fundamentally sweet fellow.
With the exception of Dennis Quaid, the other performances are fine,
but nothing special.  Quaid was badly miscast.  For a better Doc
Holiday see the quirkier but fascinating performance by Val Kilmer in
Tombstone.  Oh yes, Mark Harmon tries his hand at a Western.  He should
stick to playing serial killers on TV.  He can do that.
     WYATT EARP is rated PG-13 for a fair amount of blood.  Teenagers
will be fine at it, but keep the little ones away.  It runs an
incredible 3:10, but feels more like four hours.  It got ** from me and
a mild thumbs down.  If they would have cut out an hour, I could have
boosted my rating to ** 1/2 and recommended it, but as it is, I give it
a thumbs down.  In fact, if they lightened up a bit and did not treat
every scene like it was the parting of the Red Sea, I probably would
have even given another 1/2 star.  If you go see it, you will leave
very tired, but will have some beautiful scenes to remember.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Paul McElligott
Before the eruption of dueling volcano movies and dual impact of the
killer asteroid movies, there was the showdown between this pair of
cinematic takes on the life of Wyatt Earp and the now legendary gunfight
at the OK Corral.
Aside from being released within a year of each other, these two film
have little in common other than attempting to relate similar events. 
"Tombstone," released first, approaches the story as standard action
fare, while "Wyatt Earp" strives to be a "serious" biopic in the
tradition of "Patton."  Held up against their respective aspirations,
"Tombstone" is the more successful film, but it's a near thing.
The obvious place to begin is by comparing the actors portraying Wyatt
Earp.  Kurt Russell in "Tombstone" is the standard Kurt Russell
character with an 18-century mustache.  It's not a bad performance, but
it hardly distinguishes itself among Russell's recent performances.
Kevin Costner as Wyatt Earp is much harder to evaluate.  He plays the
older Earp as an emotionally repressed man, so the range of his
performance is limited.  As the younger Earp, when the future lawman was
simply guarding a payroll wagon, before life had crushed all the
optimism out of him, Costner shows some sign of the goofy exuberance he
showed in "Silverado", his last collaboration with director Lawrence
Kasdan.  Overall, Costner's portrayal is superior but his Earp is often
so coldly unlikable that it's hard to care much about him.
One similarity between the two films is fact that the actor playing John
"Doc" Holliday steals all the scenes he is in. 
Val Kilmer's role in "Tombstone" is showier and more comedic.  He plays
Holliday as an effete Rhett Butler with a droll wit.  In "Wyatt Earp"
Dennis Quaid simply disappears into his role, pulling a reverse DeNiro
by losing 43 pounds to play the tubercular Holliday.  His character has
his own form of wit, but it's colder and harder than Kilmer's.  Also,
Quaid does a far better job of portraying the effects of Holliday's
tuberculosis.  Kilmer never seems to have anything worse than a bad flu,
except when its dramatically necessary for him to look worse.  The
downside is that Quaid's Holliday doesn't appear until the film is half
over and gets a lot less screen time than Kilmer does.
As history, "Wyatt Earp" holds a sizable lead in accuracy over
"Tombstone" although its fidelity to the facts is questionable in a lot
of areas.  Interestingly, they both take the same liberty with the
shooting of Morgan and Virgil Earp, condensing events two weeks apart
into a single night.  
Of course, key to both films is their depiction of the events in
Tombstone leading up to the famous shootout.  This is the entire focus
of "Tombstone" but occupies only the last hour of the three hour "Wyatt
Earp".  "Tombstone" is more "interesting" and "exciting" but very
superficial.  The "bad guys" are simply bad because there has to be bad
guys.  There is also a klutzy analogy to modern inner city gangs that
robs the "Tombstone" villians of their only shreds of credibility. 
"Wyatt Earp" does a much better job of portraying and clarifying the
issues that drove Earps and Holliday to shoot it out with the Clantons
and the McClaurys.  The personalities involved are less colorful but the
are more believable.  How true they are to history is another question,
but clearly "Wyatt Earp" gets closer to the truth than "Tombstone" ever
does.
The shootout itself is similar in both films, but "Tombstone" goes over
the top, turning it into a scene that owes more to "Lethal Weapon" than
"My Darling Clementine".  It doesn't help that during sequence where the
Earps and Holliday walk side-by-side to the OK Corral, they pass by a
totally unexplained house fire.  Was this set by the Clantons?  Or was
it just to give the director a dramatic backdrop against which to shoot
the characters?
It may sound like a prefer "Wyatt Earp" to "Tombstone" despite the fact
that I said that "Tombstone" was more successful.  The deal is, in areas
where the two films overlap, "Wyatt Earp" is the superior film; better
written, better acted and more authentic.  The problem is that this film
also covers areas of Earp's life that Tombstone does not touch.  Much of
this, especially early in Earp's life, is just not interesting.  Costner
seems to have become the king of three hour movies that should be
shorter.  Although editing would probably not have rescued "Waterworld"
or "The Postman" it would have lessened the pain.
It would have helped "Wyatt Earp" a great deal, however,.  If they had
left out most of the stuff before Earp meets the Mastersons, this film
would have been much more successful.  There is little before that point
that is not adequately explained later on.  
"Tombstone" is more successful only because it aims lower than "Wyatt
Earp."  The Costner film plays for bigger stakes, and thus fails more
spectacularly than the Kurt Russell version could ever hope for.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Instead of short films that
     inaccurate portray the Wyatt Earp and the gunfight at the
     O.K. Corral, Costner and Kasdan bring us a big 189-minute
     biopic of Wyatt Earp that inaccurately shows his whole
     life.  Costner does not do too much for Earp, but Dennis
     Quaid's Doc Holliday is a genuine tour de force.  Still,
     the film just does not entertain or edify sufficiently to
     justify the length.  Rating: high 0 (-4 to +4).  A
     discussion of historical accuracy at the end of this
     review may contain minor spoilers.
     Last year I reviewed TOMBSTONE and both criticized and praised the
film for being half-accurate as a film version of the events around the
famous gunfight at the O.K. Corral.  Well, I see the error of my ways.
At least I have to say that there is a whole lot more to an historical
film than accuracy.  WYATT EARP is even a little more accurate than even
TOMBSTONE on some points.  But just recreating historical facts does not
make for a good film.  The two films are faithful to the historical
detail about equally, but TOMBSTONE is certainly the more worthwhile.
The definitive film about Wyatt Earp, if it is even possible, still
remains to be made.
     Basically the title of WYATT EARP tells it all.  This is a
biography of Wyatt Earp from the time he was a teenager to his
retirement.  When the film opens Wyatt is in the Oriental Saloon waiting
for the most famous gunfight of his life and probably of the American
West.  Then we flash back and now Wyatt is a teenager on his family farm
in Missouri, anxious to go off and join his brothers fighting the South.
Instead he finds himself giving in to the will of an autocratic father
(Gene Hackman).  Wyatt's real father, incidentally, was not a lawyer as
the film would have it, but a farmer and a cooper.  Over some protest,
Wyatt's father announces one day that the family will move west.  Wyatt
goes and finds the West beautiful but also lawless and violent.  He
returns to Missouri to learn to be a lawyer and to raise a family.  When
his wife dies he returns west and tries his hand at being an alcoholic,
a low-life, a horse thief, and a mugger in the hopes that he will soon
be able to add "corpse" to his resume.  This doesn't work out for him
either.
     Getting back on his feet, he decides to hunt the mighty buffalo (or
"titonka" to you Costner fans).  Wyatt befriends Ed and Bat Masterson
who come along with him as mule skinners.  Later when Wyatt accidentally
shows his prowess at subduing drunks he is asked to become a lawman, he
brings the Masterson's along with him.  And the rest is history--not
that script writers Dan Gordon and Lawrence Kasdan did much of a job of
researching it.
     Costner plays Wyatt as Costner.  He glides through the part doing
little we have not seen from him before.  That is really a pity, since
he desperately needs a role that will give him more to do.  He has been
in some good films, but it is becoming clear he wants to play the hero
roles of an Errol Flynn without the dramatic range of a John Wayne.  But
if it looks like this film didn't give him much opportunity to stretch
himself, look what it did for Dennis Quaid.  As Doc Holliday, Quaid
submerges himself into a Georgia accent, a moustache, and a beard, and
is nearly unrecognizable.  (The real Holliday wore no beard, by the
way.)  There are a host of other familiar faces including Mark Harmon,
Catherine O'Hara, Tom Sizemore, and Betty Buckley.  Clearly not much
expense was spared on the cast or even the sets, yet the film has not
much sparkle or style.  James Newton Howard's score is never engaging.
With all the beautiful Arizona scenery available Kasdan rarely lets the
camera take much advantage of it.
     Under Kasdan's direction the film ends up being somewhat ponderous
and oddly dull.  Events take a long time to develop.  While no film has
ever so well caught the complexity of the events surrounding the corral
gunfight, and that is the difficult part, the gunfight itself is staged
very inaccurately.  The actual scenario of the fight is easily available
so that piece of the script could have written itself, but apparentlyit
just was not researched or Kasdan did not care.  I am not certain, but I
seem to remember in this film five men facing down the Earps rather than
the actual four.  It seems as if somebody who knew something about the
Earps wrote an outline for the film that said at this point put in the
gunfight, and then someone who didn't know as much wrote the description
of the fight.  The film is accurate on a high level, but very inaccurate
on low-level details.  And it is about an hour longer than it should
have been to sustain audience interest.  For what they got right, I am
tempted to rate it higher, but it also makes some big mistakes.  I rate
it a high 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     I have heard some critics praising this film as finally being an
accurate representation of Wyatt Earp.  I suppose that they mean that
because this sees to be a warts-and-all representation of Wyatt.
Actually this film just shows more of his life than most previous films,
but it also is full of inaccuracy.  As I say above, it is almost as if
the writers started with an accurate outline of Wyatt's life, then
invented the details they needed to flesh it out without checking on the
truth of the details.  Not that accurate details are easy to come by.
Wyatt is one of the most fabled characters of the West and there seemto
be all sorts of stories about him.  But many of the details that were
thrown into this version, while lending a believable historic texture,
only distort the facts.
     I don't know how emotionally scarred Wyatt was after the death of
his first wife, but he and some of his brothers were supposedly involved
in a twenty-minute street fight with two of his wife's brothers not long
after the death.  This torching of the house in grief was made up of the
whole cloth.
     Ed Masterson tells Wyatt that Bat picked the name Bat because he
couldn't stand his real name, Bartholomew.  And Bat is unhappy about
divulging this secret.  Actually, he was born William Barclay Masterson,
not a particularly stigmatizing name.  The story certainly added a
realistic texture to the script, but it didn't come out of anybody's
research.
     The film shows Earp as being a crack shot and an honest lawman.
None of this is true.  In fact he took bribes, pocketed fines, and at
least on one occasion nearly shot himself with his own gun.  Most of his
legend was little more than legend.
     Big Nose Katie Elder (Isabella Rossellini, who strongly resembles
her mother, Ingrid Bergman), explaining her unexpected good looks, says
people get nicknames for all sorts of reasons.  She points out her nose
is not actually big.  That is a nice piece of texture.  And it is good
script writing.  But the real Big Nose Katie Elder, based on her
portrait, was an ugly woman with a large nose.  In fact, most of the
Earp/Holliday women are portrayed far more attractively than their real
counterparts.  That is standard in the syntax of cinema.  Probably only
Josie Marcus would still be attractive by today's standards.  Of course
standards of beauty change, but it would be nice to see a film in which
the people and not just the scenery and buildings look right.
     There is a problem with Wyatt's distaste for prostitution and his
reforming Mattie and getting her out of the profession.  Again, it is
invented.  Some sources think that he actually was half-owner of brother
James Earp's whorehouse.  In any case, Mattie was apparently not in that
profession before Wyatt Earp knew her, as this film would have it, but
did become a prostitute after Wyatt abandoned her.
     Hype has been around throughout all of history, and perhaps the
emotional need for hype has been with us even longer.  Wyatt was a
convenient person to make a hero in his own time and in ours.  And in
truth he was one of the most colorful figures of the old West.  But even
the most admiring of his serious biographers conclude that Wyatt Earp
was a long way from being a real hero or even an admirable character.
If he fits any of the classic molds, it would be "scoundrel."  And in
showing more than usual of his negative side, though less than the
truth, perhaps this film has its greatest virtue.

Author
Sue Roberts
Directed by Lawrence Kasdan
Starring Kevin Costner, Gene Hackman, Dennis Quaid, Michael Madsen
     I knew as little of this man's legend as anyone in Britain.  The
film tells the story of how this famous lawman stood up to the scum of
the Wild West and brought them to heel.  It stretches back into his past
to show that, had his family not stood by him, he might so easily have
gone the way of his opponents.
     Work in which Costner is involved often has an uncanny feel for
the mood of the moment.  ROBIN HOOD, PRINCE OF THIEVES was received with
great delight in the U.K. as ridicule was poured upon the first attempt to
re-introduce a "poll" tax since medieval times.
     The music was lovely and I'll still be humming that hint of D'Oyly
Carte in a week's time.  One beautifully photographed vignette followed
another.  There is not a typical "vigilante" picture.  The historical
perspective of lives caught up in the turmoil of social change reminded
me of a work like ROSA LUXEMBURG by Von Trotta.  The psychology of
the hero unfolds at the pace of THE LEOPARD.  But, Visconti's style
is more "quiet Italian villa."
     I saw the TV show about the immense research involved in the
making of this picture.  And many of its scenes are packed with
people.  I longed to hear the clutter of their voices in the
background, layer upon layer, reading snatches of the biography, the
newspaper reports, the wanted notices, the Old Testament, the creak of
wood under their feet, that distant gunshot when Doc. says
"Tombstone...."
     By any measure of standards, this is a film of quality.  I mean,
compared to BEVERLEY HILLS COP III, where someone attempted to make a
comedy script into a thriller!
     But if the foreign dubs are not yet ready, perhaps there is a
chance to go for a "Director's Soundtrack." I'm sure it would be worth
it.

Author
Jeff Pidgeon

        This is a paticularly frustrating film to watch.  It's not a complete
failure on the level of "Heaven's Gate", nor is it the focused, involving ex-
ample of storytelling that "Unforgiven" is, either.  It is three hours plus of
filmmaking that more often than not fails to live up to its pedigree.  No sin-
gle level of the film is severely deficient -- the acting, directing, score,
production design, costumes and editing are all well executed.  The script has
many memorable lines and moments, although they are fewer and further between
than previous Kasdan efforts.  Kasdan still has a strong eye for composition,
and since "Unforgiven" seems to be the goal here, the pacing and character 
shadings seem appropriate.  Randy Quaid comes out of this the best...his Doc
Holliday is visually unsettling and flamboyant.  Flamboyant enough, in fact,
to seem somewhat out of place -- a sort of "Silverado" character in an "Unfor-
given"-toned film.  Still, he provides most of the film's best moments, al-
though the supporting cast delivers their share as well.  You can tell where
you're supposed to be cheering, where you're supposed be tense,  where you're
supposed to emotionally peak and valley along with the protagonist.  But you
don't connect as well as you should, the result being a well-crafted but ultim-
ately ineffectual.  Not recommended.

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  6/24/94 
Running Length:  3:09 
Rated:  PG-13 (Violence, mature themes, language, sexual situations) 
Starring: Kevin Costner, Dennis Quaid, Gene Hackman, Annabeth Gish, 
          Mark Harmon, Michael Madsen, Bill Pullman, Joanna Going, 
          Jeff Fahey, Tome Sizemore, JoBeth Williams, Mare Winningham,
          Catherine O'Hara 
Director:  Lawrence Kasdan 
Producers:  Jim Wilson, Kevin Costner, and Lawrence Kasdan 
Screenplay:  Dan Gordon and Lawrence Kasdan 
Cinematography:  Owen Roizman 
Music:  James Newton Howard 
Released by Warner Brothers 
     Kevin Costner is fast becoming Hollywood's "three-plus hour"
actor.  This is his third film in the nineties to reach or exceed the
one-hundred eighty minute mark (the other two being DANCES WITH WOLVES
and JFK).  Not many movies these days have close to that sort of
running time, and WYATT EARP shows why.  Although epic in length and
scope, it is not epic in depth and, upon occasion, that can make this a
tedious experience.
     WYATT EARP has a brief opening scene in 1881 Tombstone, then
backtracks seventeen years to a midwestern cornfield where a young
Wyatt is considering running away from home to join his older brothers
in the Union army.  From there, the film follows the experiences of the
most famous member of the Earp clan through thirty-five years of his
life.  His tragic marriage to Urilla is chronicled, as are his
experiences as a lawman (and sometimes vigilante) in Dodge City and
Tombstone.  WYATT EARP ends off the coast of turn-of-the-century Alaska
with a vignette about how historical figures become legends.
     The historical accuracy of Lawrence Kasdan's film isn't much of an
issue, at least as far as I'm concerned.  The writer/director
intertwines fact with myth to create what is, for the most part, a
reasonably entertaining story, and freely admits a certain degree of
"fictionalization" where his characters and situations are concerned.
     At times, WYATT EARP seems to drag on forever.  There's a lot of
apparently unnecessary padding that might have looked good on the
scripted page, but doesn't come across nearly as well on the big
screen.  The first hour rambles, presenting disjointed scenes that fail
to add much depth to any of the characters.  Wyatt's courting of and
marriage to Urilla (Annabeth Gish) happens so quickly that it fails to
provoke much emotional reaction.
     For the early portions of the movie, Wyatt is not an especially
interesting person.  First, he's a noble, upstanding man who loves his
wife, can't stand the sight of death, and is as honest as they come.
Then, following the first great tragedy of his life, he turns into a
drunken lout who steals horses and beats up people.  Only after
establishing Wyatt's "good" and "evil" sides in this obvious and time-
consuming manner does Kasdan allow the two to merge into the more
complex and interesting character who arrives to clean up Dodge City.
     Tombstone is rightfully at the center of WYATT EARP, and it isn't
surprising that it's the most interesting segment of the film.  The
buildup to the gunfight at the OK Corral is intense and energetic, and
the execution isn't a letdown.  Subsequent events are handled with
equal flair and, although the ending is muddled, there's a wonderfully
tense and atmospheric sequence involving a nighttime shoot-out around a
stopped train.
     Following an impressive performance in A PERFECT WORLD, Kevin
Costner is back to merely "adequate."  Most of the time, Costner's
attempts to present Wyatt's icy demeanor make the character flat and
uninteresting.  Some of the dumb dialogue doesn't help, but he's not
the only actor saddled with occasionally-stilted lines.
     As Wyatt's father Nicholas, Gene Hackman doesn't have much screen
time, and he appears to be on hand mostly to pick up a paycheck - this
is easily the actor's least-inspired performance in years.  Dennis
Quaid delivers a delightful turn as Doc Holliday.  This incarnation of
the consumption-stricken dentist mixes a sly, self-deprecating wit with
a cold, calculated viciousness.
     Most of the other cast members are fine in their roles.  There are
certainly a number of well-known faces (Bill Pullman, Isabella
Rossellini, Mare Winningham, and Mark Harmon all make appearances), but
few standouts.
     WYATT EARP is visually impressive, but that's no big surprise.
Any western, and certainly any would-be epic, has to boast a good
cinematographer (in this case, it's Owen Roizman).  The musical score
is marginally less effective.  Although composer James Newton Howard
seemingly attempts to recapture the mood of DANCES WITH WOLVES, THE
LAST OF THE MOHICANS, and GETTYSBURG, his themes aren't as memorable.
     Because of its recent release, TOMBSTONE comparisons are
inevitable.  The biggest advantage the late-1993 film has over this one
is length (TOMBSTONE clocks in at 2:08), but that's about it.  WYATT
EARP's script is less confusing, the characters are better developed,
and the acting is a notch higher.  Despite his two-note performance,
Costner is more believable as the title character than Kurt Russell,
and Quaid's version of Doc Holliday is more chilling than Val
Kilmer's.  Joanna Going manages to bring a certain sparkle to Josie
Marcus that is missing from Dana Delaney's interpretation.
     In much the same way that CHAPLIN overextends itself by trying to
present a complete picture of the actor's life, WYATT EARP's attempts
to cover so many years lead to too many scenes with little emotional
power.  The film doesn't shoot blanks, and it is better than TOMBSTONE
but, considering the names involved, a little disappointment isn't out
of the question.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Dragan Antulov
In the early 1990s western fans saw one of the many revivals
of their favourite genre. However, this time it happened
during the zenith of "political correctness" in Hollywood,
so the entire idea of "western renaissance" was associated
with the need to paint Old West in colours more suitable for
modern political sensibilities. Former heroes who had
brought the civilisation and American of life to the
Frontier were suddenly transformed into wife beaters,
homicidal psychopaths and fascist thugs responsible for the
genocide of Native Americans and the rape of virgin natural
environment. In the climate when the old myths got replaced
with new ones, even the real life legends of the Old West
had to go through revisionist makeover. That included Wyatt
Earp, lawman whose life had inspired numerous Hollywood
films through the decades, mostly centred on his role in the
gunfight at O.K. Corral. In 1993/1994 Hollywood brought two
new versions of that story. While the first, George P.
Cosmatos' TOMBSTONE, remained loyal to the past conventions
of the genre, WYATT EARP, written and directed by Lawrence
Kasdan, was more ambitious effort.
In this film Kasdan tries to fill the blank left by almost
every other filmmaker who had dealt with Earp - his life
prior to the fateful events in Tombstone. So, in this film
we follow how Wyatt Earp (played by Kevin Costner) grew up
to become the law enforcement legend of the Old West. In the
first scenes we are introduced to his family, led by
patriarchal figure of Nicholas Earp (played by Gene
Hackman), lawyer who wants Wyatt to follow his footsteps and
make career as respected citizen. At first, Wyatt follows
his footsteps, but the tragic death of first wife Urilla
(played by Anabeth Gish) would lead him to alcoholism,
gambling, and other form of anti-social behaviour. After he
barely avoided hanging for the horse theft in Arkansas Wyatt
decides to sober up and seeks new life in the West. There he
would switch many careers until his efficiency of the law
enforcer in the rowdy Middle West cattle towns earns him
reputation of the legend. That reputation would become very
useful when he retires and goes to Tombstone, Arizona in
order to seek fortune together with their brothers. In the
ensuing conflict with rival clans of Clantons his friendship
with terminally ill gambler and gunslinger Doc Holliday
(played by Dennis Quaid) would be equally useful.
Kasdan probably thought that the epic scope is the way to
make his treatment of Wyatt Earp different from other films.
He provides that epic scope by widespread use of James
Newton Howard's music and panoramic shots, but the most
"epic" thing about WYATT EARP is its three-hour length. In
other circumstances, those 189 minutes would bring texture
to the story and character, but this time the long run only
reveals the weakness in the script. Kasdan, one of
Hollywood's most talented screenwriters, seems overwhelmed
with the ambitious task to give more modern, historically
accurate and less flattering picture of Wyatt Earp while
remaining loyal to the myth in the same time. So, in the
first hour or so, the film meanders into banal and not very
significant episodes concerning Wyatt Earp's early life -
relations with his family and opposite sex or early career
choices, When we get to the point that should be the most
interesting- gunfight at the O.K. Corral - Kasdan rushes the
pace of the film to the predictable conclusion, without
bothering to explain the background of the said event and
thus leaving audience unsatisfied.
The length of the film could be explained by the influence
of Kevin Costner, Kasdan's long time associate. Costner, who
became star by playing another American law enforcement
legend in THE UNTOUCHABLES, probably tried to stay on the
screen as long as possible, so perhaps this is the reason
why WYATT EARP has many scenes that should have been cut.
Costner, however, delivers the goods and his portrayal of
Earp is commendable, but unfortunately, it can't compensate
contradictions in the story and characterisation.
Furthermore, although WYATT EARP has the truly stellar cast,
none of Costner's colleagues, with the possible exception of
Hackman in rather routine role of his father, has room for
more than couple of lines. The most tragic thing happened
with Dennis Quaid, who allowed himself to lose 20 kilograms
of his weight only to accurately portray terminally ill Doc
Holliday. That should have been truly marvellous role, but
Kasdan didn't use its potential, so Quaid's performance
looks inferior to Kilmer's portrayal of the same character
in TOMBSTONE. Actually, any kind of comparison between two
films is very unflattering to Kasdan's effort - while
TOMBSTONE looks like standard Hollywood entertainment that
delivers the goods, WYATT EARP is pseudo-"artsy" epic that
sinks under the weight of its authors' ambitions.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Cindy Bale
     WYATT EARP details thirty-five years in the life of same from
around 1865 to 1900.  After seeing the movie SPEED twice recently, I
kept thinking that I was seeing Wyatt's life pass before my eyes in
real time.  This movie was boring, slow, boring, and slow.  There were
a few scenes that tried to be great scenes that tried too hard and just
fell flat.
     The script happily woman-bashes but also tries to sound like an
80s movie.  They cannot have it both ways.  "I now pronounce you
husband and wife."  Sure, they said that in the 1800s.
"Entrepreneur."  Sure.  Every bit of male-ego-stroking dialogue that
Wyatt's third wife speaks to him made me sick to listen to it.  "Oh,
the script was written by two men?"  "No kidding!"
     The movie is torture to sit through.  The scenery is boring.  The
fades were either awkward or cliche or to self important.  Can you say
poor editing?
     Everyone looks ugly in this movie.  When you shoot people from
under their chins, they look like they have double chins.  Kevin
Costner has never looked worse.  He should sue.  He looks like he
gained the 43 pounds that Dennis Quaid lost.
     Dennis Quaid is marvelous.  If you have to see this movie just for
his performance, go into the theatre at the movie's halfway mark.  Doc
Holliday (Quaid's character) shows up at about the 90-minute mark.
     Gene Hackman is very good.  Is he in the credits?  I don't
remember seeing his name.
Mare Winningham makes the best of a small role as Wyatt's second wife.
Annabeth Gish is good as Wyatt's first wife.  I though that Jamie Gertz
played Wyatt's third wife, but I later heard that her name is Joanna
Going.  She looks great but her dialogue sucks.  She also seems way to
young for Costner.  Costner seems way to old for 90% of this movie.  In
his first scene he is supposed to be about 19 years old.  Yeah, right.
Catherine O'Hara and JoBeth Williams are always good and totally wasted
here.
     This is the worst movie that I have seen in years.  THE LAST
ACTION HERO was better that this.  Go see MAVERICK if you want to see a
Western.
Rating:  1 out of 10 bullets for Dennis Quaid's performance only.

Author
Chuck Dowling
Wyatt Earp (1994) ****1/2 - C:Kevin Costner, Dennis Quaid, Gene Hackman,
Michael Madsen, Tom Sizemore, Jeff Fahey, Mark Harmon, Bill Pullman,
Isabella Rossellini, Jo Beth Williams, Mare Winningham, Mackenzie Astin, Tea
Leoni.
"Wyatt Earp" faced unfortunate comparisons to the Kurt Russell film
"Tombstone" which came out only months earlier. And while both are immensely
entertaining, they are in fact two distinctly different kinds of films.
"Tombstone" is an action picture, centering around the events which took
place in the town of Tombstone involving Wyatt Earp. "Wyatt Earp" is a drama
about the man himself, about what made him who he was, and about the events
throughout his entire life. People who expect lots of action from this film
will be disappointed, but I knew exactly what I was about to see and
therefore my expectations were met.
"Wyatt Earp" runs over three hours long, something which audiences today
just won't stand for, no matter if the film is good or not (which makes no
sense, especially when people will rent three movies and then watch them
back to back). For me, as long as a movie is good, then it can go on
forever. "Wyatt Earp" in no way seems too long.
Surely almost every movie-goer by now has seen some version of the Wyatt
Earp legend, or at least knows it's story. So there's not much need to
discuss the plot of the film. Wyatt Earp and his family try to lead normal
lives, but get drawn into the business of keeping the peace and can not
escape that profession.
Now, I have seen many film versions of this story: "My Darling Clementine",
"Gunfight at the OK Corral", "Hour of the Gun", and "Tombstone". And I still
must say that I'm confused as to the actual events leading up to and
following the big gunfight between the Earps and the Clantons. None of the
film versions have successfully gone into enough detail to explain matters.
I guess that the filmmakers assume that we already know the background info
and therefore don't need to give much exposition into the conflict.
Kevin Costner, who in my opinion has received a lot of unnecessary criticism
in the last few years, does a fine job with the title character. He
convincingly plays Wyatt from his teenage years up until old age. Dennis
Quaid, who pulled a Robert De Niro losing over 30 pounds to play the sickly
Doc Holliday, gives a fantastic performance. The same goes for the rest of
the cast, all doing just fine with what they are given to do. The direction,
cinematography, and set design are all excellent, as is James Newton
Howard's eloquent score music.
A minor problem with the film is that the script tries to cover way too much
ground, and even at its long running time you feel as though the filmmakers
have barely scratched the surface. Also, characters seem to wander in and
out of the story with no explaination as to where they are. Other
characters, such as Mark Harmon's, aren't even introduced to us, we just
have to figure out who he is as we go along! And, the final two scenes seem
unsatisfactory. You want to see Wyatt return to his father and resolve their
conflict. You want to see Wyatt take Doc to the hospital and to say goodbye
to his friend. But, I guess if movies always went exactly where we wanted
them to, then the whole movie "experience" would lose it's effect.
A special expanded edition of "Wyatt Earp" was released on video which
included more that twenty minutes of footage which had been cut from the
original theatrical version. All of the scenes re-added are worthy scenes,
adding more depth to characters, and giving more infomation about who
certain people are, such as Mark Harmon's character and Isabella
Rossellini's character. The expanded edition gets *****.
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,500 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office
reports, film related links, and reader's polls and reviews.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Directed by     Lawrence Kasdan  
Written by      Dan Gordon & Kasdan
Cast Kevin Costner, Dennis Quaid, Gene Hackman, Jeff Fahey, Mark Harmon,
     Michael Madsen, Catherine O'Hara, Bill Pullman, Isabella Rosselini,
     Tom Sizemore, JoBeth Williams
MPAA Rating     "PG-13"
Running Time    189 minutes
     WYATT EARP has a lot to tell and little to say. This story of the
legendary lawman runs three hours and nine minutes and that's too long
for this epic-wannabe that plays more like a TV mini-series than a
movie.
     The story opens on the Earp family farm, with young Wyatt ready to
run away from home.  He wants to fight in the Civil War, but his dad
(Hackman) has different ideas and wants his son to study law. Time
passes and Wyatt heads west, returns home to marry, and, after a spell,
begins his career in law enforcement. By the time he (Costner) and his
brothers (Madsen, David Andrews, and Linden Ashby) arrive in Tombstone,
Wyatt has tried his hand at everything from hunting buffalo to dealing
cards.
     WYATT EARP is very appealing in places-- such as cast, costumes,
and cinematography-- but an overstated story and overpowered score
deaden most of the emotional impact.  Who can be moved by scene after
scene after scene of swelling strings and suffocating speeches?  Somber
is fine-- just ask Clint Eastwood-- but this film that boasts not one,
not two, but three, count 'em three, hammy death scenes!
     Still, a little bit of EARP goes a long way and the life and times
of the legendary lawman are from uninteresting stuff.  His, uh, unusual
relations with women, for example, are an intriguing contrast to his
character's credo of "nothing counts as much as blood."  Equally amusing
is a buffalo-hunting (and skinning!) sequence that is decidedly
non-PC.
     Director Lawrence Kasdan takes a refreshingly realistic approach
to the gunplay.  The infamous gunfight at the OK Corral is both brutal
and brief, devoid of almost any theatrics.  Don't look for much
glorified violence here.
     Despite some large exclamation points in the story, the characters
*do* come to life. The diverse cast includes everyone from Betty
Buckley (!) to Mackenzie Astin (!!).
     Kevin Costner is very good in the title role.  Dances With Whitney
nevers get as steely as the role requires, though, but his
transformation from lighthearted law student to stoic sheriff is fun to
watch.  He was tougher in A PERFECT WORLD.
     His foil is Dennis Quaid, who pulled a DeNiro by losing 40+ pounds
to play the tubercular terror Doc Holliday.  Gaunt *and* gamely, he's a
scene stealer who's seen too little. Other familiar faces include Tom
Sizemore (looking like Bruce McGill), Bill Pullman (looking like Jeff
Daniels), and Lea Thompson (looking like someone other than Lea
Thompson). Both Gene Hackman and Isabella Rosselini appear and
disappear like magic, while late entries Catherine O'Hara and JoBeth
Williams are surprisingly solid.
     Though the story and score should've tried "less is more," all
other credits are technical tops.  Production designer Ida Random, art
director Gary Wissner, and costume designer Colleen Atwood are some of
the VIPS who helped spend what must've been an enormous budget.
Clearly no expense was spared.
