Title
Review for Different for Girls (1996)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Steven Mackintosh, Rupert Graves, Miriam Margolyes, Saskia Reeves
Director: Richard Spence
Producer: John Chapman 
Screenplay: Tony Marchant 
Cinematography: Sean van Hales
Music: Stephen Warbeck
U.S. Distributor: First Look Pictures
     With DIFFERENT FOR GIRLS, director Richard Spence and writer Tony 
Marchant have discovered a crop that hasn't been picked over in the 
field of screen romances.  This isn't just a boy-falls-for-girl story, 
it's boy-falls-for-girl-who-used-to-be-a-boy story.  And, while this 
premise is easy fodder for a farce, Spence plays it relatively straight, 
giving us a surprisingly sensitive look at the life of someone who has 
undergone a sex-change operation.  Of course, that's not to say that the 
director ignores the potential for comedy in the situation.  In fact, 
Spence keeps things from becoming too heavy by leavening the drama with 
humor.
     One of the reasons why DIFFERENT FOR GIRLS works is because of the 
caliber of acting.  Steven Mackintosh plays Kim (whose name used to be 
Karl) with a kind of wistful sadness.  We get the sense that the 
operation wasn't something she wanted, but that she needed it to 
properly define herself.  She felt uncomfortable in a man's body, but, 
by becoming a woman, she has been forced to live with the stigma that 
society places upon those who change genders.  Unlike in fantasies, Kim 
isn't a beautiful, petite woman, but someone whose features are still 
unmistakably masculine.  Mackintosh's studied performance realizes all 
of the complexities of Kim's situation and brings them to the screen 
with subtlety and intelligence.
     Playing opposite Mackintosh is Rupert Graves (who can currently be 
seen in INTIMATE RELATIONS).  While Kim is reserved and business-like in 
her approach to life, Graves' Prentice is an angry, rowdy man in a state 
of arrested adolescence who is in constant danger of losing his delivery 
job because of his rudeness to customers.  Graves' performance is 
uninhibited and electric, and his Prentice provides the perfect foil for 
Kim -- they're oil and water.  What's more, Prentice isn't a mental 
giant, so, rather than attempting to intellectualize and analyze his 
feelings for Kim, he reacts impulsively and not always intelligently.
     The two meet as the result of a traffic accident, and Prentice 
immediately thinks he recognizes Kim.  It doesn't take him long to place 
her -- they had been friends at school together over a decade and a half 
ago, when Kim was still Karl.  More out of curiosity than anything else, 
Prentice agrees to meet Kim for a drink, but his boorish behavior causes 
the reunion to turn ugly, and he and Kim part on bad terms.  She's 
determined never to see him again until, the next day at work, he 
delivers a bouquet of flowers accompanied by a very apologetic note.  
     In exploring the deepening relationship between the two leads, 
DIFFERENT FOR GIRLS deals with all the subjects we would expect -- 
sexual confusion, homosexuality, and how society in general reacts to 
this odd couple. Prentice doesn't know what to make of his feelings for 
Kim.  When he protests their growing closeness by saying "I'm straight," 
Kim's response is a simple "So am I."  The situation is exacerbated when 
the cops arrest them for disorderly conduct and mistake them for a gay 
couple.  Additionally, Prentice is understandably interested in the 
specifics of Kim's gender change -- why she did it, how it was 
performed, and what the results look like.  Through dialogue and a 
revealing scene featuring full frontal nudity (Mackintosh's breasts 
aren't real, but it's impossible to tell that), DIFFERENT FOR GIRLS 
satisfies Paul's (and our) curiosity about the matter.  
     The film has its weak points.  The convoluted ending wraps things 
up a little too neatly for my taste, although it does create a sense of 
closure.  Also, a subplot involving the marital struggles of Kim's 
sister (Saskia Reeves) and her husband is more intrusive than 
enlightening.  The best parts of the film are those when the focus is 
squarely upon Prentice and Kim as they try to work through their 
difficulties, and as Prentice learns to accept Kim for what she is today 
rather than what she was seventeen years ago.  In its own way, DIFFERENT 
FOR GIRLS asks many of the same questions about gender and sexuality as 
Frank Oz' IN AND OUT, and, unsurprisingly, the answers are the same.
The website has moved!!
The new address is: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."

Author
The Flying Inkpot
BE WARNED.. BRIT LOVE STORY IN THE OFFING.
     Effeminate, mild-mannered Karl is about to take a beatng from
a bunch of ruffians at school as he bathes himself under a shower,
his genitals tucked between his legs in the manner of a posing 
transvestite.  He is only just saved by Prentice, who appears in
all respects barring his protective attitude towards Karl to be your
average street-wise punk-in-the-making.  The ensuing scene ends up
with both boys being ridiculed and then unfairly expelled from the
school. They do not see each other for another eighteen yeas.      
     In that time, Prentice has matured into a somewhat loveable, if
brash and bull-heaed goon who screws up his jobs and relationships
while gamely clinging onto perennial adolescence via lether jackets,
motorcycles and punk rock music.  Karl, on the other hand, has grown 
up to become Kim, a drabby, insecure woman who works as a verse writer
for a greeting card company.  Chance brings the two together, and love,
such as will inevitably blossom in your quirky British romantic comedy, 
is what this skewed little story is largely about.    
     If at this point you think you're going to get any cheap laughs 
with that gender-bending theme (see THE BIRDCAGE, TO WONG FOO..., 
PRISCILLA QUEEN OF THE DESERT), you can just go home and brood on
your own maladjusted sexuality you low-life deadbeat. Kim is a 
post-operative transsexual, thank you very much... a new-born woman 
for all purposes, with confusions and sensitivities that deserve 
treatment with a touch of delicacy.  
     Personally, give me those cheap laughs any day.  I'd rather 
enjoy obvious camp than endure the shallow exploration of a soft-
hearted transsexual love story.  DIFFERENT FOR GIRLS comes up with a
promising enough proposition, but does nothing that surpasses the
merely workmanlike with it.  By refusing to make the audience 
really uncomfortable with the notion of Kim and Prentice's relation-
ship, or at the very least feel uncomfortable for them (Prentice for
example, doesn't seem to give hiself all that much grief when he
becomes attracted to Kim despite being a fight-picking, beer-drinking,
macho kind of guy, and Kim, for all her insecurities and fears is always
saved any truly disturbing victimisation in the film), and instead
drawing them into a basically wimpy love story, the film manages to
lobotomise itself.  
     Lightweight comedy as it's doomed to be, it could've still have
hacked it with the requisitive endearing couple.  But this doesn't
either, since even Mrs Doubtfire is sexier than Steven Mackintosh's Kim
Foyle, and as either sex, he's just plainly a simpering wanker nobody
should like.  Prentice does though, and that's never explained.  But
then Rupert Graves gives us so heroic performance as Prentice, the guy who 
never grew up (and if there is a BAFTA prize for Most Convincing 
Portrayal of a Rabid Fan at a Buzzcocks' Concert, he should win that 
too) that I guess there's no reason to explain why he's so screwed up.
     If oddly enough you grow to like this show, you'll be wanting
your happy ending, and the film won't fail you there either.  Snide 
underling at Kim's office gets her come-uppance.  Misogynistic police 
officer who beats up Prentice gets his come-uppance.  The couple 
prevail against a disagreeable society and come together in Kim's
apartment.  Kim's sister and her impotent sarge-type husband kiss and
make up after a tiff (TV movie sub-plot with incidental juxtaposition).  
And best of all, Kim sheds her insecurities and learns how to ride
the motorcycle and wear leathers, making Prentice ride pilion.  Awwww.
Terrific closure.  Happy ending.  But just what is it that's differnt
for girls anyway?  If you figure that one out, let me know.  
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
 * Wait for the TV2 broadcast. 
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha! 
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend. 
 **** Amazing, potent stuff. 
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Steven Mackintosh, Rupert Graves, Miriam Margolyes, Saskia Reeves
Director: Richard Spence
Producer: John Chapman
Screenplay: Tony Marchant
There has been a movie made for almost every sexual encounter possible.
A man meets a woman they have sex (most movies), a man meets a man they
have sex (PRIEST), a woman meets a woman they have sex (BASIC INSTINCT),
a man meets a man dressed as woman they have sex (THE CRYING GAME) and
vice versa (TWELFTH NIGHT). So why is it DIFFERENT FOR GIRLS? Well, as
far as I know, this is one of the few films that deals with man meets
tran-sexual and they have sex.
The man we are referring to is Prentice (Rupert Everett), an
on-the-edge, adult-with-adolescent-complex, lacking-social-graces
misfit, who was once great friends with an effeminate guy named Karl
(Steven Mackintosh), in high school. The movie opens with Karl sensually
washing himself like a girl in the school shower, but when Karl becomes
Kim, instead of remaining sensual, he becomes a bit of an uptight,
prissy aristocrat. Steven Mackintosh does not seem to suit this role
well. He comes across as a bit of a Martina Navratilova - butch and
heavy-handed. If they wanted to make this movie a sensitive, romantic
piece they should have hired an actress to play the role of the
tran-sexual instead.
The whole film is a lead up to a moment where Kim gets to talk about her
skin softening with oestrogen replacement, her breasts getting larger
and fuller, the areolar darkening, inevitable giving Prentice a hard on.
The situation then leads to Prentice becoming confused about his sexual
orientation, followed by flashing his manhood around the neighbourhood,
before being arrested and assaulted by the police. Kim and Prentice then
put their personal and sexual differences aside and hop into bed. It is
here that Prentice gets to say ludicrously funny lines like, ‘Oh my God
it fits', like he was expecting it not too. Before a trite ending where
they sell the ‘Karl becomes Kim' story to a newspaper, buy an apartment
and ride off on a motor cycle like ‘Easy Riders'.
If you were ever confused about the issues of tran-sexualism, this movie
will not clarify it further.

Author
David N. Butterworth
Finding love in today's day and age is difficult enough, but when the girl
you fancy used to be a boy, it makes for some added complications.
The relationship between a straight guy and a transsexual (who also happens
to be straight) forms the root of "Different for Girls," a transmuted
romantic comedy that is only partially successful.  Tony Marchant's script
works best when it deals directly with the relationship between Prentice
(Rupert Graves), a free-wheeling, arresting young man, and Kim (Steven
Mackintosh), a repressed transsexual trying to come to terms with her
sexual identity.
The two were schoolboy friends back when Kim was Karl.
Twenty years later Prentice is working as a courier for a London dispatch
service and "hasn't really come through puberty."  At 34 he's still
listening to punk 45s from the late seventies--Stiff Little Fingers,
Wreckless Eric, the Buzzcocks, etc.--and has a volatile personality to
match.  Kim, "three years pre-op and one year post," writes creative verse
for a greeting card company, and the two run into one another on the city
streets, rekindling lost interests and emotions.
What's refreshing about their relationship is that Prentice, for all his
rudeness and crudeness, is so accepting of Kim.  His attraction to her is
unexamined and non-judgmental.  Kim refers to Prentice as an "odd sock";
like those you lose in the wash, they invariably come back together.  The
implication, of course, is that she's his match.
Unfortunately, the events surrounding their social intercourse is the stuff
of pure soap opera, which wind up bogging the film down, such as when
Prentice is arrested for some indecent highjinks after a rant.  In
addition, there's a distracting and way too obvious subplot concerning
Kim's brother-in-law, whose infertility brings into question his definition
of manliness.
Writer Marchant's brushstrokes are far too broad: Prentice is rough-edged,
Kim is refined and softly-spoken (although in most scenes her masculinity
is as obvious as a five o'clock shadow).  When they groove to the sounds of
"The Only Ones" in Prentice's hovel of an apartment, it's oddly moving,
their contrasting dance styles distinguishing the roles they have chosen in
life.  But it's one of the few sequences that really work in the picture.
A voyeuristically uncomfortable scene, in which Prentice asks to see Kim's
surgically-altered body for himself, comes across as gratuitous rather than
pivotal, as if seeing a naked transsexual formed the initial conceit behind
this film.
At times director Richard Spence seems more concerned with the
industrialized landscape of the London Docklands than he does the
interaction between Prentice and Kim, utilizing unnecessarily dramatic
crane shots and thunderous rock music to contrast the unfolding human drama.
Graves and Mackintosh give a good account of themselves but "Different for
Girls" simply doesn't have the courage to examine forcefully the issues at
its center.  In fact, for a film that claims to be different, it's
remarkably--and disappointingly--mainstream.
