Title
Review for Sling Blade (1996)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Christopher Null
     Unlike most critics, I've been largely unimpressed with Billy Bob
Thornton's work in the past.  From ONE FALSE MOVE to A FAMILY THING,
I've always found his writing to lack depth and miss a true focus.
     But then there's SLING BLADE, and with Thornton in complete control
as the writer, director, and star of the show, I do believe he's created
a real gem.
     SLING BLADE has its origins in Thornton's little-seen (and kind of
dull) short film, "Some Folks Call It a Sling Blade."  The short, a
10-minute black and white affair, is actually incorporated -- nearly
verbatim -- into the feature.  It presents to us the character of Karl,
a mentally deliberate man who, as a boy, killed his mother and her lover
some 25 years ago.  After a long spell in the mental hospital, Karl is
"well" and is being released into the world.
     That's where the short film ends, and that's where my plot
description ends as well, because from there on out, SLING BLADE is a
true original.  The film is an American Gothic tale, following Karl's
reluctant return to modern rural Bible Belt society, complete with
small-town closet homosexuals (John Ritter, surprisingly good here),
bigoted rednecks (Dwight Yoakam), and the Frostee Cream.  Unable to deal
with the cacophony of new things, Karl just tunes them out, living in
the garage of his new little friend (Lucas Black) and subsisting on
french fries and mustard, working as a small engine repairman.
     But while Karl is simple, he shows us the complexities of life
through less experienced eyes, and yet the film never wanders into the
campiness of FORREST GUMP.  Inside is to be found a tale of true
friendship, the meaning of love, an amazing morality fable, and some
beautiful imagery.  All of it to be found in the simplest of places.  It
feels slow at times, but the pacing actually enhances the experience of
being pulled in to the Deep South.
     I loved your movie, but don't get cocky, Billy Bob; I want to see
another great one.  After all, *I* know Molly Ringwald was in your short
film...
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Edwin Jahiel
SLING BLADE (1996) *** 1/4. Written & directed by Billy Bob Thornton.
Photography, Barry Markowitz. Editing, Hughes Winborne. Production design,
Clark Hunter. Music, Daniel Lanois. Produced by Brandon Rosser & David L.
Bushell. Cast: Billy Bob Thornton, Dwight Yoakam, J.T. Walsh, John Ritter,
Lucas Black, Natalie Canerday, et al. A Miramax release. 135 minutes. Rated
R (language). At the Art.
With a name like Billy Bob as writer, director and star of a movie, you may
expect a bubba picture about good ol' boys. Instead you get something
decidedly anti-drive-in, serious, somber, excellent in concept, direction
and the protagonist's performance. All this was shot for peanuts.
With a title like "Sling Blade," you may expect theater of blood which
could keep many away from the movie-house. Violence, however, is either
recounted in sedate terms or takes place off-screen. Even so, the
suggestive title was a miscalculation.
Thornton, from Malvern, Arkansas, has had supporting roles in several
films. With his childhood friend Tom Epperson he also scripted the
underrated "A Family Thing" and Carl Franklin's superior and quite bloody
"One False Move" in which he has a major part.
"Sling Blade," set and made in Arkansas, is Thornton's debut as director as
well as star. He plays Karl Childers, who, after a 25-year stay at the
Arkansas Hospital for the criminally insane, is released. The opening -- a
two-part introduction admirable in its simplicity --sets the mood.
First we meet Karl, sitting impassively silent and staring into the
distance, as a fellow inmate (J.T.Walsh) babbles on about his sexual
obsessions. Then Karl, the only thing lit in a darkened room (it's like a
parody of a police interrogation) relates for a journalist how, at age 12
he was the mistreated child of a fundamentalist couple. One day, thinking
that his mother was being raped, he killed a man with a sling blade, a sort
of scythe; then realizing that the act was consensual, he dispatched the
woman.
Now asked if he thinks he can kill again, Karl answers in a masterful set
of triple negatives: "I don't reckon I have no reason to kill nobody."
Leaving the hospital with a bundle of books (all he owns -- he had spent
years re-reading the Bible), he returns to his hometown, a wide spot on the
road.
Karl is not all there mentally, but certainly does not deserve to be called
jeeringly "a retard" by the film's heavy. There's sharpness and intuition
about him, along with kindness and strong feelings. All this does not jump
out at you but keeps coming bit by bit.
Karl stands like a figure S, with his head and stomach thrust forward and
his back hunched up. He has the shuffling walk we associate with old movies
where convicts step out of weeks in The Hole (solitary). His jaw juts out,
his lower lip covers the upper one. He speaks little, slowly and
hesitatingly, breathes heavily, grunts and concludes his phrases with
"hmms" and"mmms."
Yet that strange man is a likable being that one might wish to adopt, like
a stray. That's what happens, in a sense. Most people are kind to him. On
his first night of "freedom," Karl, having nowhere to sleep, returns to the
hospital. Regulations forbid his staying there now, so the director takes
him to his own home for a family dinner and a room. The local rurals are
un-fussily decent too. It helps that Karl is a whiz at fixing small
engines, like lawn mowers. This gets him a modest job in a garage and gains
the respect of many.
Frank makes friends with young Frankie (Lucas Black). The boy's widowed
mother, Linda (Natalie Canerday), works at the local Dollar Store whose
discreetly gay manager is Linda and Frank's best friend.(He is played with
economy by John Ritter, in the most sensitive part I can remember him in).
The cast of dramatis personae is small. The principal ones are essentially
supporting characters to Karl. They are rounded up by  Doyle (country
singer Dwight Yoakam, impressively loutish), Linda's lover. A heavy
drinker, he is constantly and disgustingly abusive of the fatherless Frank
and nasty to Linda, yet he spends most his time in Linda's small house
where he acts in insufferably dictatorial ways. A local fellow is right
when he warns Karl that Doyle is a monster. Why the nice woman puts up with
the monster is inexplicable, unless this indicates a major shortage of
males in the area.
Young Frank soon talks his mother into letting Karl sleep in their garage.
Soon he becomes something like a member of his hosts' small circle --which
does not include Doyle. Only near the end of the film  it became clear to
me that Doyle was a construction worker. A nice bit of irony, since he is
such a destructive man.
>From the start Doyle insults, and jibes at, Karl. He does the same,
however, for his pals. Later, after a fit of violence that resulted in
Linda kicking him out, Doyle returns with apologies. "Well, he's trying,
but God knows for how long" she declares. Frank is more clear-eyed : "He's
lying. I'm not stupid." Sure enough, Doyle proposes marriage  but sets to
Frank conditions worthy of a savage prison guard -- and he wants Karl out
too.
The movie's pace is slow, but none of its scenes is protracted. Whether or
not it would gain by getting trimmed down is something that I cannot decide
on a single viewing. It seems to me, though, that since this is no
ordinary, plot-and-action film but a character driven work, its emphasis on
Karl does make the tempo fit the man's slowness.What is needed from the
audience is that they adopt the old rhythm of a rural South.
Slowness does not mean boredom. There are enough bits of local color and
people's traits to supply threads of realism and unforced humor. Like Karl
diagnosing a sick engine as lacking gasoline. Like Karl and his passion for
french fries. Like the rapport between the two outcasts, the gay man in a
tiny town and Karl. Like a rotund colleague of Linda's, the  Employee of
the Month,who complains about all shoes and brings Karl a bunch of
flowers:"They're not fresh, they're a special at $2.99 plus my 10 %
employee discount."
There is much I will not detail about this film, most of it positive. (Look
for Jim Jarmusch and Robert Duvall in unexpected short appearances).
While the outcome is rather predictable, Karl's part is especially well
done, all the more so since Mr.Thornton had the very difficult task of
directing the movie, directing himself and probably doing daily rewrites.
Inevitably, Thornton-the-actor will bring up the acting of Geoffrey Rush,
the mature David Helfgott in "Shine." It is a pity, especially at
Oscar-time, to have to compare two tour-de-force performances at the
extremes of the spectrum -- apples and oranges: one minimalist, the other
wildly eccentric.
Noticeable in "Sling Blade" is the strategy to keep the visuals underlit,
plain and not colorful. This may be taken too far, too systematically. It
applies to sunny outdoor shots where the characters are often in the shady
part of the image, yet not even lit by reflectors.
The photography uses mostly natural light,but there are times when the
crypt-like darkness of interiors made me think that electricity was
rationed in that part of Arkansas. This causes problems, such as hardly
ever allowing us to get a good look at Linda's face. But no matter.In
ambience, description and speech the film feels authentic. And the last
line is a classic, on a par with the last words of Paul Muni ( "I steal")
in the 1932 "I Am A Fugitive From A Chain Gang." Here, back at the
hospital, asked by his pal how he found the outside world, Karl
replies:"It's too big."
In "The Autobiography of Gertrude Stein" by Alice B. Toklas,  Ms. Stein
says (and I quote from memory) "I always prefer the normal to the abnormal;
it is so much more complex and interesting." Right she is, yet  what  films
like "Sling Blade" and "Shine" have achieved is to make the abnormal as
interesting as the normal.

Author
Scott Renshaw
     Billy Bob Thornton has presented me with a wonderful dilemma in SLING
BLADE:  I don't know where to begin praising him.  There are writers who
get a shot at directing films, and actors who do some writing, and
film-makers who take the occasional turn in front of a camera, but in
most cases you can tell you are watching a writer direct, or an actor
write, or a director act.  In SLING BLADE, you never feel as though you
are watching a writer try to act, or an actor try to direct.  You realize
you are watching a natural born story-teller who understands that the
words, the performers and the images are not discrete elements, but
indivisible parts of a cohesive story.
    In SLING BLADE, that story is an enthralling drama centered around
Karl Childers (Thornton), a mentally handicapped man who has spent the
last 25 of his 37 years in a psychiatric hospital for murdering his mother
and her lover after catching them together.  Deemed fit to return to
society by the state, Karl is released from the hospital and returns to
the small Arkansas town where he grew up.  There he finds work as a
mechanic, and befriends a fatherless boy named Frank Wheatley (Lucas
Black).  Karl is invited to live with Frank and his mother Linda (Natalie
Canerday), but he same welcome is not extended by Linda's abusive
boyfriend Doyle (Dwight Yoakam).  As Karl tries to adjust to life in the
outside world, he finds himself caught in the middle of a growing domestic
crisis, and faced with some challenging decisions.
     Thornton, who co-wrote the acclaimed ONE FALSE MOVE with Tom
Epperson, is a writer who seems to understand every facet of the craft as
though he created it.  His setting, an insular Southern town, is rendered
with a vivid combination of characters and locations; his characters, down
to the last minor player, are given personalities uniquely their own.  But
it is the remarkable dexterity with which Thornton weaves the threads of
his story that makes SLING BLADE so powerful.  It is the story of a
simple-minded man trying to understand Christianity directly from the
source, the Bible, after being schooled in a twisted version of the faith
by his unstable parents.  Even that effort is complicated, however, by an
experience of the world which seems to contradict the Bible, particularly
when he comes to respect Linda's gay friend Vaughan (John Ritter).  Karl's
story is heart-breaking because he always is striving to do the right
thing, but it is terribly hard for him to get his mind around what that
right thing is supposed to be.
     It is a marvelous character Thornton has written for himself, and he
does an astonishing job of bringing Karl to life.  Playing someone with a
mental or emotional handicap is one of the most treacherous assignments in
acting (right up there with playing an alcoholic), because it is so easy
to nail the character's twitches without nailing his soul.  The former can
be achieved through technical proficiency and a gift for mimicry, with
Dustin Hoffman in RAIN MAN and Geoffrey Rush in SHINE as a couple of showy
recent examples.  Neither of those roles, however, showed us a character
trying to grow as a person, and that is what Thornton accomplishes in
SLING BLADE.  Karl is far from oblivious to the world around him; he is
trying to understand morality, atone for his sins and learn from the
wrongs that were done to him.  While Thornton does turn in an exceptional
physical performance, which his polite demeanor and quirky speech
patterns, he does not allow Karl to be defined by the way he talks.  This
isn't a character you feel sorry for, like a pet; this is a man you feel
for as a fellow human being.
     Thornton the director draws similar superb performances from his
entire cast, particularly Dwight Yoakam (yes, _that_ Dwight Yoakam) as the
cruel Doyle.  He is casually chilling as he mixes insults and threats with
chuckles and expressions of endearment as though incapable of telling the
difference, and we can see the pathetic man behind the monster.
Complexities spill over from SLING BLADE, a film so perfectly crafted and
acted from the moment Karl leaves the hospital that I wish Thornton had
reconsidered the first fifteen minutes.  That opening finds Karl
describing his crimes to a reporter in a darkened room, with Thornton
re-creating the stage monologue which inspired the film.  It is an awkward
conceit which gets SLING BLADE off to an uneven start, but it is just as
well Thornton demonstrated imperfection as a director.  With the kind of
flawless work he does as writer and star of SLING BLADE, he might have
become positively insufferable if he had directed a perfect film as well.

Author
Walter Frith
Actor, writer and director Billy Bob Thornton has created a sharply
perceptive film entitled 'Sling Blade'.  A mentally retarted, middle
aged man named Carl (Billy Bob Thornton) is released from a mental
institution where he was sent as a young boy for murdering his mother
and her lover after catching them red handed at commiting adultery.
The film begins with the surroundings of the institution where Carl
mingles with other patients of the asylum and grants an interview with
the assistance of his doctor to a young girl writing for her school
newspaper.  There is a monlogue of eerie dialogue in which the camera
doesn't cut away for quite sometime as Carl is speaking which instantly
develops his character quickly, drawing the audience in and making Carl
a strong protagonist.
Carl is due for release a short time later, and tells his doctor that
the hospital is all he's ever known and that he wants to stay.  The
kindness shown by his doctor helps Carl greatly as he lands a job
fixing small engines for farm and gardening equipment at a local shop
and Carl befriends a young boy during the process of his release and
comes to find that the boy's mother is involved in a relationship with
an abusive man (Dwight Yokum).  His mother's best friend is the manager
of a supermarket (John Ritter --- yes, that's right, Jack Tripper from
'Three's Company' and barely recognizable with Buddy Holly glasses and
a weird hairdo) who is a homosexual and this is where 'Sling Blade'
becomes important and symbolic.
The underlying message of this movie is tolerance and acceptance of
those in our society and Thornton has directed the film with a quiet
sense of maturity and surprising sensitivity. There are moments in the
film of conflict and tension in which Carl is present but doesn't
participate yet Thornton acts it out as if Carl understands all the
while exactly what is going on but is powerless to do anything.  There
is wonderful use of the music score in 'Sling Blade' as a lot of the
quiet and tender moments are blended together with soft tones of
musical riffs which are barely audible at time but enhance the scenes
they're in greatly and it's still hard to believe that in an age where
the average film can cost thirty to forty million dollars to produce
that Thornton had this one made for only one million dollars.
'Sling Blade' has earned Thornton 1997 Oscar nominations for Best Actor
and Best Screenplay Adaptaion and they are nominations that are more
than deserving and Thornton has established himself as a talented force
to be associated with and the studios ought to take note of this man
whose 'Sling Blade' will be a gem talked about for years to come.

Author
Ben Hoffman
>From the opening scene in an asylum for the criminally insane to the
film's inevitable end, we are caught up in a marvelously
tense film that moves inexorably to its climax.  While the story is
grim but fascinating, the great performance of Billy Bob Thornton as
Karl Childers is worthy of Oscar nomination.
Karl Childers is slightly retarded, enough so that his slack-jawed
expression never changes. Before he speaks you can see the wheels in
his head turning and mulling over what he is about to say.  And when he
has spoken, his sentence is punctuated with a kind of grunt as if
getting the words out was difficult..  Add to his facial expression
that he walks with a slight forward stoop as his feet seem to pound the
very ground he walks on, and you have an unforgettable character and
one wonderful acting performance that is sustained throughout the
entire film.
Childers is in the asylum because he caught his mother and the town
bully nude in bed. Believing that what they were doing was wrong,
wrong, wrong, he kills them with a whack of his sling blade.  As the
film opens, he is sitting near a window with another inmate, Charles,
(J. T. Walsh) as Charles expounds on some of his deeds.  This is
greeted with utter silence by Childers.  Now it time for Childers to be
released from the asylum.  He has served his time of 25 years and is
now declared "cured" and must leave despite his not wanting to go into
the outside world.  But the law is the law and the law says he cannot
legally remain in the asylum.
The story now takes on new dimensions.  Karl is a talented mechanic
who, with the warden's help, gets a job.  Karl meets the youngster,
Frank, (Lucas Black) who befriends him; a first for Karl who is
accustomed to always being judged.  Frank talks his mother, Linda,
(Natalie Canerday) into letting Karl live with them but a problem
arises in the form of a frequently drunk and vicious boyfriend of
Linda's, Doyle (Dwight Yoakam).  Vaughan Cunningham (Jack Ritter) is
Linda's best friend, gay, who is attempting to live unobtrusively in
Bible Belt country; not easy, especially with the abusive Doyle around
to upbraid him for his homosexuality.
Karl witnesses everything that is happening in the house and one of his
fears is that the young Frank will be beaten by the drunken Doyle,
Without saying a word, Frank's thoughts are conveyed to us and we know
that things will shortly take a new turn.
Everyone in the film does more than justice to their role but Billy Bob
Thornton is phenomenal. Star of the film, writer and director,
Thornton has turned in a great film.  This should not be entirely
unexpected as, although this is his directorial debut in a full-length
film and the first film he has written by himself, he co-authored with
Tom Epperson the excellent A FAMILY THING.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Mental institutions for the criminally insane can house some
pretty harmless looking characters.  One such gentle soul is Karl
Childers (Billy Bob Thornton, a character actor in many shows including
ONE FALSE MOVE, TOMBSTONE, and DEAD MAN).  Karl appears like he
wouldn't harm the proverbial fly.  He just sits stoically staring out
the window as fellow inmate Charles Bushman (J. T. Walsh in a cameo
role) tells of renting a prostitute who turns out to be male.  Nothing
fazes Karl.
     Peaceful Karl is the lead of Miramax's SLING BLADE, Miramax is
billing as a "southern gothic tale."  This is a small picture that
feels like it was originally a short story, and it is not easy to
characterize.  I went to a special advance screening knowing nothing,
not even the name of the picture.  If you like films where the acting
takes center stage, then SLING BLADE is the film for you.  Calling it a
southern gothic tale works about as good as anything I could have come
up with.  It reminded me somewhat of BEING THERE, RAINMAN, and other
movies, but it is fairly unique.
     Besides being an actor, Billy Bob Thornton is an accomplished
screenwriter.  He crafted the innovative scripts for ONE FALSE MOVE and
A FAMILY THING.  In SLING BLADE, he does the script and, for the first
time, tries his hand at directing.  The film, which won a standing
ovation at the New York Film Festival, has a single problem.
Thornton's pacing too often bogs down.  Certainly, this is a film you
want to take leisurely, but he goes overboard on the slowness.  The
acting, on the other hand, is so involving that one can easily overlook
this flaw.  I'd give Thornton an Oscar nomination for best actor if it
were me, but I'm sure this obscure picture will be overlooked by the
members of the Academy.  Thornton has the speech cadence, the physical
mannerism, and the overall presence of a southern hick with an IQ in
the low double digits.
     "I reckon, I'm gon'na have to get use to lookin' at pretty
people," Karl tells Warden Jerry Woolridge (James Hampton) after a
plain looking girl from a high school newspaper interviews Karl before
he is released from prison.  She can not understand why they are
releasing him since twenty-five years ago he killed his mother and her
lover with a sling blade.  The warden shrugs and says he has served his
time, and since he has been ruled no longer insane, they have to let
him go.
     Even though he is a killer, his gentle presence and slow walk
immediately wins the audience's heart.  Karl finds the outside world
unbearably frightening.  He goes to the Dairy Queen where the counter
help (director Jim Jarmusch in a cameo role) wants to know what Karl
wants.  This is a tough question for Karl.  You feel like crying for
the poor guy.  Finally, he has Jarmusch just recommend something.
     After Karl freaks out and returns to his prison home, the warden
gets him a job back in town working as a repairman for Bill Cox (Rick
Dial).  In an ongoing subtheme, many of the sane people in the film,
like Cox's worker Scooter Hodges (Brent Briscoe), have less effective
smarts than Karl.
     Karl goes to live with Linda Wheatley (Natalie Canderday) and her
son Frank (Lucas Black II from the TV show "American Gothic").  Their
life has been almost as traumatic as Karl's.  Frank's father blew his
brains out with a shotgun, and his mother is dating an abusive redneck
named Doyle Hargraves (Dwight Yoakam).
     Karl and Frank strike up a friendship, and Karl becomes the Daddy
Frank never had.  The dialog between them is touching and reminiscent
of that from BEING THERE.  At this point in the film, I had no idea
where the movie was going.
     "You think I'm scared of you staying here?  You're just a humped
over retard.  ...  Welcome to our humble house," Doyle greets Frank
when he comes to live at Linda's house.  Doyle is so dumb and
prejudiced that he is easy to hate, but this is not the typical
overacted redneck part.  Yoakam gives a highly controlled performance
of a guy so ignorant that he almost gets your sympathy until he opens
his mouth.  Actually all of the characters are quite genuine.  Even
Robert Duvall appears in an important cameo role as Karl's long absent
and abusive father.
     John Ritter appears as Linda's coworker and friend Vaughan
Cunningham.  Since he is one of the few openly gay people in the small
town, he is subject to much derision from Doyle.  The irony is that
Karl, Vaughan, and Frank are all much more of a man that Doyle.  Doyle
is little more than the shadow of a man.
     Since Karl seems so serious about everything, people are convinced
he is some sort of a sage.  At a coffee shop, Vaughan asks him, "You
seem like a thinker.  You seem to always be deep in thought.  So what
are you thinking right now?"  After Karl's trademark pregnant pause, he
says, "I'm thinking I could take more of these po'taters."
     Linda tells Karl she has invited her coworker Melinda (Christy
Ward) over the next day as his date for dinner and asks him what he
thinks about that.  "I reckon I wouldn't mind a little supper."  The
terse script has a poetic quality to it.  It is touchingly humorous,
but I rarely laughed in the film.  I guess I was so wrapped up in
feeling sorry for and worrying about my new friend Karl.
     The cinematography by Barry Markowitz is naturalistic with the
warm glow of a few incandescent bulbs.  The sets by Clark Hunter have
lower class southern homes down pat.  The houses are clean but
cluttered with cheap furniture and tacky memorabilia.  The music by
Daniel Lanois knows just when to switch to peaceful melodies.  Even the
sound by Jeff Kushner has an extra serenity thanks to abundant use of
the southern minstrels - crickets.  Technically, a well constructed
film for one that clearly had to survive on a fairly low budget.
     Most films fad in our minds like the setting sun.  I suspect SLING
BLADE will too, but I will long remember the lovely performance of
Billy Bob Thornton.  Every halting movement of Karl's was touching.
>From the way he kept his mouth shut tight with his lower lip swallowing
his upper to the way he stared at situations trying to parse their
meanings to his delightful aphorisms, his acting was near perfect.  I
can not imagine any other actor approaching the role in a more
convincing and captivating manner.  An acting tour de force you don't
want to miss.
     SLING BLADE runs 2:15.  It is rated R for some profanity and one
scene of strong but off screen violence.  There is no sex or nudity.
The film would be fine for teenagers.  This is a tender show even given
its prejudice and overriding threat of violence.  I recommend this
little picture to you and give it ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Michael Redman
Recently things have changed in the world of cinema. Not only are
independent films capturing top awards, but one of the most successful
auteurs around is named "Billy Bob".
Billy Bob Thornton wrote, directed and starred in the most disturbing
film in recent memory. The movie was made for an incredibly low $1
million, sold to Miramax for $10 million and is well on its way towards
earning many times that for the studio.
Thornton plays Karl Childers who returns home to his rural southern town
after spending 25 years in a "nervous hospital". At the age of 12,
Childers murdered his mother and her lover misunderstanding the
situation. Now he reckons that the doctor thinks he's cured. Un huh.
Gentle to a fault, the simple man is much more complicated than you
might expect. Making close friends with a young boy as a result of a
chance meeting, he is drawn to his new family. Young fatherless Frank
Wheatley (Lucas Black) likes the way Karl talks (un huh) and appreciates
the protection he offers from his mother Linda's (Natalie Canderday)
drunken abusive boyfriend Doyle (an all-too-convincing Dwight Yoakam).
Linda's best friend, the gay effeminate Vaughan is played convincingly
by, of all people, John Ritter.
Karl speaks with a halting yet confident Old Testament view of the
world. Guilty of not only the double murders, but also of involvement in
an even more unspeakable crime, he is searching for redemption for his
sins committed from a distorted innocence.
The portrayal of the redneck life that exists in this small town is both
frightening and compassionate. Country singer Yoakam's drunken rage is
particularly convincing as he instantly alternates from slapping around
Frank to begging forgiveness to threatening to kill Linda. Life in the
fast and desperate lane.
The ending is telegraphed from the beginning. The audience knows what is
going to happen and it is somewhat of a disappointment when it does. The
film isn't about a surprise finale, but rather the inescapable one. The
players are set into motion and no power on earth can stop what is to
be.
Billy Bob's Karl is a masterpiece of characterization. No Forest Gump,
the virtuous murderer is an intense image that you'll be seeing in your
mind's eye for a long time.
[This appeared in the 4/10/97 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington Indiana.
Michael Redman can be contacted at mredman@bvoice.com ]

Author
Jun Yan
        I still can't help the chuckles when I see the TV commercials for
this movie.  It portraits the main character Karl Childers as a "hero" and
makes the movie appear like Forrest Gump, while it is exactly the opposite
of Forrest Gump and a less expensive, but far more complex creation.  
        The film opens as a high school newspapers reporter interviews
Karl Childers (played by Billy Bob Thornton), a mentally retarded man who
has been kept in State mental institute for 25 years for killing his
mother and her lover when they were having an affair.  He was then 12 and
slaughtered them in a rage with a sling blade.  Here Thornton gives an
expressionless yet intense performance with the strange speech patthern
and facial composure that reveals nothing inside him except a few twitches
of the eyebrow.  The lighting was especially dim, which, I imagine,
implies the dark nature of the whole film.  
        Soon after the interview Karl is released from the hospital and
returns to the small town where he was born and raised.  The film goes to
great detail to describe his status unfit for the world outside of him.
For some unexplained reason, Karl refuses to go back to his father, who
has been living in the same town all these years.  The point is raised and
dismissed quickly.  The good-hearted hospital administrator goes through
the trouble to arrange a job at local mechanics for Karl.  Karl also makes
friend with a boy Frank (played by Lucas Black), who likes him so much
that he persuades his mother to let Karl stay in their garage.  
        The fatherless Frank and Karl develop an unusual affection for
each other.  The similar intelligence make them friends and the difference
in age kind of turns Karl into a father figure for Frank.  The two have
several scenes talking to each other about their past and present that are
terribly touching and well-performed.  The repetition is a little obvious
here, but the mood created by the director and the dialogue make up for
it.  
        Frank's trouble lies in his mother Linda (played by Natalie
Canerday)'s boyfriend Doyle (played by country singer Dwight Yoakam), a
"white trash" who is abusive and unstable.  Doyle and Frank's conflict
is obvious from the very beginning.  The tension grows and leads to a
"predictable" ending.  
        As the writer, director and actor of this film, Billy Bob Thornton
has done a quite amazingly good job, but I have to say it's his writing
that's the BEST.  Everything seems quite obvious and predictable at first,
but there is always an uneasiness underneath it, and the more I think of
it, the more I realize it's not the case at all.  First, the town looks
like such a typical southern small town, in which everyone's nice and
kind.  Despite of Karl's homocidal past, the mechanical shop owner hires
him immediately and even buys him lunch.  Linda quickly allows Karl moving
in even though she's a widow living with a child.  The unalarming southern
accent carefully plays on our bias trained by the stereotypes that
the rural people are simple-minded and good-hearted.  Quietly, the movie
slips in messages that are not that pleasant.  First it's Linda's boss
(played wonderfully by John Ritter) who is a good man, but under a great
deal of hostility because he's gay.  Then, there is Doyle, who is
obviously a very unlikable red-neck, who drinks, talks dirty, verbally
abusive and treats children badly (that's a big sign for "villain").  For
some strange reasons, Linda still stick with him even though she doesn't
fit the pattern of "low self-esteem" at all.  
        The film reveals more and more disturbing facts as the story
unfolds:  Frank tells Karl that his father committed suicide because he
lost his job and was ashamed of not able to provide for his family; the
John Ritter character says to Karl that his family are "very mean and
unkind people" and the way he says it makes me wonder; Doyle behaves
violently after getting drunk on a party and a big fight breaks out among
Linda, Doyle and Frank;  the anger and violent tendency displayed by Frank
is alarming and disturbing.  But the most unusual scene is when Karl goes
back to his old house and visits his father (played by Robert Duvall).  We
see a terribly deserted house in which the old man sits in the couch
almost motionless amongst the garbage (I could almost smell the disgusting
house) not much better than a corpes.  Karl says, "I'm your boy."  Yet,
the father insists monotonously, "I ain't got no boy."  Karl delivers
perhaps the most revealing lines in the whole film: "I have studies the
Bible a lot.  The things Mama and you taught me ain't in there." (not
exact words)  On screen for only several minutes, Robert Duvall's
character is probably the most pathetic creature on screen I've seen.
Given extremely limited information, we can only glimpse into Karl's
childhood with twisted parental guidance and great psychological damage.
When he was about 6 years old, his mother had a premature baby boy.
Because they didn't want it, Karl was told to throw it in the dumpster
even though it was alive.  
        It was the horror reflected in the present state of Karl that
takes me aback and makes me question just how normal is
such a small town's life.  Suddenly I'm reminded of something said by
Shelock Holmes that even the filthiest gutter in big cities cannot hide
evil as effectively as romote countryside.  And no one in the film seems
that normal anymore.  
        This movie has some characteristics of Billy Bob Thornton's style
displayed previously in "One False Move" which he cowrote.  One is the
subtle emphasis on the characters' dark, secret past that affect their
present life and the deep, complex nature of human psychology and
motivation.  Why does one choose to do what he does?  The ultimate
question here is: why does Karl kill Doyle? To prevent Doyle hurting
Frank and 
Linda? To prevent Frank's rage turns the boy into another Karl?  Does he
think because he has killed before and is doomed to go to hell, he can
kill again for the boy's benefit?   There are also other questions just as
puzzling and the writer gives no obvious answer: Why does Linda continue
an obviously unhappy relationship with a guy like Doyle and even decides
to marry him?  Just how retarded is Karl?  He carefully calculates the
murder of Doyle and prepares it with the precision of a mad man, but
certainly not a retarded man.  What's the significance of religion to
these people?  Karl gets himself baptised, indicating his willingness to
"be good," then why did he choose killing that he KNOWS will bring him to
hell?  
        Another strength of this film is the characters.  Like "One False
Move" but even more ambiguously, he establishes complicated peripheral
characters as well as the central one Karl.  They seem to fit into certain
formulas but then they really don't.  Is Doyle the bad guy?  He's not
unaware of his offensive talk and behavior.  He appears quite smart and
manipulative with words.  He establishes dominance skillfully with
threats.  He's also a coward easily bent under power.  You can see clearly
that he's constantly testing other people's limit to tolerate him and
accept his control.  Is he violent?  He certainly appears to be with
unstable mood and acts, but if you look carefully, he didn't really beat
up anyone except pushing Linda once.  However, the viewers always get the
impression that he's dangerous, partly due to his unpredictability.  Is
Karl the good guy?  He kills Doyle is such a cold-bloodly fashion that one
has to question his sanity and morality.  Maybe there is no answer to good
and evil, only the unsolved mystery of human behavior. 
        Nothing is what you see and what it appears to be.  This film is
full of twists and turns and irony.  Many cliches are presented in a
familiar but slightly different way that produce a completely troubling
response.  The feelings are strange, yet strangly natural and genuine.
It's a very dark and disturbing study of psychological issue while
providing numerous comical scenes and dialogues.  I'm totally at awe with
Thornton's writing, which the more you dig, the more unexpected meanings
you find.  The casting is also rather weird, but very effective.  The
directing is successful in creating mood and style that affect the
audience, while some parts can be improved.  I have a feeling that
Thornton did not intend to create a masterpiece and make it grand and
perfect.  The dialogue is unsurpassed by any film I saw last year.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Very little seen but central to the film TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD is
the figure of Boo Radley, played by Robert Duvall in his theatrical
cinema debut.  For years Radley has been his town's legendary monster
stemming from an act of seemingly senseless violence against his own
family.  Radley is, in reality, a simple and likable man who redeems
himself by another act of violence, a revolt against the hatred of
others.  Radley is not responsible for his own violence, but focuses
the callousness and evil around him, redirecting it back at its origin.
A nearly identical character--right down to having his shirt sleeves
too long--is Karl Childers, the center of an enigmatic black comedy
that is at times horrifying and at others amiable.  SLING BLADE was
written by, directed by, and stars Billy Bob Thornton.  It is an
expansion of the short film "Some Folks Call It a Sling Blade,"
directed by George Hickenlooper but also written by and directed by
Thornton.  In both films he plays Karl Childers a patient in an
Arkansas state mental institution.  Life there would not be bad if he
did not have to be immersed in the sadistic sexual recountings of
another patient, a predator played superbly by J. T. Walsh.
     Karl is given a chance to tell his own story to a visiting
reporter and though presented in a horrifying manner we begin to see
Karl as a victim, yet somehow one without an ounce of self-pity.  If we
blame Karl's parents for his condition, it is our decision and not
Karl's.  Karl remains completely dispassionate about his past and his
ability to do so makes his even more disturbing.  Maintaining through
the film a stone-like face with jutting lower lip he never shows any
emotion.  We are never sure what is happening behind that face and
indeed when one of the characters probes later in the film we find it
is either nothing or more likely it is well-hidden.  Reportedly up to
Karl telling his own story was all there was to Hickenlooper's original
short film, but Thornton was apparently intrigued by the character he
had written and played.  SLING BLADE continues the story with Karl
being released into what is for him a bewildering world.
     Karl is out for just a few hours when he befriends a boy about
twelve, Frank (Lucas Black) with roughly Karl's own mental capacity.
Karl and the unquestioning Frank become fast friends and he is accepted
almost as a family member in Frank's distressed family.  That Frank's
mother Linda (Natalie Canderday) accepts Karl seems almost more
believable than her acceptance of her own abusive boy friend Doyle
(Dwight Yoakam).  Doyle is a bad ol' boy who verbally savages Karl,
Frank, and Vaughan (John Ritter), Linda's gay boss.
     The plot from this point follows a predictable path, but the story
is not as important as the style and the textured look at life in a
small Arkansas town.  One can tell when a script is respected by the
people who agree to be in small roles in the film.  In SLING BLADE one
spots several familiar faces in tiny roles including Jim Jarmusch as an
ice cream stand boy and Robert Duvall in a tiny part as Karl's father,
perhaps as an allusion to his own Boo Radley role.  The photography is
usually a bit straightforward and not as interesting as it could be,
but as a first-time director Thornton has a sure hand.  And he writes a
script that is by turns sad, horrifying, and funny.  If the ending is a
little too neat, it also is clever and ironic.
     The subject matter may not be to everybody's taste but the film is
a winner on just about all counts.  Rate this one a +3 on the -4 to +4
scale.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(Mirimax)
Directed by     Billy Bob Thornton
Written by      Billy Bob Thornton
Cast            Billy Bob Thornton, Lucas Black, Dwight Yoakam, Natalie
                Canderday, John Ritter, James Hampton, J.T. Walsh
MPAA Rating     "R" (presumably for violence and language)
Running Time    125 minutes
Reviewed at     The Studio, Raleigh, N.C. (14FEB97)
    Who is Billy Bob Thornton?  Well, he's an actor (DEAD MAN, INDECENT
PROPOSAL, CHOPPER CHICKS IN ZOMBIETOWN), a writer (ONE FALSE MOVE, A
FAMILY THING), and, now, a director.  SLING BLADE, the story of a gentle
giant who returns to his rural Arkansas hometown years after murdering
his mother and his mother's lover, is Thornton's first time behind the
camera.  His direction is good, very good, but his writing and acting--
both on display here-- are the stuff of Oscar nominations.  (And the
stuff of head-scratching.  I wonder how many people think that Joe Bob
*Briggs* is up for Best Actor and Best Adapted Screenplay?) Thornton's
performance as Karl, the slow-moving, slower-speaking small-engine whiz,
is mesmerizing.  He's Forrest Gump with fewer laughs and darker
thoughts.  Much darker thoughts.  Karl ends up staying with a young boy
(Lucas Black) and his single mom (Natalie Canerday) and, after we've met
her abusive boyfriend (Dwight Yoakam, excellent), the outcome of the
story is no longer in question.  SLING BLADE is many things, including a
catalog of unspeakable small-town (Southern?) horrors.  No, nothing is
shown on screen, but they add a grim-- and at times gruesome-- subtext
to an equally endearing and, even, hilarious tale.  Uh huh.
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
I'm also on the Web!  http://www.pagesz.net/~legeros/

Author
John Bauer
Sometimes it is difficult to *not* resist the hype surrounding a movie.  We
are so saturated with media pronouncements of greatness that it seems nothing
could ever fulfill our heightened expectations.  So it is with pleasure that
I can say that the subtle charms of SLING BLADE were able to overcome the
burden of lavish praise.
For such a low-key film, this is no mean feat.  There are no sumptuous
landscapes to sweep you away, no grand acting gestures to amuse and
entertain, not really much in the way of high drama to rivet your attention.
 What we get instead is a small tale with big implications, just as a brief
shot of a man on a railroad bridge imparts nothing directly but conveys much
through the image.
The reason the story carries so much weight lies mainly in the performance of
writer-director Billy Bob Thornton.  Like a less fantastical Forrest Gump,
his character Karl Childers is earnest but somewhat dim.  Unlike the former's
humorous intersections with American history, however, Karl's earnestness
leads him to real trouble.  And when Karl finally concludes near the end of
the film that in his little piece of Arkansas "the world is too large," we
readily sympathize.
The heart of the film is about Karl's relationship with a fatherless boy,
well-played by Lucas Black.  But its soul is about Karl's struggle for
redemption and a place in the world.  Karl counts among his few possessions a
Bible which he claims to have read, though he doesn't understand much of it.
 On the surface, as another character suggests, that makes sense:  the Bible
is incomprehensible to most of us.  But for Karl the things we most readily
accept -- such as the sinfulness of murder -- assume a complexity that forces
him into tragic paradoxes.  In part this is because he is incapable of
understanding the complications of ordinary life that we take for granted;
but he is also a victim of our need for order, for justice in black and
white.
There are some holes in the script, the biggest being the all-too-easy
acceptance of Karl by the small town society he encounters.  I would think
that his crimes would make him infamous and something of a bogeyman around
town; rather, he is practically greeted with open arms wherever he goes.
 There are other, lesser tugs at credibility as well.
But in the end these do not matter.  The essentials of the story are strong
enough to hold our attention and meaningful enough to penetrate our
consciousness.  In crafting a small-town morality play that speaks to us all,
Billy Bob Thornton has made his world large indeed.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Billy Bob Thornton, Lucas Black, Dwight Yoakam, Natalie Canderday, 
      John Ritter, James Hampton, J.T. Walsh, Robert Duvall
Director: Billy Bob Thornton
Producers: David L. Bushell, Brandon Rosser
Screenplay: Billy Bob Thornton
Cinematography: Barry Markowitz
Music: Daniel Lanois
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films 
     SLING BLADE, the directorial debut of actor/writer Billy Bob 
Thornton (who scripted ONE FALSE MOVE and A FAMILY THING), is a 
fascinating examination of a damaged man's quest to make restitution for 
his past crimes.  To a lesser extent, it also offers an atypical vision 
of the concept of "family" in modern society.  Thornton has developed 
SLING BLADE as a slowly-paced character study.  Nearly every scene is 
designed to reveal something about one of characters rather than advance 
the minimalist story.  The narrative is little more than a flimsy 
envelope -- it's the men and women who are sealed within that make SLING 
BLADE worth watching.  
     The best acting in the entire motion picture is by Thornton 
himself.  He plays Karl Childers, a "mentally challenged" man who has 
been incarcerated in the Arkansas State Hospital for the criminally 
insane since the age of nine, when he butchered his mother and her lover 
with a sling blade.  As the film opens, Karl is being released from the 
hospital.  According to the doctors, he has been cured.  By Karl's own 
admission, he doesn't reckon he's got a reason to kill anyone else.  But 
we in the audience aren't so sure.  His rough, gravely voice is 
intimidating, and his nervous mannerisms -- constantly rubbing his hands 
together, uttering "uh-huh"s every few words, and never meeting anyone 
else's gaze -- do not inspire confidence.  Is he still dangerous, or 
just the "gentle, simple man" others see him to be?
     It's not an easy question, and SLING BLADE doesn't insult us with 
an easy answer.  Despite his low IQ, Karl is every bit as complex as any 
other human being -- if not moreso.  There's a little bit of FORREST 
GUMP in him.  His mental simplicity makes him strangely compelling and 
likable, regardless of his bloody history and uncertain future.  
     Once Karl is out of the hospital, he goes to work as a mechanic in 
the small town where he was born (and where he committed his crime).  He 
befriends a fatherless young boy, Frank Wheatley (Lucas Black), and, 
after meeting Frank's mother, Linda (Natalie Canderday), is invited to 
live in their garage.  Frank is glad to have Karl around, not just 
because he yearns for a father-figure, but because he's afraid of 
Linda's often-drunk, abusive boyfriend, Doyle (Dwight Yoakam), and 
believes that Karl's presence will keep Doyle in line.  Meanwhile, 
Linda's friend and boss, Vaughan Cunningham (John Ritter), is concerned 
about a stranger living with Frank and Linda, and decides to keep an eye 
on the newcomer.
     It could be argued that the ending is predictable, but I think 
"inevitable" is a better word.  The audience sees the resolution long 
before any of SLING BLADE's characters do, but that's because we're more 
removed from the situation than they are.  The film builds to a 
perfectly-fitting, climactic moment.  The key scene is not overplayed, 
nor are the ramifications.
     When we first meet Karl in SLING BLADE's prologue, he is a strange, 
sinister figure recounting his history to a local high school newspaper 
reporter.  As we get to know him, however, we come to understand the 
depth of his personality, and the manner in which personal tragedies 
have formed his character.  By bonding with Frank, Karl sees a path to 
redemption, a way to salve the wounds inflicted by his two long-ago 
misdeeds (the double murder and an equally horrifying crime that he was 
an accomplice to).  In the process, he illustrates how much more there 
is to being a father than supplying sperm and applying a "firm hand".  
Karl seeks to save Frank the way his own father was unable to save him.
     While Thornton's performance is obviously the standout, there are a 
number of noteworthy turns by supporting actors.  Lucas Black and 
Natalie Canderday are both believable, and John Ritter is surprisingly 
effective playing against type as an effeminate homosexual.  Dwight 
Yoakam goes a little over-the-top as the despicable Doyle, but that's 
the nature of the character.  SLING BLADE also features cameos by some 
impressive names:  Robert Duvall (Karl's father), J.T. Walsh (a fellow 
inmate at the hospital), and Jim Jarmusch (an ice cream salesman).
     SLING BLADE runs for a little longer than it needs to, and there 
are a few scenes that border on being too cute (such as one where Karl's 
"date" from the previous evening gives him flowers), but, in general, 
it's a fine motion picture.  Karl is sufficiently interesting to hold 
our attention for more than two hours, and, if the resolution of his 
dilemma is obvious, watching him arrive at it makes SLING BLADE 
worthwhile.  Billy Bob Thornton has done some interesting things with 
this film; his next project should be worth the wait.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
