Title
Review for Nutty Professor, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Steve Rhodes
     On the way back from three days at the parent-child Space Camp
with my son where he and I heard and saw what exemplifies the best in
America, the whole family stopped to see the remake of THE NUTTY
PROFESSOR.  In quite a contrast, the construction of this movie is
symptomatic of much of the current degradation of our society.
     In the remake, producers Brian Grazer and Russell Simmon manage to
transform a simple kids' comedy into the filthiest kids' movie I can
ever remember seeing.  Certainly the show does have many funny parts,
and Eddie Murphy does demonstrates tremendous acting bandwidth,
nevertheless, as a picture marketed to youngsters and where the
audience is filled with kids under ten, this film exemplifies all that
is wrong in Hollywood today.
     Don't misread me.  I am a libertarian when it comes to films.  If
produces want movies overflowing with bad language, that is a judgment
call they get to make.  In some movies it works (PULP FICTION or
GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS) and others it doesn't (GIRLS TOWN).  However, in
shows where the trailers make it look like good humored fun for kids,
where the original movie was silly and innocent, where you know that a
large portion of the audience will be kids under 10 and where the
rating is PG-13, one should not expect a constant stream of filthy
language including crude sexual jokes about mothers.
     A few years ago, this movie would certainly have gotten an R,
which would, of course, have decreased the box office take.  To me this
movie speaks volumes about the state of the country.  Adults should
have their shows, but why do we think children should be taught the B
and the N words?  Do we want them to use them to their friends?  Do we
want them to begin insulting each other with horrible sexual innuendoes
about each other's mothers?
     The movie does have some good aspects and several big laughs,
although not near enough for an adult audience.  The film opens with
enormously fat Professor Sherman Klump (Eddie Murphy) watching a
Richard Simmons look-alike doing an exercise show on television.  The
film starts off quite promisingly.  The professor is a brilliant, but
nerdy scientist.  He accidentally released hundreds of hamsters around
the campus.  My favorite small scene has one of them running up one
student's leg.
     The plot by writers Barry Blaustein, Steve Oedekerk, Tom Shadyac,
and David Sheffield starts off to be a comedy with some serious
messages.  The movie has the professor inventing a drug to become thin.
The messages surround how hard it is to get thin and how fat people are
stigmatized and humiliated by society.  The first message is
trivialized, and the second is contradicted.  The movie turns into a
diatribe against fat people regardless of the movie's tacked on and
moralistic ending.  As a person who was fat for the first twenty years
of my life and who then lost one hundred pounds (to 135) and kept it
off for the last thirty, I am well aware of the importance of the
messages that this show only flirts with.
     The show by director Tom Shadyac (ACE VENTURA: PET DETECTIVE) soon
goes straight for the gutter.  In an impressive acting demonstration by
Murphy we have him playing all of the roles of a large family with
obese members.  In a horrible caricature, they are extremely gross with
a grandmother with a very foul mouth and a father who engages other
members of the family in seeing who can let off the most gas during
dinner.
     Other scenes in the movie, thank goodness, do work better.  In a
nightmare scene, the professor sees himself on the operating table.
The doctors look on in horror as one shrieks, "He's getting fatter, and
we can't stop it!"  Looking like he will explode at any moment he gets
out of the hospital only to become a GODZILLA sized creature who
terrorizes the city.
     Like an alcoholic, the professor wakes one morning after a night
of binging to finally proclaim that is the last time.  After that the
show becomes a fat and thin version of DR. JEKYLL AND MR. HYDE.
     The professor's alter ego is an obnoxious and self-centered
creature who calls him self Buddy Love.  Of course, he is out to steal
the professor's girlfriend, Carla Purty (Jada Pinkett).  Murphy, who
was so touching in COMING TO AMERICA, does his crude nightclub routine
though most of the show.  That he can play seven roles is an amazing
testament to his inherent talents and to some great special make-up
effects by Rick Baker, but why couldn't the sweet Murphy come out when
the picture calls for it? Why?
     THE NUTTY PROFESSOR runs 1:35.  It is an R picture, but with an
MPAA rating of PG-13.  Do not take kids under 13 to see the show, and I
would prefer to see teenagers be mature before going.  Although we
tried to get him to leave, Jeffrey (age 7) refused.  In the end he gave
the film a thumbs sideways.  We developed a new family rule after the
film that whenever a parent says leave, there are no more negotiations.
We try to investigate PG-13 films, but were lolled by the innocent
trailers and the name of the picture to think this one would be okay.
I do not recommend this lame picture to any age group, and I give it *
1/2 for a few nice laughs and excellent special effects.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Eddie Murphy (Prof. Sherman Klump, Buddy Love, the entire Klump
family), Jada Pinkett (Clara Purty), Larry Miller (Dean Richmond).
Written by
David Sheffield, Barry W. Blaustein, Tom Shadyac, Steve Odekerk,.
Directed by Tom Shadyac.
I had heard rumours that Eddie Murphy had used this movie to poke fun at
fat people. After watching the movie, I remain unsure. It's like that
episode of ‘Seinfeld', where the dentist becomes Jewish, and has a field
day cracking jokes about Jews.
Whatever his intentions (money making I'm sure), at least the themes of
accepting yourself as you are come through by the end of the movie. Yes,
that cliched term ‘beauty comes from within' and, no, it's not something
that only fat and ugly people say to make themselves feel better.
Eddie Murphy has enough split personalities, to easily fill the roles of
Buddy Love and Sherman Klump with ease. He just acts himself to play
Buddy, and pretends to be nice  when Sherman. I still feel shivers
running down my spine when he does one of his cheesy smiles.
Sadly to say, much of the humour is generated at the expense, and
improper portrayal of fat people. Sitting around a dining table laden
with food enough to feed a glutton, bingeing in front of the T.V. set,
and stashing snacks is not a problem of the obese, but the bulimic.
Comment: Sherman Klump NOT Forrest Gump.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Eddie Murphy, Jada Pinkett, Larry Miller, James Coburn, Dave
Chappelle.
Screenplay:  David Sheffield, Barry W. Blaustein, Tom Shadyac, Steve
Oedekerk.
Director:  Tom Shadyac.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     If you ask most movie stars whether a given project is a "comeback,"
they would probably insist that they were never away.  In the case of
Eddie Murphy, that's actually pretty close to the truth.  _You_ may not
have seen HARLEM NIGHTS, or THE DISTINGUISHED GENTLEMAN, or BOOMERANG, or
even BEVERLY HILLS COP III, but someone did -- over $300 million worth of
someones, in fact.  So no, Eddie Murphy never went anywhere; it was only
his ability to make people laugh which took a long vacation.  I was
beginning to wonder whether there was any of the old spark left in Murphy,
and then along comes THE NUTTY PROFESSOR.  he still might have trouble
identifying a decent script, but his talent is in full flower, including
an unexpectedly broad acting range.
     Murphy plays Sherman Klump, a brilliant chemistry professor with a
bit of a weight problem -- about 400 lbs. worth.  His weight has resulted
in clashes with the university's dean (Larry Miller) and has made him
rather unlucky in love.  When the department's new graduate student Carla
Purdy (Jada Pinkett) captures Sherman's fancy, he resorts to testing his
latest experiment, a formula for reducing weight at a genetic level, on
himself.  The result is a startling transformation of Sherman Klump into
Buddy Love, a lean, mean testosterone machine who is every bit the party
animal Sherman never was.  The problems begin when Buddy reverts to
Sherman at the most inconvenient times, and gets worse when Buddy's
personality begins to become dominant, threatening to take over Sherman's
life for good.
     The lion's share of the pleasures in THE NUTTY PROFESSOR are pure
Eddie Murphy, but not necessarily Eddie Murphy the way you are accustomed
to seeing him.  True, he does take on multiple roles behind Rick Baker's
incredible makeup, including a Richard Simmons-styled fitness guru and
several members of the Klump family, much as he did in COMING TO AMERICA.
There are some big laughs in those family dinner scenes, particularly an
extraordinarily embarrassing dinner with Carla in attendance, although the
flatulence gags are piled on a bit thick.  But Murphy is not coasting on
his street-wise motor-mouth persona here, the persona which often seemed
to be the only reason for dud projects like THE GOLDEN CHILD or THE
DISTINGUISHED GENTLEMAN to exist.  If anything, THE NUTTY PROFESSOR is a
chance to poke fun at that persona through the hyper-slick Buddy Love.
Buddy is the arrogant, self-absorbed misogynist everyone probably believes
Murphy really is, and he knows enough to tweak that image for all he's
worth.
     The real surprise is watching Murphy sink his teeth into a real
character, and do some real acting.  Klump is not a sad-sack or a
grotesquerie, like his counterpart in the Jerry Lewis original; he is a
sensitive soul who tries to laugh along when he knows others are laughing
at him, until that laughter becomes a humiliation at the hands of an
obnoxious "Def Comedy Jam"-type stand-up comic (hilariously played by Dave
Chappelle).  At the same time, Klump shows a streak of the repressed sex
god, grooving to Teddy Pendergrass after Carla agrees to go out with him.
Murphy brings out that side as something endearing, and makes his shy,
self-effacing manner terrifically appealing.  I never thought I would see
the day when Eddie Murphy would play a character who inspired sympathy,
but watching Klump disintegrate before a barrage of the comedian's barbs
is genuinely poignant.
     Murphy is so good that it's too bad he doesn't have better material
to work with, or a more supportive supporting cast.  The exceptions to
both rules come in the wonderful nightclub scenes, the second of which
finds a caustic Buddy turning the tables on the same comic who tore
Sherman to shreds.  For the most part, the script is all set-up with few
truly inspired comic situations, relying on absurdist dream sequences and
special effects for the big gags.  There are moments when Buddy Love is on
screen that you are waiting for Murphy to run to the extreme, and ACE
VENTURA director Tom Shadyac just seems to be waiting for him to do
something wacky.  The script doesn't really give him the best
opportunities, though, and he is playing off undeserving foils in Jada
Pinkett and an uncomfortably edgy Larry Miller.  Murphy is trying to show
what he can do here, and he is given material like the overly obvious
homily at the film's conclusion which doesn't show trust in his abilities
to convey emotion without spelling it all out.  Those abilities turn out
to be what makes THE NUTTY PROFESSOR so much fun.  Welcome back, Eddie,
even if you never went away.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Eddie Murphy, Jada Pinkett, Larry Miller, Dave Chapelle, 
      James Coburn
Director: Tom Shadyac
Producers: Brian Grazer and Russell Simmons
Screenplay: David Sheffield, Barry W. Blaustein, and Steve Oederkerk
      based on the movie written by Jerry Lewis and Bill Richmond
Cinematography: Julio Macat
Music: David Newman
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures
     Eddie Murphy does not make "comebacks", because, according to him, 
he hasn't been out of the spotlight.  But, following three critical and 
box-office flops (THE DISTINGUISHED GENTLEMAN, BEVERLY HILLS COP III, 
and VAMPIRE IN BROOKLYN), Murphy is hoping THE NUTTY PROFESSOR gets his 
career back on track.  Combining his own brand of high-energy comedy 
with that of ACE VENTURA veterans Tom Shadyac and Steve Oederkerk, 
Murphy is attempting to appeal to as wide an audience as possible.  And, 
while the flatulence-joke lovers who flocked to DUMB AND DUMBER will 
doubtless be overwhelmed, not to mention doubled-over, by this movie, 
those hoping for more cerebral humor are destined to be disappointed.  
THE NUTTY PROFESSOR aims for guffaws at the lowest level -- anyone with 
a double-digit IQ will get every joke.  Whether you laugh at them or not 
is often more of a matter of taste than a question of having a sense of 
humor.
     Murphy is very funny, giving his most manic, inspired performance 
in years, and playing no less than seven different roles.  Too often, 
however, the script lets him down.  I'll admit to laughing a number of 
times, but I couldn't help noticing all the squandered opportunities.  
THE NUTTY PROFESSOR should have been funnier than it is, but, by 
concentrating on bodily function humor, the film makers have limited 
Murphy's effectiveness.
     This version of THE NUTTY PROFESSOR is loosely based on the 1963 
Jerry Lewis comedy about a nerd inventing a potion that turns him into a 
lothario.  That story, in turn, was a reworking of Robert Louis 
Stevenson's THE STRANGE CASE OF DR. JEKYLL AND MR. HYDE.  It's 
interesting that in the last twelve months, we've seen three 
interpretations of this story.  And, while THE NUTTY PROFESSOR isn't 
nearly as impressive as Stephen Frears' eerie, atmospheric MARY REILLY, 
it's infinitely more watchable than 1995's DR. JEKYLL AND MS. HYDE.  
Curiously, for a tale known best for its horrific elements, none of 
these movies fits into the traditional horror genre -- two are comedies 
and the other is a drama.
     Murphy plays mild-mannered Sherman Klump, a 400-pound science 
professor at Wellman College.  One day, the gorgeous, willowy Carla 
Purty (Jada Pinkett) walks through the door to Sherman's classroom and 
introduces herself as one of his biggest fans.  The poor professor is 
instantly smitten, and embarks on a campaign to shed his extra pounds.  
Day-after-day, he works out, but an opportunity in his lab presents him 
with a quicker, easier way to shape up.  A serum for re-aligning genetic 
structure has worked marvels for hamsters, so Sherman decides to become 
a human subject.  Moments after gulping down the light blue contents of 
a vial, the overweight scientist has been replaced by his svelte, well-
toned alternate self, Buddy Love.  But, along with Buddy's perfect 
physique comes a nasty, out-of-control personality.
     When it's not concentrating on members of Sherman's family passing 
gas, belching, or threatening to sneeze all over the dinner table, some 
of the comedy is cute.  For example, in a nightmare sequence where 
Sherman imagines himself to be King Kong, his goal when reaching through 
the window of a skyscraper isn't the girl, it's a roast turkey.  Among 
the other memorable sequences are an amusing takeoff on FROM HERE TO 
ETERNITY and the nicely-choreographed, climactic "battle" between 
Sherman and Buddy.
     There's an underlying message in THE NUTTY PROFESSOR about self-
respect and accepting people as they are (oddly, this is the same theme 
advanced by Disney's THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME).  Because Murphy's 
performance as Sherman makes us care about the character, it's easy to 
sympathize with his plight.  Unfortunately, this aspect of the story, 
which is the most touching, is skimmed over, presumably because the 
material is too heavy for a comedy.  Worse still, the presence of so 
many barbed fat jokes makes it easy to suspect THE NUTTY PROFESSOR of 
conflicted motives.
     The visual effects are top-rate, recalling Jim Carrey's THE MASK.  
With the help of makeup guru Rick Baker, Murphy is equally believable as 
the hulking Sherman, his doddering grandmother, a Richard Simmons look-
alike, and the slim-and-trim Buddy Love.  It's a tour-de-force for the 
comic, and that almost makes THE NUTTY PROFESSOR worth seeing.  Alas, 
this movie is a little too interested in easy jokes to bother with 
having a heart.  And, in the end, we're not sure whether we're supposed 
to be cheering for Sherman or laughing at him.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Andrew Hicks
        It's all been downhill for Eddie Murphy these past eight 
or nine years career-wise, and he's still trying to make a crowd-
pleasing blockbuster to relaunch his 80's stardom. If the crowd I 
was with is any indication, Murphy has succeeded. God only knows 
if the rest of the country's audiences will feel the same way, but the 
packed mall crowd I saw THE NUTTY PROFESSOR with laughed 
so hard at the surface-level gags that I missed half the dialogue.
        What do you say about a movie like this, where fart 
jokes abound and the word "ass" is used every couple minutes 
for laughter? That it's the kind of movie most of us could write in 
our sleep if given the premise, a lightweight and predictable comedy 
that the brainless masses laugh out loud at over and over. I'd almost 
have to lump myself in with the "brainless masses" demographic 
because I succumbed to a lot of the cheap laughs in THE NUTTY 
PROFESSOR, although not loud or long enough to drown out any 
dialogue.
        Murphy plays Sherman Klump, a four-hundred pound 
college professor who has stumbled onto a formula that will change 
his molecular structure and turn him into a slim love god. So after 
the customary fat person sight gags (Murphy's stomach erasing 
the chalkboard as he writes, Murphy trying to sit in a chair, etc.) 
and the introduction of the love interest, a beautiful grad student 
(Jada Pinkett, looking ten times better here than in A LOW DOWN 
DIRTY SHAME), Murphy drinks his potion and reaps the immediate 
benefits ("I can see my dick!").
        I'm sure you've heard the expression that inside every 
fat person there's a skinny person waiting to get out. THE NUTTY 
PROFESSOR assumes that skinny person is a completely different 
alter-ego from the person's usual personality. At his correct body 
weight, Murphy becomes Buddy Love, a brash, over-confident 
loudmouth with sex on his mind. High testosterone levels are an 
apparent side effect of taking the potion, causing Murphy to act 
on his feelings for Pinkett.
        This being a cut-rate sitcom, of course, he doesn't tell 
her that Love and Klump are one and the same, he pulls the old 
Clark Kent-Superman thing, having her know both personalities 
and having them talk about each other but never interact. And 
Pinkett doesn't have a clue as to what is going on because Murphy's 
voice is completely different as Love than Klump. His Love voice is 
much higher-pitched than Klump, making me wonder if we're 
supposed to think his voice lost weight too. Either way, the voice 
mystery is never explained, but you're probably not supposed to 
stop and think about any of this.
        As another sitcom gimmick, Murphy's potion wears off 
after a certain amount of time, and always in the exact wrong place 
at the wrong time. That way people can stare as his lip suddenly 
swells to several times its size or his foot becomes twice as big 
because, besides being Murphy's comeback vehicle, THE NUTTY 
PROFESSOR also showcases some admirable special effects from 
Tom Baker, the man who turned Michael Jackson into a freak in 
the Thriller video (which took a lot of effort, believe me). But while 
Murphy was sitting in that makeup chair for five hours everyday, 
someone else should have been working on creating a decent, 
cliche-free script.
        The movie continues with Pinkett trying to choose 
between Klump and Love, along with Klump having to pitch his 
idea to millionaire donor James Coburn (also in ERASER). We 
also get a couple of extended flatulence scenes with the Klump 
family, where Murphy plays five different overweight roles, and 
some TV inspiration from a Richard Simmons exercise clone 
(Murphy again).
        The ending is as absurd and unbelievable as the rest 
and contradicts the movie's entire premise (that fat people would 
do anything to achieve an effortless weight loss), but if you can 
overlook all of that and just let yourself enjoy the decent amount 
of genuine laughs mixed in with the cheap ones, you might have 
a positive (but probably not nutty) experience with THE NUTTY 
PROFESSOR.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50 of a Century!

Author
Chad Polenz
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1996, PG-13, 95 minutes [1 hour, 35 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Eddie Murphy (Prof. Sherman Klump, Buddy Love, the entire Klump
family), Jada Pinkett (Clara Purty), Larry Miller (Dean Richmond), written by
David Sheffield, Barry W. Blaustein, Tom Shadyac, Steve Odekerk, produced by
Brian Grazer, Russell Simmons, directed by Tom Shadyac.
If "The Nutty Professor" is Eddie Murphy's attempt at a "comeback" it's not
a very good one. The film starts off with cartoonish innocence to it, but
eventually it becomes a typical, raunchy Murphy flick just slightly toned
down to appeal to a wider audience. 
The story starts off in a lighthearted manner as we meet Sherman Klump
(Murphy), 400-pound chemistry professor whose obesity keeps getting him in
trouble. Klump is the typical, lonely-but-lovable fat man who can't help but
feel sorry for himself. He tries to exercise and diet, but it just doesn't
work. 
The jokes and the atmosphere revolving around such an easy target seem like
just that: easy jokes and gags that can be funny, be could be even funnier
had they some originality to them. The first such example of this is a
somewhat funny scene involving thousands of hamsters running all over the
college grounds (that escaped due to Klump's massive bulk bumping into
everything). However, this immediate cartoony humor is symbolic of how the
film works as a whole.
And what's a comedy without a beautiful woman? Jada Pinkett co-stars as
Clara Purty, a new chemistry teacher who somehow finds herself drawn to
Klump, and even agrees to go out with him. Let's see... we have a beautiful
woman with a fat man, and they go to a comedy club... the story and the jokes
essentially write themselves from here.
Klump can't take it anymore and concocts a formula that causes him to drop
250 pounds in a few seconds. But when his size changes, so does his
personality, that of the extremely vain, but smooth Buddy Love.
Unfortunately, Love's charm wears out quickly and the film starts to return
to Murphy's vulgar roots. We get sit-com-esque scenes of Love and Purty
arguing with each other even as he seduces her. Then zany scenes as Love
proceeds to become a wiseass who cracks on every person he sees, and even
gets into a fist fight (that's not funny!). I found myself somewhat laughing
at these parts, but I felt like I've seen it all before. The scenes with
Klump had an innocent charm I hadn't experienced in a while, and just as it
started to grow on me the entire film changed and became just another
screwball comedy.
At times the film can be quite gross and offensive to say the least. In
fact, isn't its entire premise a little too politically incorrect for the
times? Fat jokes are funny in passing, so having an entire film revolve
around them is not. Consider the scenes in which Murphy plays every member of
the extremely obese Klump family. All we get is a family arguing with each
other and having farting contests. I laughed at the time, but in retrospect
this type of comedy is pandering the lowest common denominator and who likes
to be pandered to?
Most of the plot of the film involves Klump's struggle to control his
personalities and not get fired and Purty in the process. The battle between
the personalities is what creates for most of the jokes, but the formula
repeats itself often. It all depends on how much of it you can take.
"The Nutty Professor" is pretty funny at times, but is just too contrived to
be taken seriously. The comedy relies a little too much on special effects
and makeup instead of zany situations and dialogue.
[Note: I highly question the PG-13 rating. There is little sex or violence
in this film but there is a great deal of profanity. Not vulgar profanity,
but just disgusting, lowbrow dialogue which proves this is really an R-rated
Murphy flick in disguise.]
please visit Chad'z Movie page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz 
