Title
Review for Dangerous Beauty (1998)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     It is 1583 in Venice.  Society has proscribed a place for its
women.  The vast majority are to remain the uneducated maintainers of
households for their husbands.  It is not the most exciting of lives,
but if a woman is sufficiently charming her family may arrange a
marriage to someone prominent.  This will get the woman and perhaps her
entire family good social connections.  And at least the married woman
may hope to live in moderate comfort.  In most arranged marriages love
is not given strong consideration in the choice of a husband.  Families
essentially sell off their daughters for material gain.
     On the other hand a few of the most beautiful women can become
courtesans--mistresses or prostitutes of the wealthy and powerful.
Veronica Franco (played by Catherine McCormack) is in love with
handsome Marco Venier (Rufus Sewell).  But he is from a wealthy family
and her father had died leaving the family with a pile of debts and a
desperate need of money.  As Veronica's mother (Jacqueline Bisset)
tells her she must give up the idea of marriage.  Besides "marriage is
a bargain, not a perpetual tryst."  And it is not profitable enough to
support the Franco family.  Veronica must make the sacrifice of
becoming a courtesan as, she is informed, her mother did years ago.
     The plot follows a very predictable trajectory from here.
Veronica does not want to become a prostitute, but agrees when she
discovers that being a courtesan has its advantages.  It really is the
only way that a woman in Venetian society can escape the heavy
restrictions placed on women.  A good courtesan is allowed to become
educated and, in fact, learning becomes a necessity.  Trained by her
mother, Veronica learns the skills necessary for the new profession and
makes herself the most desirable courtesan in Venice as well as a quick
wit with verse.  We follow her career from being too poor to have a
normal life to having one of the most powerful names in Venice.  But
the fantasy world she comes to know will change abruptly when it
collides with the real world of the Plague and of the Inquisition.
     DANGEROUS BEAUTY was written by Jeannine Dominy based on the book
THE HONEST COURTESAN by Margaret Rosenthal.  The plot is predictable
and even familiar, somewhere between myth and soap opera.  This does
not ruin the story but a less obvious story could have improved the
film considerably.  As interesting as the foreground plot is the view
of life in Renaissance Venice in the background is really what rivets
out attention.  The visual effects are far from perfect, but
occasionally they do create a stunning image, particularly the
recreation of nautical scenes.
     McCormack previously played Mel Gibson's love interest in
BRAVEHEART.  In this film she get chances to display her wit, her skill
with a sword, and her body, one more enjoyable to see than the other.
Rufus Sewell of COLD COMFORT FARM and the current DARK CITY plays Marco
her lover.  There seems to be between Sewell and McCormack genuine
chemistry, a thing too frequently missing from screen love stories.
DANGEROUS BEAUTY is populated with actors who would not seem typical
for a historical film. Fred Ward seems an odd choice to be playing as a
member of the Venier family, but is reasonable if cast against type.
Oliver Platt of FLATLINERS as a competing wit also seems as out of
place in a costume drama thought he did play in THE THREE MUSKETEERS.
     If DANGEROUS BEAUTY has a rather obvious plot and takes the safe
course of exploiting a feminist theme, but the production is well-
mounted, well-acted, and pretty to look at.  I give it a 7 on the 0 to
10 scale and a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     As the wealthy, but illiterate, assembled wives stare in
disbelief, Veronica Franco, the highly educated courtesan, uses Latin
to discuss the common fruit she holds in her hand and then performs an
erotic act with it that challenges the laws of physics.  The stunningly
beautiful Catherine McCormack, the female lead in BRAVEHEART, plays the
poetry-spewing prostitute.
     Welcome to the city-state of Venice in the late 1500s.  The
opening credits of DANGEROUS BEAUTY, thankfully, say the story is true
-- it's based on Margaret Rosenthal's biography "The Honest Courtesan."
Were it not true, as it claims to be so, the frequently ridiculous,
silly plot would have had the audiences laughing at all the wrong
places.
     We learn, for example, that most women of that era, with the
exception of courtesans, were not able to read.  It seems the
courtesans were the only females permitted in the libraries because
they needed the knowledge to advise their clients in more matters than
just sex.  For those of you who have trouble suspending disbelief in
movies, this film may short-circuit your brain.
     Jeannine Dominy's screenplay adaptation takes a modern language
approach, laced with poetry, that might be termed Shakespeare-lite, so
there are ample opportunities to ridicule the picture if you are so
inclined.
     But don't get me wrong, as filmed in a romantic haze by Bojan
Bazelli and as sumptuously decorated by Norman Garwood, the production
dazzles the eyes at every turn.  When the boy king of France comes to
visit, the royal barge is gorgeous coming down the canal.  Even more
dazzling and bizarre is the film's opening.  Gondolas take every
courtesan in the city through the waterways as the city's adoring males
burst out in hoots, calls and poetry.  The women, lapping it up,
respond by flashing bare breasts back at them.  (This much nudity so
early in a picture is not a good sign.)
     Jacqueline Bisset, cast against type, plays Veronica's mother,
Paola.  The script likes to include advice, witty and bawdy.  When
Veronica asks her mother about marriage, her mother chides her that,
"Marriage is a contract, Veronica, not a constant tryst."  (The
courtesan's life is just the opposite, as Veronica will soon find out.)
     Veronica's old friend Marco Venier (Rufus Sewell) returns after a
long absence to find that she has developed into a great beauty.  He
uses come-on lines that include, "God made sin that we might know his
mercy."  They love each other, but his father, played in a tiny part by
Jeroen Krabbe, lectures Marco that he cannot marry beneath his
position.
     Veronica's resourceful mother has just the right solution, she
should take up a trade.  Since she can't marry her beloved, she can
become a courtesan and bed him anyway.  In shock, Veronica learns that
her mother had been a courtesan herself.  Some of the show's better
scenes have Jacqueline Bisset instructing her daughter in the ways of
the flesh using vegetables and a nude male model who looks like he is
posing for a great artist.  The movie has the potential to become a
camp classic.
     Although the costumes look authentic, especially the ridiculous
eight-inch platform shoes that the courtesans wear, the simple make-up
looks exactly like what you see on the street today.
     Veronica not only becomes a courtesan, she is an instant hit.  Her
dance card, as it were, becomes fully booked overnight.  Poor Marco
finds even he can't get a reservation.  Veronica quickly turns into a
literary success as well.  She has a book published of her poetry and
engages the men in duels of poetry, sometimes lewd but more often not.
In a big showdown with her old friend Maffio, played with style by
Oliver Platt, they battle with words and swords.
     As absurd as it is at times, the movie, directed by Marshall
Herskovitz from the TV series "My So-Called Life," can be quite cute.
And with its full plate of romance, jealousy, humor, titillation and
even a bit of pathos, it tries to please everyone.  The light-hearted
show quickly turns dark at the last with the arrival of the Holy
Inquisition.  But the ending scene, which you've seen a hundred times
before, neatly wraps it all up.
     Although parts of the picture are enjoyable, the characters never
rise above playacting.  Like some ribald tale from the Playboy Channel
but with most of the sex scenes edited out, the movie is never sure
what it wants to be.  It's certainly not soft porn, but neither is it
is very substantial.
     DANGEROUS BEAUTY runs 1:41.  It is rated R for nudity, sex and
profanity and would be acceptable for teenagers if they are both older
and mature.

Author
James Kendrick
Director: Marshall Herskovitz || Screenplay: Jeannine Dominy
(based on the book "The Honest Courtesan" by Margaret Rosenthal)
|| Stars: Catherine McCormack (Veronica Franco), Rufus Sewell
(Marco Venier), Jacqueline Bisset (Paola Franco), Oliver Platt
(Maffio Venier), Moira Kelly (Beatrice Venier), Fred Ward
(Domenico Venier), Naomi Watts (Guila De Lezze), Jeroen Krabbé
(Pietro Venier), Joanna Cassidy (Laura Venier), Daniel Lapaine
(Serafino Franco), Jake Weber (King Henry) || MPAA Rating: R ||
Review: *** (out of ****)
"Dangerous Beauty" is a really nothing more than a grandiose soap
opera set in Venice circa 1583. It is beautifully filmed,
wonderfully acted, and certainly nothing short of entertaining,
but it lacks any true fundamental seriousness. Dealing with
themes of forbidden love, religious intolerance, subordination of
women, sexual freedom, and the roles of pleasure and sin in a
high-cultured society, it still feels like brightly lit fluff.
The director, Marshall Herskovitz, doesn't want to follow the
dark and dangerous trail this story could lead down, so he opts
for a more genial, livelier, and relatively shallow
interpretation.
The film takes place during the Renaissance, a time when Venice
was the pleasure capital of Europe. At this time, Venice was its
own republic, and it thrived on being the central juncture of
East-West commerce. The film is told almost entirely through the
viewpoint of the aristocracy and the bourgeoisie of Venice, so we
rarely get to see how the rest of the society lived. However,
there is an abundance of detail concerning the lives and
livelihoods of the upper classes, their hedonistic lifestyles and
constant merriment.
The story centers on Veronica Franco (Catherine McCormack), a
lower class woman who falls in love with Marco Venier (Rufus
Sewell), the son of wealthy aristocratic parents (Jeroen Krabbé
and Joanna Cassidy). Unfortunately, the culture of that time
period did not view marriage as an act of love -- rather, it was
more like a business transaction, where rich families married
their sons and daughters to each other in order to secure power,
wealth, and ensure that outsiders couldn't get in. Veronica,
despite her charm and good looks, is certainly an outsider. After
a short love affair, Marco breaks her heart with the news that he
cannot marry her.
However, because she is beautiful and intelligent, Veronica has a
chance to enter Marco's world, albeit not as his wife. She
decides to become a courtesan -- a class of women who were as
well-educated as they were ravishing, and sold their sexuality to
wealthy men for the privilege of wining and dining with the
elite. A courtesan was not a mere prostitute; they were afforded
a special place in society, and they were greatly revered,
respected, and often envied. At one point, a character mentions
that some rulers obtain more political advice from their
courtesans than from their lieutenants.
Veronica goes through the transformation with the help of her
mother, Paola (Jacqueline Bisset), who was once a famed courtesan
herself. Once she enters the lifestyle, Veronica finds that it
suits her quite well. She is allowed to read all the books she
wants, she is given the opportunity to publish her poetry, and
she has the richest and most powerful men in the republic
throwing themselves at her feet, including the awestruck Marco.
Their relationship develops into a playful bantering, with
Veronica utilizing her newfound power by constantly rejecting
Marco's advances. In many ways, their relationship is sad because
Marco is married to a women he is unable to love, and Veronica is
consumed by multiple relationships with men she is unwilling to
love. "Love the love, not the man," as her mother told her.
"Dangerous Beauty," which was based on a factual book by Margaret
Rosenthal, flows along as smoothly and serenely as the Grand
Canal running through the heart of Venice. It has multiple plot
lines -- including Veronica's adversarial relationship with a
court poet (Oliver Platt), her role in obtaining France's
military assistance in Venice's battle against the Turks, and
even the dreaded shadow of the plague and the encroachment of the
Spanish Inquisition -- yet it is never confusing or overbearing.
Much of the film's success is due to the glowing performance by
Catherine McCormack in the lead role. Known chiefly for the small
part she played as the lover whose murder raised Mel Gibson's ire
in "Braveheart" (1995), McCormack shows the true gifts and
inarguable talent of a leading lady. She has the kind of
exquisite classical beauty that would be treasured in a
courtesan; her character is intelligent, witty, and both sensual
and vulnerable, all of which McCormack easily transmits with a
single flash of her eyes.
The rest of the roles are also filled well, including Rufus
Sewell whose performance here and earlier this month in "Dark
City" have assured him a solid place in Hollywood. He has the
same kind of unusual good looks and charm of Ray Liotta, and he
seems perfectly at home in period dramas. Oliver Platt plays a
variation of the comic relief role that he has come to inhabit
like a second skin, although the film deals his character a cheap
blow at the end by having him improbably join the Inquisition and
turn into the bad guy.  Platt is a good actor, but he's just too
hard to hate. Jacqueline Bisset proves that she is every bit as
stirring as she ever was, and even Fred Ward turns up in a small,
but moving performance as Marco's uncle.
"Dangerous Beauty" is Marshall Herskovitz's sophomore directorial
effort, after the overlooked 1993 film "Jack the Bear." Partnered
with Edward Zwick, Herskovitz has spent most of his time as a
producer on television ("thirtysomething," "My So-Called Life")
and in the movies ("Legends of the Fall"). His directing style
can be best described as transparent -- it never gets in the way
of the story, yet it has no discernible flourish or particular
distinctions. He could have approached the film in any number of
ways, including overdosing on the sexual aspect, which he wisely
avoids. "Dangerous Beauty" contains just enough bare flesh and
ribald sex to make it appropriately erotic, but not so much that
it seems exploitative.
Herskovitz is also aided by a strong supporting crew, including
the luscious photography by Bojan Bazelli, whose previous efforts
include the highly-stylized thriller "Kalifornia" (1993) and Abel
Ferrara's dark sci-fi film "Body Snatchers" (1994). Bazelli
captures the film in strong, bold colors, and be brings
sixteenth-century Venice to life in wide, panoramic shots that
are often enhanced with digital imagery. However, the real
details are found in the production design by Norman Garwood
("Brazil," "The Princess Bride") and the costumes by Gabriella
Pescucci ("The Age of Innocence").
The only problem with "Dangerous Beauty" is that it doesn't stick
with you. It's a good story well-told with interesting
characters, but it's easy to shrug off once you've left the
theater. The only sequence that has the chance to be truly
indelible is Veronica being pulled in front of the hypocrisy of
the Inquisition and threatened with the death penalty for her
transgressions, but it never quite comes off because it's simply
too melodramatic and conventional. Herskovitz tries with all his
might to make it a nailbiter, but somehow its outcome is a
foregone conclusion, and like the rest of the film, it carries no
real weight, despite the potential severity of the subject
matter.


Author
Greg King
A DESTINY OF HER OWN (M).  
(Twentieth Century Fox)
Director: Marshall Herskovitz
Stars: Catherine McCormack, Rufus Sewell, Oliver Platt, Moira Kelly, 
Naomi Watts, Jacqueline Bissett, 
Fred Ward, Jake Weber, Jeroen Krabbe, Joanna Cassidy, Daniel Lapaine, 
Simon Dutton, Peter Eyre, 
Justine Miceli
Running time: 112 minutes.
In overseas markets, A Destiny Of Her Own is also known as
Dangerous Beauty, a stronger and far more appropriate title.
This elaborate historical melodrama is set in the decadent
Venice of the late 16th century, when women were still treated as
second class citizens.  Only the courtesans, in essence highly paid
hookers, were well read and educated.  They were also permitted access
to areas, such as libraries, normally off limits to ordinary women.
In the bedroom, the courtesans had the ear of kings, bishops and many
of the wealthiest and most powerful men in society, and often
influenced policy decisions.  "A courtesan is a force of nature,
cloaked in civility," explains Jacqueline Bissett.
This glossy, visually sumptuous period piece looks at the life
and fortunes of Veronica Franco (Catherine McCormack, from Braveheart,
etc), one of the most famous of Venice's courtesans.  Although
Veronica is in love with the handsome Marco Vernier (Rufus Sewell),
she cannot marry him because she is below his noble station.  His
parents have arranged a more fitting marriage, for the good of the
family fortune and the stability of Venice, of course.  Veronica's
mother (Bissett), a former courtesan herself, trains her in the
bedroom skills that will enable her to enter this hypocritical
male-dominated world and have access to a life style that would
normally have been denied her.  There's plenty of wit, sex, nudity,
scandal and courtly intrigue in this bawdy, spirited, overdone yet
moderately entertaining costume drama.  Not content to explore the lot
of the beautiful heroine, writer Jeannine Dominy also throws the
plague, the inquisition, and a witchcraft trial into the busy drama.
Somehow, A Destiny Of Her Own tends to lose focus towards the end.
The film has a beautiful chocolate box quality, thanks to
Czech cinematographer Bojan Bazelli, who gives the film a glossy
surface.  The costumes, impressive set design and gorgeous locations
also add to the rich texture, and bring the period to life.  However,
the computer generated recreation of 16th century Venice becomes a
little obvious on the big screen.  Director Marshall Herskovitz hails
from a background in television drama (thirtysomething, Family), and
his direction here becomes a little pedestrian and betrays his
origins.
The cast throw themselves into this period romp with a sense
of abandon that adds energy to proceedings.  McCormack brings a
contemporary flavour to her role as the feisty, intelligent heroine.
In a rare screen appearance, Bissett brings a touch of class to her
role as her sympathetic mother.  Sewell is good as the brooding
aristocratic Marco, while the very busy Oliver Platt (The Impostors,
Bulworth, etc) provides some humour as the quick witted court poet
Maffio with whom Veronica has some entertaining clashes.  Veterans
Jeroen Krabbe, Fred Ward and Joanna Cassidy are wasted in undemanding,
throwaway roles.

Author
Steve Kong
You find out from the man that you love that he cannot marry you.  Why?
Because you are in a different economic class than he is and your father
has spent your entire dowry.  So, what's a girl to do?  Become an
over-priced, well-educated prostitute for the rich, of course.  Then you
can accomplish three things: get yourself some high pleasure, make some
money for your family, and--the most important--make that man that you love
mighty jealous.
That is the basic story line for Dangerous Beauty, the second film starring
Rufus Sewell I've screened in less than a week.  Of course the girl,
Veronica Franco (Catherine McCormack), is not called an "over-price
well-educated prostituted" in the film; Franco is actually called a
courtesan.  She becomes a courtesan like her mother (Jacqueline Bisset)
before her for the main reason to earn money for the family.  But, we all
know that she's also doing it to make the man that she loves, Marco Venier
(Rufus Sewell), jealous and to find that opportune time to spend with him.
Veronica meets many men as a courtesan and one of them discovers her
talent; she is a gifted poet.  She befriends Marco's uncle, Domenico Venier
(Fred Ward), who is a rich man and is willing to publish her works.  There
are a few subplot lines that run through the film, including one about the
jealousy of Marco's cousin, Maffio (Oliver Platt), over Veronica's
published works.  Don't let these small details slip; they will come back
later.
Dangerous Beauty starts off telling the audience that it is a movie based
on a true story, I'm not familiar with the story of Veronica Franco so I
can't say if it's true to life or not.  The movie itself is very
entertaining.  It has two things that kept my attention: the beautiful
cinematography and the gorgeous and talented Catherine McCormack.
The cinematography, sets, and all-around look of Dangerous Beauty are
breath taking.  Cinematographer Bojan Bazelli films Dangerous Beauty with a
fuzzy lens that makes everything very soft.  But along with this, take note
of the changes of colors that follow the changes of moods during the film.
There are two very distinct looks.  One is the golden bright look when
Venice is doing well and the other is the dark blue look when Venice has
fallen into trouble.
The performances are generally good, but it is Catherine (Braveheart)
McCormack's that lights up the screen.  She does a wonderful job with her
part of the courtesan that is supposed to love only the pleasure that comes
from her job.  Rufus Sewell does well also onscreen; Sewell and McCormack
have definite chemistry, which helps the film.  Whenever the two are
onscreen together the sparks are flying.  I hope to see McCormack in more
films soon.
The script by Jeannine Dominy, based on the book The Honest Courtesan by
Margaret Rosenthal, is entertaining enough to hold our attention.  It is
not quite a gripping script but there are moments when we are completely
caught up with what is happening in the film--look for the two poetry
contests between Veronica and Maffio.  Though there are those moments that
run a bit long and we are left to look at our watches.  The pacing of the
film is a bit uneven, but this is a small flaw.
Dangerous Beauty is an extremely entertaining film that benefits from the
beauty and acting of Catherine McCormack.  Though the pacing is a bit
uneven and some of the lines performed seem out of place, those are small
flaws in the overall view of this film.  Don't Miss Dangerous Beauty in the
theatres.

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  Marshall Herskovitz
Cast:  Catherine McCormack, Rufus Sewell, Jacqueline Bisset, Oliver
Platt, Moira Kelly, Fred Ward
Screenplay:  Jeannine Dominy
Producers:  Sarah Caplan, Marshall Herskovitz, Arnon Milchan
Runtime:  111 min.
US Distribution:  Warner Bros.
Rated R:  Sex, nudity, language
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
        Time and time again, we see period films that revolve around the
primitive idea of arranged or forced marriages.  We learn about and feel
sympathy for the peasant boy who can't marry the rich heiress, whom he
loves, because of his lower placement in the caste system (such as in
the excellent Washington Square); and, sometimes, it's the woman unable
to marry a man of higher class.  This situation is familiar, and often
works as a plot device, but there has to be a spin somewhere.  Dangerous
Beauty, which tells the story of a young woman in 1500s Venice, is a
film that begins with this premise.  What makes the movie interesting is
her method of avoiding the problem:  she becomes a prostitute.
        Of course, she's not an average prostitute:  she's a courtesan--an
educated, intelligent, and undeniably sexy woman who makes men feel
important in numerous ways, and gets paid for it.  The woman's name is
Veronica Franco (Catherine McCormack), and, upon falling in love with a
young senator named Marco Venier (Rufus Sewell), is made a courtesan by
her mother (Jacqueline Bisset).  Becoming a courtesan doesn't change
Veronica's social class, but, interestingly, it makes an affair with
Marco easier, despite his marriage to a cold and quiet woman.
        Conflict arises mainly towards the end, when the Holy Inquisition
assumes control of Venice during a plague which kills thousands of
people.  Believed to be spreading the disease through witchcraft,
Veronica is put on trial for her apparent crimes against God.
        Dangerous Beauty is a lot of things:  it's a love story about two
well-developed and well-acted characters; it's a period film rich in
detail and atmosphere; and it's a political statement of the status of
women in the 1500s.  All of these elements are ultimately successful in
various ways, and this is due, in part, to the steady direction by
Marshall Herskovitz, and the sharp script by Jeannine Dominy (adapted
from the factual novel The Honest Courtesan by Margaret Rosenthal). 
It's remarkable, really, that the film manages to develop each of these
elements while still proving lively entertainment.
        It's liveliness often springs from McCormack's energetic and convincing
performance.  Last seen (and underused) in Braveheart, McCormack
effortlessly proves herself as a leading actress, and I find it a marvel
that this huge, sumptuous role was not given to an actress who has
"proven" herself (not just in talent, but in box-office draw, for I am
speaking of a Warner Bros. film here).  McCormack, aside from radiating
a physical beauty that does, in fact, feel dangerous (in a good way),
she wistfully slides through this film, never hitting a foul note.  Her
performance is both strong and subtle, and developed fully.  We get a
feel for her innocence when she is a maid in the beginning of the film,
but we can also see her strength in her eyes.  Later, as in the
satisfying conclusion, she need not raise her voice to prove her power: 
her calculated words are enough.
        Matching McCormack's talent is Rufus Sewell (Dark City, Hamlet), an
intense actor who gives this rich senator life and verve.  Sewell, like
McCormack, attests with this role his versatility and vigor, and shows
once again that he is capable of holding an entire film with his
presence.  The scenes between the two leads--particularly the love
scenes--are electric:  their dialogue flows smoothly, and they
compliment each other physically.  Also good are the supporting
performers, including Jacqueline Bisset and Oliver Platt.  
        The tone of Dangerous Beauty is complete, and always pleasing.  The
primary colors used are gold and light browns, and each scene seems to
be shot with filters that soften the image.  The sets and costumes, too,
are exceptional and noticeable, and all of this creates a film that
never falters with its mood.  The uniqueness of Venice is done justice
here.
        Perhaps most interesting (and unexpected) about the film is the
statement it successfully conveys.  Here is a woman who finds her own
salvation in going against the typical route of women (which, normally,
leads to being a housewife and a mother to many children).  She doesn't
just reject this monotony, however--she spits in its face by becoming
something that most "ladies" find degrading and limiting.  Veronica
loves what she does, and is happy because of it.  This is not a feminist
film, mind you--there is no male-bashing here.  What there is, however,
is a detailed illustration of how much men desire women, and to what
lengths they will go to have what they need.  
        Like all films, Dangerous Beauty isn't perfect.  It is fairly
predictable in its plotting, and the climax, though satisfying, falls
prey to some seriously heavy-handed emotions.  But these are minor
quibbles:  Dangerous Beauty is engrossing from start to finish.  I
admire films that are complete in their endeavors, and a film that
successfully develops multiple themes while actually making us care
about the characters will forever be welcome.  Dangerous Beauty also
supplies a little history lesson about the importance of courtesans and
the role of women in this society.  And while I am often skeptical about
history lessons learned in films, it's nice to know that a film can, on
occasion, provide more than simple entertainment.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Catherine McCormack, Rufus Sewell, Oliver Platt, Moira Kelly, 
      Fred Ward, Jacqueline Bisset, Jeroen Krabbe, Joanna Cassidy
Director: Marshall Herskovitz
Producers: Edward Zwick, Arnon Milchan, Sarah Caplan
Screenplay: Jeannine Dominy based on THE HONEST COURTESAN by 
      Margaret Rosenthal
Cinematography: Bojan Bazelli
Music: George Fenton
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     DANGEROUS BEAUTY is a lavish historical melodrama that has enough 
suds, sex, and flashes of flesh to appeal to soap opera-lovers and 
enough substance to attract those of a more intellectual bent.  However, 
while the movie does more than pay lip service to themes of female 
empowerment and religious intolerance, the main focus is the kind of 
hopeless, star-crossed romance that gave WINGS OF THE DOVE flight.  How 
do two young lovers, separated on their social terrain by a gulf of 
wealth and power, reconcile the hot reality of their passion with the 
cold truth that they can never marry? 
     DANGEROUS BEAUTY came into being using the title THE HONEST 
COURTESAN (which is also the name of Margaret Rosenthal's "true story" 
novel, upon which the film is based).  That appellation was dropped for 
fear that audiences wouldn't know what it meant.  However, not only is 
THE HONEST COURTESAN a more apt title, but it's a more provocative one.  
The words "dangerous beauty" mean very little, especially in connection 
with this film.  In fact, a name like this sounds more apropos for a 
soft-core exploitation flick than a sumptuous tale of late-16th century 
Venice.
     The time of DANGEROUS BEAUTY is the era in which Shakespeare lived 
and thrived, and the region of the world in which this story transpires 
was one of the Bard's favorite locales.  As in many of Shakespeare's 
plays, the film makers have elected to have English-speaking actors play 
Italian characters.  What's more, there are no silly accents.  And, 
although the dialogue sounds more contemporary than archaic, the 
costumes, set design, and attitudes of the characters serve as powerful 
reminders that this is an historical tale.
     In 1583 Venice, women were regarded as little more than 
possessions.  Education and willfulness were negative traits, reserved 
only for those who plied their bodies for money.  Marriage had nothing 
to do with love -- it was a contract made based exclusively on 
considerations of wealth and position.  If a girl's family didn't have 
money, she had no hope of marrying an "important" man, no matter how 
deeply the two loved each other.  In a situation like that, if she 
wanted him, her only hope was to become his mistress.  And, if she was 
truly ambitious and skilled, she could become a courtesan, a mistress to 
dozens of men, all willing to pay for her services.
     Such are the circumstances of Veronica Franco (Catherine 
McCormack), who is desperately smitten with Marco Vernier (Rufus Sewell) 
-- and he with her.  But the difference in their social position makes a 
legal relationship impossible.  When Marco, not wanting to lead Veronica 
on, informs her of this harsh truth, she is devastated, and chooses to 
follow the advice of her mother (Jacqueline Bisset) and become a 
courtesan.  Soon, with her rare mix of beauty, intelligence, and wit, 
she is the most prized prostitute in Venice, desired by everyone from 
the local bishop to the King of France.  But, during the age of the 
Spanish Inquisition, power gained through "sinful" means can be a 
tenuous thing.
     Against the backdrop of Veronica and Marco's tumultuous 
relationship, director Marshall Herskovitz explores the injustices 
visited upon women at a time when they were universally viewed as 
inferior to men.  The obedient wives are presented as timid, uncertain 
creatures who dream of a better lot for their daughters while secretly 
envying Veronica's freedom.  For her part, although Veronica uses every 
weapon at her disposal to hold her own in power struggles with men, she 
would give all that she has away for a life with Marco. 
     Catherine McCormack (who played Mel Gibson's lover in BRAVEHEART) 
is perfectly cast as Veronica.  The actress has a wonderfully expressive 
face and is capable of flowing effortlessly from an almost-comic 
portrayal to a more serious one.  Added to that, she shows a flash of 
Errol Flynn.  During the course of DANGEROUS BEAUTY, McCormack is given 
several opportunities to become involved in duels where the weapons vary 
from poetry to rapiers.  Playing opposite her, Rufus Sewell (COLD 
COMFORT FARM, HAMLET) displays both confidence and sensitivity, which 
makes him the ideal romantic lead.  It doesn't hurt that he and 
McCormack ignite a few sparks when they're together.
     One of DANGEROUS BEAUTY's subtle treasures is the top-notch 
supporting cast.  Jacqueline Bisset is calm and tranquil as Veronica's 
mother, who was once a famous courtesan.  Fred Ward shows real depth as 
Marco's uncle, who understands his nephew's longing for the seductive 
temptress.  And Moira Kelly (as Marco's sister, Beatrice), despite being 
relegated to the background for most of the film, has one scene of 
startling, unbridled vehemence when she launches into a bitter diatribe 
about the fate of women in a world that treats them with so little 
value.
     The actors, like the story, are helped immeasurably by the film's 
look.  Visually, this is a gorgeous motion picture.  Cinematographer 
Bojan Bazelli's camera loves the streets and canals of Venice, making 
the city as much a character as any of the people.  Filters only enhance 
the beauty.  Using Bazelli's photography as a catalyst, Herskovitz 
creates the perfect tone -- one that is often serious, but occasionally 
playful, and where serenity can be suddenly interrupted by a burst of 
passion.
     As is the case with too many melodramas designed to give the 
audience a triumphant rush, DANGEROUS BEAUTY goes over the top in its 
closing moments, offering speech-making and grandstanding that undercuts 
some of the film's drama.  Still, it's hard to argue that, contrived as 
it may be, there's something satisfying about the way things wrap up.  A 
"commercial" finale isn't the worst thing that could happen in a picture 
like this -- it may be emotionally manipulative, but, on a certain 
level, it works.  DANGEROUS BEAUTY isn't great art, but it is good 
entertainment.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Matt Williams
Marshall Herskovitz directs this alternatively comic and earnestly
serious period piece based on the biography of a famous 16th century
poet/courtesan, Veronica Franco.
As a girl, Veronica Franco (Catherine McCormack) has only eyes for Marco
Venier (Rufus Sewell).  Yet fate schemes to keep them apart.  For, you
see, this is 16th century Venice, where marriage is a political tool,
and women are little more than property, their worthiness judged by
their dowry.  Marco comes from a high standing political family, and
Veronica, alas, is poor.
However, there is a way out for Veronica.  Her mother (Jacqueline
Bisset) gives her the option of becoming a high-class prostitute, a
courtesan, as she once was herself.  Although it may seem appalling at
first, the courtesan dwells amid luxury, freedom and riches.  And (the
point which wins Veronica over) courtesans are the only women in which
education is encouraged, since they are the confidants and bedtime
advisors of nobles and generals.
By taking this path, rather than following her friend, Beatrice (Moira
Kelly), into the sheltered life of an arranged marriage, Veronica hopes
to be Marco's lover, since she can't be his husband.  But will Marco be
accepting of the love of a courtesan?
Dangerous Beauty is at its best when it is lighthearted, a mood which
dominates most of the film.  However, there are moments, particularly in
the film's finale, when the film's tone shifts to one of deadly
seriousness. At such times, the dreadful self-importance threatens to
overwhelm the film.  Luckily, they don't make up the bulk of the film.
As long as you have an open mind about the film's subject matter, the
playful attitude of Dangerous Beauty wins out.
Catherine McCormack delivers a splendid performance as Veronica,
believably running the gamut from innocent to...not so innocent, with an
appropriate mix of inquisitiveness and longing. Though Rufus Sewell
turns in a decent performance as her would-be lover, Oliver Platt steals
the show as his penniless friend, Maffio, who engages Veronica in a
battle of wits, while he secretly longs for her.
The film faithfully recreates 16th century Venice, with some stunning
vistas along the canals.  The beautiful scenery helps to enhance the
atmosphere which made Venice one of the most decadent cities of its
time.
Dangerous Beauty is anything but the stuffy period drama a cursory look
might curse it to seem.  As a lighthearted and funny look (most of the
time) at 16th century mores, the movie is a delightful sweet to savor.
- Matt Williams (matt@shreck.com)
Reviewer for Shreck's Cinema: http://www.shreck.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Scott Renshaw
DANGEROUS BEAUTY 
(Warner Bros.)
Starring:  Catherine McCormack, Rufus Sewell, Oliver Platt, Moira Kelly,
Jacqueline Bisset, Fred Ward.
Screenplay:  Jeannine Dominy, based on the novel "The Honest Courtesan" by
Margaret Rosenthal.
Producers:  Marshall Herkovitz, Edward Zwick, Arnon Milchan, Sarah Caplan.
Director:  Marshall Herskovitz.
MPAA Rating:  R (nudity, sexual situations, adult themes, profanity)
Running Time:  115 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     For quite a while, DANGEROUS BEAUTY tempts you with an irresistable
combination of compelling substance in a glorious package...quite fitting,
considering the premise.  Based on Maragaret Rosenthal's fact-based "The
Honest Courtesan," it tells the story of Veronica Franco (BRAVEHEART's
Catherine McCormack), a young woman of humble means in 1583 Venice.  With
no dowry to offer, Veronic has little hope of ever being a suitable match
for her beloved Marco Venier (Rufus Sewell), a gentleman of high station.
In fact, her mother (Jacqueline Bisset) offers that Veronica's only hope
of a good life which can support her family is to become a courtesan to
the powerful men of Venice.  Though she initially recoils at the idea,
Veronica soon finds herself one of the most desired women in venice,
sharing her bed with senators, kings, bishops...and yes, even the
now-married Marco.
     If you smell a tale of degradation and class warfare in the making,
sniff again.  DANGEROUS BEAUTY actually paints quite a rosy portrait of
Veronica's life while presenting an intriguing history lesson in gender
politics.  While the noble ladies of Venice were able to marry well, they
paid the price with their tongues and minds.  Denied education, property
or participation in public life, a good wife faced a lifetime of staying
home, bearing children and sitting quietly in a corner with her sewing.
Veronica, on the other hand, learns that a courtesan is expected to seduce
not just with her body, but with her mind as well.  She learns of history
and art, writes love poetry and interacts with men as they discuss the
issues of the day.  When the other option is mute insignificance,
prostitution suddenly seems considerably less cruel a fate.
     Director Marshall Herskovitz wraps this tale in enough style, romance
and humor that it's usually as entertaining as it is provocative.
Sumptuous production design renders 16th century Venice in romanticized
colors and dark interiors, accentuated by Lucianna Arrighi's marvelous
costumes.  The central pairing of Sewell and McCormack generates heat and
tension as the two characters negotiate the tricky parameters of their
relationship.  Then again, McCormack never hits a single false note in her
performance, her expressive face registering emotions ranging from
innocence to astonishment to wicked wit.  Her sense of liberation as she
achieves a level of equality a "lady" could never achieve anchors the
film's strongest scenes, including a battle of verse with Marco's cousin
Maffio (Oliver Platt) and an encounter with oblivious Venitian wives
forced to quiz her on the war in which their husbands are engaged.
     For well over three quarters of its running time, DANGEROUS BEAUTY is
an unqualified pleasure.  You can feel free to leave the theater when the
plague strikes fair Venice, because at that point it quickly degenerates
into thematic proclamations and over-wrought courtroom confrontations.  It
certainly doesn't help matters that the court in question is an
Inquisition court charging harlotry and witchcraft as the causes of the
plague, providing plenty of opportunity for right-thinking audience
members to cluck their tongues at religious hypocrisy and demagoguery.
After offering well over an hour of subversive notions cloaked in costume
drama, Jeannine Dominy's script plants Veronica on a soapbox for the
deliver of an I-am-Renaissance-woman-hear-me-roar manifesto, inspiring all
and sundry to leap to their feet in an "Oh Captain, my Captain" show of
solidarity.  Don't let those cheap theatrics wash the good taste of the
rest of DANGEROUS BEAUTY out of your mouth.  McCormack's radiant
performance and an unusual exploration of primitive feminism give it the
real punch its forced conclusion tries too hard to provide.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Warner Bros./Regency Enterprises
 Director:  Marshall Herskovitz
 Writer:  Jeannine Dominy, biography by Margaret Rosenthal
 Cast: Catherine McCormack, Rufus Sewell, Jacqueline
Bisset, Oliver Platt, Moira Kelly, Joanna Cassidy, Fred Ward,
Jeroen Krabbe
    A movie, play or novel that takes place in the distant past
gains resonance when we in the present can see its universal
truths. Thus the conflict between Montagues and Capulets in
Shakespeare's "Romeo and Juliet" becomes the rivalry
between the Latinos and mostly Polish Americans in Arthur
Laurents' "West Side Story" and Julius Caesar turns into
Mussolini in contemporary versions of that slice of political
theater.  As you watch "Dangerous Beauty," which is set in
the Venice of the late 16th century, your mind may well
wander to today's news-monopolizing headlines about the
Monica Lewinsky affair, which has taken the shape of a story
about a young woman who has allegedly used her feminine
wiles in part to get herself employment in the glamour field of
women's cosmetics.  There are differences, as expected,
since in Jeannine Dominy's screenplay, based on a bio by
another woman, Margaret Rosenthal, the principal character--
who insists on a life of independence from the constrictions of
society--has little choice.  But similarities abound, in no small
part because in both the Lewinsky situation and that of the
person of Veronica Franco four centuries earlier, the mothers
are mentoring their daughters in their chosen, ill-reputed
avocations.
   "Dangerous Beauty" is the story of the lovely Veronica
Franco (Catherine McCormack), seemingly in her early
twenties, who is madly in love with the curly-haired Marco
Vernier (Rufus Sewell).  Marco has tasted the pleasures of
quite a number of the Venice aristocracy and loves Veronica
in return, but is culturally constricted.  Because of his high
position in the Venetian nobility, he is constrained by his
father (Jerome Krabbe) to marry someone of equal stature. 
Though Veronica's family has had a coat of arms for the past
seven hundred years, she has no dowry.  She is neither here
nor there.  Too blue-blooded to consider wedlock with
someone in the more proletarian orders and not sufficiently
wellborn to mate up with Marco, she is directed by her mother
Paola (Jacqueline Bisset) to become a courtesan, i.e. a high-
class prostitute, revealing that both Paola and Paola mother
were courtesans in their own youth.  
   Now, a courtesan in the Venice of the time is no
streetwalker but is, rather, quite the opposite.  She is a
woman sought out by the betters of the city-state because
she is intelligent, has an education far surpassing that of the
typical noble lady, and is as well-versed in protocol as the
graduate of any top American finishing school today.  She is
sought after for her cerebral charms as much as for her
carnal bent, principally by high-born fellows bored with their
vapid wives and bimbo girl friends.  The picture, directed with
only a portion of tongue in cheek by Marshall Herskovitz, is at
once a romance, an education in European politics, a feminist
tract, and an outright hoot.  The scene which best exemplifies
these missions is one in which Veronica is playing host to the
king of France, a man whose influence is badly needed by
Venice's ruler, since he has the power to lend the Italian city-
state the ships it needs to fight the invading Turks.  A night
with Veronica pursuing activities so strenuous that the king
can barely sit on the royal cushion in the morning leads to the
king's granting this favor to the doge.  Veronica becomes,
then, the face that launched a hundred ships.
   Perhaps no picture has done more to elevate the hooker's
status in the world than "Dangerous Beauty," formerly "The
Honest Courtesan," a title that was scrapped allegedly
because the producers feared that the public would think it
was a movie about cortisone.  Veronica is transformed by her
mother from a lovesick virgin to a courtly companion almost
overnight, acquiring an instant education at about the time
she learns to walk on shoes that could keep podiatrists in
business for several lifetimes.  She charms the nobility during
the day by matching her skill at inventing verse with Maffio
(Oliver Platt), a courtier and poet who grows to hate his rival
because he cannot afford a night in her boudoir.
   Of the performers, only Mr. Platt is miscast.  His ideal role
would have been that of a fool, a Sancho Panza to a story's
Quixote as in the forthcoming movie, "Bulworth."  The bulgy-
eyed Rufus Sewell, quickly becoming a hot property with a
role in the critically acclaimed "Dark City" which was released
at about the time of this film, is sexy enough.  But in shaping
his character, we wonder whether scripter Dominy is indulging
a male fantasy, that of a man who is eagerly sought in
marriage because of his repetitive conquests of other women
rather than in spite of this trait.  Jacqueline Bisset is the
woman most pleasant to look at, a mother more alluring than
Catherine McCormack, and in fact the whole picture is a
pretty spectacle filmed by Bojan Bazelli with post-card
splendor.  If producers Herskovitz, Ed Zwick, Arnon Mitchan
and Sarah Caplan were willing to write off some of their
audience by taking the story more seriously, the English
language would have to be scrapped in favor of Italian with
subtitles.  In any event, the story is involving throughout and
effectively carries the message that a smart woman will do
what she has to do to make it in a society which is still run by
men.  Rated R.  Running Time: 115 minutes.  (C) 1998
Harvey Karten  

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Poor Veronica.  She's in love with the wealthy Senator, Marco Venier.
But because of that pesky caste system, it is impossible for them to
marry.  So Veronica does the next logical thing.  She becomes a
courtesan.
Such is the allegedly true story behind Dangerous Beauty, a beautiful
yet unintentionally hilarious look at high-class whores in 1583 Venice.
Catherine McCormack (Braveheart) is Veronica, the milky-breasted hottie
with hair of spun copper who falls for her unobtainable hunk, the
bug/lazy-eyed nobleman played by Rufus Sewell (Dark City).  Luckily,
they live in a time when mistresses are pretty much acceptable.
Veronica's Mom (Jacqueline Bisset), a former courtesan (as was her
Mother), shows her future-slut-of-a-daughter the hooking ropes.  She
starts slowly, teaching Veronica how to properly eat and drink like a
seductive concubine and then quickly builds up to the proper technique
for `man-handling' the johns.
Showing little remorse or inhibition in her new profession, Veronica
eagerly pleases her first lay and quickly becomes the most popular
trollop in all of Venice.  She also possesses a unique flare for poetry,
which strangely makes the guys want her even more.  Early on, the city
is sent in to a tizzy by a very public and very silly sword and pen
fight between Veronica and Maffio Venier (Oliver Platt, A Time to Kill),
a friend of Marco.
When the Venetian warmongers turn to France for help in the impending
war over Cypress, the visiting horndog King Henry takes immediate notice
of Veronica and makes it clear that if she pleases him, he will lend his
ships for battle.  Now this King Henry is twice the man of both faggy
Prince Edward from Braveheart and the upcoming limp-wristed King Louis
in The Man in the Iron Mask.  Our Veronica shags him so well that he
commits most of his fleet.
So far, so good, but the story takes an idiotic twist involving the
plague and the religious right.  See, the church blames the plague on
the courtesans and, even though she curled the toes of the King of
France for her fair city, Veronica is deemed deserving of death for
being a dirty stinking harlot.  There is a big dumb Holy Inquisition
scene that borders on being wildly ridiculous.
I expected a more depressing ending from director Marshall Herskovitz
and producer Edward Zwick, the gloomy minds behind the quality
television tear-jerkers thirtysomething, My So Called Life and
relativity and, more dramatically, Legends of the Fall.  Herskovitz and
cinematographer Bojan Bazelli (Kalifornia) craft pictures of an
astonishingly dazzling quality.  The soft warm lighting brings to mind
the works of Emmanuel Lubezki (Like Water for Chocolate), Darius Khondji
(Stealing Beauty) and maybe even the Vaseline-coated photography of
Gerald Perry Finnerman (Moonlighting).
McCormack is thoroughly mesmerizing as Veronica, blending the
tantalizing qualities of both the Virgin Mother and Mary Magdalene
simultaneously.  She also resembles former Sports Illustrated swimsuit
model Paulina Porizkova.  Her beauty was obviously played down in
Braveheart as her acting skills were in Loaded.  Sewell is merely
adequate in his role, although the sex scene between the two is one of
the hottest screen spectacles since Broken English.
Dangerous Beauty could have been a much better movie if it didn't take
the ugly turn towards Demi Moore's The Scarlet Letter.  But, I guess
when you're filming a true story, you don't have too many options to
liven things up.  And, in this case, that's just too bad.
