Title
Review for Short Cuts (1993)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  Several unrelated stories by Raymond
     Carver are braided together into one overly-long telling.
     Carver's Pacific Northwest tales are moved to Los Angeles.
     Unfortunately none of the individual stories is particularly
     interesting and the whole is little more than the sum of
     those parts.  Rating low +1 (-4 to +4).
     By all accounts the stories of Raymond Carver are strong on describing
the texture of life in the Pacific Northwest, but plotwise have been
described as "minimalist."  In SHORT CUTS, Robert Altman relocates those
stories to give a feeling for the texture of life in Los Angeles.  In fact,
they probably could have been moved to Massachusetts, Texas, or Wisconsin
without doing much harm.  The narrative approach is a lot like that of
1980's SERIAL, though the end result is neither so cohesive nor so humorous.
     There is no single unifying element to the stories tied together in
SHORT CUTS, though many of the plotlines do involve men who act selfishly
and in unfeeling ways.  A philandering traffic cop secretly rids himself of
the family's obnoxious but loved dog.  Some friends on a fishing trip put
off reporting the discovery of a body in order to get in more fishing.  An
alcoholic keeps pestering his long-suffering wife who seems unaccountably to
love him in spite of his personality.  Another man executes a painstaking
revenge against his former wife.  Revenge is also on the mind of another man
who terrorizes a woman over what seems like a trivial offense.  This film is
over three hours long to tell all these stories simultaneously, yet none of
the stories is particularly enthralling in itself.  What becomes more
interesting is the manner in which these minor stories are tied together
with each story touching nearly all the others.  However, that also strains
the credibility a bit since all these people have dramatic stories which
start within hours of each other and end the same way.  The main story line
is of Ann and Howard Finnigan (played by Andie McDowell and Bruce Davison)
facing a crisis when their son is hit by a car.  Ralph and Marian Wyman
(Matthew Modine and Julianne Moore) have unfinished business about and
incident in Marian's past.  Jerry Kaiser (Chris Penn) can't quite come to
terms with his wife's (Jennifer Jason Leigh) phone sex business.  And the
list of plots could go on and on.
     Robert Altman directs and co-authored the screenplay with Frank
Barhydt.  The style is remiscent of NASHVILLE with its set of intertwined
stories, but without nearly so much a sense of why tell this particular set
of stories.  Perhaps one advantage to this manner of story-telling is to
allow the viewer to see the diversity of lifestyles that can be found in one
small community.  The stories include liberal amounts of female nudity,
often with no more necessity than to dress up (or undress) a scene.  There
are several scenes of light comedy, warm humanity, or cold tragedy.  One
sequence will seem very timely but at the same time the flaws of the
sequence will be more obvious than when the film was made.
     SHORT CUTS is yet another film this year that did not quite come up to
most critic's estimation.  My rating is low +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     The Raymond Carver stories adapted in SHORT CUTS as reported in VARIETY
are "Jerry and Molly and Sam," "Will You Please Be Quiet, Please?,"
"Collectors," "Neighbors," "A Small Good Thing," "So Much Water So Close to
Home," "They're Not Your Husband," "Vitamins," "Tell the Women We're Going,"
and the poem "Lemonade."

Author
C Roberts
Starring Andie MacDowell, Jack Lemmon, Tim Robbins, Lily Tomlin, Annie Ross.
     I have previously admired the satirical content of Robert Altmans
work in THE PLAYER and POPEYE.  However these leave one unprepared for
SHORT CUTS which must rate as one of the more scathing critiques of
suburban life!
     It implies that the most educated generation in the world inhabit
an environment where no one feels a need to recourse to a newspaper and
conversation has been reduced to monosyllables.
     A portrait of women who potter through life completely engrossed
by the next party, but occasionally managing to retain their common
sense.  This contrasts with all but one of the male characters, who
seem to stumble blindly on with no standards whatever!  Is this Raymond
Carver's vision of hell?  Was it Altman who added the earthquake to shake
some sense into them?
     It is a very curious thing to see a director use such a realistic
setting to convey a feeling of supreme decadence.  As humorous as a
bird watching a snake.  Like a painting by De Kooning, this work exists
not in the marks on the canvas, but in the emotional response
experienced by the viewer.  (Beyond natural empathy, eh?)
     We are all neighbours.  In fact thats the name of one of one of
the myriad of "soaps" shown for families on U.K. television, which draw
their content from prurient tabloid headlines.
     Altman's film, which makes those observing children integral to
the plot, can be appreciated for its ingenuity and wit.  The Australian
and British soaps which employ such similar themes cannot.  Judging by
their ratings Im in the minority, having banned them from my household
on grounds of taste.  This director has I think put his finger on the
problem.  Whilst we must all endeavour to mind our own business,
indifference is a value we pass on to children children at our peril.
     NB.  This film is awful.  The people involved have gone to immense
time and trouble to make it precisely so.  Its brilliance lies in the
subtlety of its indictment.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Andie MacDowell, Bruce Davison, Lily Tomlin, Tom Waits,
           Anne Archer, Fred Ward, Tim Robbins, Madeleine Stowe,
           Julianne Moore, Matthew Modine.
Screenplay:  Robert Altman and Frank Barhydt.
Director:  Robert Altman.
     Point #1:  Raymond Carver purists might be extremely disappointed
in what Robert Altman has done to some of the best short stories
written in the English language.  The interlocking story structure of
SHORT CUTS does not serve those stories well, and the small pathos of
Carver's Pacific Northwest isn't the same in Altman's Los Angeles.
     Point #2:  SHORT CUTS stands independently as a splendid film
achievement, a brutally funny collection of fragments from broken lives
crafted by a director with renewed vitality.  Only an abiding cynicism
and the uneven appeal of the nine main stories mar this dynamic, poetic
work.
     SHORT CUTS follows 22 characters through four days in contemporary
Los Angeles.  Howard and Ann Finnigan (Bruce Davison, Andie MacDowell)
are an upscale couple whose young son is hit by a car driven by Doreen
Piggot (Lily Tomlin).  Doreen is a waitress with a drunken husband (Tom
Waits) and a disaffected daughter, Honey (Lili Taylor).  Honey is
married to Hollywood make-up artist Bill (Robert Downey Jr.), and best
friends with Jerry and Lois (Chris Penn, Jennifer Jason Leigh).  Howard
and Ann's son is cared for by Dr. Ralph Wyman (Matthew Modine), who is
married to aspiring artist Marion (Julianne Moore).  Marion's sister
Sherri (Madeleine Stowe) is married to philandering cop Gene (Tim
Robbins), who's having an affair with Betty (Frances McDormand), much
to the dismay of Betty's estranged husband Stormy (Peter Gallagher).
Also in the milieu are the Finnigans' next door neighbors, a night club
singer (Annie Ross) and her cellist daughter (Lori Singer), and Claire
and Stuart Kane (Anne Archer, Fred Ward), a clown and her unemployed
husband.
     SHORT CUTS is about those moments when individuals are at their
most basic, naked and vulnerable.  Indeed, nakedness and scatology play
a key role in the film, perhaps more than some viewers might find
palatable.  Characters in SHORT CUTS pop zits, break wind, urinate into
streams, talk bluntly about sexuality and wander around in various
states of undress, but none of these elements ever seem gratuitous.
These are the hidden moments when men and women reveal themselves, full
of insecurity, guilt and fear, and SHORT CUTS captures them with a
stunning grace.  In one of the film's most memorable moments, Julianne
Moore stands before husband Matthew Modine making a painful confession,
with evidence that she is a natural redhead in full view.  In another
scene, Bruce Davison squirms while his father (marvelously played by
Jack Lemmon) describes the tryst that led to his estrangement from his
family thirty years before.  This is a film loaded with individual
moments that slam home with the intensity of reality recognized, and
frequently inspire nervous laughter.
     In my estimation, however, Altman erred in the decision to
interlock his stories.  While the structure serves a purpose in
emphasizing a great tapestry of lives, the impact of Carver's
individual stories is largely lost.  "Neighbors," in which a couple
begins living vicariously through the apartment they are taking care
of, is reduce to a couple of white trash folk messing up a nice place;
"Collectors" becomes a single scene with a door-to-door vacuum cleaner
salesman.  It's true that I'm criticizing the film SHORT CUTS is not
rather than the film it is, but it just seems a shame that such rich
source material is given such a cursory treatment.  Altman never seems
to identify with his own characters the way Carver did, and as a result
it seems he's laughing at them and not with them.
     Opinions will vary as to which stories worked best.  I cast my lot
for the most faithful of the adaptations, "So Much Water So Close to
Home," in which Fred Ward, Buck Henry and Huey Lewis discover a dead
body while on a fishing trip.  "A Small Good Thing" also scores big
point from the fine performances of Andie MacDowell as the nervous
mother, Jack Lemmon in the previously noted turn as Bruce Davison's
father, and Lyle Lovett in a quirky appearance as a baker with a mean
streak.  The two big losers are "Neighbors" and the one story created
wholly by Altman, the relationship between a boozy singer and her
daughter which tries to fit in but always seems obviously out of
place.  The valleys, however, are few, and the peaks are massive.  At
over three hours, SHORT CUTS is anything but boring.  It's a sharp,
clever, perceptive look at life in the big city that goes for the
jugular rather than the heartstrings.  These SHORT CUTS are somewhat
cold cuts, but they're mighty tasty.

Author
Samuel Stoddard
Set in the bustle of Los Angeles, this star-studded Robert Altman
cinematic tapestry tells the interlocking stories of a host of
characters.  Tapestry is precisely the right word.  Each
character is a thread in said tapestry, who contributes to the big
picture, interacts with other characters who also contribute to the
big picture, but really have no conception as to what the big
picture looks like.
We do.  We see everything that happens to each of the characters in
the few days the film spans.  This omniscience gives us, the audience,
a unique perspective.  We can see the series of accidents and chance
that change the course of people's lives forever.  The characters
persevere, try hard to make their lives work.  Sometimes they do,
sometimes they don't.  Usually it's a mix of the two and often dictated
by happenings completely out of their control.  If each of the
characters knew everything there was to know about all the others,
how much more compassionate, less angry, might they all be, and how
much simpler their lives?  All the characters are linked to all the
others in some direct or indirect way, but no one knows everybody.
Roger Ebert surmised in his review how much things might change if
they did.  One character might never meet another character throughout
the course of the film, but has plenty of precisely what the other
needs.  Maybe some of these perfect pairs will one day meet up --
several, undoubtedly, will not.
"Real life" films rarely interest me.  This one fascinates me.  I was
not expecting to love it so -- I expected fine filmmaking, but not
necessarily fine entertainment.  Short Cuts does several
things with smashing success:  it is an upstanding example of
cinematic art, it is engrossing entertainment, it is hilariously
funny, it is poignant and moving, and it inspires an awe rarely
evoked by every day life.  Within the days that the film takes place,
there are momental events that take place, which the characters will
never forget as long as they live, and there are the routine events
that occur and are forgotten.  All of these are somehow made
fascinating in some way.  Frances McDormand's story, for instance,
about her affair with a married man and a malicious ex, borders on
hysteria.  There are no punchlines -- it's pure situational humor,
in the uncorrupted sense of the term -- and induced greater laughter
in myself than most pure comedies can do.  Andie MacDowell's story,
on the other hand, evokes our utmost concern and compassion, more so
than most pure dramas can.  Short Cuts is surprising,
shocking, and unpredictable in this fashion -- true to life, just
when things seem settled and ordinary, something happens that snaps
you attention.  And it's a different kind of thing each
time.  It might be a sudden moment of humor or horror, or a facet of
a character abruptly revealed that shows us that they're all real
people after all, not the stereotypes that a few of them seem like at
first.
Rare indeed is a film that runs over three hours yet leaves us wanting
more.  Most of the stories have resolutions of some sort, enough to
provide a necessary level of satisfaction a viewer expects from a
film.  But the end of the film isn't the end of the stories -- no
more so than the beginning of the film was the beginning of the
stories.  In real life, episodes in people's lives never really end --
they shape the people they happen to, are often recalled in sporadic
moments, and always affect their futures.  The film's open-ended
conclusion is appropriate and necessary, but it is admittedly
disconcerting to see the credits roll so soon.  It takes some
thought and reflection afterward to bring the film to a close in our
own minds.  Viewers put off by the seemingly abrupt end may not be
inclined to do so and will therefore not fully appreciate it.
But the characters must get on with their lives, and we must get
on with ours.
Visit the At-A-Glance Film Reviews page at:
 http://pubpages.unh.edu/~ss1/movies/
1500+ ratings, 600+ reviews, on films from all eras, 1918-1997.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     SHORT CUTS is a dozen short stories all neatly woven together into
a seamless whole.  It has 3 or 4 dozen stars in it - basically every
major or minor star within 30 miles of Hollywood boulevard has a part.
In SHORT CUTS, among others are: Andie MacDowell, Bruce Davison, Jack
Lemmon, Julianne Moore, Matthew Modine, Anne Archer, Fred Ward,
Jennifer Jason Leigh, Chris Penn, Josette Maccario, Robert Downey Jr.,
Madeleine Stowe, Tim Robbins, Lily Tomlin, Frances McDormand, Peter
Gallagher, Lori Singer, Lyle Lovett, and even Alex Trebek.  Finally, it
is a war picture since it describes itself as "set in LA during the
Medfly wars." Most of all, however, it is a Robert Altman film.
     Let me be candid with you and confess that I have seen most of
Altman's works, and I generally rank them from so-bad-I-walked-out to
watchable-with-some-good-parts.  This movie blew me away, perhaps
because I love documentaries so much (e.g., SHERMAN'S MARCH or 35 UP).
The screenwriters (Robert Altman, Frank Barhydt, and Raymond Carver)
and the editor (Geraldine Peroni) take about 12 hours worth of material
and boil it down to 3 short hours of utter fascination.
     With the exception of the bad singer who sang terrible, cliched
songs, every character was extremely interesting and different.  It was
a tribute to the script that you could even get to recognize much less
care about this many characters in so short a time.  I admit it did
start a bit slow since it had a lot of people to introduce.  The
hospital scene with the very sick little boy was so real that I had to
keep myself twice from praying for him!
     The camerawork and editing was handled especially well - never
choppy, yet it switched around a lot among the stories.  They used the
technique popularized in the movie SLACKER where the character in story
A goes by the character in story B and the camera switches from A to B
without changing momentum.  Also, most of the stories had a character
that linked it to another.
     That the occupations were so varied was another reason it had a
documentary feel.  We had swimming pool cleaners, doctors, artists,
makeup students, unemployed, clowns, airline pilots, housewives, etc.
Made it feel like a real cross section of society.  Like most Hollywood
movies however they have no idea how many people smoke these days.  80%
of the people smoked cigarettes in this movie whereas it is closer to
20% in the real world.  Also too much smoking of dope in the show as
sort of a natural thing to do.  One of the lines in the movie was "All
they ever do in LA is snort coke and shout."
     SHORT CUTS runs 3:07, but I would not have wanted them to cut it
down at all.  It is rated R for drug use, nudity, sex, etc.  It would
be okay for older teenagers if you go with them.  I am still thinking
about the show, give it *** 1/2, and recommend it to you highly.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Dragan Antulov
In my country, TV shows dedicated to seventh art tend to be
named after great or popular films. Our national television
so far had two such shows - one named after A FISTFULL OF
DOLLARS and another named after VERTIGO. Local television in
my home town adopted the same practices - for the past five
or so years, the movie show is named after SHORT CUTS, 1993
drama by Robert Altman. That film perhaps owes such honour
mostly to its "cool" title, but it is nevertheless
considered to be the one of the most important and most
successful films of early 1990s.
The film is based on the short stories by late American
writer Raymond Carver. Script by Altman and Frank Barhydt
changed the scenery from Pacific Northwest and brought it to
Los Angeles where the plot takes place few days before the
earthquake. The film actually lacks the plot in the usual
sense of the word - instead there are nine vignettes in
which we are introduced to few dozen characters. All of
those characters are faced with variety of problems which
are difficult but mundane - couple must deal with a death of
a child, husband has difficulties accepting his wife as
phone sex operator, participants in the fishing expedition
must decide whether to spoil their fun by reporting dead
body to police etc. Those vignettes are connected through
characters from one briefly appearing in another and they
would all end with the earthquake at the end of the film.
One of the most popular descriptions of SHORT CUTS is "the
shortest 3-hour movie in history". This catchphrase, very
popular among 1990s critics, seemed impossible for many of
those who followed Altman's career a decade earlier. Once
one of the most celebrated directors, Altman was practically
exiled from Hollywood in the era of Lucas and Spielberg,
since everyone began thinking about his films as "too
artsy", "hermetic" and incomprehensible to the average
viewer. Altman made a comeback with a style in 1992 and got
even with Hollywood establishment by mercilessly satire in
PLAYER. One year later, Altman finally got his satisfaction
by having one of such "artsy" and "hermetic" films being
lauded as one of the most important American films in 1990s.
SHORT CUTS in many ways resembles NASHVILLE, another
Altman's film populated with myriad of characters and their
stories accidentally intertwined on the same place. However,
this time Altman doesn't want to use satire in order to
expose specific cultural phenomenon (he would do it one year
later in PRET-A-PORTER); his goals are more ambitious and he
wants to expose modern life in all of its horror. He uses
camera as god-like instrument that allows the audience to
have insight into the most private and intimate details of
protagonist's lives, while in the same time he allows
audience powerless to change horrific fates that await some
unfortunate individuals in the film. SHORT CUTS is powerful,
gripping film in which the black humour often intertwines
with tragedy - one of the example is the scene in which a
boy gets hit by a car only to refuse the offer of
guilt-stricken driver to be taken to hospital, justifying
his decision with the most sensible advice given by his
parents. Actually, all the misery in this film comes from
understandable, down-to-earth human frailties as well as
equally down-to- earth and understandable twists of fate.
However, although Altman's masterful hands manage to keep
our attention from the beginning till the end, SHORT CUTS
doesn't deserve all of the praise received by the critics.
Since the material is so diverse, it is natural to expect
that some characters and vignettes would work and some would
not. Among the latter is the love story between alcoholic
Earl (played by Tom Waits) and his long-suffering wife
Doreen (played by Lily Tomlin). Quality of acting also
varies from vignette to vignette and from character to
character. It is interesting to find that the most powerful
performances come from a relatively obscure actor like Lyle
Lovett, while more established actress like Julianne Moore
gets remembered mostly for her willingness to appear
partially nude in front of camera. Another distraction in
SHORT CUTS comes from rather irritating musical soundtrack
by Mark Isham and Gavin Friday, dominated by jazz tunes.
However, although SHORT CUTS had its formula later used by
other, perhaps even more successful and talented filmmakers,
it still provides an interesting viewing experience and
clear demonstration of the talent of a very important
American filmmaker.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Jon A. Webb
     SHORT CUTS is a kind of 90s sequel to NASHVILLE.  The location is
L.A., and the theme is sex.  Like Altman's last film, THE PLAYER, this
film is filled with stars, but here they are playing characters.  An
early joke has Alex Trebek appearing in a cameo role.
     I thought all the actors did well, with the exception of Matthew
Modine.  For some reason he seems off his mark here: his lines sound
amateurish and flat.  This is odd, because he's playing a character
he's played before, in GROSS ANATOMY.  (In fact, almost all the actors
are playing characters they've played before, more or less.)
     I found Tim Robbins the most fun to watch.  He plays a
philandering, self-important cop, very broadly and with almost
slapstick wit.  The scene with the megaphone is a classic.
     On the whole the film does not have as much impact as NASHVILLE,
probably because Altman simply does not have as much to say now as he
did then.  It must be nice to know everyone, and to be so respected
that they all want to work with you, but that in itself does not seem
to me to be enough reason to make a film.
     Given the content, the film is also overlong.  Three-hour films
should be reserved for movies with great themes.  It is still an
entertaining film, with a remarkable cast and excellent direction, but
I felt as though I was looking at the imitation of film art.

Author
James Berardinelli
     Date Released:  10/7/93 (limited); 10/22/93 (general)
     Running Length:  3:09
     Rated:  R (Full frontal nudity, mature themes, language)
Helicopters thunder through the air over Los Angeles, raining down 
malathion on the city in an attempt to end the dreaded Medfly invasion.  
Below, in each house and apartment, an individual drama is being played 
out.  As in any human settlement at any time in history, there is joy, 
sadness, jealousy, fear, reconciliation, pain, and death.  With SHORT 
CUTS, a film by director Robert Altman based on nine short stories and 
one poem by the late Raymond Carver, the audience is given a glimpse into 
several of those dramas.
Infidelity mars two marriages, while a tragic accident to another 
couple's son brings their lives to an abrupt halt.  A trio of fishing 
buddies find a dead girl's body floating near their campsite.  Another 
marriage is troubled by a husband's uncertainty about his wife's career 
choice - running a phone sex business.  A man decides to teach his 
estranged wife a little something about the real meaning of "dividing 
things up", and a mother and daughter discover the pain that can come 
from not communicating.
Twenty-two characters and ten tales - it would take a master to 
interweave all of these into a seamless whole.  There are few directors 
who would tackle the challenge, and fewer still who could succeed.  Not 
only has Robert Altman faced the Herculean task, but he has emerged 
victorious.  SHORT CUTS is a magnificent triumph, an example that dramas 
can still be found that don't make use of the time-honored tactics of 
manipulation and oversentimentalization.
Each of the stories told in SHORT CUTS (except perhaps one) could easily 
warrant its own movie.  There are facets of each character that are left 
completely unexplored and, in a sense, we're still waiting for more when 
the final credits begin to roll.  In spite of the long running time, 
there's a lot left unsaid and undone by the time the movie slides into 
home plate.
What is impressive about SHORT CUTS is not only that it tackles so many 
diverse personalities and situations - and presents them well - but that 
it manages to interconnect them in a manner that doesn't leave the viewer 
shaking his head in confusion.  The texture of this film is rich beyond 
belief, and the three hours flies by.  Fans of Carver, however, should 
check their expectations at the door - these are in no way strict 
adaptations (as the change of setting from the Pacific Northwest to 
angst-riddled LA indicates).  Altman admits that SHORT CUTS is "not a 
verbatim retelling of Carver's works, but rather a cinematic 
interpretation of their essence."
Altman has surrounded himself with an ensemble cast that includes some 
highly-respected names.  Some of these actors he has worked with before; 
others are new to his fold.  For the most part, the performances are 
solidly-executed, although there are instances of overacting.  Matthew 
Modine, Andie MacDowell, Madeleine Stowe, and Tim Robins have moments of 
anger that fail to ring true.  However, in the overall scope of things, 
this is a minor complaint.
As is almost always the case in a movie of this nature, there will be a 
story or two that won't interest you much, and a certain group of 
characters which, for one reason or another, will enthrall you.  One of 
the strongest attributes of SHORT CUTS is that the stories occupying the 
"middle ground" have something compelling about them.  What you choose as 
the best and worst of the tales will likely be based on personal 
experience and preference.  Viewers more easily drawn to humor will enjoy 
those portions of the film that are comedy-oriented.  For the record, my 
favorite sequences involve three families - the Kaisers (Chris Penn and 
Jennifer Jason Leigh), the Finnigans (Andie MacDowell and Bruce Davison), 
and the Shepards (Madeleine Stowe and Tim Robbins).  The weakest 
portions, on the other hand, feature husband-and-wife Earl and Doreen 
Piggot (Tom Waits and Lily Tomlin), and the fishing expedition (Fred 
Ward, Buck Henry, and Huey Lewis).
In some ways, SHORT CUTS is loosely-reminiscent of last year's GRAND 
CANYON.  In this case, the project is more ambitious and the premise less 
forced, but there are noticeable similarities.  Doubtlessly, SHORT CUTS 
is the better of the two films (GRAND CANYON couldn't resist resorting to 
a little deft manipulation), but some of the same themes are explored, 
and some of the same motifs (including an earthquake) used.
Also worth mentioning are the inevitable comparisons to Robert Altman's 
own NASHVILLE (considered by some critics to be his best work).  Both 
that film and SHORT CUTS are effective ensemble movies, even if some of 
the things that they try to do are different.  For those that got hooked 
on Altman with THE PLAYER, however, beware - this movie bears little 
resemblance to 1992's biting satire.
Some controversy has been stirred up about SHORT CUTS' inclusion of 
apparently-gratuitous nudity.  Madeleine Stowe and Frances McDormand bear 
their breasts, Lori Singer leaps into a pool in the buff, Julianne Moore 
argues with her husband without a stitch on below the waist, and Huey 
Lewis urinates with the camera watching him from the front.  While it's 
clear that all of these scenes could have been filmed differently (and 
more discreetly), director Altman has a decided reason for doing each the 
way he did.  The result is certainly not titillating, and given the 
impact of the film, it's hard to question Altman's judgment in these 
instances.  
It's a genuine pleasure to find a movie with such a deep and intelligent 
portrayal of simple human lives, with all their minor triumphs and 
tragedies.  SHORT CUTS is a grand, and highly-successful, film because it 
doesn't force more on us than the kinds of things that we personally have 
experience with.  This motion picture is an example of a highly-respected 
modern director in top form.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
