Title
Review for Paper, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
12

Author
Tak
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     Henry Hackett (Michael Keaton), editor of a big-city newspaper
tabloid, is hot on a big story that could expose a major scandal and
free two innocent young men charged with murder--if he can meet his
deadline for the morning edition.  With his wife (Marisa Tomei) about
to give birth, his managing editor (Glenn Close) locking horns with him
and a rival newspaper trying to lure him over, Hackett is facing more
than one crisis in this everyday adventure: this day is going to change
his life forever.
Tak Thoughts 
------------
     If you think *you* lead a stressful life, maybe seeing THE PAPER
will change your mind.  The running time of THE PAPER depicts more
stress than I've been subjected to in months, and it's all supposed to
happen over a period of twenty-four hours.  Yeesh.
     In this time span, we follow a heap of different plot lines, all
intertwined with Hackett's pursuit of a big expose that could free two
innocents.  He's also interviewing for another job and reassuring his
distraught wife.  The harried editor is worried about his medical
condition and trying to reunite with his estranged daughter.  A host of
reporters are out on the street doing research, most with their own
problems, including hiding from an angry city official.  To top it all
off, Glenn Close's character actively tries to stymie Hackett's story,
while simultaneously schmoozing to re-negotiate her own contract.
     There's *so* much going on in this movie, you can't help but be
overwhelmed.  Especially in the newsroom.  In one scene, Hackett is
juggling three people on hold and conducting an argument in his
office.  It's common to have many conversations going on at once (I
counted five in one scene), and there's always something happening in
the background if you have time to look. (Watch for five clocks)
     The characters in THE PAPER were great.  Glenn Close's has
unintentionally turned into everything she previously hated ("You're a
manager now, if everyone liked you, you'd be doing something wrong.").
Robert Duvall is the gruff editor in chief ("The trouble with being my
age is that everyone looks up to you as a father figure, but you know
that you're still the same old asshole.").  Marisa Tomei is Hatckett's
wife, an apprehensive career reporter who's envious that her husband
can still pursue his career ("Hypothetical situation: If a gunman said
he was going to shoot me or blow up the [office], which would you
choose?").  Then add more newsroom characters--the kid photographer,
the whiny complainer, the conspiracy nut, and varied screwballs.
     And did I mention that it's funny too?  There are one-liners,
hilarious arguments, amusing situations and funny events throughout.
     The trick to enjoying this highly charged, funny and complex movie
is staying detached and *watching* all the excitement.  If I'm not
careful, I get too involved in a movie--if it's even halfway decent, I
feel right along with a character.  Which is great if I'm watching
feel-good stuff.  Depending on your personality, watching THE PAPER
might get you a) stressed out, b) pumped, c) excited and/or d) amused.
Unfortunately for my date, I mostly got stressed out.
Tak Rating:
-----------
     I liked THE PAPER--it's exciting, funny, stressful and dramatic.
I'll gladly accompany my friends to see it again.  There's bound to be
more to catch the second time.  And I'll certainly never see my daily
newspaper in quite the same way after THE PAPER.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Michael Keaton, Glenn Close, Robert Duvall, Marisa Tomei, 
          Randy Quaid, Jason Alexander, Spalding Gray  
Director:  Ron Howard 
Producers:  Brian Grazer and Frederick Zollo 
Screenplay: Stephen and David Koepp 
Music:  Randy Newman 
Released by Universal Pictures 
     Ron Howard has a history of making entertaining films that tend
towards weak conclusions (one could call this the "happy endings"
syndrome).  Joining PARENTHOOD and FAR AND AWAY in this category is
Mr.  Howard's newest release, THE PAPER.  For something that starts out
as a boisterous, amusing, potentially-incisive look at the newspaper
business and the people who run it, this motion picture finishes with a
relative whimper.
     Henry Hackett (Michael Keaton) is at a watershed, and the next
twenty-four hours are going to determine a lot--perhaps more than he
could imagine.  Caught in a dilemma between two jobs--his current one
at the tabloid-like NEW YORK SUN and an offer from the prestigious NEW
YORK SENTINEL--Henry must make a decision.  On one hand there are
factors that argue for the career change:  his pregnant wife Martha
(Marisa Tomei) wants security and his bitter feud with his boss Alicia
Clark (Glenn Close) is getting nastier by the moment.  On the other
hand, Henry doesn't want to leave the friendly chaos of THE SUN and the
friends he has made while there.
     No viewer is likely to be bored during THE PAPER.  The film moves
along quickly, using mobile cameras and rapid cuts to keep the energy
level high and the pacing crisp.  This is especially true in the
newsroom scenes, as director Ron Howard attempts to convey the spirit
and atmosphere of the disorganized-but-productive work environment.
His eye for detail is evident.
     Away from the paper's offices, the movie is less successful.  The
personal lives of Henry and his co-workers aren't all that interesting,
and seem scripted rather than real.  This is especially true during the
drawn-out melodrama that characterizes the last fifteen minutes.  There
are also several out-of-place scenes with Robert Duvall and Jason
Alexander commiserating at a bar.  The contrivance used to incorporate
these into the overall plot is a little too obvious.
     One scene within THE SUN's building that rings false takes place
in the middle of a crucial press run.  The climactic struggle that
ensues between two of the main characters looks like it belongs more in
a Three Stooges movie than a pseudo-real look at the behind-the-scenes
newspaper business.
     But there's a lot in THE PAPER that works.  Although most of the
characters are types, the actors play them with sympathy and
understanding.  Three-dimensionality may not be achieved, but attempts
are made to give the men and women in this film some depth, and the
freshness of the performances helps a great deal.
     The main performers--Keaton, Close, and Duvall--do the kinds of
solid jobs expected from them, but it's a pair of less prominent
figures that steal their share of scenes.  Randy Quaid is magnificent
as the gun- toting, paranoid McDougal.  Although not a developed
character in any sense, McDougal has some of the best one-liners.  Then
there's Spalding Gray who, in two appearances, sends up to perfection a
stuffy NEW YORK TIMES-type editor.
     The dialogue is frequently snappy--presumably the product of
screenwriters with ears for the way people actually talk.  There's a
fair amount of natural humor, and only a few occasions when the laughs
are forced.
     THE PAPER is a crowd pleaser and, regardless of any viewer's
experience (or lack thereof) with the behind-the-scenes wrangling that
goes on in newspaper offices, the story is compelling enough to be
affable and entertaining.  While there are no startling revelations
here, the film's atmosphere contains enough strength of realism that
more than one viewer may momentarily think of the goings-on at THE SUN
as they sit down with their morning cup of coffee and look at the day's
headlines.
- James Berardinelli (new e-mail address at blake7@itc.cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Director Ron Howard is a master craftsman at taking the viewer
into another profession - remember how you felt the terror of being a
fireman in BACKDRAFT?  In THE PAPER you enter the newspaper world.  You
and your colleagues have a half a day to get the front page story right
and scoop your competition.
     The movie starts at a good clip, but by the end, you are on a
roller coaster ride as the background investigative reporting just is
not happening fast enough to get to the 8pm press run.  By the end,
your heart is racing.  Wonderful images as the building actually shakes
every time the big presses run.  Although not technically realistic
perhaps, it remains a perfect metaphor.
     At a surface level, THE PAPER is a comedy.  I laughed out loud
constantly.  The script is extremely funny and Michael Keaton, as the
Metro Editor, delivers the lines as only he can.  The newsroom scene
where they are deciding on the lead story for tomorrow is great.  The
ripostes between Keaton, his boss (Glenn Close) and her boss (Robert
Duvall) are classics.  You feel like you are there and arguing with
them.
     Keaton's wife (charmingly played by Marisa Tomei) is a reporter on
maternity leave about to have a baby.  This story within the larger
story was touching and had me crying some by the end.  You see, I think
the movie ultimately is not a comedy - although it is extremely funny.
This is a first rate drama.  It simultaneously made me want to work day
and night for a newspaper like this to get out the daily big story
while at the same time it made me want to take it easy and enjoy my
family as the only thing in life that really matters.
     Okay, it is not perfect.  Keaton's boss (Close) comes in to chew
him out for something, and he interrupts her with the line "first, let
me say how great you look".  In real life, this could get you in BIG
trouble.  The cops are evil and in stupid ways.  I did not buy that
part of the plot.  The scene by the presses works great in the movie
but would never happen that way in the real world.  But, this is a
movie and a darn good one.  If I just wanted to see real life, I would
have gone to the mall.
     THE PAPER races along at 1:52 thanks to superlative editing by
Daniel P.  Hanley and Michael J.  Hilland.  It is rated R, but I
thought it should have been PG-13.  Certainly everyone above the age of
say 10 should love it.  I give it *** 1/2 and strongly recommend it to
you.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Ralph Benner
        I don't believe but a minute of Ron Howard's THE PAPER. It's
typical Howard -- showing his general competence as a storyteller and 
once more showing his insistence on making movies for the boobgoisie. If
Howard had an adult movie maker's vision and audacity, THE PAPER would be
about what's eating away at our media faster than an unchecked cancer --
the frightening Power PC speed of tabloiditis. But Howard's too
pedestrian, too ready to avoid the very issues this and some of his other
movies bring up and instead goes in for goofy fantasies: in his puerile
confusion about the real condition of journalism, he's dispensing
retrograde honor to a profession that lost its way -- way long ago. Giving
benefit of doubt he's even aware there's a very powerful danger in what's
happening in our press, the question may be -- Is Howard afraid of
tackling it? He drags everything down to a suburban ha-ha teenage level;
like James Brooks in BROADCAST NEWS, he codifies sitcom behavior. When one
half of the audience for THE PAPER is listening to the other half laugh at
scenes that don't seem to be very funny, it's like edited-in canned
audience responses used by TV comdies to cover up their emptiness. 
        The news business has become the nation's favorite whipping boy --
as well as whipper -- by the very nature of its pervasiveness. It's our
most publicly accessible, bottomless pit -- the ultimate voracious
consumer. If we attack it for its excessive abuse and callous intrusion,
we must also remember that it's often asked to be or condoned as the
national intruder -- our communal "private eye." The current recklessness
of media is the rage of disseminating fractured information: it's
"Gotcha!" before the facts. All of us have the same conflicting feelings
about the press, and especially TV news. As a nation reeling in a case of
the hates over just about everything and probably hating the press more
than anything else, we paradoxically "love" it because it makes complex
issues simplistic and debase. We don't have to think if headlines and TV
news shows scream out allegations of wrongdoings, cover-ups, scandals; the
preponderance of gossip, rumor, innuendo, grudges make it seem that
whoever is alleged to have committed a crime or violation is guilty first,
innocent -- if that even matters nowadays -- later.  (Like the apparent
joy in branding the First Lady guilty of phantom crimes.) We love being
glued to the box during a crisis or scandal or tragedy, absorbed by its
immediacy, how we're "right there," as we were during the Persian Gulf
War, or the scorching of the Waco cult compound, or the Oklahoma bombing.
Our adrenaline is really pumping -- and particularly true in a live
interview. Those of us who saw the original broadcast-exchange between Dan
Rather and George Bush in 1988, or watched the Senate Confirmation
Hearings of Clarence Thomas, felt a heightened sense of response, of
danger, because we didn't know what direction the interview or hearings
would take. (It is this element of risk, of the unknown, of intoxicating
provocation that no other news medium can match. Radio is close, but it
can't provide truth-or-lie-or-demeanor-telling properties the way the
camera usually can.) What we hate about news isn't merely our suspicions
about those in the business -- that "Gotcha!" is replacing hard news and
real facts -- or our fears concerning our growing voyeuristic cravings for
the sensational, as in the Thomas-Anita Hill, Gennifer Flowers, Magic
Johnson, Michael Jackson, Tanya Harding cases, it's also our guilt in
allowing ourselves to be so damned consumed by the titillating drama of
news. Like we were during the trial of William Kennedy Smith vs. "I'm not
a blue blob," or the Bobbitt thing, or the on-going mockery of justice of
the O.J. SImpson fiasco. 
        Many of us feel guilty when we don't watch the unfolding of a news
"event" -- afraid that we're going to miss something. Until very recently,
some of us even felt guilt about missing a nightly newscast or two. It's
the need to get it now and not later, in a newspaper, because by the time
we read about something in the morning edition, the box has already
updated that something; it's a matter of instant discretion -- the
zapper's power -- because the growth of TV news has permitted choice; it's
also subjective, aesthetic and cosmetic -- selectively allowing specific
TV anchors or reporters or commentators into our homes because they appeal
to us. Some women fantasize about suave Peter Jennings; outdoorsy males
respond to Tom Brokaw's Lands End quality; college-age fattie bigots
worship Rush; technocrats mainline with CSPAN. We're picky about
newspapers and magazines and their writers too, but we can better control
whatever our responses; we don't have to fight sensory overload. Yet it is
the very addictive nature of the "overload" that compels us and the
programmers and editors onward and thereby permitting a proliferation of
TV tabloids, ideological talk shows, informercials, a rush of speculation
in newspapers and, the latest kick, online forums. News has become
stimulation, visceral, but without a filter of veracity. Is it any wonder
that we've become a nation of instant paranoids, panicked not on the basis
of facts but over rumors and gossip packaged as factoids? Murderess Susan
Smith claimed a black man kidnapped her two children and Newtie invects
implicit racism as election ploy. CNBC's effete flabbermouths are probably
more responsible for any week's stock market dive than the Fed and actual
investors. Is it exaggeration to say news has become dangerous to our
national health? If dangerous now, what will we call it when the 500
channel nightmare arrives? To keep those channels profitable, there will
be a new crisis or scandal manufactured every hour. 
        How often have we heard the media defend themselves over their
moral infractions and insensitivity and intrusions by saying that they're
constitutionally guaranteed freedom to "report"? Had Ron Howard had given
us a newspaper that once had a tradition of solid reporting, of
respectability, and had to resort to using tabloid tricks to bring in the
revenues, there might have been something beyond fantasy, something
hopeful, in the way THE PAPER climaxes, but more than that he might have
looked into the future: he might have guessed that soon the Supreme Court
will re-address the issue of the freedom of the press. Tthe Court is going
to go after total disregard of the facts in reportage; it will recognize
that, some years back, when decreeing that public figures are fair game,
it set into motion a freedom of irresponsibility. That's why we can get
Xmas time sex scandals concocted by misogynists like David Brock; that's
why there's never an apology from the press over such stories that can not
be proved, only alleged. That's why we're getting Gutter Encounters of the
Weird Kind about Whitewater: Rush on TV repeating groundless rumors that
Vince Foster was murdered in a "safe house" rented by Hillary Rodham
Clinton. That's why we're getting scum like Jerry Falwell using a
president to publicly preach hate as a family value. Scarier still is that
perople are willing to accept fabrication over fact, as Paula Jones' money
hunger confirms. The press has never been innocent, yet in recent years
it's gotten intolerably bloody and trashy. Can we pinpoint a reason why? I
think so: When sleepyhead Ronnie was elected in 1980, one of the first
demolition jobs he instructed his henchmen to perform was on the FCC's
"Fairness Doctrine." Basically, this guideline demanded, with TV in
particular, equal time for opposing sides on issues. Ronnie didn't like
that because it prevented his Morning in America propaganda from being
promulgated as gospel. After his re-election, he managed to get the
equality mandates downgraded to voluntary and national and local public
affairs programs shifted the emphasis of fairness to screaming
contentiousness: the exchange of views became ever less civilized and ever
more Buchanan-loaded and Rushy. One notes with deep regret that though
there are minimal efforts to maintain a balance of opinion, the scales
have tipped to hypertensive demagoguery. The demise of the fairness
doctrine also meant the death of hundreds of locally-produced public
affairs shows, which at one time served the community well in that large
numbers of the citizenry got on TV. What's left of these kinds of programs
is now exclusively the domain of the hacks of local newspapers who write
unreadable columns and send out correspondence written on notes with their
pictures plastered on them, and the "nobodies" have moved to cable access
channels where, to say the least, production values and sometimes
transmissions are poor and viewership small. Something else happened as a
result of the lack of enforcement of the fairness doctrine: a deluge of 
TV tabloid exposes that don't even bother to attempt to explain the
absence of the "other side"; we're getting more and more on the so-called
prestige newscasts and magazine shows a virulent form of vigilante
journalism -- indicting and convicting people on air for only alleged
crimes, especially child abuse crimes, that, with closer inspection, never
happened. (It was TV that caused California to spend over $120 million to
presecute without conviction the McMartin Pre-School case.) We get
televised show trials that pretend to be "fair," but are monuments to
horrible exploitation and very likely unconstitutionally censored. I'm
thinking specifically about the rape trial of William Kennedy Smith. 
        Acknowledging that only two out of 250,000,000 really know what
happened, the trial was, in the final analysis, a mockery of equal
justice. CNN and other broadcasters decided that not only would they cover
Patricia Bowman's face with the infamous "blue blob," but would do as much
as they could to keep her name from being revealed. Spokesmen for the
networks said that they were honoring so-called "shield laws," which in
effect are supposed to be civilized protections of privacy for alleged
rape victims. I even heard a few say that they were forced by Florida law
to protect Bowman's identity. It didn't matter that the very shield law
they used to defend their actions was in fact declared unconstitutional,
and therefore, during the trial, not law. It gets worse: the media did not
extend to the defendant the same level of privacy. As a member of the
Kennedy Clan, he became a "public figure" who could be freely smeared
without fear of litigation. The press, at the conniving behest of a Betty
Anderson-Harrington, whose endless string of men, parties, drug-taking,
abortions, mental history were community knowledge, made a private man a
figure of obscene public abuse. Watching as much of the trial as was
televised, I'd have voted for acquittal simply because of Bowman's
performance. Not that I believed Smith more -- his demeanor drove me nuts
and there's every likelihood he's at least as good a liar as his accuser.
But there's every reason to believe that Bowman wanted not only the
"shield" protection but also the show trial; it would give her the
opportunity to audition for the her own story: PALM BEACH PLACE. Her first
breakdown was moving, and the second almost as touching, but by the third
cue-prompt, there was a surprising actor's polish in her voice -- even the
sniffles were too grand. (I kept wanting to blow my nose.) Then she showed
a fatally clumsy intellectual side -- having answered "I don't know or
remember" 162 times. She wasn't helped when the prosecution's star witness
admitted to taking $40,000 from "A Current Affair" and falsified under
oath as to when she first met the plaintiff, and it didn't help Bowman
much either that her heavy drinking and popping of muscle relaxants the
evening of the alleged crime were disclosed. Booze and relaxants -- legal
kicks for the trust fund set. Did the media pay much attention this, or to
the witness for the prosecution's repeated lies, or to the lack of
physical evidence of any forceful assault, or the sheer mind-boggling fact
that during the time of the alleged rape, nine people were sleeping in the
Kennedy compound, which has no air conditioning? No, they went on their
merry way with the protective blobs and rumors that Bowman, having lost
the trial, would likely file a civil suit for unspecified damages. She
didn't; and one look at her PrimeTime and Larry King appearances tells us
why.
        The popular, sometimes accurate perception that most if not all
news reporters are hard-boiled or bloodthirsty -- or, in some cases are as
corrupt as the corrupters they report on -- probably got started back with
the late 19th century London newspaper wars, many of them centering on
Jack the Ripper, and the feeling was reinforced during the American yellow
journalism wars engaged in by William Randolph Hearst and Joseph Pulitzer.
And renewed by the proliferation of lurid sex & crime tabloids and cheapie
magazines that displayed boobs and bums and dismembered guts on their
front pages during the 50s. In no small way, Ben Hecht and Charles
MacArthur's THE FRONT  PAGE, a play that has been steadily performed since
it first opened back in 1928 and has been filmed at least four times, has
done its share to perpetuate the perceptions by glorifying them in a macho
reverie. The almost-validating bite of their play is that journalism
wouldn't be fair without some lowdown hanky panky. Movie makers in recent
years haven't given the press a clean bill of health either: ALL THE
PRESIDENT'S MEN, which on the surface looks like a salute to journalism,
eventually taxes a fair-minded audience's receptiveness by not only using
our national hatred of Nixon but also by using the mysterious "Deep
Throat" as method and news source -- subterfuge that, in retrospect, fails
to earn an acquittal: doesn't the accused have the right to face his
accuser? NETWORK, the bitchkrieg that admonishes TV-induced paranoia
that's a 1976 look into our present; ABSENCE OF MALICE, ridiculing a
reporter's naivete; THE  YEAR OF LIVING DANGEROUSLY," a slam against a
reporter's desire to make a name for himself; UNDER FIRE, depicting the
suicidet of reporters when they take sides in political battles; and THE
PAPER dealing with tabloid economics vs. twenty four hour suppression of
facts. Naturally these films aren't acceptable to most responsible
journalists -- they mistakenly think they're above the moral muddle, like
Helen Thomas, who one day suggests Hillary should hold a news conference
to explain Whitewater and then turn around and publicly attack the first
lady on CSPAN for doing what she suggested. 
         At the height of Joseph McCarthy's rampage against supposed
American Communists in the 50s, the climate in newspaper and radio
journalism -- TV not having quite come into its own, although it played
the key national part in McCarthy's demise -- was so rotted and feverish
with paranoia that lives were daily sacrifices to the vicious killing
machines of yellow headlines. Only when it became clear that McCarthy
could be broken by the soft-spoken rebukes of rational voices did the
press then turn on him, vilifying him for exactly what they so freely
practiced without fear of retribution. Arguably the nation absolved the
press of its role in whipping up a frenzied battle over the semantics of
political freedom because it shared in the guilt. Slanted journalism,
according to the ultra-conservatives, hit an apex during the Vietnam War
-- especially television's coverage of it. No war before and probably no
war after -- as proved by the Persian Gulf episode -- has been more
documented by the lie-detecting camera; the daily bloodletting images of
the Michael J. Arlen-termed "Living Room War," shown on ABC, NBC and CBS,
betrayed the weekly General William Westmoreland pep rallies that promised
victory. The Agnew speeches, jerked off by shock troopers Patrick
Buchanan, and William Safire, were designed to counter the rising
revulsion and attack those, mostly in the press who were against the war,
as "nattering nabobs of negativity," "pampered prodigies of the radical
liberals," and all the verbal attacks were peppered with codes like
"pusillanimous," "sniveling," "eunuchs," "effete soobs." After the
assassinations of John and Robert Kennedy and Martin Luther King, Jr., and
after the fascist Chicago Democratic Convention, "The Time of Illusion" --
the title of Jonathan Schell's collection of political pieces originally
written for The New Yorker -- came to a halt for most press outlets. (Only
temporarily: softball reporting got retrofitted for Reagan, and would
again go soft during the actual bombing duration of Bush's tantrum against
Saddam.) The gulf between country right or wrong and a national conscience
would only enlarge when Nixon's Watergate adventure destroyed him. But
audiences, at least at this writing, may not have evolved as much as the
technologies of TV communications: voters may not fail to recognize a
scoundrel, but that doesn't mean they won't vote for one: the
Republican'ts recently elected a prevaricating, deadbeat daddy as House
Majority Leader who once served his former wife divorce paper while she
was in the throes of a serious battle with cancer.
        Actors as anchors, editors or reporters aren't exactly
caricatures, or impersonations; they're more like examples of the fear of
being hip. You almost hear the actors anxiously half-giggling, "Are we
getting it right?" Jane Fonda couldn't get in right in THE CHINA SYNDROME.
Neither Sigourney Weaver in EYEWITNESS nor Christine Lahti in JUST BETWEEN
FRIENDS got it right. Sally Field was a wipeout in ABSENCE OF MALICE and
Joanna Cassidy failed to get "radiospeak" down pat in UNDER FIRE. Mel
Gibson had the romantic fantasy but hardly the authority of a foreign
correspondent in THE YEAR OF LIVING DANGEROUSLY and Sam Waterston, looking
a little like D. H. Lawrence, was a Yale poseur as Pulitzer Prize winning
Sydney Schanberg in THE KILLING FIELDS.
        With receding hairline and toughened face, Glenn Close could play
a bean-counting managing editor, ala Katherine Graham, but not as Ron
Howard directs her in THE PAPER, and he allowed Michael Keaton to be too
scatterbrained a city editor to have the kind of righteous punch aimed
for. He'd make it as an editor for something as low as the New York Sun
but it's an insult that he'd be considered for anything more than a
janitorial position for a competing paper like the New York Sentinel,
which surrogates as the N.Y. Times. Only when Robert Duvall, as the Sun's
editor, flays into his own editorial pages filled with "columnists, guests
columnists and celebrity columnists," is there a bit of reality. (It's the
only time the silent half of the audience responded -- by cheering.) Maybe
it's me; I just can't seem to accept actors playing overly-familiar faces
or professions. The blurring of celebrity tends to discount whatever value
is left of the real professional journalist. This happened to Carl
Bernstein and Bob Woodward when Dustin Hoffman and Robert Redford play
them, respectively, in the moldy, chiaroscuristic ALL THE PRESIDENT'S MEN.
Somehow the movie fakery intensifies the often fake seriousness and
righteousness of the business of news. Perhaps this is why audiences felt
and still feel a charge from Peter Finch's Howard Beale in the bombastic
NETWORK, which earns masterpiece status compared to the snoozing BROADCAST
NEWS and the juvenile PAPER. Finch's rantings were manifestly rigged, and
the audience knew it, but the rigging was also premonitory and the
audience felt it. (Pauline Kael's most grievous error of perception is her
review of the movie, entitled "Hot Air.") Though Finch, William Holden and
Faye Dunaway weren't required to be anything other than Paddy Chayefsky's
conniptions about what the box was -- in fact, is -- turning all of us
into, they did it with such frenzied passion that the warnings,
particularly those expressed by Holden about the dangers of many of us
turning into Dunaway's Diana, have real resonance; we HAVE become little
Diana horrors. These actors have a rip-roaring good time (and so does the
audience) with dialogue actors kill for. What glorious diarrhea of the
hates! Despite a few passable one-liners, William Hurt in BROADCAST NEWS
seems frustrated by a lack of words -- he's constipated. He'd be right at
home in THE PAPER, in which the only bits of minimal interest take place
in the men's room.
        Andy  Rooney once described BROADCAST NEWS as "one of the best
movies I've ever seen," and, if that's not enough of a wound, inflicted
this: "As a writer, sitting there watching the movie, I was exultant, to
the point of tears, with (James Brooks') success in converting what was in
his head to paper and then to film...A movie director doesn't really want
good writing -- just a sheaf of papers that provide some notes and an
outline to keep in mind where to set up the cameras and what to tell the
actors to do...The best writers have, with a lot of exceptions which I
won't stop to note, never written for television or motion pictures. This
is partly because good writers are nervous about being associated with
what usually are considered to be second-class art forms, but also because
good writers don't know how to write for television or the movies, and
they're reluctant to expose their ignorance of something they don't
respect much, anyway." No reluctance on Rooney's part to expose his. And
clearly, in THE PAPER, in spite of the clever ads for Compaq, Multi-Sync
monitors and QuarkXPress, Howard isn't afraid to reveal his, either. The
one inescapable fact we can derive from the media's triumph of hype over
fact, shamelessness over decency is that ignorance is indeed bliss.
"Gotcha!" without responsibility, without accountability, is destroying
what moral value is left in journalism.                            

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Directed by Ron Howard
Written by David Keopp & Stephen Keopp
Starring Michael Keaton, Robert Duvall, Glenn Close, Marisa Tomei, and
Randy Quaid
MPAA Rating     "R" (presumably because of f-f-f-f-foul language)
Running Time    Approx. 114 minutes
     Ron Howard makes good, old-fashioned Hollywood movies with good,
old-fashioned Hollywood casts.  In PARENTHOOD, Opie snagged Steve
Martin, Rick Moranis, Dianne Wiest, and Mary Steenburgen.  In
BACKDRAFT, he "fired" Kurt Russell, William Baldwin, Scott Glenn, and
Bobby DeNiro.  Howard's newest, THE PAPER, is an immensely enjoyable
big-city newpaper nod with a by-line that reads Michael Keaton, Robert
Duvall, Glenn Close, Marisa Tomei, and Randy Quaid.
     So what if the notion of a newspaper film is nothing more than a
tired truckstop on the information highway?  In New York City--where
the story is set--newspaper newsrooms, plural, still exist and still
reach a readership that television hasn't turned completely
illiterate.  This PAPER is the fictional "New York Sun," a tabloid
loosely modeled on the "New York Post."
     First and foremost, THE PAPER reminds us why we like Michael
Keaton.  As the editor of the City Desk, who's worried about everything
from a job interview to a very-pregnant wife (Tomei), Keaton crackles
with an energy that we haven't seen in years.  MY LIFE was no life and
the real Mr. Mom appeared only briefly in both MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING
and BATMAN RETURNS.
     THE PAPER brings Keaton back into the foreground with a role he
can sink his sharp teeth into.  His character is super-strung and lives
on Coke product placements and never takes a break to eat or sleep or
have a lengthy conversation with his wife.  He stays wired as only
Keaton can, which is one-step below W.F.O.  Except for one scene on a
phone call to Spalding Gray-- who plays an edtior at a rival 'paper--
when Keaton get nuts and transforms into Beetlejuice Beetlejuice
Beetlejuice.  And that's why we love him.
     Randy Quaid is a riot as a gun-toting columnist who's waging a
personal war against the City's parking commissioner.  Even in a
mock-serious bar fight, Quaid drops one-liners like the seasoned pro
that he is.  Marisa Tomei seems to have fewer scenes than Quaid, but
she has a good time getting ticked at her husband and playing roving
reporter and looking like all other movie wives who are at least
ten-years younger than their husbands.
     Glenn Close is a delight as the bitchy Managing Editor who is
perpetually feuding with Keaton up to the point of exchanging blows
without the benefit of rubber costumes.  Her role improves with the
running time, though, and Close closes the film with a classic line.
     Oddly, Robert Duvall is wasted as the weary-with-prostrate-cancer
Editor-in-Chief.  We've heard his voice-of-experience rap before and
with an estranged-daughter subplot, his character exists solely to
hammer home the central idea of "do not squander time, that is the
stuff life is made of."
     The dialogue crackles from start to finish.  Pick your scene and
pick your favorite line.  Keaton to Quaid: "When did you get so
paranoid?" Quaid to Keaton: "When they started plotting against me."
The words are backed by impressive images--a nice synthesis of
photography and production design.  Which translates into a lot of
conversations with gorgeous skylines or gargantuan printing presses in
the background.
     THE PAPER smudges in a few spots.  Howard employs a handy-cam too
many times and, obviously, didn't watch either HUSBANDS AND WIVES or
MANHATTEN MURDER MYSTERY to see just how annoying *that* technique can
be.  Unless you're filming in Poland, Ron, keep your stuff steady.  The
story is also rather pat in places and this to be expected because in a
Ron Howard film *everything* gets wrapped in a comfortable and logical
fashion.
     Still, a little more grit would've been welcome.
     Finally, THE PAPER is a great sum of great parts.  Smaller, but no
less significant, bits include a hilarious bar fight with Jason
Alexander wearing a fake moustache and waving a gun while overacting; a
wall of clocks displaying separate times for each borough; and Tomei
touch-typing baby-shower thank-you notes.

Author
Dragan Antulov
In today's world of journalism, dominated by television,
Internet and "news as entertainment" business philosophy,
printed newspapers are considered to be the thing of the
past. Same thing happened to the perception of journalists
as fearless crusaders for truth and justice in this cynical
age. As a result, once thriving subgenre of journalism
movies almost disappeared from Hollywood. THE PAPER, 1994
drama by Ron Howard, represents one of those precious films
that deal with realities of life of modern newspaper
reporters.
The screenplay of THE PAPER, written by brother David and
Stephen Koepp, follows 24 hours in lives of reporters and
editors in "New York Sun" tabloid newspaper. The nominal
protagonist of the film is Henry Hackett (played by Michael
Keaton), workaholic editor who loves his job. But long
hours, low pay and uncertain future of the tabloid lead him
to think about new career. His pregnant wife Martha (played
by Marisa Tomei) urges him to think about better-paid but
more boring job in respectable "New York Sentinel"
newspaper. In the meantime, rapidly developing story about
two black teenagers being arrested for racially motivated
murders would represent another opportunity for Hackett to
use his skills of investigative reporter. Results of his
investigation, on the other hand, would later lead to
dramatic confrontations with bullish managing editor Alicia
Clark (played by Glenn Close).
Judging by some of American newspaper movie reviews, Koepp
brothers in their screenplay managed to paint rather
convincing picture of the life in modern editorial offices.
According to medical statistics in many countries, news
reporters and editors have shorter average lifespan than
those belonging to other professions and THE PAPER explains
the causes of this phenomenon - deadline, editorial
pressures and consequent stress that leads to chain-smoking
and alcoholism, and, naturally, all that has devastating
effects on reporters' personal lives. Ron Howard is faithful
to this gritty picture laced with black humour, but he
nevertheless adds some Hollywood touch with few moralising
scenes and melodramatic finale that went over the top with
some of the cliches (including notorious "Stop the presses!"
line). However, THE PAPER compensates these flaws with truly
great ensemble cast that relies more on character actors
like Keaton, Tomei, Close, Robert Duvall and Randy Quaid
Tomei than standard Hollywood stars. Because of them,
realistic atmosphere of modern-day editorial offices isn't
lost. THE PAPER, therefore, is a film that should be
recommended as skillfully done example of almost forgotten
dramatic subgenre.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Jon A. Webb
     In THE PAPER Michael Keaton is the assistant managing editor of a
tabloid newspaper in New York City.  He relentlessly pursues truth in
the face of opposition from his wife (Marisa Tomei), who is 8-1/2
months pregnant and doesn't want him to work so hard, and the managing
editor (Glenn Close) who wants to maintain control over the paper and
doesn't like being shown up.  Naturally, all this leads to a huge
dust-up over Truth.  Does Keaton win?  You'll have to see the film (or
practically any other film based on the legend of the Fisher King) to
find out.
     The depiction of life in a newspaper room is very realistic and
compelling.  It has just about the right amount of tension and disorder
that you'd expect, with conflicting personalities playing a major
role.  This is the most entertaining part of the film.
     On the downside, there is an artificial juxtaposition of three or
four subplots leading up to the big tension-filled climax of the film.
It's just not credible that so many things would happen all at once.
Since the film aims for accuracy, this silly device diminishes the
whole thing.
     Michael Keaton is very good, if familiar.  All this Type A
frenetic wise cracking is beginning to wear a little thin.  I would
like to see him stretch himself a little (though I suppose BATMAN
qualifies.)  Marisa Tomei plays her role successfully, but she should
be trying something more demanding.  After her Oscar last year she
should be taking the lead in a film that does not require her to act
like a up-from-lower class New Yorker, or she is going to get type
cast.
     I found Glenn Close's performance to be the most satisfying of the
major characters.  She is right on the edge, heading over the hill,
threatened by Keaton, a cold and distant woman who has no one to fall
back on when things start to go wrong.  The part is a little too small
to earn her an Oscar nomination, but she is clearly an actress at the
peak of her abilities.
     Robert Duvall is very nice as the editor of the paper.  I really
enjoy watching him play these gentle fatherly roles.  I don't think the
part is well-written--the interaction with his daughter seems very
cliche--but he's still fun to watch.
     Randy Quaid has a nice small role, and Spalding Gray has fun as
the guy at the New York Times who tries to hire Keaton away from his
tabloid.  It's always nice to see Mr. Gray in a movie, and to think
about his working this experience into one of his monologues.

Author
Chuck Dowling
(1994) **** - C:Michael Keaton, Glenn Close, Marisa Tomei, Randy Quaid,
Robert Duvall, Catherine O'Hara, Jason Robards, Jason Alexander, Jill
Hennessy, Clint Howard, Rance Howard, Bob Costas.
Henry Hackett (Keaton), editor of a New York City tabloid, is doing
everything he can to gather enough information to print a big story that
could expose a major mafia scandal and free two innocent black youths
charged with murder, all while he's racing to meet his deadline for the
morning edition. With his wife (Tomei) about to give birth, his
argumentative managing editor (Close) always taking the opposing side, and a
rival newspaper trying to bring him into their organization, he's confronted
with more than one problem in just a 24 hour period.
Hackett's wife wants him to take the job with the other paper, which would
pay more money and he would be able to work fewer hours. But Henry isn't so
sure. Deep down, he likes his job. He likes the anxiety, the frustration,
and the utter chaos of it all.
There are plenty of subplots also. Randy Quaid plays a columnist who's
having a war of words with the city's parking supervisor, which later in the
film evolves into a much more drastic situation. Robert Duvall, the senior
editor of the paper, is undergoing health problems and wants to make up with
his daughter, who hasn't spoken to him in years. All of these come together
at the end.
Normally, I can't stand movies about journalists and their profession, but
director Ron Howard (who in my book has almost a perfect filmography), the
excellent script, and the great cast make this one worthwhile. The pacing is
perfect, the acting is right on the mark, and it's funny too. There are
plenty of one-liners, wisecracks, and amusing situations. An uptight
reporter asks Duvall's character to put out his cigar because his doctor
found nicotine in his urine, and Duvall's response is priceless.
-- 
Chuck Dowling
Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Over 1,500 movies rated and/or reviewed!  Movie news, box office
reports, film related links, and reader's polls and reviews.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Michael Keaton, Glenn Close, Marisa Tomei, Robert Duvall,
           Randy Quaid.
Screenplay:  David Koepp and Steven Koepp.
Director:  Ron Howard.
     After establishing himself with gentle mass-market fantasies and
taking a break for an overstuffed comedy, this man got the bug to be
Taken Seriously as a Director; the results tended to be as notable for
their excesses as their successes.  Sound like I'm describing Steven
Spielberg?  Not surprising.  Ron Howard's career as a director has
often seemed too consciously patterned after Spielberg's (although
there are clearly worse models), and has represented much that is best
and worst about his much more successful colleague's work.  THE PAPER
is one of these films.  It's a bit too busy and precocious for its own
good, but still has enough of a charming throwback quality that I was
willing to forgive many of its flaws.
     THE PAPER stars Michael Keaton as Henry Hackett, metro editor of a
New York tabloid daily called The Sun.  In the course of one hot
Friday, Henry and his colleagues will face a journalistic moment of
truth.  Henry has been offered a position at the more respectable New
York Sentinel, much to the delight of his very pregnant wife Marty
(Marisa Tomei).  However, Henry finds himself waffling on the move as
he is caught up in the biggest story of his life, an apparently
racially-motivated slaying which Henry discovers may be something else
entirely.  As deadline approaches, Henry pleads with editor Bernie
White (Robert Duvall) for time to get his story, while managing editor
Alicia Clark (Glenn Close) pushes for a front page which highlights the
two black fall guys arrested in the case.
     THE PAPER is delivered with an energy that matches the barely
controlled chaos of the newsroom, and that energy is nearly enough to
sell the film all by itself.  The go-go pacing echoes newspaper films
of past decades, the same films the current THE HUDSUCKER PROXY
parodies.  Indeed, while there is a decidedly 90's spin to the
proceedings (no film of the 40's would ask if its hero were spending
too little time with his wife), THE PAPER still features such standbys
as the gruff editor, the wet-behind-the-ears reporter (here a
photographer), and an ethical dilemma.  There is nothing daringly
original about the way THE PAPER serves up these elements, but the
setting itself is so lively and the cast generally so engaging that the
lack of originality doesn't assault you.  Keaton, in his third
collaboration with Howard, delivers a solid protagonist even though the
role demands little of his considerable talents.  Marisa Tomei has some
delightful moments as Marty, herself a reporter going through career
withdrawals and dealing with her fears that Henry will always be too
busy for their baby.  Randy Quaid gets the showy role as a paranoid
attack columnist, and Catherine O'Hara has a funny cameo as Marty's
bitter friend.  Less successful are Close and Duvall, but that
certainly isn't the fault of the two talented actors.
     The weak link in the script by David and Steven Koepp is an
unnecessary subplot involving Duvall as the editor dealing with a
diagnosis of prostate cancer and trying to reconcile with his estranged
daughter.  While the intention was clearly to establish a parallel
between what Bernie is and what Henry is becoming, Bernie's story is
never integrated with Henry's  We never see Henry responding to
Bernie's situation; for all we know, he never even knows about it.  As
a result, it seems like we're getting snippets from an entirely
different movie.  Bernie's story is just filling up minutes.
     It's too bad, because a resolution connected to Bernie's family
troubles would have been much more effective than the one we get.  That
resolution includes a bar scene which suffers from extremely sloppy
editing leading into not one but two medical crises.  It seems like a
Ron Howard film isn't complete without someone dying or nearly dying,
as though he doesn't trust any conclusion not based on the biggest
possible emotion.  What had been a taut, energetic film about
priorities and the thrill of reporting bogs down seriously in the final
fifteen minutes.  It's not quite enough to sabotage THE PAPER's
strengths completely, but it does show once again that Ron Howard the
"serious director" too often equates serious with saccharine.

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews, go to http://surf.to/joblo
Ron Howard, also known as Richie Cunningham from the famous 80's sitcom
"Happy Days", scrapes out another entertaining picture, following the
great success of BACKDRAFT (7.5/10) and PARENTHOOD (7.5/10).
PLOT:
This film covers one day, behind the scenes, in the life of a big-city
newspaper. A possibly untrue story breaks out about two
African-American youths who appear to have killed a pair of out of town
white businessmen. As the day, and the story unfold, we get entangled
in the personal, and professional, lives of every single person needed
to put a news article, and paper, together. Is the truth more important
than a story?
CRITIQUE:
Entertaining, extremely informative, rapidly-paced film that literally
puts you on the front lines with the cast and crew who fabricate the
news stories which we read in our newspapers every day. This film was
interesting for me because it seemed to give me a lot of insight into
the high-flying antics of a big city newspaper, without dumbing it down
for the sake of the lowest-common audience member. Having said that, I
didn't buy most of the extreme dinky personal stories that ran through
their lives during this one day (it seemed like that one day was the
biggest day in the lives of every single person in the movie!), but
then again, I guess they needed to jazz up some of their stories in
order to make their characters a little more interesting than Woodward
and Bernstein. 
The acting was top-notch on all fronts, with Keaton pulling off another
quirky, stressed-out guy role, and Tomei demonstrating some depth as
the pregnant reporter wife who feels her husband's life slowly
trinkling away from her own. Close plays her cold, bitchy editor role
superbly, and Duvall also steps up to the plate as the old, editorial
coot with ailing health and family issues (his "uncomfortable for
everyone in the room" coughing sequence was very cool and authentic.)
One might argue that the film is a little too engrossed in its own
world of high-stakes stories and jargon, but I guess I didn't mind that
aspect one bit. In fact, that's exactly what I liked about the movie.
Overall, this picture will be extremely interesting to all those that
want to know more about the business of selling newspapers, and/or
those looking for some extremely bright acting moments from some of
today's best actors. If neither point interests you in any way, then I
suggest you stay away from this rat-race of a flick, and check out
Howard's more inclusive cinematic vehicles like PARENTHOOD and
BACKDRAFT.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Director Ron Howard frequently casts younger brother Clint Howard in
small roles. Ron also went to high school with one of the stars of his
movie RANSOM (6.5/10), Rene Russo.
Screenwriters David and Stephen Koepp are brothers. 
When Glenn Close was 13, her father opened a clinic in the Belgian
Congo (now Zaire) and ran it for 16 years. During most of that time,
the Close children lived alternately in Africa and at boarding schools
in Switzerland. Close once dated the ultimate Boston Bruin, Cam Neely.
Jason Alexander's (George from TV's "Seinfeld") real name is Jason
Scott Greenspan. In 1985, he appeared in a commercial for McDonald's
McDLT sandwich.
Critic's note: This film was watched during a weekend layaway in New
York City with Mrs. JoBlo by my side. Chinese take-out food was
thoroughly enjoyed during our screening, which may or may not have, in
some shape or form, altered my enjoyment of this film. Thank you for
understanding.

Author
Chad Polenz
1994, R, 112 minutes [1 hour, 52 minutes]
starring: Michael Keaton (Henry Hackett), Robert Duvall (Bernie White), Glenn
Close (Alicia Clark), Marisa Tomei (Martha Hackett), Randy Quaid (McDougal),
produced by Brain Grazer, Frederick Zollo, written by David and Stephen
Koepp, directed by Ron Howard.
We'd like to think that the "real" media has a much higher standard of
quality and ethics than sensationalistic tabloids, but "The Paper" proves
they really don't. The media is a business just like everything else, and
they'll do whatever it takes to make more money and sell more papers.
The story revolves around Henry Hackett (Keaton), the Metro editor for "The
Sun," a New York tabloid newspaper. It's not the most elite publication in
the world, but it is respected and has good production values, yet Henry
wants to move on to the "New York Sentinel." 
We learn a lot about the paper through Henry, and we learn a lot about Henry
through the paper. He is an important editor under a lot of stress, working
long hours and making sure things get done. Back home, his wife Martha
(Tomei) is pregnant with their first child and she feels he is ignoring her
and their marriage is suffering because of his work. But at the same time,
his work is suffering from his marriage. It's a no-win situation and this
goes to show just how stressful jobs in the media can be. I'm sure some of
this is exaggerated for characterization, but Howard plays upon it in such a
way as to make it believable without going over the top. 
There are some other interesting characters here: Bernie (Duvall), the
generic editor-in-chief,  (has there ever been an editor-in-chief who wasn't
divorced, balding, and a strict?); Alicia (Close), another editor who is
constantly trying to one-up Henry; and McDougal (Quaid), the 30-something
slacker who somehow has fantastic connections. The characters might not be
anything special, and that's fine with me because it makes the story more
sympathetic.
The sub-plot of the film involves a supposedly race-related murder of two
white businessmen. All the other papers get the scoop on this story except
for The Sun, and this becomes their driving force: to finally beat everyone
else. We follow Henry and McDougal and learn how a paper operates in the
process. 
The underlying theme here is truth as "If it's wrong we'll print the
exclusive that it was wrong tomorrow, but for now we go with this" can
constantly be heard in the background. Henry seems to be one of the last
people who has some kind of values and would rather have the truth be known
even if it means selling fewer papers.
The last act involves Henry and Alicia fighting over what story should be
the front page catch, will it be either a headline that is wrong but will not
be known to the public, or will it be the truth? And if the truth should be
published, it will take a lot of effort and production time to do it, which
is more expensive. The fact this is even questioned is depressing in a way.
Our news may depend upon two people's personal disputes? 
Still, "The Paper" is a good film and it certainly is interesting to watch
the production of a newspaper and see how a story is portrayed through the
storyteller.


Author
Mark R. Leeper
