Title
Review for Amantes del Círculo Polar, Los (1998)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     CAPSULE: A tender love about love, fate, and the power of
coincidence.  This is the story of Ana and Otto who love each other
from childhood, become foster brother and sister, lovers, and finally
have linked fates within the Arctic Circle.  Rating: 7 (0 to 10), low
+2 (-4 to +4)
   - Written and directed by Julio Medem.
   - Arctic plane crash under the credits, a teaser for what will
     happen in the final reel.
   - Story is told in chapters, usually alternating between "Otto" and
     "Ana."
   - Otto as a child loves paper airplanes.  He flies dozens over the
     school playground setting several plot lines in motion.  Otto's
     father meets Ana's mother and leaves Otto's mother for her.  Otto
     and Ana fall in love even though they are living like brother and
     sister.  They have a secret love affair in their parents' house.
   - Stories and flashbacks keep interconnecting with each other.
   - Otto who has left his mother's house to live with his father and
     Ana then blames himself for his mother's death.  Theme of guilt
     and shame.
   - There is some nudity in some nicely filmed love scenes.  Spanish
     films usually seem to have interesting approaches to their
     frequent nude scenes.
   - Supposedly story is told from one character's point of view or the
     other's.  Yet scenes in which they come close but do not see each
     other cannot be from either's point of view, or how would they
     have known?
   - Characters believe very heavily in power of coincidence and
     coincidence is what drives the story.  Some of the coincidences
     are extremely far-fetched.
   - End of film seems very contrived.

Author
Ross Anthony
Now here's a movie with lots of elements that I like. An attractive plot: a
tender love story budding from the hearts of two very complex eight-year
olds that continues into adulthood. More than one rich motif: the pattern of
circles (in one's life) and the repeated symbol of airplanes. These motifs
are artistically woven into the quilt-like fabric of the film. And then the
casting: since the story follows Ana and Otto as they grow, three separate
characters are needed for each lead. For the most part, these faces are very
well cast. Child Ana, and adolescent Ana, are shockingly beautiful; but all
(for the most part) give strong performances.
I also share a fascination with the Arctic Circle. Though you should know,
only a small portion of this film takes place in that region. And then
there's the texture. Foreign films seem especially attuned to reproducing a
very porous image on the screen. I appreciate that. "Lovers of the Arctic
Circle" is no exception -- it's a picture you can feel with your eyes.
But ... I didn't quite get it (for reasons I can't reveal without spoiling a
few good twists). It was certainly beautiful, but dark. Like an abstract
painting that draws you in by virtue of it's wonderful shapes and patterns,
only to leave you feeling trapped in its dark tragic colors. You're
mesmerized somehow, then the museum lights flicker at closing time leaving
you with the feeling of confusion and an odd sense of extraction from real
life for an extraordinary long amount of time.
On the other hand, if you're a lover of dark abstract art, you might just be
a lover of the Arctic Circle.
One last point ... Warning... don't read this if you haven't seen the movie.
Near the end, as Ana walks into Finnish Otto's apartment for the guest, why
can't it be her father that she finds?
Spanish Language with English subtitles.
Starring Fele Martinez and Najwa Nimri.
Written and Directed by Julio Medem.
Produced by Fernando Bovaria and Enrique Lopez Lavigne.
Presented by Fine Line Features.
Rated R.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
In THE LOVERS OF THE ARCTIC CIRCLE, a stunning picture with a plethora
of magical images, the paper airplane scene is among the most memorable.
8-year-old Otto (Peru Medem) goes to the school bathroom and lets fly a
squadron of paper airplanes in hopes that one of them will reach his
newfound girlfriend, Ana (Sara Valiente).  Ana attends a school
separated from his by only a high wrought iron fence.  On each plane he
has written the same question about love, one so profound that those
finding the planes assume that an adult must have written it.  We watch
their flight as they glide effortlessly through the air.  We see the
only one that makes it to her courtyard perfectly framed by a circle in
the iron gate.  After she reads its inscription, her life is forever
transformed.
Thus starts a hauntingly beautiful love story that spans a lifetime.
Ana, whose dad has recently died in car accident, initially sees him
coming back in the body of Otto.  Otto has just had his own tragedy
since his parents have just separated.
Written and directed by Julio Medem, the movie is easily one of the most
poetic movies in some time.  The images captured by cinematographer
Gonzalo Berridi are as breathtaking in the intimate moments as in the
grand.  One time-lapsed sequence filmed over a lake in Lapland during
the time of the midnight sun will take your breath away.
Otto and Ana feel bound by many things, including the way both of their
names form palindromes.  They have a complicated life since Ana's mom
and Otto's dad, soon fall in love and end up living together.  Otto, who
stays with his mom, doesn't like Ana to be called his sister, and Ana
feels likewise.  They just stare at each other for years with such deep
intensity that it is misconstrued as dislike by their parents.
Finally, as older teenagers, Otto (Víctor Hugo Oliveira) and Ana
(Kristel Díaz) began to consummate their dormant relationship.  The
scene in which the wall between them finally breaks is just as
astonishing as the aforementioned airplane scene.  Using the aphorism
that silence is golden, the director stages their first liaison more
with subtle images than words.  As he looks on his sleeping love, Otto
remains speechless and frozen.  The wind rustles loudly in the trees,
and lights and shadows dance on his face.  This is the sort of
reverential look at sexuality rarely found in American films, especially
those dealing with teens.
After more tragedies and complications, the film jumps forward again to
the now grown Otto (Fele Martínez) and Ana (Najwa Nimri), neither of
whose life has gone as expected.  What hasn't changed is that deep down
their love for each other is eternal.
Ana describes her life as a "chain of coincidences."  The story explores
this circularity of life with some strategically placed movements
forward and backward in time to illustrate the ties our past have with
our present.  The story is organized into many chapters, usually named
either Otto or Ana.  In each of these chapters we learn the story from a
different perspective.  The delicate beauty of the narrative is enhanced
by the way the filmmaker doesn't feel the need to explain everything and
leaves some key scenes purposely ambiguous.
In a film that is so much more than just the sum of its parts, its parts
are pretty impressive in themselves.  The casting and the acting,
especially tricky with a story that spans three sets of ages, are
wonderful.  Alberto Iglesias's music has a haunting lyricism.  And the
dialog possesses a simple beauty.  "I felt that something known had
moved into the unknown," is how Ana describes one of her revelations.
The mesmerizing film so transfixes the audience that you feel you are
engulfed in the picture.  It is more than a mere movie and becomes
almost a spiritual experience.  Bursting with memorable images, the
movie's strength can be witnessed in the perfect ways the transitions
between scenes are handled.  One image in flames cuts to the coolness of
Otto and Ana sledding down a mountain.  And as in the rest of this
carefully constructed film of delicate intricacy, these two scenes have
many links, only some of which are immediately apparent.  A film for the
mind as well as the heart, THE LOVERS OF THE ARCTIC CIRCLE has only one
significant fault.  It ends.
THE LOVERS OF THE ARCTIC CIRCLE runs 1:52.  The film's sparse dialog is
in Spanish with English subtitles.  It is rated R for brief nudity,
sexuality and mature themes and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz
LOVERS OF THE ARCTIC CIRCLE, THE (AMANTES DEL CIRCULO POLAR, LOS)
(director/writer: Julio Medem; cinematographer: Gonzalo F. Berridi;
cast: Fele Martinez (Otto), Najwa Nimi (Ana), Nancho Novo (Alvaro), Maru
Valdivielso (Olga), Peru Medem (Otto (child)), Sara Valiente (Ana
(child)),Victor Hugo Oliveira (Otto (teenager)), Kristel Diaz (Ana
(teenager)), 1998-Spain)
This is a hopelessly romantic film that traces in three parts the lives
of two children who fortuitously meet as eight year olds and feel
destined to each other for different reasons, who as teenagers consumate
their love, and when adults, they have been separated for a long time,
try desperately to find each other again. Their lives are compared to
how mythical and circular things are, and how one's fate is circular,
and how it is not fate alone but free will that determines what happens.
Two eight year olds attending nearby boys and girls schools, who both
happen to have palindromic names, Otto (Fele Martinez, Otto as an adult)
and Ana (Najwa Nimi, Ana as an adult), which is one of many coincidences
that Spain's influential film director, Julio Medem (The Red
Squirrel/Earth/Cows), uses to tell his dour love story about romantic
obsession and fate. The two children form a 17- year relationship from
their casual meeting over a soccer ball lost in the woods and from a
question posed on a paper airplane flown out of the school bathroom
window by Otto and retrieved in the adjacent schoolyard by Ana, who
says, "It is too lovely a question about love for any boy to have
written." The audience is not told what that question was, except that
one student says, as he recovers one of the many paper planes flown with
the same question written on it, "It's corny." Another student  says,
"It's embarrassing." In truth, those comments crossed my mind about many
aspects of this film, as I waivered about my feelings toward the story,
as spellbinding as the overall film was, because the story, in parts,
did feel "corny."
What's important about that unseen question, that Otto's father says is
the most important one in life and Ana's mother says how romantic it is,
is that it links the parents together, as they meet each other through
their children on the day Otto flew all those paper planes onto the
school grounds and when Otto's divorced father, Alvaro (Novo), is taking
Otto back home to his German mother from school. The parents hit it off
and become lovers driving the children home from school everyday from
now on and will soon get married, so that in a rapidly short period of
time the children go from being strangers, to being acquaintances, to
being brother and sister, and then to being secret teenage lovers.
The film can be told either backward or forward in time (which plays up
its palindrome theme), it starts from the plane crash at the end of the
film and it haphazardly veers back  from there to the beginning and
later portions of their lives, as the story is interpreted through the
eyes of either Ana or Otto, with sometimes different versions of the
same scene being told.
Medem makes a symbolic point about relating the children's lives to a
circle, where there is no real ending or beginning to their story. Otto
states that every life should include numerous circles and the Arctic
Circle becomes one of the symbolic physical circles used, as it becomes
the location where the frustrated 25-year-old lovers will meet for the
last time, after their real life seems to be going around in circles.
There are several other symbolic devices that are used by Medem a bit
more obtusely (like empty gas tanks), and one of those images might even
be considered prophetic, the repeated image shown of a car stopping
short of a collision with a red bus.
The solid story is befuddled with versions showing how the imagination
of the two differs from the supposed reality of the story, which should
leave the audience scratching their heads to try and figure out what is
actually happening. But the straight story goes something like this: Ana
interprets her first meeting with Otto in the woods to be an omen that
her father is trying to communicate with her, as she has just received
the news from her mother, Olga (Maru), that her father died in a car
crash. By believing that he is reincarnated as Otto and speaks to her
through him, she finds a satisfying sort of solace with her father's
death. Otto did not know what to make of this chance meeting with her
but was strongly attracted to her and felt they shared a true bond, and
that she will be a part of his destiny.
And destiny is one of the subtexts that Medem coyly toys with, as we
learn that Otto got his name from a German Nazi pilot who flew a bombing
mission over Guernica during the Spanish Civil War and crashed his plane
but was rescued by Otto's grandfather. Otto has from early on, had an
obsession with planes and will grow up to become a pilot and will
eventually meet that same pilot in Finland, who had married a Spanish
woman he met while trying to escape from Spain. When he meets the pilot,
his wife is already dead, as that is in tune with the theme of the film,
where a loved one either dies, is not found, or gets divorced. The story
stretches the coincidences to a point of incredibility and becomes more
tainted with its philosophical message than a typical romance film
usually is, as Medem carries out the argument that both reality and
fiction can be likened to a series of circles that interconnect through
the efforts of coincidences that may not make sense to our mortal eyes,
but these circles are present, in either physical places or in events
taking place in one's life.
Happiness does not last forever (nothing does according to Medem), and
into the couple's seemingly tranquil new marriage comes a major setback,
the stepmother cheats on Otto's father with no reason given except it is
implied that these things just happen, just like Alvaro left his wife
for no particular reason. The other man is not only also named Alvaro,
but he is the son of the German pilot Otto's grandfather rescued, and he
will marry Olga; and, Otto's father, who was madly in love with her,
will become a broken and lonely man as a result of the separation. The
teenage Otto, who was living with his German mother all this time, moves
out of her house to be with the only female he loves more than his
mother, as he now lives under the same roof with Ana. But this breaks
his mother's heart and she drops dead one day when she is cleaning
lettuce, presumably from a broken heart, and this has a traumatic effect
on him, as he feels guilty about leaving her and thereby abandons his
father's new family and goes off without telling anyone where he is.
There is one scene where Ana and him are in the same outdoor cafe in
Madrid, but fail to see each other, even though sitting at tables with
their backs next to each other, which outlines the course fate will take
for the two of them.
After her mother's new marriage to the other Alvaro, Ana becomes the
lover of someone she met in that Madrid cafe where the fated lovers did
not meet, Otto's elementary school teacher, and will live with him for
four-years. She also will become an elementary school teacher, as again,
things are shown to go around in circles. But she leaves her older
lover, pulled toward finding Otto again. And, she gets that chance after
another coincidence occurs. Her new stepfather hooks her up with his
father, who is the Otto that Otto was named after, and the former German
pilot will let her stay in a cabin he owns in Finland, where she will
await for her Otto to rescue her from her unhappiness. He is now a
mail-delivery pilot, seen doodling circles on his pilot's map while
circling around the Antarctic Circle, and is still pining for Ana, as he
suffers from his decision to be alone. His life seems to be damaged by
his misunderstandings and miscommunications, which have prevented him
from being with the one he loves.
As you might suspect by now, this film is not going to be clearly
resolved. Why should it be at this point, it has teased the audience
from the opening scene onward and there is no reason why the ending
shouldn't also be speculative.
Ana sends a letter to Otto's father, a letter that Otto actually
delivered himself without realizing it was from Ana, and he reads it
when he visits his lonely and aging father to cheer him up. In the
letter, is the same note that she sent to the teenage Otto, when she was
encouraging him to be her lover and climb through her bedroom window, by
stating: "Be brave!"
The film will end on two differing versions, one is labeled "Ana's Eyes"
and the other "Otto in Ana's Eyes." In the first version, there is a
happy ending, as Otto parachutes to safety on the grounds of Ana's
Arctic Circle cabin and just misses her, but finally comes into her arms
in the pilot's apartment and supposedly will find some renewed happiness
in his life. Though, even in this type of traditional Hollywood ending
that has pleased movie goers of romantic films for generations now, the
director has his doubts if there is any state of being that can be
permanent. In the second version, there is a sad ending, as Otto goes to
meet Ana and sees her crossing the street clutching a newspaper with a
picture of a downed plane, grief-stricken, thinking that Otto has died,
and she is hit by a red bus and dies. In the final shot, there is a
picture of Otto in her eyes. Which one is the true version probably
doesn't matter, as the director will allow you to believe whatever you
want to. If you are interested in my guess, it would be the later
version, the story seems to flow in that direction. Most people I know,
were put off by this slick ending, and question the filmmaker's real
intentions for playing with the audience like this. As for me, it wasn't
the ending that bothered me about this breathlessly beautiful film, with
its stunning shot of the midnight sun and of the Arctic wildlands, as
much as the story getting lost in trying to be too fanciful, playing
with my expectations for things to work out for these amenable lovers
and then not delivering any firm message but what seems to be at first
glance, only, a pretentiously philosophical one. And, by not staying on
target with the romantic part of the story, but drifting around in
circles, where the coincidences are just too much for any two people to
experience in a lifetime, the film becomes marginalized and makes it
seem like a philosophy exercise, albeit an absorbing one, but one that
is, nevertheless, less dramatic and more melodramatic than it should be.
But what I found strangely pleasant about the film, was that even though
I was somewhat put off by the tricks employed throughout the story, I
still found myself caught up in the dynamics of the characters and how
commonplace their lives were, that is, if you could discount all the
chance encounters. This made me realize that it didn't matter if this
film wasn't going to meet my expectations about what should be happening
or if its philosophy was overtly too oblique; the film had a special
quality about it that got its message across despite being off target.
The directors son, Peru Medem, Otto as a child, gave a dreamlike
performance as someone who is wrapped up in innocence and desire, which
is tearing at the fabric of his being, and he made the story come to
grips with what it was about or should have been about, the obsessive
love one has for someone, a love that is inexplicable and can't be
explained away by rationality or palindromes or reflections. Victor Hugo
Oliveira, as the teenage Otto, twisted up inside by the strange love
relationship he is going through, was delivering a sensitive
performance, as this relationship was intriguing, dangerously close to
being incestuous, but was one that was not clarified any further, to the
detriment of the film but to no fault of the actor. Therefore, the
startling ending to the film became less important to comprehend,
because the heart of the film wasn't explored as much as it should have
been. The strangeness of this film, is that its haunting use of language
and visuals to fill in the blanks for the characters, still overshadows
its melodramatic story and keeps the pot boiling, even when you might
think the film is skiing lumberingly uphill instead of gracefully
downhill and is about to slip and slide downhill in a crackup. But that
never happens because the film has a special elusive quality about it
that original films seem to always have.
Thusly, I felt caught up in the film's magical spell despite the many
reservations I had about the manipulations the director used, as he
ultimately proved that he has weaved a tale about the darkened lovers
and their near-misses and made it into a tale of haunting
characterizations, leaving something mysterious about this intangible
and intelligent film that held my undivided attention throughout.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Greg King
LOVERS OF THE ARCTIC CIRCLE (M).  
(Dendy)
Director: Julio Medem
Stars: Fele Martinez, Najwa Nimri, Nancho Novo, Maru Valivielso, Peru 
Medem, Sara Valiente, Victor 
Hugo Oliviera, Kristel Diaz, Pep Munne, Jaroslaw Bielski, Joost Siedhoff, 
Beate Jensen
Running time: 112 minutes.
Gorgeous scenery and superb cinematography are not enough to
prevent this new film by Spanish director Julio Medem (The Red
Squirrel, etc) from becoming something of a gloomfest.  This is a love
story spanning some 25 years, and following two people whose lives are
governed by coincidence and chance.  It bears a vague resemblance to
Vincent Ward's dream-like Map Of The Human Heart.  But in that film
the lovers were separated by the gulf of international events like a
world war; here they are merely separated by personal problems,
misunderstandings and jealousy.
Otto (Fele Martinez) and Ana (Najwa Nimri) first meet as eight
year olds attending neighbouring schools.  They are intrigued by the
fact that both their names are palindromes.  But the pair soon share
more, as Otto's father falls in love with Ana's widowed mother.  As
they reach adolescence, Ana and Otto become illicit lovers.  When
Otto's mother dies, he is consumed by guilt and runs away to find his
destiny as a mail pilot flying to remote corners.  Ana follows her own
path, but the pair can never quite forget each other.  As their lives
take them in different directions, their paths occasionally cross even
though they are unaware of it.  Finally, Ana moves to a remote cabin
on the Arctic circle where she awaits an ill-fated reconciliation with
Otto.
The philosophy behind Lovers Of The Arctic Circle seems to be
that life goes in cycles, and everything follows a predetermined
pattern.  The film's structure unfolds in a neat circle as Medem takes
us from the opening prologue back to the same events, and there is a
lot of repetition of smaller and insignificant events.  Medem's
sometimes allusive style sees events unfold from the different
perspectives of its two central characters.
Medem takes his time in allowing the story to unfold, and
often Lovers Of the Arctic Circle seems to be going in circles,
heading nowhere fast.  Medem uses ominous symbolism and obtuse
narrative styles to tell his epic tale, and the result is occasionally
boring and repetitive.  There seems to be a lack of real passion here,
and a suspension of disbelief is required to accept some of Medem's
more fanciful coincidences.  However, Gonzalo F Berridi's
cinematography is sumptuous, creating a series of haunting images, and
he brings a rich visual quality to the film.  The stunning locations,
ranging from Madrid to Helsinki, also enrich the movie.
The cast give solid performances, although newcomer Peru
Medem, who plays Otto as an 8 year old, is a standout and brings a
seriousness and soulfulness beyond his years to the role.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
rated R
Fine Line Features
in Spanish with English subtitles
starring Najwa Nimri, Fele Martinez, Nacho Novo, Maru Valdivieso, Kristel
Diaz, Victor Hugo Oliveira, Sara Valiente, Peru Medem, Jaroslav Bielski, 
Rosa Morales
written and directed by Julio Medem
Julio Medem's poignant, unconventional "Lovers Of The Arctic Circle"
is a film that shows the viewer the earthshaking power of destiny. The
film stars Najwa Nimri and Fele Martinez(both of whom starred in this
year's other Spanish import "Open Your Eyes") as Ana and Otto, two
people with palindromic names who are destined to be lovers. We learn
of their destinies through a series of coincidences; coincidences that
Ana says, through voice-over, make up her entire life.
When Ana meets Otto, her father has just died, and she believes that
his soul has crossed over to this boy. Fate then works in mysterious
ways, making her mom and Otto's dad fall in love. While she is still a
child, she only looks up to Otto in a paternal way.
Otto, however, is love-stricken from the first time he sees Ana. His
parents have just gotten a divorce and he is going through problems of
his own. Otto and Ana bond together in their time of loss, creating a
kinship based on empathy.
As they become teenagers, their relationship becomes sexual, and they
must try to hide their affairs from their very naive parents. As they
get older, though, they begin to drift apart. The inevitable tragedy,
foreshadowed in the film's first scene, draws nearer.
Writer/director Julio Medem crafts a highly poetic love story; one
that spans the circle of life.  "Lovers Of The Arctic Circle" gives an
entirely new spin on the age-old tale of tragic romance.  The camera
work is wondrous and the characters are vivid. "Lovers Of The Arctic
Circle" gets my full recommendation.
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://www.angelfire.com/mo/film

