Title
Review for Frighteners, The (1996)
Number of Reviews
13

Author
Shane Burridge
I suspect Peter Jackson's latest offering will mark a division between
his fans.  There will be those who accuse him of copping out with a
commercial soft sell (Michael J. Fox?  In a Peter Jackson movie??) and
there will be others happy to see the larrikin New Zealand film-maker
getting his foot in the Hollywood door.
Jackson and co-writer Fran Walsh (who'd collaborated with him on his
earlier film HEAVENLY CREATURES) have thrown together a grab-bag of
ideas for this big-budget comic thriller.   Fox plays Frank Bannister,
a conman who makes his living performing fake psychic cleansings
house-to-house in the small coastal town of Fairwater.  He is aided in
his work by three less-than-enthusiastic spirits who are awaiting
their crossover to the `other side'.  Apart from an unrecognizable
John Astin, this ghostly trio doesn't provide as many laughs as they
should, and Fox's familiar mannerisms don't promise to lift THE
FRIGHTENERS much above the level of a ho-hum supernatural sitcom.  But
not all is lost.  Jackson soon shifts gears, and as things begin to
get serious, so does Fox - his performance improves as the movie goes
on.  Oddball characters begin to spring out of the woodwork (notably
an unhinged FBI agent played by Jeffrey Combs), and the plot takes new
turns:  Bannister is trying to help nominal love interest Lucy (Trini
Alvarado) cope with the recent death of her husband;  Lucy is trying
to help a housebound woman (Dee Wallace Stone) escape from her
domineering mother; the local sheriff is trying to find the cause of a
series of fatal heart attacks plaguing the town; FBI agent Milton
Dammers is trying to pin the blame for these on Bannister.  At the
core of all this is a mysterious dark figure, at first glance the Grim
Reaper (marvelously realized as a furious, flapping streak of robes),
that is causing murder and mayhem throughout Fairwater.  It's up to
Bannister, of course, to stop it.
The most impressive thing about THE FRIGHTENERS is the amount that
Jackson has managed to stuff into it.  In fact there is almost too
much of everything: plot, laughs, suspense, special effects, action,
imagination.  Its only puzzle is why, ultimately, it fails to impress.
 The fans of Jackson's earlier films BAD TASTE and BRAIN DEAD will be
disappointed that his gore has now become computer-generated; fans of
HEAVENLY CREATURES will no doubt see his new film as a step backward
to his splatter days.  But for every weak moment there is a
directorial flourish that compensates (one of my favorites is a wild
scene in a cemetery where all four protagonists are fighting each
other off simultaneously); and who would have believed that a film
touted as a  comedy could contain a sequence as chilling as the one in
which Bannister relives flashbacks of a mass murder?  It is best,
perhaps, to think of THE FRIGHTENERS as Jackson's Ghost Train.  It is
an amusement park ride of a movie, although one tailored to the
director's own tastes.  As Jackson himself laughs it off, "I went to
Hollywood to make a movie, and I blew it".  It's obvious that he saw
his chance to grab the brass ring, and made the most of the ride while
he could.  As should any prospective audience of his new movie.

Author
James Berardinelli
United States/New Zealand, 1996
U.S. Release Date: 7/19/96 (wide) 
Running Length: 1:50
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, mild gore, profanity) 
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Michael J. Fox, Trini Alvarado, Peter Dobson, Jeffrey Combs, 
      Dee Wallace-Stone, Jake Busey, Jim Fyfe, Chi McBride, John Astin
Director: Peter Jackson
Producers: Jamie Selkirk and Peter Jackson
Screenplay: Peter Jackson and Frances Walsh
Cinematography: Alun Bollinger and John Blick
Music: Danny Elfman
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures
     THE FRIGHTENERS isn't a bad film, but it is a disappointment.  
Following director Peter Jackson's powerful, true-life matricide tale, 
HEAVENLY CREATURES, THE FRIGHTENERS falls short of expectations by being 
just one of many in the long line of 1996 summer movies.  It's driven by 
some pretty nifty special effects, but the characters are fairly 
lifeless, and the plot, when it makes sense, is silly and needlessly 
convoluted.  As horror-comedies go, this one doesn't offer much that's 
original or daring.  Jackson's past efforts, such as BRAINDEAD and MEET 
THE FEEBLES, have taken more chances, and THE FRIGHTENERS doesn't match 
the audacity of Sam Raimi's EVIL DEAD movies or even this year's 
CEMETERY MAN.  
     It's not hard to pinpoint what's wrong with THE FRIGHTENERS.  The 
storyline is extremely confused, and there's no big payoff.  The 
proceedings meander along, throwing jokes, dripping ectoplasm, 
unnecessary characters, and pointless action sequences at the audience, 
until they rather suddenly come to an end.  There's no big buildup to a 
final confrontation, nor is there any real sense of anticipation 
regarding the climax.  The script is unpolished, and often feels more 
like a draft than a finished product.
     THE FRIGHTENERS opens with a solid premise.  Frank Bannister 
(Michael J. Fox) is a paranormal investigator operating in the small 
town of Fairweather, California.  Bannister is a con artist, but his 
accomplices are unusual -- a trio of ghoulish spirits named Stuart (Jim 
Fyfe), Cyrus (Chi McBride), and the Judge (John Astin).  Because, even 
though Bannister is a fraud, he really can see, communicate, and 
interact with the dead.  Bannister has a simple arrangement with his 
associates.  Stuart, Cyrus, and the Judge haunt a house, then Bannister 
shows up to do an exorcism -- for a fee, of course.  
     But, when a local doctor, Lucy Lynsky (Trini Alvarado, from LITTLE 
WOMEN), loses her husband, both the dead and the living of Fairweather 
have cause to be worried. Victims all over town are dying of sudden 
heart attacks, and only Bannister knows the cause. Cloaked and armed 
with a scythe, the Grim Reaper (a.k.a. the "Soul Catcher") has arrived, 
connected somehow to the spirit of an executed serial killer.  When 
Bannister sets out to end the massacre, he finds that the living are 
impotent against Death.  Lucy believes in him, but, when he's arrested 
on suspicion of murder and she is marked as the Soul Catcher's next 
target, there's not much she can do to save Bannister or herself. 
     THE FRIGHTENERS includes some enjoyable, and potentially 
interesting, elements, none of which are given enough exposure to do 
them  justice.  Bannister's interaction with his ghostly con partners 
could have made for an enjoyable film on its own; here, it's part of the 
setup.  Then there's the idea that the protagonist might have to kill 
himself to do battle with the Soul Collector on its own turf.  Again, 
the possibility is only toyed with, not fully realized.  At times, it's 
frustrating to watch THE FRIGHTENERS, because the seeds of a good story 
are there, struggling to get out.
     That said, the movie held my attention for its one-hundred ten 
minute running time.  It's lighthearted and paced like a runaway train, 
and some of the gore-and-humor mix works.  The special effects, which 
were done exclusively by a New Zealand company, are as impressive as 
anything produced by ILM.  THE FRIGHTENERS isn't as eye popping as 
TWISTER or INDEPENDENCE DAY, but it functions as a nice piece of visual 
candy.  Michael J. Fox does a better-than-adequate job in the lead role, 
and he and Trini Alvarado display a nice rapport, even if their romantic 
relationship remains underdeveloped. 
     THE FRIGHTENERS is about as mixed a bag as you can get.  The 
muddled story is a serious drawback, as are the host of unnecessary 
characters and subplots.  A nutcase FBI goon (Jeffrey Combs) and a loony 
agoraphobic woman (Dee Wallace Stone) irritated me; every time they 
appeared, I wanted them to go away.  The former, although supposedly on 
hand for comic relief, was a little too creepy to be funny, and the 
latter was critical only to an unnecessary plot twist.  Essentially, 
neither was needed, and THE FRIGHTENERS would have been better without 
them.
     If there's one obvious aspect of this movie that recalls HEAVENLY 
CREATURES, it's that Jackson once again plumbs the depths of his 
imagination.  Next time out (possibly for his rumored re-make of KING 
KONG), if he can wed that creativity with a substantive, less convoluted 
story, he should be able to regain the form that catapulted him to 
international acclaim last year.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Paul-Michael Agapow
[laserdisc/film] "The Frighteners"
In a provincial town, people are dying suddenly and inexplicably.
Snooping around the edges of the mystery is the smarmy but
disturbed "psychic investigator" Frank Bannister (Fox) whom many
suspect of being involved.  Bannister, who fears they may be
correct, is only slightly fraudulent for he can see the dead and
the sinister figure which stalks the town.
Whoever the genius was that recognised the talent in New
Zealand director Peter Jackson should be congratulated.  His
first three features ("Bad Taste", "Braindead" aka "DeadAlive",
"Meet the Feebles") were low budget, disgusting gorefests that
were a lot of fun but are hardly the sort of thing that would
encourage you to see Jackson as a director of Major Serious
Projects.  Yet "Heavenly Creatures" confirmed this vision.
"The Frighteners", although not his best picture and
sometimes illogical, is yet further evidence.  It shows a
perceptive balance in juggling a humorous, sad and even
frightening story in an economical framework.  The sad sight of
Bannister's half-complete dream house gives way to comic misfit
ghosts to angry poltergeists literally straining the structure of
an old house.  Even once in a while the plot throws us a curve
ball but neither this nor the extensive but subdued special
effects are allowed to dominate.  Jackson insists that the story
be told and that these other things are there merely to support
the tale.
As one wonders who would have picked Jackson, a similar thing
might be said of Michael J Fox.  It's all too easy to cast the
perpetually cherubic Fox as cloying or overly-earnest, the legacy
of too many years in "Family Ties".  Yet he comfortably slips
into the role of the downbeat Bannister, an shyster but a
pathetic and broken one, just skimming the surface of life.  The
seriousness of this central character is balanced by his spectral
sidekicks, including an unrecognisable John Astin, and lunatic
Jeffrey Coombs playing a deranged FBI agent (in what may well be
a sly "X Files" reference).
In truth the climax is rather cluttered and in parts very
Hollywood but not to any extent that ruins the picture.  In
summary "The Frighteners" is a well constructed and entertaining
picture.  Despite Jackson's next project being "King Kong" (no,
really) his work will be looked forward to with some
anticipation.  [***/interesting] and summer bays at the beach on
the Sid and Nancy scale.
------
paul-michael agapow (agapow@latcs1.oz.au), La Trobe Uni, Infocalypse
[archived at http://www.cs.latrobe.edu.au/~agapow/Postviews]

Author
Christopher Null
     GHOSTBUSTERS meets TWIN PEAKS?  Michael J. Fox's comeback movie?  A
film about a lazy guy who catches ghosts for a living?  A supporting cast
of unknowns?  Does anyone want to see a movie like this?
     *Yes!*  And you'd better get to the theater quick, because THE
FRIGHTENERS, in a manner suggested be the above questions, will not make
huge waves at the box office in a crowded field of summer blockbusters.
     Nevertheless, THE FRIGHTENERS is one of those gems that deserves to be
seen for its fresh and funny approach to the horror genre.  Peter Jackson,
writer-director and master of schlock, is behind the camera for the first
time since 1994's HEAVENLY CREATURES.  His tale this time is most simply
described as... GHOSTBUSTERS meets TWIN PEAKS.
     It all starts with spirit-chaser Frank Bannister (Fox), whom everyone
thinks is a con-man except for the unhappy Lucy (Trini Alvarado).  And when
people suddenly start turning up mysteriously dead in the town of
Fairwater, Frank becomes Suspect #1.  While the cops and feds come after
him, Frank starts a witch hunt of his own, chasing a Grim Reaper-type
character who is really responsible.  Meanwhile, Frank's spiritual friends
come to his aid.
     No, the one-paragraph description doesn't do it justice, but trust me,
after 30 minutes of rough exposition, Jackson hits his stride, even if it
doesn't make a whole lot of sense until 10 minutes from the end.  No
matter, because the payoff is worth it, and along the way we are treated to
the end-result of the morphing effects Jackson began meddling with in
HEAVENLY CREATURES.
     Even better is a performance by co-star Alvarado, who steals the show
from Fox *and* the ghosts (not an easy feat) with her graceful beauty and
excellent acting ability.  If I were a studio exec, I'd be throwing lots
and lots of money at her right now, because this girl (who most recently
appeared in LITTLE WOMEN, is going to be a star.  I have to admire
Jackson's casting ability -- after all, he discovered Kate Winslet for
HEAVENLY, now Alvarado... who's next?  (Me!)
     And my gushing about fair Trini is not to detract from Fox or the
other co-stars, the most notable of which are R. Lee Ermey, recreating (as
a ghost) his sergeant role from FULL METAL JACKET, and Jeffrey Combs (yes,
THE RE-ANIMATOR himself), as the most twisted FBI agent you'll ever see on
film.
     Jackson's innovative use of flashback and humor overcome the script's
shortcomings and some surprisingly bad (and annoying) voice dubbing, but
only if you give the film a chance to pick up some steam.  Early judges
will not be pleased.  Jackson's fans will be elated.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
W. Graves
I don't know how or why, but Michael J. Fox (why does the "J" have to be said 
anyway?) has the lead in this non-leader.  Don't get me wrong, I enjoy Fox's 
acting.  I just haven't seen him in a strong comedy/drama since the "Back to 
the Future" series ended.  I saw a brief reincarnate when I saw "Greedy" and 
"The American President," but this ends the streak.  Frighteners has some 
dazzling effects, and the script wasn't too shabby, however, the humor failed 
to come from Fox.  The cast of ghosts got most of the laughs, and the R rating 
is what kills them all.  It's hard to tell at first what type of movie this is. 
 The comedy/horror/drama mix is extremely lopsided and awkward.  There are 
several parts of this film that are excessively violent, and could have made 
the movie much better if they were deleted.  I'm not against violence in films, 
but it just doesn't fit with this script.  Michael did the best he could as 
this character, but the part should have been focused more on the Fox we know 
and love, and not the corny jokes and effects the ghosts offer.  What you get 
is a half serious horror/ half "Casper" mix that simply doesn't do the job.  It 
would have done better as a kiddy movie, but the big "R" will prevent that.  
Fox plays a con who has befriended several spirits he can see and communicate 
with after a traumatic accident.  They help him scare customers into paying for 
his bogus services as a ghostbuster.  The twist comes when a deceased serial 
killer continues his mayhem as a spirit, and must be sent to the "other side" 
to end the murdering spree and prevent Fox from being framed for the killings. 
 I'd seriously consider waiting on this one...either for the video release, or 
indefinitely.  Either way you won't miss much.
AS SEEN AT: http://www.txdirect.net/users/aaron/toad/movie.html
The ALTERNATIVE page.

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Peter Jackson
Writers: Peter Jackson and Frances Walsh
Starring: Michael J. Fox, Trini Alvarado, Peter Dobson, Jeffrey Combs,
Jake Busey, Dee Wallace-Stone, Chi McBride, Jim Fyfe, John Astin, R. Lee
Ermey, Troy Evans
"Dead Alive" (a.k.a. "Brain Dead") was a hilarious darkly comic horror
film with the best single gorefest ever put on celluloid.  "Heavenly
Creatures" was a wonderfully disturbing character study/black comedy
which examined two school girls' strange obsession with one another,
going WAYYYY past simple homosexuality.  Compared to these two amazing,
amazing flicks, "The Frighteners," Jackson's American debut (and
subsequent box office flop) is rather tepid.
That's not to say that it's not a good flick.  Often when foreign and
acclaimed directors arrive to make American films, they have a bit of
trouble settling in (it's natural; just ask John Woo and Danny Boyle). 
In some cases, it's because they're homeland material is a tad too
risque for our elite, censored-as-hell American tastes (most of Woo's
Hong Kong flicks are "unrated," which also applies to "Dead Alive;" and
I still haven't seen the uncut version of "Trainspotting").
Granted, Jackson's arrival is a tad more well-done than that of Woo's
and Boyle's ("Hard Target" is considered a "failure," and...I mean, it
starred Van Damme; and "A Life Less Ordinary" MIGHT peak 5 million bucks
and might get more than 10 good reviews out of the whole country).  But
it's just not as good as his earlier films.  I've never seen his early
early work (like "Bad Taste," and the sick Muppet parody, "Meet the
Feebles" - both are more rare than finding a gas station in Philadelphia
- inside joke), but I'm pretty sure that "The Frighteners" is just as
tepid as it seems.
Not to say it isn't a shock for us Americans.  The film's mood twists
and turns: it starts off as an off-beat comedy, then ultimately settles
into wild horror.  The film opens spectacularly, giving off hints of
Jackson at his most manic, with a ghost chasing a screaming woman (Dee
Wallace-Stone - you remember the mom from "E.T.") through a crumbling
mansion, seeping through walls, and creeping under the carpet, and
ending in a great shot that scares the hell out of the viewer.
The we meet Frank Black (Michael J. Fox, right before "Spin City" came
out), a bitter, world-weary con-man, or so it seems.  He says he's a
psychic and can exorcise ghosts, and no one really believes him...until
a ghost starts poltergeisting (a word?) them.  Then Frank comes in, does
his stuff, and no more ghosts.  Maybe he's the real thing...guess
again.   Yes, he can communicate with ghosts, but they're really his
buds, and are working with him (or for him) to get him money and
business, a pure example of the cleverness of the script.
But soon numbers are appearing on people's heads, only seen by Frank. 
And soon enough, they turn up dead.  It seems a serial killer ghost is
doing the nasty deeds, and making it look like Frank is the culprit. 
The film shifts into horror, yet never really looses the twisted humor
from the first parts.
The humor in this film is in no way as great as that of "Dead Alive" and
"Heavenly Creatures."  A typical joke in "Dead Alive" featured a woman
turning into a zombie sitting at lunch with a group of people who don't
know she's a zombie, and accidentally eating her eyeball, which has
fallen into her soup.  And a "Heavenly Creatures" joke involved great
style, and acting by one of the actresses, especially a scene where a
paranoid father was checking up on the two girls who were in the
bathroom, taking pictures of eachothers' clevage.
But "The Frighteners" is a little more off-beat, and more American. 
Sometimes there's some good old American slapstick, but then there's
some good old American movie allusions.  One of the funniest film geek
jokes involves a graveyard where the general of it just happens to be
the robotic, insulting drill sergeant from Kubrick's "Full Metal
Jacket," reincarnated as a ghost and played by the exact same actor as
in the film, the great R. Lee Ermey.  And cult horror fans will love
that Jeffrey Combs ("Re-Animator") shows up halfway through as a totally
bizarre and surrealistic investigator who's hung out with way too many
cults.
But the humor just isn't as wild and manic as it was in Jackson's
earlier "Dead Alive."  I mean, I probably laughed more during the final
30 minutes of that movie than I would have if I watched all of Chris
Farley's movies, and multiplied the number of times I laughed at all of
them combined by one thousand.  But "The Frighteners" is much more
restrained, and there-in lies its main problem.
Sometimes when a film is too structured, it looses the impact it would
have needed.  Sure, "Heavenly Creatures" was structured, but it was a
more dramatic film than his other flicks.  But "Dead Alive" was funny
because it went wild.  "The Frighteners" needed this same kind of touch
to it, to differentiate itself more from American flicks.  I mean,
there's a reason why we bring acclaimed foreign filmmakers over here to
make films: money.  But the other reason is to bring a part of their
culture over to this one.  When they assimilate, they kind of loose
their luster, and "The Frighteners" looses that.
On better news, the film works on its own anyway, although it's nothing
absolutely spectacular.  The acting is also very good, with Fox doing a
strangely good job in a role he was definitely not typecast for.  Trini
Alvarado ("Little Women") does a good job as his love interest (there
has to be one: it's American).  Jake Busey plays the big villain, and
has that same kind of creepy-ass visage his father once had...hell, he
still has it.  John Astin, unrecognizable under layers and layers and
layers of make-up and special effects, does a good job with a small
role.  And Jeffrey Combs is...wow, he's a cool guy.
"The Frighteners" works, but is not as jaw-droppingly amazing as
Jackson's other films, yet still shows that Jackson can at least do a
pretty good job on his American debut.  But if you want to see a real
piece of Jackson-ography, see "Dead Alive" and/or "Heavenly Creatures."
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
David Wilcock
After Heavenly Creatures, Peter Jackson returns to the genre that
started him off...the over the top horror comedy. Sadly, this is not as
over the top as some of his other films (Dead Alive, Meet the Feebles)
but is still very good fun. Fox plays a ghost exterminator who can
really see ghosts, thanks to an near death experience that he had. He
is running a scam by making the ghosts he knows mess up people houses a
bit, and then he comes and gets 'rid' of them. However, things start to
go weird when people really are being visited by a ghost who gives
their heart a bit of a squeeze. The suspicion falls to Fox, and he must
prove his innocence.
One of the main things about this film is the speacil effects. And they
really are quite speacil. The ghosts faces get ripped off, ceilings
ripple, and the Soul Taker is a very impressive piece of speacil
effects. And, even the plot if quite good. However, don't take this
film as a proper comedy. The main emphasis is on gore etc, and there is
a lot of it.
If there is one bad thing about this film, it will have to be Jeffrey
Combs FBI agent. He is way over the top, and is irritating after a
while. Also, he is not really needed in the picuture, and his charecter
should've been toned down if they wanted an FBI agent that much.
Another bad thing about the film is the gaping plot holes. For example,
when Fox dies, he can walk though the floor, while the other ghosts
can't.  Also, although ghosts can interact with anything, John Astins
character sits down in a chair! They are also many other gaps like
this. But because you're enjoying yourself so much, you never really
think about these things until after the movie.
So, overall, this is a good film, and if you can stand blood and guts
and intense speacil effects, then this is the film for you.

Author
Larry Mcgillicuddy
****(out of 4)
Directed by Peter Jackson
Starring Michael J. Fox, Trini Alvarado, Dee Wallace Stone, Jeffery
Combs, Peter Dobson, John Astin, Chi McBride, R. Lee Ermey
Review- Peter Jackson's The Frighteners has received some notice for
setting the record for most computer effects ever in a movie, and still
coming in at the extremely cheap $30 million price tag. But for those
who were dismayed by this year's blockbusters like Twister and
Independence Day, The Frighteners has much more to offer than special
effects. And for those worried wether or not Peter Jackson would
compromise to Hollywood you can rest easily. The Frighteners is as far
removed from Hollywood as a high-profile movie can get.
Michael J. Fox stars as Frank Bannister, a con artist who can speak to
ghosts. He uses this ability to set up a scam in a small town where his
ghost buddies scare the hell out of people, then he comes and pretends
to get rid of them. This is how he has made a living ever since his
wife died in a car crash 5 years ago.
Frank's latest customers are a young couple, played by Trini Alvarado
and Peter Dobson. When Dobson ends up dead, Alvarado starts to take an
interest in Fox. But Dobson's spirit is still around as he refuses to
beleive he's dead. This leads to a very awkward and amusing dinner date
between Fox and Alvarado, with Dobson tagging along as a ghost.
Things start getting complicated for Fox when he is accused for a
series of murders taking place in the town. Fox sees someone named The
Soul Collector crushing the heart of the victims, but noone else can
see that. So when Fox shows up to try and save each victim, naturally
people suspect he is the killer. Fox sees that Alvarado is next on The
Soul Collector's hit list, and the last half hour of the movie deals
with Fox's attempts to save her from this evil spirit.
There are many wonderful twists and turns in the screenplay written by
Peter Jackson and Frances Walsh.  The movie starts off as a black
comedy, and ends up a horror-action film. The mix between these genres
are perfect. No laughs are sacrificed in the name of horror, and vice
versa. One point of contention might be a lackluster score by Danny
Elfman. But that hardly seems like a flaw when you have such a diverse
cast all in top form. Michael J. Fox delivers one of his best
performances to date as a man who hides the sorrow of his wife's death,
and then is forced to confront this later on. Alvarado, looking like
Andie MacDowell, makes a great frightened, tough, and smart heroine.
And Jeffery Combs, as a paranoid FBI agent, is brilliantly bizaare.
The Frighteners never once feels like it is running long. The first
hour is as funny as any comedy this year, and the last half hour is as
thrilling as any of the big budget blockbusters. This movie is probably
what Casper would've looked like if David Lynch directed it. It's
easily the best film of the year, so far.

Author
Chuck Dowling
(1996) ** - C:Michael J. Fox, Trini Alvarado, Jeffrey Combs, Jake Busey,
Dee Wallace Stone, R. Lee Ermey.
"The Frighteners" tries to be too many things all at once. It's part comedy,
part horror, part thriller, and sadly, only partially entertaining.
The film stars Michael J. Fox, a con-man who enlists the aid of two spirits
to haunt people's houses. Then he shows up to "exterminate" them and
collects from the homeowners. Sounds good so far. The town that he lives in
however, has had a recent history of people dying mysteriously. Mainly,
their hearts have been crushed with no signs of outside force used. Sounds
good too. Then, Fox is able to see one of the murders take place. It's
committed by a grim-reaper type spirit that just reaches into people and
rips the life out of them. Also very interesting. So what's the problem?
Well, the main problem with "The Frighteners" is that there's no depth into
anything. The paragraph above gives as much information as the movie gives,
which is hardly any. Fox is working with two spirits, a stereotypical black
man and a wimpy white guy, to help him scam money. How does he know these
spirits? How did he meet them? How did they decide to do this? What exactly
do they do during these cons? No details available. At one point, the
spirits are haunting a rich woman, making her small children fly around the
room. When Fox shows up to exterminate them, she waves a newspaper in his
face which states that he is a local con man who bothers people at funerals.
So she throws him out. Now, did the newspaper state that he works with two
spirits to con people? No, of course not. If it had, ever newspaper in the
world would be hounding him. All it said was that he bothers people at
funerals. So she just dismisses the fact that her children were FLYING
AROUND THE ROOM. Yeah, ok. Anyway, this interesting plot line is dismissed
15 minutes into the film.
So now we're onto the mystery of what is killing all the people in town.
Well, early on in the film we are treated to footage from a documentary
about a vicious killing spree at a hospital in town. The murders were
committed by an orderly there (Jake Busey, who looks and sounds so much like
his father Gary that it's frightening) who wanted to kill more people than
one of his mass murderer idols. We are then told that the orderly was
executed for his crimes. Now, why are we watching this? Well, one of the
Laws Of Movies is that you will hardly ever be given information in a film
that doesn't have anything to do with the story (unless you're watching
Michael Mann's Heat). So obviously it's this guy's spirit who's doing all
the killing. But the film treats the discovery of this like some sort of
revalation, like we're supposed to be so surprised by it. I can't stand
watching a story where we the audience know everything that's happening but
have to watch the characters on screen figure it out for themselves. That's
why I can't stand TV's "Columbo".
The biggest problem I have with the film is that nothing about the spirits
or the spirit world is given any detail. For example, the two spirit friends
of Fox have to ride in his car to get from place to place, yet other
spirits, like the demon, just fly around. These spirits walk without any
problems, but pass through walls and fall in holes and other things. Then
why does the ground support them? R. Lee Ermey (the drill sergeant from
"Full Metal Jacket") has a great bit part here as a drill sergeant spirit
who's in charge of the graveyard and keeps the other spirits in line. He
can, at will, change outfits and suddenly produce big machine guns from thin
air. So why can't the other spirits do this as well? The black spirit
complains early on that he wants a new outfit. Well, Ermey can change his
clothes with ease, so why can't the black guy? Later, Fox's two spirit
buddies are fighting the demon, basically just by holding on to it. Yet,
when Ermey fights with the demon, he magically produces heavy artillery to
fight the beast. Again, why can't the other spirits do this? What are these
levels of the spirit world where you can do different things?  It's bad
writing, that's what it is.
Late in the picture, Fox's character realizes (how he realizes this I have
no idea) that the only way he can fight this demon is by fighting it in the
spirit world, so he basically kills himself to go fight it. Then, 20 minutes
later he's brought back to life and after resting for about three minutes,
he proceeds at full strength, alive, to go and fight the demon again. So
what was the point of killing himself in the first place??? Ten minutes
after coming back from the dead he gets shot several times, falls 5 or 6
stories through many floorboards, dies again, but is still ok by the end of
the final scene, which can't take place more that two days after the ordeal.
The police, who were not witnesses to the film's outcome, seem completely ok
with the explanation that Fox must give them, about demons and ghosts
killing everyone. Also, the romance that develops between Fox and Alvarado
is so phony that it's annoying. These people fall in love in a matter of
minutes, which also happens to be a matter of minutes after Alvarado's
husband dies. Truly ridiculous.
There are a few bright spots in the film. Jeffrey Combs plays a truly
whacked-out FBI agent who's in charge of investigating "weird cases". Combs
("Re-Animator" and "From Beyond") always plays this type of character
flawlessly, and he's very entertaining here. The special effects are also
excellent, but just as with another Robert Zemeckis production Death Becomes
Her, the special effects are all there is. "The Frighteners" is a major
disappointment.

Author
cgireaper@aol.com
     Acclaimed director Peter Jackson (HEAVENLY CREATURES, DEAD ALIVE) and
executive producer Robert Zemeckis (director of FORREST GUMP) have teamed
up to bring this breathtaking visual masterpiece to the big screen.  And
in a dazzling mixture of black comedy and pure horror it delivers like no
other film!
     The film is about Frank Bannister (Michael J. Fox), a con man who can
communicate with the spirits of the dearly departed due to a car accident
that altered his perception five years before.  His best friends are
spirits in fact; the worm hole riddled Judge from the 1800's (and his
ghost dog Rustler), an African American "brother" from the 70's called
Cyrus, and a nerdy guy named Stuart.  Frank's buddies haunt houses, the
owners call Frank in to get rid of them, and then Frank collects the cash;
the PERFECT con.  But the little town of Fairwater has a rapidly rising
death count and the victims have all had a tremendous amount of pressure
on their hearts.  Only Frank and his pals can see what is doing the
killing.  It is the Soul Collector.  Frank is determined to stop it, but
how can you destroy Death?
This film is the best!  The plot, which may seem like overkill city
when the film is first viewed, is actually VERY interesting and fun with
plenty of twists.  Michael J. Fox and Trini Alvarado give great lead
performances, and the other cast members are good too; all of the ghosts,
FBI agent Dammers, Patricia, and Johnny Bartlett are all extremely
memorable supporting characters.  The delightfully evil score is composed
by the master, Danny Elfman.  The make-up by Academy Award winner Rick
Baker (ED WOOD, AN AMERICAN WEREWOLF IN LONDON) is top-notch.  The real
standout is the visual effects.  With a record breaking 570 CGI effects
shots this film required the longest predetermined shoot in Universal's
history.  The result: EVERY effect is a jaw dropper!  In fact, the only
bad thing about this film is that when a new effect shows up...you still
haven't gotten over the last amazing visual.  Add to this list the "in
your face, 90mph" direction of Peter Jackson AND you know this film is a
winner!  A thrill-packed, visually stunning, and frequently funny roller
coaster ride...this film is the greatest! 

Author
Jean Loiselle
Ok, when I went to see Frighteners, I thought I'd get another movie where 
they're too busy putting special effect that they forget to put in a 
plot, like Twister. I was pretty surprised that it included some type of 
a plot. I am a big fan of comedy-fantasy-horror movies (like Army Of 
Darkness by Sam Raimi). I thought this movie would be more like a horror 
movie with some funny cliches like most horror-comedy movies. But 
actually, it was a lot like a supernatural thriller. While watching it, 
you'll ask yourself all the classic serial-killer questions like: Who did 
it? Who the hell is this guy?
The special effects are really cool but some are not for the weak at 
heart. One thing that I really disliked about this movie is that you keep 
asking yourselves questions about plot mistakes and such. For an hour and 
a half I kept wondering things like:
Where did that spirit get that cape and blade thingie?
What happens to the spirits when the Reaper "kills" them?
That one got me going for a long time...I found some stuff quite 
disturbing like the fact that people can avoid going to hell simply by 
not going in a light funnel.
Also, some spirits were just too dumb to remember they could FLY! Like 
the guy who's getting buried and needs help, why doesn't he just FLY OUT? 
HELLO?!?!?! You can FLY!!
All in all, it was pretty cool. The super indestructible hero (who dies 2 
times in the movie but always manages to come back to life) is played by 
Michael J Fox. He does his role well, but in some parts he just doesn't 
convince me.
So if you want to see a movie about a con-man shooting holy water from a 
water pistol, you know which movie to watch.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Each week, the magazine "Entertainment Weekly" includes a blurb in
their movie section which compares the opinions of several national
critics.  Their ratings are averaged and compared to the weekly results
of an audience exit poll.  Not surprisingly, the public tends thinks
more of most movies than the critics do.  One of the explanations for
this might involve the concept of popular versus critical opinion.  I
won't go down *that* road.  Another likely reason is the simple fact
that most people want to enjoy what they pay for, even if they don't
really like it.  Think about that.  Add in the price of popcorn, plus
the investment of time required to wait in traffic, wait in the lobby,
and wait for the trailers to end, and you're stuck in a situation where
the only alternative to feeling good about a movie, is to feel shame for
the wasted effort.  For this reason, I presume that most folks will
*not* be walking out of THE FRIGHTENERS, a failed supernatural comedy
that is nearly unwatchable for the first thirty minutes.
    The beginning is the worst-- a sloppy, incoherent mess that shows
such silliness as a woman (Dee Wallace Stone) being chased through an
old mansion by special-effects induced apparitions, a short "psychic
investigator" (Michael J. Fox) attempting to crash a funeral, and that
same person later careening down a hill in an out-of-control jalopy.
Huh?  Is bad driving what New Zealand director Peter Jackson (HEAVENLY
CREATURES) thinks is funny to us Americans?  Next comes the appearance
of a floating Elvis statue-- "he lives," utters an unbeliever-- and the
discovery that Fox's character is a con man, thankyouverymuch.  Though
he really *can* see the spooks, he's actually on fairly friendly terms
with them.  They help him scare up business.  Of course, nobody in the
small coastal town is particularly fazed by these ghoulish goings-on.
Maybe they've seen GHOSTBUSTERS a few too many times, but the residents
sure take their psychic investigator in stride.  Just as they seem
unfazed by a recent rash of inexplicable deaths...
     Mercifully, the movie gets (a bit) better as it goes.  The human
element is execrable, but a clever cast of Caspers often amuses.  Chi
McBride is funny as a jive-talking spirit still wearing bell- bottoms.
That's John Astin under make-up as the (literally) jaw- dropping Judge;
he has some salacious fun with an Egyptian mummy.  Also look for a
memorable appearance by R. Lee Ermey, reprising his FULL METAL JACKET
role as a deceased drill instructor.  I rather enjoyed all the
oppressive imagery of death and decay.  You may want to leave the
younger ones at home, though, as the rotting corpses and dusty skeletons
may send them screaming into the lobby.  Heh, heh.  A macabre finale,
set inside of an abandoned hospital, is the high-point of this low
movie.  Jackson cross-cuts between the present (Fox and Trini Alvarado
in peril) and the past (Jake Busey as a mass-murdering orderly) and it's
a grisly gas.  With exploding heads and carved foreheads, the sequence
might even have been scary, if the rest of the movie hadn't so
completely dulled our senses. 
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Scott Renshaw
(Universal)
Starring:  Michael J. Fox, Trini Alvarado, Peter Dobson, John Astin, Dee
Wallace Stone, Jeffrey Combs, Jake Busey, Chi McBride, Jim Fyfe.
Screenplay:  Fran Walsh, Peter Jackson.
Producers:  Jamie Selkirk, Peter Jackson.
Director:  Peter Jackson.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     All those who worried that Peter Jackson's first big studio film
would be a sell-out, please step forward to receive your slaps on the
wrist.  Yes, it is true that many independent and international directors
have found that their first steps into Hollywood left something foul on
the bottom of their shoes (see Kevin Smith's MALLRATS, Lee Tamahori's
MULHOLLAND FALLS or John Dahl's UNFORGETTABLE for just the most recent
examples).  But none of them was as intensely and perversely original as
Jackson, the twisted mind behind HEAVENLY CREATURES and DEAD ALIVE.
Jackson's direction is still in top form in THE FRIGHTENERS, a
comedy-thriller which, amazingly, works as both.  Unfortunately, his story
and casting choices are not quite up to the task.
     THE FRIGHTENERS stars Michael J. Fox as Frank Bannister, a
psychically gifted resident of the seaside community of Fairwater with a
unique scam.  Frank shares his residence with spectral cohorts Cyrus (Chi
McBride), Stuart (Jim Fyfe) and The Judge (John Astin), who help Frank out
by getting houses good and haunted so that Frank can step in and
"exorcise" them for a considerable fee.  It's a cozy little arrangement,
but it soon becomes clear that there are other supernatural goings on in
Fairwater.  Apparently healthy people are dying of mysterious heart
attacks, including the husband of new doctor Lucy Lynskey (Trini
Alvarado), and FBI paranormal expert Milton Dammers (Jeffrey Combs) begins
to suspect that Frank might be involved.  Frank, however, can see the real
culprit:  Death itself, sickle and all, has come to Fairwater.
     Robert Zemeckis acted as executive producer of THE FRIGHTENERS, and
if you remember his DEATH BECOMES HER, you will have a good idea of what
to expect.  The visual effects are wild and entertaining, and sometimes
decidedly creepy, like an ectoplasmic face which slowly drips down a
tombstone.  Jackson fills the film with great comic characters, including
Combs as the only special agent in the FBI who makes "Twin Peaks'" Dale
Cooper seem normal, and a hilarious cameo by R. Lee Ermey, playing his
Sgt. Hartman character from FULL METAL JACKET as a ghost running a very
tight graveyard.  The first half of THE FRIGHTENERS is a feast for those
with a warped sense of humor, particularly those who have no problem with
the idea of the decomposing Judge enjoying...ummm...relations with a mummy
in an Egyptian museum exhibit.
     The main problem with the second half, quite surprisingly, turns out
_not_ to be the shift from comedy to horror; in fact, it's not so much a
shift as a gradual build-up.  Bizarre comedy is a part of THE FRIGHTENERS
throughout, but the suspense elements become ever more significant, until
the conclusion becomes a sometimes rather bloody confrontation between
Frank and a pair of killers including a wonderfully unhinged Dee Wallace
Stone.  Jackson knows how to make an audience giggle and shiver at the
same time, and it all blends into one creepy funhouse ride.
     No, the problem, quite simply is Michael J. Fox, or rather the
decision to include a sub-plot for which Fox is really unsuited.  In THE
FRIGHTENERS, we learn that Frank was once a happily married, happily
un-psychic architect who gained his powers and lost his wife in the same
car accident five years earlier.  Other characters keep telling Frank --
and us -- that he is haunted by that event, but Fox never manages to make
Frank seem like anything more than a happily sleazy con man.  His attempts
at showing emotional turmoil are sadly superficial; I don't think I've
ever seen someone look as thoroughly unconvincing while a glycerine tear
rolled down his cheek.
     The back story for Frank is just one of many bits and pieces which
Jackson and co-writer Fran Walsh pile onto THE FRIGHTENERS, making it feel
like just that -- bits and pieces.  With serial killers, gun-toting
ghosts, lunatic G-Men, snooping reporters and love interests all running
around, THE FRIGHTENERS sometimes gets far too busy for its own good.  By
the time we get to a finale which includes visions of the afterlife (both
the good and bad version), it actually seems just plain silly.  Peter
Jackson has a welcome quality in a director, which is that he always wants
to keep his audience on its toes, never quite knowing what to expect, and
he is ready to entertain them any way he knows how.  THE FRIGHTENERS is
ultimately a satisfying ride which shows that Hollywood hasn't shaken the
life out of Jackson; now Jackson needs to shake some of the loose ends out
of his scripts.
