Title
Review for Storia di ragazzi e di ragazze (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian L. Johnson
90 min., not rated, Comedy/Drama/Romance, 1991, In Italian with
English subtitles
Director: Pupi Avati
Cast: Davide Bechini, Lucrenzia Lante, Della Rovere
     In Italy a man and a woman are preparing to get married.  The
woman's family is very rich and the man's family is quite poor.   This
film shows the two families preparing for the wedding.  The wedding is
to be held at the woman's house and just about everything that could go
wrong does.
     I generally don't like foreign films at all.  This film is rather
good, although not nearly as good as MY MOTHER'S CASTLE.  It is comical,
yet dramatic at the same time.  I would recommend, if this film comes to
a theater close to you, that you go for not higher than a matinee price.
People who tend to like foreign films should be sure to see this film.
It will be just as good on video, if it comes to video, for it gains
nothing from being shown on a big screen.  On a scale of zero to five, I
give THE STORY OF BOYS AND GIRLS a three.  THE STORY OF BOYS AND GIRLS
is not rated, but contains adult situations.
     This film will not be liked by all audiences.  It requires a person
who is willing to sit down and think while watching.  It also requires a
person with an open mind.  Someone who just likes to go to films where
no thought is involved, or who tends not to like any films other than
comedies, should not go to see this film, because there is not enough
comedy in the film to satisfy you.
     The acting is average.  I have seen some films where the acting is
better, but the acting is not horrible.  There is no actor/actress that
really stands out with an exceptional performance, on the other hand, no
actor/actress does a really poor job either.  The story though, is
original.  The parents of the bride are fighting with each other because
the bride's mother's husband has been having an affair with another
woman.  One of the brides brothers is a real show-off.  The groom's
parents aren't sure of the marriage, because they really can't afford
it.  To add to the confusion, the married man who rents the downstairs
rooms in the bride's house shows up with a mysterious female.
