Title
Review for Crna macka, beli macor (1998)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Dennis Schwartz

BLACK CAT, WHITE CAT (Crna macka, beli macor) (director/writer:Emir
Kusturica; screenwriter: Gordan Mihic; cinematographer: Thierry
Arbogast/Michel Amathieu; cast: Bajram Severdzan (Matko Destanov),
Florijan Ajdini (Zare Destanov), Salija Ibraimova (Afrodita), Branka
Katic (Ida), Srdan Todorovic (Dadan Karambolo), Zabit Memedov (Zarije
Destanov), Sabri Sulejman (Grga Pitic), Jasar Destani (Grga Veliki),
Adnan Bekir (Grga Mali), Predrag Pepi Lakovic (Priest), Zdena
Hurtocakova (Black Obelisk), 1998-Ger/Fr/Yugo/Aus/Greece)
Bosnian-born writer/director Emir Kusturica (Time of the Gypsies,
Underground) has come up with a robust (lively music and characters with
plenty of energy) but excessive screwball comedy with Felliniesque
touches here and there, and before the film literally goes in the shit,
it was able to show some warm romantic moments and garner many laughs
from its odd-looking and strangely-acting characters. The film is a
relentless slapstick comedy depicting the Gypsy community in Slovenia on
the banks of the Danube. It revolves around two friendly patriarchal
families and a feud with a third Gypsy patriarch, who is disdainfully
called a `businessman patriot.' All the patriarchs are thieves, set in
their own ways and customs, with each trying to either control who their
children marry or are obsessed in making sure that they do get married.
Grga Pitic (Sabri Sulejman) is the old-wily patriarch enamored with the
ending to the "Casablanca" film, which he often watches on his video (it
could be said, that one of the film's themes could be about a beautiful
friendship formed by a seemingly odd pair). His son, Grga Veliki (Jasar
Destani), is the one who wants to marry for love, but his father just
wants him to marry anyone before he dies. The other families' patriarch
is Zarije (Zabit), who is the elderly father of the slimy screw-up
swindler Matko (Bajram). His son is Zare (Florijan), a clean-cut Gypsy
boy, who has fallen madly in love with a waitress, a real spit-fire, Ida
(Branka), but can't have her because his father owes money to the third
patriarch, Dadan (Srdan), who wants Zarije's son to marry his sister,
Afrodita (Salija). She is known by the disdainful name of "Ladybird,"
and is viewed as a midget. She courageously stands up to her brutal
brother by saying that she will marry for love only. Dadan is a
cocaine-sniffing womanizer and vulgar disco lover (singing out when high
on drugs, I'm a "pitbull"), who plays his part with manic energy.
Grga Pitic, garbage dump owner, and Zarije, cement works owner, are old
friends, though they haven't seen each other in 25 years (these Gypsies
move around). When Matko thinks up a heist of a train carrying diesel
fuel, he needs money to finance this hijacking; and, he goes to Grga for
help instead of his father. But Matko is double-crossed by his ruthless
partner in this venture, Dadan, and subsequently the reason for the
forced wedding between Zare and Ladybird to pay off the debt or get
killed by Dadan.
The heart of the film is the farcical wedding and the problems that
occur there, which include forcing the bride and groom together, hiding
the death of the patriarchs in mounds of ice, and having the bride run
away from the ceremony, disguised as a tree stump, and to watch her fall
in love there with the man she dreamed of. The film comes replete with a
happy ending, as noted onscreen by the ending saying just that.
The two cats appear as the title and are seen constantly crawling in and
out of scenes, sometimes contributing in a comical way to what is
happening onscreen. The film is sometimes a "Keystone Kops" comedy, like
those old Mack Sennett films. But the comedy keeps getting more and more
absurd as the story gets out-of-hand, going from hand-grenades blowing
up parts of a house, dead men reviving themselves after being packed in
ice, and finally dissolves into complete chaos. The film just ran too
long, close to two hours, for a story that shouldn't have been longer
than 90- minutes.
The group of Gypsies were mostly nonprofessional actors, colorful
characters, with their mouths filled with gold teeth, and a screen
presence that was absurd and defying in logic. Their mannerisms offered
a strange and earthy blend of venality. This original film offered
something different to see, for a viewer who usually doesn't get to see
real Gypsies onscreen.
It's a noisy comedy, with a loud brass band coming in at any time during
the film. It takes suspension of belief on the part of the viewer to
stick with this one for its complete romp across Gypsy land, plus the
skits become too labored to sustain the frenetic pace of the film.
The characters make this film enjoyable. The Gypsies are real
humdingers; they are always grinning; and, while acting grotesque, they
seem to be cruel, and ridiculous. The warm moment in the film, is the
romance between Branka and Florijan, vanishing in a field of sunflowers.
She's a live-wire, and when onscreen was a commanding presence.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 October Films
 Director:  Emir Kusturica
 Writer:  Emir Kusturica, Gordon Michic
 Cast: Severdzan Bajram, Florijan Ajdini, Salija Ibraimova,
Branka Katic, Srdjan Todorovic, Zabit Memedov, Sabri
Sulejman, Jasar Destani, Ljubica Adzovic, Miki Manojlovic,
Predrag Lakovic, Stojan Sotirov.
   You might be tempted to walk out during the first twenty
minutes of "Black Cat, White Cat."  The opening scene,
perhaps meant to develop one of the principal characters,
comes off as largely irrelevant and all too casually paced. 
But remain in your seats.  You're in for a treat.  "Black Cat,
White Cat" is one of the most energetic pictures you'll ever
see, featuring unrelenting physical comedy: pratfalls, vulgar
jokes and repugnant situations, as well as oodles of ethnic
folklore.  Emir Kusturica, arguably the most important director
of films in the Serbo-Croatian language, demonstrates his
resolute love of gypsies in his native land with a frenetic
burlesque that his previous work, "Underground," barely
suggests.  The Bosnian-born filmmaker--who in 1995, after
some disastrous reviews of "Underground" swore off films--
has come back with a vengeance in this pulsating French-
German-Yugoslav production now scheduled to open
commercially in the fall of 1999.
   Following up on his Cannes-winning "Time of the Gypsies"
which Kusturica made ten years back, "Black Cat, White Cat"
follows the lives of two feuding gypsy families living on the
banks of the Danube River.  The families are led by two 80-
year-olds who have not seen each other in twenty-five years,
though they remain good friends.  Grga Pitic (Sabri
Sulejmani) and Zarije Destinov (Zabit Mehmedovski) are big
industrialists, one owning a cement plant, the other heading a
garbage dump, each with a son involved in a predicament. 
Zarije's boy Matko (Bajram Severdzan), is a racketeer
planning to rob a train of its fuel.  To fund the operation he
contacts Grga.  The operation does not pan out: Matko is
double-crossed by Dadan (Srdjan Todorovic) to whom he
now owes a debt.  Dadan, a manic, coke-snorting gangster,
demands that Matko marry off his son Zare (Florijan Adjini) to
Dadan's dwarfish daughter, Afrodita (Salija Ibraimova).  When
Afrodita demurs, insisting that she will wait for a man she can
love, she is unceremoniously dumped into a well until she
reluctantly agrees to the match.  For his part Zare has fallen
for the attractive barmaid, Ida (Branka Katic), whom he
follows around like a puppy, but upon Ida's shoulders falls the
need to instruct the callow young man in the mysteries of
love.
   "Black Cat, White Cat" features a hilarious, extended
wedding scene, full of throbbing gypsy music, a scene in
which the hugely entertaining Srdan Todorovic walks away
with the movie.  A perpetual motion machine, Dadan is all
motility, sniffing coke, waving his arms about like a 20-year-
old American kid in an acid-rock disco.  He alternately
threatens his opponents and celebrates his daughter's
nuptials with all the frenzy of a cheetah on speed, ultimately
gaining his comeuppance as he falls through the floor of the
local outhouse.
   The film combines Marx-Brothers antics with Fellini-esque
scenes (including a repeated vista of a pig eating a
dilapidated car and gaggles of geese, a dog, and two cats).
Kusturica's camera people, Thierry Arbogast and Michel
Amathieu do a matchless job of capturing fetching expression
on the faces of the mostly unprofessional actors as they
plunge headlong into life.  One darkly comic situation centers
on the two octogenarians who, believed to be dead, are
hidden in the attic under mounds of ice so that the wedding
can proceed without the customary 40 days of mourning. 
The subtext that runs through the picture is Kusturica's
implied belief that ethnics around the world are not only
similar in temperament but they are also the folks who really
know how to live.

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
On the way home from a recent movie screening, a friend of mine was
telling me about the sorry state of modern cinema. I remarked that I'm
looking forward to so many different movies this autumn. He replied
that the only flick he was looking forward to was "Black Cat, White
Cat", from the director of "the all-time greatest film", "Time Of The
Gypsies".
His recommendation and the film's title intrigued me, so I rented
myself a copy of Emir Kusturica's "Gypsies". It took a while for the
film to grab me, but once it did I was mesmerized beyond belief.  The
film, about a young man who rebels against his Gypsy ways in order to
make a fortune, was both funny and powerful. Once the end credits
finished rolling, and I was still glued to my chair, Kusturica had
worked his way into the "favorite directors" section of my mind.
In 1995, Emir Kusturica won the Palme D'Or at Cannes for his overlong
epic "Underground", which told the tale of 50 war-torn years in his
native Yugoslavia. However, when he was attacked by the French press
for being not sufficiently anti-Serb, he publicly vowed to give up
filmmaking. But luckily, a couple of years later he was convinced to
embark on a documentary about Gypsy musicians, and that documentary
has turned into the fictional "Black Cat, White Cat".
Like all of Kusturica's films, this one is centered around a quirky
wedding ceremony. A man named Matko (Bajram Severdzan) has engineered
a failed train robbery, and to repay his debt to the wealthy Dadan
(Srdan Todorovic, from "Underground"), he must force his unwilling
son, Zare (Florijan Ajdini) to marry Dadan's tiny sister. The result
is the uneven, rollicking Gypsy fun that has become Kusturica's
trademark.
All his films have complicated plotlines, but the story is never the
point.  Kusturica's films are about culture, and the ironic effects it
has on our daily life. Music is always a big part of Gypsy culture,
and these tunes in "Black Cat, White Cat" do not disappoint.
Because "Black Cat, White Cat" features less drama than Kusturica's
other productions, I was expecting to be disappointed. But this film
is a spirit-lifter; one that will entertain you with its farcical
comic sensibility.
In the end, this wild party is a bit long, but I was sad to leave this
world of Gypsies, mobsters and overall quirkiness. "Black Cat, White
Cat" is a fine, joyous work, and a wonderful slice of Gypsy life. But
before you rush out to see it, rent "Time Of The Gypsies", and let me
know what you think.
note: Emir Kusturica won the Silver Lion Award for Best Director at
the 1998 Venice Film Festival.  That award is well deserved.


Author
David Dalgleish
Starring Bajram Severdzan, Florijan Ajdini, Srdan Todorovic, Branka Katic;
Directed by Emir Kusturica;
Written by Kusturica and Gordan Mihic;
Cinematography by Thierry Arbogast
        BLACK CAT, WHITE CAT is a movie in which no effort has been spared,
a movie which makes other films seem as if they are merely going through
the motions.  It is a riotous, exuberant, irrepressible comedy from Emir
Kusturica, who seems to treat every film as if it might be his last, and
had better put everything he's got into it.  His previous work,
UNDERGROUND, had the same energy and invention, but was concerned with the
matter of Yugoslavia, and was therefore a tragedy.  The joy of BLACK CAT,
WHITE CAT is untrammelled by the hardships of geopolitical conflicts.  It
exists merely for the pleasure of being, and that is more than enough.
        The gleefully convoluted plot, which I'm not sure I understood
entirely, goes something like this: Matko (Bajram Severdzan), a man of
gypsy descent living with his son Zare (Florijan Ajdini) by the side of the
Danube, has a get-rich-quick scheme which depends on purchasing a train
full of oil-drums and bringing it across the border to sell for major
profit.  To obtain the train, he calls in favours from rich obnoxious
gangster Dadan (Srdan Todorovic) and his father's old friend Grga (Sabri
Sulejmani).  But Dadan fleeces Matko and demands his money back.  Matko
can't repay him because he invested everything he had in the train, but,
according to his dead father's wishes, Dadan also needs to marry off his
sister (Salija Ibraimova)--who is called Afrodita but is variously
described as a dwarf or gnome--and says that he will forget the debt if
Zare marries Afrodita.  Matko reluctantly agrees, even though his son is
madly in love with the decidedly ungnomish Ida (Branka Katic).  Meanwhile,
Grga is urging his own grandson to get married, but the grandson is
determined that he will only marry the woman of his heart's desire.  We can
guess that all these hurtling narratives will collide before the movie is
done, and they do.
        Kusturica likes to hurl as much as he can into the frame and then
simply move the camera about, allowing us to observe the chaos.  The screen
teems with life: a recurring band of gypsy musicians orchestrating scenes
with their infectious upbeat playing; a gaggle of geese often found
swirling about the feet of characters as they bustle about; a pig munching
on the rusted frame of an old car; the black and white cats of the title.
These anarchic presences crop up again and again, their vital chaotic
antics paralleling and parodying the profuse comic antics of the people.
        The whirligig motions of the plot somehow come to rest without
flying off in all directions in the film's centrepiece, a wild wedding
which is a splendid illustration of Kusturica's technique.  Dadan dances
about shooting a gun into the air, the absent-minded official gets the name
of the bride wrong, a tearful Ida displays the wedding presents to the
guests, Matko's dead father lies under a block of melting ice in the attic,
abd the coerced bride escapes by shuffling about the floor in an overturned
box, slipping through a trapdoor, and escaping into a nearby forest where
she hides in a tree-stump as the wedding party searches for her; Grga and
his sons approach from the other direction, leading to a fateful encounter.
The ever-present gypsy music pulses throughout, heartbeat of the film.
        The movie as a whole approaches the same level of delirious
unstoppable energy.  What saves it from becoming overbearing is the
rightness of the details.  Kusturica enriches the film with generous human
touches, like the delightful sequence in which Zare and Ida chase each
other through a field of sunflowers, performing a gradual striptease as
they go, radiant with young love; like the secret stash Zare's grandfather
has set aside because he knows Matko is too irresponsible to provide for
his son; like the hideous teeth of the two patriarchs, Grga and Matko's
father, rotting and gold-capped, emblematic of human weakness and
mortality.  The "anything goes" sensibility of the film is somewhat
deceiving: the madness is so entertaining only because it so carefully
nuanced.
        BLACK CAT, WHITE CAT is not a perfect film, but it never stays in
one place long enough for us to dwell on its imperfections.  Perhaps the
abundance of motion and music and madcap plotting, the sheer relentlessness
of the spectacle, could be said to disguise the thinness of
characterization and the thematic incoherence.  But who cares?  The
disguise, in this case, is all that matters.  BLACK CAT, WHITE CAT is a
celebration, a carnival, a parade of the grotesque and bawdy, and it is
only as good as it is gaudy, colourful, lively.  As far as those qualities
are concerned, you couldn't ask for more than this movie gives.
                Subjective Camera (subjective.freeservers.com)
        Movie Reviews by David Dalgleish (daviddalgleish@yahoo.com)
