Title
Review for Ravenous (1999)
Number of Reviews
18

Author
"Average Joe" Barlow
        Black comedies have always courted the concept of
cannibalism, but few have done so with the fervor of Antonia
Bird's "Ravenous."  Like so many recent films, the idea
probably sounded better on paper: a group of soldiers develop
a taste for human flesh, and are forced to deal with the
conflicting emotions this stirs within them.  But "Ravenous"
uses its perch not to entertain but to preach: it's a thinly
disguised morality lesson on mankind's animal tendencies,
told with some of the most disquieting violence I've ever seen
on the big screen.
        I'm willing to believe that cannibalism can be funny--
those of you who are Monty Python fans will no doubt recall the
comedy team's famous skit about an outbreak of the practice among
the British Royal Navy.  "Ravenous," however, takes the same three
minutes of humor and pads it out to two hours, losing the focus
and immediacy of the comedy along the way.
        Captain John Boyd (Guy Pearce), a decorated veteran of the
Mexican-American War, finds himself transferred to the wayward Fort
Spencer in the mountains of California.  The outpost is a small one,
staffed by only eight people, but Boyd doesn't mind: it sounds like
the perfect place to recuperate from his recent combat trauma, not
all of which is physical.
        He's not the only new arrival, however: a Scottish man
named Colqhoun (Robert Carlyle) is found nearly frozen to death
in the snow outside the camp.  He soon recovers, and tells his
hosts a strange tale involving the cannibalistic habits of his
former traveling companions when they were trapped in a cave
together during a fierce winter storm.  Colqhoun escaped, he
claims, just in time to avoid becoming their next meal.
        Col. Hart (Jeffrey Jones, the bumbling principal from
"Ferris Bueller's Day Off"), leads the group to the nearby cave
to investigate Colqhoun's story.  What they find there I will
not reveal, except to mention that multiple members of the party
eventually succumb to the temptation of tasting human flesh,
which has ramifications they do not initially suspect.
        "Ravenous" is essentially a vampire movie without the
fangs, as the characters who develop a taste for human meat are
forced to deal with their unnatural cravings without arousing the
suspicion of their companions.  Had the film been clever enough
to further develop these ideas, we may have been treated to a fine
psychological thriller, or at least a decent black comedy.  But
no: the tale repeatedly goes for cheap shots and cliche'.  Robert
Carlyle, so charming in "The Full Monty," enjoys playing the
demented madman here: observe how he cackles like a mad scientist
while dragging his latest victim into a cave.  Carlyle is no
stranger to playing psychotic characters: he was the dangerous
Begbie in "Trainspotting."  But he is less convincing as Calqhoun,
probably because the character is so thinly sketched.  He
contradicts his story so many times over the course of the movie
that I never knew whether I was supposed to feel horror, sympathy
or mirth towards him.
        There are some interesting avenues for character
development, which the film unfortunately chooses to ignore:
Boyd's experiences in the war are fascinating enough that they
deserve their own movie, not the cursory flashback that "Ravenous"
allows them.  David Arquette's portrayal of the cackling drug-
addicted camp cook seems so inconsequential that I wonder if it
was improvised.  He has few lines, preferring instead to giggle
continuously throughout the movie.  The two Indians who live in
the camp also appear to have larger stories to tell, though the
film doesn't give them the opportunity to become anything more
than dialogue placeholders.
        It's possible that the movie may have been a worthy
thriller if it had stayed within its psychological boundaries;
Calqhoun's tale, for example, hits a fine note of tension and
horror, and we are at least able to understand the reasoning
behind his actions, even if we don't condone them.  But "Ravenous"
goes for cheap horror cliches time and time again: Dead people
repeatedly spring back to life, ala "Friday the 13th."  People
who are on death's door can be completely healed by a simple taste
of human flesh, since the meat gives supernatural powers to any
who might eat it, or some similar nonsense.  By the time the
film attempted to explain itself, I'd quit paying attention.
        There are a couple of nice touches.  The landscape
photography is beautiful (I've always been a sucker for well done
snow photography).  Also, the musical score from Michael Nyman is
unconventional, seeming to consist of three notes played over and
over again, conveying a sense of looping, sonic madness.  I liked
the subtle but disquieting effect this generated.
        There are a few entertaining moments in "Ravenous," but
they are few and far between, a fact that is not helped by the
story's slow pacing.  The movie is much too long to justify a
plot this miniscule; a more liberal fat-trimming during the
editing stage (or a better script) would have made it more
watchable.

E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net
Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm
If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please
write to: joefilm-subscribe@listbot.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   "Ravenous" tries to be both a hoot and a horror but despite
some breathtaking photography succeeds in being neither. 
The targeted audience is probably teen-aged males who
probably would not have the title word in their vocabularies. 
To get an idea of its driving force, pretend you are in poor
health: you have fierce headaches, your skin is always pale,
five cavities are diagnosed during your last dental visit, and
you're afflicted with borderline tuberculosis.  Then a
pharmaceutical company discovers a cure but there's a heavy
price, more than you can easily afford.  Would you buy the
prescription drug?  Of course you would.  You would pay any
price.  Now make believe that the drug does not exist but
health practitioners discovered that eating the flesh of dead
human beings could shape you up.  Could you go for it? 
Sounds disgusting, but probably, yes.  Push the envelope a
notch or two further.  You have to kill other human beings
because the flesh must be fresh.  No?  Probably not.  But
don't put this solution past some people, particularly those
with addictive personalities, for whom the sense of elation will
cause them to turn their backs on the usual moral standards. 
In that respect, "Ravenous," an unusual piece of storytelling,
could be taken as an allegory about heavy drug users who
would steal, prostitute themselves, even kill to get their hands
on that nostrum without which live seems not worth living. 
The theme is a powerful one which, given the right treatment
on the big screen could mesmerize an audience.  But
"Ravenous," whose strangest notion is that it is directed by a
woman whose previous movie "Safe" offers little indication of
this current output, is oddly devoid of suspense.  Antonia
Bird, whose movie features only a single female, goes for the
gore instead.  
   A twist on the vampire legends, "Ravenous" is the story of
men who kill other men and eat their flesh in part to appease
their voracious appetites, in part because their diet makes
them feel stronger, healthier, better.  They are like vampires,
who each have the strength of ten men but who are not
limited by a need to remain indoors during bright, icy,
California days.  The tale takes place in the Sierra Nevada
mountain area of our most populous state in 1847, at the
time of the Mexican War--which added a large and wealthy
territory to the U.S.  The great Gold Rush would come in a
handful of years and Manifest Destiny was America's logo. 
As the most villainous character in the movie tells us, "This
country is stretching out its arms, consuming all it can." 
Colqhoun is the story's central scoundrel, of Scottish bent,
who takes that slogan personally.
   The film opens on Captain John Boyd (Guy Pearce),
considered a hero by some but exposed as a coward by his
commanding officer--who banishes him to a forsaken military
fort in an icy region of California.  He reports to Hart (Jeffrey
Jones), who commands a motley, dissolute bunch of sad
excuses for soldiers.  They include Toffler (Jeremy Davies),
the fort's religious leader; Knox (Stephen Spinella), who
"never met a bottle of whiskey he didn't like;" Reich (Neal
McDonough), a Nordic-looking zealot; and the drug-addicted
Cleaves (David Arquette).  Colqhoun (Robert Carlyle), a
shivering, starving Scot arrives looking for shelter, and
promptly rivets the ragtag bunch with a yarn about a group of
settlers who killed one another for food in order to survive a
treacherous snowstorm.  He guides the soldiers to a cave
that reveals a stack of mangy-looking skeletons, soon
revealing that it was he who killed the entire bunch to satisfy
his unusual gourmet tastes.  After additional, graphically
depicted bloodbath, a showdown develops between Colqhoun
and Captain John Byrd.  Byrd, who retains some semblance
of moral behavior, is faced with a choice that would send
most of us running to the psychiatrist's couch.
   The picture's leading attribute is Anthony B. Richmond's
dazzling photography, using the sparkling mountain scenery
of the Czech Republic and Slovakia which stand in for the
California of the mid-19th century.  In one extended and
particularly well-staged sequence, a character leaps from a
cliff like a championship bungee jumper and is photographed
in free fall down the rocky mountainside, his plummet broken
by a series of tree branches--all to Michael Nyman and
Damon Albarn's inviting soundtrack.   Parts of Ted Griffin's
screenplay provide a modicum of amusement--but not
fright--to the intended audience.  Much of the humor comes
from Hart's wit, which has dried up during his extended stay
at a barren, godforsaken outpost and delivered effectively by
the always amusing Jeffrey Jones.  "It's lonely being a
cannibal," he moans, "It's tough making friends."  Believe it or
not, there are references to Plato and Aristotle, with a quick
debate on whether Aristotle's highest good was happiness or
truth.
   Robert Carlyle, known to a more select audience for his
comic role as Gaz in the surprise hit "The Full Monty" and his
capacity as Glasgow bus driver George in "Carla's Song," has
mastered an American accent (despite his usual shtick
uitilizing in a barely decipherable Scottish dialect), though he
occasionally slides back to his native enunciation amusingly. 
Guy Pearce manages to keep a dour face, though we can
imagine his breaking into laughter frequently during
rehearsals of this sophomoric horror-comedy.  Jeffrey Jones
remains the comic centerpiece, reminding us at one moment
of Harvey Keitel's plea in "From Dusk Till Dawn," to kill him
when he turns into a vampire.  The big disappointment all
around is Antonia Bird, who has opted for playing it box-office
safe after affording us the pleasures of sophisticated
charmers like "Priest" and "Face."  Inspired by the box-office
success of "From Dusk Till Dawn," Bird has afforded us a
reasonably charming first half with good character
development and a fascinating image of a man's throwing up
when cutting a steak.  She spends the remaining time dishing
up the usual banalities of the carnage and general mayhem.

Author
DeWyNGaLe
The topic of cannibalism is a very serious one, and you hardly see the topic
taken as seriously as it was in Ravenous as you usually do.  The plot of
Ravenous is actually quite original, and although disgusting, it was a good
one.  During the Mexican-American war in the small town of Ravenous,
California, John Boyd, played by Guy Pearce, Cleaves, played by David Arquette,
Toffler, played by Saving Private Ryan's Jeremy Davies, and Hart, played by
Jeffrey Jones, and Martha, played by Sheila Tousey are among the characters
that we're acquainted with.  When a man who has been in the cold for some time
now, the people take him inside to keep him warm and safe.  The man is
Colqhoun, played by Robert Carlyle, a man who has a long, eerie story regarding
how he came to be at Ravenous, California.  After Colqhoun shows up, so does
the idea of cannibalism.  You can pretty much see where the film goes from
here, but I do not want to reveal too much.  The film is quite unpredictable,
and I enjoyed that.
The leading performances by Carlyle and Pearce are simply amazing.  Carlyle in
particular played a great villain, and he was also a very believable and
realistic villain.  Carlyle plays the part to near perfection, if not
perfection.  He is most likely the best villain I have seen since the Joker,
played by Jack Nicholson, in Batman.  Carlyle will also play a villain in the
upcoming Bond film, The World Is Not Enough, that will be in theaters this
November.  Pearce was great as John Boyd.  I don't want to reveal too much
about either one of the character's because there isn't much to tell, and if I
do, the entire plot will be given away.
Unfortunately, we don't get to know any of the supporting roles very well.  The
supporting characters generally have around seven to eight minutes of screen
time, which was very disappointing to me.  The stunning performance by Carlyle
made up for the absence of the supporting characters though.  Jeremy Davies is
quite honorable in the few moments he is the film.  He plays the most effective
supporting role.  We didn't know much about him at all, but we saw him the
most.  Arquette delivers a few laughs and sort of brightens up the film in a
few dark places.  Arquette's character doesn't go anywhere either.  
Ravenous was a great movie, and it was very well put together, but I do not
approve of the film at all.  It is one of the most gruesome movies I have ever
seen and it should not be viewed.  It may sound like I am over exaggerating,
but this movie could without a doubt influence potential psychotic people to
try and eat other people.  If the film was bad and the theme of cannibalism
wasn't taken as seriously, then it really wouldn't have mattered, but the topic
is not presented lightly at all.  Do not expect a lot of fun or funny moments
in Ravenous.  It is extremely dark and unfavorable, but it was pulled off very
well.  
The film does not tone down on the blood and gore at all.  We are shown a lot
of flesh being eaten, people being brutally murdered for their flesh, and the
site of blood shows up everywhere and all the time.  Very disturbing images
that are almost unforgettable are still fresh in my mind.  I couldn't even look
at the screen for parts of the movie.  This is your warning.  If you cannot
stand the site of blood, you will not be able to watch this movie without
getting an upset stomach. 
The Bottom Line- Without a doubt, one of the best snack movies ever.  (Yeah
right!)

Author
David N. Butterworth
        Its storyline reads like one of those "Plot or not?" slides shown
before the main feature: "In 1847, a cowardly soldier is exiled to a remote
Californian compound where a Scottish cannibal drops in uninvited for
lunch."
        As far as original story ideas go, "Ravenous" is truly unique.
It's best described as a period cannibal horror comedy, or thereabouts.
Whether or not you can stomach its grisly subject matter for 100
fascinating minutes, one thing is clear: the folks who made this picture,
especially in today's "I Still Know What You Did Last Summer" climate, had
guts.
        Cannibalism on any level is never an easy topic, but director
Antonia Bird ("Priest"), screenwriter Ted Griffin, and an absorbing cast
(among them Guy Pearce, Jeffrey Jones, Jeremy Davies, David Arquette, and
"The Full Monty"'s Robert Carlyle) give "Ravenous" a depth that belies its
jocular "you are who you eat" promotional campaign.  A successful campaign
nonetheless--the preview for this movie, with its blaring soundtrack, has
been running for months, and I was hooked the very first time I saw it.
        A word about that soundtrack.  Co-composed by Michael Nyman
(usually associated with filmmaker Peter Greenaway) and Damon Albarn, the
score for "Ravenous" is one of the most disconcerting I've heard in a long
time.  With its jangling, jarring rhythms and bumpkin levity, the music is
loud when it should be delicate, whimsical when it should be brooding, and
fractious when subtlety would have been the obvious way to go.  Frankly,
it's amazing.  Like director Richard Lester once said: "You've done
everything I wouldn't have done, but it works!"
        Guy Pearce ("L.A. Confidential") plays Capt. John Boyd, a military
officer who feigns death in order to escape an American-Mexican War
offensive.  Castigated by his commanding officers, Boyd is transferred to
Fort Spencer, a desolate outpost in the western Sierra Nevadas where a
party of six dig in for the cold winter ahead.
        One day a disheveled stranger called Colqhoun (Carlyle) appears at
their door, spinning a horrific tale of a terrible storm, a subterranean
refuge, dwindling supplies, and an unthinkable source of fresh meat.  Boyd
and a small company of men return with Colqhoun to the cave and it's then
that the film's supernatural hijinx, and copious bloodletting, kick in.
        That its cannibal theme is played so beautifully straight gives
"Ravenous" much of its substance, its psychological as well as visceral
horror.  Straight, but with a sly sense of humor.  The trailers may stress
the film's comedic element but don't be fooled: the gore quotient in
"Ravenous" is extremely high.
        On the surface, "Ravenous" could easily be dismissed as nothing
more than hocum, yet the quality of the production grants it an eerie
resonance.  Either way, the film deserves high praise for its startling
originality.

Author
Alex Ioshpe
No humans were harmed, tested or tasted in the making of this film. All
recipes are fictions.
TWENTIETH CENTURY FOX DOES NOT CONDONE CANNIBALISM.
A psychological thriller that will scare you to the depth of your soul!
Director/writer Antonia Bird shows us that the most terrifying horror is not
provided by giant beasts, but instead by monsters lurking in ourselves..
"..They were a party of settlers in covered wagon times and they had to
resent to cannibalism in order to stay alive.." This true story, briefly
mentioned in "The Shining" , has no turned into a 143 minutes long motion
picture. In 1847, the United States was a land of pioneers, of gold-starved
Americans making their way west. It was a period of Manifest Destiny, the
inevitability of the country extending its boundaries, stretching out its
arms and consuming all the land it could. Capt. John Boyd (Guy Pearce) has
become both a "hero" and a victim during this period of relentless
consumption ... in ways he could never have imagined. Boyd's journey to hell
begins when he is awarded for an act of cowardice during a horrific
Mexican-American War battle earns him banishment to a desolate military
outpost, a waystation for western travelers in the barren and icy Sierra
Nevada mountains in California. Upon his arrival he is greeted by a small,
motley group of soldiers, including his commanding officer, Hart (Jeffrey
Jones), a previously intelligent and sophisticated man who has lost his
aristocratic origin in the heat of battle and has pretty much given up on
life; Toffler (Jeremy Davies), the fort's personal emissary to the Lord;
Knox (Stephen Spinella), the veterinarian that plays doctor, who never met a
bottle of whiskey he didn't like; Reich (Neal McDonough), the no-nonsense
soldier of the group; and the seriously "over-medicated" Cleaves (David
Arquette), a cook whose meals are inspired more by peyote than culinary
ambitions. Into this cold, bleak and bizarre world staggers a stranger,
Colqhoun (Robert Carlyle), a half-starved Scot who had been traveling with a
group of settlers until they became snowbound. Seeking refuge in a cave,
they soon ran out of food - and were forced to consume one another. Colqhoun
barely escaped becoming an hors d'oeuvre himself. Our heroes then decide to
journey through the mountains to find the survivors, and Colqhoun tags along
to help out. Soon it becomes clear that Colqhoun's tale has ramifications
beyond cannibalism and the will to survive. It involves an old Indian myth
called Weendigo, which states that a man who eats the flesh of another
steals that person's strength, spirit and very essence. His hunger becomes
an insatiable craving: the more he eats, the more he wants, and the stronger
he becomes. There can never be enough, and death is the only escape..
It's all fairly sickening and you have to have a healthy stomach to see the
whole movie through. As professionally made as the movie is, you have to
wonder who they thought would come piling into the theater to see this.
Teen-age horror fans won't care because none of the soldiers look remotely
like Neve Campell. Older folks might show up when they hear that the movie
is actually a satire about the pioneer spirit, but they'll be disappointed
once all the raw meat starts getting waved in their faces. But jokes aside,
this is a film that is well worth watching. It has wonderful and mature
characters, that few horror film s can boast of and a strangely effective
story that continues to electrify you till the end. The two main characters
are also the most interesting. Boyd is a simple, honest man tiered of war,
killing and fear. His sacred wish is to live a normal, quite life away from
gunpowder and blood. Colqhoun is different. He proves that a man, on the
brink of death, would do anything to stay alive, including sacrificing his
own soul. He believes so much in this Indian myth that he starts to change
physically. It is the power of the human mind and conviction that make
miracles happen. The atmosphere in "Ravenous" is macabre and bizarre, scary
and surreal. Completely isolated from the rest of the world, stands fort
Spencer. Here time stands still, and nothing changes. The inhabitants are
soldiers driven by war and pillage. They are all somehow losers of society
that have been banished -- men that are used to killing and have not done
anything else in their entire life. Men that are nothing, and has nothing to
loose. The result is some sort of cabin fever. Cannibalism is more like a
sick game for them. Since they find no pleasure in living, they find some
excitement in killing and dying. It's like "who's going to die first?" The
unchangeable icy landscape, where birds do not sing and even wind doesn't
move the leaves on the trees, resembles Kubrick's "The Shining". It's hard
to not get mad here! One of the scary aspects of the film is a strange
connection that the viewer establishes with the characters, and starts to
understand them, although they have turned into half crazed killers. Music
is another factor that strengthens the atmosphere. A strange musical score,
composed by Michael Nyman (The Piano) and Damon Albarn, that often seems out
of place, and in complete contrast to the image, somehow reflects the
characters' twisted reactions on the world and their situation.
The director herself stated that it was "OK to laugh" during the picture.
And I must admit that it is often very funny, in a strange way (such as the
wonderful quote: "..It's lonely being a cannibal. You don't get that many
friends..." or when Colqhoun is quoting Ben Franklin, saying "Eat to Live.
Don't Live to Eat.").But mostly it is frightening and shocking as it goes
deeper into the minds of these strange men and we witness their
psychological change. Every actor does a great job. Especially Robert
Carlyle as the sinister and intelligent cannibal, and Guy Pearce as  the
moral and honest soldier, nagged by his undeserved honor. This strange
couple resemble Lestat and Lois in Neil Jordan's 'Interview With The
Vampire' . Actually there are many amusing parallels and connections to
vampire movies, since the topics are so alike.
"Ravenous" starts wonderfully and continues to shock and scare until it gets
to the finale, where it looses focus and gets too primitive and rather
boring. However these little failures don't diminish the impression. This is
a bizarre dark comedy about the human mind and its change in different
situations. It is a scary fable about the monster that lurks in everyone's
soul, a dark side which we're all trying to hide -- but it's there --
always. It is one of the most frightening and successful horror films since
"The Shining".
"..I said no food. I didn't say there was nothing to eat..."
- Colqhoun, RAVENOUS

Author
Matt Williams
Ah, what could be better than the return of the good ol' fashioned
cannibal movie?  Well, judging from Ravenous, quite a bit, actually.
Though it nearly hits its stride as a black comedy, the film never quite
finds its rhythm, and falters when it turns into a hybrid monster movie.
The film follows a war hero of the Mexican-American  war, John Boyd (Guy
Pearce).  An accidental hero, Boyd's true cowardice is suspected by his
superior (John Spencer). And, though promoted to Captain, Boyd is sent
to a remote outpost in the California wilderness
The soldiers at the fort are eccentric and unusual (played by Jeffrey
Jones, David Arquette, Jeremy Davies and Neal McDonough among others).
But things take a turn for the bizarre when a stranger (Robert Carlyle)
arrives at the fort with a dreadful tale of a settler expedition that
turned to cannibalism during the harsh winter.
The soldiers mount a rescue party to see if they can locate any
survivors.  However, Boyd learns of a peculiar Native American legend.
A man who eats the flesh of another becomes a wendigo,  a vampire of
sorts, who grows in strength, and appetite, with each mouthful of human
flesh.  Could this monstrous legend be true, and, if so, how can the
soldiers hope to stop the beast?
Ravenous falls somewhere between being an out-and-out monster movie, and
a very dark comedy, and it probably would have fared better as one or
the other.  As implemented in the film, the comic tone works better.  In
fact, when the film strays into the supernatural, things seem out of
place, and don't quite click.
Robert Carlyle is a perfect fit for this film.  His wiry, menacing
presence has always been a bit on the feral side. However, Guy Pearce is
a weak link in this film.  Whereas his quiet fortitude worked wonders in
L.A. Confidential, it never seems at home here.
>From its unusual scoring, to its casting, it is apparent that Ravenous
is trying to be quirky.  Sometimes it works (with a great performance by
Jeffrey Jones), but mostly it doesn't (as with the overly distracting
nature of the score).  The search for the perfect cannibal movie
continues...
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of nearly 700 reviews, and information on over 750 upcoming
releases

Author
Steve Rhodes
Antonia Bird's RAVENOUS argues convincingly for vegetarianism.  Bird,
reportedly a vegetarian herself, creates a relentless, gothic horror
tale of cannibalism set in the old west of the rugged Sierra Nevada
mountains.
Capt. John Boyd, played by Guy Pearce from L.A. CONFIDENTIAL, is a
coward and an accidental war hero from the Mexican-American War of 1847.
He is assigned to a remote "fort," where he and 7 others live in squalor
like barbarians.  They all act like they've been smoking too much of the
local weed.
One day a nearly dead Scotsman named Colqhoun, played with great gusto
by Robert Carlyle from THE FULL MONTY, stumbles into their remote
outpost and relates a story that shocks everyone.  A dead-ringer for
Charles Manson, he claims to have been part of a party of 6 settlers
whose covered wagons got trapped in the winter snows after they took a
"shortcut." Starving, they ate their animals, their leather and then
each other.  He says that a few are still alive, so the fort's
inhabitants go to rescue them.  The Native-American in the group warns
presciently about a legend that those who have tasted human flesh are
made stronger and must have more.
What with the flashbacks and the violence in the present, your stomach
will quickly be tested.  Most of the film is little more than an adult
version of a teen slasher flick, but some of the staging is imaginative.
When trapped, one of the characters jumps off of a high cliff knowing
full well that only the tree limbs far down below can break his fall.
Anthony B. Richmond's cinematography gives the picture a sharp and
handsomely startling look.  Michael Nyman's quirky music does its best
to transform the gruesome drama into a black comedy.
If you go, whatever you do, don't stand near the exits.  If you do, you
will be in danger of being crushed by walkouts who are heading for the
bathrooms.  And if you are crushed to death, consider what might be your
fate when those who like the movie see you dead on the floor.  It's not
a pretty picture.
RAVENOUS runs 1:40.  It is rated R for considerable gore, strong
violence and brief nudity and would be acceptable only for older
teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: March 19, 1999
Starring: Guy Pearce, Robert Carlyle, Jeffrey Jones, John Spencer, Neal
McDonough, David Arquette, Stephen Spinella
Directed by: Antonia Bird
Distributed by: 20th Century Fox Films Corp.
MPAA Rating: R (considerable gore, strong violence) 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reveiws/1999/ravenous.htm
There's a certain taboo about the subject of cannibalism, and even those
most accustomed to eating red meat find thoughts of human flesh as
sustenance most disgusting. And so their ought to be something truly
frightening in Antonia Bird's latest film, RAVENOUS. Instead, the
director of 1994's PRIEST crafts a stylishly goofy film; a film that
manages to stumble through its running time without creating substantial
success or error. Largely, though, RAVENOUS is simply too extreme for
any mainstream audience. 
The story even starts out extreme. The audience meets John Boyd (Guy
Pearce), a US Army captain rewarded for bravery in the line of duty but
terribly squeamish. As it turns out, his supposed valor was nothing more
than luck, and as such he's sent to distant Fort Spencer, California,
where he'll be out of the Army's way. Fort Spencer is a prosperous way
station during the summer but a ghost town during the winter, and as
Boyd shows up on the eve of a great snowfall he meets the skeleton crew
assigned to the post during the down months. Headed up by a man named a
cynical nice guy named Hart (Jeffrey Jones), it seems the place is one
of tedium.
Far from it, in fact, as Boyd soon learns after half-dead stranger named
Colqhoun (Robert Carlyle) shows up. Colqhoun explains that he barely
escaped a cannibalistic disaster in the mountains above Fort Spencer,
and when his story is investigated the movie begins its twisted journey
into the nether regions of storytelling. 
The story is slim and the acting isn't much better. On the whole, the
story is told in a rather drab fashion and is executed poorly, drawing
no emotion other than a tinge of doubt from the audience. Attempts at
suspense or depth do not work, as when the story tries to play with
Colqhoun's background. His role is immediately obvious to the audience.
Similarly, the process of establishing Boyd's history is muddled, giving
us fragments of his story in seemingly random order; for instance, we
know he dislikes blood (or possibly red meat) but we don't know why. The
only part of the movie that does work is the comic relief, provided by
the soldiers positioned at Fort Spencer. Their tongue in cheek dialogue
goes a long way toward drawing the audience in, and unfortunately it
can't account for other missteps. 
The thriller RAVENOUS opens with a quote from Friedrich Nietzsche, and
for the next 100 minutes, that's about as serious as it gets. For all of
the spooky seriousness about cannibalism and rampant hunger, there's
very little in Antonia Bird's film that evokes prolonged consideration
of myth or superstition. Instead, the movie chooses to be something of a
dark comedy (very dark, indeed) and espouses true thrillerism only when
it suits the ends of shock value. There's nothing truly substantial in
RAVENOUS, and this may be a better video rental.

Author
Jamey Hughton
Starring-Guy Pearce, Robert Carlyle, Jeffrey Jones, Jeremy Davies,
Neal McDonough, David Arquette, Stephen Spinella and John Spencer
Director-Antonia Bird
Rated 18A
20th Century Fox
The tag-line for Ravenous is `You are who you eat', and that couldn't be
more accurate. The subject in this deranged and enjoyable horror/comedy
is cannibalism, so if you don't have a stomach that can withstand
graphic dismemberment's (which there are plenty of), I would advise you
to keep your distance. But, for those individuals with an acquired taste
for an original story with their carnage, this unique little bloodbath
could spell genuine fun.
The year is 1847, and the Mexican-American War is in full swing. Captain
Boyd (Guy Pearce) has been dispatched to the base of Fort Spencer.
There, he joins an interesting troupe of characters. The commanding
officer is Lieutenant Hart (Jeffrey Jones), who informs Boyd of his
duties at the Fort. Major Knox (Stephen Spinella) is a careless drunk,
Toffler (Jeremy Davies) is a dedicated man of God, Reich (Neal
McDonough) is a cocky soldier and Cleaves (David Arquette) is the
bumbling idiot of a chef. Fort Spencer is a desolate and uneventful
location, until a mysterious stranger arrives at the door, freezing and
suffering from malnutrition (ha!).
The strange drifter, who calls himself Colqhoun, is played by Robert
Carlyle. He describes to the group how he came to be in their presence.
You see, he was part of a six-person expedition when they became lost
and stranded by oncoming weather. After eating the oxen and horses, they
had to resort to something even more terrifying. Yep... cannibalism. Lt.
Hart opts to travel to where the group had taken shelter and look for
any survivors, but once there he discovers the real truth. Could it be
that Carlyle is not really who he seems....?
Ravenous basically tanked at the box office, a statistic that could have
been easily predicted. This movie is not for all tastes. Director
Antonia Bird has created a bizarre cocktail of black comedy and bloody
horror, and either aspect may possibly disgust the average viewer. In
it's inner workings, however, Ravenous is something truly interesting.
There is some great suspense and atmosphere at the film's core, backed
up by a wonderfully oddball musical score that combines bizarre
instrumental work with some genuine excitement. The script is also full
of amusing one-liners, usually spoken by the witty Carlyle and centering
around the pun of `eating people'. In fact, he even has an argument for
cannibalistic actions: `Winston Churchill once said ‘Eat to live, don't
live to eat.' '
Which brings me to the cast. I had a minor problem in that most of the
supporting players were hideously stupid, but then again, each actor is
so convincing with a limited IQ. The stand-out here is easily Carlyle,
who many will recognize from The Full Monty (and soon as the new Bond
villain in The World is Not Enough). The actor perfectly rounds every
corner of his role, showing plenty of depth and craftsmanship, even as
he puffs contentedly on a cigar. Pearce plays a cowardly but
strong-minded character, much like his role in the excellent LA
Confidential, but he doesn't have as much success here. As the
protagonist, he shows hardly enough courage to be considered a hero,
even despite Boyd's typical spineless ways.
The first act of Ravenous is wonderfully staged, efficiently setting up
the domino's so that they can (hopefully) be knocked over with style
when the time comes. Alas, there are a few too many garish and
unpleasant twists as the movie nears the finish line, but not so much
that the film loses complete momentum. There are still the performances
and soundtrack to keep it churning - and that, surprisingly, seems to be
enough.
There is plenty of icky gore involved. If just the thought of
cannibalism makes you feel nauseous, then this movie is not for you. It
is what you would call `different', yes, but I also found it engagingly
offbeat and entertaining. If you're getting sick of the endless
repetition that Hollywood has to offer, try Ravenous on for size. It's a
scary, amusing - an overall bloody good time. Bring a napkin and dig
right in.
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
         MOVIE VIEWS by Jamey Hughton
         http://Welcome.to/MovieViews
http://MovieThing.com/members/movies/MovieViews
FeedBack Appreciated:  movieviews@hotmail.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Antonia Bird.
Cast: Guy Pearce, Robert Carlyle, Jeffrey Jones, David Arquette, John 
Spencer, Stephen Spinella, Jeremy Davies, Neal McDonough.
1999 - 103 minutes
Rated R (for violence and extreme gore).
Reviewed March 20, 1999.
"Ravenous," the new horror film directed by Antonia Bird (1995's 
"Priest," "Mad Love"), is one of the most unsettling motion pictures I 
have seen. Although far from perfect, when the end credits began to 
roll, I physically felt sick in my stomach, not to mention surprisingly 
disturbed, at what I had just watched. Rarely does this ever happen, at 
least to me, anyway.
Set during the Mexican-American War and obviously obtaining much of its 
story ideas from the true account of the infamous Donner party, the film 
begins as Captain John Boyd (Guy Pearce) has sat down to eat with his 
comrades and, thinking back to his horrific experiences previously in 
the war (mistaken as a dead body, he was buried under the blood-drenched 
remains of his fellow soldiers), he runs out to throw up after 
witnessing everyone around him eating rare, very rare, meat. Immediately 
afterwards, Boyd is sent to stay at an outpost in the snowy Sierra 
Nevada mountains, where he meets a wide array of eccentrics: the 
commanding officer, Hart (Jeffrey Jones); Cleaves (David Arquette), the 
goofy, drug-addled cook; and Toffler (Jeremy Davies), a religious, young 
recruit, among others. Just as Boyd is starting to become acquainted 
with his new surroundings, everything ultimately changes when they come 
across a mysterious and bearded, nearly frozen man named Colqhoun 
(Robert Carlyle), who tells them of the pioneers he had been with who 
became stranded in a cave when winter arrived and, when worse finally 
came to worse, they ended up murdering and eating each other for food. 
Colqhoun claims he is the only one to have escaped the clutches of the 
maddest man there, Ives, so all of the men trek back to the cave to 
investigate the goings-on there. 
Although this is only the basic set-up, it's decidedly best not to give 
away any more of the plot developments since "Ravenous" is a film that 
wins many of its brownie points for the high quotient of surprises that 
proceed this opening. Not only that, but "Ravenous" is a true example of 
a film that stands as a perfect moniker for the saying, "style over 
substance." There wasn't a second to be had that I wasn't completely 
impressed by the film's technical areas, many of which added to the fact 
that this is certainly one of the more frightening films to come along 
in some time (certainly more effective, overall, than the recent teen 
slasher movies we have recently been bombarded with). Scene after scene 
arrived from the half-hour point on that was almost nerve-rattlingly 
suspenseful, thanks, in part, to the bravura, remarkably eerie and 
complex music score composed by Michael Nyman and Damon Albarn. Even 
though it is only March, there is no doubt in my mind that this score 
will go down as one of the five best of the year, and it would be 
criminal for the Academy to overlook it. Also adding to the picture's 
potency is the chilly, atmospheric cinematography by Anthony B. 
Richmond, and the tight, captivating editing by Neil Farrell.
So far, however, the main elements that the film brings up have not been 
discussed, and that includes the overwhelming themes of cannibalism, 
which then can easily be linked to vampirism. If "Ravenous" had not 
dealt with this idea is a straight-forward manner, it, no doubt, would 
have ended up seeming like a cop-out. Instead, the film is filled with 
extreme violence and unimaginable gore, even for an R-rating, and it 
should be stressed that those people who are easily grossed-out should 
not, under any circumstances, torture themselves with this film. Even I, 
who almost always remains unaffected by the visceral experiece of a 
film, found myself often shrinking down in my seat, afraid to see what 
was going to happen next, but not daring to take my eyes off the screen, 
either. 
The cast in "Ravenous" is filled with an equal measure of those actors 
who are recognizable and those that are less so. The supporting 
characters, headed by Arquette and Davies, are highly underused and have 
very little to work with, but they do their jobs professionally and 
disappear rather (and unpredictably) quickly. The main characters fare 
better and are more memorable, as Pearce, following his role in 1997's 
"L.A. Confidential," stands as a sympathetic, if not purely "good," 
protagonist, while Carlyle (1997's "The Full Monty") comes off as one of 
the more believably nasty and dispicable villains to grace the silver 
screen in a while. Meanwhile, Jones, an underused actor who has one 
classic performance to his name, in 1986's "Ferris Bueller's Day Off," 
is thankfully handed a rare meaty role to sink his teeth into (pardon 
the pun).
All of the technical expertise and professional performers, not to 
mention director Bird, who obviously understands how to make a powerful 
genre piece, work together to make "Ravenous" a stirring experience that 
will not easilty be forgotten. Sure, the film feels like more of an 
exercise in terror (with noticably dark, pitch-black humor) than a 
three-dimensional movie, but why should that be a problem? With all 
things considered, "Ravenous" is definately worthy of being looked upon 
as the "Texas Chainsaw Massacre" of the '90s.

Author
Matt Prigge
Director: Antonia Bird
Writer: Ted Griffin
Starring: Guy Pearce, Robert Carlyle, Jeffrey Jones, Jeremy Davies,
Stephen Spinella, Neal McDonough, Sheila Tousey, David Arquette, Joseph
Runningfox, John Spencer
It's been a good long while since we had a really good horror film, not
merely one that's scary, but one that puts atmosphere before plot, that
replaces cheap special effects with more draw to earthly elements, and
that is totally and truly original.  Of course, 'Ravenous' isn't all
original: it's more like a suspenseful twist on the Donnor Party or
'Alive.'  'Ravenous' may even be a twist on the more traditional vampire
flick, with a villain who's seemingly unstoppable, suave, and lovable,
and a general air of men sinking their teeth into other men and finding
strength.  Sounds all 'Interview With the Vampire'-esque to me, but
'Ravenous' is pretty much all about shocking you, not with gore or
tension, but with originality and a bucketload of terrific atmosphere.
Pretty much everything about 'Ravenous' screams unique, from the
incredibly bizzaro score by Michael Nyman and Damon Albarn
(incidentally, two of my favorite musicians, the latter who has a new
album with his band Blur coming out in a few short days) and, my
favorite aspect, a tone which is so off-the-wall unplaceable that just
explaining it sends me into streams of gibberish.  It's not exactly
darkly comic, and it's not exactly camp, but it's really funny and still
really disturbing and gory and freakish and, well, I can't put a finger
on it.  The opening, especially, caught me off guard, even before the
first shot.  The screen pops up with a traditional quote from Nietzsche
(the one about if you fight monster you may become him...), then you
hear an arrow shot on the soundtrack and hit its mark, and suddenly
another quote has popped up: '"Eat me." - Anonymous.'
We quickly meet our faithful protagonist, Capt. John Boyd (Guy Pearce),
an accidental hero during the Mexican-American War being awarded a medal
for capturing a fort, but in flashback, we see that after all, he was
basically a big fat coward, who, like I probably would, plays dead in
the middle of a key battle.  A flashback occurs during the ceremony when
he stares at the big juicy steak put in front of him (teeming with
blood), showing us how he was buried under a pile of corpses, and when
blood dripped into his mouth, he was able to regain his strength and
single-handedly capture the fort.  Due to nausea and whatnot, the
commanding officer unveils his cowardice, and awards him third in
command of a post way out in northern California, in the middle of
nowhere.  There he meets the usual motley crew: nervous priest Toffler
(Jeremy Davies), drunken second-in-command Knox (Stephen Spinella),
anal-retentive soldier Reich (Neal McDonnough), peyote-loving cook
Cleaves (David Arquette), two helpful native Americans (Sheila Tousey
and Joseph Runningfox), and droll C.O. Hart (Jeffrey Jones).
Mundanity plagues the post until one night when a mysterious man named
Colqhoun (Robert Carlyle) stumbles into the area, freezing, starving,
and unconscious.  They nurse him back to health, and he relays his
story: he was part of a trip to settle out in the west that got derailed
due to a snow storm and had to take refuge in a cave.  There, they ran
out of food, and one by one, they started dying off, at which point they
ate the dead.  Hart, hearing that Colqhoun fled for fear that one of the
two remaining people would kill him and eat him too, suggests that some
of them take the three day hike up to the cave and investigate.  From
here, there are frightening revelations, numerous twists, and soon the
film has turned into a gory, intense thriller, with frightening acts
befalling several of the characters, and then a major twist that is
there basically to keep the story going.  Much of it is clichéd, and a
lot of it is unbelievable (especially when one key character returns
unexpectedly), but what keeps this film afloat is the way it has been
crafted.  On paper, it'd look lame and underthought, and standing back
from it, and looking at each twist that occurs and everything that
happens, it's easy to see how this film could use a little bit more work
on the script and idea level.
But it's easy to ignore all that when it's right there in front of you
because what is most memorable about this film anyway is not the twists
and turns and contrivances of the plot, but the freakin' tone, which is
so unnerving and strange that I can hardly believe that a major studio
has released this wide, hoping it'll make a bit of kickback.  I doubt it
will; it's so weird that during the screening I attended, I was
surprised surprised surprised that there weren't a whole bunch of
walkouts.  'Ravenous' is strange, and people usually don't like strange,
but maybe this film has a unique pull that makes it completely
absorbing.  I liked how it dealt with a Native American myth (that by
eating flesh, one absorbs that person's energy and lifeblood) but never
took it way too seriously, like a lot of films do (no chants and the
peyote smoking is kept comical, thank you David Arquette).  I liked the
way it's structured, it allows there to be layer after layer after layer
of mystery, making sure we never totally know what's going on and are
shocked by every twist.  And despite a somewhat boring lead character
(Pearce needs to get out of the silent quasi-noble types department he's
been in in this and in 'L.A. Confidential' before he gets in a rut),
everyone else is pretty much interesting, if not a bit baffling (I just
couldn't figure out Davies' character).  And there's good acting too,
especially from Caryle, who uses his trademark zeal to really ham it up
and demonstrate that he's one of the best up-and-coming actors right
about now; and there's a great performance from Jeffrey Jones, showing
us what an ingenious supporting player he can be, breathing life into
what could have been an otherwise dull character with a couple nice
lines (again, just love this guy).
But as much of a blast as it is to watch, this film just doesn't know
how to reach several of its conclusions throughout: its finale, notably,
is extraordinarily anticlimactic, if not drolly stretched out and nicely
gory.  And throughout, even with the clichés, I was flabbergasted by how
much they took the opening Nietzsche quote so literally, so much that
placing it at the beginning seems coyly campy.  Yet this film, despite
its obvious and numerous flaws, is really entertaining.  Antonia Bird,
the director who stepped in when its original director was removed
shortly into shooting, finds exactly the right tone for the film from
the get-go, carries through with it, and makes 'Ravenous' several times
better than it would have been, all while crafting everything to be
devilishly unique and clever, from the performances to the
cinematography.  She even knows how to set up a shot so that it's at
once interesting to look at and completely surprising in its
revelations.  In fact, 'Ravenous' may be the extreme example of a film
saved by the correct application of atmosphere: its more mundane scenes,
like flashbacks and gory bits of business, are saved by the tone, which
give it a fresh, idiosyncratic feeling.
In fact, I'm nearly willing to ignore all the lousy parts of the film
and merely state that this film is a rather excellent movie going
experience: tense, captivating, original, moody, and abashedly
entertaining.  For every distracting cliché, there's a totally
wonderful, free-spirited, and witty moment, like the one where a
visiting general (John Spencer) discovers a pot o' stew and tastes it,
though only we know what's really in there.  For every lousy moment
involving plot explanation or Native American mysticism explained over
and over again, there's a great scene like the one where two cannibals
try to seduce another one into their flock by robbing him of free will,
all while spouting witty one-liners and aphorisms by Benjamin Franklin.
And because of its tone, its sense of humor, and its general air of
moody atmosphere, it's easy to brush off the more lame aspects of the
film into the back corners of your membrane, and enjoy what's there on
the screen.  It's fun to watch a film that would otherwise be bad, that
has a pretty terrible trailer that makes it looks like dung, and
discover that it actually has a streak of originality and wit that
allows to rise above what it could potentially be.  Now, wouldn't it be
nice if there was a film that took this farther, and was a surprise
masterpiece despite the premonitions surrounding it?
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
Ravenous (1999)
Guy Pearce, Robert Carlyle, Jeremy Davies, Jeffrey Jones, John Spencer, 
Stephen Spinella, Neal McDonough, David Arquette, Sheila Tousey, Bill 
Brochtrup, Joseph Running Fox. Score by Michael Nyman and Damon Albarn. 
Cinematography: Anthony Richmond. Screenplay by Ted Griffin. Directed by 
Antonia Bird. 103 minutes.
Rated R, 2 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at
http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com 
Both visually and thematically, "Ravenous" is a messy little film. The 
tale of cannibalism in the Old West can't decide whether to be a horror 
movie, a black comedy or a sweeping metaphor about American imperialism, 
and tries in vain to be all three. The result is a grisly curiosity that 
rarely works on any of its levels.
Set in 1847, we follow the morose Captain Boyd (Guy Pearce) to his 
reassignment at a remote fort in the Sierra Nevadas. Shortly after his 
arrival, Colqhoun (Robert Carlyle), a half-frozen Scotsman, staggers to 
the encampment and collapses. Nursed back to health, he recounts the 
nightmarish story of his group of settlers, forced into cannibalism while 
snowbound in the mountains. 
The soldiers immediately launch a search for survivors, only to discover 
that Colqhoun, hungry for fresh meat, has led them into a trap. Boyd 
escapes by leaping from a cliff, then lands on the body of a fallen 
comrade and, incapacitated by injury, is forced into cannibalism himself. 
Strengthened by the food, he goes back to the fort, only to see Colqhoun 
return, this time in the guise of a commanding officer. Shunned by 
disbelieving fellow soldiers, Boyd tries to convince them of the truth, 
even while fighting an ever-increasing hunger for more human flesh.
After a somber opening, "Ravenous" takes a turn towards black comedy, 
with Jeffrey Jones, looking like some grand Dickens' character, drolly 
introducing the odd ducks who staff the fort. Jeremy Davies (Corporal 
Upham from "Saving Private Ryan") is intriguing as the skittering, giddy 
camp chaplain (despite the fact that, for about the fifth film in a row, 
he plays a minor variation of the same character) and Neal McDonough, 
whose wolf-like blue eyes are mesmerizing, is effective as a soldier 
experiencing the 1847 equivalent of 'roid rage. David Arquette, playing a 
zoned-out loco-weed aficionado, is fun during his brief time onscreen.
Instead of focusing on these interesting folks, the plot dispatches them 
far too quickly as it veers towards straightforward horror. We learn of 
Weendigo, a Native American myth which claims that if you eat the flesh 
of another, you gain their strength and spirit. The wild-eyed Colqhoun is 
a walking testimonial to the belief, displaying super-human strength and 
amazing healing powers generated by his taste for humans. As Colqhoun, 
Robert Carlyle gives an enthusiastic performance, but Pearce's morose 
Captain Boyd is an uninspiring foe for the monster. Almost any of the 
other cast members would have been far more entertaining adversaries. 
As if things weren't going bad enough, the script takes a self-important 
turn, making pompous comparisons between cannibalism and the country's 
expansion. In case anyone misses the leaden metaphors, Colqhoun 
editorializes about Manifest Destiny, helpfully stating that America 
"wants to be whole, stretching out its arms and consuming all it can." 
Despite some stunning photography and a powerhouse score, "Ravenous" 
succumbs to its own pretensions and lack of focus. Had the filmmakers 
ditched the political commentary and followed either the black comedy or 
the horror theme, this could have been a nasty treat. Instead, "Ravenous" 
is merely an exercise in bad taste. And yes, the pun is intentional.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY:  http://www.sick-boy.com
Let's see – a period piece about cannibalism with no bankable stars,
filmed almost entirely in Slovakia and the Czech Republic by an arthouse
director (Antonia Bird, Priest) - I could see why Fox would bankroll a
project like that.  The film is set in pre-Civil war America, where
Capt. John Boyd (Guy Pearce, L.A. Confidential) has just been honored by
his commanding officer for infiltrating enemy lines during the
Mexican-American war.  Little do they all know, Boyd is really a
yellow-bellied coward who played dead while his platoon was wiped out by
the feisty Mexicans.
Boyd is assigned to Fort Spencer, which is located in the Sierra Nevada
mountains of California.  Upon his arrival, he finds a wacky group of
soldiers – a drunk, a Bible-thumper, a pot-head, a hot-head, two Indians
and Ferris Bueller's principal.  Then one night, they find a strange
settler (Robert Carlyle, The Full Monty) who tells a ghastly story of
being caught in a blizzard and having to share a cave with a blood
thirsty man-eater, who slowly killed and ate the other members of his
party.  Intent on bringing this savage to justice, the military men set
out to find his cave…but is the stranger's story true or is it all just
a trick to lead them into a big, black pot filled with onions and
carrots?
Pearce is fantastic, despite having few lines, and comes off as a cross
between Dead Man Johnny Depp and Legends of the Fall Brad Pitt.  Carlyle
really sinks his teeth into his meaty role, making a real meal of it
(sorry).  Ravenous also features both breathtaking views and a creepy
score from Michael Nyman (Gattaca, The Piano), but is definitely not for
the faint of heart. (R – 1:40 for extreme violence, gore, adult language
and cannibalism)

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie trivia, visit http://www.joblo.com/
So you've been waiting for ages for a decent cannibal movie to come along,
eh? Well, wait no further, this one's got all the blood and horror that you
could sink your teeth into. Robert Carlyle of THE FULL MONTY and
TRAINSPOTTING (9/10), and Guy Pearce from L.A. CONFIDENTIAL
(6.5/10) (He was the square cop) star in this entertaining plate of human
hors d'oeuvres. Bon appetit!
PLOT:
A cowardly soldier is sent to a small village of eight in response to his
weak character. One night, a strange man falls among them with tales of
starving folks in the mountains eating one another for survival. It is only
when the villagers actually go into the hills to investigate, that they find
more than what they bargained for.
CRITIQUE:
An extremely original tasty feast of suspense, disgust and human delicacies.
If you've been waiting for an original movie to come to dinner this year,
wait no longer, because this film's got a solid premise, great actors, an
entertaining and gory story, and all the trimmings of a cannibal
movie...with laughs! This movie starts off slooooow, but once it gets going
about thirty minutes in, it doesn't let up until the last bone is licked
dry. It's even got an eerie DELIVERANCE-type, addictive score that takes the
edge off the serious tip of the film, without ever losing focus of the
drive, interest and human drama engaged in this film about men who eat one
another!!! Overall, this movie is played pretty seriously, but you can't
help but find yourself laughing at some of the extraordinary situations
presented to some of these men. Now that's finger-lickin'-good!
This movie is not for those who are faint of heart. In fact, I noticed a few
people shuffling out during my screening. But for all those of you who are
sick of seeing Hollywood churn out one old TV-show-into-a-movie after
another, enjoy a little bloody fun, and don't have a problem with people
discussing the benefits of eating human beings, you will most certainly
relish this flick. You might never look at a piece of steak the same way
again, but that's beside the point. All in all, this movie does take its
time to get started, slow pace and all, but once the eating begins, it's all
about sitting back, belching enjoyably, and trying to take your eyes off the
screen. Look mom, there's an arm! And there's a leg! Fun for the whole
family. Well, maybe the Addams Family.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
When this movie's first director, Milcho Manchevski was fired from the set
by Fox 2000 (as reported in Premiere magazine, May 1998), star Robert
Carlyle is reported to have personally requested that director Antonia Bird
be brought on to the project. A few months later in May 1998, shooting
resumed with Bird at the helm. Carlyle had starred in two earlier films
directed by Bird called PRIEST and FACE.
MORE COMING SOON to JoBlo's Movie Emporium

Author
Michael Dequina
In his review of the 1993 cannibalism-for-survival drama _Alive_,
_Entertainment_Weekly_ critic Owen Gleiberman called the moment when the
plane crash survivors finally decide to eat the remains of the dead
passengers "truly disgusting."  In these eyes, it was an undoubtedly
discomfiting but rather tame moment, with most of the grisliness left to
the imagination; it only got as bad as seeing arms moving as if cutting
into something and the slices of, um, meat.
If that's Gleiberman's idea of "truly disgusting," I'm interested in
hearing what he has to say about _Ravenous_, which opens with a table full
of hungry 19th Century army men voraciously digging into extra-rare slabs
of meat, which leads one soldier, John Boyd (Guy Pearce), to lose his lunch
and just about any other meal he's ever had.  OK, so they're not eating
humans--they're eating beef.  But it gives one a fair inkling of how
graphic the "food" consumption gets once the cannibalism theme takes over.
After narrowly escaping death in a battle in the Mexican War, Boyd is
assigned to a remote outpost in the Sierra Nevadas manned only by Hart
(Jeffrey Jones), the commanding officer; Toffler (Jeremy Davies, doing the
soft-spoken thing yet again), the religious leader; Knox (Stephen
Spinella), the hard-drinking doctor; no-nonsence Reich (Neal McDonough);
and Cleaves (David Arquette), the over-medicated cook.  Entering their fold
one night is the mysterious loner Colqhoun (Robert Carlyle), who tells a
horrific tale about how his now-dead settling party turned to cannibalism
in the wilds.  In due time, the human flesh diet starts to gain popularity
with this group.
_Ravenous_ is definitely not for the squeamish.  Director Antonia Bird
pulls no punches as far as gore is concerned; one especially graphic scene
between Pearce and Arquette is certain to send some viewers racing to the
restroom, and a climactic bloodbath of a fight scene really pushes the
limits of an R-rating.  But Bird's tongue is often in cheek during the gory
proceedings; the over-the-top nature, while sure to offend many, is
actually the big factor in keeping one from taking it overly seriously.
Screenwriter Ted Griffin is also in on the joke, offering some amusingly
self-aware lines ("It's lonely being a cannibal.  It's tough making
friends.")  But his script accomplishes the seemingly impossible task of
being overstuffed and undercooked at the same time.  He offers a mystical
explanation for all the cannibalism, which then launches into metaphors
about addiction and the quest for eternal youth--this all in addition to
trying to be a down-and-dirty horror film.  But then there's the matter of
characterization, which there is little of; with only schematically
developed personalities onscreen, there's no real audience investment as to
who ends up being the diner or dinner.
I cannot say that I was ever bored by _Ravenous_; the actors and its
deliciously disgusting subject matter always keep it watchable and--dare I
say it--amusing.  There's nothing wrong with that, but in attempting to be
something more, _Ravenous_ ends up offering even less to chew on.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
Christopher Null
     "You are who you eat."  So goes the tongue-in-cheek (so to speak)
tagline of RAVENOUS, the inexplicable black comedy by iffy directress
Antonia Bird.
     Set during the Mexican-American War, RAVENOUS starts with the
promising tale of a soldier named Boyd (Pearce, from L.A. CONFIDENTIAL)
who finds himself transferred to a remote Sierra Nevada outpost in the
dead of winter.  Enter Colqhoun (Carlyle), a traveller suffering from
frostbite and famine... and who turns out to be, well, a bit of a
cannibal.
     Sadly, RAVENOUS delves into the predictable and silly faster than
you can say "fava beans."  It's all very kitschy, with Colqhoun
developing a, well, ravenous streak in him for human flesh, resulting in
the steady attrition of the outpost's crew.
     Curiously humorous performances by Davies and Arquette are
welcome... until they are consumed by one character or another.  But
really, what's the point of this movie?  It's not that RAVENOUS is
offensive in the slightest.  Now that we've digested Hannibal Lecter (so
to speak), cannibalism isn't such a taboo.  Make it funny - well, *try*
to make it funny - and it's even less "shocking" and "controversial,"
both of which Bird was clearly shooting for.
     Two hours of feasting, and bah... I left the theater hungry.
http://www.foxmovies.com/ravenous/
Christopher Null - null@sirius.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Scott Renshaw
     It's okay for a horror film to be a metaphor; in fact, they can work
best on an underlying psychological level.  The original THE THING and
INVASION OF THE BODY SNATCHERS served as analogs to Cold War-era
anti-Communist paranoia, while any number of takes on the vampire legend
have delved into drug addiction effectively.  A scary film can be more
than just scary, but it shouldn't work so hard at it that the whole thing
becomes a pretentious, preposterous mess.  RAVENOUS is just such a
convoluted concoction, throwing mountains of sub-text at its tale of
cannibalism in the vain hope that something might stick, instead of merely
"ick."
     The setting for RAVENOUS is a remote U.S. Army outpost called Fort
Spencer, a way-station hidden in the Sierra Nevadas of California circa
1847.  Fort Spencer is the new assignment of Capt. John Boyd (Guy Pearce),
a soldier bearing a tainted medal of honor after his cowardice led to an
inadvertent triumph during the Spanish-American War.  Boyd discovers that
Fort Spencer is populated by an odd crew of outcasts -- introspective Col.
Hart (Jeffrey Jones), peyote-fueled cook Cleaves (David Arquette), drunken
doctor Knox (Stephen Spinella) -- but the strangest case is yet another
new arrival.  His name is Colqhoun (Robert Carlyle), a man discovered
half-dead in the snow with quite a tale to tell.  It's the a tale of a
stranded westward party that turned into a cannibalistic feast, a tale of
how the consumption of human flesh created a strange sort of monster.
     Every once in a while, when RAVENOUS settles down for some good
old-fashioned terror tension, you can almost enjoy it.  There are a few
nicely staged confrontations and creepy moments in Antonia Bird's
direction (or perhaps that of Milcho Manchevski, the director replaced two
weeks into production), including a sequence involving a sneak attack that
builds far longer than you might think possible.  Writer Ted Griffin slips
a few darkly comic lines into the dialogue, and Robert Carlyle's manic
performance helps support that tone whenever he's on screen.
     How much more tolerable RAVENOUS might have been if Griffin and Bird
had been content to let the black comedy guide them.  Instead, it becomes
a potpourri of narrative notions and random themes:  the dehumanizing
destruction of battle (i.e., war itself as cannibalism), the mad drive for
the American frontier (i.e., the Manifest Destiny as cultural/ecological
cannibalism), the equally mad drive for the gold in them thar hills (i.e.,
the Gold Rush as economic cannibalism), plus yet another gloss on
addiction, and on and on to a dizzying degree, with the Native American
myth of the Weendigo thrown in for good measure.  Boyd's tortured quandary
over whether to join this particular Diners' Club is played as such grand
opera, infused with such socio-political baggage, that Guy Pearce looks
like he's carrying the entire weight of Western Civilization on his
shoulders in every scene.
     No one's saying that the jaunty gruesomeness of EATING RAOUL is the
only possible approach for a successful foray into same-species snacking.
It may, however, be the best approach.  When Jeffrey Jones is cracking
wise while supping on a human stew, RAVENOUS begins to emerge from its
coma of self-importance; when he pleads to be relieved of the misery of
his hunger, you wonder when he suddenly developed a character of any
significance.  At a certain point, RAVENOUS becomes so consumed with
putting a heady spin on its subject matter that it consumes itself.  A
horror film with something to say between shocks is fine.  It's rare --
and annoying -- to find one that just won't shut up.

Author
Greg King
RAVENOUS (M).  
(Twentieth Century Fox)
Director: Antonia Bird
Stars: Guy Pearce, Robert Carlyle, Jeffrey Jones, Jeremy Davies, David
Arquette, Stephen Spinella, Neal McDonough, John Spencer
Running time: 101 minutes.
British director Antonia Bird's second American feature,
following the disappointingly formulaic Mad Love, is a strange hybrid
western cum horror tale involving cannibals and ancient Indian myths.
Ravenous is set in 1847, during the westward expansion that
preceded the gold rush.  Captain John Boyd (Guy Pearce, in his first
role since LA Confidential) has been awarded a medal for bravery
during the Mexican-American War.  Because the true circumstances of
his heroism are actually a little embarrassing for the US Army, Boyd
is banished to a small outpost in California, which is manned by a
small unit of drunkards and misfits.
Into the camp stumbles the nearly dead Colqhoun (Robert
Carlyle), who claims to be one of the few survivors of a strange
expedition stranded in the Sierra Nevada mountains.  Colqhoun tells
how his band of settlers turned to cannibalism in order to survive.
His tale shocks the soldiers.  The camp's Indian guide raises the
spectre of an ancient myth in which cannibals mysteriously gain the
strength of their victims.  As Colqhoun reveals his true nature and
begins slaughtering the soldiers, Boyd is faced with a horrible
decision - to eat or be eaten.
Ravenous is the first script from writer Ted Griffin, and is
ludicrously full of holes.  The whole thing grows sillier as it
progresses.  The injection of modern throw away humour further
unbalances the tone of the film.
Ravenous is the fourth collaboration between Bird and Carlyle,
but it is also the least compelling.  The pair seem to enjoy working
together, and obviously had fun making this film, but unfortunately
the result is not so pleasant for the audience.  Carlyle seems to be
enjoying himself with this rather risible role, and he overacts
wonderfully in a manner reminiscent of Gary Oldman when he is slumming
it.  Pearce brings a brooding quality to his role, but he always seems
to a little uncomfortable.
The supporting cast includes a number of character actors who
have made their mark playing quirky characters in smaller, independent
films.  However, they all have little impact on this preposterous
material.  David Arquette (Scream, etc) is wasted in a silly, almost
contemporary flavoured role as Cleaves, a soldier perpetually doped up
from smoking a peace pipe.  Jeremy Davies (Spanking The Monkey, Going
All The Way, etc) has recently cornered the market with edgy, neurotic
adolescents on the cusp of sexual maturity, but is given little to do
in a fairly straightforward role as the religious Toffler.  Veteran
Jeffrey Jones (Ferris Bueller's Day Off, etc) lands the meatier role
as the fort's eccentric commander, and he hams it up accordingly.
The film has been handsomely shot by cinematographer Anthony B
Richmond, and the snow covered locations are quite beautiful.  (Prague
actually doubles for 18th century California!)
Bird directs with a lack of subtlety, emphasising the gore.
Anyone who has seen her tough and confronting British films (Face,
Priest, etc) will know that she makes few concessions for being a
member of the fairer sex.  However, when crossing the Atlantic, her
Hollywood projects have been bland and fallen short of expectations.
With this nasty, tasteless piece of nonsense about cannibals in the
old west she seems to have bitten off more than she can chew.
Ravenous is a twisted and unsatisfactory experience that will leave a
bitter aftertaste in the mouth.
Whatever was Bird thinking at the time?  It must have been
something she ate!
