Title
Review for Babe (1995)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     These days you hear the terms "children's film" and "family film"
used interchangeably.  The film industry may intentionally blur the
distinction so that some adult will drop in to see their children's
films.  They do not want to admit that even a "Rainbow Brite" film or
MY PRETTY PONY might not be enjoyable or even appropriate for any adult
with more neurons than fingers.  But the result is that good family
films that have plenty to offer adults are seen only by children and
the parents who bring them.  Very often my wife and I find ourselves in
a theater the only adults not accompanied by children.  And it is a
pity.  This week I have seen WATERWORLD, CLUELESS, and BABE.  Of the
three films, the one with the biggest laughs, the most impressive
special effects, and the best story was BABE.  The story should be
enjoyable for anyone in a wide range of ages.  That range goes from
adult down to any child old enough to realize and accept the reality
that today's cute farm animal and tomorrow's dinner may be one and the
same.
     The story opens with the young pig, still nursing, telling us
about the wonderful "pig paradise" where pigs go when the big trucks
come and carry them away.  Already we have a wry little dig at religion
and this family film is just moments old.  The runt of the litter is
given away to a small carnival where he is to be both the subject and
the prize in a "guess the weight of the pig" contest.
     The contest winner is Farmer Hoggett (played by James Cromwell),a
pensive and quiet farmer who sees something special in this particular
pig.  His wife Esme (Magda Szubanski) sees something special in the pig
also, a nice holiday dinner.  In this world all the farm animals talk
to each other; they just don't talk to humans.  Babe, as the pig comes
to be called, falls in with and is provisionally adopted by two Border
collie sheep dogs.  Fly, the mother collie, has just sadly watched her
new pups given to strangers and she feels like adopting something new
to care for.  This is not a film to sugar-coat sad facts of life for
farm animals.  While the film does not dwell on these aspects or let
them spoil the fresh and funny comedy, the film is honest enough to
show that farm life can be painful for animals.  Fly needs Babe as much
as Babe needs Fly and we hear it in her voice.  Eventually Babe will
follow Fly and her mate Rex into the sheep-herding task.  Comic relief
is provided by Ferdinand, a street-smart and wise-quacking duck with a
propensity for causing trouble.  While some of his humor and mischief
may be inspired by Donald Duck, he still is an original character and
his mischief motivated by a very real fear of ending on the Hoggett
dinner table.  One convention is carried over from cartoons--the duck
has many of the funny lines.
     The visual effect of talking animals is not done by cartooning the
mouths as is so often done, and not by filming animals chewing peanut-
butter-like gum as was done with Francis and Mr. Ed.  Instead
animatronics from the Jim Henson shop are used to have lip-movement fit
the words and to provide facial expression.  A careful eye can tell the
real animal from the mechanical one--some of the time--but there are
certainly some scenes that should leave even expert effects spotters
wondering how they were done.  The screenplay was written by George
Miller (known for the "Mad Max" films) and Chris Noone.  Noone directed
and Miller produced, working on this project for seven years.  Miller
and Noone have a good feel for where to economize in the production.
The only familiar face in the film is James Cromwell and he has usually
been a minor actor.  No big name actors voice the animals, though
Roscoe Lee Brown narrates.  The score is by Nigel Westlake who simply
reworked classical themes sometimes to great effect.
     Hearing what BABE was about, I probably would not have wanted to
see it.  Even hearing positive reviews did not convince me.  But the
one or two film clips I saw were such a pleasure to watch that I was
convinced.  And certainly there was a great deal more to enjoy than
what the clips showed.  I rate this a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Brian Koller
It was the battle of the pig movies.  Who would come out on top?
Would it be Gordy or Babe?  Both played in theaters in the
summer of 1995.  Gordy had a three month head start, but it was 
Babe who was the clear winner, both in terms of box office gross 
and in quality.
When the Golden Globe awards for 1995 were announced, the
surprise winner for Best Comedy Picture was "Babe", a movie that 
featured pigs, dogs, and sheep.  Unfortunately, Babe the pig
was not nominated for Best Actor, a clear case of Hollywood
discrimination!  Since dozens of different pigs played Babe,
it would have been quite a spectacle for them all to clomp
down the stairs to the microphones for their acceptance speech.
"Babe" is the story of a pig, destined for greatness rather than
gravy.  Parted from his mother at an early age, and chosen at
random to escape the factory for a life on the farm, Babe must
find his place there.  He hangs with the dogs, and is adopted
by them.  He learns their ways, including how to herd sheep.
He is entered in a sheepdog contest by the Boss, the farmer
husband.  But Babe must overcome many obstacles if he is to win 
the contest and prevent the Boss from being the laughingstock 
of the country.
There are some sad moments in this film.  Some of the animals
meet cruel fates.  The powerlessness of farm animals comes
across: the may not fear God, but they certainly fear man.
Why is this an outstanding film?  First, Babe is a sympathetic
character, an orphan, a little guy, who has to prove himself
worthy, instead of being a pork dinner.  The story is compelling.
The cinematography is beautiful, with the lush greens of the
fields, and lovely black and white puppy dogs. The various animals 
each have their own distinct personalities.  Finally, the 
casting of the farmer (James Cromwell) and his wife 
(Magda Szubanski) is perfect.  After seeing the movie, it is as 
if no one else could have played the roles.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     BABE is a talking animals picture.  Now, don't touch that dial!
Don't give up before it has a chance to work its charms on you.  I need
to point out that the plot of this movie has a striking resemblance to
the recent major critical bomb called GORDY, but this is not that
movie.  Moreover, although it starts slow, BABE's inherent sweetness
will hook you.  It is a hard movie not to like if you do not give up
the ghost in the beginning.
     All of the animals in BABE talk, but only to each other and never
to humans.  The animals have a caste system a la ANIMAL FARM.  Each one
has its place and many of them learn that their purpose in life is to
be eaten by their masters.  They are not amused.  Be warned, seriously,
that many kids may leave this movie wanting to become vegetarians.  As
for Jeffrey, he had no problem in consuming his hot dog during the
show.
     Babe is a young pig that gets lucky and is spared a trip to the
packing house when her time comes.  She is won by the Hoggett family
(James Cromwell and Magda Szubanski), and they take her home to their
farm to fatten her up for the Christmas dinner.  Babe turns out to be
extra smart and soon becomes a sheep dog wannbe.  The movie consists of
the twists and turns of her life as future bacon vs.  a sheep dog
athlete.
     The acting by Cromwell is straight out of Grant Wood's "American
Gothic" except here the farm looks English, although it was actually
filmed in New South Wales in Australia.  Cromwell gives a monotonic and
yet interesting performance at the same time.  A more animated and
better job is done by Szubanski.  The special effects are realistic and
the voices of the animals are well cast.
     The cinematography is the best part of the movie.  Sometimes it is
so dramatic you think you are watching Tara in GONE WITH THE WIND.
The music score performed by the Victorian Philharmonic Orchestra is
equally dramatic with loud horns and winds playing in key scenes.  The
script is by MAD MAX writer George Miller, and it is quite funny in
parts.  The movie has about ten different sections and each is named
and the name is sung by three small mice that sound like those singing
chipmunks from the 50s.
     BABE runs 1:31 which was a little long.  It starts slow, but don't
walk out or give up.  It will work its magic on you.  It is an
extremely well crafted show, especially for its genre.  It is correctly
rated G.  There is no sex, nudity, violence, smoking, drinking, or cuss
words.  One animal used the word "butt" once and my son went wild with
laughter.  Finally, one minor animal does die, but it is handled well.
I think any aged kid could see BABE, and I recommend it for them as
well as the young at heart of any age.  Jeffrey (age 6) got a little
scared in a few parts as he frequently does, but loved the show overall
and gave it a double thumbs up.  This is a good family film.  It gets
** 1/2 in my book.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Somehow, from all the hype, I was expecting BABE to be one 
of the most entertaining movies ever made. Don't get me wrong, it's 
definitely ninety minutes of fun for the entire family with no sex, 
violence or anti-Semetic content (all of a sudden I feel like Michael 
Medved), but it won't go down in history as any kind of classic, at least 
not in my book (this book, of course). I'll leave all the jokes about pigs 
who are one day nominated for Oscars and the next day killed by 
Oscar Meyer to the talk show hosts who have said it all a thousand 
times, but I'll admit the concept of a pig as the cute hero of a movie 
never struck me before watching it, but I now realize it can be 
done -- and done well.
        Babe is born in the stockyard, where sooner or later all pigs 
are "chosen" to be marched onto the truck to heaven. (I wouldn't call 
Safeway "heaven," but it's only a movie after all.) Babe is the only pig 
who doesn't get picked for slaughtering because he's a runt and we all 
know little pigs like that are hardly worth the McDonald's circular 
bacon strips they eventually become. So he ends up being given to an 
old farmer (James Cromwell) as a prize for winning a state fair 
midway game. It beats one of those plastic whistles, I guess.
        The farmer's wife (who, oddly enough, looks like a pig 
herself) is looking forward to fattening up the pig so she can serve the 
family a nice Christmas ham, but Babe soon proves his worth in a 
different field -- sheep-herding. His tactic involves asking the sheep 
nicely to come into the corral, rather than barking and biting them on 
the legs (and I think if Clinton would do this he'd find Congress that 
much more cooperative). He soon becomes the prize sheep dog / pig in 
the farmer's eyes, taking the place of a bitter sheep dog named Rex. So 
the farmer decides to make Christmas dinner out of Rex instead and 
spare Babe's life... I'm lying, of course.
        The amazing thing about BABE is of course that they 
managed to make all the animals' lips move to appear as if they were 
talking, all without any form of electric shock. It's almost like "Mr. 
Ed" multiplied by a hundred, with talking dogs, pigs, horses (of 
course, of course), sheep and a duck who thinks he's a rooster. BABE 
has a wonderful surreality to it that makes it appeal to children and 
adults, with an intelligent sense of humor and saccharine sweetness to 
boot.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Chad Polenz
*** (out of 4 = good)
1995, PG, 92 minutes [1 hour, 32 minutes]
[comedy]
Starring: Christine Cavanaugh (voice of Babe), James Cromwell (Farmer
Hoggett) Magda Szubanski (Mrs. Hoggett), produced by George Miller, Doug
Mitchell, Bill Miller, written by George Miller, Chris Noonan, directed by
Chris Noonan, based on the novel by Dick King-Smith.
"Babe" is one of the cutest, original, and charming films I've ever seen.
How a story about farm animals could have such innocence and be so good
amazes me.
The film starts off like your typical children's story, it seems like it may
be a sappy and boring movie for adults, but surprisingly enough it isn't.
It's about an Australian pig named Babe (voiced by Cavanaugh) who was
randomly picked to be in a contest to sponsor a charity. Whoever guessed his
correct weight won the pig, and that person is our main human character
Farmer Hoggett (Cromwell).  Babe is the only pig on Hoggett's farm and we see
how the other animals consider him somewhat of an outcast. The dogs know
their place, they have an important role and are not eaten. The cat is the
family's pet and always stays inside the house - her job is to keep the
humans happy. Even the sheep and the ducks know they have duties of sorts,
but what they all are sure of is pigs have no purpose. 
Most of the story revolves around Farmer Hoggett training Babe to be a sheep
dog. Hoggett enters Babe in the annual sheep dog competition and we watch
them go through all the training and see even more interaction between the
animals. It's funny to watch the humans get so excited over the animals and
vice versa. 
The screenplay works very well, we get a definite sense of the animals'
characters, but it does not get sappy as to make us feel sorry for them. The
humans are not played as evil butchers either, we can relate to them too.
They're just trying to make a living and they eat animals for food. It's
amazing a story like this is doesn't become an anti-meat campaign nor a
simple, childish story.
"Babe" is a very cute and adorable picture. It's just a nice fairytale about
farm animals. (3/18/96) (12/11/96) (5/23/97) [see also "Gordy"]
visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: James Cromwell, Magda Szubanski, and the voices of 
      Christine Cavanaugh, Miriam Margolyes, Danny Mann 
Director: Chris Noonan 
Producers: George Miller, Doug Mitchell, and Bill Miller 
Screenplay: George Miller and Chris Noonan based on Dick King-
            Smith's Book: BABE: THE GALLANT PIG 
Cinematography: Andrew Lesnie 
Music: Nigel Westlake 
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures 
     At first glance, a movie about the adventures of a piglet who 
thinks he's a sheepdog doesn't appear to be the perfect entertainment 
recipe for those beyond puberty.  However, through a mixture of 
imaginative storytelling, impressive animatronics, and irresistible 
cuteness, BABE casts a spell over all viewers -- young, old, or 
somewhere in between.   
     Babe is a small pig whose parents have gone to hog heaven.  
Abducted from the pork penitentiary, he ends up as the lone 
representative of his kind on the property of Farmer Hoggett (James 
Cromwell), a kindly man of few words who knows far more about sheep than 
pigs.  On the farm, Babe makes a few enemies, but many more friends, 
including a talkative duck who wants to be a rooster and a dog willing 
to play the role of substitute mother.  Unfortunately, one of those not 
in the pig's corner is Mrs. Hoggett (Magda Szubanski), who has visions 
of a roast pork Christmas dinner dancing in her head. 
     BABE is a new twist on the traditional story of the underachiever 
attaining greatness.  It's a buddy film, about a man and his best friend 
(who, in this case, happens to be pink), and an adventure-comedy.  Above 
all, it teaches the lesson of how easy it is to fall back on 
"comfortable" prejudices.  Babe triumphs because his first thought is 
always of bridging gaps, not building walls.  Unlike in George Orwell's 
ANIMAL FARM, here the pig is the instrument of unity and mediation. 
     BABE's greatest asset (besides the pig) is director Chris Noonan, 
who finds the right tone for this modern fable.  Most animal movies come 
across as unbelievably cloying or simply unbelievable, but Noonan makes 
his picture work.  Aside from THE BEAR, there aren't many films that can 
boast this distinction.  And, by using the talents of the men and women 
of Jim Henson's workshop, Noonan has assured that when the animals' lips 
move, they don't look like MR. ED.   
     BABE has been getting a lot of raves, and deservedly so.  This is a 
fun movie to sit through.  Despite the presence of so many animals -- 
cats, dogs, horses, cows, ducks, roosters, sheep, and a pig -- the 
"cuteness factor" is kept carefully in check.  Of course Babe is 
adorable, but we're not subjected to the countless smarmy bonding scenes 
that too-often infect this sort of picture.  Thought was put into the 
adaptation of Dick King-Smith's book.  Even the narrative voiceovers, 
laced with subtle irony and understated revelations, are effective in 
this context.  If there's a non-Disney family film that's going to break 
through the barrier of economic success, BABE could be it.  It's 
certainly merits the distinction. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 
