Title
Review for Play It Again, Sam (1972)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Andrew Hicks
        I never thought I'd see Woody Allen imitating Humphrey 
Bogart, and doing such a bad job to boot. But that's the premise of 
PLAY IT AGAIN, SAM -- that Woody Allen can't pick up girls with 
the flowery CASABLANCA dialogue or even act tough when he 
wants to. This is the guy who says he's been beaten up by Quakers 
and this time two bikers who pick up one of his failed dates. Most of 
PLAY IT AGAIN, SAM focuses on Woody's quest for love, going out 
on one disastrous blind date after another, little realizing the woman 
he really wants is his best friend's wife (Diane Keaton).
        Woody is helped along in his journey by the ghost of 
Bogart, who pops up every once in awhile to give him advice on 
masculinity, which none of us would argue he needs. But obviously, 
the charm of Woody Allen has always been his "loser" alter ego who 
ponders endlessly the value of sex, death and God while trying to 
gain and hold onto a meaningful relationship with the opposite sex. 
PLAY IT AGAIN, SAM is hardly a deep comedy like CRIMES AND 
MISDEMEANORS, though, with much of it playing like a sitcom 
from heaven, especially the extended blind date scene in Woody's 
apartment that has him going painfully out of his way to impress 
his date while Keaton and her husband (Tony Roberts) look on in 
a mixture of sympathy and disgust.
        This film is a fun mix of comedy and romance while still 
not being overly optimistic like MIGHTY APHRODITE. The ending 
parallels the "If you don't get on that plane, you'll regret it; maybe 
not today, maybe not tomorrow but soon -- and for the rest of your 
life" finale of CASABLANCA but isn't just a ripoff of that movie. 
PLAY IT AGAIN, SAM offers beginning and ending bookends of 
homage to CASABLANCA as tribute (and of course the Bogart's 
ghost device) but is 100% Allen, even if it wasn't directed by him. 
Though Woody scripted (from his Broadway play) and starred in 
it, Herbert "Steel Magnolias" Ross did the directing honors.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50th of a Century!

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Herbert Ross
Writer: Woody Allen (based on his play)
Starring: Woody Allen, Diane Keaton, Tony Roberts, Jerry Lacy
Okay, I admit it.  I've tried to flirt with girls using movie cliches.  
There I said it.  Does it work?  Kinda, sometimes.  But I'm an insecure 
neurotic, and I think they really aren't gonna dig me if I be myself.  
Now that my self-analyzation is done, I will say that Woody Allen's play 
"Play it Again, Sam" features a protgonist who's probably more insecure 
than I am (or anyone else really) or loves movies and thinks that his 
role model for being a "swinger" should be Humphrey Bogart.  And much of 
the film has the protagonist chatting with a figmented Bogart, with the 
latter giving the former advice like, "I never knew a woman who didn't 
understand a slap in the face or a slug form a .45," or "Somewheres in 
life you got turned around; Its her job to smell good for you."  
Woody didn't direct this wonderfully engaging romantic comedy, as many 
believe.  Verstatile director, Herbert Ross, who can direct neurotic 
comedies like this and "The Goodbye Girl" and still do fluff like 
"Footloose" and "Steel Magnolias" did, and he somehow manages to get the 
right feel for it, even if it takes place in Woody's vision of the 10th 
ring of Dante's Hell - California (San Francisco to be exact).  And this 
is the first time we ever see Diane and Woody together as a comic duo on 
celluloid (although I think they did it on Broadway together).  And Tony 
Roberts is also on for the first time with Woody as (GASP!) his best 
friend.
The plot centers around Allan (the Woodster), who has just broken up 
with his wife, Nancy (Susan Anspatch).  He's incredily depressed and 
he's a major hypochondriac ("I'm turning into an aspirin junkie.  Soon 
I'll be burning the cotton at the top to get the extra").  He's also a 
film geek (making us look good) who writes for a film magazine.  In the 
beginning, the film shows the final scene of "Casablanca," then pulls 
back to show Allan watching in literal awe with his mouth wide open at 
the greatness of the film.  Once the film's over, he leaves and his 
voice-over narration tells us the exposition (which I have already done 
for you, thank you very much).
His best friend, Dick (Tony), and his wife, Linda (Diane), come over to 
help him but he just can't get over his wife leaving him.  They somehow 
manage to get him to try to move on by setting him up on dates.  The 
first one is a comical disaster, with him overdoing everything and being 
so nervous that he ends up breaking records, lamps and knocking down 
chairs and what-not in his messy apartment.  His second one, with a 
famed nymphomaniac, ends tragically (and ironically) when he tries to 
take advantage of her.  
Meanwhile, he becomes closer to Linda as Dick is a workaholic and is 
always leaving his number at his office wherever he goes (in a running 
gag).  And before we know it, Dick has gone off on a business trip and 
Allan and Linda realize they are in love...or at least temporary/sorta 
love.  They sleep together and plan to live together and all, but he 
realizes he would be hurting a friend...and that he is in "Casablanca." 
 In one of the funniest scenes of the whole 70s as a decade, Allan gives 
Linda the "Maybe not today, maybe not tomorrow..." speech from the 
finale of "Casablanca" (Linda even dons the Ingrid Bergman hat as she 
leaves her apartment to chase after Dick).  In the end, Allan has moved 
on and realized to be himself.
It would be fluff, but it is handled so hysterially that it has been 
given the title of "classic."  This film came right in the middle of his 
slapstick period, so that may be the reason why Woody didn't direct it. 
 But his writing is perfectly on and his knack for creating comical 
situations and realistically funny characters is also as good as his 
later material.  This is one of his most perfectly realized films, even 
if he didn't direct it, and also one of my favorites.
