Title
Review for Chances Are (1989)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Randy Parker
        When I learned that the plot of CHANCES ARE involves reincarnation,
my reaction was: oh great, another contrived fantasy.  Much to my delight,
however, I was dead wrong.  CHANCES ARE is a spirited and good natured
romantic comedy in the tradition of BACK TO THE FUTURE and PEGGY SUE GOT
MARRIED.
        In the film,  Alex--played  by Robert Downey Jr.--makes a shocking
discovery about himself when he meets Philip, played by Ryan O'Neal.
Philip invites Alex to join him for dinner at the home of his friend
Corinne and her daughter Miranda.  Cybill Shepherd plays Corinne, a widow
who lost her husband, Louie, 23 years ago and still hasn't overcome his
death.  Blind to Philip's love for her, Corinne lives completely in the
past, posting pictures of Louie all over her house, office, and car.  While
dining with these new acquaintances, Alex experiences the startling
revelation that he is Corinne's late husband, Louie--or at least he was in
his past life.  In short, with his restored memory, Alex/Louie realizes
that Corinne is his wife, Philip his best friend, and Miranda his daughter.
        Given its outlandish premise, CHANCES ARE is a surprisingly good
film.  Although the movie may sound inane, its execution is anything but
gimmicky.  Rather than exploiting Louie's reincarnation as an excuse to
milk easy laughs, CHANCES ARE explores the complications and conflicts that
arise from this unusual situation.  The movie's premise is merely a vehicle
for developing intriguing relationships between sympathetic characters.
For instance, Miranda falls in love with Alex and literally throws herself
at him, which puts him in an awkward spot since he sees her as his
daughter.  Although CHANCES ARE is by no means stingy with its laughs, its
primary emphasis is always on character.  By the end of the movie, Corinne,
Miranda, Philip, and Alex/Louie have all matured; they are wiser about
themselves and each other than they were at the start of the film.
        As much as I liked these characters and their conflicts, I can't
say that CHANCES ARE is terribly profound.  The movie is utterly
predictable, and it fails to leave a lasting impression.  And although the
performances are good, they aren't inspired.  Only Mary Stuart Masterson as
Miranda gives her character an extra spark.  However, these are mostly
minor quibbles in an otherwise charming and emotionally-satisfying comedy.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     The light supernatural comedy-fantasy has been around for a long time,
having its greatest flourish in the late 1930s and early 1940s with the film
versions of Thorne Smith's books, particularly the "Topper" series and
TURNABOUT.  I doubt that there has been a year since the 1940s that has not
had one and probably several, from ONE TOUCH OF VENUS to BIG.  But lately,
perhaps in part due to the so-called "New Age" thinking, there has been an
upswing in the number of whimsical comedies on supernatural themes such as
soul transference and reincarnation.  The "turnabout" films in which the
protagonists trade bodies have almost become their own sub-genre.  The
latest entry in the supernatural derby (last time I checked) is CHANCES ARE.
     The prologue introduces us to newlyweds Louie and Corinne Jeffries
(played by Christopher McDonald and Cybill Shepherd).  They are passionately
in love.  Louie's best friend, Philip Train (played by Ryan O'Neal), also
loves Corinne, but from a proper distance.  Louie loves Corinne so much he
cannot worry about minor things like crossing streets safely, which is how
he comes to be in Heaven asking to be reincarnated as close as possible to
Corinne.  Flash forward twenty-four years and Louie is now in his next life
as Yale journalism graduate Alex Finch (played by Robert Downey, Jr.).
Through an odd, not to say absurd, set of coincidences, Alex finds himself
in the house he used to own, looking at the woman who used to be his wife,
and it all comes back to him.
     CHANCES ARE is unpretentious and whimsical.  When he first realizes the
joke that fate has played on him, Alex completely loses all his self-control
in a way that seems totally out of character.  Previously having shown
himself to be a quick thinker, it is unlikely that he would so totally go
incoherent without ever asking himself, "How must this behavior look to
other people?"  One curious novelty of this film is that Cybill Shepherd
comes off as doing a reasonable acting job.  I think this works by contrast
to Robert Downey, Jr., who is not yet an accomplished actor by anybody's
definition.  Then there's Ryan O'Neal, who can display the whole range of
emotions from "A" to "A.5."  Like Downey, O'Neal started his career playing
good-looking youths, but already Downey has more dramatic range than O'Neal.
     CHANCES ARE is a pleasant but unoriginal television-quality film.  I
rate it a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
