Title
Review for Bitter Vengeance (1994) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
Virginia Madsen built her career around the roles of women
who use their sex appeal in order to manipulate men and
bring them to their doom. The character played by Virginia
Madsen in BITTER VENGEANCE, 1994 television thriller by
Stuart Cooper, is total opposite of such stereotype. Annie
Westford is modest librarian married to Jack (played by
Bruce Greenwood), former policeman who now works as security
guard in the bank. The husband is far from being incarnation
of marital virtue - he not only has an affair with co-
worker, but also dreams of using his position and law
enforcement experience in order to execute a perfect bank
robbery. The carefully drawn plan works wonderfully for Jack
- he escapes with stolen money and fakes his own death. For
Annie, this is beginning of a nightmare - she just lost a
husband, all her money and became prime suspect in the
robbery.
The script, written by Pablo F. Fenjves, looked rather
promising, offering few interesting twists to film noir
formula - woman being manipulated by man instead of other
way around. Unfortunately, director Stuart Cooper approached
this material in the same way Soviet bureaucrats used to
approach economic problems - by blindly following formulas
and not caring if the thing didn't work. As a result, BITTER
VENGEANCE suffers from inadequate pacing - in the beginning
it is too slow, and the ending is too fast. Apart from
Virginia Madsen who does her best in rather unusual role,
and Bruce Greenwood (who would later become one of the more
reliable character actors in Hollywood) as her husband, the
acting is not particularly impressive. Because of that,
BITTER VENGEANCE is a routine television product, not good
enough to earn viewers' attention.
Review written on September 30th 2001
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
