Title
Review for Dirty Dancing (1987)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     At least one film critic and one three-dimensional person have told me
that DIRTY DANCING is the SATURDAY NIGHT FEVER of the 1980s.  I can see what
they mean.  The dancing hooks the kids and then they see a good story of
human values anyway.  It's a good way to solve the problem of "I don't want
to see a film with character development.  hey, let's get Mikey to watch
it."  The problem is that while the story is good, it is a little pat.
Things work out a little too well.  Life is not really like that.  SATURDAY
NIGHT FEVER is a genuine slice-of-life film.  Things do not all work out
right, but they do work out like they do in life.  It is not true at the end
of SATURDAY NIGHT FEVER that "all's right with the world," but some progress
has been made and that is a victory.  DIRTY DANCING is a good film too.  It
is good like ON GOLDEN POND.  But it lacks the grit of SATURDAY NIGHT FEVER.
     DIRTY DANCING is the story, set in 1963, of how Baby Houseman (played
by Jennifer Grey) comes of age during a two-week stay at a resort in the
Catskill Mountains.  (Actually the resort film is becoming its own sub-
genre.  The best of the lot is probably THE GIG.)  She gets involved with
the resort dance instructor (played by Patrick Swayze), and Penny, a
pregnant but unwed dancer (played by Cynthia Rhodes).  Baby has a natural
desire to get involved with people in trouble and try to set things right,
but in doing so she risks hurting her own relationship with her father
(played by Jerry Orbach).
     The title refers to two or three steamy scenes of dancing, but really
erotic "dirty" dancing is sort of a paste-on to the plot.  Professional
mambo dancing is much more important, but let's face it, who under 60 years
of age would go to see a film called PROFESSIONAL MAMBO DANCING?  When it
got to video, it would end up with the instruction tapes.
     Acting honors for the piece go to Grey, who really does seem to
transform, but they also go to Jerry Orbach, who presents a real aura of
integrity.  He is sort of the father that everyone wishes they had.  For
being a little too neat and pat, this film gets a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     "That was the summer of 1963, when everybody called me 'Baby,' and
I didn't mind," says our heroine in the opening of that 1987 cult
classic, DIRTY DANCING.  Yes, it's been 10 years since that perennial
video rental favorite was released so its time for the studio to
release a new print to the theaters with a new Dolby Digital and SDDS
soundtrack.
     Let's cut to the chase.  As a movie, the cliche-ridden script by
Eleanor Bergstein is so bad that it almost becomes unintentionally
funny.  Easily, the worst part of the story is the self-imposed
second-class citizenship of the film's male lead.  Patrick Swayze, who
delivers a terrific performance in the film when his mouth is firmly
shut, plays an enormously handsome dance instructor named Johnny
Castle.  Johnny, believing his collar has been stained permanently
blue, complains about his place in life.  "The reason people treat me
like I'm nothing is because I'm nothing," he laments in one of his
typical lines.
     The film's saving grace is that fully a third of the film has the
actors dancing rather than talking.  With the Academy Award winning
music by John DeNicola, Donald Markowitz and Franke Previte, the film
pulsates with good spirited energy in the dance numbers.  The title of
the show comes from a sexually oriented dance that the kids do when the
grownups are not around.  Certainly scandalous behavior in 1963 when
the film is set, the raunchy dirty dancing still works to titillate
even if no longer to shock.
     In the film's first major dance number, Johnny dances with Penny
Johnson, his long-time partner and buddy but never his lover.  Penny is
played by the svelte and lithe Cynthia Rhodes -- no, not even a kissing
cousin.  Rhodes is as poor an actor as she is an incredibly
accomplished dancer.  Johnny and Penny's dance routines resemble two
swirling tornadoes in a pas de deux.  Rhodes has the flexibility of a
contortionist, and Swayze, oozing sex appeal, is the master of the
energetic and macho dance movements.
     Johnny and Penny are dance instructors at a family oriented hotel
ostensibly in the Catskills but filmed in North Carolina and Virginia.
Johnny teaches the rich women ballroom dances like the mambo and
services them in their rooms at night for additional tips.  Being a
PG-13 show, this and most of the other sex is mainly hinted at.
     Into this most plastic of environments, where bringing only ten
pairs of shoes for three weeks is considered a tragedy, comes the
Houseman family.  Although they can stay for only a few weeks for this
their first vacation in years, the owner assures them that it will feel
like a year.  Ah, love those double meanings.  Triple, if you consider
that the movie will feel that long when the actors aren't dancing.
     Jennifer Grey, in a relatively undistinguished career, gives her
best performance ever as Baby Houseman.  During Baby's three weeks, she
will have to confront the issues of abortion, lying, stealing and going
against her father, played earnestly by Jerry Orbach.  Most of all, she
will learn to dance with and will fall in love with Johnny.  In one of
moviedom's more fake plot devices, Penny, who has been "knocked up,"
will not be able to figure out a way to get off work the one night the
illegal abortionist will be in town.  The only solution is for Baby to
train quickly to look and dance like Penny.
     In an important and effective small part, Lonny Price plays the
self-proclaimed "catch of the county," Neil Kellerman.  Neil is the
owner's slimy son, who loves barking orders at the staff.
     Jeff Jur's cinematography adds to the dance numbers.  Especially
worth noting is his choice of Baby's feet as a focal point.  Her
pristine white tenny runners never get a speck of dirt on them.  As
Baby dances on her little toes in her snow-white shoes, her innocence
is actuated in ways that a full profile could never accomplish.  He
also does a good job of framing the two stars when they cavort in a
dance number on a log over a small stream.  It is in playful scenes
like these that the film is at its most charming.
     The show pumps you up at the end with a happy dance number
reminiscent of WEST SIDE STORY.  You'll leave the theater with a song
in your heart and your feet tapping -- just try to forget the spoken
text.
     DIRTY DANCING runs 1:36.  It is rated PG-13 for sexual situations.
It would be fine for kids ten and up.

Author
Sharon Badian
     I went to see DIRTY DANCING because one of the critics on a NY independent
station loved it.  Not that I always listen to the critics (far from it,
believe me), but he gave it such a glowing review that I couldn't resist.  I
had not seen any of the ads for it.  Which is probably a good thing since it's
being pushed as the next SATURDAY NIGHT FEVER-FLASHDANCE-FOOTLOOSE type movie.
Obviously they hope to draw the teenagers who spend most of the big bucks on
movie tickets.  Well, don't be fooled by this bogus advertising!!  The movie
has more to offer than slick dancing!  And it doesn't fall into the all too
familiar trap of gratuitous female flesh used only to satisfy a bunch of horny
teenage boys.
     This movie is not about anything new; the pain of growing up has been
dealt with in many movies.  But I can't remember another one that does it with
such charm and affection.  Baby (Jennifer Grey) goes to the Catskills* with her
family for a three week vacation.  In three weeks, her world changes forever;
she becomes a woman, an adult.  She's not Daddy's little Baby anymore.  There
is pain and turmoil, but also humor.  It's like real life and maybe, that's why
I liked it so much.
     The title DIRTY DANCING comes from the fact that the help at the hotel
engage in very close dancing at their parties and it is seeing this dancing for
the first time, that starts Baby's transformation.
     The acting is wonderful.  These people seem real.  You feel for them.  And
they can all dance.  It's nice to see actors and actresses dancing instead of
dancers doing the dancing and actors doing the acting.  Both Jennifer Grey and
Patrick Swayze started out as dancers.  It's to their credit that they can act
too.  Together they are like dynamite, dancing or acting.
     And I can't stop without saying something about Patrick Swayze.  I think
all the women in the theater were sighing.  He just takes your breath away.
     So, forget the advertising.  Go see the movie.  It will make you feel
better.
* The Catskills are mountains in NY State where many New York City Jews spent
their summers (my great-grandparents, grandparents, parents and me included).
Though it looks like the Catskills, the movie was actually filmed at a pretty
hotel on a lake in southwestern Virginia, near Blacksburg.

Author
Ken Perlow
     Based on the previews, you probably wouldn't go see DIRTY DANCING unless
you're either bored out of your skull or under 16.  And you'd miss a real gem.
I was curious because the screenplay was written by a woman, and this is pretty
rare for the usual LA-LA fare.  (I had visions of my delight at ROMANCING THE
STONE--for once a heroine not made of perfumed cardboard.)
     I was expecting SATURDAY NIGHT FEVER.  But what I saw was a tight,
emotional, well-told story of a fall from innocence.  With real people.  It's
the summer of '63, the the twilight of the Camelot days.  If this is a movie
for kiddies, they'll never understand that special time.  With Kennedy's death
and then into Vietnam, we all grew up in a hurry.
     Interestingly, as with ROMANCING THE STONE, it's the male characters who
are a bit stereotypical.  The male lead (one of these days I'll remember names
of actors, directors, et al.  and write *real* reviews) is a classic "noble
savage" right out of Rousseau, but you want to believe it anyway.  There's also
a slimy, effete twit who justifies his arrogance in a marvelous scene where he
pulls a copy of THE FOUNTAINHEAD out of his pocket and tells the female lead,
"It's all in here.  I've made notes in the margins."
     Ah, Jennifer Grey.  She did a first-class, remarkably subtle job on a part
that begs to be overacted.  And can she dance or what?
     No great piece of cinema, but a damn good movie.  I'd give it a solid 2
stars on the Leeper Scale.  The Ayn Rand-trashing scene alone is worth the
price of evening admission.
