Title
Review for American Perfekt (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dennis Schwartz

AMERICAN PERFEKT (director/writer: Paul Chart: cinematographer: William
Wages; editor: Michael Ruscio; cast: Fairuza Balk (Alice), Robert
Forster (Jake), Amanda Plummer (Sandra), David Thewlis (Santini), Paul
Sorvino (Frank), Chris Sarandon (Sammy), Joanna Gleason (Shirley), 1997)
Perfekt is a psychological thriller about a psychopath, Jake Nyman
(Forster), who decides someone's fate by the toss of his silver coin.
The movie's locale is in the desert outside of Los Angeles county, where
the 30-ish Sandra Thomas (Amanda Plummer-she's the wife of the director)
is going to meet her 25-year-old hitchhiking, unbalanced, hippie sister,
Alice (Balk), in a place called Pear Blossom and then the two will visit
their mother in Utah. But the ex-secretary for a collection agency,
having just been fired, is having a bad hair day, which only gets worst
on the road. Sandra is driven off the road by a driver's road rage. The
driver is a British con man named Santini (Thewlis), who it turns out
was just trying to signal her about something he found and was not
really a madman. When her car is stalled, she mistakeningly leaves her
door open, as a speeding car crashes into her door and unhinges it. But
that crash driver turns out to be a perfect gentleman, a criminal
psychologist from Los Angeles, who happens to be single and handsome. He
gives her a lift to the next roadside motel where she calls to get her
car towed. She thinks she has struck it lucky and has finally met the
man of her dreams. But she is only alive for the moment because he
tossed a coin and she won the right to live, for awhile. You see, this
Mr. Perfect turns out to be a madman.
These four (Forster, Plummer, Thewlis, and Balk) will play out life's
game of chance, with Forster calling the coin tosses and therefore
holding their lives in his hands. He exhibits signs of being a control
freak, someone who might even be a nut case, by taking everything so
literal and acting in a robotic and deliberate fashion when he speaks,
so that everything he does seems out of place.
Paul Sorvino, as a local sheriff, brings renewed energy to the film, as
he plays his role straight (thank the director for at least giving us
one such real character in the film) as a small-town law officer who is
more than willing to do his job. In fact, the acting in the film by
everyone is really fine, especially considering how thin the script was.
It is the story itself and the way it is directed that leads to the
detriment of the film, allowing it to have the look of one of those
films made only to be seen as a rental video, which indeed is how this
film was released.
The film tries to play like noir, but only ends up being the kind of
fake noir that is more irritating than complimentary. It tries to be
purposefully evasive about its storyline and to have its tenuous story
be based on chance as being the sole determinant of life. What it
eventually becomes is a predictable psycho flick and not an
unpredictable noir film, as it wanted to be. It has trapped itself into
being a film without a plot, with rotten dialogue, and a fake means of
maintaining tension. It tries so hard to give itself a weird angle
through its characterizations, which only work on a superficial
level-from the neurotic damsel-in-peril, Plummer- to the split
personality performance of Forster, whose actions waiver between
maniacally calm reasoning to histrionic schmaltz, as he goes off the
deep end reciting rhymes.
The main problem, which the film is never able to overcome, is that the
storyline is not that compelling and that the characters are not
necessarily interesting even if they are quirky.The story never had a
real strength to it; it always seemed like the actors were play-acting,
that the script was struggling to device another gimmick to go with the
coin toss motif, instead of letting the story seem to come about out of
its own accord. What the director came up with as the other gimmick, was
a two-headed coin to toss. This did not help explore anything going on
inside the characters, only trivializing the story further, making it
rely solely on a gimmick to tell its story.
What we are left with is a series of encounters among characters who are
not that appealing in the first place, and also by the end of the film,
we know only a little more about the psychopath than we did from the
opening scene. I therefore wasn't sure what the director wanted to
accomplish, except he probably thought by showing how idiosyncratic all
the characters could be, that would be enough to get it over. If that
was what he was thinking, he misjudged the quality of the film, but not
before he showed flashes of talent here and there, for example, in the
opening scene in the desert ---  Forster's calm demeanor was played-off
beautifully against Plummer's nervous energy, and with the desert
lurking as a hostile backdrop to the action, it added a thrilling
surreal sense of dramatics to the story. But the film fell too quickly
into the serial-killer mode, and lost the edge it never had but always
wanted.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
David Dalgleish
"All over America, sane people doing insane things."
Starring Robert Forster, Fairuza Balk, Amanda Plummer, David Thewlis
Written & Directed by Paul Chart
Cinematography by William Wages
AMERICAN PERFEKT knows exactly what kind of movie it wants to be, but 
it doesn't know how to be it.  It aspires to be a quirky road movie, 
but goes about it in the wrong way.  It's as if debut writer/director 
Paul Chart held his material at arm's length, looked at it carefully, 
decided that he wanted it to be weird, and systematically applied 
cosmetic changes to make it seem weird, hoping that these surface 
changes would somehow sink into the bones of the story, transforming 
it.  They don't.  
Chart works from the outside in, but real weirdness comes from the 
inside and works its way out, distorting everything it touches along 
the way.  It takes the eye of a David Lynch or a Joel Coen to make a 
really weird movie.  Chart doesn't have that eye.  This is not to say 
that he doesn't have talent; I think he does.  But, in AMERICAN 
PERFEKT, I think his talent is wrongly applied.  The premise is that 
of a thriller-cum-road-movie, pure and simple; the other stuff just 
gets in the way.
Robert Forster stars as Jake Nyman, a criminal psychologist obsessed 
with chance.  In a world where science seems to have an answer to 
everything, Jake thinks the toss of a coin--a 50/50 proposition whose 
outcome cannot be known in advance--holds an uncertainty that is 
immensely appealing.  He decides what to have for breakfast by tossing 
a coin; he decides who to kill by tossing a coin.  Life, he believes, 
has become routine and predictable; people need the unexpected in 
their lives.  This, he says, is the reason why white-collar petty 
crime, like shoplifting housewives, is on the rise; he takes this need 
for the unexpected to the extreme.
Forster, fresh off his Oscar nomination for JACKIE BROWN, does good 
work here.  He seems like such a regular guy, in appearance and 
demeanor, but there is a maddening reasonableness in everything he 
says and does which subtly suggests the insanity of a serial killer.  
As he travels through California, two emotionally unbalanced sisters, 
Sandra and Alice (Amanda Plummer, Fairuza Balk), and a British con man 
(David Thewlis) will be involved in his fatal game of chance.
Each scene in the film has an off-kilter quality, as the characters 
talk and act in unpredictable ways, but there is no flow.   Each scene 
seems to stand apart, and the weirdness does not progress according to 
any internal logic.  Characters act strangely only because the script 
wants them to be strange.  Alice at one point describes her 
ex-boyfriend as being "like all the colours you've never seen," yet 
nowhere else does she speak in this flowery fashion.  Santini makes a 
comment about a piece of music which makes him want to cry--for no 
apparent reason, except that it's not the sort of thing you'd expect 
him to say.   Nor are they an appealing bunch--Plummer, Balk, and 
Thewlis play people who are downright annoying.  You want to grab them 
by the lapels and shake some sense into them.  We don't care about 
them, so what we have to care about, if we are going to like the film, 
are the idiosyncracies that make the material fresh and compelling.  
But it is not idiosyncratic enough.  The narrative momentum carries us 
past the weaker moments, but leads to a conclusion which is abrupt and 
unsatisfying.  AMERICAN PERFEKT is not solid enough as a thriller to 
satisfy us, and not weird enough to intrigue and entertain as a 
bizarre road movie.
There are nice details.  I liked Paul Sorvino as a small-town law 
official who seemed at first to be another of those incompetent hick 
sheriffs who are commonplace in movies, but turned out to be an 
efficient, reasonable guy, playing off our expectations.  And Sharp 
has a flair for disorienting the viewer in small, subtle ways.  Early 
in the film, Sandra and Jake are talking, and the camera pans right 
till we can only see Sandra, who keeps talking; moments later, Jake 
reappears on the opposite side of the frame, having circled around 
off-camera.  It's a neat, disarming touch.  Even the end credits 
scroll backwards, from bottom-to-top.
But all this stuff, which I liked, happens on the edges of the film.  
The centre does not hold.  The story is incoherent, lacking background 
and resolution, leaving us with a series of encounters and incidents, 
loosely pieced together.  Maybe all this incohesion is justified by 
Chart as being part of the randomness of life, the randomness 
celebrated by Jake in his own bloody way--but anyone can use that as 
an excuse for a bad movie.  Cinema is not a random happening.  And if 
Chart really wanted to make a movie which imitates the messy 
unpredictability of life, he shouldn't have used the overdetermined 
logic of a thriller to draw us in, then abandon that logic when it 
suited him.  He wants to have his cake and eat it too; he plays with a 
two-headed coin, and as Jake himself observes in the movie, that's 
cheating.

Author
David Nusair
Starring Robert Forster, Amanda Plummer
When Robert Forster found himself famous again after appearing in "Jackie
Brown", he immediately signed up for a little film called "American
Perfekt".  This was almost two years ago.  I waited patiently for the film
to be released, but it never was.  Finally, I forgot about it.  The other
day, though, while I was perusing the selection of the local video store,
I stumbled upon, you guessed it, "American Perfekt".  I immediately rented
it and with a certain amount of glee, rushed home to view it.  Having now
seen the film, I understand why it never saw theatrical release.
"American Perfekt" is a jumbled mess.  The storyline is non-existent.  It
took me half the movie just to figure out what was going on.  And at that
point, the only thing I really knew for sure was that the movie was
*never* going to introduce a plot of some sort.  It wants to get by on
quirkyness and so-called charm alone, and it just doesn't work.
Robert Forster plays a psychiatrist who picks up Amanda Plummer, and they
head off on the road together.  Along the way to no discernable
destination, they run into all sorts of kooky and wacky characters.  I
suppose this free-wheeling, no plot style is supposed to give the film an
element of danger and excitment, but all it did was make me sleepy.  I'm
all for trying new things within the realm of film, but not at the expense
of coherence.  Nothing in this movie makes sense.  The actions of the
characters go unexplained, even when they're truly bizarre.  I'll give you
an example, without giving too much away.  David Thewlis has a part as a
drifting con-man.  At one point, mid-way through the movie, he runs
Forster and Plummer off the road with his car.  As he passes them, we see
that his face is covered in blood.  Do you think we would get an
explanation as to what happened to him?  You would think so, wouldn't 
you.
"American Perfekt" is a waste of time.  Nothing is gained from watching
this movie, except maybe a migraine.  And if you do rent it, don't bother
trying to figure out what's going on in the hopes that everything will be
resolved by the end.  This doesn't happen.
And no explanation is given for the misspelling of "perfect", either.
-- 
David Nusair                                http://chat.carleton.ca/~dnusair"As I have pointed out before, Andre Rousimoff's portrayal of a giant in
"The Princess Bride", Richard Dawson's portrayal of an obnoxious game show
host in "The Running Man", and Courtney Love's portrayal of a junkie hooker
in "The People vs Larry Flynt"."
        -R. Wiley on the all-time biggest Oscar snubs
