Title
Review for Gold Diggers: The Secret of Bear Mountain (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Ben Hoffman
     This was supposed to be an exciting adventure about two
thirteen-year-old girls who became close friends even though they
seemed to have nothing in common.  Instead, the "adventure" is quite
unexciting ... boring, in fact, thus wasting the talents of two fine
young actresses: Anna Chlumsky who appeared in MY GIRL and MY GIRL 2,
and Christina Ricci who was the unsmiling little girl in the ADDAMS
FAMILY, and CASPER.
     The story, in addition to lacking any excitement, is also on the
unbelievable side.  Jody (Anna) has a map of a nearby mountain that no
one believes has gold.  Miners have died years ago in an explosion and
since then everyone has forgotten or derided the idea that there might
be gold there.  But not our tomboyish Jody.  She entices city-bred Beth
(Christina) to go with her to explore the mysterious mountain.  They
use what looks like a boat that has been put together with chewing gum
and sail down the river, miles from home, although Beth has promised
her mother she would be home for dinner.  Fat chance.
Directed by Kevin James Dobson and written by Barry Glasser.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Christina Ricci, Anna Chlumsky, Polly Draper, Brian Kerwin,
      Diana Scarwid, David Keith
Director: Kevin James Dobson
Producers: Martin Bregman, Rolf Deyhle, and Michael S. Bregman
Screenplay: Barry Glasser
Cinematography: Ross Berryman
Music: Joel McNeely
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures
     Some day, hopefully, Christina Ricci will get a worthy showcase for
her talents.  Until then, however, we're going to have to be content
watching her provide a spark for such staples of mediocrity as THE
ADDAMS FAMILY, CASPER, NOW AND THEN, and GOLD DIGGERS.  It's not
overstating the case to say that Ricci is the best thing about these
films. In fact, it's not far from the truth to say that she's the only
worthwhile thing, especially where GOLD DIGGERS is concerned.
     Formulaic to a fault and guilty of trivializing a serious issue,
GOLD DIGGERS starts out messy and contrived, and never gets any better.
The movie attempts to wed teen bonding with low-key adventure, while
simultaneously tackling the issue of domestic violence.  Admittedly, I
don't expect a ONCE WERE WARRIORS-type approach to wife-beating and
child abuse in a PG-rated film, but a harder-hitting, less superficial
style is requisite for a topic of this import.  If you're going to do a
movie about the subject, don't shortchange it the way GOLD DIGGERS does.
     As teenager Beth Easton, Ricci is marooned in a dumb story with a
bunch of performers who don't pull equal weight.  MY GIRL's Anna
Chlumsky, an actress of modest talent, is on hand as Beth's wild best
friend, Jody Salerno, but Ricci takes center stage for their scenes.
Chlumsky was appealing in her previous outings, but here, with a short
haircut and tomboyish attitude, she's less-than-endearing.  Polly
Draper, as Beth's recently-widowed mother, is more irritating than
sympathetic.  Brian Kerwin (Sheriff Matt Hollinger) and Diana Scarwid
(Jody's mother) are all-but-invisible, and David Keith sneers his way
through his role as the film's resident bad guy.
     The movie, which takes place in 1980, opens with Beth and her Mom
moving from Los Angeles to a small, backwater Pacific Northwest
community (forty-five minutes from the nearest mall).  There she meets
Jody, who is regarded as a local troublemaker.  Although the two don't
hit it off immediately, it doesn't take long for a friendship to
develop.  Soon, Beth and Jody are in search of the lost gold of Molly
Morgan, which is supposedly hidden deep in the caves of Bear Mountain.
While the new friends navigate paper mache tunnels with styrofoam
stalactites, they engage in inane conversation that passes for bonding,
with Jody confiding that her mother's boyfriend becomes abusive when he
gets drunk.
     GOLD DIGGERS is intended as a "family film", but this is the kind
of movie that gives family outings a bad name.  The only ones likely to
derive any enjoyment from this drivel are pre-teen girls.  With its deus
ex machina ending and juvenile prattle, this is not a picture designed
for adult entertainment. Far from striking gold, this film consistently
comes up empty.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
