Title
Review for Harlem (1993)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Directed by Leon Ichaso  
Written by Barry Michael Cooper
Starring Wesley Snipes, Michael Wright, Theresa Randle, Abe Vigoda,
Ernie Hudson, and Clarence Williams III
MPAA Rating     "R" 
Running Time    Approx. 110 minutes
     Wesley Snipes is starting the year solo!  After recent pairings
with everyone from Dennis Hopper to Sly Stallone, the back-to-brunette
actor has returned to NEW JACK territory as another KING OF NEW YORK.
     In the downbeat drama SUGAR HILL, Snipes stars as a Harlem hood
who's ready to retire.  For years, Romello and his brother (Wright)
have been dealing drugs for a neighborhood gangster (Vigoda).  But
Romeo's tired of the trade.  He's knows what's ahead--including a rival
dealer (Hudson)--and wants to "get out." Unfortunately, Romello's
"retirement" is threatened by obligations to both his brother and his
junkie father (Williams).
     Forget SUGAR HILL's moral slant, the *cast* is the best reason to
watch this film.
     Snipes is great and always worth watching.  He's backed by former
"Mod Squad-er" Clarence Williams III, a knock-out as the drugged dad.
Father's final scene is the most chilling in the film.  Less impressive
is Michael Wright, who twitches more than Samuel Jackson in JUNGLE
FEVER.  And don't forget Abe Vigoda's genial gangster.  He gets the
best lines *and* the best monologue.
     Of course, *everyone* in SUGAR HILL gets a monologue.  Which is
the problem.
     Barry Michael Cooper's script is way too talky.  Yap yap yap and
everyone keeps talking.  Here's a first: a gangster film with more
speeches than murders!  Don't look to director Leon Ichaso--he doesn't
know when cut his characters off.  So every scene d-r-a-g-s.  *Then*
come the flashbacks, which stop the film cold.
     The intrusive soundtrack doesn't know when to quit, either.
     But there are *some* rewards to the overdone drama.  In addition
to the acting, the photography is handsome, the humor is rich, and the
message is frank.  Not a bad balance for a "butt bruiser."

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Wesley Snipes, Michael Wright, Theresa Randle, 
           Abe Vigoda, Clarence Williams III, Ernie Hudson
Director:  Leon Ichaso
Producers:  Rudy Langlais and Gregory Brown
Screenplay:  Barry Michael Cooper
Music:  Terence Blanchard
Released by Twentieth-Century Fox
     SUGAR HILL, a moody, atmospheric tale of violence and drugs on the
streets of modern-day Harlem, moves along too slowly for its own good.
While the story doesn't score points for originality, the themes
addressed are important and immediate, and ultimately it's a failure in
execution that keeps this film from joining the ranks of a number of
recent, memorable pictures chronicling life on the streets and in the
ghettos.
     Romillo Skuggs (Wesley Snipes) and his older brother Ray (Michael
Wright) grew up in Harlem with junkies for a mother and father.  At an
early age, the boys began working for one of the local bosses, Gus (Abe
Vigoda).  As the years went by, their influence and power expanded,
until they have become the premier drug dealers in the neighborhood,
wielding power to be reckoned with.  But Romillo is becoming
disillusioned with his life of crime, and is desperately seeking a way
out, even as Ray tries to keep the "team" together.  Things get more
complicated as another player (Ernie Hudson) enters the local drug
game, and the killings that start threaten to ignite into a full-scale
street war.
     With a brooding jazz score and dark, gloomy cinematography that
highlights shadows, SUGAR HILL is a masterpiece of atmosphere.  It has
a stylish feel that lends a romanticized aura to its depiction of
gangsters and violence.  This film does not have the punch-in-the-guts
realism of a BOYZ 'N THE HOOD or a MENACE II SOCIETY, nor does it have
the quality or scope of THE GODFATHER.  The 40s aura allows us to keep
all but the most brutal moments of SUGAR HILL at arm's length.
     The tale of a high-ranking criminal trying to go straight has been
the central focus of numerous movies.  If done right, it can be a
fascinating topic.  SUGAR HILL, however, having decided on the premise,
can't figure out how to execute it.  The script meanders for nearly two
hours, with numerous scenes dragging on for too long.  There is rarely
any tension or energy--of either the dramatic or action-oriented
variety.
     Presumably, one of the reasons for the uneven, plodding tone is to
allow for character development.  In that, the filmmakers have
underestimated their first half-hour.  A quarter of the way into the
film, Romillo and Ray are already fully fleshed out.  The additional
talky scenes add little to the relationship or the individuals, and
Romillo's constant repetition of the refrain "I've got to get out of
here" becomes tedious.
     Wesley Snipes, who appears capable of playing almost any sort of
character, from action hero to paraplegic, turns in another capable
performance as Romillo.  This is certainly not his best role, but the
actor understands the character whose identity he has taken on, and
manages to present a man capable of capturing the audience's sympathy
without compromising the essence of his personality.
     The weak link in the film may be Michael Wright, who plays Ray.
Only occasionally convincing, Mr. Wright picks one of the most
inopportune moments to act beyond the boundaries of believability:  the
all-important climactic moment.  This rather heavy-handed scene had the
misfortune of receiving a smattering of unintentional laughter within
the darkened confines of the theater where I viewed the film.
     The moral of SUGAR HILL is "don't do drugs," and this message is
presented in an obvious and uninspired manner.  The preachiness becomes
a little irritating, whether in words (Mr. Snipes' opening voiceover)
or in deeds (every act of drug use leads to unpleasant
consequences--often death).
     Still, this picture's most obvious flaw has nothing to do with its
sermonizing.  The problem lies instead with its somniferous pacing.
SUGAR HILL moves with all the speed of molasses.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Tak
One-Line-Summary
----------------
     A native drug lord in Harlem's Sugar Hill neighborhood tries to
break away from the cycle of violence and start a new life.
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     SUGAR HILL revolves around Romello (Wesley Snipes), his brother
Ray Nathan (Michael Wright) and their father (Clarence Thomas III),
told from Romello's point of view.  With both parents as victims of
heroin addiction, native Harlem residents Romello and Ray Nathan now
control the drug action, supported by old-time mob suppliers.  Problems
arise when smart, educated Romello wants out, tired of the
hopelessness, fear and violence.  Forces beyond his control, including
mob ties, a new and more ruthless operator, and his own family, try to
convince him that his place is in Harlem.
Tak Thoughts 
------------
     I love deadly serious, epic gangster movies like NEW JACK CITY,
JUICE, BOYZ IN THE HOOD, PUBLIC EYE, and THE GODFATHER series.  These
movies usually include slow motion shoot-outs, agonized and anguished
characters, and plenty of what could be considered melodramatic
scenes.  Sometimes they end on an upbeat note, and sometimes they end
like classical tragedies, with everyone dead or wishing they were.
SUGAR HILL manages to do both.  How?  I can't tell ya....
     The violence inherent in any drug/gangster movie was well handled
and not glamorized in the slightest.  When people get killed, tortured
or roughed up, it's not pretty, though it's not a gore-fest either.
It's stark, and all the more shocking.
     A friend of mine thought the pacing was slow, and even complained
about extraneous scenes, but I was totally into the movie and didn't
even notice the time.  Nor did I think any scenes were out of place.
     The scene under discussion involved Romello's love interest after
she spurns his lifestyle and goes out with an athlete, who ends up
almost raping her--instant asshole, just add alcohol.  She realizes
she had a good, loving man in Romello, especially as he's trying to
escape his old ways.  My friend argued that the whole "bad date" scene
was worthless, but I felt it served to explains why she returned after
so firmly rejecting him.
     Clarence Thomas III was wonderful as their shattered father.  A
former musician who used to deal but strayed, he was crippled by his
mob suppliers and was directly responsible for Romello's entry into a
criminal career.  Romello cares deeply for his father, a feeling not
shared by Ray, who can only see his father's failings.  Michael Wright
gives a believable performance as Ray Nathan, who is Romello's
constantly strung-out and emotionally insecure older brother.
     Wesley Snipes convinced me that Romello was intelligent,
street-wise and strong enough to establish his turf, yet also wise
enough to see that he's headed nowhere fast.  I believed he was a
basically good, caring person who had begun to regret the role he had
taken in life.  When I think about it, what I just wrote sounds really
implausible, but it worked, and worked well.
Tak Rating:
-----------
     I liked the intensity of SUGAR HILL.  The acting is first rate,
and I enjoyed the story.  If you like serious gang/drug dramas (verging
on tragedy) that depict the hopelessness and simultaneous struggle for
redemption, treat yourself to a performance of SUGAR HILL and then
bring some friends.
