Title
Review for Out for Justice (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dragan Antulov
There is time for peace and there is time for war. There is
time for movies that take cautious approach to sensitive and
complex issues and there is time for movies in which Good
Guys kick the living daylights out of Bad Guys without
burdening themselves with any serious contemplation. The
time in which we are living is the time for the latter, so
movies like OUT FOR JUSTICE, directed in 1991 by John Flynn,
would be more than appropriate.
The protagonist of this film is Gino Felino (played by
Steven Seagal), New York police detective who grew up on the
mean streets of Brooklyn. His marriage is just about to end,
but family issues suddenly take second place when he hears
the news about his partner and best friend Bobby Lupo
(played by Joe Spatara) getting brutally murdered in front
of his family. Since the perpetrator - crack-smoking and
ultraviolent Mafioso wannabe Richy Madano (played by William
Forsythe) - has already been identified, the investigation
actually turns into manhunt. Both police and Mafia take part
in it, but hardly anyone shows the zeal equal to Felino who
uses various (mostly violent) methods in order to extract
information about Madano's whereabouts. As Felino begins to
close in, Madano and his small but vicious gang of street
decide to hit back by targeting Felino's family.
Steven Seagal is arguably one of the worst actors in
present-day Hollywood and his reputation wasn't helped by
the projects in which his ambitions turned out to be way
higher than his abilities. Thankfully, OUT FOR JUSTICE,
which he co-produced and co-wrote (including few song
lyrics) is not one of them. Weak standard plot about
policeman who avenges the death of his partner is nothing
more than an excuse for the series of scenes in which Seagal
displays what he knows best - taking care of any individual
or group foolish enough to challenge him in a various forms
of physical combat. The script lacks the usual preaching
tone of other Seagal's movies and the mean streets of
Brooklyn are used more to provide exotic flavour to the
setting than to serve as an illustration of drug addiction,
crime, violence and other social ailments of pre-Giuliani
New York. Instead of moralising, film presents things like
corruption and symbiotic relationship between police and
organised crime as something quite natural and, at times,
even beneficial to the society. And, naturally, in a
situation when everyone wants to see quick justice done,
issues like civil liberties and police procedure are thrown
through the window. Steven Seagal's character might be
obnoxious, intimidating and ultraviolent and the only thing
that actually align him to the forces of Good (apart from
couple of obviously manipulative attempts to show his
sensitive, altruistic side) is the fact that the villains
are even worse and, consequently, can be dealt only by
higher doses of their own medicine. Because of that
otherwise good character actor William Forsythe goes over
the top in his portrayal of homicidal cokehead. On the other
hand, other actors are quite solid in their roles, even when
they are thankless, like those of Madano's brother and
sister, played by Anthony De Sando and Gina Gershon.
Director John Flynn is more than able to keep things under
control and the film goes quite smoothly for 90 minutes,
leaving hardly any time for audience to pick various flaws
in the film. In the end, authors of OUT FOR JUSTICE can be
forgiven for cliched storyline, cartoonish characters and
ridiculous amounts of senseless violence - few films managed
to show how Good can defeat Evil in such a simple and
entertaining way.
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: John Flynn
Writer: David Lee Henry
Starring: Steven Seagal, William Forsythe, Jo Champa, Jerry Orbach, Gina
Gershon, Julliana Marguilles, Shannon Whirry, John Leguiziamo, Athena
Massey
It was with a huge lack of something to do that I decided to watch this
on good old UPN on sunday afternoon, when the only good things on TV are
the second-rate movies they show (some are good: they showed "Total
Recall" before this one).  If you know me, I think Seagal is probably
the most boring action star to ever live.  And this includes Keanu
Reeves.
What do I hate about Seagal?  I hate how he uses one facial expression
for every single threatening and non-threatening situation (the
squint).  I hate those scenes in every movie where he goes around,
bullying people up, saying stupid lines with a brooklyn accent more fake
than Burt Reynold's hairpiece in "Boogie Nights."  I despise how he
never gets a bruise in any of his fights.  I hate how every single plot
twist leads to just a melodramatic fight between he and the chief
villain.  I hate his non-satirical messages (in the beginning of this
one, he slaps on a quote from Arthur Miller, which has nothing to do
with the film, except it's about Brooklyn where this film takes place). 
And I hate how he's so narcissistic that he thinks that he can actually
fucking sing (during the end credits, he has a good old hill billy rock
tune sung and penned by him).  Sure, the guy's probably a nice guy in
person (I actually found him very non-threatening when he was on
Letterman not too long ago).  But the guy makes worse films than Reagan
did.
So what's the plot of this shit-terpiece?  Well...something about him
trying to catch a stupid-ass crook (William Forsythe) who shot and
killed his partner in broad daylight.  I couldn't believe how bad this
scene was - the guy was conveniently with his family so we get the
maximum emotional effect (ahem!).  And Forsythe even said some stupid
lines to him before he took off.  I'm sorry, did anyone ever hear of
concealing one's self?
So in comes ex-Brooklynite Seagal, who dedicates his life to catching
this guy.  And I just wished he had caught him in the beginning, then
ended the film.  But NOOOO, this drags on, as he bullies Forsythe's
family members (including a stupid bar-owner, and none other than Gina
Gershon as his other bar-owner sister).  And Forsythe more than once
threatens his family.  At one point, he actually comes to their house
and stalks them like a non-threatening Nicholson in "The Shining"
(complete with them all hiding in the bathroom, but with an added bonus
of one girl conveniently loosing her cool and screaming to give them
away).
Seagal paints himself as a lovable person, with a son, and a fiancee. 
He even shows him hanging with his son, checking up on his homework, and
then about to take him out for a bit of "catch," when he's conveniently
called away on assignment.  I dunno about you, but playing "catch" with
Seagal was one of my childhood nightmares.  He also shows him as that
bad-ass he wants to be, with scenes of him bullying crooks around, and
taking out people who are stupid enough to attack him even after he's
unarmed a chinese guy swinging bats with a pool cue.  Serves them right.
This film, as some of his do, has an interesting supporting cast of
actors who are actually talented, but don't appear to be in this film. 
I already mentioned Gina Gershon (who's pretty horrible in this one), as
well as William Forsythe, who over-acts terribly.  I know this guy can
act: he was awesome in "Raising Arizona" as Goodman's partner in crime. 
But he's just awful here.  Jerry Orbach gives the only credible
performance in the film as the police chief who checks up on Segal after
things have gone down.  Why is he the only one who gives a good
performance?  Well, because his role is small enough and sporadic enough
to not tarnish his credibility.  He seems to be in here just to give it
a cool "Law and Order" feeling (even if it's not a "cool" feeling).  And
in cameos are B-rated erotic-thriller-Cinemax-style stars, Shannon
Whirry (as "Terry Malloy," which is more of a bad joke than a clever
one) and Athena Massey.  Oh!  And "ER"'s Julliana Margiulles has two
scenes.
"Out for Justice" just proves once again that American action films just
suck.  I know that there's such a good thing as good action - he's
called John Woo.  But if you're in the mood for some good old
no-brainer, fun-yet-dumb action, don't bother watching this.  It's so
stupid that it's boring.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/
