Title
Review for All the Little Animals (1998)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   A few blocks from where I live is a farmers' market. 
Growers come in from upstate New York twice a week, and
on Saturday morning one such family parks a van housing a
couple of goats, a pig, and a rabbit.  This family makes
money on the deal by situating a collection box outside the
truck with a sign, "If you want us to continue coming here
with the animals, please contribute."  The little kids love to
come up to the cage and pet the goats and the pig.  One six-
year-old asked the farmer about the man's "pets," but was
told that only the rabbit was for companionship.  The others
would "go to market."  The kid seemed to accept that answer
without asking further.
   Now, I wish that little boy and others like him could see "All
the Little Animals," a poignant, sometimes tense and violent
fable about a 24-year-old emotionally-challenged man living
in London with his abusive stepfather. Here is a fellow who
had never left home since he was somewhat brain-damaged
in an auto accident years back but who decides in a moment
of great anxiety to flee from his London home to the wholly
unfamiliar Cornwall countryside.  He finds his identity there
while experiencing one particularly strained encounter of
life-or-death proportions.  The movie is not a great one but is
an appropriate choice for its presumed target of little ones as
it more or less follows the pattern of classic fairy tales.  
   In this fable, Bobby (Christian Bale), having experienced
the death of his beloved mom, is pressured by his sinister
stepfather De Winter (Daniel ali) to sign over his
mother's large London department store on pain of being
committed for life to a hospital for the disturbed.  Bobby
sneaks out of the house, hitches a ride to Cornwall, and
bonds with a people-hating hermit, Mr. Summers (John Hurt). 
Summers, who burns with fury at automobile drivers because
their speeding vehicles kill scores of road animals daily,
believes that all animals have an equal right to life as people-
-including mice, rats, roaches and moths.  Financially
independent, Summers makes a career of giving proper
burials to the hapless creatures who litter the highways but
don't go anywhere.
   The chemistry between Bale and Summers is credible
enough. They are two of a kind, both products of an abusive
society, with Summers a natural mentor for the unhappy
young man who had been patronized at best for most of us
24 years. John Hurt, whose piquant role as a stodgy British
writer in "Love and Death on Long Island" should have
earned him an Oscar, is made up to look ten years older and
who displays the gruff exterior so unknown to the love-sick
Giles De'Ath in the remarkable 1997 movie.  Jeremy
Thomas's direction is particularly reliable in the depiction of
De Winter, who never raises his voice, who listens attentively
and does not lecture, but who in the final analysis is bent on
murder for its own sake.
   I'd compare the trajectory of "All the Little Animals" to that
of "The Wizard of Oz," in which Bobby (substituting for
Dorothy) winds up in Cornwall (substituting for Oz) after
fleeing his stepdad (the Wicked Witch of the West) and is
mentored by a flawed but well-meaning recluse (the Wizard). 
Very young children might be disturbed by the scenes of
violence and tension (one person's neck is slit on screen, and
gravesites are being prepared graphically).  If you can allow
for one irrational and unbelievable scene involving Bobby and
Summers' trip to London, you're left with a decent, small-
scale movie, perhaps more suitable for video than the large
screen.

Author
Dennis Schwartz

ALL THE LITTLE ANIMALS (director: Jeremy Thomas; screenwriters: from a
book by Walker Hamilton/Eski Thomas; cinematographer: Mike Molloy;
editor: John Victor Smith; cast: John Hurt (Mr. Summers), Christian Bale
(Bobby), Daniel Benzali (De Winter, "The Fat"), James Faulkner (Mr.
Stuart Whiteside), Amy Robbins (Bobby's Mother), John O'Toole (Lorry
Driver); Runtime: 111; 1998-UK)
A strangely intriguing, darkly made psychological allegory based on the
late Walker Hamilton's only novel. It is the directorial debut film of
Jeremy Thomas, the producer of Bertolucci, Roeg, and Cronenberg films,
and the husband of the screenwriter Eski Thomas. This is a difficult
film to categorize or to fully explain its meaning, except it has
clearly been influenced by "The Night of the Hunter," though not up to
that film's quality, nevertheless it shares with that film the
frightened way a child looks at the world when an evil stepfather comes
into his world and the child is helpless to stop him from ruining his
life.
Bobby (Bale) is a 24-year-old, who is simple-minded because of an early
childhood car accident. The repercussions are that he is over-sensitive,
completely innocent, and very fearful, hardly ever venturing outside,
and never attending a regular school. His kindly mother, whom he loved,
has just died because his ogre-like stepfather De Winter (Benzali), who
is mockingly called by him "The Fat", has treated her cruelly. He now
threatens to place Bobby in a mental institution unless he signs over
control of his mother's large department store to him. To further
threaten the frightened youngster, who has been told by his mother to
never sign over anything to his stepfather, he kills the young man's pet
mouse, which he secretly kept in the bathroom.
The next day Bobby walks outside of London's city limits going further
from home than he has ever gone before and hitches a ride with a
friendly hippy couple that takes him to the Cornish countryside, where
he decides to go to Cornwall. He gets a ride from a lorry driver whose
face lights up with joy when he sees a fox on the road and tries to run
it over, as Bobby tries to steer the lorry the other way, the lorry goes
over the side of the road, killing the driver. But Bobby comes out of
the accident without a scratch. An eccentric recluse, living in a
cottage in the woods nearby, Mr. Summers (Hurt), suddenly appears
holding a dead rabbit in his arms, saying the driver missed the fox but
hit the rabbit, and that he will bury the rabbit. He says that his
mission in life is to bury the little animals killed by humans who don't
care, further proclaiming that no one should kill anyone, and railing
against the automobile for all the roadkills.
Bobby and Mr. Summers hit it off, sort of like birds of the same
feather, as they spend the summer together in Mr. Summers' hidden
cottage, burying a badger, feeding mice inside their cottage and, in an
outstanding scene, Bobby breaks the light bulb with a rock that a
lepidopterist uses in his net to trap moths for his collection, while he
sits on the porch and drinks wine and listens to classical music. Mr.
Summers is not a sexual predator, and in many ways appears to be as
naive as the boy he is mentoring, but is earnest about caring for the
animals and is articulate, as he walks in the woods with a spade by his
side, burying all the animals he can, because they are helpless to bury
each other, while humans are not his concern, since he reasons that they
can bury their own.
When hiking through the woods, Mr. Summers who seems to have plenty of
money, offers to buy Bobby an ice cream, but the place is a crowded
summer tourist stop, which frightens Mr. Summers away. When Bobby goes
to the ice cream stand, he is recognized by one of the managers in the
department store (Faulkner), who tries to keep him there while his wife
calls De Winter. But Bobby escapes his grasp and finds his way back to
Mr. Summers' retreat.
Bobby proceeds to tell him about his fear of De Winter and his life
story. After absorbing the full impact of his story, Mr. Summers takes a
walk and returns to tell Bobby his tragic life secret, about how he
worked in a bank and was able to obtain a lot of money and about his
horrible secret, and how he has buried in the cottage enough money for
both of them to never worry about money for the rest of their lives. He
reasons with Bobby that they return together to see De Winter and sign
over the store to him, and thereby he will be free from him.
When they meet De Winter in the store, things don't go as they expected,
as he turns out to be a villain without any scruples, in fact, there is
no way to explain him but as a person who is evil through and through,
while Bobby is the essence of goodness. The film works its way to a
suspenseful but tacky and implausible revenge conclusion, as all its
energy seems to have been spent on its fairy tale setup and the
relationship between the two kindred spirits. But, nevertheless, this
film, if you allowed it to be seen as a proficiently lyrical work, one
that is heartfelt and never false, then you can feel the sincerity of it
and you can see in the grand shots of Bobby's escape to the wilderness,
away from civilization, as he earnestly narrates his tale of woe
offscreen, how poetical the film is and how it is a modern fairy tale
for adults and fans of the cinema that still believe that movies can
make them see things again as they did when they were children.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
