Title
Review for Strangeland (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
David Butterworth
        "Dee Snider's Strangeland."  To movie buffs, it doesn't have the
familiar ring of, say, "John Carpenter's The Thing," "Russ Meyer's Vixen,"
or "Sidney Sheldon's Bloodline."  And it's not nearly as funny as the
recent "Jane Austen's Mafia!"
        I wonder what made Dee Snider, best and perhaps only known for his
heavily made-up persona as the front man for the heavy metal outfit Twisted
Sister, associate his name with this film directly.  Because he stars in
it?  Because he co-produced it?  Because he wrote the sick and twisted
thing?  Maybe because he thought his name alone would rock the box office.
        So what was going on in Snider's mind when, perhaps while awaiting
the encore during the latest Sister tour, he sat down at his word processor
and dreamed up "Strangeland"?  Did he plan to revolutionize the horror film
by conjuring up a uniquely shocking movie-going experience, or did he
simply hope to cash in on a genre made profitable by those undiscerning
enough to tell a "Scream" from a "Scream 2"?
        If you said B then go to the top of the class: "Strangeland" is as
by-the-book as horror movies come, but as such it's no less watchable than
any number of "Psycho" rip-offs.  No less watchable if "gross body
piercing, nudity, sexual situations, profanity, psychosexual themes,
near-naked women, and tortured men" happen to be your cup of tea.
        As it turns out, "Strangeland" owes more to "The Silence of the
Lambs" and the "Hellraiser" series than it does "Psycho" (if you were
hoping for a little mother fixation, the remake of Hitchcock's classic
shocker with "Return to Paradise"'s Vince Vaughn and Anne Heche is coming
to a theater near you this Christmas).  In "Strangeland," Snider plays a
sadomasochistic deviant who prowls the Internet's teen chat rooms with the
handle Capt. Howdy (Twisted Sister fans thrill away), luring unsuspecting
minors to his basement of body-piercing depravity.
        The online conversations are a little difficult to follow,
visually, but it doesn't much matter since Capt. Howdy wastes little time
in handing out the party invites.  One victim proves to be the daughter of
small town cop Mike Gage and his wife Toni (played with equal and adequate
concern by Kevin Gage and Elizabeth Peńa) and it's
find-and-nail-the-psycho-before-he-kills-again time.
        There's a strange climax of sorts halfway through the film, when
Howdy is tracked down and arrested rather easily.  But if you've seen
"Halloween" 1 through 7, you'll know you can't keep a good psychopath down.
Howdy is reformed and rehabilitated as Carleton Hendricks who looks like he
crawled off the pages of a Nathaniel Hawthorne novel, and this meek,
apologetic personality is almost as creepy as his "Spawn"-like,
rhetoric-spouting alter-ego.
        Of course the townsfolk hassle Carleton and his medication
accidentally gets run over.  Oops.
        The body-piercing focus and Snider's eerie dual performances keep
the film interesting.  While it's nice to see Robert Englund (aka Freddy
Krueger) on the receiving end of the suffering for a change, there ain't
buckets of creativity here.  As for Dee Snider's drawing power, well, there
was only one other person in the audience and he left before the film's
closing metal track banged to an end.
