Title
Review for Clean Slate (1994)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Dana Carvey, Valeria Golino, James Earl Jones, Michael Gambon,  
Kevin Pollak, Michael Murphy. 
Screenplay:  Robert King. 
Director:  Mick Jackson. 
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw. 
     When I stepped into the theater to see CLEAN SLATE, I had yet to see  
any evidence that Dana Carvey might actually be capable of acting.  In  
fact, he seemed incapable of anything but the broadest schtick.  His  
"Saturday Night Live" characters were usually caricatures, and the  
WAYNE'S WORLD films and the horrible OPPORTUNITY KNOCKS simply  
regurgitated those characters.  So it qualifies as one of the most  
unexpected surprises of the year that CLEAN SLATE turns out to be an  
absolutely delightful comedy.  As improbable as the concept might seem,  
director Mick Jackson (THE BODYGUARD) reins in Carvey's tendency towards  
excess and gives him a real character to work with, and the chance to  
generate big laughs. 
     Carvey plays M. L. Pogue, a small-time private eye with a big-time  
problem.  As the result of an explosion, Pogue suffers from a unique form  
of amnesia which causes him to wake up every morning with no memory of  
anything which has taken place before he fell asleep.  That proves a  
hindrance professionally, as he is supposed to testify against  
criminally-connected businessman Cornell (Michael Gambon), but can't  
remember his testimony.  It's also problematic personally, as he seems to  
be involved with at least two women, one of whom (Valeria Golino) is  
supposed to be dead.  With every passing day, Pogue's mystery continues-- 
and deepens--until he finds that he can't trust anyone. 
     CLEAN SLATE is so full of unpredictable pleasures that it's  
difficult to know where to begin.  The greatest is probably the  
performance of Carvey, in a role analagous in many ways to Bill Murray's  
in GROUNDHOG DAY.  Like Phil Connor, Pogue is trapped in a cycle of  
repetition and confusion, except that Pogue is the only one who *doesn't*  
know what's going on; like Murray, Carvey gets a chance to play some low- 
key scenes that prove he doesn't always have to be a class clown.  He  
gets to play several hysterical scenes based on Pogue's need to improvise  
every encounter with his friends (including James Earl Jones as a  
wheelchair-bound district attorney, Kevin Pollak as Pogue's jealous best  
friend, and Michael Murphy as his doctor), including a surprise birthday  
party and his eventual testimony against Cornell.  However, Carver is  
equally affecting in moments such as his reaction to discovering that he  
might be a father, and trying desperately to remember a woman he thinks  
he loves.  The nature of Pogue's condition inevitably limits his  
character development, but merely watching Carvey react to that situation  
is endlessly entertaining. 
     But there is virtually nothing about CLEAN SLATE which isn't quirky,  
off-handed and charming.  Screenwriter Robert King has filled this film  
with bits that come out of left field, like the sequence where Pogue and  
his mysterious client attempt to escape Cornell's henchmen with well- 
aimed rocks, or a couple of unexplained moments when Pogue demonstrates  
martial arts skills, or Pogue's dog, who suffers from a lack of depth  
perception.  Director Jackson complements the weirdness with visual  
throwaways like the neck brace James Earl Jones' character wears with a  
hole for his tie to come through, and the Band-Aid Carvey sports through  
out the film.  CLEAN SLATE is that rare comedy which simply never goes  
exactly where you expect it to go. 
     All this would be quite enough to recommend CLEAN SLATE, but it also  
provides a neatly-polotted little mystery.  Occasionally it feels as  
though King and Jackson are trying to throw in a bit too much (the  
character of Pogue's ex-wife is particularly unnecessary), which  
sidetracks the film's energy.  However, at the end of CLEAN SLATE I was  
left without a single plausibility problem. 
     In the 24 hours since I saw CLEAN SLATE, bits and pieces have popped  
into my head constantly, prompting spontaneous laughter, and it just  
keeps growing on me.  It wouldn't be surprising, given Carvey's track  
record and an advertising campaign which can't do it justice, to see  
CLEAN SLATE make a quick exit from theaters.  Then again, there might  
just be one more surprise coming. 

Author
James Berardinelli
     Consider this premise:  a private investigator (Dana Carvey) who's a 
key witness in an upcoming trial has a memory problem.  Not only can't he 
recall the crimes of the man he's supposed to testify against, but he 
can't remember things from day to day.  Every time he goes to sleep, his 
amnesia asserts itself, wiping out events, places, and people.  So, every 
night before he goes to bed, he uses a cassette recorder to tape 
instructions to himself - basic facts of life to get him through the day. 
     Add to this a beautiful woman who is supposed to be dead (Valeria 
Golno), a mobster with a British accent (Michael Gambon), and a doctor 
who seems to know things that no one else does (Michael Murphy), and the 
seeds are there for a decent thriller - or a hilarious comedy.  
Unfortunately, CLEAN SLATE is neither.  For all its promise and 
possibilities, this film manages to be nothing more than forgettable. 
     As far as featherweight entertainment goes, this isn't bad.  The 
script is peppered with funny moments, although probably less than half the 
jokes actually click.  CLEAN SLATE works better when its humor isn't too 
outrageous - the climactic trial scene is more silly than enjoyable 
because it's so completely over-the-top (lawyers, bailiffs, and courtroom 
observers pile atop each other in the middle of a free-for-all melee). 
     One of the most disappointing things about this film is that it could 
have been so much better, either as a mystery or a comedy.  Only on one 
or two occasions is the central plot device of amnesia used to its full 
potential.  Whichever way the filmmaker chose to play CLEAN SLATE - for 
laughs or thrills - it would seem they had a winner.  Yet, mysteriously, 
the result is a unsatisfying mix of a hard-to-swallow gumshoe tale and a 
pedestrian comedy. 
     The cast is solid.  Although you occasionally expect him to start 
imitating George Bush, Dana Carvey brings a welcome likability to Maurice 
Pogue, the man with no memory.  Valeria Golino, known best as Charlie 
Sheen's girlfriend from the two HOT SHOTS films, again functions as the 
token female love interest.  James Earl Jones enjoys himself in this 
comic turn, while bringing a touch of class to CLEAN SLATE.  Other 
performers include Kevin Pollak, Michael Gambon, and Olivia D'Abo. 
     The first act, where the audience is finding things out along with Pogue, 
is the most entertaining segment of the film.  For the first forty-five 
minutes, the script cleverly forces the viewers to identify with the main 
character.  It's almost - albeit not quite - a first-person motion 
picture.  Certainly, Pogue is in every early scene.  Then he goes to 
sleep and forgets everything, but the audience remembers, and the effect 
is ruined.  Now Pogue's memory loss seems like what it is - a device to 
set up jokes and move the story along. 
     There are some worthwhile running gags, including the local blind man's 
"joke of the day", a painter's continuing attempts to render a Mona Lisa 
likeness on the side of a building, and the misadventures of a dog with 
depth perception problems.  None of these, however, make up for what 
CLEAN SLATE is missing. 
     This film is likeable, if not especially worthwhile.  Admittedly, Dana 
Carvey is a more engaging screen presence than his former SATURDAY NIGHT 
LIVE co-star Mike Myers, but there's little in the way of breakthrough 
comedy in his latest feature.  With CLEAN SLATE, the lackluster results 
speak of a wasted opportunity. 
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
eye WEEKLY
     Young people may grow up quickly in today's complicated world, but
still they seem to want pop heroes who are in perpetual childhood.
That's been Dana Carvey's great fortune.
     Acquiring a hefty youth following during his seven years on
SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE, Carvey combines a parodistic accuracy with a smart
kid's let's-pretend delight in showing off.  It was all part of a
lifelong practice of surviving socially.
     "I was half-shy, half-funny," he says of his tyke-to-teen years.
"I discovered I had an ear and could mimic things when I was 7 years
old--and I could get attention.  And that's how it started.  I was
alternately shy or extroverted all through grade school."
     Though his most popular character has been chronic adolescent
Garth of WAYNE'S WORLD, he's branching into grown-up territory--sort
of.  In his new screen venture, CLEAN SLATE, he takes his cue from
gumshoe movies, stands tall and tries out an adult character--albeit
a funster one.
     Directed by Mick Jackson (THE BODYGUARD), this cloak-and-dagger
comedy casts him as a private detective with memory loss who's due to
testify at an important trial.
     Along the way, he gets snared by a femme fatale (mahogany-voiced
Valeria Golino) and locates a missing coin worth millions.  The hook is
that Carvey keeps losing his bearings while the audience stays way
ahead of him.
     "I thought the script was charming and kind of different," he
says.  "It was like some '40s movie, so it's retro, like some kind of
Danny Kaye-Bob Hope movie.  So I thought, 'I'll give this a shot.'"
     The part he plays doesn't call for mimicry, and Carvey wasn't
interested in doing any.  "That wasn't really the gig--I was just
supporting the story.  I liked the idea that the audience would get
ahead of the character."
     This did not keep him from amusing his fellow workers between
takes with constant caricatures, so much so that Golino says, "After a
while you wanted to say, 'Could I talk to Dana now?'"
     Two of his biggest fans have been his most public targets: Ross
Perot and George Bush, who have both called him up to pal around.
     "I was in the White House, real nervous, having cocktails with
George and Barbara Bush," he says, "and I said, 'Ross Perot is a gift
to comedians everywhere,' and Bush said, 'He wasn't a gift to me.' I
wanted to be sucked into the ventilation system at that point."
     Soon to come are films that may release new forms of deviltry.
Promising in particular is Alan Parker's upcoming adaptation of
T. Coraghessan Boyle's bestseller THE ROAD TO WELLVILLE, in which he
plays an all-out maniac opposite Anthony Hopkins.
     "I get to throw bottles of feces--human excrement--at Sir
Tony's face," he says with satisfaction.  "It's a dark, twisted movie."
     He's also in the middle of the Toronto shoot of It Started In
Paradise, a mafia comedy that casts him as an Italian-American hood
opposite Nicholas Cage.  And there's a completed Hans and Franz script
that may one day be filmed, equipped with a musical part for Arnold
Schwarzenegger.
     "Arnold loved the idea of it.  His favorite line is [and with
automatic ease he assumes Schwarzenegger's wiener-schnitzel baritone]
'I could flick you with my little finger and you would fly across the
room and land in your own baby poop.'"
     Not quite adult talk, but Carvey's juvenilia is infectious.  He
may not be forever young (one day he and Michael J.  Fox may battle to
inherit Mickey Rooney's twinkling geezer roles), but for the moment our
hero is the Earl of Adolescence.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Freely transmitable in cyberspace     Author holds traditional copyright
eye@io.org (416-971-8421)    Archives: ftp/gopher io.org /pub/eye.WEEKLY
