Title
Review for King Lear (1971)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Pedro Sena
If you like Willy, this IS as good as it gets.  Though it is a bit too
wordy for most of us, this is one of those productions where the passages
somehow make sense, and don't lead you astray very much.  I do recommend you
take a break somewhere in the middle of it, because it IS really intense.
Peter Brook got his start with theatre in England, and has specialized in
Shakespeare, though his best work is in the field of experimental theatre.
This LEAR is not set on a stage, thus freeing it from the overly confined
spacing which befalls all of Willy's work.  It is not a theatrical
production of any kind, for example, there is no music beyond what is heard
and required in the scenes ( the FOOL playing his lute, etc ) and the sound
effects are nature's wonders.  The usual stage allegories are done away
with, and the strong scenes, like the storm/thunder moments are actually
done outside in an environment that I don't think many actors enjoy working
on, and with, ... it is very difficult to act with robes that weight nearly
50 to 75 lbs. and on top of it are wet,... and the scene continues,...
The actors here are Paul Scofield as LEAR ( geesus h charrrist ); John Hurt
( ever wonder where he got started? ); Diana Rigg; Cyril Cusach; Patrick
Magee, Ian Hogg.  Stunning camera work and editing.  The most realistic
costumes you ever will see in a Willy production.  Filmed in northern
England in the area where it would have taken place.
It all makes for a rather 'brutal' presentation of Willy's, but one which is
reminiscent of the same appeal which Zeffirelli's Romeo and Juliet did in
the late sixties.  It is thorough, it is honest, and lays it on the line. If
you like literature, and an occasional Willy, take a dose of this.
        Meetings With Remarkable Men ( mid seventies, occasionally found
        in the shelves of the new age stores,... gasp,  GASP, ... ) based on
        Gurdjieff's books and life, with incredible scenery in Afghanistan,
        Pakistan, Egypt, and northern India.  And the ending will just floor
        you.  Features Terence Stamp, Athol Fugard ( he single handedly owes
        his fame to Peter Brook's productions of his work,......in SOUTH
        AFRICA, too,.... they weren't about to insult the best art in the
        land, were they,... take that DeKlerk... Athol is black,... Sizwe
        Banshe is Dead and several other plays. ), and many others.
Peter Brook's work is always challenging, and does not bang you over the
head  with 'heavy' meanings.  But the intensity of the work, and how it's
done will surely awake your mind up,...   highly recommended for serious
enthusiasts.
