Title
Review for Tall Guy, The (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Wayne Citrin
     THE TALL GUY is a 1990 film that never made it to Boulder.  I
recently had the chance to see it on video.  I don't remember having so
much fun watching a movie (on video or on the big screen) in a long
time.  See it.
     Jeff Goldblum is Dexter King, an unhappy American actor in London
who has spent the last six years as the straight man in a comedy revue.
In short order, Goldblum falls in love, loses his job in the revue, and
gets the lead role in "Elephant!," a musical version of "The Elephant
Man."
     There's so much to like in this film, it's hard to know where to
start.  There's Goldblum trying to work up the nerve to ask out the
no-nonsense nurse (Emma Thompson) with whom he's fallen in love.
There's his lovable nymphomaniac landlady and her parade of weird
boyfriends.  There's the great sex scene (and I mean it in both senses:
it's a great scene, and it suggests great sex), and there's the scene
where Goldblum and a friend are lectured by a blind man on the nature of
love.  And best of all, there's "Elephant!," a musical even funnier than
the classic "Springtime for Hitler" in THE PRODUCERS.  Listen hard for
the wonderfully awful lyrics.  What makes this even funnier than
"Springtime for Hitler" is that one can really see someone producing a
show like this, or like "Elephant!"'s director's other project: a
musical version of "Richard III," with such songs as "I've Got a Hunch
I'm Gonna Be King."  The scenes from "Elephant!" had me rolling on the 
floor, and I can't remember the last time that happened.  And there's
lots more that I haven't mentioned.
     THE TALL GUY is shot in a refreshingly different style, reminiscent
of Richard Lester's 1960's comedies.  This film has definitely been
inspired by A HARD DAY'S NIGHT and HELP!  I don't know who Mel Smith is,
or what else he's directed, but I'll certainly try to find out.
     In addition to all this, the backstage scenes (particularly the
rehearsals and opening night of "Elephant!") are done with a
verisimilitude that makes them particularly exciting.  Note that I say
"verisimilitude" and not "authenticity," since I have no idea how
authentic they really are.  They just *feel* right.  You get the tension
and excitement of rehearsal and opening night, even as you see how bad
this play really is.  But, unlike "Springtime for Hitler," you really
want it to succeed.
     It's a pity that this film never got the widespread release that it
deserved.  Fortunately it's on video, so it'll never entirely disappear.
Rent it, see it at a revival theatre, but definitely go see it.  You'll
have a great time.
