Title
Review for Nosferatu, eine Symphonie des Grauens (1922)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: F.W. Murnau
Writers: Henrik Galeen (based on the novel "Dracula" by Bram Stoker)
Starring: Max Shreck, Gustav von Wangenheim, Greta Schröder, Ruth
Landshoff, John Gottowt, Alexander Granach
F.W. Murnau's "Nosferatu" was the first adaptation of Bram Stoker's
"Dracula," and that's probably to its advantage.  Hollywood destroyed
Stoker's atmospheric novel, turning the Count into a suave lady's man, and
the entire franchise into a joke.  By the time Mel Brook's finally got
around to parodying it, he discovered that all the jokes that could have
been used were already stale.
It's almost ironic that this was also the same film that was almost
destroyed completely by Stoker's widow, who ordered the film to be changed
because its was an unauthorized adaptation of the novel, because this film
is probably the one that is the most faithful, not so much in story, but in
the way the film is presented.  Count Dracula (renamed to Count Orlok) is
not cool like Bela Lugosi or Frank Langella, and not just plain weirdly
suave like Gary Oldman, but is instead a hideous creature, with large ears,
ginormous claws, and a rat face.
Played by Max Shreck, Orlok is a creature of the night, lurking in shadows,
scaring people just by looking at them, and slowly decomposing.  There's a
scene where he slowly attacks a woman, and we only see what he's doing by
the shadows across the victim's face.  Compare this with any of the attack
scenes and any other of the Dracula films and you see why "Nosferatu" is
just the best.
The film, as I said, is based on the Stoker novel, but because of Stoker's
widow, a couple things have been changed, primarily the names.  But the
basic story is still there.  In it, young real estate agent Thomas Hutter
(Gustav von Wangenheim) is instructed by his boss, Knock (Alexander
Granach), to go see a man named Orlok who is interested in buying a home
near him.  Hutter goes, leaving behind his fiance, Ellen (Greta Schröder),
and after meeting with Orlok and spending the night, he awakens with some
bite marks on his neck.
Soon, Hutter pieces everything together, and once Orlok has taken off over
the seas with a bunch of coffins filled with earth, he tries to race him
back home via a carriage.  Meanwhile, Ellen is having some weird
connections with Orlok, and we discover that she is the means to either
give Orlok new life or to destroy him.  The film is not so much concerned
with their romance, as the Coppola version was, because there is no
necessity in showing Orlok trying to seduce Ellen.  It's more like a gritty
version of the famous tale, concerned more with atmosphere than story.
There are several sequences which stick out in the mind, most notably the
frightening sequence of Orlok on the ship, which is something which is
usually overlooked in the Dracula films.  Here, we have a long bout where
sailors are dying by the numbers, and we have a scene where one brave
member goes down, opens the coffins, finds a bunch of rats, and Orlok rises
from the coffin, completely stiff, and scares the hell out of the man. 
It's a bit that was used in the Coppola version as well, only this is more
scarier, probably because Orlok is a whole lot freakier looking than the
Gary Oldman version, even if Oldman had that stupid wig on.
The other scene is where Orlok stalks Ellen, which takes place towards the
end of the film, which is one of the most atmospheric sequences I have ever
seen.  The entire film is not so much scary as it is chilling to watch. 
The visuals are incredible, the special effects are suprisingly competent
for 1922 (there's a great scene where Orlok dissolves which is flawless,
even by today's standards), and the lighting is incredible.  I remember
saying that the lighting for Robert Wiene's "The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari"
was atmospheric because of the lack of technology when it was made.  The
same goes for here, but they also use some great use of shadows in several
sequences.  I already talked about the scene where Orlok attempts to attack
a victim and we only see his shadow, but there's another scene where Orlok
is coming up the stairs and the lighting on it is absolutely perfect.
"Nosferatu" has recently been re-released to mass audiences by Arrow Video
Inc. in a package called "Nosferatu: The First Vampire."  The film contains
the film, but has been digitally remastered, and redone just like Fritz
Lang's "Metropolis" was back in the 80s when Girgio Moroder added extra
scene, tinted the film, and tossed on a soundtrack of such people as Pat
Benatar and Adam Ant.  That was packaged to appeal to the 80s crowds; this
has been packaged to appeal to the Goth crowd.
On the tape is a trite introduction by David Carradine (the Carradine from
"Kung Fu" - I know, there's so many of them), some tinting (half of it is,
and half of it is just in standard black and white), and a soundtrack by
alternative group Type-O Negative.  I never saw the Moroder "Metropolis,"
but I imagine this is what it is like.  All the extra stuff is trying to
enhance the experiene and open it up to modern day audiences, but all it
does is stand seperate from the film itself.
In fact, I discovered that this isn't even the entire film.  In 1995, there
was a re-release of the film which added roughly another 30 minutes to the
film, which I imagine filled in some of the gaps left in by the original
cut, which I think this is.  I bet there are such things as: more
explanation of Knock, who suddenly becomes the equivalent of Remfield, the
crazed servant of Dracula who is confined to a mental institution; some
explanation of Ellen's connection to Orlok; and more with Professor Bolwer,
the equivalent of Professor Van Helsing, who is shown in one scene
discussing vampires with some students, is talked about later, and then
forgotten.
In fact, most of the additions don't really do anything for the film.  The
introduction by David Carradine gives us a couple bits of trivia then
praises the movie.  That's it.  I would have liked to have learned more
about it, maybe a short documentary on it.  And the score by Type-O
Negative doesn't give it much mood that isn't already there, and in some of
the lyrics, spells out exactly what is going on annoyingly.  And just to
pander to the Goth crowd a little bit more, the title cards are written in
a Goth-like font, although most old title cards are incredibly incompetent
in being legible or understandable, so you have to at least give them
credit for retyping them so nicely.
Yet I have to really recommend this re-issue, primarily because it seems to
be the only way anyone can access this film, which is one of the most
haunting, atmospheric films I've ever seen.  It takes its topic seriously,
and doesn't submit itself to any campy trends, which would lower the film's
quality.  Like Carradine says in the beginning, it HAS stood the test of
time, and for that reason, "Nosferatu" is worth seeing at any cost.  So
what I recommend you do is buy or rent this, watch the introduction, then
mute your television, turn the color down so it's all in black and white,
and just sit there and watch the entire thing.  You'll thank me later.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
Bill Chambers
NOSFERATU: THE FIRST VAMPIRE ***1/2 (out of four)
-by Bill Chambers (wchamber@netcom.ca)
(Life is harsh; your website shouldn't be.
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Set/7504
aka FILM FREAK CENTRAL)
starring Max Schreck, Gustav von Wangenheim, Greta Schroder, John Gottowt
written by Henrik Galeen
directed by F.W. Murnau
Available in an all new video edition from Arrow Entertainment
($29.95), with an introduction by David Carradine, written &
produced by Wayne J. Keeley
F. W. Murnau's career ended sadly and prematurely. The German director
of such classics as "Sunrise" and "The Last Laugh"
died in a car accident shortly after signing a deal to make American
pictures at Paramount. Murnau was reportedly a giant man,
well over six feet, a towering figure probably incapable of anything
but a grand entrance. Which brings us to "Nosferatu: A
Symphony of Horror": surely he felt a kinship with his title
character, the looming vampire embodied by intimidating Max
Schreck; in one of the most indelible images in film history, silent
or otherwise, Schreck rises from his grave, gnarled hands
outstretched, and he's so big that part of his head is cropped by the
top of the frame.
The plot of "Nosferatu..." is lifted--unauthorized--from Bram Stoker's
"Dracula". The British Hutter is an eager real estate man
assigned to visit and discuss future living arrangements with Count
Orlock of Transylvania. He leaves behind girlfriend Emily,
only to discover Orlock's secret--he's a bloodsucker--and struggle to
return to England before the nosferatu reaches his lady
love. In addition to Schreck's performance, the cinematography and
effects are outstanding.
Arrow Video's digitally remastered version of the classic is something
of a mixed-coffin. The cover art features a red-tinted,
hairy, goateed vampire staring straight at you, his fanged mouth
agape, while the bodies of two sexy, writhing women entice you
below. Trouble is, Murnau's monster is pale-faced, bald, pointy-eared,
and non-goateed, and there isn't a single sexy, writhing
woman to be found in his movie. This sort of misleading packaging
makes little sense when one recalls the countless number of
ghouslish scenes in the film from which cool cover art could have been
extracted. Additionally, notifying the viewer that this is in
fact Murnau's film seems like afterthought since his name and the
genuine title are written in small print below our goateed
vampire.
That said, a good mastering job has been performed on the film itself.
The original elements are not in the best
condition--non-studio silents were unlucky in their preservation-- so
we're still dealing with a slightly washed out, scratched,
jittering image. But at least the day and night scenes are tinted
sepia and blue, respectively, especially helpful to an audience who
may question Nosferatu's waltzing around during what seems like
sunlight (it took a lot of light to expose stock in the twenties).
The title cards have been redone, and they are legible, accurate, and
digitally altered to flicker--a very nice touch. (Even the
opening copyright warning flickers!) The score has been replaced by
music from Type O Negative, a hard-rock group,
arguably gothic, and their songs underscore the film nicely--
certainly the coolest video a band can ask for. When our
hero, Hutter, first steps onto the doomed carriage to Count Orlock's
castle, we hear a well-timed "Now you're dead!" from
lead singer Peter Steele.
David Carradine makes an appropriately vampiric host; he fiddles with
a blade and cane while introducing the film. After the
feature, which runs about 63 minutes, is included a new music video
from Type O Negative, the black-and-white fang-fest
"Black No. 1". Of course, "Nosferatu: A Symphony of Horror" is the
main attraction, and while my latest viewing raised
questions (Why is the woman called Emily in the title cards but
"Mina"--as Bram Stoker called her--in Hutter's letters?, for
instance), it made me realize how much this movie has inspired and
been stolen from. Coppola's 1992 "Bram Stoker's Dracula"
owes a great stylistic debt to Murnau's masterpiece, but the one thing
it couldn't thieve was the original's abstract charms. This
latest incarnation from Arrow will probably- -like the rescored
"Metropolis" a few years back--turn a silent film into more
palpable entertainment for the latest generation of film freaks.

Author
Jason Wallis
Nosferatu (1922) * * * * (out of four)
Starring Max Shreck, Gustav von Wangenhein, Greta Schroeder, Alexander
Granack and John Gottowt 
Directed by F.M. Maunau 
Unrated, but the equivalent of a PG for intense themes 
Theatrical aspect ratio of 1.33:1 
Released in 1922 
Running 63 minutes 
Hollywood has really done the whole Dracula thing to death (no pun intended
- honest). It's a shame, too, because the good Count was probably the most
frightening out the old B-movie monsters. I mean, come on. Are people
really going to get that scared over a big green guy named Frankenstein
that moves at a speed of five miles per hour? Hell no. And not only was the
idea of a vampire frightening as hell, but it also carried with it a kind
of sensual feeling as well, not commonly associated with horror films. 
And not only has the idea been done too many times, but with the possible
exception of From Dusk 'Till Dawn, has not been done very well lately,
either. This is precisely why it was so much fun for me watching the
original Nosferatu. I got to go back to the times when making movies (even
horror movies) was considered an art form, and not just done to make cash
like nowadays. And that is exactly what this film is; art. I've been a
horror fan since I was eight years old, and to this day I have not seen any
horror film cover the intellectual ground that this film covers. 
Let me backtrack a minute. When I say "intellectual ground", I don't mean
that Nosferatu tackles philosophical questions or anything like that, I
just mean that in order for the film to work the way it was intended to, a
little bit of thinking is involved. With most modern slasher movies like
Friday the 13th and what-not, you can just simply sit back in your chair
and be frightened by the gore that is shown. Those movies could have been
made by a fifth grader with a good makeup kit; movies like this require the
viewer to actually pay attention and ponder what is happening on the
screen. You see, this movie has barely any violence in it and even less
blood or gore. This is a thinking man's slasher flick. 
The "Nosferatu" of the title is Orlock (Max Shreck), a strange, hermit-like
count that, as the film opens, is looking for a new home to buy. He employs
the help of Hutter (Gustav von Wangenhein), a real estate salesman (or
something to that effect) who has a nice home and even a fiancee named
Ellen (Greta Schroeder). Upon orders from his boss, Hutter treks to the
Transylvanian Mountains to visit Orlock's castle and speak to him about his
new home (which just happens to be right next door to Hutter's). The next
morning, he wakes up to find teeth marks on his neck...not really a good
sign. 
He then discovers through some reading that the count is a "Nosferatu", or
vampire, one of the undead that feeds off the blood of living humans. But
by the time he pieces this together, he is too late; Orlock has already
embarked to Hutter's hometown via boat. Will Hutter reach his destination
in time to save his fiancee from the deadly clutches of Count Orlock? 
The character of Orlock is, of course, Dracula. The only only reason his
name was changed was because this was an unauthorized account of Bram
Strocker's novel. Just thought that was an interesting little side note... 
Probably the only way you will get to see this fine film is by purchasing a
copy of Arrow Entertainment's digitally restored cut, now available in
stores. However, this version is quite different than Maunau's original
masterpiece. The movie is now sporting a new soundtrack by band Type
O-Negative and color tinting, much like the 1984 version of Lang's
Metropolis. Now, I really appreciate what Arrow Entertainment is trying to
do here, bringing a classic like this to the attention of a wider audience
that might have otherwise just skipped this one. But alas, I like watching
movies the way they were originally intended to be seen. But that's just my
bag; you may like the newer, more "modern" version better. Either way, I
suggest investing your money in a copy. If you like what they have done
with it, pop it in the VCR and enjoy. If you're like me, just do what I'll
do during future viewings; turn the color all the way down on your
television, hit mute, turn on some Bach or Mozart or whatever, dim the
lights and prepare to view what is truly one of the greatest films ever
made. 
