Title
Review for Monkey Business (1952)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
There was great suspense at the 1952 Academy Awards.
Who would win the Oscar for Best Supporing Chimpanzee?
There were many close-ups of the faces of the nominees:
Cheetah, from "Tarzan's Savage Fury".  Esther, from
"Monkey Business".  Bonzo, from "Bonzo Goes to College".
Thunderous applause rocked the auditorium when the winner's
name, Esther, was announced.  At only six months, Esther
was the youngest chimp to be so honored.
Esther gave a very moving acceptance speech.  After much
hooting and screeching, she described the discrimation she
had overcome: not being allowed to join the Academy, not
getting listed in the credits, even being imprisoned in a
small metal cage, against her will.  And her agent had taken
her entire paycheck!
This is a silly way to begin a film review.  But it is
appropriate, for "Monkey Business" is a very silly movie.
One of several screwball comedies directed by Howard Hawks
and starring Cary Grant, "Monkey Business" is often hilarious.
The plot has Grant cast as a middle-aged, fuddy-duddy chemist,
working on a Fountain of Youth serum at a private research
center headed by Charles Coburn.  His wife (Ginger Rogers)
is devoted to him despite his absent-mindedness.  At the lab,
a chimp escapes from a cage and re-mixes Grant's formula,
getting it into the water cooler.  Grant and Rogers unwittingly
drink the formula and regress into their youth, getting into
endless ridiculous situations.  My favorite scene has
Grant pretending he is an Indian brave, and leading a scalping
party for Grant's hapless rival Hugh Marlowe.
Also present is Marilyn Monroe, cast as Coburn's dim-bulb
secretary.  Monroe and Coburn have a famous dialogue that
runs something like this:
Coburn: You'd better get somebody to type this.
Monroe: Oh, Mr. Oxley, can't I try again?
Coburn: No, this is important.
(Monroe walks out of the room, with Coburn gaping at her)
Coburn: Anybody can type.
Screwball comedies, where the plot consists of a series of
connected gags, are very difficult to pull off.  The gags
have to be funny, they have to fit the characters, and they
have to make sense within the framework of the film.
Unpredictability and imagination is required.  The screwball
comedy is something of a lost art, with most recent attempts
resorting to bathroom humor and pandering to the youngest
audience, as in the "Police Academy" series.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
