Title
Review for Some Like It Hot (1959)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Sridhar Prasad
A miracle of filmmaking, "Some Like It Hot" is a brilliant film, and
maybe the foremost example of slapstick comedy brought to screen with
clever sight gags and plot twists.  It is the pinnacle of writer-director
Billy Wilder's career, a stunning feat considering the vast catalogue of
films he had helped make.
Jerry (Lemmon) and Joe (Curtis) are two stage musicians who go from gig
to gig, trying to earn enough money to feed themselves.  One night, as
they're playing at a banned Prohibition speakeasy, the place is raided.  As
it turns out, the owner, Spats Columbo (George Raft) was ratted out by
Toothpick Charlie (George E. Stone).  Several weeks later, on Valentine's
Day, Jerry and Joe go to a garage to pick up a car and end up witnessing a
gangland murder of Charlie by Columbo in a parking garage.  Eager to
escape, the duo are forced to take a job in Florida with all expenses paid.
 The only catch..its a girls band.  So Josephine (Curtis) and Daphne
(Lemmon), make their way onto the train and go to Florida.  On the way
there, they meet Sugar Kane (Monroe), a bombshell singer who is looking for
love.  Jerry and Joe immediately fall for the singer, but there's two
problems: 1) they're in drag, and 2) millionaire Osgood Fielding (Joe E.
Brown) falls madly in love with Daphne.  What follows in pure hysteria,
still complicated further by the arrival of Spats Columbo to Florida for
the "Italian Opera Lovers Festival".  
Tony Curtis is hysterical as Joe/Josephine, especially in his
preposterous attempts to woo Sugar.  Marilyn Monroe, in a wonderfully comic
performance, is Sugar, providing incredible timing and sex appeal, along
with true sincerity.  The scenes, however, are all stolen by either Brown
or Lemmon.  Lemmon is hysterical as Daphne. Cast as the less rational one,
Lemmon's performance is ridiculously crazy, it is disorder in the style all
Billy Wilder's.  Brown is particularly hilarious as Osgood, as we are
treated to the finest kind of comedic irony.  He manages to use Lemmon's
ingenious performance as a springboard for an even loonier performance as a
completely eccentric millionaire.
Every set-piece is flawless, as Wilder brilliantly changes settings
constantly, and uses every comic trick in the book to make his picture.
Wilder's script is stunning, as he carefully combines gangsters,
cross-dressing, romance, sex, music, gender roles, and social taboos in a
riotous blend of wit and oddball craziness.  Wilder manages to create
scenes of utter hysteria, so pitch-perfect that the audience is dying of
laughter with the last comic piece, the final line of this absolutely
incredible film.  Wilder's is dead wrong when he says nobody's perfect:
Billy Wilder is, especially when he makes something this disastrously
funny.  Nobody's perfect but Billy Wilder.  
  
RATING:  **** out of ****

Author
Brian Koller
Close your eyes and imagine Tony Curtis and Jack Lemmon
in drag.  If this image is instantly hilarious to you,
you will be among the 95% or more who consider Billy Wilder's
"Some Like it Hot" to be one of the greatest American
comedies.
But there are always some people, such as myself, who are
sufficiently humor-impaired, non-conformist, and/or overly
critical so as not to get the joke.  Cartoonish mobsters,
empty-headed blondes, unlikely romances and Lemmon camping
it up under a wig and false breasts may provide the elements
of a great comedy, but only if the script allows and the
pieces fit together.
"Some Like it Hot" stars Curtis and Lemmon as Prohibition
era Chicago jazz musicians who witness the Valentine's Day
Massacre.  The surviving gangsters seek to kill them as well,
forcing Curtis and Lemmon to dress up as women and join
a travelling all-girl's band.  Our cross-dressing heroes
take turns romancing whispering dunce Marilyn Monroe, then
have an unlucky reunion with the gangsters in a Florida hotel.
After seeing "Some Like it Hot", I trolled the internet
for reviews of the film.  Without exception, everybody felt
that the film was both a hoot and a masterpiece, leaving
this grumpy critic uninvited to the party.  Feel free to take
the following comments with a grain of salt.  Nevertheless,
it would be dishonest to change a grade or a review based
upon the opinions of others rather than the film itself.
Compare "Some Like it Hot" to my favorite star-in-drag flick,
"I Was a Male War Bride".  Cary Grant clearly dislikes having
to dress as a woman, and men who see him dolled up only
make caustic remarks.  Jack Lemmon, on the other hand, has
a wonderful time as a transvestite, and has an elderly male
paramour (Joe E. Brown).  Curtis in drag also has a suitor,
a tactless underage bellboy.  All the film's characters readily
accept Lemmon and Curtis as women, when no one over the age of
ten would be fooled.  Cary Grant also makes a better Cary Grant
than does Tony Curtis.  A jury would have to decide which
crime merits the greater punishment: Curtis' trespass on a
yacht, or his Cary Grant impersonation.  Finally, while
"War Bride" provides a believable female lead in Ann Sheridan,
Monroe is simply a male's fantasy woman.  She's gorgeous,
stupid, willing and vulnerable.
Curtis convinces Lemmon to romance Brown, so that Curtis
can romance Monroe on Brown's yacht.  Why would Lemmon agree
to this?  Curtis is risking getting arrested, and risking
his (her?) cover, which if blown would risk their lives.
Lemmon himself has an interest in Monroe, and has no motivation
to help Curtis.  Lemmon also risks his cover in spending an
evening with frisky Brown.  Most confusing of all, Lemmon
actually enjoys dancing with Brown, and is so taken with the
wealthy but aged lecher that he seriously considers marrying him.
Curtis, who spent earlier scenes sanctimoniously criticizing
Lemmon for his lust, mysteriously changes his character to
become a risk-taking playboy.
The Chicago mobsters arrive at the same Florida hotel that
Curtis and Lemmon are staying at.  This coincidence is beyond
remarkable.  Despite the fact that law enforcement agents have
made their presence in the hotel known, and that the gangsters
have registered there as guests, and that the hotel is a public
place, there is another mob shootout.  Curtis, running for
his life from the mobsters who have spotted him, takes time
off to run up on stage, dressed as a woman, and kiss Monroe.
Monroe is so impressed by this that she leaves the band to
join Curtis in his escape.
Anyone who has made it this far into the review is likely
thinking, 'it's a COMEDY, stupid'.  Admittedly, I feel like
the guy who didn't like the film "Antz" because the characters
acted more like people.  But I feel that characters should
have plausible motivations for their actions, and I didn't
find that in "Some Like it Hot".
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Andrew Hicks
     The Billy Wilder romantic comedy factory reached a climax
with SOME LIKE IT HOT, a delightful transvestite farce that features
a gorgeous and charming Marilyn Monroe. The beauty of these
Wilder films is that they push the envelope so much from the usual
"Leave it to Beaver" fluff of the '50s. Every one of these comedies
involves premarital or extramarital sex, or the desire thereof, as
part of its plot. While most other films ignored this very human
distinction, Wilder turns it into great entertainment that still seems
more or less wholesome.
     Who else in the '50s exemplifies the dichotomy between sex
and wholesomeness than Monroe? The woman posed for Playboy
and slept with the president but still seems like such an innocent
child, especially here. As the victim of countless deceptions and
advances from men, she comes out naive and making the same
mistakes over and over again. We sympathize with her from the
beginning, although we completely understand Tony Curtis and
Jack Lemmon's desire to score with her. I mean, she's Marilyn
Monroe!
     Like the other Wilder comedies, SOME LIKE IT HOT has an
elaborate, almost-epic set-up. This almost seems like two movies
in one. We first see a car chase between the cops and a bunch of
mobsters with bootlegged liquor, then a wild party thrown by gang
leader Spats (Edward G. Robinson) that is broken up by the
police. Curtis and Lemmon are two members of the band playing
the shindig, and barely escape arrest. 
     The next day, Curtis and Lemmon are at the music agency
looking for work and find the only opening available is a
three-week gig in Florida for two musicians that play the same
instruments they do. But it's an all-female band, so they instead
decide to head upstate for a low-paying gig. In the parking garage,
there are Raft and his boys deciding one of their own has ratted
them out to the police. Raft kills one of them just as Curtis and
Lemmon walk in. Again, they barely escape capture. 
     This added element -- the mob wanting them dead -- is
enough to make the two musicians put on dresses and high heels
and join the girls band. As with any movie cross-dressers, they
look nothing like the opposite sex, but we have to suspend our
disbelief enough to accept that no one else can see through this
disguise, least of all Monroe who, as the band's singer Sugar, is a
dim-bulb and an alcoholic. In these surroundings, Lemmon says he
feels "like a kid in a candy store." 
     Curtis and Lemmon both begin pursuit of Monroe, in and
out of drag. Curtis, after a girl-to-girl talk with Monroe about what
she's looking for in a man, masquerades as a visiting millionaire.
Meanwhile, Lemmon has a lusty old man to contend with. This
being the '50s, the only goal of any of these women is to get
married. After the old guy proposes to Lemmon, Lemmon
considers going through with it because he probably won't ever get
another chance to marry someone that rich. 
     Lines like that show that the film has intelligence and social
insight to go with the laughs. SOME LIKE IT HOT is the best Wilder
film, with wonderful performances by the three leads and other
minor characters and great writing. Not only is there a treasure
trove of classic lines, the plot is also brilliantly constructed. 
I can't name a single bad thing about this film, except for the 
fact that it seems sexist now. I can only wonder what Monroe 
could have accomplished in a liberated world. 
