Title
Review for Critical Care (1997)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   "Critical Care," a spoof of doctors and hospitals more
concerned with a vital bottom line than in restoring their
patients' health, is only mildly satiric, but that's OK. 
A book or movie or theater piece which seeks to ridicule an
institution of society does not have to hit it over the head with
a sledgehammer.  Many mild-manned lampoons are effective
indeed. You need look only to such masterworks as the music
of Gilbert and Sullivan or the comedies of Oscar Wilde to
witness the power of restrained ridicule.  Greedy lawyers, self-
seeking doctors, and pseudo-religious hypocrites have been
taunted for a while now.  Didn't Shakespeare's King Henry VI
say "let's kill all the lawyers," Moliere's Tartuffe explain "To sin
in private is not a sin," and Paddy Chayefsky's George C.
Scott complain "We cure nothing"?  What we need, then, is a
new way of looking at the evils that professionals and
institutions practice.  Despite Steven Schwartz's clever writing
and Sidney Lumet's dutiful direction, "Critical Care" is not that
novelty.
   The setting of "Critical Care," which is filmed almost
completely in a studio, has the airless look of an ultra-modern
hospital, one which is surprisingly quiet for an urban medical
center, making Dr. Werner Ernst's (James Spader) complaints
about overwork seem strange.  The story focuses on
professionals' reactions to two patients near-death; one is
comatose and kept alive only technically, the other quite
conscious but virtually unable to move and eager for death. 
By the time the film ends, Dr. Ernst has gone through a
metamorphosis, changing from a self-serving, skirt chasing
physician eager to make up in money and partying for all the
suffering he endured through ten years of college, to a true
professional who feels entitled for the very first time to call
himself a doctor.
   The drama takes off when Felicia (Kyra Sedgwick), a bimbo
model whose father is in a persistent vegetative state, asks
that the old man be removed from life support.  The conflict
arises when Connie (Margo Martindale), her apparently
devout, bible-thumping sister, refuses to authorize the pulling
of the plug, insisting that dad hears everything she says to
him and communicates by squeezing her hand.  In short
order the hypocrisy of both women is exposed, but not before
Ernst is seduced by Felicia, leading him into a serious case of
blackmail.
   Ernst discusses the case repeatedly with his supervising
physician, Dr. Butz (Albert Brooks)--who is unrecognizable in
the disguise of an alcoholic geezer with his mind as much on
money as Ernst's is on models.  Butz comes on as the classic
case of the medical profession's obsession with insurance. 
Reminding Ernst to treat even hopeless cases if they have
comprehensive, catastrophic coverage and reject those who
have none, Butz is the comic center of the film whose other
characters seem to speak primarily in the hushed tones of a
public library.  He does convey some words of wisdom worth
our consideration: Make sure you do not allot big bucks for
catastrophic health insurance and you'll die with a smile on
your face. Lumet proves his point by displaying some of the
suffering which terminal patients go through while being kept
only technically alive. 
   Lumet, who has done far more vigorous work in the past
including "Serpico," "Dog Day Afternoon" and "Network," is
just connecting the dots this time around, slapping doctors,
lawyers and religious hypocrites on the wrist ever so gently,
allowing Wallace Shawn some embarrassingly banal dialogue
as the Devil's advocate. Rated R.  Running Time: 109
minutes.  (C) 1997 Harvey Karten

Author
Nicholas Amado
After a series of disappointing motion pictures, one of cinema's most
brilliant and powerful directors shows us he really hasn't lost a step.
Sidney Lumet, who brought us such fantastic films as Dog Day Afternoon, 12
Angry Men, Network and The Pawnbroker, presents us with a stylish, darkly
comic and poignant picture in Critical Care.
James Spader is excellent as Dr. Werner Ernst, a young man in his third year
of residency who is seduced and blackmailed by hopeful starlett Felicia
Potter (Kyra Sedgwick). Potter, and her half-sister Connie are battling over
the fate of their comatose father. One wants him kept alive, one doesn't want
to see him continue to suffer. Spader is caught in the middle.
Critical Care points an accusing finger at the medicare system. Who cares?
Who doesn't? And is everyone in it for their own selfish reasons? Dr. Ernst
is trapped between doing the right thing or continuing with what promises to
be a successful career. In this cold hospital environment, no one is really
there to help anyone else when they need it. The doctors aren't there for the
patients, the administration isn't there for the doctors, and lawsuits
surround the administration. 
Albert Brooks (completely unrecognizeable in white hair and extremely well
done makeup) is fantastic as scatter-brained old Dr. Butz. He spends most of
his onscreen time calling Dr. Ernst up to his office to give him advice on
patient care, which boils down to dedicating time only to those patients who
have extensive insurance coverage, and to hell with the others. He is a
symbol of what is wrong with the system, and why things aren't getting any
better. Though Brook's Dr. Butz is often redundant in his dialogue, we get
the feeling he is supposed to be that way. It is an effective effort to
frustrate both the young Dr. Ernst and the viewer. Helen Mirren is good, but
understated as a compassionate nurse. Her character never gets to make much
of an impact.
Visually, the film is quite impressive. We spend most of the time in sterile,
spacestation-looking Intensive Care Unit rooms. The ICU is circular, and the
nurse's station is in the middle of it all. The beds are inflatable blue
plastic. They look like something you'd want to float on in a pool. The
machines are all futuristic and complex. But most striking is the lack of
background inside the rooms. There are no walls, just endless white space.
But this look in the ICU area is extremely important. It helps ease the
transition between realism and surrealism. There are a few dreamlike
sequences that show us the fears of certain characters. One patient, played
by Jeffry Wright (Basquiat) is visited by an assistant to Satan, played by
Wallace Shawn. Angelic Anne Bancroft visits James Spader in a dream sequence,
and helps him form his future by suggesting a course of action. Both sets of
sequences, though, take place in these other-worldly ICU rooms, so the
transition is not jarring, but rather smooth and almost expected. 
The production design by Philip Rosenberg certainly is one of the most
amazing aspects of Critical Care. Early in the film, there is an impressive
shot of Sedgwick and Spader going up an escalator in an intricately
structured mall. It suggests equilibrium and and calm. Things at this point
in the film are peaceful. But later, as Spader is pleading with a prestigious
doctor about his own future, the same camera angle shows us a twisted and
cold steel staircase, blocking most of the character. Dr. Ernst is trapped,
and no one will help him.
Lumet has really approached new territory with Critical Care. Presenting
controversial material is nothing new. He loves to make films about police
corruption, and he has touched on racism, and the judicial system before.
Here, he tackles ethics and the structure within the medical profession. But
Critical Care has an independent feel to it. It is fresh, and modern. Some of
the dialogue fits the black comedy mold quite well. Lumet makes all the
elements of this film, the acting, the set design, the camera work, and the
fantastic script by Steven Schwartz come together beautifully. It is an odd
film, no doubt, but also a treat to see a master filmmaker doing great work
again.
3 1/2 stars out of 4
Copyright (C) 1997 Nicholas Amado

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Sidney Lumet is a great director who is past his prime.  Four
decades ago, he received a well deserved Academy Award nomination for
one of his first films, 12 ANGRY MEN.  Three decades ago, he gave us
THE PAWNBROKER.  Two decades ago, when at the top of his form, he
directed the hard edged SERPICO, DOG DAY AFTERNOON, and NETWORK.  And a
decade ago, he came up with THE VERDICT.
     In the 1990s, Lumet's films (Q & A, A STRANGER AMONG US, GUILTY AS
SIN, and NIGHT FALLS ON MANHATTAN) have all been disappointments, even
if each has had parts worth treasuring.  His latest, CRITICAL CARE,
fits firmly within his repertoire for this decade.
     Although masquerading as a black comedy, CRITICAL CARE is actually
a long polemic against the efficacy of our health care system.  Set in
an intensive care ward, the picture features doctors and hospitals
interested in keeping terminally ill patients alive so long as their
health insurance holds out.  A side story has two warring half-sisters,
played by Kyra Sedgwick and Margo Martindale, wanting to carefully
adjust when their dying father perishes.  Depending on the exact date
of death, one or the other will get his entire ten million dollar
fortune.
     James Spader is partially miscast as the overworked and oversexed
young resident, Dr. Werner Ernst.  Spader is convincing as the latter,
but his perfect hair, fashion model looks, flawless attire, and his
relaxed demeanor makes it hard to believe that this is a guy who works
38 hours straight through.  Dr. Ernst and Helen Mirren as Stella, the
head nurse, are the show's conscience.  The patients, who either beg to
die or are long-term vegetables, have no one but this lone doctor and
nurse to care about them.  The doctors in charge of the hospital are
interested only in the health insurance money, and the other doctors'
sole motive is promotion.
     Filmed by David Watkin with oversaturated whites to emphasize the
clean room atmosphere of the hospital and scripted by Richard Dooling
and Steven S. Schwartz with Orwellian logic, the self-absorbed film has
strong pretensions.  The dialog, although there are quite a few nice
one-liners, generally falls flat.  Never quite entertaining, rarely
enlightening, and only sporadically funny, the movie seems destined for
a limited market.
     The hospital has two role models.  One is a Dr. Hofstader, played
with military precision by Philip Bosco, who claims that, "seeing
patients is a waste of time."  He has his patients all hooked up with
probes that feed into cyberspace.  His diagnosis is done in a room full
of computers.  And he carries two cell phones wherever he goes so he
can simultaneously consult with two of his colleagues throughout the
world while talking with someone else next to him.
     In complete contrast is an almost unrecognizable Albert Brooks as
Dr. Butz, a chronic alcoholic, who lives in an old office with dusty
file cabinets.  Looking in his late 60s, Dr. Butz forgets everything
except how to make money.
     In one episode, Dr. Ernst argues against unnaturally prolonging
the life of one of his permanently vegetative patients by yet another
medical procedure.  "If he's going to die, why should we proceed," Dr.
Ernst asks.  "Where have you been all your life?" Dr. Butz shouts back.
"It's called revenue!"  The patient, it turns out, has three health
insurance policies which came through with $112,000 for last month's
bill.  Case closed as far as Dr. Butz is concerned.
     In a great twist, Dr. Butz readily admits that he personally has
no health insurance because he doesn't want to be artificially kept
alive like his patients.  The show has a similarly clever ending, but
none of this makes up for the tedium of most of the picture.  Rather
than seeing CRITICAL CARE, go and rent one of Lumet's great films.
I'd start with 12 ANGRY MEN.
     CRITICAL CARE runs 1:49.  It is rated R for language, adult
themes, and sexual situations.  The film would be fine for teenagers.
