Title
Review for Love's Labour's Lost (2000)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Chuck Schwartz
Love's Labour's Lost
Rated [PG], 95 minutes
Starring Kenneth Branagh, Alicia Silverstone and Nathan Lane
Based on the play by William Shakespeare
Adapted and Directed by Kenneth Branagh
website: www.miramax.com
IN SHORT: An all-singing, all-dancing, all-sensational revamp of a play
first staged in 1596.
As I've written it before, you could put Shakespeare's words through a
meat grinder, add an egg and some bread crumbs, whack it into palatable
little meat loafs and serve with a nice chianti and you still would have
to double over backwards to do serious harm to his stories. That's why
said stories still work four hundred plus years later. It's also a
matter of fact that the full text of his plays can take hours to unfurl,
when orated from the stage (or screen. Rent Kenneth Branagh's uncut
Hamlet if you want to test your endurance levels -- and we liked KB's
version, btw). So here we have Love's Labour's Lost, Branagh's audacious
take on one of Shakespeare's simplest stories; his version owing as much
to vaudeville and the Marx Brothers as it does to certain stylish movies
of the 1930's and 40's.
What Branagh does to Shakespeare is something that is so simple, and
simply outrageous that we hunkered down to an early morning screening
'cuz we had to see his adaptation of Love's Labour's Lost with fresh
eyes. Now, remember that we don't compare to Source Material, not that
our knowledge of Shakespeare extends very far, which allows us to avoid
the purist view which may liken Branagh's take as the first sign of
Armageddon. It's not.
Like Richard III a couple of years back, LLL is set in the World War II
time period, here with France preparing for war. In the neighboring
country of Navarre, the King (Alessandro Nivola) has decided that war is
for sissies and has issued a proclamation that all men of his kingdom;
in this case specifically himself and his three closest courtiers, shall
devote themselves to intellectual study and spiritual enhancement. This
means a full day's fast each week, food every other day, and only three
hours of rest before returning to their study of all things wise and
wonderful.
Oh, one more thing. No women. Not to talk to, to consort with, to wine
and/or dine and/or ... you know ... for three years. Penalties for
breaking their solemn vows include having your tongue ripped out, or
more major stuff. And while, Longaville (Matthew Lillard) and Dumaine
(Adrian Lester) acknowledge their Word of Honor by signing their names
to the Proclamation, Berowne (Kenneth Branagh) hesitates, pointing out
that "the Princess of France is an intelligent woman and you may need to
negotiate treaties with her" (I'm paraphrasing badly), so a lack of
tongue could prove to be a problem. Besides, he sings to the King while
cueing an offscreen orchestra, "I'd Rather Charleston". Yes, sings. The
women will eventually respond (I won't dance. Don't Ask Me) as the men
find themselves smitten by the Princess (Alicia Silverstone) and her
Court (Emily Mortimer, Carmen Ejogo and Natascha McElhone). Love's
Labour's Lost is a randy comedy where the boys must sneakily communicate
with the girls -- their chosen messenger is an illiterate clown named
Costard (Nathan Lane, mixing Harpo Marx and Senor Wences into one
racoon-coated personage) who delivers the right letters to the wrong
people -- which evolves into a bittersweet romance mode as the
inevitable war reaches the border of Navarre.
Until that point, though, the flick is packed with just about every song
worth remembering from any Fred and Ginger movie. The songs by George
and Ira Gershwin, Irving Berlin and Cole Porter, among the best known
names all take the place of pages of dialog that has been excised. All
of 'em, unlike most musicals, fit with their placement and move the
story along. If you're old enough to know what came before rock 'n'
roll, there's not a dud song in the bunch. What remains, according to
the notes, is about 30% of the original play and, frankly, had I not
read that in black and white I wouldn't have known it.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Love's Labour's Lost, he would have
paid...
Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 2000 by,
Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Laura Clifford
Kenneth Branagh brings his fourth Shakespearean adaptation to the screen
with a twist - the frothy play, "Love's Labour's Lost" is set just as
World War II is dawning and set to the music of the Gershwin brothers and
Irving Berling, as much an homage to old movies as to Shakespeare.
The King (Alessandro Nivola, "Face/Off") decides to devote himself to years
of study, banning wine, women and song from his palace grounds.  His three
best friends, Berowne (Branagh), Longaville (Matthew Lillard, "Scream") and
Dumaine (Adrian Lester, "Primary Colors") aren't thrilled, but respect their
king in a pact that will soon be broken when the French princess (Alicia
Silverstone, "Clueless") and her ladies Rosaline (Natascha McElhone, "Ronin"),
Maria (Carmen Ejogo, "The Avengers") and Katherine (Emily Mortimer, "Scream 3")
pays a political visit for her father.
Branagh's proven very adept at translating the bard to the screen as period
pieces, so it's invigorating to see him try something different and
unequivocally nail it.
His screenplay adaptation deftly jumps the action of Shakespeare's light 
tale forward with song and dance numbers set to standards such as
"I Get No Kick from Champagne," "The Way You Look Tonight," "I'm in Heaven,"
and "You Can't Take That Away From Me"  The story is simple:  when the 
ladies appear, the King allows them to set up camp outside the palace gates 
where one by one they pair off with the kings' men until the King himself 
succombs to the princess.  The men try to keep their affairs secret from one 
another (Branagh stages a truly brilliant scene in the King's library for
them all to discover each others' dishonesty) while letters get into the wrong 
hands and the ladies switch identities to give the men their comeuppance.  
Word is sent that the King of France has died and the princess is distraught, 
declares the love matches mere flirtations and announces she and her ladies 
will depart.  The king proposes a one year enforced separation to test their 
loves after which they all live happily ever after.
Casting is brilliantly insane (two veterans from the "Scream" franchise?!).  
Branagh and McElhone are actually the preeminent couple and he allows her to 
shine as perhaps the most mature and womanly of the four ladies.  Silverstone 
is engagingly kewpie-dollish, delivering her lines with a petulant, baby doll 
pout, but becoming serious when circumstance demands.  Her man, Nivola, is 
handsome and dashing and funny, acting as if he'd stepped right out of a 30's 
screwball comedy.  Lester is fantastic with the dance moves, suggesting no less 
than Donald O'Connor's work in "Singin' in the Rain.  Lillard is surprisingly 
agile,putting a touch of slapstick in his long limbs even as he retains control
of his moves.  Their loves, Mortimer and Ejogo respectively, keep pace,
but don't get as much opportunity to develop their characters (it's also
neat that Branagh chose to racially crisscross these two couples).
Other lovers are afoot as well, from the hilariously over the top Timothy
Spall (Leighs' recent films) as Don Armado who pines for the country wench
Jaquenetta (Stefania Rocca, "The Talented Mr. Ripley").  He trips about on
tiny feet before launching into one of the most fantastical set pieces where
he even gets to perform aerial stunts in a biplane!  The king's
professors, Holofernia (Geraldine McEwan, "The Love Letter") and
Nathaniel (Richard Briers, Branagh's "Hamlet") represent the senior set,
albeit capped and gowned ones.  Nathan Lane is The Great Costard, a vaudevilian 
who is the agent of crossed wires, while Richard Clifford (Branagh's "Much Ado 
About Nothing") is Boyet, the ladies' 'old lovemonger.'
Branagh's love of old films is shown in dance numbers which mimic
Astaire and Rogers, Esther Williams, the June Taylor dancers and
even Bob Fosse, while non-dancing scenes recall the likes of "Casblanca" and 
the Marx Brothers.  Production design (Tim Harvey) and art direction (Mark 
Raggett) are superb, using muted colors and obvious set bound fakery to both 
mimic old films and throw the players into the spotlight.  Costumes (Anna 
Buruma) are gorgeous, particularly the four ladies' color themed ensembles in 
red (Silverstone), blue (McElhone), orange (Ejogo) and green (Mortimer).
This thoroughly delightful entertainment is presented by Stanley Donen and
Martin Scorsese - high praise indeed.  This is one to remember for this year's 
award nominations, and should bring a smile to any film lover's face.
It's the Bard meets Busby Berkeley as director Kenneth Branagh adapts
Shakespeare, this time with "Love's Labour's Lost," for the big screen, but
with an unconventional twist. Branagh stages his version of the play as a lush,
lively musical that pays as much homage to the classic musical extravaganzas of
1930's as it does to Will S.
It's 1939 and the King of Navarre (Alessandro Nivola) swears an oath with his
three best friends to forsake the company of woman for three years so the
quartet may devote themselves to the lofty study of philosophy. This plan is
thrown into complete disarray with the arrival of the Princess of France
(Alicia Silverstone) and her three beautiful attendants.
The men are smitten by the beauty and charm of the women and each, secretly,
seeks to seduce his beloved. Eventually, all four men realize that each has
betrayed their sacred oath, but recover from the disappointment as they fall
for the magic of love.
Branagh takes one of Shakespeare's lesser-known plays and puts his own
imaginative spin on the subject. Besides setting the play in a fictional
European kingdom at the brink of World War II, he introduces the music of the
era as a key element of the story. Salted throughout the film's runtime are all
manner of dance numbers that honor the stylish choreography of Busby Berkeley's
colorful musicals (the original "42nd Street," "The Gold Diggers of 1933"). The
classic overhead shots of pretty, geometrically placed young women are reprised
in the new film, even including a nod to the Ester Williams waterlogged
musicals that carried Berkeley's signature style into the 40's.
Accompanying the flashy dance numbers that Branagh and choreographer Stuart
Hopps so lovingly create is a litany of songs that capture the spirit put forth
by the film's creators. Such musical maestros as George and Ira Gershwin, Cole
Porter, Irving Berlin and Jerome Kern were selected to supply the wonderful
tunes used for the numerous, flashy dance numbers. Branagh's choice of such
seminal song and dance numbers as "I Get A Kick Out of You," "Cheek to Cheek,"
"Let's Face the Music & Dance," and other great songs had me whistling for days
after seeing "Love's Labour's Lost." The songs are the best part of the film.
Where "Love's Labour's Lost" is problematic is in Branagh's attempt to mix
genres. The music is great. The dance numbers, utilizing actors rather than
singers/dancers, are done with great enthusiasm by the players, but with uneven
results. Everyone works very hard, but only a couple of the principles look the
look of hoofers. Adrian Lester (playing the King's friend Dumaine) has a
background that includes a variety of stage and screen musicals and it shows in
his graceful execution of his dance numbers. Nathan Lane ("The Birdcage") shows
his Broadway chops in his performance as Costard the Clown, recreating the
moves of a true vaudevillian. Of the rest of the amateur dancers, Branagh shows 
the most grace as the King's trusted friend, Berowne, working harder than 
anyone does in his effort at being Fred Astaire. The rest of the cast give 
their all, but come across as enthusiastic and plucky non-professionals.
The crossover between the musical interludes and the straight Shakespearean
dialogue doesn't flow well. The almost abrupt way the dance numbers, with their
30's lyrics, ends and the "But, hark" of Shakespeare's lingo kicks in is
distracting. Branagh has a firm enough grasp of the Bard's work that his
delivery is fine. The rest, though, fare lass well. Alicia Silverstone, in her
big speech near the end, is wooden and unconvincing. She delivers her lines
like she's reciting them, without passion. Natascha McElhone is pretty and 
charming as Berowne's love interest, Rosaline. Of the rest of the ensemble 
cast, only Timothy Spall ("Topsy-Turvy") fares well as the outrageously 
accented Spaniard who considers himself a loyal friend to the king.
Costume design, by Anna Buruma (who, coincidentally, once worked at the Chamber
of Horrors at Madame Tussaud's) has a sweet continuity as each of les dames has
her own color scheme with red, blue, green and peach as the primary color for
their costumes. The scheme is carried through not only with the many different
outfits of each, but with accessories, too, including the boutonni
hres of the suitor and even the ladies' cocktails. It helps you keep track of 
who loves whom, too. Production design, by Tim Harvey, a long time 
collaborator with Branagh, provides suitable period feel.
In the end, "Love's Labour's Lost" feels derivative of Woody Allen's "Everyone
Says I Love You," but with the Bard's work as the subject matter. Branagh's
oeuvre has more to it when it comes to song and dance and less in the overall
execution. The musical numbers, alone, are worth the price of admission and I
give it a B.
For more Reeling reviews visit www.reelingreviews.com

Author
Jon Popick
I'm all for people attempting to make Shakespeare more accessible to the
masses, but I draw the line at Love's Labour's Lost.  Kenneth Branagh's
fourth adaptation of the Bard (four and a half if you count A
Midwinter's Tale) tries to do way too much with what is arguably
Shakespeare's weakest play.
There are several things a filmmaker can do to liven up Shakespeare and
make his work more appealing to Betty and Ron Normalson of Wheeling,
West Virginia.  The first and most obvious is changing the setting, like
in Michael Almereyda's inspiring new version of Hamlet, which takes
place in present-day New York City.  An ambitious filmmaker can even
raise an eyebrow by casting acting talent that you wouldn't normally
associate with Shakespeare, like Branagh did with 1993's Much Ado About
Nothing, which featured Denzel Washington and the Razzie-nominated Keanu
Reeves.
Branagh does both of these here, as Lost is set in pre-World War II
Navarre, a small county outside of France, and features performances
from borderline Gen-Y talents Alicia Silverstone (Blast From the Past)
and Matthew Lillard (S.L.C. Punk).  But things go awry by the presence
of about ten song-and-dance numbers from the likes of Irving Berlin,
Cole Porter, Rogers & Hammerstein and the Gershwin brothers.  And when
the characters aren't singing, they're wrapped up in what appears to be
a zany screwball comedy from the 30s, full of silly pratfalls,
double-takes and exaggerated, slack-jawed facial expressions.  There's a
reason that vaudeville died, but nobody seems to have told Branagh.
The story is about The King of Navarre (Alessandro Nivola, Timecode) and
his three horny buddies, Berowne (Branagh), Longaville (Lillard) and
Dumaine (Adrian Lester, Primary Colors), who decide that war is for
sissies and make an agreement to hole up for three years, depriving
themselves of women, food and sleep to study philosophy.  Their plans
are interrupted by the arrival of a French princess (Silverstone) and
her three horny friends Rosaline (Natascha McElhone, Ronin), Maria
(Carmen Ejogo, The Avengers) and Katherine (Emily Mortimer, Scream 3).
They sing, they dance, they fall in love, and I went home.  End of
story.  Oh, and then I had lunch.
There are also a lot of annoying supporting roles that made me want to
leave the theatre and run over someone's dog.  Each actor seemed to be
in a contest to see who could `out-ham' the next, and as a result, Lost
plays like a silly parody.  But I don't think it's supposed to be, which
just makes the whole thing laughably sad.  Particularly annoying are
Nathan Lane (Isn't She Great) and Timothy Spall, the latter of whom was
so likeable in Topsy-Turvy.
I've heard people complain about the quality of the singing and the
dancing of the actors, but I thought it was pretty commendable, with
Lester a notable standout.  It's certainly a lot better than I could do,
or would even be willing to do.  It's a risky move that unfortunately
doesn't pay off here.
Branagh deserves credit for his ambition, but little else.  He's been
nominated for three Oscars (writing and acting) in his Shakespeare
adaptations, but only when he sticks to the serious plays (Hamlet and
Henry V).  Most of Hamlet's crew is on board here as well, with
cinematographer Alex Thomson, editor Neil Farrell, production designer
Tim Harvey and composer Patrick Doyle (who was nominated for Hamlet)
contributing to the overall look, feel and sound of a 30s musical.
1:33 - PG for sensuality and a brief drug reference

Author
Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Odeon (Manchester City Centre)
Released in the UK by Pathe on 31 March, 2000; certificate U; 93 minutes;
counties of origin UK/USA; aspect ratio 2.35:1
Directed by Kenneth Branagh; produced by David Barron, Kenneth Branagh.
Written by Kenneth Branagh; based on the play by William Shakespeare.
Photographed by Alex Thomson; edited by Daniel Farrell, Neil Farrell.
Kenneth Branagh's "Love's Labour's Lost" conceives many good ideas on how to
inject life into one of Shakespeare's most inane plays, then spoils them with
bizarre execution. It's one thing to intersperse the Bard's original dialogue
with Busby Berkeley-style musical numbers, and quite another to fill the
frame with actors who look like they've been smoking crack.
In the story, a young king (Alessandro Nivola) forms a pact with several
countrymen, who pledge to lock themselves away for three years and dedicate
their attentions to study. They will sleep only three hours per night, fast
frequently and avoid female company. It's a bit like boarding school, I
guess, except without the buggery.
The early scenes show words of concern coming from Berowne, the character
played by Branagh, who doubts whether he and his chums will be able to live
without romance. This is an accurate prediction, and soon he and the king, as
well as fellow scholars Dumaine (Adrian Lester) and Longaville (Matthew
Lillard), are bewitched by the charms of four French ladies -- Princess
(Alicia Silverstone), Rosaline (Natasha McElhone), Maria (Carmen Ejogo) and
Katherine (Emily Mortimer).
Neither the play nor the film explain what possessed the king to lock himself
away -- is it intentional that the man seems mad? If so, why do none of the
characters ever mark his insanity? More importantly, what is supposed to be
so entertaining about men and women sending each other messages of love,
shuffling away tittering, discussing the process and then repeating it?
That's the ridiculous game that fills most of "Love's Labour's Lost". Hardly
Shakespeare's finest hour.
Because its story is so very lame, I was grateful for the film's singing and
dancing -- at least some energy is brought to the proceedings. Wouldn't you
rather hear songs such as "Cheek to Cheek" and "There's No Business Like Show
Business" than the frivolous chatter of sub-standard Elizabethan drama? The
movie's problem is its excess of reaction shots, and its performers'
over-the-top gestures, bulging eyes and sweeping hand movements. Especially
irritating is Timothy Spall, who attempts to be a jester by way of an
embarrassing fake Spanish accent and clumsy walk.
Branagh loves the work of William Shakespeare, and UNDERSTANDS it, which is
why his screen adaptations garner so much acclaim. "Hamlet" (1996) was one of
cinema's great directorial achievements. "Love's Labour's Lost" is a film of
ingenious concepts put into practice with disappointing clumsiness.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
http://members.aol.com/ukcritic

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
What do I love most about going to the movies? The surprises! Here I was, a
hater of all films musical, not a fan of the old-school movies, not a fan of
a man they call Shakespeare and definitely not a fan of this movie's lame
ass title, and I walked out of this picture with a shit-eating grin so wide
across my face, you'd think I just hit the motherload. Instead, I was
treated to a fun, joyous, wonderfully orchestrated picture resurrected for
the audiences of today. Will it bring back the genre as GLADIATOR did
earlier this summer? Only time will tell...
PLOT:
The four boys of Navarre have sworn off girls and limited their food and
sleep intakes for a period of three years, in order to concentrate
exclusively on their studies. Unfortunately for the gents, circumstances
soon change when four very lovely ladies come to visit, and cupid, the boys,
the girls, the songs and the dances all take a shot at their hearts.
CRITIQUE:
Wow. A magical recreation of the classic 1930s style musicals, filled with
infectious dances, delightful songs and an overall sense of joy and
merriment all around. What a wonder to see such an original film still being
produced in our day and time. Is there a market for this type of movie? I'm
not sure, but the film put together here by Kenneth Branagh is certainly an
excellent candidate to begin the trend. The movie is able to capture the
pure essence of the classic films from the day, and present it to us within
a bouquet of colorful costumes, authentically decorated settings,
captivating performances from the cast and every fine detail that you would
expect to receive from a master craftsman. In fact, the opening credits
impressed me right off the top, with their classic-style of character
presentation, pictures - actor names - character names, along with the
proper background music and letter font, all of which just seemed to
kickstart the whole show on a sensibly nostalgic tone. Stranger more is the
fact that rarely had I ever sat through any of those "old time" movies
before, since not a one had interested me in the least.
And yet the "feel" of this movie, the "look" of the entire piece, the songs,
the black and white updated news footage from the time, the many groovy
choreographed dance sequences, all seemed to resonate a flawless homage to
the classics, and just won me over, dammit! It's funny because I honestly do
not prefer the word of the Bard to the words of Tarantino, since for one, I
do not understand most of what Shakespeare is saying (mark me an ignoramus,
but at least I'm honest), and two, I'm a child of the 80s...sniff, sniff.
Pity me. Seriously though, my only reservations with this film actually lay
within those areas. Granted, I did love the dances, the songs, the costumes,
the settings, but you know the thin story line actually had to be driven
along by at least some dialogue, and when the dialogue came, well...I just
tuned out. Half of what was being said struck a foreign chord with me, so
getting the gist of their conversations was the best that I could do. I also
couldn't help but notice the Alicia Silverstone factor, which just seemed
out of place, to be sure. Not that she was necessarily bad in her role, but
somehow, she just didn't seem to belong there. But no biggie.
In the end, we accept the fact that these types of films aren't exactly
character studies or created solely on the merit of their story lines. They
are generally based on the spirit of their convictions, the zip of their
songs and the zap of their dances, and by golly, this movie struck gold on
all those counts. Color me impressed, cause God knows I would be the first
to tell you to keep me far and away from any musicals this side of the SOUTH
PARK movie, but listen to I, when I tell thee this...romance, show tunes,
dance, enchantment, moonlight and even a little humor never hurt anybody.
Drop your cynicism off at the door and enjoy.

Author
Michael Dequina
_Love's_Labour's_Lost_ (PG) ** (out of ****)
In blending the poetry of Shakespearean text with the timeless sounds of
pop standards from the 1930s, Kenneth Branagh--a proven hand at handling
the Bard and an avowed fan of the old MGM musicals--should theoretically
have little problem casting a bewitching romantic spell with
_Love's_Labour's_Lost_.  And that's exactly what he achieves in one
sublime moment where new lovers bid each other a reluctant adieu with a
solemn rendition of "They Can't Take That Away from Me."  The scene is
sweet yet genuinely sad, but not without a knowing sense of humor about
itself (Branagh makes no bones about lifting _Casablanca_ wholesale).  In
short, it's the exact type of natural, persuasive emotion that Branagh is
going after with the whole of this ambitious project--and, more often
than not, ends up falling short of success.
_Love's_Labour's_Lost_ is one of Shakespeare's more obscure works, and
on a basic plot level, it's not difficult to see why.  The King of
Navarre (Alessandro Nivola) and his three closest friends--Berowne
(Branagh), Dumaine (Adrian Lester), and Longaville (Matthew
Lillard)--have made an oath to devote three years entirely to study,
meaning no "vain delights" such as romance.  However, their vow is almost
immediately challenged when the Princess of France (Alicia Silverstone)
and her fetching ladies in waiting--Rosaline (Natascha McElhone), Maria
(Carmen Ejogo), and Katherine (Emily Mortimer)--arrive to hammer out a
financial agreement between the kingdoms.  Complications predictably
ensue as the four men neglect their oath and pursue true love.
Given such a thin story, Branagh's decision to recast the play in the
year 1939 and expand the material with songs of the era is an inspired
one.  And from a technical standpoint, he knows exactly what he's doing. 
Everything looks and sounds right: the overlit, soundstagy sets; the
insanely elaborate choreography; the free-flying camera angles; the
distinct disregard to realism once the music swells.  The cast underwent
a crash course in dance before filming began, and everyone acquits
themselves fairly well, even in the singing department.  There are a
couple of standouts: on the male end, Lester's fancy footwork puts
everyone else's to shame; among the women, McElhone's sultry moves and
song stylings lead the pack.
All the competent staging and performance is of little use, however, if
the very presence and intent of the musical numbers are questionable. 
With relatively few exceptions (such as a simple and charming "The Way
You Look Tonight" crooned by two of the King's tutors, played by
Geraldine McEwan and Richard Briers), Branagh does a clunky job of
meshing the music with the story.  The first few numbers are especially
dreadful in this respect.  For example, a collective "Huh?" could be
sensed in the audience once the King and his buddies abruptly broke into
"I'd Rather Charleston" right before they signed their oath; and for all
its amusing aping of the classically excessive Busby Berkeley style, the
women's pool-set "No Strings (Fancy Free)" simply serves no apparent
purpose other than to have a big Busby Berkeley-style number.
_Love's_Labour's_Lost_ is also meant to be a comedy, and it is in this
area that Branagh stumbles the most.  His apparent direction to all the
cast is to play the material as broadly as possible, hence any real
acting is lost behind some insufferable mugging, particularly in the case
of the designated comic relief characters played by Timothy Spall and
Nathan Lane.  To be fair, though, Branagh's script doesn't offer much
opportunity for many to attempt any real acting.  There are eight core
characters, but only half of them (the King, the Princess, Berowne, and
Rosaline) are allowed to exhibit some personality; the other four are
more like background chorus members.
Also, some given the chance to act drop the ball--or, rather, one.  I'm
referring, of course, to Branagh's most controversial casting choice,
Silverstone.  Any chance the _Clueless_ starlet had to silence critics
starts to creep out the window the instant she opens her mouth, then
comes crashing down below earth during a couple of climactic speeches. 
She tries her best; the problem is that her effort is much too apparent. 
The constantly strained look on her face suggests that she's either (1)
struggling to remember her lines or (2) struggling to remember how to
pronounce them.
Her performance is indicative of the larger problem that plagues
_Love's_Labour's_Lost_.  The film's heart is definitely in the right
place, intending to show how easy and natural it is to be consumed by the
magic of love.  Unfortunately, Branagh's well-meaning but mechanical
execution makes falling in love seem like an uncommonly laborious task.
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CinemaReview Magazine:  http://www.CinemaReview.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Akiva Gottlieb
To many fans of modern cinema, the name Kenneth
Branagh is synonymous with Shakespeare, and rightly
so.  He has adapted the Bard's work in the films
`Henry V', `Much Ado About Nothing' and `Hamlet'
(which is widely considered to be the finest of many
film versions of the play), and enjoyed major success
with each.  His devotees claim that Branagh is the
only working filmmaker who truly understands
Shakespeare, presenting it in a form that is
simultaneously creative and faithful.  I wonder what
those folks will think of his latest foray into the
Bard's creative genius, the amusing yet forgettable
musical treatment of `Love's Labour's Lost'.

Shakespeare's play has been moved to the 1930's, on
the heels of World War II, in fair Navarre.  Four
eligible bachelors, Berowne (Kenneth Branagh), Dumaine
(Adrian Lester), Longeville (Matthew Lillard) and the
King himself (Alessandro Nivola) have sworn off women
and fine food in order to devote three years to the
study of philosophy.  But a diplomatic visit from the
Princess of France (Alicia Silverstone) and her three
beautiful attendants soon attempts to disprove the
men's belief that they can live without love.
Each man, unbeknownst to the others, carefully breaks
the pact and woos one of the women, setting off some
genuinely Shakespearean wordplay and visual comedy. 
The main difference is that, in this production, the
characters break into song at random moments of glee. 
Branagh's decision, to make `Love's Labour's Lost' in
the style of a 1930's musical (with classic songs by
George Gershwin and Irving Berlin), is surely a
welcome one, considering the lowly status of the
modern movie musical.  However, while the choreography
and singing are top-notch (all the actors recorded the
songs using their own voices, and did all the dancing
as well), only a couple of the musical interludes add
to the story.  It is as if the characters are so bored
with the material that they choose their own agenda.
This we should be thankful for, as the dramatic side
of Branagh's film is underdeveloped.  Shakespeare's
characters often referred to women as the `weaker
vessels', and this production does little to disprove
that theory.  Alicia Silverstone, attempting some kind
of dramatic comeback, is severely miscast, showing
Valley-girl type problems with her lines, and her
three female companions fail to make any kind of
impression.  As a result, parts of the 95-minute
running time drag, since the romance in `Love' is
what's truly lost.
However, this comedy still has a lot going for it. 
The story is lighter than a feather, and the film's
all-around joyfulness makes it a breath of fresh air,
especially in the wake of recent angst-ridden Bard
adaptations like Michael Almereyda's Gen-X `Hamlet'. 
Also, while `Love's Labour's Lost' retains much of
Shakespeare's original language, it is relatively
easy-to-follow and enjoy, the story being as
straightforward as it is.
Kenneth Branagh's `Love's Labour's Lost' is certainly
an intriguing project; one that refreshingly lacks the
cynicism found in his earlier films.  Sadly, though,
it will not reinvent the movie musical, nor
reinvigorate the work of Shakespeare.  However, it's
still more fun than you're likely to find in the
multiplex.   

Author
Steve Rhodes
On this, the 60th anniversary of that classic, sweetly hokey, but
delightful romantic musical, LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST from 1940, the studio
is re-releasing it so that this generation can savor its charms.  Based
on the Shakespeare play of the same name, the movie features more song
and dance numbers than you can count.
The biggest production number is set to "There's No Business Like Show
Business."  The famous songs include: "I Get A Kick Out Of You," "Just
The Way You Look Tonight," "When We're Out Together Dancing Cheek To
Cheek," "Let's Face The Music And Dance" and "They Can't Take That Away
>From Me."
Directed by Kenneth Branagh, the large cast includes Kenneth Branagh,
Alessandro Nivola, Alicia Silverstone, Natascha McElhone, Matthew
Lillard, Adrian Lester, Timothy Spall, Nathan Lane, Stefania Rocca,
Richard Clifford, Emily Mortimer and Carmen Ejogo.  Although there
aren't any Fred Astaires among them, they all sing and dance their
hearts out, so much so that you'll find yourself singing away in the car
afterwards.
Okay, so I lied.  This is actually a new movie made very much in the
spirit of an old one.  Complete with a great film score and rich,
oversaturated colors like the old Technicolor prints, this new film is
an audacious homage to the musicals of old.  It even has an Esther
Williams-style synchronized swimming number.
The decidedly amateurish production is actually more interesting because
of it.  It is easy to picture yourself singing and dancing along with
the actors.  "Hey, if they can do it, so can I," you'll find yourself
thinking.
Using fake, black-and-white newsreel footage, the movie sets the place
and time as a small country in Europe just before the outbreak of World
War II.  The weakest part of the script is the play itself, not one of
Shakespeare's better efforts.  But this isn't a problem since, most of
the time, the players are singing their hearts out and not speaking
Elizabethan English.  It is undeniably fun, however, to hear Alicia
Silverstone (CLUELESS) uttering such lines as "I am too sudden bold."
It took a lot of guts for the cast to do this, knowing full-well that
many critics would make fun of them since most do not appear to have had
the proper musical training.  The result is a good-spirited film that
makes you want to sing and dance.  How many movies have done that for
you lately?
People are always asking me why they don't make musicals any more.
Well, they do -- sometimes.  This is one of the few, and it deserves a
good-sized audience.  See it when it plays your town.  Unlike bad teen
comedies and gory action flicks, which play for weeks and weeks, the run
of musicals is, sadly, very short.
LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST runs a very fast 1:33.  It is rated PG for
sensuality and a brief drug reference and would be fine for all ages.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
 
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com ">http://www.InternetReviews.com> 

Author
Max Messier
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Max Messier.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/f76feb254c17f08d882568fe00098e80?OpenDocument
Film musicals are a tough sell these days.  It's either the annual
Disney animation vehicle or it's Edward Norton dancing to swing music.
I could probably count the last five years worth of decent musicals on
my left hand.  The juxtaposition of dialogue with song and dance always
seems to remind me of the tragedies of my high school drama days.  Those
damn tights.  The bad pancake makeup.
Kenneth Branagh's latest Shakespearean opus, Love's Labour's Lost, falls
into the category of an ingenious experiment gone horrible wrong.  Like
a bartender with one too many vodka-tonics on his breath, Branagh mixes
one of Shakespeare's lesser-known comedies with the music of Cole Porter
and Irving Berlin and places everything in 1939 France.  Think the Rat
Pack in some bad 1960s film.
Tell me if this doesn't seem a bit strange to you:  The King of Navarre
and his three best friends decide to put down their swords and seclude
themselves from the world in order to study philosophy and fast from
food and comfort for three years.  No women are allowed in the court,
and all of them can do great Fred Astaire impressions.  Ummm... sounds a
bit kooky to me.  The arrival of the Princess of France and her three
maidens sends the boys into a crazed frenzy.  Each of the guys decides
to lay down his oath of seclusion and romantically pursue one special
maiden of his choice.  War erupts and all four boys must leave their
newfound loves to fight for France's freedom.  Toss in a couple of
supporting characters full of enough shtick to shake a stick at (my lame
attempt at iambic pentameter), comical deception, and bake at 300
degrees for thirty minutes or until the cheesy top turns a golden brown.
The scariest thing about this film is the decision to cast Alicia
Silverstone as the lead role of the Princess of France.  Has Branagh
been doing drugs to suppress the memory of his role in last year's
cinematic opus Wild Wild West?  When Silverstone appears in the film and
starts spouting Shakespearean dialogue, all I could see was her
character Cher from Clueless performing a really, really bad
Shakespearean oral report for her English final.  It's a bit jarring at
first to watch the actors move from the complicated dialogue of the play
to the memorable songs of Gershwin, Porter, and Berlin: Sinatra and Dino
are probably calling Branagh the `biggest palooka from Endsville' from
the great beyond right now.  Branagh also pulls the same mistake as
Woody Allen did in his attempt at a musical by hiring actors that
could't even sing and dance for change on the street.
It's also a damn shame that this film doesn't work on the whole.
Branagh's directing is crisp and original.  The inclusion of
newsreel-style footage about the King's exploits makes for smart scene
changes.  The entire cast, with the strong exception of the Batgirl,
runs the difficult dialogue with great ease.  The costumes, makeup, and
set design are amazing.
The most problematic thing about the film is that it would have been a
success if only Branagh had stuck to the actual text of the play without
the distractions of the music.
One thing's for sure... Branagh ain't no song and dance man.
Adapted for the Screen/Director: Kenneth Branagh
Producer: David Barron, Kenneth Branagh, Bob and Harvey Weinstein
Starring: Kenneth Branagh, Nathan Lane, Adrian Lester, Matthew Lillard,
Alicia Silverstone, Alessandro Nivola, Natascha McElhone, Timothy Spall
">http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html">
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
To unsubscribe from filmcritic.com's Breaking Reviews mailing list,
reply to this e-mail with UNSUBSCRIBE as the subject.  E-mail address
changes via reply with both old and new addresses.

Author
Susan Granger
 Having done "Henry V," "Hamlet" and "Much Ado About Nothing"
on film, Kenneth Branagh, who comes from working-class background,
continues his determination make Shakespeare more relevant to
contemporary audiences. This time, he punctuates the Bard with '30s
and '40s musical numbers. Set in Europe in 1939, just before the
outbreak of W.W.II, the romantic comedy begins when the King of
Navarre (Alessandro Nivola) and three companions (Kenneth Branagh,
Matthew Lillard, Adrian Lester) swear to shun all distractions and
study for three years. But no sooner have they made their monastic
vows than the Princess of France (Alicia Silverstone) and three lovely
ladies-in-waiting (Emily Mortimer, Carmen Ejogo, Natascha McElhorne)
show up, and the four flirtatious couples pair off to songs from Cole
Porter, Irving Berlin, Jerome Kern, George and Ira Gershwin. The fact
that his cast has mediocre musical ability didn't deter Branagh's
enthusiasm. "It wasn't our ambition to achieve the slickness and
impossible perfection of Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers," he
explains. "What we did want was abandonment to the enterprise, joy and
commitment to the songs and dancing." Indeed, singing "Cheek to Cheek"
mid-air, they float to the rafters of a library.  Branagh wavers
uncomfortably between the various styles of American musicals,
attempting to combine the crisp, formal precision of Busby Berkeley's
choreography with the more relaxed ambiance of Gene Kelly. Also, in
his ambitious attempt to condense the narrative and combine the
ensemble numbers, Branagh loses much of the comedy, except for Nathan
Lane as the clown. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Love's
Labour's Lost" is a whimsical 7, putting a frothy, new spin on old
Will.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Miramax Films
 Director: Kenneth Branagh    
 Writer:  Kenneth Branagh from the play by William
Shakespeare and the songs and dances of Cole Porter, the
Gershwins, Irving Berlin, Busby Berkeley and others
 Cast: Alessandro Nivola, Alicia Silverstone, Natascha
McElhone, Kenneth Branagh, Carmen Ejogo, Matthew Lillard,
Adrian Lester, Emily Mortimer
   We all know that Broadway does not produce new musicals
as it used to.  Gone forever are the delights of Rogers and
Hammerstein, Lerner and Loewe, E.Y. Harburg, Hugh Martin
and Ralph Blane.  Forget the classic dignity of Cole Porter's
caustic wit, the mellifluous tunes of Irving Berlin and the
songs and lyrics of the Gershwin Brothers.  The work of the
latter group is produced mostly in intimate cabaret rather than
on the stage, but now Kenneth Branagh has found a way to
attempt new life and meaning for the songs and to the
dances made famous by Fred Astaire on the ballroom floor
and Busby Berkeley's choreographed water ballets.  The
premise is an intriguing one: fit the music, however
Procrustean one must be, into the compressed stanzas of
one of Shakespeare's lightest and most insipid comedies,
"Love's Labour's Lost."  By doing this, Branagh hopes to
honor some of the greats of the American musical theater
and film while rekindling interest in a Shakespearean
burlesque that's rarely required reading in any college.  
   The exertion is mostly for naught, principally because the
delightful music and dance are contrivances, shoehorned into
the mostly unfunny vaudevillian sketches whenever the
slightest excuse presents itself.  The filmmaker's choice of
"Love's Labour's Lost" is an unfortunate one not because the
caper is one of the Bard's weakest but because the simplistic
rhyme schemes that inhabit songs like "There's No Business
Like Show Business" and "Cheek to Cheek" do not mesh with
the metaphoric convolutions of Shakespeare's rhyming
patterns.  When we hear lyrics from the 1930's, we yearn for
more of the same but are hit with the poetic layout in
Shakespeare's play droned mostly by a crew of American
actors whose voices bear little music, we are frustrated. 
Alicia Silverstone, who shoulders a Sean-Connery-style lisp
which might be attractive to a teen audience for "Clueless"
simply ravages the feeling of magic that Branagh relies on
calling up.
   This is an update to the 1930's of a Shakespearean
comedy of love in which four nobles from Navarre vow to give
up women for three years in order to devote their lives to the
study of philosophy.  To answer online critic Ian Waldron-
Mantgani's query about the purpose of the contract we need
look only at the opening lines of the play: "Our late edict shall
strongly stand in force/ Navarre shall be the wonder of the
world;/  Our court shall be a little Academe,/ Still and
contemplative in living art."  Thus exclaims the King of
Navarre (Alessandro Nivola) to his best pals Biron (Kenneth
Branagh), Longaville (Matthew Lillard) and Dumain (Adrian
Lester) "You three, Biron, Dumain, and Longaville,/ Have
sworn for three years' term to live with me/ My fellow
scholars, and to keep those statutes/ That are recorded in
this schedule here."  
   The oaths are soon forgotten as a quartet of maidens
paddle into town, namely the French princess (Alicia
Silverstone) and her friends Rosaline (Natascha McElhone),
Maria (Carmen Ejogo) and Katherine (Emily Mortimer).  A
good deal of the comedy comes from the manner in which
each gentleman in turn breaks his pact, hoping to get away
with his courtship outside the vision of the others.  In the
movie's most creative scene, which takes place in the
institutions' library, each character in turn joyfully concedes
his bliss unaware that the others are eavsdropping. The
choreographed staging involves Fred Astaire-like climbing on
chairs, tilting them gracefully over by pressing the left leg
against the arm, and emerging without a pratfall on the floor
below.
   The goofy side characters are the most unfortunate
segment on screen, as each tries to out high-camp the other
but succeeds only in embarrassing himself and presumably a
fidgety audience.  Nathan Lane, so adept on the stage of
New York's Manhattan Theatre Club and in films like "The
Bird Cage," looks like little more than a babbling cretin while
the pudgy Timothy Spall is merely obnoxious as the ribbon-
bedecked Spanish nobleman crawling about the floor for no
seeming purpose and bullying his Sancho-Panza-like cohort,
Moth.
   Given better casting, a longer dance rehearsal period than
the three weeks purportedly allotted (only Adrian Lester's
"Dumaine" comports himself credibly as a hoofer), and
perhaps a scrapping of "Love's Labour's Lost" in favor of a
95-minute collage of the songs and dances of the thirties, this
picture might have been saved.  
Rated PG.  Running time: 93 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
