Title
Review for Point Break (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Chad Polenz
1991, R, 122 minutes [2 hours, 2 minutes]
starring: Keanu Reeves (Johnny Utah), Patrick Swayze (Bodhi), Gary Busey
(Pappas), Lori Petty (Tyler), written by W. Peter Iliff, Rick King, produced
by Peter Abrams, Robert L. Levy, directed by Kathryn Bigelow.
Although "Point Break" is one of the most cliche action/crime movies I've
ever seen, it is tolerable to watch because its premise of crime as the
ultimate rush gives the film a unique hook. However, that theme could have
been conveyed better by not shoving it down our throats.
The story is a retread of staple action and crime formulas: the rookie and
the seasoned pro; the crime fighting camaraderie; the mean, cynical captain;
the rookie who almost blows his cover; the woman who falls for the rookie;
and of course the uncatchable criminals. Surprisingly enough, the beginning
of the film and the establishing of these elements work rather well.
Keanu Reeves stars as Johnny Utah (could that name be any more made up?), a
rookie FBI agent who is paired with Pappas (Busey), the veteran who has been
trying to catch a gang of bank robbers known as the Ex-Presidents for years.
We get some details and interesting detective work that leads them to believe
the robbers are surfers, and so Johnny goes undercover to try and find the
criminals.
One of the cardinal rules of undercover stories is that the hunky hero must
be involved with a woman so the bad guys can later use her for blackmail.
Lori Petty plays that role to the letter as Tyler, a surfer who Johnny
manages to seduce to teach him how to surf and to absorb him into the
community. Now this is all fine and good, and it doesn't seem too predictable
at the time, but the film lingers on the joy of surfing a little too much.
Reeves is a fine actor, but he isn't convincing when he is having an
adrenaline rush. He's even less convincing when he infiltrates the community
and is "accepted" by Bodhi (Swayze), a drifter in pursuit of "The Ultimate
Rush."
The first act builds up to a fantastic action scene as Utah, Pappas, and the
FBI bust who they thought were the Ex-Presidents, but turn out to be just
drug dealers. Then everything starts to conviently fall into place: Johnny
realizes the bank robbers have been under his nose all along and somehow
figures out where they will strike next. Then there are some more
over-the-top action sequences, and a part of me couldn't help getting caught
up in the action and thrill of it all. I was impressed by some of the camera
work during the chase scene, but as soon as it ended the film took a drastic
nose dive.
The final act of really lost me. Johnny knows Bodhi and his friends are the
Ex-Presidents and vice versa, but they all continue to act like friends. They
take Johnny skydiving and we think this will be another action-packed escape
scene but it's not. In fact, throughout this film there are many scenes of
surfing and skydiving that serve no purpose but to try and get the viewer
pumped because the story is not interesting nor clever enough to do it.
By the end we get many shoot-outs and nearly everyone dies. The final scene
is what should be a case of poetic justice, but turns out to be something
that's just plain dumb.
"Point Break" certainly had great potential to it. It could have been an
intricate crime and detective story or it could have been just a drama about
finding the greatest rush. Unfortunately, it tries to mix both with
gratuitous stunts and adventure, and the result is another action flick in
disguise.


Author
Frank Maloney
     POINT BREAK is a movie by Kathryn Bigelow.  The script is by W.
Peter Iliff.  It stars Patrick Swayze, Keanu Reeves, Gary Busey, and
Lori Petty.
     If I were one of those professional, cynical, go-for-the-joke
critics, I would suggest retitling POINT BREAK "Beach Blanket Burglary."
Instead, I'm going to say that this is an acceptable summer movie with
some good action photography of the ENDLESS SUMMER school, a nutty,
preposterous story -- excessive, fun, but a little too long.  And it has
some interesting people in the cast.
     The directory Kathryn Bigelow, who previously directed BLUE STEEL,
has turned out a slightly schizoid movie that's rather funny in the
first part and hyperviolent in the second part.  The script is a joke
about surfers financing their "endless summer" by donning rubber masks,
doing Tricky Dick imitations, and robbing 30 banks in 4 years, and about
two FBI agents, the burnt-out vet (Gary Busey) and the new hot-shot
(Keanu Reeves) who track them down.  Cinematography is by Donald
Peterman, who gives us some great zoom-lens work on mountainous surf and
who also gives a truly impressive sky-diving sequence.  Unfortunately,
Bigelow lets the movie run down at the end and gets pretty sloppy about
continuity.  She also use an Oregon coast locale as a budget-saving
stand-in for Australia.  I spotted it instantly and anyone who knows
either place will too.
     She does get a funny performance out of Swayze, who is not the star
of this movie, despite his top billing.  Reeves carries it, as best he
can.  I think the jury is still out on this particular Brat Packer.
Swayze plays the leader of the Ex-Presidents Gang, a pseudo-mystical
guru of b.s.  who justifies his violence, felonies, and betrayals as
inspiring all us "dead souls inching along the freeways in their metal
coffins."  It was good to see Swayze in a negative role.  Swayze did a
lot of his own stunts--at least the easy parts that required only a
beginner's skills--but that is him on the board and him going out the
plane door.  He's a gutsy guy, and I will admit to a sneaking admiration
for him.  (But then, I liked ROAD HOUSE.)
     Gary Busey does a good turn as the alternately time-serving hack
and obsessed pro; he is wigged-out and screwy.  Busey is a lot of fun to
have in any movie.
     And then there's the fresh surprise, Lori Petty, who plays the
surfer who first teaches Reeves and then sleeps with him.  I liked this
woman a lot.  She has presence and a distinctive voice; she's small and
pretty in a perky, independent way.  She leaves a group of male surfers
talking about their death wishes with the line "There's too much
testosterone here."  I hope to see her again.
     (Anybody who knows neat stuff about Petty, write me.  I'm
interested (no, not in that way, silly).)
     There're a lot of f-words, a lot of splashy violence, no nudity
(except in one very violent FBI raid, where is there is women in a
shower and another in a thong), no sex as such, a lot of action, some
humor.  You might like to take this one in, but pay matinee rates only.
It is not worth full fare.  Or wait for the video and relive the summer
next winter.
