Title
Review for Halloween (1978)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Jerry Saravia
Just as the original "Psycho" sired the slasher genre, John Carpenter's
"Halloween" solidified the genre that became more shock for your buck than
genuine scares. Amazing that so few directors followed Carpenter's model -
atmosphere to spare and a chilling sense of doom that none of the sequels or
"Friday the 13th" films ever came close to capture. "Halloween" has its flaws,
but it is a superb scare show - a triumphant exercise in style that dictates
its substance.
"Halloween" begins with a young kid walking around the outside of his house,
looking for his sister. He grabs a mask and a kitchen knife, approaches his
sister's bedroom by walking up the stairs and finally stabs her. All this time,
Carpenter shows us what this kid does from his point-of-view - a very
subjective stance that comes from Hitchcock and, of course, the notorious
"Peeping Tom," which showed the killer filming his subjects as he killed them.
The kid is Michael Myers, who is admitted to a mental institution. Nearly a
decade later, Michael is still in a institution, and his psychiatrist, Dr. Sam
Loomis (Donald Pleasance), is checking on him obsessively, aware that he is
pure evil. During a rainy night, Michael escapes and drives away and now Loomis
is in hot pursuit of someone he calls "inhumanly patient." 
The story then shifts to October 31st, the celebrated day of Halloween, at the
calm, homely town of Haddonfield, Illinois. We see a teenage woman named Laurie
Strode (Jamie Lee Curtis) walking to school with a young kid who believes in
bogeymen. They make plans for the evening since Laurie will be babysitting him
(the title of the film was originally "The Babysitter Murders."). Then we meet
some of Laurie's friends, who are actively dating and dreaming of sexual
escapades, yet Laurie is the lonely, straight girl of the trio. There is the
brunette-haired Annie (Nancy Kyes), whose father (Leigh Brackett) is a local
cop, and Lynda (P.J. Soles), the ditzy blonde who ends every sentence with the
word "totally." They all make plans for the evening since Annie and Laurie are
babysitting, and Lynda wants to bring her boyfriend over at one house. And in
this town, terror awaits - Michael Myers is paying a visit to wreak havoc. 
"Halloween" is almost monochromatic in its look - the scenes during the day are
overcast and the nights are truly dark where silhouettes and shadows exist -
perfect time for Michael to attack (in one scene, Michael kills a dog and
offscreen, we hear it whimper). Carpenter uses the hand-held camera effectively
to build the tension by choosing to follow the subjective nature of its
characters. Examples of such moments are when Annie hears noises outside her
house as she prepares to do laundry, the car that comes to a screeching halt
when Annie shouts, "Speed kills," the discovery of the dead bodies by Laurie,
and so on. Subjectivity is especially well-handled when Laurie walks across the
street to the house where Lynda and Annie are supposedly, and this scene,
accompanied by Carpenter's famously eerie electronic score, is a hark back to
Vera Miles' similar walk to the Bates House in "Psycho." 
What is particularly arresting about "Halloween" is that the characters are not
killed immediately - Carpenter lets us observe these teenagers and who they
are. The long takes of Laurie, Annie and Lynda walking home from school show us
the daily activities and thoughts of teenage girls, oblivious to the unseen
terror about to take place. Laurie is not as oblivious, and conveniently sees
Michael Myers hiding in bushes, driving by, or standing by his car while she
looks from behind windows. Lots of subjective shots throughout, and the
suspense builds with a real pulse eschewing any of the gore or blood that would
have diminished its overall power. These tree-lined avenues of Middle America
hide something inexplicable and without emotion, and all Laurie can do is run
and cry when she finds that this killer is after her (in a way, Laurie's escape
from an unstoppable killer led the way to Linda Hamilton's escape from the
unstoppable Schwarzeneger in "The Terminator") There's a terrifying moment
where Laurie begs for help from a neighbor, and the neighbor observes and
closes her shades, thinking it is a Halloween prank.. "Oh, my God! Help,"
shouts the helpless Laurie. 
There is a stretch of Catholicism in "Halloween" emanating from its
semi-Production Code morals (though the Production Code was eliminated back in
the late 50's). The idea is that any teenager girl or boy who has sex or
lustful thoughts is killed by Michael Myers. Laurie is the only survivor
because she is still a virgin, though she may have lustful thoughts about a guy
in her class. "So. You do think about things like that, don't you Laurie," says
Annie at one point. The only thing Laurie does that may make her a member of
this triad is that she smokes marihuana, yet has more interest in chemistry and
studying than any of her friends do. Since this premarital sex-is-a-sin complex
began in "Halloween," it became a mode for all rip-offs to follow. You have
sex, and you will die, as indicated in the post-modern "Scream." 
Back in 1978, "Halloween" was made for a low-budget and went on to gross
millions of dollars making it the biggest independent film ever (initial
reviewers panned it until someone from Variety spoke highly of it).  It is a
superb motion picture, reveling in its atmospheric, nocturnal pull guaranteed
to give you some major shivers. Precisely, what makes this horror film so
central to the genre is acknowledging that it is what you don't see that can
kill you in the dark. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with questions, concerns or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or at
Faust667@aol.com

Author
Doug Skiles
Starring: Jamie Lee Curtis (Lauris Strode), Donald Pleasance (Dr. Sam
Loomis)
Directed by: John Carpenter, Written by: John Carpenter and Debra Hill
Rated R by the MPAA for blood, violence, nudity, sexual situations,
strong language, drug usage, oh hell you name it.
Why, you ask, is this labeled as a review and not a retrospective?  And
why, you ask, are you reviewing this in Febuary?
Alright, here's the deal.  Back in October of 1997, a nice little
theater here in the St. Louis area, the "Mid Rivers 6" (one of those
little mall theaters) decided to show the original HALLOWEEN film on one
of its big screens - you know, like they say all the time, "the way it
was meant to be seen." Anyway, since I didn't see HALLOWEEN for the
first time until October of '97 (yes, sad isn't it?), and it was playing
in a theater, it's a review.  As for why I'm writing it now... well I
just got around to it, that's all.  Sorry I couldn't have a better story
for all this.
Anyway, this, the first of what is about to become seven HALLOWEEN
films, is quite the damn good show.  You have to keep in mind, this
movie was made for less than 1 million dollars, is scored via John
Carpenter's keyboard, and is the film that spawned oh, say... ALL the
slasher flicks of the 80s.
So in other words, the plot here has become the stuff of legend and the
stuff of so many imitators that it's predictable on a level that most
people don't even know existed.  And so what?  It's still effectively
spooky, and a good time.
Okay.  Here's the story.  This guy, Michael Myers, killed his sister in
Haddonfield, Illinois, when he was six.  And then he got shipped off to
the mental hospital and all that kinda stuff.  With me?  Good.  So this
Doc, Dr. Loomis, is studying the freak, and realizes that he's is "PURE
EVIL" (a Dr. Loomis catch-phrase).  And that means he's one of the most
wigged people when Mikey escapes over a decade after his original crime
and heads home... on Halloween.  Hence the title.  And hence the line
from the ads: "The Night HE Came Home." Get it?  Good.  Oh yeah, and
this girl, Laurie Strode, happens to be babysitting this night, and so
are her friends, and they're all doing this in the same area, and, well,
you can figure out the rest.
It's suspenseful, that's what this comes down to.  The music, cheesy
though it may seem at first, works.  The acting, particularly from our
two leads, works.  It's a classic, and it deserves to be, it's damn
fun.  Sure it's predictable.  But so?  A lot of movies are - you knew
that John McClane was going to kick terrorist ass in every DIE HARD
movie right?  It's all of matter of how you get to that point.  
So yeah, it lives up to the test of time.  It has the FEEL of a classic,
and that goes a long way towards the fun - even at the hokey times, you
know it only seems hokey because of the time period it was made in.
Anyway, that's enough from me.  All I really have to say is, you've
heard it's a classic film, and I'm agreeing that it deserves the
mantle.  Not many horror/suspense DO, after all.  All that without the
KWC.  And you know, nothing's scarier than a William Shatner mask,
either.  

Author
Dustin Putman
Note: In celebration of the holiday, I offer to you an archive review I wrote 
of John Carpenter's 1978 classic, "Halloween," in October of 1998. Not to 
toot my own horn, but just rereading this review made me (1) cringe, (2) 
notice how much my writing has strengthened in the last two years, and (3) be 
thankful I've gotten better, and not worse :)  If you can get past the fairly 
inept writing of yours truly, it should be known that my feelings for 
"Halloween" will always remain the same, and I urge you that, if you have 90 
minutes of nothing to do tonight, and you have never seen the film, go out 
and rent it and have yourself a frighteningly good time. If you have already 
seen it, watch it again. Happy Halloween!!!
Directed by John Carpenter. 
Cast: Jamie Lee Curtis, Donald Pleasence, Nancy Loomis, P.J. Soles, Charles 
Cyphers, Brian Andrews, Kyle Richards, Nancy Stephens. 
1978 - 93 minutes
Rated R (for violence, sexual situations, brief nudity, and profanity). 
Reviewed October 26, 1998.
I have probably seen John Carpenter's horror masterpiece, "Halloween," more 
times than any other film (the first time being when I was all of 
4-years-old), and it will always be the best horror film ever made, in my 
eyes. None of its six sequels (and counting) have been able to even remotely 
capture the style and brilliance of the original. I simply cannot imagine a 
genre picture being better than this one. 
"Halloween," starts off with a prologue set in 1963, all done in an 
elaborate, one-take POV shot, in which 6-year-old Michael Myers grabs a 
butcher knife, makes his way upstairs, slips on a clown mask, and goes into 
his teenage sister's room and stabs her to death.
Switch to October 30th, 1978, Myers, now an adult, escapes from a mental 
hospital, returns to his hometown of Haddonfield, and on Halloween night, 
goes on a murder spree, singling out three friends, Laurie (Jamie Lee 
Curtis), Annie (Nancy Loomis), and Linda (P.J Soles), two of which are 
babysitting. Meanwhile, Michael Myers' psychiatrist, Dr. Sam Loomis (Donald 
Pleasence), knows he will strike again, and goes searching for him.
John Carpenter's "Halloween," is the quintessential horror film, perfectly 
executed, atmospheric, suspenseful, and terrifying. Yes, it is a "slasher" 
movie, but I'd like to think that it is so good that it surpasses that 
dubious label. 
There are many reasons why "Halloween," was and still is an effective film. 
One of the big reasons is Carpenter's clever use of the foregrounds and 
backgrounds of all of his shots. If you look really good at the backgrounds 
of all of the scenes, you will often see something lurking around, including 
Michael Myers himself. Many pictures have copied this approach, but none have 
been able to do it so successfully.
Another reason it is so enthralling is that the story is very, very simple, 
and is actually a sort of "slice-of-life" movie, when dealing with the 
teenage girls. There are no "big" scenes between them. Instead, it just sort 
of observes them in their normal life. It just happens to be while they are 
being stalked by a serial killer. In recent horror movies, there is always a 
mystery to who the killer is, and this 90's-style approach is getting old 
fast, even though I am a big fan of "Scream," "I Know What You Did Last 
Summer," and "Urban Legend."
"Halloween" also has the most memorable music score I've ever listened to. 
Like 1960's "Psycho," the score, when heard, is always paired with this 
movie, and even those people who have never seen it probably can hum it. It's 
sort of like in, "Psycho." Many people remember the shower scene, even if 
they've never actually seen the movie.
Despite being a slasher film, "Halloween" surprisingly has next to no gore or 
on-screen violence. Because of this, it proves that horror pictures do not 
need to have graphic violence to be a scary experience (something 1981's 
highly inferior, "Halloween II," should have realized). 
As most people know, this is the film that made Jamie Lee Curtis a star, not 
to mention being labeled a "Scream Queen," and this is actually one of her 
best performances, even though it was her feature debut. Donald Pleasence, 
who died in 1995 after making, "Halloween: The Curse of Michael Myers," also 
was linked to his role as Dr. Loomis more than any other in his life. P.J. 
Soles, as the promiscuous, big-mouthed Linda, is often very funny, and a 
standout. And Michael Myers...well...no slasher villain will ever be able to 
compare to him. 
John Carpenter's "Halloween," is a nearly flawless thriller, but it is also 
simply a great motion picture. Period. It is everything a film in this genre 
should be: intelligent, stylish, and horrifying. "Halloween," is a 
one-of-a-kind, unforgettable experience. Watch it in a pitch black room while 
you're home alone one night, preferably on the namesake holiday. I dare you.

Author
Jason Overbeck
Halloween is as good a film as Psycho, if not a better one.  They are
both terrifying, both caused many rip offs - none of which were as good,
and both invented the mad slasher films.  Halloween builds tension so
wonderfully and keeps it so well that you keep waiting for some relief,
none is in site.  You can't even rely on corny horror cliches, other
than the one created by this film.  
Halloween has an escaped insane psychopath visiting his old hometown
Haddonfiels, Illinois, killing babysitters and teenagers.  This is told
not with extreme violence or splatter touches (no killing with rods) and
but tense love of suspense.  It is told as a slice of life, with hardly
any character development and none is needed.  In fact all character
development would ruin the impact and breakneck pace.
Many think that Comedy is the hardest genre to pull off, I think it is
horror.  Horror films have such a limit in depth of plot they can have,
originality in horror is hard to come by.  When you see a great orror
film like Halloween it is easy to over praise it.  I'm not doing that. 
Halloween is horror.  Halloween has inspire more horror films than any
other, including Psycho.  Halloween is a true terrifying experience for
those who love films and horror films.
** NOTE: Try not to watch this film in Pan & Scan!  This is a film that
demands letterbox or a theatre viewing (if you can).  Films like this
should be outlawed from Pan & Scan because you are missing 1/2 of the
film.  The shadows are as much a part of the film as any character.  The
only way to watch the opening mask scene and later scenes where the
killer will loom into frame is in Letterbox or Widescreen format.  DO
NOT SEE THIS IN PAN&SCAN I beg of you.  Otherwise enjoy.

Author
Brandon Herring 
Rated R for intense violence, sexuality and some nudity.
Starring: Jamie Lee Curtis, Donald Pleasance, Nancy Loomis, P.J. Soles.
Once in a great while a brilliant horror film will come out, this year we've
had the new classic 'The Blair Witch Project' which has been hailed as the
scariest film ever made. While one of the scariest, Halloween still reigns
supreme as the most horrifying movie ever put on film strip. It's whole
approach to horror movies are the most amazing thing of the film is that it
needs no gore, no explicit violence and no excess blood to scare the hell out
of us, instead it relies on genuine scares and atmosphere to make us pee our
pants with fright. The score of the film is also a big thing too. Sometimes the
score is what scares us the most, along with Michael Myers we have no mercy
from this terrifying motion picture masterpiece.
The film starts out with a creepy opening sequence to which has the now classic
and creepy score by Writer/Director/Producer John Carpenter who in my mind is a
brilliant director, he really is. He wrote this film, he directed this film, he
produced this film and he made the excessively creepy score to this film. I
think he is and always will be famous for this classic which after 21 years has
not lost it's popularity or it's ability to scare the wits out of people. I
think I have seen 'Halloween' over 100 times and each time I find something new
and brilliant, and each time I am scared even though I know what is going to
happen. I own three different versions of the film: A VHS regular version that
came with a limited edition 20th Anniversary t-shirt, a boxed edition VHS in a
hardcover case digitally re-mastered with the original theatrical widescreen
presentation, in a nifty plastic picture decorated box with a numbered
snow-globe.
In other words I am completely and utterly obsessed with the film. It has
changed horror movies forever and spawned six sequels with only 2, 4, and 7
being truly good. It also spawned several cheap imitations of the film that
were offensive in some ways to a true Halloween Fan. Since I heard about
Halloween being released on DVD in a limited edition of 30,000 copies, I knew I
had to buy one no matter what! I did and man to me it's the best DVD ever
manufactured with the brilliance of the film. No words can describe the DVD.
In 'Halloween' Michael Myers is a evil person whom killed his sister in cold
blood 16 years ago in 1963. Now in 1978 grown up and in a mental hospital
Michael Myers escapes to go back to his hometown of Haddonfield, Illinois,
followed by his past doctor Sam Loomis. The person Michael is targeting is
Laurie Strode who is played by Jamie Lee Curtis in her film debut. Why is he
stalking her? Check out Halloween II it explains it all. On this unholy night
on October 31, 1978 Laurie Strode and her two friends are going to have the
time of their lives, which is trying to stay alive. The whole film is filled
with terrifying moments most coming from just seeing Michael Myers walk. Nick
Castle who played The Shape in the first movie did an incredible job, and no
other person in any other Halloween flick can do what he did.
What John Carpenter did in 1978 is made a ground-breaking new film, with
scares, wit, and style. The movie is flawless if not perfect. No other movie or
sequel has lived up to this one, and in my opinion never will. 'Halloween' will
be like 'Psycho' and still be extremely popular even almost 40 years later. I
just hope someday 'Halloween' will be released in a new Dolby Soundtrack with
the 4 extra scenes on the DVD edition. 'Halloween' isn't just another
slice-and-dice horror flick, it's an intelligent, horrifying and best film
experience ever made. See 'Halloween' and be scared....then watch it again!
Reviewed by Brandon Herring October 7, 1999.
Ratings for the other Halloween Movies:
Halloween II- * * *Ë
Halloween III- Zero Stars
Halloween 4: The Return of Michael Myers- * * *
Halloween 5: The Revenge of Michael Myers- * *
Halloween: The Curse of Michael Myers- * *
Halloween: H20- * * * *
Brandon Herring
Movie Review Heaven
(http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by John Carpenter.
Cast: Jamie Lee Curtis, Donald Pleasence, Nancy Loomis, P.J. Soles, 
Charles Cyphers, Brian Andrews, Kyle Richards, Nancy Stephens.
1978 - 93 minutes.
Rated R (for violence, sexual situations, brief nudity, and profanity).
Reviewed October 26, 1998.
By Dustin Putman 
Dustin Putman's Film Reviews ">Http://members.aol.com/filmfan16/index.html>
I have probably seen John Carpenter's horror masterpiece, "Halloween," 
more times than any other film (the first time being when I was all of 
4-years-old), and it will always be the best horror film ever made, in 
my eyes. None of its six sequels (and counting) have been able to even 
remotely capture the style and brilliance of the original. I simply 
cannot imagine a genre picture being better than this one. 
"Halloween," starts off with a prologue set in 1963, all done in an 
elaborate, one-take POV shot, in which 6-year-old Michael Myers grabs a 
butcher knife, makes his way upstairs, slips on a clown mask, and goes 
into his teenage sister's room and stabs her to death.
Switch to October 30th, 1978, Myers, now an adult, escapes from a mental 
hospital, returns to his hometown of Haddonfield, and on Halloween 
night, goes on a murder spree, singling out three friends, Laurie (Jamie 
Lee Curtis), Annie (Nancy Loomis), and Linda (P.J Soles), two of which 
are babysitting. Meanwhile, Michael Myers' psychiatrist, Dr. Sam Loomis 
(Donald Pleasence), knows he will strike again, and goes searching for 
him.
John Carpenter's "Halloween," is the quintessential horror film, 
perfectly executed, atmospheric, suspenseful, and terrifying. Yes, it is 
a "slasher" movie, but I'd like to think that it is so good that it 
surpasses that dubious label. 
There are many reasons why "Halloween," was and still is an effective 
film. One of the big reasons is Carpenter's clever use of the 
foregrounds and backgrounds of all of his shots. If you look really good 
at the backgrounds of all of the scenes, you will often see something 
lurking around, including Michael Myers himself. Many pictures have 
copied this approach, but none have been able to do it so successfully.
Another reason it is so enthralling is that the story is very, very 
simple, and is actually a sort of "slice-of-life" movie, when dealing 
with the teenage girls. There are no "big" scenes between them. Instead, 
it just sort of observes them in their normal life. It just happens to 
be while they are being stalked by a serial killer. In recent horror 
movies, there is always a mystery to who the killer is, and this 
90's-style approach is getting old fast, even though I am a big fan of 
"Scream," "I Know What You Did Last Summer," and "Urban Legend."
"Halloween" also has the most memorable music score I've ever listened 
to. Like 1960's "Psycho," the score, when heard, is always paired with 
this movie, and even those people who have never seen it probably can 
hum it. It's sort of like in, "Psycho." Many people remember the shower 
scene, even if they've never actually seen the movie.
Despite being a slasher film, "Halloween" surprisingly has next to no 
gore or on-screen violence. Because of this, it proves that horror 
pictures do not need to have graphic violence to be a scary experience 
(something 1981's highly inferior, "Halloween II," should have 
realized). 
As most people know, this is the film that made Jamie Lee Curtis a star, 
not to mention being labeled a "Scream Queen," and this is actually one 
of her best performances, even though it was her feature debut. Donald 
Pleasence, who died in 1995 after making, "Halloween: The Curse of 
Michael Myers," also was linked to his role as Dr. Loomis more than any 
other in his life. P.J. Soles, as the promiscuous, big-mouthed Linda, is 
often very funny, and a standout. And Michael Myers...well...no slasher 
villain will ever be able to compare to him. 
John Carpenter's "Halloween," is a nearly flawless thriller, but it is 
also simply a great motion picture. Period. It is everything a film in 
this genre should be: intelligent, stylish, and horrifying. "Halloween," 
is a one-of-a-kind, unforgettable experience. Watch it in a pitch black 
room while you're home alone one night, preferably on the namesake 
holiday. I dare you.

Author
Joe Chamberlain
I first saw Halloween when I was in junior high, which was more than a
decade ago. To this day the theme song still gives me chills. By far,
Halloween has the best soundtrack of any horror film ever made, with the
possible exception of Psycho. Much like the other early slasher films such
as Friday The 13th or Texas Chainsaw Massacre, Halloween wasn't made on what
you would call a big budget. Unlike the other films of that era, Halloween
had one extra thing going for it, director John Carpenter. Carpenter makes
use of what limited money he had, down to the last penny. That is not to say
that Halloween always looks great, but in the places where the shoestring
budget shows itself it only adds to the charm. Carpenter probably also saved
money by not only directing the movie, but by writing it, and composing all
of the music. Fortunately for we the audience, Carpenter excels in all three
areas. The other leg up that Halloween has on the other early slashers is
its cast. Sure it has its share of acting class failures, but they aren't
bad enough to detract from Jamie Lee Curtis and Donald Pleasence.
Young Michael Myers, at the age of nine, decided to give new meaning to
trick or treat on Halloween night by killing his sister with a butcher
knife. He is confined to a mental hospital where he is placed in the care of
Doctor Sam Loomis (Donald Pleasence). 15 years to the day that he killed his
sister, Michael escapes from the institution to return to his hometown of
Haddonfield and resume his killing. He is pursued by Dr. Loomis and the
local police, but before they can catch him he resumes his love for large
cutlery by using it on some of the local teen population. One of the locals
who run into big Mike on Halloween is Laurie Strode (Jamie Lee Curtis) who
happen to be baby sitting in the wrong place at the wrong time. It should
come as no surprise that mayhem and carnage ensue.
As I said, the budget wasn't big, so don't expect Star Wars quality
production values in this film. With most of the cast (or if you prefer,
victims in waiting) the acting is passable. Pleasence does a great job at
being creepy, and Jamie Lee Curtis, even with the bad seventies hair and the
bell bottoms is a hottie. She also does a pretty good job in the acting
department, considering that this was her first role. The story is pretty
good considering this is a slasher flick. It is even more interesting if you
also watch the sequel that gives a bit more of the back story.
No review of Halloween would be complete without the requisite fun fact
about this movie. Take a good look at Michael Myers white mask that he wears
throughout his killing spree. You may just notice that it is actually a
William Shatner (that's right Trekkies, good old Captain Kirk himself)
Halloween mask painted white. Other fun bloopers include the fact that the
film is supposed to be set in Illinois but all of the cars have California
license plates. I would recommend Halloween to anyone who wants a good
scare, despite the fact that it looks very dated in places. One other
recommendation that I would make is that if at all possible watch Halloween
and its sequel at the same time as they take place within hours of each
other.

Author
Justin Felix
HALLOWEEN (1978)
A "Turkey of the Week" film review by Justin Felix.  
Copyright 1998 Justin Felix.  
These reviews are archived at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Justin+Felix
Screenplay by John Carpenter and Debra Hill.  
Directed by John Carpenter.  
Starring Donald Pleasence, Jamie Lee Curtis.  
Rated R (contains violence, profanity, and brief nudity)  93 mins.  
Synopsis:  Silent Michael Myers escapes a mental institution 15 years after
murdering his sister, dons a William Shatner mask, stalks an intelligent
babysitter, and terrorizes his hometown on Halloween.  Brooding, impatient
Dr. Loomis, Michael's psychiatrist, pursues him, constantly reminding
people that Myers is evil.  
Comments:  A challenge was made to me: watch and write a film review for a
movie that's actually good.  I decided that this movie couldn't be
something too obvious, like an epic that won a billion Academy Awards, but
it still had to be a genre classic of some sort (since most of the turkeys
I review are horror, suspense, and sci-fi films).  What better film to fit
the bill than the original HALLOWEEN?  
It's hard to believe that HALLOWEEN, a modern horror classic, turns 20 this
year.  To commemorate (or perhaps "cash in" is a more accurate way of
putting things) HALLOWEEN's anniversary, a sixth sequel is due out later
this year.  Titled HALLOWEEN: H20, it will star Jamie Lee Curtis and
reportedly (and thankfully) ignore the last four sequels of this horror
franchise.  Video Treasures released a special anniversary edition of
HALLOWEEN last year featuring a widescreen presentation and the original
theatrical trailer.  Two more good reasons to revisit the original and
write a film review of it.  
Though not the first slasher film ever made, HALLOWEEN's success spawned,
to a certain extent, the slasher movie craze of the 1980s which included
such franchises as FRIDAY THE 13TH and NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET.  Despite a
few obvious goofs with the setting (e.g. it's October 31 in Illinois yet
all the trees are green), HALLOWEEN passes the test of time remarkably
well.  I am not a big fan of the slasher genre itself; most are derivative
and highly predictable.  HALLOWEEN, however, manages to be very suspenseful
-- and it does so without a huge body count and overemphasis on gore like
so many other slasher movies.  
HALLOWEEN's story appears simple enough.  Michael Myers, at the age of six,
stabs his sister to death on Halloween.  15 years later, capitalizing on an
apparent lapse in security at a mental institution, Michael escapes and
returns to his hometown of Haddonfield, Illinois.  Why?  It's never made
quite clear (although sequels would offer a few lame motives).  This is one
of the original HALLOWEEN's strengths.  Though the audience sees many
lengthy scenes from the subjective eyes of Myers himself, it's never quite
clear what he's up to.  The lack of motive adds to the audience's
uncertainty of what will happen next, intensifying the suspense.  HALLOWEEN
is a rare example of a film that never really answers all the questions
that it sets up but still pleases the audience.  Sure, suggestions are made
about the masked Myers: Dr. Loomis, his psychiatrist, connects Myers to the
devil at one point; children think he's some kind of supernatural
boogeyman.  Whoever or whatever he really is, though, doesn't matter too
much.  He's evil, plain and simple, and he has returned to a sleepy little
town where houses are lined up, row after row (like graves at a cemetary as
the movie implies but never explicitly states), filled with people in
danger of being slaughtered.  The twist ending becomes believable because
of the enigmatic Myers, and the central theme during the closing shots
suggests that evil never dies.  It just hides in places where you least
expect, waiting and watching for the right time and place to strike.  It's
truly creepy (and hard to explain to those who haven't seen the film
without spoiling the ending).  
As stated before, HALLOWEEN lacks the excessive body count that many
slasher films rely upon.  Myers murders a total of four people -- one of
them in flashback -- a comparatively low figure.  The murder scenes prove
frightning rather than disgusting (many slasher films use gory special
effects and lots of blood).  Myers dispatches his victims rather violently,
granted, but director Carpenter chooses not to linger upon the gore.
Instead, he shows Myers curiously examining the victims after they have
died, suggesting the killer has a child-like wonder or fascination of what
he has just done.  It's later revealed -- somewhat anyway -- what's going
on in Myers's head as he examines the corpses.  Myers is such a successful
horror figure in this movie that his presence is felt even when he is not
seen.  Carpenter effectively places the masked, cloaked figure at the side
of a scene or in the background watching.  Watching and waiting.  So, even
when he's not present, the audience never knows when he will appear.  In a
climatic scene, a classic scene in horror film history I think, for
example, Myers's mask slowly becomes illuminated by moonlight (?) in the
utter darkness behind a frightened babysitter (Jamie Lee Curtis in a
career-starting role).  To experience the full effect of Carpenter's
masterful usage of Myers's presence and nonpresence, one must see the
widescreen version on video (or, if lucky, at a theater).  The pan-and-scan
versions for TV and most video releases ruin the effect.  
Despite its low budget, HALLOWEEN possesses a very strong cast.  Jamie Lee
Curtis began her successful acting career as the virtuous teenager who
becomes trapped inside a house with Myers.  She plays the part convincingly
and realistically.  She will return to her roots in the upcoming HALLOWEEN:
H20 (as an interesting side note: Janet Leigh, Curtis's mother, will make
an appearance in H20.  Leigh also starred in the grandaddy of all slasher
films, Hitchcock's PSYCHO).  British actor Donald Pleasence, who would
become a mainstay in the lackluster HALLOWEEN sequels, plays Michael's
psychiatrist very well.  Some of his gloom-and-doom lines are performed in
such a fashion that they'll bring a smile to horror enthusiasts everywhere.  
HALLOWEEN is undoubtedly one of the best independent, low-budget horror
films ever made.  It is also one of my favorites (though, to be honest, I
have so many favorites...).  The last half hour of this movie is just
non-stop suspense.  It had me frightened the first time I saw it years and
years ago, and it's still effective today.  John Carpenter not only
directed and co-wrote this classic thriller, but he also composed a highly
memorable and chilling soundtrack as well.  The theme, typically played on
piano, resurfaces again and again throughout the movie, heightening the
suspense better than just about any horror film score I can think of.  All
in all, HALLOWEEN is a cinematic gem that came from a budget and
circumstances which usually produce turkeys.  I highly recommend it.  
HALLOWEEN is rated R and is very intense despite its relative lack of gore
and blood.  Children may be easily frightened, and people who do not view
themes typical in slasher films favorably (i.e. serial killers,
women-in-danger, or sex) will probably be offended by this movie as well.
Fans of the SCREAM movies, by the way, will definately want to check
HALLOWEEN out, as they borrow heavily from it.
Huh.  Writing a film review without having to ridicule the movie was rather
fun.  I'll have to do this again sometime!  (Review written on June 30,
1998)

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1978
U.S. Release Date: 10/25/78 (limited)
Running Length: 1:33
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, profanity, sex, brief nudity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 2.35:1
Cast: Jamie Lee Curtis, Donald Pleasance, Nancy Loomis, P.J. Soles, 
      Charles Cyphers, Nick Castle
Director: John Carpenter
Producers: Debra Hill
Screenplay: Debra Hill and John Carpenter
Cinematography: Dean Cundey
Music: John Carpenter
U.S. Distributor: Compass International Pictures
     In late 1978, a small horror film opened in Bowling Green, Kentucky 
(before moving on to Chicago and New York City) that would change the 
face of the genre.  Initially dismissed by many serious critics as 
unworthy of attention or praise, the motion picture looked headed for an 
oblivion where it would never make back its small, $300,000 budget.  
Then, months later, Tom Allen's insightful and complimentary essay 
appeared in THE VILLAGE VOICE.  Suddenly, critics began to notice that 
there was more to this film than initially met the eye.
     Because of its title, HALLOWEEN has frequently been grouped 
together with all the other splatter films that populated theaters 
throughout the late-1970s and early-1980s.  However, while HALLOWEEN is 
rightfully considered the father of the modern slasher genre, it is not 
a member (the HALLOWEEN sequels, on the other hand, are).  This is not a 
gruesome motion picture -- there is surprisingly little graphic violence 
and almost no blood.  HALLOWEEN is built on suspense, not gore, and 
initiated more than a few of today's common horror/thriller cliches.  
The ultimate success of the movie, however, encouraged other film makers 
to try their hand at this sort of enterprise, and it didn't take long 
for someone to decide that audiences wanted as many explicitly grisly 
scenes as the running length would allow.  By the time HALLOWEEN's 
sequel was released in 1981, the objective of this sort of movie was no 
longer to scare its viewers, but to gross them out.
     From a shock-and-suspense point-of-view, HALLOWEEN is the rival of 
Alfred Hitchcock's PSYCHO.  With only a few arguable exceptions (such as 
THE EXORCIST), there isn't another post-1970 release that comes close to 
it in terms of scaring the living hell out of a viewer.  HALLOWEEN 
starts out in a creepy fashion with a brutal murder, and never lets up 
from there.  Every frame drips with atmosphere.  Who cares that it was 
filmed during the spring in California instead of during the autumn in 
fictional Haddonfield, Illinois?
     HALLOWEEN was the film that earned Jamie Lee Curtis the infamous 
title of "Scream Queen."  She plays Laurie Strode, the virginal 
protagonist.  Curtis' capable interpretation of the gawky, awkward 
Laurie is frequently overlooked in analyses of the movie and its genre, 
but she effectively conveys the feelings and aspirations of a shy, 
insecure teenager.  It's hard to believe that the actress would develop 
(in more ways than one) into a woman whose sexual appeal would drive 
pictures like A FISH CALLED WANDA.
     The film opens with a long, single-shot prologue that takes place 
on Halloween night, 1963.  A young Michael Myers watches as his older 
sister, Judith, sneaks upstairs for a quickie with a guy from school.  
After the boyfriend has departed, Michael takes a knife out of the 
kitchen drawer, ascends the staircase, and stabs Judith to death.  The 
entire sequence employs the subjective point-of-view, an approach that 
writer/director John Carpenter returns to repeatedly throughout the 
movie.  Only after the deed is done do we learn that Michael is only a 
grade-schooler.
     The bulk of the movie takes place fifteen years later.  Michael, 
confined to an asylum for the criminally insane for more than ten years, 
escapes on the night before Halloween.  His doctor, Sam Loomis (Donald 
Pleasance), believing Michael to be the embodiment of evil, tracks the 
killer back to his hometown of Haddonfield.  From there, it's a race 
against time as Loomis seeks to locate and stop Michael before he starts 
again where he left off in 1963. 
     Michael's primary victims are Laurie and her two best friends, 
Annie (Nancy Loomis) and Lynda (P.J. Soles).  Throughout the film, 
Michael is shown gradually closing in on the girls, until, in the final 
act, Laurie is involved in a face-to-face fight for her life.  Much has 
been made of the fact that the key to survival in HALLOWEEN is being a 
virgin.  The three girls who have sex with their boyfriends (Judith 
Myers, Annie, and Lynda) don't survive their encounters with Michael.  
Laurie, who has nothing to do with boys, does.  Co-writers Carpenter and 
Debra Hill have stated numerous times that this was not a conscious 
theme, but, ever since HALLOWEEN, the standard for slasher films has 
been that sexual promiscuity leads to a violent end.
     Nick Castle plays Michael (who is referred to in the end credits as 
"the shape") as an implacable, inhuman adversary.  Because he wears a 
painted white Captain Kirk mask, we only once (briefly) see his 
features, and this makes him all the more frightening.  He kills without 
making a sound or changing his expression, and his movements are often 
slow and zombie-like.  Carpenter is exceedingly careful in chosing the 
camera angles he uses to shoot Michael.  Before the climax, there's 
never a clear close-up -- he's always concealed by shadows, shown in the 
distance, or presented as otherwise obscured.  This approach makes for 
an especially ominous villain.  Subsequent HALLOWEENs delved more deeply 
into Michael's origins and his connection to Laurie, but, in this one, 
he remains an enigma, and the lack of a clear motive makes his actions 
all the more terrifying.  
     Another important element of HALLOWEEN's success is our ability to 
identify with the trio of female protagonists, and Carpenter establishes 
a rapport between the audience and the characters by employing 
intelligent, realistic dialogue and placing the girls in believable 
situations.  For Annie and Lynda, the most important thing about 
Halloween night is finding a place to have sex with their boyfriends.  
For Laurie, it's making sure the kid she's babysitting is having a good 
time.  Annie and Lynda are blissfully unaware of their danger until it's 
too late, but Laurie recognizes her peril.  Meanwhile, if Michael 
represents pure evil, Sam Loomis is the avenging angel.  He's the voice 
of reason that no one listens to, and, in the end, he's the cavalry 
coming over the mountain, gun blazing. 
     HALLOWEEN is one of those films where the attention to detail is 
evident in every frame.  While there are many memorable moments, three 
scenes stand out above the rest.  The first is the long, unbroken 
opening sequence where the young Michael dons a clown mask and murders 
his sister.  Often copied, but never equaled, this scene was unique for 
its time and reminiscent of PSYCHO's shower murder for its effect.  The 
second also occurs early in the movie, as Michael escapes from the 
asylum during a rain storm.  To this day, I find these to be the most 
chilling three minutes of the movie.  Finally, there's the scene near 
the end where Laurie is banging on a locked door while Michael 
approaches slowly and inexorably from behind.  It's a credit to 
Carpenter that, no matter how many times you've seen the movie, the 
tension at this point still mounts to a palpable level.
     Despite being relatively simple and unsophisticated, HALLOWEEN's 
music is one of its strongest assets.  Carpenter's dissonant, jarring 
themes provide the perfect backdrop for Michael's activity, proving that 
a film doesn't need a symphonic score by an A-line composer to be 
effective.  Carpenter's HALLOWEEN main title, one of the horror genre's 
best-recognizable tunes, can bring chills even away from the theater.  
Try putting it in the tape deck when you're alone in the car sometime 
after midnight on a lonely country road, and see if you feel secure.
     The final body count in HALLOWEEN is surprisingly low (the 
immediate sequel, HALLOWEEN 2, rectified this matter, but that's another 
story), but the terror quotient is high.  This is the kind of impeccably 
crafted motion picture that burrows deep into our psyche and connects 
with the dark, hidden terrors that lurk there.  HALLOWEEN is not a 
perfect movie, but no recent horror film has attained this pinnacle (as 
evidenced by the plaudits heaped upon it in Wes Craven's recent SCREAM).  
Likewise, John Carpenter has never come close to recapturing HALLOWEEN's 
artistic or commercial success, though he has tried many times.  
HALLOWEEN remains untouched -- a modern classic of the most horrific 
kind.
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"For me, the cinema is not a slice of life, but a piece of cake."

Author
James Brundage
Halloween : The Boogeyman don't scare me.
Someone once told me it was the most successful independent film of all
time. Someone else told me that it revolutionized horror. Yet another told
me it created horror (HELLO, Psycho?). Personally, I don't see what the big
deal is all about. There are movies that I just can't stand. That their even
being created mystifies me. Halloween was such a film.
Like all of the horror movies that you and I, the babies and the people who
lived through the 80s dealt with, it has the same basic plot: Psycho escaped
from institution has fun stabbing/gutting/strangling/decapitating (based
upon film) the victims of his killing spree.
 Like most horror movies, it could have been good for a laugh. But no. Trust
John Carpenter (director) to give us a film that takes itself so seriously
that you just can't laugh at it. All you can do is sit there with that
glazed look in your eyes.
I am truly sorry it was made. If it wasn't, there would be no horror genre
(for mass market), and we would be out some of the worst films of all time.
Granted, the Scream franchise would be gone too, but I could live with that.
I'm sorry if you already saw it. I'm sorry if you want to see it. Please, I
implore you, don't waste your time.

Author
David Wilcock
Starring Jamie Lee Curtis and Donald Pleasence
Directed By John Carpenter (The Thing, Escape from New York)
A Compass Films Production.
In this likeable slasher movie, a seriously disturbed boy (who, although
he's called Michael Myers, has nothing to do with the Mike Myers of Waynes
World's fame!) kills his sister, gets locked up in a mental home, and,
thirty years later, escapes, ready to terrorise his neighbourhood again.
Pleasence knows about him and tries to stop him, Curtis soon  learns about
him and tries to stop it. It basically amounts to a load of jump scenes put
together very slickly.
The film is standard jumpy fare. It's the sort of film where the lead
character would see something rustling behind the bushes, would walk up to
the bush slowly, would look round the bush slowly...and.....there's nothing
there! S/he, of course would then turn around, and bump into the local
sheriff/old guy/kid, giving the hero, and the audience, a short scare. The
film does this well. The audience gets nervous because they don't know if
something will jump out the bushes/cupboard/door. Of course, the film has
it's fair amount of gore, there's lots of silly supporting characters who
do silly things, and the usual sex scene. In theory this should be very
tacky, but Carpenter directs it in such a way, and the music plays scarily
throughout, you can't help but feel a little nervous and scared.
Sadly, however, the ending can't hold up. It's silly, and not very scary.
In fact, I thought the ending took an easy route out, and left itself open
for a sequel (which, of course, they have been loads of). In fact, like The
Game, the ending let down the film a bit. However, I still recommended
this, especially if you get a big group of friends, turns the lights out,
and make silly noises throughout. 
