Title
Review for Clerks (1994)
Number of Reviews
14

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  One day in the life of two clerks.
     CLERKS. is a very funny and perceptive film debut for
     writer/director/editor/clerk Kevin Smith.  This ultra-
     low budget film proves the most cost-effective
     ingredient to improve the quality of a film is the
     writing.  Rating: +2 (-4 to +4)
     The logo at the beginning of the film is a microcosm of the film
itself.  Technically it is a poor piece of animation.  Under the title
telling us this is a View Askew Production is a slightly off-color gag
that is fairly funny.  And CLERKS. is the first View Askew production,
a comedy about clerks at the local Quick Stop.  In fact, Kevin Smith,
who wrote the film based on years of experience clerking, shot the film
at night, then when the daylight came the actors cleared out and Smith
worked behind the counter as (what else?) a clerk.  He paid for the
film on what little he could get from backers, even less that he could
earn clerking, and money he could borrow with his credit cards.  The
film is shot in black and white with virtually no art direction.  To
prepare the store for shooting, Kevin Smith moved the lottery machine
off the counter.  Smith had only two professional actors.  Second
billing went to Jeff Anderson who has no acting experience (and happens
to work in the mail room of the same company I work for).  This goes
beyond film minimalism; in only slightly less capable hands this would
be considered an amateur film.  Instead it won top prize in the
Critics' Week section at Cannes, has been doing very well at other film
festivals, and has been fought over by distributors.  Miramax won the
battle and will spend four times the cost of the film just promoting
it.  Why has it been so successful?  Because Kevin Smith is a good
writer with a great sense of humor.  Good jokes and dialogue are cheap
and are most of what this film has to offer.
     Dante (Brian O'Halloran) didn't plan to work today.  He wanted to
take it easy and play a little hockey in the afternoon.  But when you
are a clerk you have to answer even the unexpected call of duty.  The
day starts badly with first some vandalism discovered and then an
anti-smoking activist trying to scare off cigarette customers.  Dante's
girlfriend Veronica (Marilyn Ghigliotti) visits, and the two sit behind
the counter and have an explicit sex discussion in which each is
shocked by the other's experience.  Dante's best friend Randal (Jeff
Anderson) drops in from the video store next door where he clerks.  And
so the day goes with friends and weirdo customers coming in and
leaving.  Through the dialogue we get a story of a love triangle, and
another of unfinished business between friends.
     In fact, this is not a typical day at all in a Quick Stop.  Like
the flight in MEMPHIS BELLE, it is a distillation of the most dramatic
parts of many days.  Even with that, the plotting is pretty mundane
stuff.  What sets this film apart is the dialogue which is often
hilarious.  Not unlike PULP FICTION, the story is broken into titled
substories.  The one-word titles of those stories (e.g.  "Syntax,"
"Juxtaposition") do not always make sense, but they do focus the
audience in on the story.
     Smith tells his story with no more violence than a poorly staged
fist fight between two people who are really friends.  There is no
nudity or on-screen sex, yet the MPAA rated the film an NC-17 for
extremely explicit sexual language.  This seriously damaged the film's
profit potential and Miramax hired Alan Dershowitz to appeal the
rating.  Without any cuts the MPAA changed the rating to an R.  But for
those who are bothered by such things, be warned that the language is
very explicit.  Still CLERKS. is one of the funnier comedies you are
likely to see this year.  I give it a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
     CLERKS. qualifies as a genuinely experimental film if for no other
reason than that it is the only film in recent memory to have scenes in
a convenience store without having the store being robbed.  Earlier
cuts of the film had Dante murdered at the end in a robbery, but that
ending has been excised.
     Note: The film and Kevin Smith's cap list the title with a period.
Every place else the period seems to be dropped.  I assume that Smith,
who titled the film, prefers the title with the punctuation.

Author
Chad Polenz
****
1994, R, 92 minutes [1 hour, 32 minutes]
[comedy]
starring: Brian O'Halloran (Dante), Jeff Anderson (Randal), Marilyn
Ghiglotti (Veronica), Jason Mewes (Jay), Lisa Spoonauer (Caitlin),
produced by Kevin Smith, Scott Mosier, written and directed by Kevin
Smith.
        "Clerks" is really a landmark in film history, although I don't
think anyone will recognize it as such. This is a film that cost about
$25,000 to make, yet it is much more enjoyable and better written than
most commercial films costing a thousand times as much. This is a film
about Generation X slackers hanging out in a convenient store talking
about their lives and little idiosyncrasies in a way that is so mundane,
yet so unique and sometimes vulgar, but still brilliantly hysterical. We
don't get a story with characters trying to overcome a conflict, we
essentially get a fictional documentary that really captures the essence
of dialogue, especially modern dialogue. Many non-Gen Xers may find it
rather offensive and unrealistic at times, but those of us who are
essentially the same as the characters in the film can relate all too
well.
This is a film about two buddies hanging out in their place of
employment. There is Dante (O'Halloran), the clerk who tries to do his job
and get on with his life -  "I don't bother them and they don't bother
me." Dante hates his life but somehow finds a way to deal with it, he
comes to work and does his job just hoping that tomorrow will be a better
day. And then there is Randal (Anderson), the rude, but very funny slacker
who represents the attitude that we Gen Xers think, but don't say aloud.
He speaks his mind, he poses questions that we don't really think about
(one involving an extremely detailed, but very hilarious analysis, of the
"Star Wars" films), he also refuses to be nice to customers, nor swallow
his pride just for the sake of etiquette and courtesy. 
Dante and Randal are both 22, work full time at minimum wage jobs
serving the public, are not in school and may never go back. They hate
everyone and everything, and this tension is often relieved on their
customers. The entire atmosphere of the film is so campy and almost
"realistic" in a way, as it was shot in a very grainy black and white and
does not feature a celebrity, which only makes the tone more suited for
the story. These bare essentials are what force us to pay attention to the
basic elements of theme, mood, and dialogue.
I can relate to this film so well because I have had experience in
very similar occupations. There are conversations in this movie that are
almost word-for-word duplications of conversations I have had with
co-workers. For example, when Dante and Randal start to complain about
customers and their stupid questions, I was dying laughing because it was
just so true for me. There is a very funny scene in which Randal beats a
customer at their own game, as he blatantly admits that he doesn't care
for them and that it feels good to point out the shortcomings of others,
ahh... how true that is. Even if you are not, or never have been in a
position like this, it is still hysterical because of the genius knack of
dialogue that Kevin Smith has, and his sense of character for Gen Xers. 
Dante and his girlfriend Veronica (Ghiglotti) constantly argue
over the importance of college, the differences in the requirements to
make men and women come to orgasm, and deciding who and what is most
important in a relationship. Specific examples are not given, but the
entire atmosphere of the film really gives one the sense of what modern
relationships are based on, that is, nothing. 
At some points "Clerks" can get rather crude, but the dialogue did
not seem unbelievable to me. Even though the actors are not professionals,
they are able to deliver a credible and very entertaining performance.
There are many scenes where it is obvious that they are reading cue cards,
one scene even shows the actor admitting that he messed up the line, but
the improvisation is still funny and does not break our concentration at
all. 
I still think that "Clerks" is truly a landmark of sorts, as it is
somewhat following a trend of telling funny stories about "nothing" as
this story is the epitome of that idea and does not become commercial at
all, as it relies upon its originality and comical genius to provide for a
very funny, very entertaining, and very unique film unlike any you will
ever see. Kevin Smith has basically exploited my generation, and for that
I thank him. [other films by Smith: "Mallrats"] (3/19/96) (12/18/96)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Brian O'Halloran, Jeff Anderson, Marilyn Ghiglitotti,
Lisa Spoonhauer.
Screenplay/Director:  Kevin Smith.
     For the past few years, filmmakers have been trying to capture
what it is that defines the generation which has thus far been
difficult even to name.  So-called "Generation X" films like SINGLES;
BODIES, REST & MOTION; and REALITY BITES have tried, but their target
audience seems to have rejected those attempts.  At first glance,
CLERKS appears to be cut from the same cloth, a bargain basement
variation on tales of cynical, over-qualified and under-achieving
whiners.  But CLERKS is a horse of a different color (black and white,
in fact), a sly episodic story with a challenging perspective.
     CLERKS examines one day in the life of two 22-year-old New Jersey
residents living in the exciting world of retail.  Dante (Brian
O'Halloran) is called in to work at his job at a convenience store on
his day off; Randal (Jeff Anderson) works at the video store next
door.  While they share a friendship, they have little else in common.
Dante hates his job but rejects the entreaties of girlfriend Veronica
(Marily Ghigliotti) to return to school, and worries about leaving the
store unattended.  Randal, meanwhile, shuts down the video store
whenever the mood strikes him, is openly hostile to his customers, and
goads Dante into taking more chances.  Dante also obsesses over his
ex-girlfriend Caitilin (Lisa Spoonhauer), whom he has just discovered
is engaged.
     Made for a paltry $36,000 by writer/director Kevin Smith, CLERKS
frequently shows its low-budget roots in performances which can
charitably be called amateurish.  Jeff Anderson in particular reads his
line like a student in a high school production, and his big emotional
speeches are pitched at about the same level as his sarcastic banter.
Brian O'Halloran has an easy-going and engaging presence, but he's
often far too broad in his physical acting.  Only Lisa Spoonhauer as
the sexy and sharp Caitlin puts much real spark into her performance.
Smith's direction is simple, but his insistence on swinging his camera
back and forth in two-character scenes also proves distracting.  Like
GO FISH earlier this year, CLERKS is occasionally just a bit too clunky
to be completely endearing.
     The episodes which make up CLERKS are of inconsistent quality, but
the good ones are very good.  A conversation between Dante and Veronica
concerning their respective sexual histories is a riot, and Dante and
Randal share an illuminating discussion on the moral implications of
blowing up the "outside contractors" working on the second Death Star
in RETURN OF THE JEDI.  The dialogue is filled with ultra-crude
observations which almost earned CLERKS an NC-17 rating, but they're
caustic and on-target.  Randal in particular, who acts both as the
devil on Dante's shoulder and as the real voice of reason in CLERKS,
gets some marvelous lines, though virtually every one of them is
unprintable.  Less effective are sequences involving a roller hockey
game on the store's roof which simply lasts too long, and a montage of
annoying customer types which is a bit is too cutesy.
     But CLERKS turns out to be more than just the sum of its parts.
In the final fifteen minutes, Smith begins pulling the threads of his
narrative together with a surprising message about the twenty-
somethings.  Dante becomes a character representative of everything
that is wrong with his generational peers, wallowing in self-pity and
willing to blame everyone but himself for the circumstances of his
life, and Randal's brutally honest rebuke is perhaps the film's
highlight.  Kevin Smith places himself in the awkward position of
chastising those who are most likely to be his audience, and it is that
daring that makes CLERKS most worthy of admiration; it is not often
that personal responsibility is the moral to a story.  While he may not
have had all the tools at his disposal that a studio filmmaker would
have had to tell this story, Kevin Smith did have a story to tell.
CLERKS is unquestionably uneven, but it is also a very funny wake-up
call to the over-the-counter culture.

Author
Sue Roberts
Directed by Kevin Smith.
Starring Brian O'Halloran, Jeff Anderson, Mary Ghigliotti.
Wicked, amusing and possibly the most outrageous thing you will hear
in a long time.
It opens a door on the life of  Dante and shows a hell of a day. The 
boss has gone to Connecticut and the poor guy finds it anything but 
convenient that he's been left him to mind the shop. 
The customers are a truly bizarre assortment of folk. However its not 
hard for him to appear competent compared to Randal from the store next 
door!
A hockey game was planned, but things don't turn out the way he 
intended.The funeral was unexpected, and when a lady from the past turns 
up, it causes him to ask where his life is headed!.
Like all good comedy it leans on the boundaries of taste, but has a ring
of truth underlying some of the jokes. The conversation stretches over 
life, the universe and everything. Is it any wonder with this assortment 
of characters dropping in? 
Orson Welles made "F for Fake" about how the camera can be used 
to confuse the viewer's perception of what is fact, or fabrication, in 
art and in life. But Smith goes further down the road towards Ken 
Loach's "Raining Stones" in his choice of social realism for a backdrop. 
The grain of the black and white filmstock gives this film the ambience 
of a documentary and I think it is the presentation of fiction in this  
format which makes "Clerks" astonishingly powerful. 
He puts his finger neatly on the sense of women that education is 
something to be fought for, but asks some impertinent questions about 
whether they are using their freedom without responsibility. Maybe the 
hockey players are not alone in taking their eye off the ball.
Perhaps most astonishing is the representation of young men with little 
conception of how, or where, they might engage with society.
Such a satire, that dénouement. The mere suggestion that a dealer could 
have more commitment to his work than a bona fide employee, and more 
awareness of what is relevant in life, points to some glaring holes in 
what this world seems to offer the next generation.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     CLERKS is about a day in the life of two convenience store clerks
in New Jersey.  It is an almost no budget film that was made on location
in New Jersey about an hour from where I lived for many years.  If you
like quirky shows, the plot of this one has great potential.
Personally, I love this type of picture.  In fact some of my favorite
movies are SHERMAN'S MARCH, ALWAYS: BUT NOT NECESSARILY FOREVER, MY
DINNER WITH ANDRE, 35 UP, EATING RAOUL, and HOUSE OF GAMES--which all
qualify as very strange and off-beat.
     CLERKS was filmed in a grainy black and white that has numerous
contrast problems.  The movie was written and directed by Kevin Smith.
The actors seem to all be fresh out of Acting 101, and I will not list
their names as I feel sure you know none of them.  I read later that
the lead actor works in the mailroom at AT&T and is still waiting for
his break into a movie with a budget.
     Movies like this either work for you or they don't.  This one
frequently put me to sleep.  I know there are better actors in New
Jersey, I remember seeing some excellent ones in the New Jersey
Shakespeare Festival every year.  The minor characters in the movie who
play the local losers and drug dealers who hang out at the convenience
store are played by high school kids who appear have to have failed
Acting 101.
     CLERKS is not a waste however.  It is done as a series of
vignettes.  Some of them do work and are quite funny as written if not
as acted.  We have the guy who gets his hand stuck in the Prinkels tube
while trying to get out the last few potato chips.   There is another
scene where a guy talks people out of buying cigarettes by showing them
a lung of someone who has died of lung cancer--the mystery in this
scene is what is the guy's real occupation that motivates him to do
this.  Many of the vignettes deal with long discussions of unusual sex
practices.
     If you go to the movie, listen to the dialog and forget the
attempt at acting.  Some of the material is good and for that I award
it * 1/2.  I do not recommend this movie to anyone.  On the other hand,
if you really like strange movies, you might go to this one and find it
works for you--good luck.  It is the sort of show that could become a
cult classic.  The movie runs a long 1:43.  It has no nudity or
violence, but lots of explicit conversations and is correctly rated R.
I think it would be acceptable for older teenagers.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: November 10, 1994
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
David Dalgleish
"This job would be great if it wasn't for the fucking customers."
Starring Brian O'Halloran, Jeff Anderson, Marilyn Ghigliotti, Lisa Spoonhauer
Written & Directed by Kevin Smith
Cinematography by David Klein
        Kevin Smith is a frustrating director.  The man clearly has talent: 
last year's CHASING AMY was a smart, funny, surprisingly wise film.  
But the wretched MALLRATS and the uneven CLERKS seem to be the work of 
a lazy writer, someone with inspiration and skill, but without the 
discipline to keep his work at a consistently high level of quality.  
CLERKS was Smith's debut, and, in a sense, it anticipates both CHASING 
AMY and MALLRATS.  It is a hit-and-miss affair (with the emphasis on 
miss): moments of CHASING AMY's wit are interspersed throughout 
tedious stretches of MALLRATS' juvenile humour.
        The premise is simple.  We follow an eventful day in the life of 
Dante (Brian O'Halloran), a clerk in a convenience store.  He is 
visited by his girlfriend and ex-girlfriend (Marilyn Ghigliotti, Lisa 
Spoonhauer), attends a wake, plays hockey on the roof of the store, 
and discusses RETURN OF THE JEDI, auto-fellatio, and the worthlessness 
of guidance counsellors, usually accompanied by Randal (Jeff 
Anderson), the clerk from the adjacent video store.  Jay and Silent 
Bob (Jason Mewes, Kevin Smith) hang around outside the store, 
occasionally dropping in.  And, of course, Dante and Randal must deal 
with obnoxious customers, like a man in search of perfect eggs and a 
man who won't stop talking about tabloid headlines--at least not until 
someone spits water in his face.
        Much of the film consists of nothing more than a few characters 
relaxing and talking.  Smith, fortunately, has a flair for dialogue, 
and isn't afraid to let his characters be smart and verbose.  Some of 
the lines are good (high school is about "algebra, bad lunch, and 
infidelity"); others fall flat.  The actors, unfortunately, aren't 
quite up to the challenge of making the dialogue sound authentic.  
Mostly, it sounds like exactly what it is--contrived, scripted lines.  
O'Halloran is quite good, but the rest of the cast are not able to 
deliver their lines in a natural, unstilted manner, and often sound 
like they are reading from a teleprompter.
        They are not helped by Smith's direction: there are many static, long 
takes of characters simply talking and doing little else.  Woody Allen 
has used this technique to great effect, but while Smith may have a 
flair for dialogue, as a director he is nowhere near Allen's level.  
The film, as a result, grows tedious after a while, not helped by some 
recurring jokes which lose whatever charm they had very, very quickly.  
The frequent use of 'chapter' titles like "Perspicacity" and "Malaise" 
is particularly annoying, being both pointless and unfunny, as is a 
recurring joke about shoe polish.
        The film as a whole is too contrived for my taste.  Smith tries too 
hard to be funny: the people who visit the store are caricatures and 
the situations are exaggerated, telegraphing the humour.  A less 
forced approach could have resulted in a funnier film: allowing the 
situations to develop naturally, allowing the customers to seem real, 
would have given us a better pay-off.  Smith has a gift for observing 
the natural interactions between people, yet seems afraid to let them 
remain natural.  And some sequences are simply tedious, like the 
rooftop hockey game.  CLERKS is a good idea, poorly executed.
        That this movie was made at all--and then distributed--is something 
of a triumph, however, given its infinitesimal budget and 
less-than-stellar production values.  And Smith's profane, 
self-indulgent dialogue is a refreshing contrast to all those 
Hollywood films where dialogue is used only to further the plot.  But 
the intended effect is better than the final result, and after CHASING 
AMY, CLERKS' pleasures seem even less rewarding.  Let's hope Smith is 
able to make more films as good as his last one, and doesn't get lazy 
again.

Author
Andrew Hicks
        I guess it's just the fact that I've been a teenager for the past 
five years and heard every possible obscenity and sexual innuendo 
on a daily basis, but the film CLERKS didn't offend me at all. There 
were certain lines of dialogue that morally disgusted me, but none 
of it had any shock value. Nothing new under the sun, as it were. 
But the Motion Picture Association of America took a different 
stance on the movie, slapping it with the dreaded NC-17 rating, 
the first movie ever to receive an NC-17 based on language alone. 
It was eventually reduced to R, but CLERKS is definitely an 
adult film, even if I've heard and read this kind of stuff since 
junior high.
        Talented director Kevin Smith brings us a day in the life 
of two slackers, Dante Hicks (no relation) and Randal, who work in 
a convenience store and video store, respectively (but not respectfully). 
Dante agrees to man the store on his day off because another employee 
is sick. He definitely picked the wrong day to come to work. By the 
day's end, he's closed the store twice to go to a funeral and play 
hockey on the roof, been responsible for an act of necrophelia, lost 
two girlfriends and been fined $500 for selling cigarettes to a four 
year old, among other things.
        In the wake of PULP FICTION's revolutionary use of 
pop-culture references in intelligent dialogue, CLERKS brings us 
several memorable exchanges, in sexual and nonsexual contexts, 
including the least respectable job on the planet (the guy who 
mops the peep show booths at a porno house), the ending of 
THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK vs. RETURN OF THE JEDI and 
Randal on the phone to the video distributor, ordering a couple 
dozen adult movie titles while a woman and her small child wait 
to be helped. There are plenty of G-rated sequences mixed in with 
the NC-17 ones, leading me to believe this movie actually could 
be shown on TV one day, albeit in an hour time slot.
        CLERKS is basically plotless, but Smith keeps it far 
above the level of a sitcom or "wild comedy" movie like D.C. 
CAB or REVENGE OF THE NERDS. It has a distinct identity 
no other "Generation X" film has brought us, filmed in black-
and-white, surveillance camera-style. Most artsy movies like this 
don't appeal to the masses, but CLERKS brings with it that 
self-indulgent air of dirty talk most people our age secretly enjoy 
engaging in at some point or another with our friends. What the 
MPAA needs to realize is that everyone's life would be rated 
NC-17 if it were a movie because none of us can escape the adult 
situations and dialogue life brings us. Not to mention the 
gratuitous nudity every time we take showers.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Jason Overbeck
CLERKS is raunchy, obscene, cheap and very funny throughout.  Made for
just 27,000, and set mostly in a convenience store, this represents a
vry good film made for very little money.  Often films get special
treatment and consideration if they cost less, and this is unfair
because it can be done.
Clerks cronicles the day of a Quick Stop Convience Store clerk Dante and
his buddy Randal next door who runs a bad video store.  Randal shows up
and starts utterly pointless yet often hilarious results.  Did
independent contractors get killed in The later of the Star Wars tilogy,
it was still being built when it was blown up?
Kevin Smith, the films writer and director, said that Randal represented
who he wants to be and Dante is who he is closest to.  You can tell by
the dialogue provided for his characters.  Dante is a loser, he pins for
two women and doesn't understand when one of them gets upset, he also
complains about his job constantly.  Randal doesn't care about anything,
he sits around, BS's with Dante and somethimes the costumers (when he's
not assaulting them), he is also provided with a great deal of the funny
dialogue.  
Jeff Anderson, who plays Russel, hasn't acted since his turn in Clerks. 
This is very unfortunate, Anderson provides perfectly cynical spins on
every line of dialogue, making even the dialogue that doesn't quite
work  seem funny.  Smith is moving towards bigger movies with bigger
stars and I wish we would get another look at Anderson and Brian
O'Halloran in more films.  In Clerks they have a perfectly funny
chemistry, and deliver this movie home.  People have criticized the
acting in this film , calling it a true sign of the films budget.  I
think the acting is perfect for this films feel, and I want to see more
of them.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     Made on the very meager budget of under $30,000, by a dropout from
film school, CLERKS is one of the funniest, good-natured and vocally
raunchy movie in a long, long while.  Originally slapped with the
dreaded NC-17, on appeal it was given an R rating.
     Dante Hicks (Brian O'Halloran) is a clerk at the Quick Stop
Groceries, in New Jersey, a convenience store where the nuttiest
customers in the world seem to frequent.  There is, to cite but one
example of many, the elderly man who asks to use the employee restroom
but who then requests to borrow one of the porn mags on the shelf to
take with him into the toilet.
     "Working" in a miserable video store next door, where he treats
the customers with utter disdain, is his friend, Randal (Jeff
Anderson).  Throughout the film, where every other word consists of
four letters spoken in a most offhand relaxed manner, are the customers
with whom the two have to contend, each of who is odd in his own way.
Randal is of the belief that every customer should be insulted.
     Writer-director Kevin Smith who himself worked on and off in a
convenience store does a masterful job in this his first film.  But
this is much more than a mere recounting of his experiences as a
register jockey.  This is one funny film.
     Also starring are Marilyn Ghigliotti (as Dante's devoted
girlfriend, Veronica) and Lisa Spoonauer (as Caitlin, the high school
ex-sweetheart who has just announced she is getting married).

Author
Raymond Johnston
Director: Kevin Smith
Starring: Brian O'Halloran, Jeff Anderson, Marilyn Ghigliotti.
     CLERKS is a bold and audacious comedy from New Jersey.  First-time
director Kevin Smith raised under $30,000 to make this black and white
ode to the minimum wage worker.  A sum that in Hollywood is not enough
to design even an advertising poster.  With that money and a cast of
unknowns he created a sometimes ragged but more often hilarious comedy
of errors.
     Originally the film was rated NC-17 for language alone.  A famous
lawyer made a freedom of speech argument and got it reduced to an R
without cutting.  CLERKS takes the obscene adolescent banter of the
aimless class and raises it to a new level.  The film charts the course
of one misbegotten day in the life of a convenience store clerk and a
video store clerk, neither of whom seem concerned with actually
working..  Most of the humor in the film is very crude, discussions
over sex and former girlfriends, descriptions of X-rated tapes.  But
the film is not just a barrage of crude jokes, if it were that the film
would be little more than a fast food version of POLICE ACADEMY.
Beneath the graphic dialogue are serious issues of relationships and
goals.  As things go progressively wrong, the clerks are forced to face
up to the shortcomings of their personalities.  Through an absurd
series of unlikely events they have to make choices that will effect
the rest of their lives.  Beneath all the crude banter, there is a
complex discussion of the two divergent philosophies of the clerks.
The variety of people who manage to wander into the stores keeps the
film being a monotonous two-character dialogue.  Odd (to say the least)
circumstances take the clerks out of the mall briefly to provide a
break from the one-set atmosphere.
     While the black and white film and realistic locations suggest a
documentary, the events quickly suggest surrealism.  Like Luis Bunuel's
great farces on the manners of the European upper classes,  CLERKS
takes a cross section of lower class people and faces them with the
sublimely ridiculous.  Dante, the main character, is plunged into a
world that seems to be plotting against him, and everyone he has ever
known or wanted to know.  Dante thought he had trouble when his relief
fails to show up so he can play hockey.  When he reads in the newspaper
that his girlfriend is getting married to somebody she never mentioned,
his troubles just begin.
      The shoestring budget and non-professional actors leads to a less
than perfect film.  In one long scene, shot with one camera movement,
one of the actors noticeably forgets her line.  Other actors give
somewhat stiff deliveries to their small bits.  The flaws really add a
dimension to the film.  They remind you that this is not a polished
multi-million dollar film where a team of 32 writers managed to come up
with nothing worth watching.  This film is a joke scribbled on the wall
as the pen runs out of ink.  The crudeness of the technique accents the
crudeness of the humor.

Author
Jerry Saravia
"Do you know what the real tragedy of all this is? I am not even supposed to be
here today!" - Dante
That one line sums up Dante's life in a nutshell (well-played by Brian
O'Halloran). He is a Quick Stop convenience store clerk in Leonardo, N.J. with
no real ambition in life except to serve customers and whine all day long. If
only he could see how farfetched that life is since he obviously possesses some
potential and is generally a smart guy. It only takes his best friend, Randal
(Jeff Anderson), and Dante's girlfriend, Veronica (Marilyn Ghigliotti), to make
him see the light. 
I am of course describing the incredibly funny debut of director Kevin Smith,
known as "Clerks," a hilarious, obscene and unpredictable comedy that is
something of a classic in its genre. The fact that it was independent shows
where real talent for writing lies - from people like Kevin Smith, Quentin
Tarantino, David O'Russell, among others. They all got their start in low-budget
features and Smith's debut may be the most impressive of all since I have yet to
see a film of his that rivals "Clerks" for sheer audacity and sharp humor. 
The film begins at Dante's home where he is woken by his boss and told to show
up for work. It's his day off and he has a hockey game in the afternoon but
there is not much of a choice - Dante has a problem saying no to people. He
shows up at the convenience store, opens it, discovers gum in the shutter locks,
and begins his day selling various items to customers. The customers who come to
the store are certainly a colorful bunch. One is a guidance counselor who
peruses each and every egg in the cartons. Another complains that the video
store next door is closed. There is an older man who needs to read porno
magazines in the bathroom. And so on. Randal is the next-door video store clerk
who shows up late and berates and curses his customers. He is the fearless
leader of his domain, abusing his power as a clerk as an excuse to spit on and
shout at people. Randal hardly spends much time in his store, and always walks
in to Dante's store and makes his life miserable. 
Randal: "But I love gatherings. Isn't that ironic?" 
There are too many good scenes, almost all are side-splittingly funny and
truthful. Randal is a jerk, but also an understanding and sensible jerk - he
knows his life as a clerk is not much and that doesn't stop him from offending
each and every customer. My favorite moment is when a customer asks about the
quality of a couple of videos. Randal doesn't pay attention, makes no eye
contact and points out to her that her "cunning attempt to trick him" is futile.
It's funny and pointed humor, offering real-life clerks an opportunity to hear
the things they would love to say. 
Every scene with Dante is also brilliant, including a long scene where his
girlfriend, Veronica, confesses to have had oral sex with about 37 guys. Dante's
nauseousness sets in, questioning how she could not have slept with the guys
like a decent person. His own manhood is tested and for the rest of the film, he
whines about her oral abilities, though Veronica is a very sweet person who
brings him lasagna to work. 
And how can one forget the introduction of the drug dealer duo, Jay (Jason
Mewes) and Silent Bob (Kevin Smith), both who find smoking weed and getting laid
is all  that life has to offer. 
Director Kevin Smith employs a proper visual cue of stabilizing his camera,
occasionally going in for a close-up shot and then cutting to a long-shot. Every
scene is practically a long-take so that we take the time to invest in Randal
and Dante's running monologues about irksome customers, the merits of "Return of
the Jedi," ex-girlfriends, funerals, and so on. It's a technique that works and
doesn't call attention to itself. The irreverence of "Clerks" shines through
like a bright diamond and Smith's ear for dialogue becomes clear. This style of
direction helps during the wild, unbelievably crude twist in the film that is as
shockingly profane as anything Smith has done since.
"Clerks" has been hailed as a rarity for low-budget pictures for its extreme
low-budget - roughly 27,000 dollars. This of course does not add to the
advertising and marketing campaign, not to mention a re-recorded soundtrack. It
has also been one of the few films to have reversed its initial rating of an
NC-17 to an R for raw language. Yes, it is raw but also hysterical, deep and
truthful. We are not talking about an onslaught of potty-mouthed words with no
rhyme or reason - Smith is too good a writer to let it sink to toilet humor.
Some have professed to finding "Clerks" raw and offensive. This may be true but
it is a one-of-a-kind comedy that speaks the truth of its characters more so
than most movies of its ilk. It's not just about vilification. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust668@aol.com

Author
James Berardinelli
Date Released:  10/14/94 (NY); 11/4/94 (wide)
Running Length:  1:37
Rated:  R (Graphic language, mature themes)
     1994 has boasted a number of innovative and humorous films:  FOUR
WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL, EAT DRINK MAN WOMAN, CIAO PROFESSORE!, THE
HUDSUCKER PROXY, MY LIFE'S IN TURNAROUND, FEAR OF A BLACK HAT, THE
ADVENTURES OF PRISCILLA QUEEN OF THE DESERT and SPANKING THE MONKEY.
Funnier than all these, and surely the current front-runner for comedy
of the year, is Kevin Smith's CLERKS, the hilariously R-rated debut
about life behind the counter at a Central Jersey convenience store.
     Smith, who filmed his low-budget black-and-white feature at the
Quick Stop shop where he worked, set out to make a film with "no
meaning whatsoever--just a lot of [four-letter word] jokes."  Despite
his original intention, however, the director slipped, and a theme
about the ennui of today's youth wormed its way in, giving CLERKS a
slight dramatic underpinning to its often-uproarious vignettes.
     The comedy is raw and ribald, varying from somewhat off-color to
truly tasteless.  Nothing, no matter how outrageous, is beyond Smith,
and his willingness to flaunt cinematic taboos is one of the reasons
why CLERKS is such a unqualified success.  Where else can you find an
explicit discussion of certain sexual practices immediately preceding
an argument over a unique interpretation of the ending of RETURN OF THE
JEDI?
     The dialogue of CLERKS has accurately captured the street language
common in the part of the country where the movie was filmed.  There
are a few lines that come across as scripted, but this is often the
result of the manner in which they're delivered (the actors are good,
but not seasoned).  As far as the level of profanity is concerned,
anyone spending time on a Monmouth County (New Jersey) street won't be
shocked, but those who are offended by such language should beware.
But for a successful appeal to the MPAA, the movie would have been
released with an NC-17 rating.  The obscenity count tops that of PULP
FICTION--not something easy to do, especially considering that CLERKS
is an hour shorter.
     By Smith's own admission, there isn't much of a plot--just a
loose framework to hold together a series of scenes featuring odd
personalities in bizarre situations.  The main characters are Dante
(Brian O'Halloran), a Quick Stop clerk who does his best to cater to
his customers, and Randal (Jeff Anderson), the man behind the counter
at a local video store who spends his time insulting and offending
every potential renter.  Also wandering in and out of the story are a
local drug-dealer, Jay (Jason Mewes), and his sidekick, Silent Bob
(Kevin Smith), as well as Dante's current girlfriend, Veronica (Marilyn
Ghigliotti), and his ex, Caitlin (Lisa Spoonhauer).
     Given more money, the director would have preferred a 35 mm color
shoot rather than a blowup of a 16 mm black-and-white print, but the
grainy, occasionally-"homemade" quality of the movie lends CLERKS a
pseudo-documentary look that a more polished product would not have
achieved.  It's hard to imagine the picture working as effectively with
a different style--some of the strange goings-on might then seem
staged rather than natural.
     It's rare for a motion picture to maintain the level of
irreverence and humor of CLERKS for its full running length.  In his
first outing behind the camera, Kevin Smith has given his audience the
kind of film at which veteran film makers often fail.  As the final
credits roll with the promise that "Jay and Silent Bob will return in
DOGMA", we can be thankful that this isn't the last we'll see of Smith
or his cast of offbeat characters.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Joan Ellis
Listen up, world: "Clerks" is a landmark movie, and you
will remember you saw it in 1994. Kevin Smith, writer, producer,
director, editor, and actor, is writing in a new language that
represents not only the arrival of a new generation, but also a
profound change in the world of movies. 
Smith's "Clerks" and Quentin Tarantino's "Pulp Fiction" have
appeared back to back, a double-feature exemplifying the creative
explosion of the video culture so many of us have misunderstood.
Here, then, is the flip side of the conventional wisdom that
watching too much TV dulls the mind. 
Both movies are driven by dialogue born in the minds of men
who have soaked up the rhythms of the video screen. Using a
vocabulary of classic four-letter words not as epithets but as
natural conversation, Smith and Tarantino are saying that this is
the way people talk. If obscenities used to imply a kind of
mental poverty, a literary laziness, they now mean comfortable,
easy exchange. 
Kevin Smith raised $27,000 to make a movie about two
convenience-store clerks on his home turf of Leonardo, NJ, and
walked away with major awards at the Cannes and Sundance film
festivals. His movie chronicles, in excruciating detail, the
nothingness of one day in the life of the lethargic Dante Hicks
(Brian O'Halloran), who wakes up on his day off to discover no
one is running the store. 
Arriving grumpily at the Quick Stop, he steps into his daily
routine and lets the world happen to him. His drifty and
outrageously funny friend, Randall (Jeff Anderson), needles him
relentlessly to grab control of his life. Alas, poor Dante. A
guy who says, "That's what high school is about: algebra, bad
lunch and infidelity," is not likely to be touched by the
pressures of duty, drive, or goals. 
These two spend the day laid out on the floor talking about
girls, hockey, nudie booths, and nothing while selling cigarettes
and coffee to anyone unlucky enough to cross their slothful
paths. They comment on the passing parade of "women who check
the dates looking for milk that won't go bad for a decade" and
"guys who check every egg to get a perfect dozen."
If you can suspend your disbelief and surrender to the feel
of the thing, you will see a very funny, gentle movie played by a
group of perfect slackers. 
Ten years ago, video schmoozing was a new sport. At least
two of the kids transfixed by it grew up to be video clerks,
absorbing B-movie dialogue while missing the picture as they
waited on customers. What stayed in their heads were words, not
images. Kevin Smith and Quentin Tarantino have absorbed the
rhythms of their time, and they are going to teach them to the
rest of us. They have done no less than announce the birth of a
new language and a new way of making movies. 


Author
Jules N. Binocula
     Ever plan for a day off from a low-paying, dead-end job--and get
a call to come to work for half-a-day--and end up staying all day, to
be hassled by a steady stream of local weirdos--all because you just
can't say no to anyone?
     Ever wish you could stop complaining, but can't find the
time--because you're back-logged with your old complaints?
     Ever be so bored that you ask your girlfriend about her past
sex-life and find out she's given oral performances on more organs than
you could count in a suburban shopping mall?
     Ever imagine Estragon and Vladimir--from Samuel Beckett's
existential play, WAITING FOR GODOT--living in New Jersey, doing
penance with perverts, wasteoids, and involuntary necrophiles?
     If so, punch your clock, and spend an entertainingly annoying day
with Dante Hicks: convenience-store operative, sans elegance.  Help
him out--his producer-writer-director could use the business!
     After KEVIN SMITH, an East-coast-twenty-something-retail-factotum,
saw the low-budget film, SLACKER--he decided to immortalize his own
phlegmatic lifestyle on 16mm film.  Why?  That's all he could afford!
And why not?  It beats working for a living!
     CLERKS starts off on a gray morning--like a pillow filled with
rocks--and takes its time before strange dream-like sequences and
eccentric losers begin to define themselves and amuse us.
     Once we're fully awakened, we realize that all the unusual
suspects have been rounded up--and aren't going anywhere in
particular.  By then it's about time to go home.
     Like CLERKS' anti-heroes--we laugh, we're horrified, bored,
can't wait to leave, but end up having a little fun--wondering if
we'll be summoned for a sequel.
     What the film lacks in polish, it delivers with enthused,
rough-and-ready charm.  Most scenes look like they were photographed
through the bottom of a soda bottle (painted black-and-white).  The
actors seem like people you'd meet on a bus--on the way to a speech
pathology lab.  Since the budget precluded fancy locations, the
audience is given an uncensored, not-so-guided metaphysical tour of
sometime-collegiate male psyches.  The humor is partially-effective,
diarrhetically snappy, mostly-misogynistic, pseudo-educated schtick.
Imagine Groucho and Chico Marx with a hormone imbalance--before they
got rich.
     Yet, for all its solipsitic frivolity, the film delivers a
poignant philosophical message: you would be what you pretend you could
be, if only you could gather the courage to pretend you should be
something you're not.  And if not, there's always tomorrow--if you
don't have plans.
