Title
Review for One Day in September (1999)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Substitute 2000 for the date 1972 and The West Bank for
The Munich Olympics and the thrilling non-fiction film "One
Day in September" can be ripped out of today's headlines. 
Kevin Macdonald's doc is about the massacre of Israeli
athletes by extremists during the Munich, Germany Olympics
in 1972, an incident whose background could be traced back
at least until 1917 but, for practical purposes might be said to
originate in 1948.  In that year, the United Nations granted a
sliver of land that amounted to just one-fifth of one percent of
the total land area of the Middle East to a new, Jewish state,
the remainder of what was held under a British mandate
since the end of World War I to form an Arab state.  The
Jewish leadership, happy to get anything at all, immediately
accepted.  But the little state was immediate invaded by
(what was it..seven, eight, nine?) of its hostile neighbors. 
Partly because leaders in the Arab states urged Palestinian
Muslims to depart from Israel "temporarily until the people of
that new country are driven into the sea" and partly because
the Israeli army "encouraged" some departures, thousands of
Palestinians abandoned their homes quickly only to be
housed in refugee camps under squalid conditions. 
   Anti-Israel extremists pursued a policy of sporadic
terrorism, or hit-and-run-guerrilla warfare against Israel.  The
massacre of eleven Israeli athletes in 1972 is perhaps the
most theatrical example of attempts by these extremists to
call attention to the issue of the displacement of these
thousands of Palestinian people and the refusal of Israel to
re-admit them to its borders.  The British documentarian,
Kevin Macdonald, made "One Day in September" to call
attention of an audience in the 21st Century to this
devastating event.  Macdonald, who had previously directed
"A Brief History of Errol Morris," knows how to make a
nonfiction film.  He avoids the error of Mark Jonathan Harris,
whose "Into the Arms of Strangers" took the heartwarming
event of the adoption of 10,000 European Jewish children by
British families during the 1940s and made it into the
deadening "talking heads" style that turns off so many of
today's moviegoers.  Macdonald treats the 1972 massacre
with all the dramatic techniques which a modern film maker
uses to add excitement to fictional tales.  His story is
anchored by an interview with the story of a single person,
Israeli fencer Andre Spitzer, a particularly heroic fellow who
taught fencing to youth as a way to get the youngsters to
respect one another.  From time to time his widow
commands screen attention amid footage of their happier
days but at no point does Macdonald give in to the
documentarian's usual compulsion to hand the movie over to
talking heads.
   Not that the interviews are banal. From from it.  Almost
miraculously producer John Battsek, associate producer
Andrew Ruhemann, and Macdonald were able to round up
people who would otherwise be most reluctant to particiate in
the project including one of the world's public enemies, Jamal
al Gashey--the only surviving member of the eight terrorists,
now hiding somewhere in Africa and fearful of meeting the
fate of compatriots who were successfully "hit" by an Israeli
assassination squad some time after the Munich event. 
While the interview with al Gashey, shown here in segments
culled from an eight-hour talk between him and the film
makers, was the most difficult to obtain, others who were
reluctant to talk showed their faces as well.  They included
German Federal Minister Hans Deitrich Gensher and Zvi
Zamir, ex-head of the Israeli secret police, or Mossad.
   Amid an stirring soundtrack which includes scores by Philip
Glass, Macdonald unfolds the tale with film clips from the
Olympic games (effectively contrasting the '72 event with the
infamous 1936 German Olympics used by Hitler to glorify
National Socialism), with the relatively restrained use of
personal interviews, with computer graphics and still photos
and various accoutrements designed to give "One Day in
September" the feel of a fictionalized event.  With occasional
voiceovers by Michael Douglas, "One Day in September"
takes us into key facets of the games including a segment
from multiple gold-medal winner Mark Spitz's strokes in the
pool and a taut basketball game pitting the Americans against
the Russians.  When eight Palestinian terrorists dressed as
athletes and toting machine guns in their bags invade the
quarters of the male Israeli athletes (ironically helped over a
fence by naive Americans), the world's attention became
centered on Munich thanks to the TV cameras--whose
intrusion gave the terrorists information of the whereabouts of
the German security forces.  
   While we are meant to abhor the craven actions of the
terrorists, director Macdonald is eager to give the audience a
look at the cowardly ways that the German government
treated the incident, and in one particularly effective bit of
probing shows how German leaders later set up a phony
hijack of a Sabena Airlines jet to quickly free the three
perpetrators being incarcerated on their land, hoping that this
sop would discourage future terrorist actions on their soil.
   Macdonald brings history to life as few other
documentarians have done, using the techniques of fictional
helmers such as irony, an effectively used soundtrack, and
interviews with people whose mere presence on the screen
demonstrates the ingenuity of producers and director in even
obtaining the exchanges.  In doing that they are echoing 
Claude Lanzmann, whose "Shoah" similarly amassed
numbers of subjects who would be expectedly averse to
appearing in a documentary.  The background of the Munich
disaster, specifically the motivations are the terrorists, is
given short shrift, a circumstance that could vex some critics.
But "One Day in September" appropriately centers on the
event itself, performing a service to today's moviegoers who
may well know nothing of yet another sad day in recent
German history.
Not Rated.  Running time: 92 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Julia Levin
The current crisis in the Middle East, with its painful controversy
regarding the sovereignty over Temple Mount, makes the timing for the
documentary One Day in September (Best Documentary Oscar: 1999)
perfect.  The film presents the historical events of the 1972 Munich
Olympics, when Palestinian terrorists took Israeli athletes hostage and
interrupted the Games.  The filmmakers use actual footage taken at the
time, interviews with German officials and children of the victims,
clips from television news reports, and interviews with the only
surviving terrorist who participated in the attack, Jamal Al Gashey.
The film starts off on a personal note: Ankie Spitzer, a widow of one of
the Israeli athletes kept as a hostage, recalls their happy marriage and
anticipation of coming to the Olympic games.  Giving the tragedy a human
face underlines the message of the film: At the core of every political
game, human life and death are nothing more than a by-product of
political cruelty.  Objectively, it gives a succinct summary of why the
1972 Olympics, besides being as political as Olympic Games always are,
were so particularly important to both Germans and Israelis. 
Subjectively, and understandably so, the film is pro-Israeli: If members
of Israeli team are presented as exemplary citizens -- young, ambitions,
with families and babies -- Palestinians are shown receiving training in
violence, hiding as Zionist refugees in Lebanon and Libya, carrying out
their terrorist acts with anonymous brutality (as they don't even know
the target of their attack until very late).  Thus, in addition and
perhaps without realizing it, the film exemplifies why cinema is such a
powerful and dangerous medium; One Day in September is an adroitly
constructed yet highly manipulative film.
Once the film gets to its point by recreating the actual events that
took place on the day of the attack, September 5, 1972, it tries to
create suspense by applying slow motion shots and stirring music score
punctuated with pounding sounds of a heart beat.  This technique is
powerful and gripping, but the real achievement of the film is in its
detailed reconstruction of the events that led to the atrocity.  It is
almost impossible to believe how it was all allowed to happen -- in a
small apartment in the Olympic Village nine athletes were held hostage,
one was killed and another was left to bleed to death, but the festival
of sport continued as if nothing happened.  Debunking the idea of the
Olympic Games as a festive celebration in peace and harmony, the
filmmakers describe step-by-step how, in the middle of public and media
attention, German officials absolved themselves from the terrorist
attack and resumed the competition.  The film then details exactly how
the police, lacking an anti-terrorist squad, proper security, and
turning down help from the Israelis, ignominiously failed to save
hostages by attempting to carry out an ill-conceived maneuver.  The
result of this drama is devastating and ghastly.
Despite the fact that One Day in September might upset a lot of people
for being manipulative and one-sided, this historical account is
shocking, jarring, and unequivocally worth seeing.
Director: Kevin Macdonald
Producer: John Battsek, Arthur Cohn
Starring: Michael Douglas, Jamal Al Gashey, Ankie Spitzer, Gad Zahari,
Ulrich Wegener
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
