Title
Review for Ox-Bow Incident, The (1943)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jude Wanniski
Memo To: Website browsers, fans & clients
Author: Jude Wanniski ">http://www.polyconomics.com>
Re: Ten movies that helped shape my life
In the next ten weeks or so, one at a time, I'll list here the
ten films that most shaped my life. These are not my favorite 
films. They are the movies I've seen that have had the greatest
influence on my thinking, my character, my life. Some are favorites
 that I enjoy watching over and over again, which you can tell
as you read each entry. Try to think of your own experiences with
 films and how they influenced the course of your life. It makes 
life more interesting to be aware, as you live it, to know how 
things such as books and films and magazine articles alter your
 path in significant ways. Sometime last year the Sunday NYTimes 
"Arts and Leisure" section had a piece on how difficult it is to 
think of a movie that may have changed history. The only movie 
they could think of was a silent film by D.W. Griffith, Birth of 
a Nation, which had a scene about the KuKluxKlan which the author
 believes changed national thinking about the KKK. How silly. 
Each of the ten films listed here changed my history, and if I 
had not seen them, I would not have helped change history in the 
ways that I have. Films don't move masses. They move individuals
who move masses.
1. "The Ox-Bow Incident." (1943) This is the movie that most 
changed my life, instilling in me a fear of injustice that is 
produced by  lynch mobs. That came to be one of my distinguishing
 political characteristics. As you will notice I am attracted to 
the defense of those who nobody else will defend. My mother took 
me to see this when I was seven years old and I even remember 
sitting near the rear of the Borough Park Theater in Brooklyn, 
N.Y. Henry Fonda is part of a posse chasing men who killed a 
rancher in the course of stealing some of his cattle. The thieve
s, including Dana Andrews,  Anthony Quinn and an old man, insist 
they did nothing wrong, but after a quick tree-stump trial in 
the woods, they are pronounced guilty -- with Henry Fonda voting 
"not guilty" -- and hung. On the way back to town, the posse 
meets a man who tells them the rancher was not killed at all, 
but was alive and well. The men who had been hung were innocent
after all. I cried bitterly, not only in the theater, but for 
many nights thereafter. For years it came back to me in dreams.
I can't watch it when it shows up on late-night television. I hate
 lynch mobs.
  -------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  Posted using Reference.COM                  http://WWW.Reference.COM 
  FREE Usenet and Mailing list archive, directory and clipping service 
  -------------------------------------------------------------------- 
