Title
Review for Tycus (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Tim Chandler
Directed by: John Putch
Written by: Kevin Goetz, Michael Goetz
Starring: Dennis Hopper, Peter Onorati, Finola Hughes
Produced by: Ashok Amritraj, Elie Samaha, Andrew Stevens
When a physicist's discovery of a comet hurtling towards Earth is
ignored, he builds an underground city with which to save a portion of
humanity.
    Tycus is the fourth film about the end of the planet due to an
interstellar collision to be released in the last two
years. Armageddon, the most financially successful of the four
disaster films, was silly, but with a suspension of reason made for an
enjoyable film. Deep Impact was written like a soap opera, but
contained enough special effects to make it passable. Last Night, the
little-seen effort by Canadian Don McKellar, contained virtually no
effects, focusing more on the subtle relationships between family and
friends during Earth's last night. While intelligently written, it is
perhaps a bit too calm and sensible. There is a very obvious reason as
to why Tycus was the only one of the four never to make it to
theatres. The Goetzes have written a cliché-ridden, implausible
script which when combined with John Putch's boring direction makes
Tycus a must-miss, even for fans of outer space/disaster films.
    The crisis is very similar to those of the other aforementioned
films. A giant object (in this case a comet) is on a collision course
with the moon, threatening the safety of every living thing on
Earth. The main difference in storyline is that in Armageddon and Deep
Impact, the American government knew about it ahead of time, and took
steps to counter the threat. In Tycus, a physicist, Dr. Peter Crawford
(Hopper), discovers the comet and its lethal trajectory, and alerts
the scientific community. Alas, no one agrees with his calculations,
and the threat is forgotten. Instead of continuing to try to convince
the world that he is right (and he is of course), Crawford goes off
and builds himself an underground city that will house a small portion
of the human population until the above-ground problems have passed. A
former combat photog turned tabloid newsman, Jake Lowe, gets a strange
scoop on the city and the comet from a friend on the inside, and goes
undercover to investigate. The film's inevitable climax is neither
thrilling nor horrific; the film's special effects are so poor that
any attempt at excitement is lost on an audience used to
state-of-the-art pyrotechnics.
    Countless clichés are found in the script for Tycus. There is
Jake's troubled marriage to wife Amy; Jake leaves her to start his
mission without a kiss goodbye. As he leaves, Amy starts to say "I
love you" but is to late. Jake has one particular monologue in which
he questions Crawford's decision to choose who gets to survive in his
city; it is almost painful to listen to, it is so cliched. There
should be a law that forbids phrases like "What gives you the right to
choose?" and "You are playing God!" from ever again appearing on
film. Everything about the film, from Dennis Hopper's "I've been doing
this stuff for decades, I'll get it on the first take" lack of emotion
in Crawford, to the cheap, obvious bloodpacks that pop whenever a
character gets shot, to the cheap, original-Star Trek-era computer
screens that are supposedly "so expensive that even the government
doesn't know what we know" make Tycus a failure.
for more revies, check out The Bottom Line at
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Heights/8000/index.html
