Title
Review for Along Came a Spider (2001)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Dennis Schwartz

 ALONG CAME A SPIDER (director: Lee Tamahori; screenwriters: based on
 the         novel by James Patterson/Marc Moss; cinematographer:
 Matthew F. Leonetti; editor: Neil Travis; cast: Morgan Freeman (Alex
 Cross), Monica Potter (Agent Jezzie Flannigan), Michael Wincott (Gary
 Soneji), Penelope Ann Miller (Lauren Rose), Michael Moriarty (Senator
 Hank Rose), Mika Boorem (Megan Rose), Anna Maria Horsford (Vickie
 Cross), Dylan Baker (McArthur), Billy Burke (Agent Devine); Runtime:
 115; Paramount Pictures; 2001)
This is a Swiss cheese psycho genre film. There are just too many holes
in the plotline of this hollow thriller for it to be convincing. The
film is most successful in hiding its plot twists and its surprise
ending but, in going for that and that alone, the film lost track of how
unbelievable the story was becoming and how shallow all the characters
were, except for the Morgan Freeman character.
Morgan Freeman played the same role in the 1997's Kiss the Girls, and
that mediocre film brought in lots of dough ($60 million). So the
producers must have thought, why not try and cash in on another mediocre
thriller! The low-key actor who breathes an air of restraint and
nobility into his roles as he carefully measures certain words he says,
returns as Dr. Alex Cross. Unfortunately, Freeman can't carry this film
on his back, though he almost does. He's so good an actor that he's
usually better than the script he's given, as is the case here.
Cross is a damaged D.C. cop, a forensic psychologist, author of a
definitive book on criminal profiling, who several months ago failed his
partner in a busted sting operation and watched her die, to his dismay.
He's now in semi-retirement or on sick leave, or just moping at home,
busy with his hobby of building model boats, as his wife Vickie (Anna
Maria Horsford) says: "I have never seen a man work so hard at being
busy." Which is the clue for the clever psycho, Gary Soneji (Michael
Wincott), to call him. He has been posing as a teacher for two years in
an elite private school in Washington, D.C., that has Secret Service
agents as security for the prominent students that attend, which include
the son of the Russian president. Soneji just kidnapped Senator Rose's
12-year-old daughter Megan (Mika Boorem) and strangled to death a
teacher from the school, before making his escape to his high-tech
houseboat. He has made the FBI wanted list, but wants further newspaper
headlines and recognition from Cross at how marvelous he is. His
intention is to make this kidnapping as big as the Lindbergh case.
Uptight FBI Agent McArthur (Baker) is in charge of the investigation and
reluctantly teams the failed Secret Service agent in charge of the
security operation, Jezzie Flannigan (Potter), with Cross, who claims
she could be valuable because she knows the psycho from her two years on
the job.
The fun in this film might be in making a list of all the holes in the
story, and whoever comes up with the first hundred wins a prize. The
list might start with why a school so worried about security would fail
to fingerprint the teacher. Secondly, why one of the many agents there
wouldn't recognize that the phony teacher is wearing a latex mask when
it is so obvious; and, thirdly, why the school or the Secret Service
don't even check for his teaching credentials, which any school in the
country has an obligation to do. Once you get the error list rolling,
you'll see how ludicrous this film is. I quickly counted thirty such
flubs before I got weary and decided to give up my count.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
In ALONG CAME A SPIDER, directed with fast-paced precision by Lee 
Tamahori (ONCE WERE WARRIORS), a senator's daughter, Megan Rose (Mika 
Boorem), is kidnapped from a prep school that is kept under tight Secret 
Service protection.  Megan is one of many children of Washington's 
political class who attend the school.  Among the many questions that 
the story poses is, why her?  Another is why the kidnapper (Michael 
Wincott), who likes to leave clues, admits that he wants to prolong the 
hunt.
Morgan Freeman, repeating the role he played in the popular 1997 film 
KISS THE GIRLS, plays  Washington, D.C. police detective and 
psychologist, Dr. Alex Cross.  This time Alex reluctantly accepts 
Special Agent Jezzie Flannigan as his partner since she feels guilty 
after having been in charge of the Secret Service detachment at the 
school.  Flannigan is rather well played by Monica Potter (PATCH ADAMS 
and HEAD OVER HEELS), an attractive and likable actress with very blonde 
hair, large eyes and lips, who up until now has delivered one bland 
performance after another.  Under Tamahori's direction, she shows a more 
vulnerable and intelligent side that hasn't been seen much up until now.  
Maybe she's a late bloomer.
As the kidnapper plays Alex like a fiddle, Alex tries his best to keep 
up with the kidnapper's strategy, trying to find some way to get one 
step ahead of him.  Freeman is nothing short of terrific again and is a 
real treat to watch.  Unfortunately, many of the supporting cast aren't 
used as effectively.  Dylan Baker is wasted as the briefly arrogant 
federal agent in charge of investigating the kidnapping.  And Michael 
Moriarty ("Law and Order"), as Senator Rose, doesn't do much other than 
look anguished.
>From the gripping action sequence that opens the movie until the last 
twist, director Tamahori keeps the audience on the edge of their seats.  
Marc Moss's script, based on James Patterson's novel, provides some nice 
surprises but not so many that it gets ridiculous.  Yes, there are 
probably plenty of logical problems with the story, but the film, to its 
credit, never goes into neutral, allowing the audience to begin thinking 
about any possible holes or implausibilities.  The result is an 
entertaining film that makes you crave for the next time Morgan Freeman 
recreates his Detective Alex Cross character.  I'm certainly ready.
ALONG CAME A SPIDER runs a brisk 1:44.  It is rated R for violence and 
language and would be acceptable for most teenagers.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
SSG Syndicate
http://www.susangranger.com/
Susan Granger's review of  "ALONG CAME A SPIDER" (Paramount Pictures)
  Morgan Freeman is back as savvy Washington D.C. police
detective Alex Cross in this psychological suspense thriller adapted
from James Patterson's novel, actually a prequel to "Kiss the Girls."
The story begins as Cross retreats into retirement after the death of
his partner but catapults into action when Megan Rose (Mika Boorem),
the 12 year-old daughter of a Senator, is kidnapped from her posh
private school, right under the nose of Jezzie Flannigan (Monica
Potter), the Secret Service agent in charge of security. As Cross is
watching the news on TV, his phone rings and the electronically
altered voice of Gary Soneji, the kidnapper (Michael Wincott), tells
him to look in his mailbox. There sits the girl's shoe. It seems this
psychopath wants to copy the Charles Lindbergh baby kidnapping,
committing another "crime of the century." So, while the Feds don't
appreciate his involvement, Cross has credible expertise they don't
have - like using tiny details to profile Soneji as "a spider." So
does disgraced Jezzie Flannigan, who's distraught that she "dropped
the ball." So it's their job not only to find Soneji but to rescue
Megan Rose.
   Marc Moss's well-constructed script actually improves on
the novel, adding unexpected twists and turns, involving
double-crosses, deception and duplicity. And director Lee Tamahori
keeps the pace fast and the tension taut, staging an intricate race
through the streets of Washington, D.C., culminating in a convoluted
ransom drop. There are several problems involving logic, not the least
being that the Secret Service does not protect children of Senators,
but on the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Along Came a Spider" is
slick, solid, escapist 8. It's great to see an actor as classy and
good as Morgan Freeman propelling a franchise like this.

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Let's say you love films where cops chase super-intelligent criminals but
skipped Hannibal because of the unnecessary gore.  Along comes Along Came a
Spider to quench your insatiable thirst for that particular genre.  The
trouble is that the genre has been rubbed into the ground, leaving Spider a
silly, clichéd disappointment.  The only thing startling about the film's
well-telegraphed "surprises" is how incredibly predictable they are,
especially if you've seen Kiss the Girls, which, like Spider, was based on a
James Patterson novel and stars Morgan Freeman as the same protagonist
detective (he's this film's executive producer, as well).
First things first.  Spider was the first of six novels Patterson wrote that
feature Dr. Alex Cross as a main character.  Kiss was the second book, which
technically makes Spider a prequel (the film never addresses this
meaningless point).  The parallels between the two films are staggering,
making Spider seem almost like a remake of Girls.  The crimes are similar,
the criminals are similar, and the twist at the end is, well, just about
identical.
This time around, Cross is on the trail of a madman who has kidnapped the
daughter of a U.S. Senator (a la Silence of the Lambs) from an
ultra-exclusive D.C. school complete with a limousine drop-off area, giant
flat-screen monitors on every desk and a gaggle of Secret Service agents to
protect the students.  The madman - one Gary Soneji (Michael Wincott, Before
Night Falls) - poses as a teacher (complete with instantly suspicious makeup
and prosthetics) for two years and makes off with little Megan Rose (Mika
Boorem, The Patriot) right under the noses of the agents hired to keep an
eye on her.
Cross (Freeman, Nurse Betty), who has been off the job for eight months
following the death of his partner, is dragged into the manhunt by Soneji,
who feels Cross is the only person intelligent enough to accurately convey
his own genius to the media.  Soneji calls Cross at home, using one of those
voice-altering devices to make his voice lower (like Wincott's already
gravelly voice needs to be lower - it's less intelligible than Brad Pitt in
Snatch), and, before you know it, it's off to the cliché races.  The only
one Spider doesn't use is the one where the killer jumps up after you think
he/she is dead.  They even crib the phone booth scavenger hunt scene from
Die Hard With a Vengeance.
Soneji purposely leaves a trail of clues that only Cross can decode, despite
the presence of hundreds of specially trained Federal agents (it's almost as
lame as Denzel Washington doing the same thing from a hospital bed in The
Bone Collector).  You know it won't be long before Cross is taking a mere
ten seconds to correctly guess an important computer password, and be
prepared to hear lines like "I think he's trying to tell us something," or
"He's playing some kind of game."  Holy déjŕ vu, Batman.  Freeman can keep
saying the same lines until he's blue in the face, but he'll never be as
cool as his Detective William Somerset in Se7en.
Head Over Heels' Monica Potter plays Jezzie Flannigan, the remorseful
Special Agent who was assigned to protect Megan, and she buddies up with
Cross to help find Soneji (the film jettisons the romance the two characters
share).  Potter has never looked and sounded more like Julia Roberts than
she does here, but considering the fact you can't spit without hitting a
photograph or print story about Roberts, it's almost refreshing.  Jay O.
Sanders is the only other recurring character from the first film.
Spider was directed by Lee Tamahori (The Edge) and adapted from Patterson's
novel by first-timer Marc Moss.  While I was glad the running time was kept
in check (it only seemed like two-plus hours), I secretly wished the film
contained a lot more forensic hokum.  Worst of all is Jerry Goldsmith's
(Hollow Man) score, which is about as grating as a shouting match between
Fran Drescher and Janice from Friends.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Lee Tamahori.
Cast: Morgan Freeman, Monica Potter, Mika Boorem, Michael Wincott, Dylan 
Baker, Jay O. Sanders, Penelope Ann Miller, Billy Burke, Anton Yelchin.
2001 - 104 minutes
Rated R (for violence and profanity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, April 8, 2001.
A superior, loose sequel to 1997's lurid and silly "Kiss the Girls," "Along 
Came a Spider" is a competently made thriller--well acted, tautly directed, 
but with more than a few ludicrous twists and plot holes. The story this time 
around does not revolve around a serial killer, but a vicious kidnapper, 
which is an admittedly refreshing change of pace from what was originally 
expected, and what I am used to seeing in this genre. It is ultimately the 
film's tight pacing that saves the day, turning what could have been a 
tiresome retread into an enjoyable, if unexceptional, viewing experience.
Brilliant investigator Alex Cross (Morgan Freeman), the one major returning 
character from "Kiss the Girls," has been having a rough personal time 
lately, unrequitedly guilt-ridden for not being able to save the life of his 
partner several months earlier. He is called back to work, however, when one 
Megan Rose (Mika Boorem), the 12-year-old daughter of a United States 
senator, is abducted by her teacher, Gary Soneji (Michael Wincott), while at 
school. Helping and guiding Alex in his desperate search is Jezzie Flanagan 
(Monica Potter), a secret service agent who has worked at the exclusive 
private school for the last two years. If anyone can possibly know why Megan 
was kidnapped, it is Jezzie, who has grown to know and care about all of her 
charges.
"Along Came a Spider" is riddled with far-fetched ideas and sequences, 
including a mad chase through the streets and metro stations of Washington, 
D.C. without any accuracy in where each location is placed on a real map. 
There is also a laughable scene in which the FBI is able to conveniently 
search through the kidnapper's home using only a camera and a computer that 
is able to zoom in on every minute detail of the room. The movie is a little 
silly when you stop to think about it long enough, and yet, it works in spite 
of its flaws.
The screenplay, by Marc Moss (based on the novel by James Patterson), and 
direction, by Lee Tamahori (1997's "The Edge"), are certainly instrumental in 
making the picture's spare parts gel together into a satisfyingly cohesive 
whole, but it is Morgan Freeman who makes everything convincing. Freeman 
(2000's "Nurse Betty") is a class-act veteran, taking every character he 
plays so seriously that it would almost be impossible for him to turn in a 
bad performance. His Alex Cross is not developed much further than he was in 
"Kiss the Girls," but it is a smart, cunning character that you cannot help 
but follow.
Holding her own is Monica Potter (2001's "Head Over Heels"), a younger, 
blonder version of Julia Roberts, who is quickly becoming quite a stunning 
actress. Potter more than makes up for the absence of Ashley Judd (the 
heroine in the movie's predecessor), and genuinely is able to go through a 
spectrum of differing emotions, as she isn't sure how to react to her own 
failings as a guardian at the school.
Mika Boorem (2000's "The Patriot"), as Megan Rose, is perhaps the standout in 
the film. Megan may be a young child, but she is a clever, intelligent, and 
strong individual--quite a rare feat for such a small kidnap victim in the 
world of feature films. Boorem is not only likable, but believable, and her 
role is not an easy one, either.
>From the opening credits, which ingeniously consist of the words being 
lowered by the strings of a spider web, to the stunning prologue that depicts 
a horrifying automobile accident which concludes over the side of a 
waterfall, to the unpredictable finale, "Along Came a Spider" is a good 
movie. Judging from how strongly I disliked "Kiss the Girls," it is probably 
better than it has any right to be. It isn't a great achievement, however. 
The climactic twist is undoubtedly surprising, but it also leaves several 
unanswered questions, and almost feels like a betrayal. You'll know what I 
mean when you see it. Suffice to say, amidst its downfalls, the ending is 
much like the entire movie in general: not completely agreeable, but 
nonetheless, it manages to somehow remain a strong entertainment.
 http://www.all-reviews.com/reviewers/DustinPutman.htm
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman
http://www.atnzone.com

Author
Norm Schrager
When you think "movie franchise," you think Harrison Ford or maybe Eddie
Murphy... but Morgan Freeman?  Yet, with the middling $60 million take
of 1997's Kiss the Girls, the low-key, dependable actor returns as Dr.
Alex Cross, in another try at a psycho thriller.  Sadly, Freeman's the
only point of interest in this one.  Kiss the Girls was average at best
-- Along Came A Spider should aspire to such heights.
Both films are based on James Patterson novels, where the good Doctor
(detective, psychologist, author, hostage negotiator, model boat
builder... good Lord) chases down some scary guy who's either a
kidnapper, a murderer, or both.  Here, our culprit is a teacher (Michael
Wincott) at a D.C. prep school for kids that require Secret Service
detail.  He conducts his entire teaching career incognito, and then
snatches the young daughter of a generic U.S. Congressman (Michael
Moriarty).
One of the more vital secrets in a psychological mystery like this
should be: Why is the madman doing this?  By keeping this fact at bay,
and perhaps even creating an inviting puzzle, a filmmaker can heighten
tension and develop characters.  First-time screenwriter Marc Moss and
director Lee Tamahori (Once Were Warriors) decide that isn't really
necessary.  So, the result is a bad guy causing evil evidently because
his parents weren't there for him.  Now that's creative!
Moss' dialogue is no help.  It's strictly cookie-cutter formula, made
all the sillier by Jerry Goldsmith's overblown theme music.  Both the
script and the orchestra are supposed to make us raise our eyebrows in
confusion or fright, but both are so self-consciously heavy, they do
nothing but cause heavy sighing and snickering.
The screenplay does take on some requisite twists to be oh-so-surprising
(taken from the novel, I imagine), but it's flat and derivative for most
of the movie.  Especially funny is an attempt at a cat-and-mouse
scenario, where our criminal is making poor old Dr. Cross run from point
to point in D.C., picking stray phones out of trash cans to get his next
instruction.  It's a carbon copy of a sequence in Ransom (among other
films), and it leads to a loot drop-off clearly stolen from Kurosawa's
High and Low.  And Moss' idea of a scene transition is Dylan Baker
closing every phone contact with the kidnapper by bellowing to police,
"OK, people, let's move it!"
Freeman does the best he can with this stuff.  He has an excellent knack
for hitting a line in a unique way, maybe emphasizing a word that others
wouldn't.  He tries to seem interested, and keep the mood grave, but
this one's just too silly.
Taking over the cutie-pie female role from Ashley Judd is Monica Potter
as a dejected Secret Service agent that feels responsible for the
kidnapping.  She has a beautiful face but minimum acting chops, and
between this and the horrific Head Over Heels, she's averaging about one
bad movie per month.
So what's next for Dr. Alex Cross if this one takes off?  Well, there
are five other books, but the latest, First To Die, will become an NBC
miniseries.  Sounds more appropriate.
Director: Lee Tamahori
Producers: David Brown, Joe Wizan
Writers: Marc Moss
Starring: Morgan Freeman, Monica Potter, Michael Wincott, Jay O.
Sanders, Dylan Baker, Raoul Ganeev, Billy Burke, Penelope Ann Miller,
Mika Boorem, Anton Yelchin, Michael Moriarty
http://www.alongcameaspidermovie.com/movie.html
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A bad guy kidnaps a little girl and teases a down-and-out detective with
some clues. Soon thereafter, the detective hooks up with a secret service
agent, who was in charge of overlooking the girl, and the duo set out to
catch the psycho.
CRITIQUE:
I might've actually recommended this movie for video viewing if it weren't
for its final 15-20 minutes, in which several "convenient" plot twists (aka
holes) basically turn this film into mush. How a great actor and a director
who has shown such admirable skill in his previous work (ONCE WERE WARRIORS
and THE EDGE) could've associated themselves to a project so generic and
predictable during its first half and ridiculous and far-fetched in its
second half, is beyond me. Yes, Morgan Freeman can play a great detective,
but does he have to keep proving this point to us every other year?
Actually, I wouldn't really have minded his redundancy if the film was a
solid effort on the whole, but sadly, it just falls apart under its own
overbearing weight of irrationality. I mean, when a detective goes into
someone's apartment, sits down in front of a computer, can't access any
files because of a password, and devises the keyword by thinking back to a
random moment he shared with the owner of the apartment, types in the words
that he remembered and is right on, in one shot...well, that's just plain
stupid! I mean, what are the friggin' chances that those words are the exact
password, dude!?! C'mon...give the audience just a little more credit than
that!
And even though I did greatly admire this film for attempting to do
something original with its ending (a couple of neat twists and turns), it's
all in a wasted effort since the plot points simply do not stick! I mean,
it's nice to surprise an audience but when they don't buy the actual basis
behind the surprise, well then, it's pretty much worth shit, right? And I'm
not exactly sure what Hollywood sees in actress Monica Potter, but to me,
she's basically a charmless version of Julia Roberts in a blonde wig and
half the talent. I mean, there ain't much happening there (other than the
great looks, of course). No zing, no zang. And even though Morgan Freeman
plays another solid detective role, the film's slow pace and ultimate
illogical turns, just don't keep you in the game long enough to care. I
mean, I might see this movie slightly entertaining some who are willing to
forego its goofy twists and leaps of faith, but I think most people want
stories that are believable and realistic, right? And even though most of
this film does give us that, it's generally just photocopied moments from
other movies, with some spots of bad dialogue, a pretty good score and an
ending which certainly goes for the gold, but falls plenty short. Sure,
Michael Wincott was a blast to watch, and his gravelly voice enjoyable to
hear, but aren't we all getting a little sick of these misunderstood "bad
guys" who always seem to want to "play games" with the cops? I mean, c'mon
dudes...let's go for some originality here, some punch, some friggin' new
ideas!!! Skip this one babies, unless you're looking for a low-rent rehashed
version of many better thrillers with a crappy ending to boot.
PS: Whatever happened to Penelope Ann Miller's career? In this film, she's
basically reduced to about three scenes and all she does in them is blubber.
Sadly for us, I think we all know why she's crying...
Where's JoBlo coming from?
The Bone Collector (7/10) - The Cell (8/10) - Fallen (7/10) - Fargo (7/10) -
Hannibal (7/10) - Kiss the Girls (7/10) - Proof of Life (7/10) - Seven
(10/10) - The Watcher (6/10)

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Paramount Pictures
 Director: Lee Tamahori
 Writer:  James Patterson (novel), Marc Moss
 Cast: Morgan Freeman, Monica Potter, Michael Wincott, Jay
O. Sanders, Dylan Baker, Raoul Ganeev, Billy Burke,
Penelope Ann Miller
   Some critics will tell you that despite Lee Tamahori's
overplotting of Marc Moss's adaptation of James Patterson's
novel, "Along Came a Spider" is one of those thrillers that
allow you to check your brains at the door.  Not true.  Did the
journalists all go for popcorn when Detective Alex Cross and
Special Agent Jezzie Flannigan (nice spelling) engaged first
in a discussion of psychology and then of philosophy?  This
may have been Phil. 101 but imagine the interest that must
have been aroused in the audience with a product placement
for university education.  Says Cross in discussing what
makes us choose our careers, "You do what you are."  "Not
so," replies Jezzie, every hair in place, even gram of makeup
undisturbed despite the excitement of the discussion..."You
are what you do."  Now if that doesn't remind me of one of
the last century's major conjectures of aesthetic, ethics and
epistemology, what will?  Every schoolkid knows that the
two cops are debating existentialism vs. determinism. The
first believes that we're born pretty much a blank slate, we
commit ourselves to a course of action (like film reviewing),
and that becomes our identity (in my case, a critic). The
second--which I'm likely to buy simply because Monica Potter
is prettier than Morgan Freeman--is that we're born with our
career virtually written across our faces.  "You have a
bouncing film critic, Mrs. Karten," is what my obstetrician
said--"a welcome addition to the already overcrowded
field."
   Does this deliberation have much to do with the theme of
the picture? Ah, indeed it does, because "Along Came a
Spider" tells the story of a kidnapper--a Bruno-Hauptmann-
copycat-kidnapper to be specific--who whisks away a lovely
girl of about twelve to his boat.  He doesn't want money, he's
not a perv.  He wants attention.  Unusual guy.  He wants the
media to treat him fairly, and then maybe he'll release the
kid, maybe not.  What we in the audience are prompted to do
is to leave the theater debating whether he was born to want
this notoriety or whether he first kidnapped and then had to
decide whether breaking the law was his true calling.
As the villainous Gary Soneji, Briton Michael Wincott doesn't
get too many witty things to say, and that's no way for a
major Hollywood studio to treat a miscreant.  Remember,
though: he's up against Detective Cross, so named because
he has one to bear (he messed up a sting operation resulting
in the death of his partner), and has now plunged into a new
case through which he seems to redeem himself.  
   The picture has the usual appurtenances of the genre--
latex masks (including one worn by a middle-school teacher
that went undetected for two years), laminated hands (to
avoid fingerprints during the teacher's tenure in the kind of
school within which I wish I could have enjoyed my career), an
assortment of guns with silencers including a 1924 Turkish
musket, and of course the gold standard of tinglers: c'mon
let's twist again!
   Listening to Detective Cross psychologize and philosophize
and guilt-trip, you'd think that, Great Scott! Maybe the title of
the movie comes from a quote that he's about to give any
minute: "Oh what a tangled web we weave/ When first we
practice to deceive!" But no, the spider of the story is a
Lindbergh nut who treats his prey to tea with honey, wraps
her in a blanket when she jumps from his boat in an escape
attempt, gives her blankets and allows her free access to the
bathroom.  Like the Monica Potter character, the little kid
played by Mika Boorem never misplaces a strand of hair
despite her reluctant vacation on a boat, and is not fond of
her teacher despite the gratis tutoring and tea.  
  Speaking of afternoon tea and British-born rogues, this film
is of the cookie-cutter variety not too different from Morgan
Freeman's usual vehicles like "Kiss the Girls," which is also
from the pen of "Spider" novelist James Patterson.  Kid's
kidnapped, parents give hell to the police for not doing
enough, turf wars erupt, guns go off.  There's an exciting
chase as millions in ransom are taken to the fame-seeking
scoundrel, a chase that no one could possibly believe
involving calls made to pay phones around DC's Union
Station with a particularly flamboyant transfer of jewelry
through a completely closed subway window.  What the heck:
Freeman is always a pleasure to watch, ditto vanilla-pudding
Monica Potter.  So why not.
Rated R.  Running time: 100 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com
