Title
Review for Hurlyburly (1998)
Number of Reviews
16

Author
Bob Bloom
Hurlyburly" (1998) 1/2 star out of 4. Starring Sean Penn, Robin Wright
Penn, Kevin Spacey, Garry Shandling, Chazz Palminteri, Meg Ryan and Anna
Paquin.
 I was taught if you can't say anything nice about something, keep your
mouth shut.
 But that would be doing a disservice to anyone who is thinking of seeing
this sorry excuse for a motion picture.
 On stage, David Rabe's play may be fascinating, but as a film "Hurlyburly"
is an excruiating two hours of self-absorbed narcissists doing nothing but
whining, crying, cursing and babbling about life, drugs, sex, money and
friendship.
 It's all pretentious nonsense as these Hollywood losers snort cocaine,
drink, screw and continually blab about nothing. This movie makes an
episode of "Seinfeld" look like Chekov.
 Even though it is fascinating watching Sean Penn seem to self-destruct,
his brave performance (which he had done earlier on stage) cannot save this
tiresome tirade of banalities.
 Never has such a fine cast, which includes Kevin Spacey, Robin Wright
Penn, Chazz Palminteri, Garry Shandling and Anna Paquin, been forced to try
to do so much with so little.
 Even the stunt casting of Meg Ryan as a hooker cannot keep this leaden
vehicle afloat.
 Some will say that I'm a cretin because David Rabe is one of our finest
playwrights. Perhaps. But if being a cretin means applauding "Hurlyburly,"
then just consider me an uneducated lout who cannot appreciate high art.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or
cbloom@iquest.net
Carol Bloom of Bloom Ink Publishing Professionals
3312 Indian Rock Lane  West Lafayette, IN 47906-1203
765-497-9320   fax 765-497-3112  cbloom@iquest.net
Committed to Lifelong Learning through Effective Communication 

Author
Steve Rhodes
In HURLYBURLY, Sean Penn and Kevin Spacey play Eddie and Mickey, two
buddies and coworkers who live in a sea of drugs.  Sharing a plush pad
that overlooks the Hollywood hills, they are acting agents who are
making more money than is good for them.  Even though there is little to
eat at their place other than moldy Ding-Dongs, they always have an
expensive stash of cocaine and other drugs.
In what is supposed to be an indictment of the non-existent morals among
some in the movie business, the characters spend little time on the job.
The script by David Rabe, based on his play, is unfocused and almost
incomprehensible.  Perhaps it worked on the stage, but the film version
is a disaster that is only made partially watchable by some wonderful
ensemble acting by a talented crew, who play characters bent upon
various forms of self-destruction.
In his usual masterful performance Kevin Spacey displays what passes for
sanity in an insane environment.  Mickey is as cool as Eddie is red hot.
"I'm a real person!" Eddie screams as he cries and jumps up and down
like a toddler who has to go to the bathroom now or he's going to wet
his pants.  That Sean Penn can do such overblown parts without
overacting is a testament to his abilities.  "I know I don't know what I
mean, which is better than most people," Eddie confesses towards the
end.
The extremely talky script revels in its obtuseness, with easily half of
the conversation being conducted on cell phones.  Most lines make no
sense whatsoever, although some are so ridiculous that they are
downright funny.  "I have thoughts sometime that can break my head
open," Chazz Palminteri says as Phil, an ex-con and would-be actor
friend of Eddie's.  Phil is such a lowbrow that any intellectual
activity might short-circuit his brain.
The male oriented story has men "giving" women to their friends and
tossing them out of speeding cars when they grow bored with them.  Among
these "disposable" women is Donna (Anna Paquin), a young runaway who
lives in Artie's (Garry Shandling) elevator until he takes her to his
apartment for sex.  Like a slave, she is offered to Mickey and Eddie
when they drop by.
Meg Ryan plays Bonnie, a hooker whose claim to fame is that she will do
absolutely anything.  In the film's only serious moment, Eddie tries to
see if his friends have any morals at all by reminding them that
Bonnie's 6-year-old daughter watched in catatonic horror the last time
they hired Bonnie to perform sex on a friend from out of town.  Mickey
looks briefly like he will be affected but blows it off with a joke
about how at least they didn't set the kid on fire.
Robin Wright plays Eddie's girlfriend, Darlene.  "I can't stand this
semantic insanity any more," she yells after Eddie picks a big fight
with her when she doesn't express a preference between a French
restaurant and a Chinese one.  "I'm finished," she concludes.  You'll
probably feel the same way about the movie.
"What's he talking about?" Donna asks Eddie about Phil's
circumlocutions.  This is a question that the audience will be asking
themselves throughout most of the movie.
HURLYBURLY runs 2:02.  It is rated R for pervasive drug abuse, sex,
profanity and brief nudity.  I would consider the film not acceptable
for those younger than college age.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Nicole Lesley
Starring: Sean Penn, Kevin Spacey, Robin Wright, Chazz Palminteri, Garry
Shandling, Anna Paquin, Meg Ryan.
What a contrast! In the space of two days, I saw Shakespeare In Love
and HurlyBurly. I'm not sure you could get two more different
movies. While the former was all over the top, telegraphing
everything, shoving its philosophy of life down our throats,
HurlyBurly was the complete opposite, wound so tight and with so much
buried in its script, one could spend weeks thinking about it.
This is one interesting movie. It's very much in a similar vein to one
of my favourite movies of '98, In the Company of Men, although not
quite so nasty.  There's lots of talking and some scary insights into
the world of men.
HurlyBurly doens't contain much plot: we just follow Eddie (Sean Penn)
around as he tries to make sense of his life and the people around
him. His big question is: does it all pertain to him? And if it does,
how is he supposed to feel about it all? "It" means everything:
television, friends, events that happen. I guess it could be summed up
more crudely as: what's it all about?
This is not a movie for answers. Donna (Anna Paquin) gives some but
they're not really satisfying: they just lead to more
questions. That's what makes this movie stay on your mind. These are
the sorts of questions that occupy our time.  Even when we push them
to the background, however we resolve these questions influences
everything we do.
The performances are all superb in HurlyBurly. I haven't seen Sean
Penn in much before (in fact, I can't remember seeing him in
anything), but he is brilliant in this. Eddie isn't a likeable
character, but Sean Penn makes him understandable. I don't want to be
his friend but I'd like to help him.  Chazz Palminteri is also great
as Phil, making him an awful person. I'd never want to know Phil but
still I understand why Eddie wants to be his friend. Everyone in this
film nails their performances, making this world real.
It's a nasty world; it's a sexist world. Unlike Shakespeare In Love
which is unfailingly politically correct, HurlyBurly is a man's world,
seen unapologetically through the eyes of men. I find this fascinating
and on two counts, depressing. First, it's depressing that such a
world exists. A large part of HurlyBurly's success is that it
convinces me that such people are real and that this sort of
environment exists every day in Hollywood; that there are a large
number of men out there who believe women to be completely peripheral
to their world, toys, playthings. Sure, everyone is background to
everyone else but in this world, women are a long way in the
background. Second, these are the movies that are being made: stories
about men's world. Where are the stories about women's world? Not the
soap operas and the "chick flicks" that are meant to satisfy women,
but the real stories that touch on the essence of life like HurlyBurly
does for men.
HurlyBurly is based on a stage play and that is evident from the
moment the film starts. It's very talkative, intelligent and
static. While this can make the film drag a bit, and people sometimes
sound like they're quoting textbooks, mostly this is a good thing. Not
all films have to be filled with special effects and sweeping
panoramas. Not all films have to underestimate the intelligence of
their audience. All it means is that HurlyBurly is probably just as
effective on video as it is on the large screen. It also means that
you have to pay attention.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Anthony Drazan.
Cast: Sean Penn, Kevin Spacey, Chazz Palminteri, Robin Wright Penn, Anna 
Paquin, Garry Shandling, Meg Ryan.
1998 - 123 minutes
Rated R (for profanity, sex, and excessive drug use).
Reviewed June 25, 1999.
"Hurlyburly" is an actors' dream, but there is a nearly non-existent 
storyline. Set "a little while ago" in Los Angeles, Eddie (Sean Penn) is a 
casting director who lives in a high-profile home in the Hollywood hills with 
his cold business partner, Mickey (Kevin Spacey), and a nasty-tempered 
struggling actor, Phil (Chazz Palminteri). The film follows them through a 
year in their life, centering on Eddie, who slowly begins to realize that a 
life full of nothing but drugs, sex, and partying is an empty life, indeed. 
Overly talky, no doubt due to the fact that it is based on a stage play, but 
just when I was about to give up on the mostly dispicable characters in the 
second half, the gentle, touching ending snuck up and left me emotionally 
shaken. Sean Penn has never been better than he is here, and that's saying 
quite a lot, while Anna Paquin (of 1993's "The Piano," for which she won the 
Best Supporting Actress Oscar at age 11), as a lost teenage wanderer, is 
remarkably refined, a character chamelion if I've ever seen one. Also of note 
is Meg Ryan, who sheds her "cutesy" image as a prostitute with a young 
daughter. Too bad more couldn't have happened in the plot department to equal 
up to the performances.
     - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
       Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Author
Heather Picker
     Directed by Anthony Drazan.  Written by David Rabe.  Starring Sean Penn
and Kevin Spacey, with Chazz Palminteri and Robin Wright Penn.  1998, 123 min.,
Rated R.
     The night before I watched "Hurlyburly," I watched Neil LaBute's "Your
Friends & Neighbors."  Both films share the common theme of disparity in the
lives of people who seemingly have it all going for them.  "Hurlyburly,"
directed by Anthony Drazan is about the self-absorption of a group of friends
and acquaintances.  Unlike the characters in "Your Friends & Neighbors," the
folks here hurt themselves and each other through drug use and words instead of
sex.
     Eddie (Sean Penn) is a casting director who lives in a Hollywood Hills
mansion with business partner Mickey (Kevin Spacey).  A brief but concise
introduction into Eddie's world opens the film.  Introduced as occurring "A
Little While Ago" (only to skip ahead a short while later), Eddie snorts
cocaine and nervously paces the room, and says "Heart's stopped.  I know how
you feel," as a picture of open heart surgery flashes across the television
screen.  At this time nothing more about the character and how he will behave
throughout the rest of the movie has to be explained or foreshadowed; there is
an almost instantaneous identification with the inner pain this man is in,
which so obviously contorts him, that just makes you feel like nothing will
really change, at least during the course of the next couple of hours we'll
spend with him, because he needs this distress in order to function the only
way he knows how.
     To say that there is plot, and then discuss it is not something that would
be enjoyable to read because the movie is basically one hundred percent
dialogue and is largely repetitive.  Adapted by David Rabe from his own play,
it is easy to imagine the script as one rather length soliloquy, as characters,
mostly Eddie, deliver rambling, occasionally incoherent speeches at such a rate
that there is little time for pause or action of any sort.  Some viewers will
be turned off by this, but these are characters who feel like they are drowning
in themselves figuratively as they literally drown themselves in drugs.  I
didn't mind that a lot of the same things were mentioned in different ways by
the characters, whose few tangible bonds are their shared feelings of
suffocating in their own thoughts, their own selfishness and constant
distraction.  Everything revolves around them, and they don't know whether or
not it is okay to feel like that, even though they do.  It is what makes them
human, and it is what made it a sometimes visceral viewing experience for
myself.  
     The elements of the story that aren't exactly cohesive but band together
characters and lead into the ending are as follows: Eddie is interested in
Darlene (Robin Wright Penn), who is also in show business, but Mickey becomes
involved with her first.  Friend Artie (Garry Shandling) shows up at Eddie and
Mickey's place with Donna (Anna Paquin), a teen runaway (?) who was living in
the elevator at his building.  He "gives" her to them as a CARE package, and
Mickey finds her more interesting a prospect than Darlene, so tries to pull the
noble friend routine by encouraging Eddie and Darlene to give a go at a
relationship.  Phil (Chazz Palminteri), Eddie's struggling actor friend and
small-time thug, is having marital woes and spends much of his free time
getting high, popping pills, and intimidating Donna at the Hills bachelor pad. 
     Along for the ride is Bonnie (Meg Ryan), infamous in Eddie and Mickey's
circle for her promiscuity, who is tossed out of a moving car by Phil, after
Eddie tried to set the two of them up towards the end of a night of mucho
chemical (plural and of various natures) intake.  Bonnie is the most
out-of-place character, though Ryan makes a nice impression during her brief
on-camera stint.  The only reason necessitating even the mentioning of her
character is a story that the sober but soon not to be Eddie tells about Bonnie
engaging in what can definitely be considered bad-parenting behavior around her
young daughter, at the suggestion of Eddie and Mickey, who doesn't show any
emotion as Eddie disgustedly keeps on with the story.
     "Hurlyburly" boasts perhaps the best ensemble acting of 1998.  Penn is
astounding, and Spacey is perfect, and appears to revel in the sarcastic,
hypocritical lines Mickey gets to slyly deliver.  Robin Wright Penn, Shandling,
and Paquin don't have too much to do, but are solid in their roles, and
Palminteri is also great.  Drazan has a visual style that is mostly
uncluttered, which works well because the dialogue is the main attraction. 
Rabe has crafted a script that will be irritating and stilted, just adequate,
or revelatory depending on the viewer.  Some of the plot is strained, and about
an hour and a half into the film I knew what the "big event" would be that
would give some of the characters a chance for redemption, and I also knew how
they'd use that chance.  Predictable, but interesting to watch unfold.  
     DVD Details: New Line unfortunately didn't release the DVD as a part of
their Platinum Series, but it is nonetheless an affordably priced ($24.99,
available online for $14.99) disc with an attractively sparse look and some
good supplemental material.  Shown widescreen (the film's aspect ratio is
1.85:1) and anamorphically enhanced, the picture is mostly solid but at times
artifacts are noticeable.  Anything less than absolute visual brilliance is
considered substandard for a New Line DVD release, but the picture quality is
acceptable and quite good.  The sound is excellent.  Stereo surround and DD
5.1, in a movie that is entirely composed of dialogue, it more than suffices
and everything sounds crisp and clear.
     The main menu is simple and nice looking, with Play Movie, Special
Features, Scene Selections, and Language Selections options.  If you click on
the New Line logo you'll see disc production credits.  The theatrical trailer
is slightly grainy at times, gives the definition of the film's title, "n. 1.
Tumultuous commotion; uproar."  Cast and crew filmographies and biographies are
included, as are two full-length audio commentaries.  The first is with
director Drazan; he rhapsodizes on directing the adaptation, and David Rabe on
the writing process.  The second track is of Penn, Rabe, and author/social
commentator Janet Brown discussing the themes in the play and movie, and
selective music cues and insight from composer David Baerwald.  It isn't an "As
Good As It Gets" or "Bound" type of together-in-a-room discussion, rather
isolated comments with some stretches of just the movie in between.  Overall,
the second commentary track is interesting and informative.  
     Notes: Rated R for constant drug use, pervasive language, and some sexual
material.  I read a review saying this film isn't appropriate (in that
reviewer's opinion) for anyone under college age, but as a high school student
I can say that most mature teenagers can 'handle' seeing this movie.  
     The Verdict: "Hurlyburly" isn't for everyone.  It's story is hidden under
layer upon layer of dialogue, but it's lasting message and the excellent acting
are it's strongest suits and fans of dark, offbeat, edgy dramas with a healthy
dose of social commentary are most likely to appreciate it.  And the DVD is
another New Line home-run.
mailto: Ahber16@aol.com
Review courtesy of http://www.thatmoviesite.8m.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   Reviewing a recent Hollywood blockbuster, New 
Republic critic Stanley Kauffmann advised that "we all have a
bomb ticking inside us."  This is not a surprising revelation. 
Think of all the books, plays and movies that would otherwise
never have seen the light of day.  David Rabe is one writer
who has made a career from this wisdom.  The Iowa-born
playwright believes that this interior bomb is the ultimate
truth; that wars are merely the external expression of a rage
that demands release.  His best work, "Streamers," is a
sharply written, highly focussed and firmly paced tale of three
soldiers in a Virginia army barracks--an intellectual, a gay
man, and a black--whose life in the quarters takes a dramatic
turn when one of them goes ballistic.  "Hurlyburly," Rabe's
1984 play which enjoyed an opening in New York's
Promenade Theater in 1984 with a dynamite cast, is not as
fortuitious an achievement.  By contrast with "Streamers,"
"Hurlyburly" is flowery and overwritten, an end-of-the-world
play about Hollywood sharks whose internal rage seeks
release in their attitudes and conduct toward women.  Though
director Anthony Drazen tries mightily to open it up in its
current screen version, its celluloid remake is a mistake; a
stagy, unfocused set of monologues which happen to be
spoken to others in the room.  Fueled by cocaine, the men in
the story and the largely masochistic women who associate
with them run through their experience in a drug-induced
haze.  The audience can't be blamed for feeling that they are
themselves enveloped by smog, by a surfeit of prose which
never lifts off to become lyrical.
   Perhaps the truest words articulated in the movie are by
the youngest member of the group, Donna (Anna Paquin),
who sums up the theme toward the conclusion of the two-
hour drama by exclaiming, "It's great when people know what
each other is talking about."  The ever-present chatter--the
"blah blah blah" as one of the characters periodically calls it--
is not especially revealing, though the writer may be making
the barb that the conversation of men in general runs in
much the same way.  During the initial half, the men vent
their spleen about women--bitches, whores, ghouls--while
during the final half, they are petulant, vulnerable, and seek
redemption at the hands of the very gender they have so
regularly belittled.  
   The principal character, Eddie (Sean Penn), is a casting
director who is ensconced in a Hollywood Hills villa with a
dramatic, hillside view.  He is joined by cronies, namely a
tough-guy actor with a prison record, Phil (Chazz Palmintieri);
a sceenwriter who is chasing deals, Artie (Gary Shandling);
and a smooth-talking business partner, Mickey (Kevin
Spacey), who is taking a break from his wife and kids. 
Shortly thereafter the company is to include a teen-age
drifter, Donna (Anna Paquin), whom Artie has found living in
an elevator; Darlene (Robin Wright Penn), who has been
dating both Eddie and Mickey; and a sweet stripper, Bonnie
(Meg Ryan) whose night out with Phil sets off a disastrous
chain of events.
   To punctuate the notion that these human beings are
leading lives of lives, deception, superficiality and
meaningless sensation-seeking, director Drazan cuts
frequently to news items on TV, which flashes a barrage of
seemingly unconnected stories--the newscasters taking little
time to penetrate the surface to catch the truth behind the
reports.  The male buddies in "Hurlyburly" lead lives of similar
prevarication, dismissing their depravities as merely aspects
of their personalities.  Drazan does a decent job of capturing
the anesthetized lives of these men, on several occasions
highlighting the diatribes of the psychotic Phil who, like one
person in David Rabe's "Streamers" is about to explode. 
When that occurs, the men break down in remorse and gain
new insights into their hurlyburly existence, intuitions that
allow them to make changes that could turn their lives
around.
   While this is Sean Penn's movie, allowing that actor to run
the gamut form self-satisfied, hollow casting director nose
deep in the cocaine culture to go below the surface (literally)
and save his soul, the performance to watch is Kevin
Spacey's.  This actor, remarkable in every role he is cast,
gives a fully realized performance as a self-protective cynic. 
We don't wonder why he hangs out with the fellows he does:
though he is the least mannered of the group, he gains his
own macho accreditation by standing above the fray, settled
in judgment over his less stable peers.  Fitted with an
outrageously cool white rug, Spacey's Mickey is the movie's
fully ripened, comic performance.  Meg Ryan is reliable as
the too-trusting stripper, eager to hook up with any decent-
looking man thrust upon her, while Chazz Palminteri plays to
type as a hoodlum whose wife--seen only once in the story--
must be the only smart one in town for having divorced him
and left his circle.
   While this movie version has an all-star cast, none except
Spacey is up to the dynamic group that appeared fourteen
years ago at a little-known off-Broadway theater; stars like
Harvey Keitel, Christopher Walken, Jerry Stiller, Cynthia
Nixon, Judith Ivey, William Hurt and Sigourney Weaver.  With
a marquee like that and a director like Mike Nichols,
"Hurlyburly" was the year's play to catch.  As a film, however,
it comes across as static--though not nearly as inert as last
year's "The Designated Mourner" which ironically featured
Mike Nichols in the starring role.  Long on theatrics that
belong on the live stage, this filmed version appears sluggish,
a buddy movie spotlighting a good-ol'-boys network whose
wires are desperately crossed.

Author
Scott Renshaw
HURLYBURLY
(Fine Line)
Starring:  Sean Penn, Kevin Spacey, Robin Wright Penn, Chazz Palminteri,
Garry Shandling, Anna Paquin, Meg Ryan.
Screenplay:  David Rabe, based on his stage play.
Producers:  Anthony Drazan, Richard N. Gladstein and David S. Hamburger.
Director:  Anthony Drazan.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, drug use, sexual situations, adult themes)
Running Time:  123 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     Eddie (Sean Penn), a second-tier Hollywood player, is slowly
realizing that Hollywood is a bad place to be if you feel things too
deeply.  His roommate and business partner Mickey (Kevin Spacey) thrives
on a callous disregard for anything but immediate satisfaction; his friend
Phil (Chazz Palminteri), a struggling actor, drifts into instability as he
tries to save his failing marriage.  In an environment where a homeless
teenager (Anna Paquin) becomes a sexual "Care Package" from a colleague
(Garry Shandling), Eddie is frustrated in his every attempt to make a
genuine human connection.  His life is a HURLYBURLY -- emotional
turbulence occasionally interrupted by attempts at communication that come
out "blah blah blah."
     It's always in fashion to take a stab at the shallow white underbelly
of Tinseltowners, but HURLYBURLY -- adapted by David Rabe from his play --
offers more than cheap shot industry-bashing.  At its heart it's a study
of a man who has set himself up for perpetual disappointment by being
tempermentally incompatible with the people who surround him.  Eddie fumes
when Mickey pursues Darlene (Robin Wright Penn), a woman in whom Eddie is
interested, foolishly ascribing scruples to Mickey; he is haunted by the
image of a 6-year-old girl watching her mother perform oral sex, an
incident Mickey barely recalls; he explodes when Darlene describes an
abortion with the same ambivalence she applies to deciding where to have
dinner.  Sean Penn brings his edge-of-control intensity to Eddie,
investing him with a savage humanity that can't be deadened by sex and
drugs no matter how hard he tries.  It's a riveting performance as one of
the best-written characters of the year.
     David Rabe's writing has the familiar rhythm of another playwright
named David -- Mamet -- giving the dialogue the snap of exchanged gunfire.
HURLYBURLY always feels like a film adaptation of a stage play, with the
action centered at all times on character interaction, which is not to say
that it's static or visually uncompelling.  Director Anthony Drazan serves
up some nice visual flourishes (a casket being lowered into the ground to
reveal the Paramount water tower in the background, a cell phone
conversation between cars driving side by side), and at least one scene of
impressive tension involving a razor and a revelation.  This is certainly
a piece for actors above all, with a uniformly stellar cast -- be prepared
to be surprised by Meg Ryan in a small role as a stripper -- but it's not
a film where the camera sets up simply for people to deliver monologues.
HURLYBURLY feels like its setting:  smooth and slick, with something dark
bubbling just underneath.
     It's easy to get caught up in one element of a film's tone,
particularly if previous films on a similar subject have led you to expect
that sort of tone.  Yes, HURLYBURLY is dark -- there are unhappy people
who spend most of their time swearing, snorting or debasing other unhappy
people, there is violence, and there is death.  There is also a strangely
touching friendship between Eddie and Phil which may be an insurance
policy for Eddie against successful friends who could desert him, but
could also be the only thing that saves his soul.  There are moments of
raw emotion that come from unexpected places and take unexpected forms.
And there is the hope that a man can remember how to care.  Those who see
this as just another nihilistic stroll down Hollywood Boulevard aren't
looking closely enough.  HURLYBURLY may be talky, but the talk isn't
cheap.  That shallow white underbelly has rarely run this deep.

Author
Walter Frith
It would be easy to miss the point of a film like 'Hurlyburly'.  That is
if it had one. I've been a movie critic for 15 years and I don't think
I've ever seen a more pointless film that rambles on and on and on like
a broken record and when it's over, it's no closer to having said
anything in its final 10 minutes than in its opening running time of the
same length.
Set in Hollywood Hills, Eddie and Mickey (Sean Penn and Kevin Spacey)
play room mates who are successful talent agency executives and are well
on their way to becoming major Hollywood players.  They wallow in all
the excesses of classic tinsel town life.  Snorting cocaine, picking up
drifting hookers and bringing them home for wild sex, indulging
themselves in the extremes of alcohol.  And when it's all said and done,
it's real but you won't care one bit.
Also along for the socially unredeeming ride is Phil (Chazz
Palminteri).  Phil is an ex-con who always wears a leather jacket and
tries to pass himself off as the GQ end of the movie business.  Nothing
more than a Hollywood wannabe, Phil wants to be a stuntman and goes on
endless cattle calls only to be passed over each time he auditions. 
Quick tempered and having had many different children with many
different women, Phil is perhaps the most amoral of the bunch and his
fate is of little consequence or surprise.
Others characters in the film are Artie (Gary Shandling).  Artie is a
close friend of Eddie and Mickey's who pops by for the occasional boys
night out and his character is perhaps the most pointless male in the
film.  The female characters are even more disappointing.  Meg Ryan is
Bonnie, a stripper with a child who comes to party at the whim of a
phone call.  Robin Wright Penn is Darlene, an actress struggling to make
it with more than just her talent and Anna Paquin is Donna, a drifter
and air head who looks for her next meal ticket and place to call home
around every corner.
'Hurlyburly' has a companion film in 1998 known as 'High Art'.  This
film knew when to listen and when to keep quiet.  It displayed the seedy
side of big city life, the consequences of drug use, and low morals with
polish and a sedated side to its personality.  'Hurlyburly' is like a
car wreck with no chance to breathe, an extremely high decibel level,
and a screenplay by David Rabe, based on his play, that tries too hard
to look like a well written piece of art when it is nothing more than a
two hour play on semantics with a calculating sense of the preposterous.
Director Anthony Drazan is a slave to the film's screenplay, adding no
injection of his own vision and there is a scene in the final third of
the film where Eddie and Darlene have sex and upon leaving the bed, the
long arm of a boom mic is visible in a mirror for about thirty seconds! 
This really is professional film making?!
How a cast like this could be coaxed into such a mess is a mystery. 
Despite their energy and convincing styles, I suspect that they wanted
to make a film with long takes, limited editing and a chance to put any
actor's true test of talent (the stage) on celluloid in a filmed stage
play that is as desirable to watch as falling into a bottomless
pit.             
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
James Sanford
HURLYBURLY (Fine Line)
Directed by Anthony Drazan
 There's nothing intrinsically wrong with making a movie based on a Broadway
hit; after all, such musicals as "The King and I," "Evita," "Grease" and
"Oklahoma" were hugely successful on both stage and screen. Transferring a
set-bound comedy-drama such as David Rabe's "Hurlyburly" is considerably
more of a challenge. A high-voltage showcase for William Hurt, Sigourney
Weaver, Harvey Keitel and Ron Silver when it debuted in New York in 1984,
this is a work driven purely by Rabe's crackling conversations and the
slowly mounting chaos inside a Hollywood home shared by a band of venomous,
misogynstic film industry types whose behavior is fueled by a certain kind
of "Bolivian health food" they constantly put up their noses.
 Though director Anthony Drazan has valiantly tried to pull the piece out of
its stagey shell, it doesn't lend itself to being opened up. When the
madness is all taking place in one room, as it does in the play, intensity
is generated. When it's spread out across a variety of locations, the power
of "Hurlyburly" is quickly diluted, despite a go-for-broke performance by
Sean Penn and a typically sleek and cunning Kevin Spacey characterization of
a heartless, self-adoring louse.
 Rabe's screenplay lifts large chunks of the dialogue verbatim from the
original, but the same exchanges that had potent shock value in the
theatre -- where it sometimes felt like the actors were spitting acid at
each other -- doesn't carry the same power onscreen, and while Penn's Eddie
does everything short of garroting himself to show how tormented he is, the
man has no charm or charisma. Certainly it's impossible to imagine him
attracting someone as seemingly bright as Darlene (Robin Wright Penn).
Hurt's interpretation of Eddie had a much better balance of dark and light:
He didn't feel the compulsion to unleash a few inner demons in every single
scene. Part-time hooker Bonnie (a raunchy Meg Ryan, miles away from "You've
Got Mail") says it best midway through the story when she tells Eddie, "I'm
gonna need a magnifying glass to find what's left of your good points."
 Perhaps ultimately the problems of "Hurlyburly" go deeper than differences
in acting styles and locations. It may be that the work belongs too much to
the cocaine-crazed period in which it was written. Though Drazan and his
cast nail the decadence and depravity of a setting in which no one has any
qualms about using a teenage runaway (Anna Paquin) as a convenient sex toy,
much of this material now seems as quaint as a "Just Say No" bumper sticker.
James Sanford

Author
Mac VerStandig
Hurlyburly is an incredibly and frighteningly dark film. Although it is 
filled with a very cynical and sarcastic humor as well, the movie itself 
is shocking, disturbingly blunt and often hard to watch. And yet, awful 
as it may sound; that is the beauty behind this film and the aspect of 
this films that makes it the most dramatically surprising independent 
film since Larry Clark showed us Kids in 1995. Fortunately for 
Hurlyburly there is more hope for success and recognition, due to a 
grade A cast, than the truly underground Kids could have ever dreamed 
of.
Hurlyburly is such an outrageously tense film that it could very easily 
make par without a plot. And it does for the most part. There is neither 
a central goal that the characters in this film pursue nor a subject 
matter that occupies the majority of the movie. What there is instead is 
a tense character study of 4 men, an exotic dancer, a runaway girl and a 
non-central female figure who exists as more of a presence that affects 
the other 6 people than a character herself.
Eddie (Academy Award Nominee Sean Penn), Mickey (Academy Award Winner 
Kevin Spacey) and Phil (Academy Award Nominee Chazz Palminteri) are 
roommates in the town of Hurlyburly, outside of LA. They all share a 
common degree of sexual disparity as well as what appears to be some 
very expensive drug habits. Cocaine is breakfast, nights are undefined 
and work is just a brief phase in their day to day lives. Whether this 
is a bond formed by 3 incredibly unusual, yet undoubtedly real people, 
or a force of separation, is for you to judge.
The common "friend" of this trio is Artie (Golden Globe and Emmy Nominee 
Garry Shandling). However his presence is so common among the 3, that 
his character develops and exists as a 4th male figure only separated by 
the absence of sexual urge. He introduces Donna (Academy Award Winner 
Anna Paquin) to the group of 3. She is a runaway who claims to have 
hitchhiked her way to LA and then established residence in an elevator. 
She is eventually picked up by Artie and is given to the trio as a "care 
package" to engage in sexual behavior with when and how they wish. Odd a 
thing as that may sound, it seems like just another every day occurrence 
when put in this incredibly complex and equally warped film.
Then there is Bonnie (Golden Globe Nominee Meg Ryan) who is a friend of 
the group. She is one of the most intriguing parts of this film because 
she is the only adult female that a complex examination is performed on. 
This film puts her under a microscope of types and examines her every 
move, revealing an odd and sad life that is totally missed when just 
looked upon from the surface. Her interactions with the group of male 
characters are incredibly complicated and must be closely examined for 
the rich symbolism to appear.
When put together, these characters create a dramatically diverse and 
frightening film. Without the great acting by every member of this 
7-person cast, the movie would be a failure. But the award-winning 
actors get it done, and they do so in style. Everyone involved with this 
film deserves yet another award to his or her name for their 
performance, and no one is more so deserving than Sean Penn. In the lead 
role he is absolutely amazing.
When combined, all these elements make what is one of the best films of 
the year, and perhaps the finest ensemble acting since the 1983 hit, The 
Big Chill. And yet it is such a deeper and more shocking film. Everyone 
who sees Hurlyburly will be stunned. When leaving this film there is an 
effect that is almost indescribable, but it is a force that the material 
you just saw lays upon you, and it grasps you and forces it's way into 
you. Perhaps it will stay the forever, I certainly hope so, as I 
wouldn't want to part with this film anytime soon.

Author
Greg King
Those audiences who relished the abrasive In The Company Of
Men will probably find much to enjoy about Hurlyburly, an
uncomfortably vicious comedy that shares a similarly wicked
misanthropic streak.  Others will find it a distinctly unsatisfying
and disturbing experience.
In this screen adaptation of his Tony award winning play,
writer David Rabe strips away the gloss and glitter behind the
American Dream to find a more disturbing reality.  Rabe exposes a
hidden, sordid underbelly of male bonding, power games, drugs, and a
group of thoroughly unsavoury characters adrift in a sea of sharks.
The film is set against the background of Hollywood during the
hedonistic '80's, when the excesses and the gratuitous abuse of sex,
alcohol and cocaine were more acceptable.
Hurlyburly traces the downward spiral of Eddie (Sean Penn), a
former high flying casting agent on a path to oblivion.  His room mate
and business partner Mickey (Kevin Spacey) watches Eddie's self
destructive path with equal parts bemusement and scorn.  To make
matters worse, the pair are both involved in a relationship with the
same woman, Darlene (Robin Wright Penn, recently seen in She's So
Lovely, etc).
Director Anthony Drazan (the little seen drama Imaginary
Crimes, etc) fails to open the material up from its stage origins.
The dialogue remains horribly pretentious and artificial.  Most of the
action occurs within the confines of Eddie's ugly, modern,
glass-walled Hollywood Hills pad, and the film becomes claustrophobic
and uncomfortable.  Chinese born cinematographer Gu Chang Wei (who has
worked with acclaimed directors of the calibre of Chen Kaige and Zhang
Yimou) effectively uses uncompromising close-ups to capture the
disintegration of these unlikeable characters.  Both Penn and Spacey
performed their roles in various stage incarnations of Hurlyburly.
They slip comfortably into their familiar roles, revealing an
understanding of these unsavoury characters and their shallow
emotional ties.  Penn seems to have cornered the niche in playing
intensely neurotic characters lately, and he brings a certain
desperation and manic quality to his performance as the pitiful Eddie.
Spacey is at his silky smooth, sarcastic and droll best here, and
relishes the occasionally caustic and bitchy dialogue.
Chazz Palminteri brings a volatile edge to his performance as
Phil, the former jail bird and wannabe actor, unaware of his
limitations and his aggressive demeanour.  Largely cast against type,
Meg Ryan brings a vulnerability to her role as Bonnie, the hooker who
is briefly brought into this turbulent environment as a blind date for
Phil.  Tv comic Garry Shandling is wonderfully sleazy as an amoral
producer.  Anna Paquin has certainly grown up since winning an Oscar
for The Piano, and her performance as Donna, the sexually precocious,
street wise teenage drifter, may shock and surprise.
The uniformly strong performances from the ensemble cast lift
the material.  But, ultimately, one can't escape the feeling that
Hurlyburly is little more than a filmed play, and one with a rather
bleak and probably unpalatable viewpoint at that.

Author
Kevin W. Welch
This is a buddy movie, pure and simple. It's different from the
usual buddy flick in that it is based on a play (by David Rabe)
and therefore has a more sophisticated theme and snappier dialog
than, say, Lethal Weapon. Still, it's all about a bunch of guys
who would rather not deal with women too seriously.
Eddie is a talent agent in Hollywood. He's very tightly wound and
does way too many drugs as well, which makes him a pain in the
ass to be around. He talks all the time, mostly to his roommates,
Mickey and Phil, both of whom have been thrown out of the house
by their wives. Mickey works with Eddie in some capacity, while
Phil is a low level actor typecast as the quiet muscular type.
They're opposites in many ways--Mickey is together, smart,
urbane, Phil is an excon and a goon. All of them are very
ambivalent about women (while remaining ardently straight, of
course) and all of them are extraordinarily verbal, even the
inarticulate Phil, unfortunately.
These three fellows, along with buddy Artie who drops by a lot,
would spend all of their time talking and blowing weed if it
weren't for the women that move in and out of their sad little
frat-house existence. There is Darlene, who is nominally Eddie's
girl friend, though Mickey has had a fling with her. Phil is
married and desperately wants to get back with his wife while
seeming to want to strangle her at the same time. There is a
performance artist-cum-stripper who likes to hang around. And
there is a jailbait street kid that seems to like casual sex very
much (these fellows show  bad judgement as a matter of course).
That's the whole movie. A few important things happen, but I
shouldn't give them away. By the end, things have changed and
there is an epiphany and even a little redemption. Mostly,
Hurlyburly is about the characters.
The movie has the star power for a character study. Sean Penn
plays Eddie as someone who is trying so hard to understand the
meaning of everything going on around him and failing miserably
because he is hung up on the words. He thinks that we create
meaning by putting it all into words, by creating verbal symbols,
yet he is too concrete, too literal minded, and as a result he
gets hung up on semantics and definitions. (He actually has an
argument with Darlene over whether she is indifferent or just
doesn't care). Penn takes chances with Eddie, portraying him as a
self-abused loser with barely a shred of self-respect; in one key
scene Eddie is left literally holding his tool.
Kevin Spacey is perfect for the self-contained and knowing
Mickey, unflappable, in control and always ready to joust with
Eddy. Of course, if Mickey is really all that together, you
wonder why his wife threw him out to live with Eddy. He's built a
wall of sarcasm around himself. Ordinarily, you'd think that this
was all defense, that there was a vulnerable and scared Mickey
behind the Flip Mickey. I don't believe so--I think there's
nothing there, or else he's Flip Mickey alll the way down to his
core.
The best performance is Chaz Palminteri as the pathetic thug
Phil. He's trying to figure out what's going on around him and he
puts it all into words, but nothing comes out that makes any
sense. Watching Phil is like watching Zippy the Pinhead. In spite
of the funny sounds that come out of his mouth, he's a character
of extreme menace who might go off at any minute. Whenever he's
in a scene, you're afraid he might kill somebody.
The women in the film are played by Robin Wright Penn, Anna
Paquin and Meg Ryan, each of whom does a fine job in three very
different roles. I don't want to slight their work here, but the
movie is clearly about the boys; these fine actresses have enough
to do but their characters are clearly satellites. The verbal and
inarticulate Eddy is really in love with the verbal and
inarticulate Phil. That's the emotional heart of Hurlyburly.
In the end, Phil tries to make himself a better person and fails.
Eddie learns a little bit more about what life is really about.
Mickey is still Mickey.
Hurlyburly is a good character movie and it's really a lot of fun
to watch all these stars do their work. Still, the movie is
relatively plotless and the movement at the end is all small and
relative. Hurlyburly betrays its theatrical roots. It's very
intellectual, very talky, and not much happens. The resolution at
the end is small and you have to think about it. There's nothing
wrong with that, as far as I'm concerned, but I've seen a lot of
this sort of thing over the last few years. In a way, Hurlyburly
seems like a remake of Glengary Glen Ross, and I'm not sure how
many of those we need. I'd recommend Hurlyburly highly to anyone
who likes this sort of thing, and not at all to anybody who
doesn't.

Author
Bill Chambers
HURLYBURLY *** (out of four)
-a review by Bill Chambers ( fonzie@filmfreakcentral.net )
(Film Freak Central - the next best thing to watching movies.
http://filmfreakcentral.net )
starring Sean Penn, Kevin Spacey, Robin Wright Penn, Chazz Palminteri
screenplay by David Rabe, based on his play
directed by Anthony Drazan
The word "hurlyburly" describes the thought patterns of Eddie the
Cokehead to a tee. As played by Sean Penn, hypersensitive Eddie is
like the wind-up toy that always threatens to stroll right off the
tabletop. Eddie just doesn't let things go-at first his behaviour
smacks of self-absorption. As the movie progresses, we come to
understand Eddie as a kind of existential Sherlock Holmes, desperate
to get to the bottom of, quite literally, everything. Hurlyburly is
about how a place like Hollywood can eat a person like Eddie alive.
Eddie, with his pencil-thin mustache and lazily gelled hair, is a
player high enough on the food chain to afford a big, sterile Beverly
Hills pad and enough cocaine to keep him buzzed all day. (He snorts in
place of morning coffee.) He shares his home with Mickey (Spacey), a
slick, bleach-blonde smoothie who is dating the woman (Wright Penn) 
Eddie had his sights set on. (Eventually Mickey, feeling not so much
shame or guilt as defeat and frustration, breaks up with the woman,
Darlene, and encourages her to hook up with Eddie.) Further stressing
Eddie out is Phil (Palminteri), a hulky, ticking time bomb who grows
more violent and more needy as his marriage corrodes. Phil is a 
stray pitbull our hero can't shake...and deep down, Eddie doesn't want
to lose him, because Phil's hostility makes Eddie look rational by
comparison. Meanwhile, a teenage runaway (The Piano's Anna Paquin,
unfortunately the film's weakest link) is staying at their house, a
"gift" from friend Artie (Garry Shandling), who spotted her on an 
elevator.
Hurlyburly does not shed its stagebound roots-no more than a handful
of scenes unfold outside of Eddie and Mickey's place, and towards the
end of the film one senses that Drazan is struggling to maintain some
visual interest in the central location. But the cast is mesmerizing
enough to compensate; these performances are grand and theatrical and,
thanks to the advantages of the close up, paradoxically intimate-our
eyes and ears are peeled throughout. Spacey, effectively typecast,
plays apathetic Mickey with confidence. (The quintessential Spacey 
moment comes during an exchange towards the end of the picture: Eddie:
"You have no feelings!" Mickey: "No, I have my own feelings, not
yours.") Palminteri as Phil annoys and frightens in balanced doses,
just as he should. However, the picture belongs to Penn, as the addict
whose brain is too big for his heart. Five and ten minute chunks 
of Hurlyburly pass with no one speaking but Eddie, who delivers
stupefacient monologues that invariably end in tears. Penn doesn't
earn our sympathies-instead, he wins something closer to pity. Your
enjoyment of the film will hinge on whether or not you can stomach two
solid hours of Sean Penn.
Which leads me to my next point: as enthralling as all this human
drama frequently is, Hurlyburly overstays its welcome. Perhaps that's
because there's very little order to the story's structure; when
Bonnie, a stripper (Meg Ryan, flexing atrophied acting muscles), shows
up in what I'll call act two, it seems for no other reason than
boredom on the part of Rabe. Such is the nature of the filmed play, I
suppose, but Drazan could have edited a tighter film. Without the
benefit of the play's intermission, the travails of Eddie and his
cruisers are thoroughly exhausting.

Author
Michael Dequina
The ensemble cast of Anthony Drazan's screen take on David Rabe's
celebrated play is uniformly excellent, led by Sean Penn, who reprises
his stage role as Eddie, a drugged-out Hollywood casting director headed
quickly down the road of self-destruction.  Filling out the very capable
ensemble are Kevin Spacey, Meg Ryan, Chazz Palminteri, Robin Wright Penn,
and the usually irksome Garry Shandling and Anna Paquin.
So what is the film _about_?  Not much at all, by my evaluation.  The
trailer for _Hurlyburly_ defines the term as "tumultuous commotion,
uproar," and it could not more aptly describe this high-strung but
virtually plotless film.  The movie is merely a collection of scenes
where a bunch of frantic Tinseltown losers such as Eddie talk, talk, and
talk some more, sometimes in English so overly complex that it's hard to
tell if any of these people, let alone the audience, know what they're
talking about.  Keeping the audience at an even further distance is
Drazan's stagy direction, which fails to sufficiently open the play up
for the screen.  But the film is not without its rewards, in particular
the work of Penn, who makes Eddie's meltdown compelling, even though it
is not particularly involving. 
Michael Dequina
Chat Forum Host, The Official Michael Jordan Web Site
http://jordan.sportsline.com
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown


Author
Dennis Schwartz
HURLYBURLY (director: Anthony Drazen; screenwriter: David Rabe;
cinematographer: Gu Changwei; cast: Sean Penn (Eddie), Kevin Spacey
(Mickey), Robin Wright Penn (Darlene), Chazz Palminteri (Phil), Garry
Shandling (Artie), Anna Paquin (Donna), Meg Ryan (Bonnie), 1998)
This glib talk-fest is based on David Rabe's 1984 misanthropic play
about friends caught in the web of Hollywood hype. What sparkles through
the two hours of its production is the magnificent ensemble cast, who
are able to make the superficial lives they are portraying seem colorful
and their story worth telling. Eddie (Sean Penn) is the hollow casting
director who lives in a Hollywood Hills luxury condominium with his
business partner Mickey (Kevin Spacey); Chazz Palminteri is cast as a
second-rate actor and violently unstable ex-con; and, Artie (Shandling)
is their sleazy friend, a big shot in a Hollywood studio who acts as
their respected confidante.
Donna (Anna Paquin) is a vacuous teen-age hitchhiker that Artie brings
back to their pad so that the boys could use her as a sex pet, and she
in return gets a free place to sleep. Darlene (Robin Wright Penn) is the
dispassionate sexual interest of Mickey, but the chilling love-life of
Eddie. After dating Eddie, she has sex with the suave Mickey, who makes
a pretentiously gallant gesture of returning her to Eddie, saying his
friendship means more to him than she does. Bonnie (Meg Ryan) is the
good-hearted stripper who freely has sex with those she wants to; one of
her most inglorious moments, she says, is when she had fellatio in a car
while her 6-year-old daughter is in the backseat traumatized by what she
sees. If the movie reaches a climax of any relevance, it is because of
her disastrous date with Phil, where he loses it and throws her out of
her moving car.
The opposite sex relationships are all disasterous and difficult to
comprehend, as the film goes overboard on dumping on all the female
leads, leaving no room for them to be anything but the objects of the
men's failures and desires.
These four unlikable men indulge us with how they prey on the weak.
Their constant need to talk and say nothing pursues them every moment of
their day. Cell phone conversations and empty self-righteous discourses
trying to explain what they are about and what trouble they are in
continues seamlessly from scene to scene. These men are not just
materialists and users of people, but are truly depraved human beings.
Eddie, as the central figure of the story, is probably the one who is
the most out of it, either because of his heavy cocaine sniffing or his
tremendous vanity or his inability to know the difference between what
is real and what is false. When Artie brings the sex-crazed Donna for
him to keep in his house as a CARE package, he pounces on her,
indifferent to her as he is with everyone else he knows. The only
difference is, that when he is with his friends he pretends to listen to
them.
Because of the sharp dialogue and the ability of the actors to get under
the skin of their characters, this morbid look at humanity seems
poignant. Its humor is in the form of sarcasm and scorn, which is a
mean-spirited way to look at others, though Mickey says he is flip not
sarcastic. His retorts and dry comebacks are flip humor used in the
sense that we are all going under, so why be that serious about life!
When Eddie asks him, "What kind of friendship is this?" He responds, "An
adequate one." He is the one who seems to be above the fray, never
getting himself dirtied by the group.
The most significant relationship is between Eddie and Phil; it was also
the oddest one and the most sycophantic. Eddie's closeness with Phil is
based on lies and a false sense of need one has for the other. It is
ruptured when Eddie finally tells him with cruel honesty, we need guys
like you in Hollywood to make the bullshit look real. You're expendable.
You do not matter.
This is not a great drama as much as it is a black comedy that has great
acting and intriguing dialogue. There are no break throughs in character
that can explain misfits like these guys, who assume power positions and
misuse the trust society has in them. Dominance and establishing their
place in the pecking order is what motivates them. They compete against
each other because of their jealousy and hatred of the other. Even a
long lasting relationship between Eddie and Phil can't be viewed as
necessarily a sincere one. Mickey tries to tell Eddie this when he
mentions how cold his relationship with Phil is. "Phil is very safe,
because no matter how far you manage to fall, Phil will be lower."
As an interesting gesture to the media age of the 1980s, Drazen uses the
TV images we view from the channel-changing Eddie, showing how
meaningless and bland everything seems on the screen: tragedies, wars
and football games are all manufactured as significant events by the
media but all meld into insignificance in one's daily life, with no
follow-up search for the truth in these stories taking place. This is
analagous to the lives of the male-bonding friends, who make small gains
upon seeing something about themselves reported by others, but fail to
search inward to see what they really are all about.
This was a tough film to like and an even tougher film to hate. Its
appeal is hypnotic, in the sense that we are overhearing conversations
we shouldn't be hearing but we can't stop listening to them. If we met
these types in our personal lives, more than likely, we couldn't stand
to be around them long enough to be sufficiently entertained by them.
For two hours to see them on film is also too long to be around them. An
80-to-90 minute film, honed down and made more mobile, taking away some
of its staginess, would have suited me just fine.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
George Wu
Hurlyburly is a very black comedy adapted by David Rabe from his own play. 
On the surface, it is about a misogynistic casting director (Sean Penn)
trying to save his relationship with his girlfriend (real-life wife Robin
Wright-Penn), but actually it is an existential treatise on communication,
or more accurately, the lack thereof.  Unfortunately, director Anthony
Drazan is not particularly adept at transcending the stage origins of the
material.  He is not the most visually stimulating director and hasn't much
perception on how to use cinematic space.  Apparently though, he is quite
good with actors.  Sean Penn supplies one of the year's best performances
in his courageous and revealing depiction of Eddie, a Hollywood casting
director constantly snorting cocaine.  Chazz Palmenteri is excellent as
Eddie's best friend, Phil, an unemployed actor who gets his points across
with threats and violence.  Even better is Kevin Spacey playing Mickey,
Eddie's deeply sarcastic roommate and business partner.  I am convinced now
that Spacey is easily one of the best actors working today.  Penn has
already long held that status.  Robin Wright-Penn, Garry Shandling, and
Anna Paquin are all fine even if their performances don't quite stand out. 
The only actor who does not pull her load is Meg Ryan, here as an
intelligent prostitute (apparently wearing the most wondrous of
wonderbras).  Regardless of what's going on around her, whether she's just
been pushed out of a moving car or is planning a day at Disneyland, Ryan
essentially keeps the same tone in her voice.
Hurlyburly is really about how the characters cannot understand one
another.  All of them with the exception of Mickey constantly ramble on
until they forget what they themselves are talking about.  Half the time,
they realize they don't even have the vocabulary to communicate their
points and their tirades dwindle into gibberish like "blah blah blah!" 
Even when they say what they mean, the other characters are either in
denial or thinking they're talking about something else.  Eddie is pulled
between spiritualist Phil and the utter realist Mickey.  Phil looks for
answers to his problems in fate and destiny or even Judaic mysticism. 
Mickey, on the other hand, always makes Phil the butt of his jokes.  Eddie
envies Mickey's ability to deal with reality unstintingly while looking to
Phil and his metaphysics for some hope in his life.
Despite the film's aspirations, it never quite fulfills its potential.  It
often plods along aimlessly, and has a few too many contrivances such as
when Anna Paquin's character reappears at the end for an attempted but
unfulfilling catharsis.  Still, if the film doesn't give answers to its
existential angst, it at least asks the right questions.
