Title
Review for Devil and Daniel Webster, The (1941)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Seth Bookey
(black and white, and known by a variety of other names, including All
That Money Can Buy)
I don't always review every movie I see on television, but having seen
Devil's Advocate the night before, I felt compelled to make the necessary
comparisons.
For those of you who don't know the story: Poor New Hampshire farmer Jabez
Stone (James Craig) is about to lose his farm to foreclosure. He has even
used all of the butter and egg money his optimistic, devoted wife Mary
(Anne Shirley) has set aside, but it is no use. His Ma (Jane Darwell),
despite his troubles, won't tolerate his exclamation "consarnit!" Uttering
aloud that he would sell his soul to the Devil for two cents, the Dark One
appears, in the folksy form of Mr. Scratch (Walter Huston). It's your
basic "deal-with-the-devil" storyline. As Jabez enjoys seven years of
prosperity, he grows greedy and cruel. The neighbors he once happily
helped are practically his slaves a few years later.  Craig is able to
pull off a range of qualities--sympathetic, cocky and arrogant, desperate. 
He begins to disrespect his wife and mother and turns all his attentions
to the sultry Belle (played coquettishly by Simone Simon). He builds her a
mansion and practically allows her to raise his son, whose hobby is
harming all animals great and small. Jabez gives up church--while his wife
and mother pray, he and Belle host card games at home.
Meanwhile, Mr. Scratch would love to get his hands on Daniel Webster
(Edward Arnold), the New Hampshire politician who might very well be
President one day. He also happens to have a namesake and godson in young
Daniel Stone. So, when Jabez' seven years are almost up and he panics,
Mr. Webster agrees to help him and gives an impassioned oratory against
Mr. Scratch's handpicked (and now famous) Jury of the Damned.
The story is extremely simple in its morality, but it is very absorbing
thanks to its style. Black and white accentuates the light and shadows.
The darks are pitch black and the brights are luminous. Underscoring (no
pun intended) it all is the Oscar-winning score by Bernard
Herrmann--especially noteworthy in the scene in which Daniel is born and
Belle arrives from "over the mountain." 
It is also interesting to see how Allied  propaganda ensconced itself in
this film, even before we got involved in the war. Daniel Webster is the
smart politician who is perfectly at home with even the poorest citizen,
and above all, a virtuous American. His particular disgust for Benedict
Arnold, the only Juror of the Damned who seems ashamed to be seen, is a
glaring giveaway.
The ballroom scene is also one of its most memorable. If you have a chance
to catch this film on TV or video, do so.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html
