Title
Review for O Que É Isso, Companheiro? (1997)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 By Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Miramax Films
 Director:  Bruno Barreto
 Writer:  Leopoldo Serran/Book by Fernando Gaberia
 Cast: Alan Arkin, Pedro Cardoso, Fernanda Torres, Luiz
Fernand Guimaraes, Claudia Abreu, Nelson Dantas, Matheus
Nachtegaele, Marco Ricca, Mauricio Goncalves, Caio
Junqueria, Selton Mello, Eduardo Moskovis, Caroline Kava,
Fisher Stevens
   When a former U.S. Ambassador to Brazil, Charles Burke
Elbrick, states in 1969 that he is opposed to his country's
involvement in Vietnam and that he is essentially against the
the military government in Brazil, we wonder whether he is
telling the truth.  Aren't ambassadors instructed to uphold their
government's positions publicly, whatever their private beliefs? 
Perhaps the reason for his liberalism is the circumstances
under which he expresses himself.  Surrounded by terrorists--
or freedom fighters, depending on your politics--he is
looking down the muzzle of a firearm held on him by some
young people who just plain don't look so dangerous, but he
is convinced that they mean business.  
   "Four Days in September," based on a book written ten
years after the events by Fernando Gaberia called "O que e
isso, companheiro?," is neither documentary nor
Hollywood-style political thriller.  It is, however, an intelligently
fashioned piece of film-making by a director who respects his
audience without capitulating to a talking-heads format which
Americans are familiar with if they watch Sunday morning TV. 
   If Bruno Barreto, who has paced his film smartly, wanted to
take sides, he would have made a movie like Costa-Gavras,
firmly on the side of the "freedom fighters" and against the
military junta ruling Brazil.  If he were a Hollywood director
like Mimi Leder ("Peacemakers") he would have made virtual
automatons out of the "terrorists" and evoked big cheers from
the audience when the Americans showed them who's boss. 
Taking a middle ground--an effective step indeed--Barreto
shows all of his characters as real human beings, not good
guys and bad guys, proving that politics involves genuine
complexities, drawing upon many shades of gray.
   "Four Days in September" is a story from the pen of
Fernando Gaberia, a journalist and congressman for the
Green party.  His subject is the amateurish, but in many
ways successful move by a tiny group of moderately
disciplined leftist individuals in Rio to win the release of
political prisoners and at the same time call the attention of
the world to the torture practiced by agents of the military
junta in Brazil.  Their plan is to kidnap the American
Ambassador--who lives in splendor in an estate in Rio--and
force the government to broadcast their demands through the
media while releasing fifteen imprisoned leftists to Mexico. 
They finance their operation by robbing a bank and, using
fake names to frustrate the police should any of their number
get caught and tortured, they take Ambassador Elbrick
hostage at gunpoint while he is riding in his limousine without
security.  
   While the film has its share of action scenes which will
please all but the most thrill-addicted moviegoers, its real
merit comes across inside the safe house in which the crew
are holding their prisoner.  It is there that Barreto highlights
the humanity of all parties, the most ironic touch being the
certainty that Fernando aka Paulo (Pedro Cardoso), who
has gotten to know his captive and to feel compassion for
him, will not hesitate to execute the ambassador precisely at
the appointed hour if the group's demands are not met.  For
his part Elbrick is neither unshaken hero nor bowl of jello as
he counts what could be his final hours on the earth.  He
speaks with genuine respect to his captors and is even
fatherly toward the most beautiful and seductive of them,
Renee (Claudia Abreu), who had used her wiles to gain
information from the ambassador's head of security back at
the mansion.
   These terrorists are nothing like the Gary Oldman character
in "Air Force One," though in a way they are just as fanatical
in their beliefs.  The firebrand, given the revolutionary name
Paulo, is a nerdy-looking guy with thick glasses who, we are
told, has held university students spellbound with his
speeches.  It's difficult to believe that this mild-looking chap
would actually shoot the ambassador in the head, as he is
ordered to do by the leader of the platoon, Jonas (Matheus
Nachtegaele), particularly after escorting the diplomat to the
bathroom during the latter's stroke of incontinence.  The only
thuggish person in the lot appears to be Jonas, who is older
than the all but one of the others in his group, a man who has
stated that he will not extend the deadline one minute and
that he fully intends to carry out his threat to kill the U.S.
representative.
   It's equally difficult to believe that the other side,
represented by a secret service torturer who admits to his
wife and his colleague that he can't sleep nights because of
his pro-government activities, is not made up as well of
genuine human beings who are caught up in having to do
their unpleasant job.  They are not depicted as sadists.
   Barreto has done such a fine job directing Leopold Serran's
adaptation of Fernando Gaberia's book that you come away
quite sympathetic to the young people, who are true believers
appalled by the censorship of their government and by the
campaign of imprisonment and torture of political opponents
of the regime.  Renee is cuddly-sweet, Maria (Fernanda
Torres), who comes on at first as hard-headed, ultimately
sobs that she does not want to die, and the rest of the gang
are just plain so much like polite middle-class lads that the
whole movie challenges our ways of thinking about
revolutionaries.  "Four Days in September" is an exceptional
work in its balance, its believability, its dignity, providing both
insight into a violent practice that has captured headlines for
the past thirty years and a good deal of entertainment for the
audience.  Not Rated.  Running Time: 114 minutes.  (C) 1997
Harvey Karten

Author
Louis Proyect
>From time to time I think about writing a novel based on my
experiences in the American Trotskyist movement. I have never followed
through on this project because deep down I realize that the beliefs
of the people in this movement were too different from those of
ordinary Americans. How could I possibly convey the reality of
revolutionary politics to people who view politics as nothing more
than what they do on election day?
The makers of "Four Days in September" faced a similar problem. How
could they make a film based on the characters and events depicted in
Fernando Gabeira's book "O que é isso, companheiro" (What's Up
Comrade?) and still draw an audience? Gabeira was a member of a
Brazilian terrorist cell that kidnapped the American Ambassador
Charles Elrick in September, 1969. They sought to protest the military
dictatorship that had just seized power, and win freedom for
imprisoned comrades.
Director Bruno Barreto, best known for his "Dona Flor and Her Two
Husbands," simply decided to dump the politics to make the film
palatable. "I did not make a film about politics but about human
beings. I did not make a film about ideas, but about the fears,
desires and tensions involved in a specific episode. Besides, no one
would be able to stand to listen to the actual way the terrorists
spoke at the time."
Without politics, the film becomes a banal crime melodrama. Except for
the occasional rhetorical flourish about the "Revolution," the
characters mainly discuss the technical details of the kidnapping. To
sustain the audience's interest, Barreto emphasizes human
relationships that have little to do with politics. There is a budding
romance between Maria [Fernanda Torres], the ringleader, and Gabeira
[Pedro Cardoso]. A filial bond develops between Gabeira and Elrick
[Alan Arkin] who turns out to be a liberal opposed to the war in
Vietnam and the military dictatorship in Brazil. A key scene shows
Gabeira allowing Elrick to view him with his mask off, thereby
revealing his humanity.
Gabeira develops a crush on  Maria when he is first sworn into the
terrorist cell. During the ceremony, she harangues the young recruits.
She assigns them each a nom de guerre: Fernando Gabeira then becomes
"Paulo." Along with their real names, they must leave behind all
normal human feelings that they had in their previous life. This scene
evokes the witch-hunt iconography of potboilers like the 1951 classic
"I Was A Communist For the FBI." These propaganda pieces inevitably
include a fanatical but beautiful female Communist cell leader who
makes speeches about how love is a bourgeois diversion.
In the production notes, Fernanda Torres is contemptuous of the
character she plays. She says, "Maria was sort of a 'sergeant' in the
group, and, to my mind, the least credible character in the script. I
wasn't alive when the kidnapping took place so I can't be sure if
militant political women really behaved like that." One can only
wonder why Torres accepted the role if she has so little
identification with the character and shows so little interest in
finding out about what made such a character tick. Perhaps there is no
tradition of method acting in Brazil. According to the principles
method acting, character portrayal grows out the totality of the
character's social relations. The actor must try to go beyond the
dimensions of the script and immerse him or herself in the social
milieu of the character. This might mean driving a cab if the
character is a cabdriver. Of course, such background research would
have done little to add depth to a character whose dialog consists
mainly of worries over whether the kidnapping will be carried out
successfully, punctuated by tone-deaf "radical" rhetoric.
After a major bank robbery, Maria's gang decides to kidnap the
American Ambassador. Such an operation requires outside assistance so
they call in Toledo [Nelson Dantas] and Jonas [Matheus Nachtegaele],
two veterans of the terrorist movement. Toledo is a man in his sixties
who fought in the Spanish Civil War, while Jonas is a young
working-class militant who is even more unsmiling and case-hardened
than Maria herself. Jonas, who takes over the operation, warns the
rest of the group that he will shoot anybody who disobeys his orders.
For the remainder of the film, Toledo and Jonas are absorbed in the
technical details of the kidnapping and we never discover who they
really are or what they believe.
In a letter to his wife, Elrick confesses his inability to understand
the fanaticism of Jonas. It never would have occurred to Leopoldo
Serran, the screenwriter, to fill in some background on such a
character. Like the rest of the people associated with the project, he
was hostile to leftist politics. He kept  resisting Barreto's
invitation to write a script based on Gabeira's memoir. "I refused
several times, because I disagreed with many of the leftist principles
and practices, and I could not agree to do anything complimentary or
biased."
Perhaps Serran might have fleshed out such a character by studying the
life of one of Brazil's most famous workers, Lula of the Workers
Party. He was the youngest of 8 children born to subsistence farmers.
In 1956, the family moved to Sao Paulo, where they dwelled in one room
at the back of a bar and shared the bathroom with bar customers. Lula,
unlike the terrorists of the 1969 generation, became the leader of a
mass social movement. The same sense of indignation that committed him
to peaceful change, however, must have fueled Jonas. It would have
made for a much richer film if Jonas spoke openly about the
circumstances that led him to such extremist politics.
Toledo, admittedly a secondary character, only speaks about his doubts
over the success of the kidnapping. It would have been interesting to
find out something about the life of a character old enough to be a
grandfather, who has decided to take such drastic measures. (It is
rather dubious that a Spanish Civil War veteran would have ever joined
a terrorist plot, since these activists had an orientation to mass
action. We would be asking too much from a film that had so little
interest in politics to try to explain this anomaly)
Serran's enthusiasm is not for characters like these with their
obnoxious left-wing politics. He invests all of his power as a
playwright into the character of Henrique [Marco Ricca], the cop in
charge of capturing the kidnappers. Henrique feels torn between duty
and revulsion over the torture he carries out against revolutionaries
in the basement of his police station as part of his job. For Serran,
there is a sexual aspect to torture which is reflected in the script.
Henrique mentions to his partner that a political prisoner has fallen
in love with and married one Pecanha, a cop who tortured her. That
Serran would even consider such an event as within the realm of
possibility shows how detached he is from the reality of police
repression. One can only hope that he never accepts an assignment to
write a screenplay based on Tomas Borge's memoir. Somoza's torturers
beat this Sandinista leader in the testicles repeatedly during his
imprisonment until he lost his manhood.
Ultimately "Four Days in September" is repression without violence. It
represses the real beliefs and the real motivations of the terrorist
band, as much as a gag over the mouth of a prisoner does. As difficult
as it would have been to translate the lives of terrorists into a
commercially viable film, a production company with some sympathy for
the left should have made the attempt. The director, the screenwriter
and the actors are all complicit in covering up the history of the
desperate and marginal Brazilian urban underground. The key to an
authentic and dramatically convincing film would have been in
uncovering the history of each character. Without such histories, the
overall history of the times remains a mystery.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
FOUR DAYS IN SEPTEMBER (O Que É Isso, Companheiro?) (Brazil, 1997) *** 1/2
. Directed by Bruno Barreto. Written by Fernando Gabeira  (from his novel
"O  Que Isso, Companheiro?" "What's Up, Comrade?") and Leopoldo Serran .
Photography,  Félix Monti. Editing, Isabelle Rathery. Production design,
Marcos Flacksman, Alexandre Meyer. Music, Stewart Copeland. Cast
(alphabetically):  Cláudia Abreu  (Renee), Alan Arkin (Ambassador Charles
Elbrick), Pedro Cardoso (Fernando alias Paulo), Nelson Dantas (Toledo),
Mauricio Goncalves (Brandao),Luiz Fernando Guimaraes (Marcao), Caio
Junqueira (Julio), Matheus Nachtergaele (Jonas), Marco Ricca (Enrique),
Fernanda Torres (Maria), et al. A Miramax release. In English and
Portuguese (subtitled). 106 minutes (113 in Brazil). Rated R. Some language
and violence.
Political films are not a dime a dozen; "thoughtful political thrillers"
(an oxymoron?) are even fewer. The 1997 Academy Award nominee (Best Foreign
Film) "Four Days in September" is very good. All its virtues don't
necessarily jump at you as you watch it (especially the first time), but
they increase when you think back on the movie.
It is based on facts, which have been minimally given the cosmetic
treatment that invariably goes with adaptations from reportages to movies,
with their spectacular "Oh, wow!" additions or their simplified Good Guys,
Bad Guys morality.
The general background lies in the agitated history of Brazil with its
autocratic governments. The immediate background is that of a succession of
military governments which, since 1964, had suspended constitutional
guarantees, civil rights, and the freedom of the press.
Demonstrations, as usual led by students, were numerous but ineffective.
The film opens with excellent fake documentary riot footage, in black and
white. Cut to  July 20, 1969.  Some young friends (among them a former
seminarist and an actor) are watching on television astronaut Neil
Armstrong (in the Apollo 11 mission) step out of the lunar module "The
Eagle" and onto the surface of the moon.
There is no uniformity in that small group's politics, except a desire for
democracy. One of the men is knee-jerkily anti-US and pro-Soviet; another
proposes drastic revolutionary action; the actor is skeptical about the use
of violence in the resistance.
Soon, some of them and others join a tiny group, MR8, the October 8
Revolutionary Movement. Led by Maria (a pseudonym), the new members are
given noms-de-guerre, trained in pistol-shooting and other matters.
Their first operation is the robbing of a bank (aka liberating funds for
the good fight), which succeeds, but at the expense of one of the men who
hesitates to shoot (a no-no in terrorist handbooks) is shot, wounded,
caught and tortured.
"Paulo," the middle-class intellectual among them, is a dud with guns but
skilled in political oratory. It is crucial that the voice and the acts of
the opposition  to the government be widely known. But since censorship
muzzles the press and other media, only a flamboyant act and its resulting
headlines can break through nationally and internationally, call the
world's attention to Brazil. Paulo comes up with that act : the abduction
of American Ambassador Charles Elbrick.
This is done, the guerillas get their publicity, announce a short,
un-postponable deadline for the release of the Ambassador in exchange of
some 15 political prisoners. Otherwise, Mr. Elbrick will die.
What develops is a story known to many Brazilians but few North Americans.
I will only reveal some of its aspects. For instance, one of the group, the
pretty young blonde "Renee," under false pretenses manages to seduce the
Ambassador's Chief of Security. The movie, in its economical fashion, shows
neither the actual sex scene (which is painful enough to imagine without
having to see it) nor the information that Renee obtains. Instead, the
action goes directly to the results.
Mr. Elbrick is taken to a safe-house. It turns out to be not all that safe.
That's an important, typical point. The kidnappers are idealists all right,
but when it comes to underground skills, they're still wet behind the ears.
Their leadership changes when two older men, respectively veterans of the
Spanish Civil War and of terrorism in Sao Paolo, arrive to take over from
Maria. Yet even then the operation is woefully unprofessional --with a
major exception: the very clever way in which the ambassador is finally
returned to freedom.
Add to this the enormous psychological burden on the young people who had
really not thought through the horror of having, perhaps, to execute a
human being. This is made even more painful as Ambassador Elbrick, held in
a small room (where either he or his captors have to be blindfolded) forms
a sort of bond with Paulo and Renee, a bond reinforced by Elbrick's quiet
but sincere disapproval of any government's repressive measures.
To its credit, "Four Days" is structured in ways that are un-sensational,
un-theatrical, un-heroic, un-romantic, un-sentimental and un-corny. Yet it
contains many moments of edge-of-your-seat tension and suspense. And it has
"State of Siege" written all over it.
"State of Siege" is a 1973 French film by the master of political "thinking
thrillers," Greek-born Costa-Gavras, famous for "Z," "The Confession," and
"Missing," among others. It too was the retelling of a true case. In 1970
Uruguay, Tupamaro guerillas kidnapped and executed Dan Mitrione, an
American agent of AID, the Agency for International Development. He was
accused of using it as a front and being in reality a CIA operative who
taught repression and torture to South American authorities in more than
one country.
"Four Days"  keeps recalling and paralleling "State of Siege" in dozens of
ways over and above the subject: from the same tactics in abducting an
official from his limousine, to the discussions between the guerillas and
their prisoner. Those, however, are inevitable aspects of such situations.
The comparison is more interesting in the details where the two movies
differ.
Whereas Costa-Gavras can create sweeping, dramatic visual moods, director
Barreto ("Dona Flor and her Two Husbands") sticks to a straight
quasi-documentary line, with ample use of original TV newsreel  footage,
whether of politics, Brazil's Independence Day, or a football game -- all
worked well into the plot.  Still, those are relatively minor technicals
aspects.
Where "State of Siege" and "Four Days" part company is that the former was
clearly an indictment of the U.S.A. and the dark side of some of its
foreign policies, while there's not anti-Yankee agit-prop in the latter,
where the culprit is the militarist Brazilian government. In "SOS" Mitrione
(called Santore, played by Yves Montand) is presented as clearly guilty,
though he looks neither ev il nor kind.  Here, Elbrick is played by Alan
Arkin as an most likable and decent being. He speaks fluent Portuguese. He
does not have a great deal of screen time, yet he under-acts so splendidly
that his restraint becomes eloquent and his character memorable.
Dialectics in "Four Days" are much less stressed than in "SOS." The
Tupamaros are infinitely more professional than the MR8 group, the latter
often reaching high levels of amateurish ineptitude.
Even so, the Brazilian movie maintains its natural, credible rhythm. It
uses skilfully  its rapid editing from one scene to another and cuts out
non-vital sections. The differences among most of the characters (the
hardened pro, the young types in search of romantic adventure, the true
believers, etc.)  are sketched briefly but sharply.
Given its subject, this may sound odd, but "Four Days" is a subtle work.
Several events (invented or not) are extremely effective. We hear Elbrick
writing a letter to his wife, but it is an imaginary letter of his thoughts
that describe his mental and physical state, some of his captors, his
reactions to them.
Better yet. An alarm rings.Two panicky captors appear  in Elbrick's room,
without their masks. Cut to Elbrick sitting on the toilet, looking
desperate. Why? He is in greater danger than before since he has seen
faces. A masterful bit.
When there comes a scene of love-making, born of despair as much as
attraction, between Paulo and Maria, the act itself is not shown. It is no
cliche either, since circumstances like those of the guerrillas easily
engender such relationships. The film is overall free of cliches,
artificial humor, moralizing, preaching or simplifications. The
theoretical, pragmatic, ideological problems of the Resistance, and above
all the problems of conscience among simpatico (mostly) idealists who may
have to fight violence by killing an innocent, come through well, without
needless rhetoric.
I found just one semi-goof. Ambassador Elbrick, a chic, fastidious dresser,
in one of those surreal moments of a talk with Paulo, speaks of his man in
Lisbon, the tailor who has been making elegant suits for him for fifteen
years. Yet, the morning of his abduction, we see Elbrick get out of his
ambassadorial bed and dress without taking a shower. Most unlikely, but
then perhaps the only unlikely bit in a very convincing film.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
James Berardinelli
Brazil, 1997
U.S. Release Date: beginning 2/98 (limited)
Running Length: 1:46
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, profanity, sexual situations)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Alan Arkin, Pedro Cardoso, Fernanda Torres, Luiz Fernand Guimares, 
      Claudia Abreu, Nelson Dantas, Matheus Nachtergaele
Director: Bruno Barreto
Producers: Lucy Barreto
Screenplay: Leopoldo Serran based on the novel O QUE ISSO, COMPANHEIRO 
      by Fernando Gabeira
Cinematography: Felix Monti
Music: Stewart Copeland
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
In Portuguese and English with subtitles
     What happens when the idealism of revolutionaries turns rotten?  Or 
when the methods of so-called "freedom fighters" become difficult to 
distinguish from those of the men they're struggling to topple?  These 
are just two of the issues addressed by Bruno Barreto's behind-the-
scenes look into the politics of revolution and terrorism, and how the 
best intentions often lead to ugly results.
     The setting is Rio de Janeiro in July 1969.  The military junta, 
which has ruled Brazil since staging a coup five years ago, has 
suspended civil rights and the freedom of the press.  The iron fist is 
closing, and the number of jailed political prisoners is on the rise.  
Universities have become a hotbed of discord.  The United States, deeply 
embroiled in Vietnam, has little time to spend on events in South 
America, although an ambassador, Charles Burke Elbrick (Alan Arkin), 
remains in Rio to keep the lines of communication open.  
     While there are many revolutionary groups, most are confused and 
fragmented.  The power lies with the military, not with the dissidents.  
One small band, The October Revolutionary Movement, emboldened by their 
successful "liberation of funds" from a bank, are preparing a major 
sally in the underground war -- they intend to kidnap the American 
Ambassador and hold him hostage.  Their demands:  the government must 
free 15 political prisoners within 48 hours of the abduction, or they 
will kill Elbrick.  The deadline will not be pushed back.  Two months 
later, The October Revolutionary Movement is ready to put their plan 
into action, and, mostly as a result of good luck, they capture the 
ambassador on September 4.
     The men and women comprising The October Revolutionary Movement are 
a diverse group.  There's Fernando (Pedro Cardoso), a passionate 
intellectual whose skill is with pens, not guns.  Maria (Fernanda 
Torres) is the fiery brunette who founded the organization and is trying 
to fashion it into something more disciplined than a "bunch of middle-
aged kids out for an adventure."  Renee (Claudia Abreu) is a 
compassionate young woman whose gentle manner makes her an unlikely 
kidnapper. Toledo (Nelson Dantas) is an aging freedom fighter brought in 
to lend his experience to the venture.  And Jonas (Matheus Nachtergaele) 
is Toledo's no-nonsense companion, who takes over the military side of 
the operation.
     FOUR DAYS IN SEPTEMBER works to some degree as a thriller, but it's 
more effective as a drama.  The film makes a number of telling points 
about the consequences of adopting violence as a legitimate means of 
revolution.  John Sayles' MEN WITH GUNS investigates the same issue from 
a different perspective.  When both sides of a struggle employ similar 
tactics, is the difference in ideology enough to differentiate them?  
The members of October Revolutionary Movement start out with the 
intention of doing their part to restore freedom to Rio, but, shortly 
after holding a loaded gun to Elbrick's head, Fernando pronounces that 
the entire endeavor "was a dream that failed."  Those words, and the 
epilogue that follows, underscore Barreto's point that revolution (or 
terrorism, depending on your viewpoint) is more likely to generate 
disillusionment than heroism.
     During the course of his two days of captivity, Elbrick forms a 
tentative bond with two of his captors.  Renee tends to his head wound 
and offers soothing words of comfort.  Fernando talks politics and 
philosophy with him.  As in both THE CRYING GAME and OCTOBER, we see how 
the relationship between a hostage and his abductor can unbalance the 
situation.  Suddenly, each side becomes humanized to the other.  It's no 
longer a matter of slogans, but of flesh-and-blood human beings.  Maria 
and Jonas remain aloof in case they have to act against Elbrick.
     FOUR DAYS IN SEPTEMBER also goes to great lengths to demonstrate 
that the members of The October Revolutionary Movement are amateurs.  
They make enough mistakes for the police to be able to track them down.  
But the flawed nature of their plans makes this film all the more 
believable (it is based on a true story).  Another aspect of the movie 
that enhances its credibility is the way Barreto works to detail the 
interpersonal relationships among members of the movement, such as the 
animosity between Fernando and Jonas and the sexual tension between 
Maria and Fernando.
     The film's best performance is given by American actor Alan Arkin, 
who successfully essays a cultured man attempting to retain his dignity 
in a nearly-impossible situation.  One standout sequence has Arkin's 
Elbrick characterizing his masked captors by describing their hands.  As 
Fernando, Pedro Cardoso does a solid job of presenting the 
disintegration of a idealist.  The other noteworthy performer, Fernanda 
Torres, plays Maria with fire and emotion.
     Under a different director, FOUR DAYS IN SEPTEMBER could have 
turned into a routine thriller.  Indeed, at times, the movie treads 
through familiar territory – this isn't exactly a unique perspective – 
but the intelligence and passion in Barreto's approach lift the film to 
a higher level.  This motion picture is not groundbreaking, but it is 
fascinating and thought-provoking, and offers a little suspense to 
enliven the drama. 
Now with more than 1300 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"No art passes our conscience in the way film does, and goes directly to our
feelings, deep down into the dark rooms of our souls"

Author
Ben Hoffman
A tense film directed by Bruno Barreto, it recounts four momentous
days in Brazil in September 1969 when some dedicated but amateurish
young men and women decide to bring to the attention of the world
that Brazil had a military dictatorship and kept many left-wing young
people prisoner.   With all their efforts thwarted, with nothing they
do making world news, they decide to kidnap the American Ambassador,
Charles Elrick (Alan Arkin) and hold him hostage with threats of
execution if Brazil does not release its political prisoners.
The film is based on Fernando Gaberia's book, O QUE E ISSO,
COMPANHEIRO, (What's happening, Comrade?).    The script is by
Leopold Serran.   In fact, an actor portraying Gaberia, is a
principal character in the film.
To accomplish the kidnap and to call the military's torture of its
prisoners to the world, the amateur terrorists (revolutionaries?)
attempt a bank holdup.   While the true story of those four days is
an edge-of-the-seat story, it is also a human story, the important
parts taking place in the room of the house where the Ambassador is
being held.
Warned that each person must assume a pseudonym and further warned
that everyone must follow orders or risk being shot, the movie comes
down to these young people, idealists who realize they do not want to
die for the revolution.    It had not occurred to them only four days
ago that they might be caught and shot.    I knew people like that
who were in the Communist Party and gave up their parents and
friends, to disappear without so much as a "Good Bye"  to pursue "The
Cause."    That they later regretted what they had done is another
story and may make a good movie.
Alan Arkin plays the ambassador with great dignity.  He is even
sympathetic to the plight of these mostly young people.   The
Ambassador is against both the war in Vietnam and the military
dictatorship . . . but his job as Ambassador requires loyalty to his
government.
Pedro Cardoso has the role of writer Fernando Gaberia/Paulo.
Fernanda Torres is Maria 
Luis Fernand Guimares is Marcao
Claudia Abreu is Renee
A Brazilian film, in Portuguese with English subtitles.
Barreto does not allow any of his personal prejudices or political
beliefs to color the film. . . and for that he deserves much praise.
