Title
Review for Lektionen in Finsternis (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Max Hoffmann
     Herzog describes this film as a "poetic vision of the new
landscapes which have emerged in Kuwait --- a national park of the
future."  The film is difficult to classify, not quite a documentary,
more akin to a silent film with titles, a few voice overs, and a
compelling score (Wagner, Prokofiev, Mahler and others).  The
compelling, surrealistic images, shot from the ground and helicopter,
let you draw your own conclusions about the conflict.  The film holds
your attention with same rubber necking fascination that makes us slow
down and scan a bad highway accident.
     There are a few segments where local Kuwaitis try to express their
horror (e.g., a mother talking about her child who lost ability to
speak).  Though many of the images are horrific or apocalyptic, there is
often a weird sort of beauty to the images.  The darkened skies over
dark blue water are reminiscent of oil paintings by old Flemish
masters.
     Herzog was at the screening, live and in person.  He revealed that
for this film, in some sequences he had the soundtrack picked out, and
he sought images that matched what he heard.  The film was made during
the last week that the oil fires were burning.  The crew trying to put
out the fires have a weird anonymous look with their asbestos gear and
masks.  Herzog says that the fires were so hot, that in a few cases the
microphones melted, and often the soles of their boots would fuse to
the sand.  The print is remarkably unspoiled, and it makes you wonder
what kind of cameras were used.  It's obvious in most of the shots that
it's not a zoom lens, or blown-up shot.  Herzog also says he met Klaus
Kinski when he was 13 and Kinski was a 25-year-old boarder in the same
run-down flat.  Kinski used to lock himself up in the bathroom for
hours at a time.  Herzog also says he shot NOSFERTU by necessity, and
kept it as close to the original silent in imagery as possible.  "I felt
like I was passing over water with no bottom.  Nosferatu let me get my
feet on solid ground again."
     LESSONS OF DARKNESS is as enigmatic as its maker and that final
quote.  Not to be missed.
