Title
Review for Journey, The (1997/I)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 New Ray Films
 Director:  Harish Saluja
 Writer: Lisa Kirk Puchner, Harish Saluja
 Cast: Roshan Seth, Saeed Jaffrey, Antony Zaki, Carrie
Preston, Nora Bates, Elizabeth Zajiko, Michael Emerson
   The telephone, TV, and computers may have made the
world seem like a small place, but cultural conflicts are still a
source of endless amusement.  In one of the funniest such
scenes, in Nicholas Meyer's 1979 feature "Time After Time,"
H.G. Wells follows Jack the Ripper in a time machine to the
United States, watches someone hail a taxi by hopping on
one foot and waving frantically, and promptly mimics the
native. "The Journey," a comedy-drama directed by Harish
Saluja and co-written by him with Lisa Kirk Puchner, is more
akin to Ang Lee's "Pushing Hands."  Lee's 1992 film deals
with a Chiense-American who brings his father, a tai-chi
master who speaks no English, to live with his American wife
and son in a New York suburb.
   What makes "The Journey" even more accessible than
"Pushing Hands" to an American audience, is that its principal
character speaks fluent English and is, in fact, a poet-
philosopher as well.  In this film, Roshan Seth, who must
have made about a hundred films in the west, is in the role of
Kishan Singh--an Indian who has just lost his wife and who is
invited to spend some time in a Pittsburgh suburb with his
son, the doctor.  In one scene of the movie, an energetic,
thirty-something woman who is introduced to the Indian man,
confides to the man's daughter-in-law, "I absolutely adore
him."  You will too: Roshan Seth is a consummate natural
who easily takes on heroic proportions during his brief stay
with his audience.
   Harish Saluja milks the cross-cultural differences for humor
quite successfully throughout. Kishan, who had never been to
the States before, has a lot to learn about American customs
and technology, but in the end he becomes the guide to his
overly-materialistic, workaholic son Raj (Antony Zaki) and the
younger man's obsessively neat and WASPish wife, Laura
(Carrie Preston).  At first he commits one gaffe after another.
Instead of putting the teabag into the cup, he opens it and
pours in the leaves.  Some time later, believing he has
mastered the cuisine, he places the individual bag of sugar
into his tea without opening it.  Manipulating the remote
control, he drives the home entertainment center nuts by
alternating quickly between television, compact disc player
and VCR. Unable to open a large bag of potato chips, he
gives the sack a sudden yank sending fragments of greased
spuds flying across the room.  He becomes the Pittsburgh
area's first person to admit a Jehovah's Witness to the large
house, then debates the handsome young men, comparing
the visitor's beliefs with his own Buddhist temperament.  A
good deal of broad comedy is provided by another performer
about as well known to Indian audiences in America, Saeed
Jaffrey in the role of Ashok, an earthy disk jockey at an Indian
radio station.
   Comedy aside, however, the real value of this wonderfully
realized narrative is its approach to life.  Kishan, who mourns
for his recently departed wife, counsels his son and daughter-
in-law, "You must love the people in your life; they may be
here only a short time."  He provides an object lesson to them
by spending considerable time with his granddaughter, Jenny
(Nora Bates), an 8-year-old who complains that her parents
are too busy to read to her.
   There is nothing wildly unpredictable about the story line,
but in the hands of superior actors like Roshan Seth and
Saeed Jaffrey, the film leaves an indelible mark for its
appropriate balance of broad comedy, home-spun humor and
touching metaphysics. "The Journey," which traveled
successfuly to the Seattle Film Festival in 1997, has a
welcome renewed life with the 21st International Asian-
American Festival shown during the summer in the boroughs
of New York City.
