Title
Review for Kissing Jessica Stein (2001)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
    CAPSULE: The plot is familiar but the writing is usually 
    fresh, funny, and at times moving.  Why can't Jessica find 
    a nice guy?  Is it because she is seeing a nice, and smart, 
    girl?  Heather Juergensen and Jennifer Westfeldt wrote and 
    star in the film based on their own play chronicling the ups 
    and downs of a straight woman who meets the bisexual 
    Ms. Right.  Rating: 6 (0 to 10), +1 (-4 to +4)
This is in many ways a fairly prosaic romantic comedy made only 
slightly less familiar by involving a straight woman who falls 
into a lesbian relationship.  Many of the touches and certainly 
most of the plot twists are things we have seen before.  Jessica 
Stein (played by Jennifer Westfeldt) is a self-assured, successful 
young woman in the New York publishing trade.  The one hole in her 
lifestyle is her dysfunctional love life.  Jessica is having a 
really hard time meeting the right man.  Her mother (Tovah 
Feldshuh) is hoping she will meet the right Jewish guy.  She goes 
from dating one man to the next and they are all losers in one way 
or another and generally not Jessica's intellectual equal.  Then 
she reads a personals ad quoting Rainer Maria Rilke.  Whoever 
placed this ad clearly has a brain.  Unfortunately it is a woman 
seeking another woman, not at all what Jessica has in mind.  Just 
curious to meet the woman who would place such an ad Jessica 
agrees to meet Helen Cooper (Heather Juergensen) with predictable 
results.
The screenplay is written by the two lead actresses based on their 
play "Lipschtick."  As new writers they bring some fresh new 
writing to the film but for the rest they rely on cliche we have 
seen too frequently before.  To show the losers that Jessica has 
been dating they have a montage of dates' faces, each saying 
something stupid.  I saw that for the first time in SHE'S GOTTA 
HAVE IT, but certainly not the last time.  Men in small roles in 
the film are frequently stupid and the contemporary equivalents of 
Stepin Fetchit.  On the other hand an office friend, Hannah Levine 
(not listed in any credits I can find) adds some real life to the 
film.  She seems to be a graduate of the Thelma Ritter School of 
Acting.  Frequently the writing is fresh as when Jessica is naive 
about the mechanics of lesbian sex and Helen has to explain it.
Charles Herman-Wurmfeld directs.  This is not an outstanding film, 
but certainly parts of it work very well.  I rate it a 6 on the 0 
to 10 scale and a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.
