Title
Review for Brewster McCloud (1970)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
Even those who aren't taken with Robert Altman's style of film-making have 
to admire him for maintaining an affection for off-Hollywood (as in the 
manner of off-Broadway) projects throughout his long career.  Audiences who 
had enjoyed Altman's breakthrough anti-war comedy M*A*S*H* in 1970 were 
interested to see what he would come up with for an encore.  The result, a 
mere 11 months later, was his laconic fable BREWSTER McCLOUD.
Bud Cort plays the title character, a loner who lives beneath the Houston 
Astrodome working on a pair of man-powered wings that will enable him to 
fly.  While he is busy collecting the materials he needs, mysterious deaths 
by strangulation occur throughout the city.  What's the link?  Birds.  
Altman's running joke through this movie is that it is a birdwatching film, 
with avian references appearing everywhere, from the meals the characters 
eat to the license plates on their cars.  Over the course of the film a 
narrator (Rene Auberjonois) compares the appearance and behavior of people 
in the story with that of birds while increasingly becoming more birdlike 
himself.  These constant bird motifs would appear to reflect the 
flight-obsessed thoughts circulating through the characters' minds.  It 
seems to me that Brewster's desire to fly is not because he has some kind of 
Icarus complex or any affinity with birds in general (although he is rather 
owl-like) but that he is acting upon a type of race memory buried deep 
within him.  It's as if he knows that we were all once born to fly, but have 
forsaken and forgotten it.
Brewster is aided in his quest by Louise (Sally Kellerman), an elusive 
mixture of mother and mentor, but more pertinently a guardian angel, who has 
scars down her back that suggests she once had wings herself.  Even though 
all Brewster wants to do is take flight (the only time we see him happy in 
the film is when he finds himself airborne) it is never made clear why, or 
even where to.  Could it be that he is trying to reach a subconscious memory 
of heaven?  The redemption angle is reinforced further when Louise is 
dismayed to find that he has slept with a girl he has barely known (Shelley 
Duvall, who had never acted until her debut in this film).  These sins of 
the flesh equal a loss of purity that will 'ground' him, i.e. seal his 
mortality and prevent his entry into the angel-world.  The only would-be 
girlfriend of Brewster's to get approval from Louise is Hope (Jennifer 
Salt), who is able to get sexual satisfaction from their relationship while 
still keeping it entirely platonic (and, as Emily Dickinson said, "Hope is 
the thing with feathers", although I'm obviously straining the motif at this 
point).  Hope also appears in the guise of Dorothy, one of a few WIZARD OF 
OZ references in the film (there's also ruby slippers and a cameo from 
Margaret Hamilton).  I'm not sure why Altman included these - another 
man-bird meld would be the flying monkeys, I guess - but it could be to 
remind us that the whole film is 'only a story' (hence the narrator).  I'll 
go along with this until the film's closing credits, which abruptly 
introduces a circus troupe to present the cast, because I think it detracts 
from the film's conclusion.  Perhaps Altman didn't want viewers to think his 
black comedy had gotten too cynical.  There's touches of that, but there's 
also humor and contemplation.  Even though this isn't one of his 
better-known films I still find the scene of Brewster circling the Astrodome 
in flight one of Altman's most enduring images.
