Title
Review for Bug's Life, A (1998)
Number of Reviews
36

Author
Craig Roush
Release Date: November 25, 1998
The Voices of: Dave Foley, Kevin Spacey, Julia Louis-Dreyfus, Hayden
Panettiere, Phyllis Diller, Denis Leary, Joe Ranft, John Ratzenberger
Directed by: John Lasseter, Andrew Stanton
Distributed by: Buena Vista Pictures
MPAA Rating: G 
URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/bugslife.htm
Lest their be any question of whether or not the Mouse House still packs
any animated clout, consider this to be the convincing argument
otherwise. 
With a eerie feeling of déjŕ vu and a virtual replay of events earlier
this year, Disney's computer-animated movie about insects, A BUG'S LIFE,
not only beat out the competition (DreamWorks' ANTZ), but did so by a
good measure. Although there may have been doubt as to which of the
"double-vision" asteroid pics would succeed (DreamWorks' DEEP IMPACT
versus Disney's ARMAGEDDON), there was no question when DreamWorks chose
to challenge Disney on its own turf. The animation in A BUG'S LIFE is of
the finest quality, superb in design and free of the flaws that plagued
DreamWorks' picture. The graphic end of the movie -- a bright palette of
pastel hues -- runs smoothly and to great effect. 
Unlike ANTZ, which was a story of internal strife in an ant colony, A
BUG'S LIFE returns to Ćsopian ground and gives us a tale of ants against
grasshoppers. Strictly speaking, both the script and the voice talent in
A BUG'S LIFE is not nearly as developed as that of ANTZ (the latter
being written with more thought and intelligence), but the simplicity of
A BUG'S LIFE is the key to its success. The movie is a departure from
the serious fare of the competition's animation studios, and, in true
Disney fashion, is plea to the viewer's inner child. Characters are
drawn with an attitude of innocence, and bad guys are sulking, sneering
characters. It's the typical Disney formula, and as far as many are
concerned, that formula's still tops. 
The story centers around the life of an ant named Flik (Dave Foley, TV's
"News Radio"), whose curious tendancies land his colony in trouble when
he unknowingly ruins the year's harvest. Flik's colony gathers food for
a gang of grasshoppers, but when Flik sends the offering into the drink,
the lead grasshopper, Hopper (Kevin Spacey), delivers an ultimatum. The
ants must gather a replacement harvest by autumn, or Hopper and his gang
will destroy the colony. Flik decides to make amends by gathering a
group of warrior bugs to fight the grasshoppers, and to keep him out of
the way, the colony's Princess Atta (Julia Louis-Dreyfus, TV's
"Seinfeld") gives him approval. So Flik heads to the "city" and returns
with a troupe of circus bugs whom he believes to be great warriors, just
in time for he first day of autumn. 
The script is peppered with witticisms to keep the older crowd
interested, and there's plenty of slapstick comedy for the younger ones.
At an hour and forty minutes, however, the movie runs a bit longer than
necessary; kids may grow restless nearing the end. Fortunately, the
competition over the holiday weekend isn't much better: BABE: PIG IN THE
CITY and THE RUGRATS MOVIE are both over ninety minutes in length. For
family entertainment, it doesn't get much better than this, and the
Academy may just think so as well -- there's something here for
everyone.

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by John Lasseter.
Voices: Dave Foley, Julia Louis-Dreyfus, Kevin Spacey, Hayden 
Panettiere, Madeline Kahn, David Hyde Pierce, Phyllis Diller, Brad 
Garrett, Denis Leary, Joe Ranft, Edie McClurg.
1998 - 94 minutes.
Rated G (nothing objectionable).
Reviewed November 28, 1998.
By Dustin Putman 
Dustin Putman's Film Reviews >
After the recent animated debacles of, "A Rugrats Movie," and "A Bug's 
Life," I am seriously considering raising my highly negative rating on 
Dreamworks' other insect film from October, "Antz." I hated that movie, 
and yet, it is so much better than these latest two excursions.
"A Bug's Life," is the second animated insect film in the last two 
months, and I hoped for the best, considering it was done in the 
wonderful style of Pixar's last film, 1995's "Toy Story," but in no way 
does, "A Bug's Life," even remotely match up to that. 
Flik (David Foley), an ant, who along with his many comrades, has the 
job every year of gathering up the seasonal harvest, only to have to 
give half of it away to the dominating grasshoppers, led by Hopper 
(Kevin Spacey). Flik, however, feels all alone and unwanted in the 
world, especially after he accidentally loses all of their food, and the 
ants are threated by Hopper to gather up a whole other season's load by 
the time the last summer leaf falls from the trees. Banished from Ant 
Island, Flik leaves the colony in search of some strong reinforcement to 
help out, but through a misunderstanding, returns with a handful of 
helpless circus bugs, including a walking stick (David Hyde Pierce), a 
dung beetle (Brad Garrett), a gypsy moth (Madeline Kahn), a male ladybug 
(Denis Leary), and a caterpillar (Joe Ranft).
"A Bug's Life," has one thing going for it. Only one thing. With its 
glorious, bright colors, the computer-generated animation is a spectacle 
to look at. The film itself, unfortunately, is a lifeless, unamusing 
contraption without any of the flair or excitement of, "Toy Story."
The characters in, "A Bug's Life," are an assortment of either unlikable 
or dull insects without any charm or personality, other than to stand 
around and recite arbitrary and thoroughly unfunny one-liners. The thin 
story was also stretched out to a nearly unbearable 94 minutes, and it 
often felt as if they ran out of ideas throughout, and so they made up 
pointless scenes to pass as time-filler.
After giving such scathing reviews to the animated films from this year, 
I was beginning to think that I had simply outgrown them, but then I 
realized this is just not so. I still adore almost all of the older 
Disney films, and many of the newer ones, such as 1989's, "The Little 
Mermaid," 1991's, "Beauty and the Beast," 1993's, "The Nightmare Before 
Christmas," and yes, 1995's, "Toy Story." Maybe this has just been a bad 
year for children's films, and hopefully, the upcoming, "The Prince of 
Egypt," will not be a disappointment. As for, "A Bug's Life," I did not 
enjoy anything about it. Not the story, not the characters, and not even 
the voiceover work, which was far more lively in, "Antz." "A Bug's 
Life," goes down as yet another failure for Disney, and it is a sad 
state of affairs when their best film in the last two years has been the 
minor Jonathan Taylor Thomas picture, "I'll Be Home for Christmas." 

Author
James Brundage
Directed by John Lasseter (Toy Story), and Andrew Stanton (A Story)
Written by Andrew Stanton, Don McEnery (Hercules), and Bob Shaw (Hercules)
Featuring the voices of: Dave Foley ("Newsradio"), Kevin Spacey (LA
Confidential), Julia Louis-Dreyfus ("Seinfeld"), Hayden Panettiere (The
Object of my Affection), Phyillis Diller ("The Bold and the Beautiful"),
Richard Kind ("Spin City"), David Hyde Pierce ("Frasier"), Joe Ranft (Toy
Story), Dennis Leary (Wag the Dog), Johnathan Harris ("Lost in Space"),
Madeline Kahn (Clue), Bonnie Hunt (Jumanji)
Well, the battle of the bugs is finally over and I think, cash wise, that
Disney will come out on top once again. After all, there is such a thing a
customer loyalty when it comes to kids and animated movies and whatever they
see at McDonalds (Disney) seems to be their drug of choice. Sadly, it has to
be ours.
A Bug's Life is about a colony of Ants who refuse to give their food over to
the locusts (actually the film's main character, Flick (the Leonardo da
Vinci of Ants (he'd cut an ear off if he had one), messes things up for them
at the beginning by knocking over the altar the ants give the grasshoppers
food on). Having to meet double-quota by the end of fall, the powers that be
send Flick away on a false mission to get larger bugs to help them defeat
the grasshoppers.
So Flick's out of the way and they're working their tails (if they had em)
off to get enough food for the grasshoppers and them. But Flick ends up
mistaking some circus bugs for warriors (due to the temper of Francis
(Dennis Leary), and comes back with them. They find out what he actually
wants, decide to leave, but end up staying after saving one of the Queen
ant's daughters, Dot, from being eaten by a bird (who has a roar that sounds
like a T-rex from Jurassic Park). Why? They got applause, and they suck at
being circus bugs so they'll be narcissistic and get appreciation any way
they can.
So everyone, under the guidance of the genius ant Flick, bands together to
defeat the grasshoppers while developing characters, making cheap jokes, and
laughing all around.
The sad thing about this year's battle of the bugs was that neither film
could make it the right for both ages, like Pixar's earlier film Toy Story
and the rather intelligent short Geri's Game, which everyone got to watch as
A Bug's Life started up. This one catered specifically to the younger
generation, which is fine for them but disappoints me, because I haven't
been five for a long time. Antz catered to us but had our children staring
with a giant "huh"? Look on their faces. I'm saddened by the both of them,
as much as I personally loved Antz, because they've all gotten so caught up
in making the buck that they've forgotten that they have to appeal to both
kids and adults.
I thought both were funny, I thought both had excellent computer animation,
and I think both will do moderately well. But if they could have only
focused on their target audience (families), then they would have done a
helluva lot better.

Author
Luke Buckmaster
Featuring the voices of: Dave Foley, Kevin Spacey, Julia Louis-Dreyfus,
Phyllis Diller, Brad Garrett, Jonathan Harris, Bonnie Hun, David Hyde
Pierce, Madeline Kahn, Richard Kind, Denis Leary, Hayden Panettiere, Joe
Ranft, John Ratzenberger
Directors: John Lasseter, Andrew Stanton
Screenplay: Andrew Stanton, Donald McEnery, Bob Shaw
Australian theatrical release: December 3, 1998
On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):
3 and a half stars
Critics everywhere have compared Disney Pixar's A Bug's Life to
Dreamworks' Antz.  Don't expect me to be any different; it is virtually
impossible not to compare these two pretty special films.  As I was
wracking my brain trying to figure out why I liked Antz more than this,
it suddenly hit me: Antz deals with its themes in more of a theoretical
sense, whilst A Bug's Life is very practical.  For example, in Antz, the
enemy was depicted as the colony itself - their inability to think for
themselves.  But in this film, the enemy is in the very practical form
of ruthless grasshoppers.
It is rare for Disney films to have a good amount of depth and meaning
(The Hunchback of Notre Damne is the only in recent memory), but A Bug's
Life - a potentially brilliant film - is just a little too thin an
experience.  But without being hyper critical, this is a very good and
solid film, which will no doubt score big with the Christmas box office.
The dangerous Hopper (voice of Kevin Spacey) and his ruthless band of
grasshoppers threaten to wipe out a colony of ants, which is led by the
ant queen (Phyllis Diller) and Princess Atta (Julia Louis-Dreyfus).
Flik (Dave Foley, of TV's NewsRadio) is an ant whose experimental views
on technology get him in deep trouble, but he rises to the challenge of
saving the colony by enlisting the help of "warrior bugs."
Unfortunately, he mistakes circus-performing insects for warriors, and
disaster brews as Hopper's threats become closer to reality.
One of the foremost reasons to see A Bug's Life is its clever jokes,
some of them parodies of our modern world.  When a fallen leaf
interrupts a group of ants collecting food, one ant screams "I'm lost!
Where's the line?"  Rescue workers quickly arrive at the scene.  "This
is nothing compared to the twig of '93!"
Many other gags, courtesy of script writers Andrew Stanton, Donald
McEnery and Bob Shaw, evolve around the crazy personalities of the
circus performers.  A repressed stick insect, a male ladybug and a
chubby caterpillar (who is eager to transform into a "beautiful
butterfly") are among the delightful characters delivering the jokes.
Kevin Spacey plays Hopper with a wickedly placid presence.  His voice is
controlled but his anger is fierce, a little reminiscent of his role as
a serial killer in Se7en.   Spacey is the best part of A Bug's Life, as
this superb actor proves that not being seen doesn't remove any power
from his performances.  Dave Foley plays a similar role to his part in
NewsRadio; acting as the sane center - the instigator that all the other
characters can react around.  David Hyde Pierce's voice is instantly
recognizable from the hit sitcom Frasier, and is a welcomed presence who
delivers his trademark personality of intelligence amongst confusion.
Almost everyone else seems uniformly average, ranging from the lifeless
Julia Louis-Dreyfus to the over the top Madeline Kahn (playing the
caterpillar).
A Bug's Life may have had it a little easy from critics.  Its plot is
lightweight, but it is not hard to be sucked into the films illustrious
computer animation.  These visuals are often a delight, although I was
surprised to find that they are significantly less detailed than those
in Antz (especially when we get a peek at the world beneath the ground).
A Bug's Life also looks much more spherical, with a smooth and shiny
design.
Definitely the best moments of A Bug's Life are near its end, in the
final battle between Flick and Hopper, and the delightful roll of film
through the credits (when an original gag is staged, which gives us an
insight into the film's real actors).  Whether you prefer these types of
films as theoretical or practical, sophisticated or slim, Antz and A
Bug's Life are both terrifically entertaining.  Now it's just a case of
whether or not Disney can provide depth and meaning in the same package.

Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of
course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com for any
inquiries or feedback
Read more of my reviews at Alphalink Movies:
http://moviezone.alphalink.com.au

Author
Scott Renshaw
A BUG'S LIFE
(Disney/Pixar)
Voices:  Dave Foley, Kevin Spacey, Julia Louis-Dreyfuss, David Hyde
Pierce, Denis Leary, Joe Ranft, Phyllis Diller, Richard Kind.
Screenplay:  Andrew Stanton and Donald McEnery & Bob Shaw.
Producers:  Darla K. Anderson and Kevin Reher.
Directors:  John Lasseter and Andrew Stanton.
MPAA Rating:  G.
Running Time:  95 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     A BUG'S LIFE deserves better.  It deserves better than to be held up
to that other computer-animated insect film from earlier this fall.  It
deserves better than to be compared to that other feature from Pixar.
It's virtually impossible to talk about A BUG'S LIFE without invoking ANTZ
and/or TOY STORY, but it deserves better.  Films with this much wit,
energy and imagination are too uncommon to diminish this one with such
petty comparisons.  A BUG'S LIFE is not just a delightful
computer-animated family film about insects.  It's a delightful film.
     Not that it's a perfect one.  It gets off to a slightly sluggish
start, introducing an ant colony forced to collect a winter food supply
for Hopper (Kevin Spacey), a grasshopper gang leader running an
entomological protection racket.  Our protagonist Flik (Dave Foley), a
dreamer whose innovations tend to cause aggravations for the Queen
(Phyllis Diller) and her successor-in-training Princess Atta (Julia
Louis-Dreyfuss), inadvertently destroys the grasshopper offering one day,
endangering the entire colony.  Thus Flik takes it upon himself to head
out from Ant Island and find warriors who will defend the ants when the
angry grasshoppers return.
     A BUG'S LIFE doesn't really take off until we meet the "warriors"
Flik eventually finds in the big city.  In actuality, they're a band of
disgraced bug circus performers Flik mistakenly assumes are warriors,
including put-upon walking stick bug Slim (David Hyde Pierce), clownish
caterpillar Heimlich (Joe Ranft) and the hilarious, imcomprehensible
acrobatic pill bug tandem Tuck and Roll (Michael McShane).  The botched
circus sequence in which they are introduced recalls Warner Bros. cartoons
at their most rapid-fire anarchic, with the cast of colorful performers
all delivering laughs.  Though Foley is a pleasant enough presence, his
redemption storyline isn't nearly as interesting as the circus performers'
search for an adoring audience.  He serves much the same function here as
he does on TV's "NewsRadio," acting as the sane center around which more
charismatic characters can do their thing.
     He's also the center around which the animators can do their thing,
and they do more than enough things to make for a wonderful ride.  The
throwaway gags in Flik's visit to the "big city" -- an annoying street
mime mimicking Flik's every move, a cricket panhandler with a sign 
announcing "Wings pulled off by kids" -- are consistently appealing to
viewers of all ages.  Meanwhile, the big action set pieces, including an
attack by a hungry bird, offer splendidly-paced thrills.  Director John
Lasseter has an uncanny eye for setting up a scene, and a comic
sensibility most directors of live action should be willing to kill for.
Nowhere is that more evident than during the closing credits, when
Lasseter pulls out the kind of brilliant conceit that makes really good
films feel like great films.  Miss the final five minutes at your own
peril.
     Sure, it would have been nice if A BUG'S LIFE had had a story as
tightly constructed as the buddy bonding of Woody and Buzz in TOY STORY.
It would have been nice if the lead character had had as distinctive a
personality as Woody Allen's Z in ANTZ.  Those are the nit-picking details
you have to come up with when a film offers as much pure fun as A BUG'S
LIFE.  Silly enough for kids, smart enough for adults, grandly-staged
enough for anyone who loves movies, it offers entertainment that deserves
a different kind of comparison.  Understand that there probably haven't
been a half-dozen better films of _any_ kind this year, and you'll be on
to the kind of comparison A BUG'S LIFE really deserves.

Author
Tim Voon
Voices: Dave Foley, Kevin Spacey, Julia Louis-Dreyfuss, David Hyde
Pierce, Denis Leary, Joe Ranft, Phyllis Diller, Richard Kind.
Screenplay: Andrew Stanton and Donald McEnery & Bob Shaw. Directors:
John Lasseter and Andrew Stanton.
Somehow the idea of playful, individualistic insects with attitude
hasn't caught my imagination. This movie is primarily aimed at children,
but will entertain adults as well. It is not as cleverly scripted as the
humourous Antz, but carries about it a more innocent charm that is rose
coloured and typically Disney. From the story's start you get the
feeling that the dumb, mean locusts are being set up for the cute,
little, purple ants to overcome. This is to highlight several Disney
themes like  It doesn't pay to be a bully', for every Goliath there
are several Davids', there is strength in unity' and dare to be
yourself'. There is enough good O' southern preaching in this movie to
fill the sermon books of any lay preacher. Needless to say, Disney does
not failed to entertain or deliver the goods. The songs are lively, the
characters delightful and engaging. Although this is not my idea of A
Bug's Life, which is usually promptly ended under my foot, who is to say
we can't romanticise a picture perfect insect world where everything
works out perfectly in the end.

Author
Curtis Edmonds
by Curtis Edmonds -- blueduck@hsbr.org
I went into A Bug's Life with certain expectations, and I was not
disappointed. I expected to see a technically advanced movie, with visually
stunning sets. I expected to see cutesy little characters spouting bad
puns. I expected to hear lots of celebrity voiceovers. And I expected A
Bug's Life to rival it's predecessor, Toy Story, in providing that
ineffable something known as movie magic. If A Bug's Life did nothing more
than meet my expectations -- which it does -- it would be a very good movie
indeed. In movies, and life, you're supposed to expect the unexpected. What
makes A Bug's Life a wonderful movie is the one thing I didn't expect going
in. A Bug's Life just happens to be a grand celebration of something that
seldom gets celebrated in Hollywood these days: The Values that Made
America Great.
First, you need to know that A Bug's Life is about a clash between three
cultural and political systems. We start off with the Ants, who are a
nameless, faceless, Communist horde. (To their credit, the ants are the
nicest, cutest Communists you'd ever want to meet, and they're ruled by
Phyllis Diller instead of Big Brother.) They are opposed by the
Grasshoppers, who are an evil Fascist menace led by Hopper (Kevin Spacey),
who rules Grasshoppers and Ants alike with an iron, er, fist, I guess. The
Ants work like Stalinist shock-workers to gather enough food to feed
themselves and the Grasshoppers.
Along comes Flik, who -- with one exception -- is the digital embodiment of
the American Spirit.  (Save for his voice, which is provided by Canada's
Dave Foley.)  Flik is an Eagle Scout among bugs (yes, they have Scouting in
A Bug's Life).  We know right from the outset that he is smart, creative
and inventive -- we see him with a jerry-built harvester designed to
collect grain more efficiently.  When he accidentally endangers the colony,
he accepts responsibility and tries to stand up to the bully grasshoppers.
He bravely goes forth on a noble quest and returns heroically -- then uses
his daring and ingenuity in the final battle with the grasshoppers.  Flik
is the closest thing to a Frank Capra hero we've seen since Captain Miller
in Saving Private Ryan (and before that, Kevin Costner's Postman, which
makes you wonder where all the Capra heroes have gone.)
Flik is aided on his mission by a wandering troupe of circus bugs, who make
the trip to the ant colony thinking they're there to entertain -- instead
of serving as mercenaries.  The troupe provides all of the other elements
that you'd expect from a Pixar movie:  lots of celebrity voices, physical
humor, and cheap puns.  The top act at the flea circus is at least as
visually complex as the "falling with style" sequence in Toy Story, and the
ending battle with the grasshoppers is as inventive as Buzz and Woody's
final dash for the moving van.  My only complaint is that there are
probably one or two too many circus performers, and the ones who are most
interesting (say, Bonnie Hunt's black widow) don't get enough screen time.
However, this is a minor quibble, and in no way should affect my admiration
for the hard work of the Pixar team in bringing us this lively holiday
gift.  A Bug's Life is a labor of love in an industry that all too often
takes the quick and dirty approach.  Best wishes to them and to their
marketing department, which is now, I'm sure, busy selling little Flik
dolls... because capitalism is an American Value too.
MovieNation:  Movie Reviews in Black and White
http://members.xoom.com/movienation
movienation@xoommail.com
"No children have ever meddled with the Republican Party
and lived to tell about it."  -- Sideshow Bob

Author
Jeffrey Huston
Directed by John Lasseter.  Co-directed by Andrew Stanton.  Produced by
Darla K. Anderson and Kevin Reher.  Screenplay by Andrew Stanton, Donald
McEnery and Bob Shaw.  Original story by John Lasseter, Andrew Stanton and
Joe Ranft.  Distributed by Walt Disney Pictures.  Running time:  93 minutes.
Release date:  November 20, 1998 in NY/LA; November 25th nationwide.
(to read this review complete with pictures from the film, visit Jeffrey
Huston's website at: http://www.impactprod.org/people/huston/abugslife.htm )
Great family entertainment is rare nowadays.  Many films and TV shows like
to present themselves under the guise of being entertaining for the whole
family, but most are not.  `Family Entertainment' is an abused expression by
studio marketers that are trying to peddle films or videos that really only
appeal to kids.  They say their product is `for the whole family', but as
the kids laugh and giggle, Mom and Dad find themselves nodding off.
As I define it, `Family Entertainment' is something that literally everyone
in the family can enjoy, no matter how young or old they may be.  "A Bug's
Life" is family entertainment at its absolute best.
Walt Disney Pictures and Pixar Animation collaborated on one of this decade'
s most revolutionary films, 1995's "Toy Story".  It was the first film to be
animated entirely by CGI (Computer Generated Imagery).  This holiday season,
Disney and Pixar give us their second effort, the energetic and highly
entertaining "A Bug's Life".  Also animated by CGI technology, "A Bug's
Life" is a sumptuous visual treat that takes the look of "Toy Story" to
another level.  And whereas it may not have quite the level of character
depth as its 1995 predecessor, "A Bug's Life" is a smart, fun adventure that
is as pleasing to the sense of sight as it is to the sense of humor.
"A Bug's Life" is the story of an ant colony oppressed by a gang of
grasshoppers.  Using their superior strength, the scary grasshoppers strike
fear into the ants, threatening them with their very lives if they do not
give the grasshoppers all of the food they have harvested through the summer
and fall.  Feeling powerless to do anything, the ants hopelessly give into
this demand.  Except one.
Flik, a simple worker ant with aspirations of being an inventor, is viewed
by most of the colony as eccentric, high-minded and foolish.  Yearning to
redeem himself, Flik ventures out of the ant colony in the hopes of
recruiting other insects as defenders of the ant harvest.  Through a
hilarious sequence of mistaken identity, Flik enlists a group of carnival
insects for this battle, believing them to be warrior insects.  This
alliance-by-misunderstanding evolves into a fable which shows us that belief
and faith in oneself and others enables us to achieve feats that reach
beyond our perceived limitations.  It is a wonderfully affirming morality
tale in the grand tradition of Disney's best animated features.
The story for "A Bug's Life" succeeds where so many family-oriented movies
fail.  It tells an exciting story with interesting characters that is
entertaining to adults while being fascinating to children.  The story is
very well structured; it displays excellent character development and
legitimate dramatic tension that challenges the resolve of its characters,
all building to an exciting climax.  It also employs a sharp wit with quick
barbs and observations that are uproariously funny.  In today's sex obsessed
culture, this is a shining example of truly great humor.  It is comedy that
makes you laugh out loud without relying on easily concocted sexual
innuendoes.  This is a smart, funny script with a positive, heartwarming
message.
"A Bug's Life" may very well be the most perfectly cast film of the year.
Boasting an impressive list of actors, the voices and characterizations
simply could not have been better.  Actors such as Dave Foley, Julia-Louis
Dreyfus, David Hyde Pierce and John Ratzenberger could be classified as
`Must See Voiceovers' as they are mostly known for their work on popular NBC
sitcoms ("NewsRadio", "Seinfeld", "Frasier" and "Cheers", respectively).  As
familiar and perfect are the voices of Pierce and Ratzenberger for their
characters, Dreyfus does well as Princess Atta in that she is appropriately
straight-forward instead of being the overly extroverted Elaine, all the
while maintaining her hallmark energy.  And while Foley doesn't do anything
that is necessarily spectacular, his performance of Flik is both exuberant
and tender.
Kevin Spacey has one of the film's juiciest roles as the maniacal Hopper,
leader of the oppressive grasshopper clan.  While being aggressively angry
at the appropriate moments, the greatness that Spacey brings to Hopper is a
quiet, calm, but fear-inducing authority.  He doesn't always explode with
hot rantings.  But rather, he pierces each ant with a cold look and a
chilling whisper.  Spin City's Richard Kind plays Molt, Hopper's hilarious
suck-up of a sidekick.  Kind's loud brashness provides much of the film's
humor.
My favorite performance would have to be that of Joe Ranft.  As well as
being one of the film's screenwriters, Joe Ranft provides the voice for
Heimlich, the shy and naďve chubby caterpillar with the voice of a
seven-year-old Arnold Schwarzenegger.  The combined talents of Ranft and the
animators make Heimlich a funny and endearing character.
Kids and adults alike will gaze in awe at the artwork in this film.  With
its bright colors, three-dimensional textures, and smooth flow of movement,
"A Bug's Life" is a visual marvel.  There is a great deal of movement in
this picture with so many things going on at once.  It is a complex
orchestration of moving images that is utterly impressive.  The colors burst
off of the screen with rich greens, blue hues, and even a foreboding sunset.
The array of insects in the story led to vastly different character designs
and creations.  It is a veritable smorgasbord of creativity, presenting us
with little creatures that range from the stout and round to the tall and
thin, and virtually everything imaginable in between.  Perhaps the best
character designs are the grasshoppers.  With scaly, rough detail and
precise nuances of movement, the grasshoppers really come to life.  The
multi-legged anatomy is clearly on display as the grasshoppers move around
effortlessly.  The grasshoppers are, in my opinion, the best creatures I've
seen created using CGI technology.
Randy Newman, who delivered one of this year's best film scores with his
compositions for "Pleasantville", has broken new personal ground with his
work for "A Bug's Life".  Newman hasn't broached full-fledged adventure
territory before, but proves himself more than up for the task.  Newman's
score is a rousing one that captures and accentuates the action and
excitement of the story.  It's so good that I'm willing to forgive him for
the annoyingly typical Randy Newman song that plays under the film's end
credits.
It's hard to avoid comparisons with the DreamWorks CGI film "Antz" that was
released less than two months prior to this movie's release.  But I believe
it is unfair and pointless to compare the two for it would be an `apples and
oranges' scenario.  "Antz" is a great film in its own right, as is "A Bug's
Life".  And although there are a few unavoidable similarities between them,
they really are two different films at heart.  Whereas "Antz" has an adult
sophistication to it, "A Bug's Life" is a childlike magical adventure.  In
fact, I can't remember the last time a film has genuinely made me feel like
a kid again as "A Bug's Life" did.  Perhaps it is for this reason that I
personally give an edge to "A Bug's Life", but not necessarily because it is
(in technical cinematic terms) a better film.
As an added treat, last year's Academy Award winner for Best Animated Short
Film, "Geri's Game", is shown in front of "A Bug's Life".  Also made by
Pixar Animation Studios, it is the oddly fun story of an old man playing
chess-against himself.  Thank Disney for this fun bonus, an Oscar winning
film unseen by a wide audience until now.  And on the other side of the
spectrum, there's fun to be had after the conclusion of the film as well.
Make sure to stick around for the end credit roll to enjoy some of the film'
s funniest moments.
With films like "What Dreams May Come", "Antz", "Dark City", and
"Pleasantville", 1998 has been a banner year for breathtaking cinematic
imagery.  Now you can add "A Bug's Life" to that list.  Like those films, it
is a true work of art that ultimately comes to life through its hilariously
enchanting insects and adventurous story.  And if you're not careful, the
story may even eventually move you as its brave characters exemplify the
story's moral of having faith in oneself and those around you.  "A Bug's
Life" is pure, unadulterated fun that is also spectacular filmmaking.  For
great family entertainment, the surefire bet presently in theaters is Disney
's "A Bug's Life", a rousing animated adventure that is destined to become a
classic.
If you would like to read more reviews by Jeffrey Huston, please visit film
review page "Believe Me" at:
http://www.impactprod.org/people/huston/core.htm

Author
David Nusair
Featuring the voices of Dave Foley, Kevin Spacey, Julia Louis Dreyfuss
Despite the fact that other animated bug movie was released just two short
months ago, I was quite looking forward to "A Bug's Life".  It's Pixar's
sophomore effort following the brilliant "Toy Story" and much of the same
talent behind the scenes is the same.  Alas, "A Bug's Life" does not live
up to "Toy Story", nor is it as good as "Antz".
The movie is about an over-eager ant named Flik (voiced by Foley) who gets
his colony in trouble with a dangerous gang of grasshoppers, led by the
appropriately named Hopper (Spacey).  Flik comes up with a plan to leave
the colony and find other insects to fight the evil grasshoppers.  He
mistakenly hires a ragtag bunch of circus performers, but this being a
Disney movie, they eventually come together and do right by the colony.
The biggest problem with "A Bug's Life" is that it seems to have been made
with a very limited audience in mind; the kids.  Young children under the
age of 10 will likely enjoy this film the most, but anyone older than that
will probably find themselves waiting for it to end.  The movie starts off
well enough, with an intelligent first act, but it's downhill from there. 
The last half-hour consists of one action sequence after another, which
really got tiresome after a while.
Another problem is that there are no strong main characters.  Look at "Toy
Story".  Buzz Lightyear and Woody the cowboy are about as vivid as
characters get.  In "A Bug's Life", what do we have?  Flik?  Well, he's
not very interesting, and he's kind of a wimp.  And then there's the
circus troupe, and while they do provide comic relief, none of them really
stand out on their own.  So we're left with no one person to root for.
However, the animation in this movie is simply *dazzling*.  There's no
other word to describe it.  The computer animation in "A Bug's Life" is
far better than the animation in "Antz".  I was literally stunned by the
first shot of the film, which features a panoramic view of the ant colony
from the air.  I remember thinking that it really looked real, and didn't
look at all like computer animation.
So, "A Bug's Life" is worth seeing simply for the breathtaking animation,
but if you're expecting a story and characters of the same calibre as "Toy
Story", you'll be left disappointed.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Easily the best family movie in the past few years was 1995's TOY STORY.
The Pixar Animation Studios are back this year with their second motion
picture, A BUG'S LIFE, which is another brilliant piece of filmmaking.
Although the script is not quite up to the level of their first film,
the movie is technically and artistically superior to DREAMWORKS's ANTZ,
a film started after A BUG'S LIFE but rushed to market sooner.
Unlike ANTZ, full of Woody Allen's angst-filled musings targeted to some
indeterminate age group, A BUG'S LIFE, with its large doses of
good-spirited humor, will charm a preschooler as well as an
octogenarian.  Brightly lit and created with dazzling computer-generated
animation, the film surpasses both TOY STORY and ANTZ in the intricacy
and fluidity of the production.
The press notes say that it took up to 100 hours of computer time to
render a single frame of the most complicated scenes.  Rarely has
computing power been put to use more effectively.  But the sheer joy of
A BUG'S LIFE comes not from the film's technical prowess but from the
sweet and loveable characters and situations it creates.  The script by
Andrew Stanton, Donald McEnery and Bob Shaw is not only delightful, it
is so funny that it had our press-only screening in such stitches that I
missed half the jokes.  It was so warmly received that the critics were
applauding in the end, something these normally reticent professionals
avoid.
The story opens with the ants harvesting food for their archenemies, the
grasshoppers. The long line of ants carrying the food is stopped dead in
its tracks by a disaster.  A leaf has fallen smack dab in the middle of
the line, and they have no idea how to cope.  Finally, it is suggested
that they might actually walk around the leaf, and, miracle of miracles,
that works.  One ants claims that the catastrophe wasn't nearly as bad
as the "twig of 93."
The grasshoppers are led by a mean looking critter named Hopper, done
with a deliciously sinister voice by Kevin Spacey.  "Ants pick the food;
grasshoppers eat the food," Hopper keeps reminding the ants of their
place in life.  And when ants don't toe the line, Hopper's universal
refrain to his troops is "Squish 'em!"  In private, he says that, since
there are more ants than grasshoppers, it would be a terrible thing for
the local insect food chain if the ants ever figured out what they could
accomplish with their vaster numbers.
The story's hero is an ant named Flik (Dave Foley), an inventor who is
always getting the other ants in trouble with his hair-brained schemes.
After he loses all of the grain that they've been storing up for the
grasshoppers, he proposes to leave their island and go in search of
"bigger bugs" that would be a match for the evil grasshoppers. Princess
Atta (Julia Louis-Dreyfus), The Queen (Phyllis Diller) and the council
agree with his proposal.  They never expect to see him again, which
would please most of them.
In a classic story of mistaken identity, Flik happens onto the acting
troop from the P. T. Fleas Circus.  He hires them thinking that they are
warrior bugs.  They, on the other hand, think they've been engaged to
perform circus acts for the ants.  The wise script milks this idea for a
long stream of laughs before it lets both sides realize how vulnerable
they are.  The colorful bugs include a praying mantis, a monarch
butterfly, a pair of roly-poly bugs and a walking stick.  Best of all is
Denis Leary as a ladybug guy named Francis.  Francis gets in touch with
his feminine side while being a den mother to a troop of little ants,
called the blueberries.
Although the film contains none of the inappropriate sexual references
of ANTZ, it does have one hilarious line when the lightning bugs
accidentally shine a light at the wrong time.  This causes someone to
yell out, "turn your butt off."  This is the only even slightly
off-color line in the entire picture.
The marvelously inventive film ends in a celebration in which the ants
even figure out how to create fireworks out of nothing more than some
weeds.  This sumptuous ending sequence is a perfect conclusion to a
magical film.
And then come the ending credits when, in the "outtakes," we see how
hard it is even for animated characters to get their lines right and to
keep a straight face.  Whatever you do, don't miss a minute of this
hilarious concoction.
A BUGS LIFE runs 1:34.  It is rated G and would be a great choice for
all ages.
My son Jeffrey, age 9, gave it ****, said it was one of the best
pictures of the year, and thought it was "way better than ANTZ."  He had
a long string of things he loved including the animation, the
grasshoppers and the ants' big attack.  He can't wait to see it again.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten, Ph.D.
 Walt Disney Pictures
 Director:  John Lasseter
 Writer:  Andrew Stanton and Donald McEnery & Bob Shaw
 Cast: Voices of Dave Foley, Kevin Spacey, Julia Louis-
Dreyfus, Hayden Panettiere, Phyllis Diller, Richard Kind,
David Hyde Pierce, Joe Ranft, Denis Leary, Jonathan Harris,
Madeline Kahn, Bonnie Hunt, Michael mcShane, John
Ratzenberger, Brad Garrett, Roddy McDowall,, Edie McClurg,
Edie McClurg, Alex Rocco, David Ossman,.
   Now that high-definition TV is here coupled with 46-inch
projection screens, pictures within pictures and attached DVD
players, you're likely to hear the old saw over and over: "The
technology is great. Too bad there's still nothing on."  Apply
the same idea to the Internet, and what do you get?  "People
from the Bronx are e-mailing comrades in Siberia, but nobody
has anything worthwhile to say."  Now we have a movie that
runs on the same track.  "A Bug's Life" is Pixar animation
carried to new marvels of technological excellence: in just
three years the razzle-dazzle that made its debut with "A Toy
Story" has exceeded all expectations.  But to what end?  "A
Bug's Life" has dialogue that will tire adults who were
intellectually challenged by the colloquy in "The Waterboy." 
And the verbal exchanges are bound to be of little appeal to
the tots who will form the majority of its audience.  One of
this movie's rare pieces of vocal wit comes from a circus
worker who says of one ant in the show, "He had the lead in
'Picnic'."  Consider the banal punch line to the villainous
grasshopper's confrontational remark to the enemy ants. "You
think this was a game?  Well, guess what--you lost!"  
   Granted: "A Bug's Life" is for kids.  But considering the
money that was spent to bring it to the screen, wouldn't you
think producers Darla K. Anderson and Kevin Reher could
hire writers who could touch base with people of all ages in
the peanut gallery?  After all, if a Greek slave could write
fables which for two millennia have charmed folks of all ages,
income levels and nationalities...well, you know the rest.
   Aesop's allegory of the ant and the grasshopper is the
inspiration for "A Bug's Life," directed by John Lasseter from
an original story which he penned along with Andrew Stanton
and Joe Ranft. The story was turned into a screenplay by Mr.
Stanton, Donald McEnery and Bob Shaw.  Aesop told of an
industrious ant who made hay while the sun shone, so to
speak, so that it could have a stockpile of food to tide it
through the hard winter months.  The grasshopper, by
contrast, fiddled and played during the good times and was
bereft of nutrition when the snows came down.  When the
grasshopper begged the ant to share the latter's hard-earned
food, the ant refused, moralizing that all play and no work
makes Jack a hungry hopper.  
   The difference in "A Bug's Life" is that the grasshoppers
are the imperialists: fierce warriors who demand tribute. 
They do not beg from the smaller ants, but threaten to wipe
out the colony if their regular demands for food were not met. 
In a plot that must be the basis for many a tale told to inspire
grade-school kids, the outsider--the scorned Rudolph-the-
Red-Nosed-Reindeer type--becomes the hero and gains
acceptance, even adulation from his people.
   The movie opens on the visionary ant Flik (voice of Dave
Foley).  Laughed at for his inventions and later threatened by
the feral grasshopper leader Hopper (Kevin Spacey), he
concocts an idea.  He will set out to find fighter bugs in the
big city to return with him to the island and rid the ants of
their parasitic enemies.  Discovering a group of circus
insects, he is amazed that they agree to do the job.  What he
does not know is that the would-be soldiers believe they have
been hired simply to put on a show.  To the cheers of the
ants, and later of the grasshoppers who have again invaded
the colony looking for their food, the clowns perform their
acts.  Manny (Jonathan Harris), the praying mantis, is the
oldest of the cast and the most cynical and pretentious,
though his shtick is nothing short of tiresome, while Heimlich
(Joe Ranft), an overgrown caterpillar with the vision of
butterfly, is a sad excuse for comic relief. A while later,
director Lasseter and his team of writers borrow from the
Greeks once more as they equip a mechanical, Trojan bird
with a troop of ants to circle around the grasshoppers hoping
to scare the antagonists back to their own quarters.  The
story build to an inevitable conclusion.
   Compare this to "Antz," which from the beginning is loaded
with good shtick for adults while retaining its appeal to the
small fry.  With the voice of Woody Allen in the lead role,
"Antz" hits home from the beginning as Ant Z (Allen) is on the
couch, whining about his worthlessness. "I feel insignificant,"
he moans, throwing up his arms. "You've made a big
breakthrough," exalts the therapist."  "I have?" replies Z. 
"Yes," the doctor responds.  "You ARE insignificant."  Good
puns abound.  One zinger occurs when the general ant asks
for time to debrief one of his privates, to which the soldier
replies, "Please, general, not on a first date."  When a group
of soldier ants and soldier termites wipe one another out,
leaving only one ant survivor, a sign appears on the ground:
"One to nothing--we win!"  (By contrast, the fellows who put
together "A Bug's Life" could come up with no sign of more
power than one held up by a beggar who listlessly sits on the
sidewalk next to his placard, "Kid pulled off wings.")
   While "Antz" has a great political edge, centering the story
on a situation of ethnic cleansing (soldier ants plotting to wipe
out worker ants), "A Bug's Life" has no such contemporary
motif.
   A good case could be made, however, to see the picture
for its technology.  The colors are anything but pale pastels,
featuring a broad array of bright, primary tones.  The artists
have done everything to scale, giving us a bug's eye view of
what the universe must look like to a creature who could
barely fit on a human toenail--grass looking like whole
savannas; trees, like gods.  When bugs take flight you can
picture yourself behind the controls of a fighter jet; in fact,
two of the tots in the audience began crying from the noise
which seems to have overwhelmed their delicate senses.
   The closing credits almost redeem the movie's insipid plot.
Taking a clue from the Jackie Chan films, Lasseter has the
insects doing several takes before they get it right.  Best of
all: when Hopper, the bad grasshopper, threatens an ant with
"Do you think I'm stupid," he can't help laughing, nor can his
victims.  You get the impression for the first time that these
creatures are not simply clever animations but actual, live
beings unable to get through a take without cracking up
hysterically.  If only the audience could be so undemanding.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Let's get the expository lump out of the way at the beginning.
All bugs are insects but not all insects are bugs.  Bugs have tube-like
mouthparts and wings that are joined to the body in a sort of thickened
area. Scientists call them "Hemiptera."  Ants, walking sticks, and
certainly spiders are not bugs.  And to further correct, ants have six
legs as we saw in ANTZ (well, sort of), not four as portrayed in A
BUG'S LIFE.  And speaking of inaccuracies, in my review of ANTZ I said
that Pixar and Disney might have to look to their laurels to match the
animation quality of ANTZ.  Well I was wrong; Pixar and Disney are
doing just fine, thank you.  A BUG'S LIFE actually is the more visually
sophisticated of the two animated films, but each has far surpassed TOY
STORY.  There may be more animated figures in some scenes in ANTZ, but
Pixar has the edge on life-like animation and in giving a three-
dimensional look.  They have also made some perceptive improvements in
digital representation light and surface texture.  Facial animation is
also better. In fact looking at the faces of the grasshoppers as they
talk, they really have more texture than a camera would pick up looking
at a real grasshopper.  They have gone into a kind of hyper-reality,
much like the saturated Technicolor of musicals of the 50s created a
sort of hyper-reality.  But since people get a little squeamish looking
too closely at real insects, Pixar seems to reserve this over-texturing
for the villainous grasshoppers and there to make them a somewhat more
repulsive foe.
     Where A BUG'S LIFE has a problem is that it has a less
sophisticated or interesting plot than either TOY STORY or ANTZ.  The
plot is directly or indirectly a rehash of the late Akira Kurosawa's
SEVEN SAMURAI.  The ants of Ant Island could live very well if they
were not obliged to pay a heavy tribute of food each year to a
ferocious band of grasshoppers.  In the colony ant Flik has many ideas
how to do things differently-he even has ideas for how to deal with the
grasshoppers.  The catch is that none of his ideas seems to work very
well.  Flik's idea for how to deal with the grasshoppers is to get
bigger bugs to fight for the ant colony.  So the colony decides to send
someone to find defenders.  And who do they choose?  The ant they can
most spare, Flik.  Our intrepid ant finds defenders, but does not
realize that they are not fighters but flea circus performers.  With
Flik's ideas and with the aid of what they think of as fighter insects,
the colony prepares to defend itself against the cruel grasshoppers.
The grasshopper leader is the nasty Hopper, voiced with real menace by
Kevin Spacey.
     It is tempting to compare this film's weaker plot but impressive
visuals with the current trend of sci-fi films being taken over by
special effects.  But many respected classic films did much the same.
Busby Berkley musicals had real visual style but had relatively bland
and cliched plots.  Then as so frequently now the entertainment was in
what the audience saw, not what the film said.
     It is worthwhile to see A BUG'S LIFE just to see how the animation
technology is progressing. If the story- line is weak at least there
are moments of really good humor, though many are in the closing
credits. It would be interesting to know if ANTZ eats into the profits
of A BUG'S LIFE.  ANTZ seems to have been timed to do just that, but if
so it may have been a miscalculation.  The two films dealing with the
one non- conformist ant in the colony could co-exist at the box-office
much like DEEP IMPACT and ARMAGEDDON have.
     I would rate A BUG'S LIFE a 7 on the 0 to 10 scale and a low +2 on
the -4 to +4 scale.  There are a few scenes that could be frightening
to younger children.
     This film has been released with the short film "Geri's Game"
which won Pixar an Oscar.  It is a funny little short of an old man
playing chess with himself in the park.  It humorously makes the point
that playing chess with yourself as an opponent is not really like
playing a different person.  Actually it could almost be a study of
schizophrenia, though I think that is reading more into the short than
Pixar intends.  One of the more interesting aspects of "Geri's Game" is
to see how far Pixar has progressed in representing computer animation
of human figures.  It is one thing to represent in animation toys and
insects with their rigid surfaces, but it is harder to represent humans
realistically.  Human characters were kept to a minimum in TOY STORY
and are not present at all in A BUG'S LIFE.
     I have one question about the closing credits.  (Hopefully this
will be meaningless to anyone who has not seen the film.)  How genuine
is what we are hearing?  The joke is obviously that the visuals are
false, but the audio track may be genuine.

Author
Steve Rhodes
"Hey, I'm getting paid for something I used to get in trouble for [in
school]."
     - Joe Ranft, voice of Heimlich and story supervisor of A BUG'S LIFE
"You know, we're parents ourselves. I hate when I have to go to a kids'
movie and have to turn my brain off. Or that I have to watch it when the
video comes out and have to watch it again and again. But I love to make
a movie that my kids can go to, that my parents can go to, and everybody
can get something out of. I think that's the hardest movie to make, and
I don't think there's many of them. And I think that's what we try to
shoot for."
     - Andrew Stanton, co-director and co-writer of A BUG'S LIFE
Several weeks ago I reviewed (see www.InternetReviews.com) the marvelous
new picture by Pixar Animation Studios. Called A BUG'S LIFE, it is their
first feature-length film after their enormous, initial hit, TOY STORY.
The film, which is easily the best kids' movie of the year and a
breath-taking film for all ages, surpasses Dreamworks' ANTZ in just
about every category imaginable.
This past weekend my son, who loved the movie as much as I did, joined
me as part of the press contingent at the early premier of the movie on
Pixar's home turf, the Silicon Valley. At the premier we were able to
interview many members of the cast and crew, including, the two
directors, the technical director, the producer, the lead voice of Flik
and one of the key supporting voices, that of Heimlich, the caterpillar.
The people from the film were warm and gracious to us, and even to my
son Jeffrey, age 9, who was there as, well, let's say a member of the
"junior press." He had at least one question for each of them. [Plus he
got some great autographs complete with sketches.]
The interview highlights are organized by interviewee in the order that
the interviews occurred. Each person provided his little tidbits, and it
is as hard to find a favorite among them as it is in the ensemble movie.
To a person, they were the types that you'd love to have over for dinner
for a long chat. There wasn't even a hint of an inflated ego in any of
those we spoke with. Nicer human beings you'd be hard pressed to find.
[The interviews were done in groups; when I wasn't the one asking the
questions, I have so indicated.]
The movie opens nationwide in the United States on Wednesday, November
25. You don't want to miss it. It is appropriate for all ages from 3 to
93.
Q: [Another reporter:] Can you contrast A BUG'S LIFE with TOY STORY?
A: "Toy Story was a buddy movie. A BUG'S LIFE was an ensemble cast.
Everything was organic on A BUG'S LIFE, whereas everything on TOY STORY
was all plastic and toys. We probably had at zenith about 210 people
working just on A BUG'S LIFE, and on TOY STORY we only had 120 in the
company."
A: "I don't think so. We even have maggots in the film."
Q: Did you envision the outtakes from the very beginning?
A: "John Lasseter had wanted to do outtakes way back on TOY STORY, but
we didn't have time so he's been thinking about that for quite a while.
And on this film we just went for it. We had this giant locomotion of a
production train going, and we just threw that on at the end. And they
got done in about 2 weeks."
Q: [Another reporter:] What were your favorite characters?
A: "My two favorites, beside the fact that I'm in love with Dave Foley
so I have to love Flik. Hopper is just so cool. The shaders, his eyes,
his movement, he's just a very, very cool character. And Heimlich is the
most lovable."
Q: [Jeffrey:] What are your favorite parts?
"My favorite part of the whole movie is what we call Dot's rescue. When
Dot's getting rescued and the big orange bird is going after it. That's
my favorite part cause I just think that big orange bird is so cool."
Q: How about marketing of this versus ANTZ? I've told some people to see
the film, and they say they've already seen it. I say, no that's ANTZ, A
BUG'S LIFE isn't out yet.
A: "I haven't even seen ANTZ. Just what little I've seen on the
commercials, I think our film looks very different.  We try to avoid
comparison. Hopefully they'll just want to see it on it's own merits.
And hopefully word of mouth will be very strong."
Q: [Other reporter:] What are you most proud of technically on the film?
A: "It's hard to say. We really worked hard on our lighting and shading,
getting organic feel. The basic premise of the film had this very
organic feel to it from the characters through the sets and everything
so we worked really hard trying to bring that out." 
"We were challenged by the crowds  a lot of the scenes had a lot of
ants in it because that's what you see when you see ants." 
"A lot of times it's just the ambiance, the feeling that is there. All
the way through the film the vegetation is moving in the wind, blowing
in the wind."
Q: [Other reporter:] Who choose blue as the color of the ants?
A: "It comes out of the art department I guess. You're trying to create
contrast.  We didn't want green characters because they would just
blend right in.  In general we wanted our characters to stand out."
Q: In ANTZ the eyes are so glassy, whereas in A BUG'S LIFE they are so
much more realistic, detailed and interesting. Did you work a lot on the
eyes?
A: "Eyes are a critical thing for us and for animation.  When you think
actors and you think about characters, you look at their eyes, just like
we look at our eyes when we're interacting with each other.  It's the
place where we connect with each other.  We worked a lot on getting the
highlights on the eyes right."
DAVE FOLEY, VOICE OF FLIK, THE LEAD ANT
When first introduced as the voice of Flik, his response was: "I'm sorry
about that."
Q: [Other reporter:] Why did you take on this job? What about it
appealed to you?
A: "I went to the audition just because I wanted to meet the guys who
made TOY STORY.  I never for a second thought that they'd hire me
because I find my voice irritating. Why would you want to tether your
movie to that kind of a sound. But they hired me and I was delighted."
Q: [Other reporter:] You didn't change your voice?
A: "It's my voice, just a little more enthusiastic than I'm used to
sounding, a little more energetic."
JOE RANFT, VOICE OF HEIMLICH, THE CATERPILLAR
He was also the story supervisor on the film, and that's the job he's
had for the past 18 years. He got picked to do the voice for this major
part as a bonus. He also had a small part in TOY STORY, the part of
Lenny the binoculars. His one-liner as Lenny was, "Guys, look; it's
Woody and Buzz coming up fast."
Q: How did you get the ensemble feeling of the cast?
A: "We had a big cast of characters and there's a circus troop. The
circus sort of made it."
Q: Did you record the characters together or did you record them
independently?
Q: [Other reporter:] Did you ever have the Heimlich maneuver in?
A: "We cut that part out. It was actually in for a little while."
Q: [Other reporter:] Where did you get the idea of an Oktoberfest-loving
German guy?
A: " A Danish guy in the story dept.  He suggested a German guy.  Some
German reporter said, 'Did you design him after [Chancellor] Helmut
Kohl?' He thought we were caricaturing Helmut Kohl."
Q: [Jeffrey:] What is your favorite part of the movie?
A: "I like it when Flik launches the bird to scare the grasshoppers."
ANDREW STANTON, CO-DIRECTOR AND CO-WRITER
The character of Dot is named after Andrew's little girl. He named it
when she was born. Now 3, she recently saw a plush doll of Dot and liked
the doll but didn't realize it was based on her.
Q: [Other reporter:] What was your favorite bug when you were a kid?
A: "I remember my favorite bug was the little roly-poly bug, you know,
the pill bug. You could roll 'em up and bat 'em around. I have memories
of bugs. Having fun with them and torturing them."
Q: [Jeffrey:] What was your favorite part of the movie?
A: "Gosh, that's a hard question. I like all of it so much. [Jeffrey;
"Me too!"] "I don't know. I like how scary and intense the grasshopper
entrance is, but I like how fun the circus is, how exciting when the
bird comes out of the tree.  I love it all. I don't think I have a
favorite scene."
Q: How about the outtakes? How did you come up with the idea?
A: "We actually had the outtakes as an idea for TOY STORY, but we came
up with it so late and we just didn't have time enough to put it in so
we said, 'Next movie, next movie, we're doin' it.'"
Q: In contrast to ANTZ, A BUG'S LIFE is so much brighter, and has such a
wider audience appeal. When you saw ANTZ [interrupts with answer:]
A: "Never seen it, honestly couldn't tell you the differences. But I can
tell you that we were about 2 years into this movie when we found out
about it. We made a very conscious effort to just put blinders on and
make the movie we would make untainted by any other influence. What you
see on the screen is a just a big reflection of us -- it's what we like
to see. If it's for more of a family group, then that's sort of what we
like to do. I like to think that we have a, sort of, edgy adult
sensibilities. We're filmmakers ourselves and like to be stimulated
ourselves when we're watching a movie, so hopefully it works for
everybody."
Q; Were there any insects that didn't make it? Or that you couldn't
quite get to work?
A: "You know the insect that did not make it now that I think about it
was a bee. I mean there is a bee in the background but not as a main
character. When we thought about it, it seemed kind of gratuitous to
shoot more of it in so we left it out. But I think all of our other
favorite bugs made it in."
Q: The whole movie has a very bright look to it, a very happy look,
there's not that, dark somber sort of thing. Was that intentional?
A; "Well, I mean I think we were intent at times with the grasshoppers,
but we tried to be very strategic about it. I mean, they're the bad
guys, and they're the consequence of the movie. But we wanted to sort of
tap into that child-like memory. Just like in TOY STORY, we wanted to
tap into that child-like imagination you had that your toys were alive
when the door to your bedroom was closed. We wanted to tap into that
child-like memory of how fun it must be to be that little bug in that
microscopic world outside in your yard. I think that comes out in things
like the color of the lighting and the mood and stuff like that."
Q: Kevin Spacey is one of my favorite actors.
A: "Oh, that's great, he's one of mine too."
A: "Well, you know, he was nominated for the USUAL SUSPECTS about the
same time we were nominated for the screenplay for TOY STORY, so we met
him in a lot of the celebrations for the Oscars.  John Lasseter said
'would you be willing to be an animated voice?' And Kevin said,
'anytime.'"
Q [Jeffrey:] How did you get the idea for the stick bug?
A: "I don't think a Stick bug is something that many people grew up with
but all of us found out about it somewhere, and we all thought it was
really cool."
He said that he makes movies not for the first viewing but for the 100th
viewing of the videotape, so that you'll still like it as much then as
you did the first time. He said that the key to a movie is not the
techniques but the story.
Q: [Other reporter:] Do you work hard?
A: "When we work, we work hard, and when we play, we play hard.
Honestly, Andrew and I laugh hard every single day. What's funny is that
we jokingly say to each other that if we worked on a road crew, just
doing asphalt or pot holes or whatever, we could go home to our wives
and say, 'Honey, it's been a hard day,' and they'd take care of the
kids. But, instead, they know we have a great time, and they say, 'it's
your turn with the kids.'"
Q: [Other reporter:] What inspires you?
A:  "Reality in computer animation -- for years, people have been doing
a lot of research for things that look absolutely real. And there's a
whole segment of film production with special effects where that's
important. But for us we love to do this creative fantasy world that the
audience knows doesn't exist."
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Michael Dequina
_A_Bug's_Life_ (G) *** 1/2 (out of ****)
With the release of Disney and Pixar's _A_Bug's_Life_, the first
head-to-head Disney-DreamWorks animation battle has officially taken place.
 The winner?  Well, there isn't one--it's a draw.  While their respective
studios continue their war of words and massive publicity, _Bugs_  and
_Antz_, it turns out, can peacefully co-exist, each carving out their own
delightful, distinctive niche in the computer-animated insect milieu.
The similarities between _Bugs_ and _Antz_ begin and end with the facts
that they are completely computer animated, center on ant colonies, and
that the two main characters are a worker ant (here named Flik, voiced by
Dave Foley) and an ant princess (Atta, voiced by Julia Louis-Dreyfus).
Ne'er-do-well Flik is ordered by the Princess to find warrior insects to
help his colony in their ongoing conflict with a gang of grasshoppers led
by the maniacal Hopper (Kevin Spacey).  Flik finds a willing group in the
praying mantis Manny (Jonathan Harris); his moth wife, Gypsy (Madeline
Kahn); male ladybug Francis (Denis Leary); walking stick Slim (David Hyde
Pierce); caterpillar Heimlich (Joe Ranft); black widow spider Rosie (Bonnie
Hunt); rhino beetle Dim (Brad Garrett); and pillbugs Tuck and Roll (Michael
McShane).  But as warrior-like as these bugs may appear, they are actually
gentle circus performers desperate for a gig after being fired by flea
circus owner P.T. Flea (John Ratzenberger).  Realizing his error, Flik
nonetheless tries to make a counteroffensive against the grasshoppers work,
lest he let down the colony once again.
The script for _A_Bug's_Life_, credited to co-director Andrew Stanton,
Donald McEnery, and Bob Shaw (from a story by Stanton, Ranft, and
co-director John Lasseter), lacks the sharp, satirical, sociopolitical
subtext of _Antz_.  For that matter, neither is the story as hilarious and
smart as that of the previous Disney/Pixar collaboration, _Toy_Story_.  In
telling a simpler story, _Bugs_ holds more kid and general family appeal,
but that does not mean that there isn't enough witty dialogue, funny
situations, and entertaining characters to amuse the adults in the crowd.
(In fact, the film's best gag, which comes during the end credits, is
clearly aimed at adults; I wouldn't dream of giving it away, but I will say
that, with any luck, it should kill a lazy trend in recent film.)  The most
memorable characters are distinguished by terrific voice performances:
Spacey completely inhabits the menacing Hopper with malicious glee;
Louis-Dreyfus is nicely neurotic as Atta; and Ranft fits Heimlich with a
hilarious, almost effeminate German accent.  As a whole, though, the
ensemble here won't make you forget the work of the more stellar cast of
_Antz_; Foley does an adequate job voicing Flik, but, not surprisingly, he
doesn't hold down the center of the movie as well as Woody Allen in the
other film.
Where _A_Bug's_Life_ is clearly superior to _Antz_ is in the visual
department.  The art by the Pixar crew is stunningly detailed, from the
gritty walls of the ant colony tunnels to, most impressively, the insects
themselves, namely the amazingly lifelike grasshoppers.  Lasseter and
Stanton also employ more ambitious camera work than their DreamWorks
counterparts, especially during an exciting aerial chase sequence set
during a rainstorm.  PDI did a terrific job with the animation on _Antz_,
but _A_Bug's_Life_ shows that Pixar is still the king of feature computer
animation.
And, by default, so is Disney, and, with its broader demographic appeal,
_A_Bug's_Life_ should handily outpace _Antz_'s impressive box office
grosses.  But DreamWorks has already established itself as a worthy
contender in the animation field, and the Mouse should watch out when the
big SKG fires its next assault, next month's hotly anticipated epic
_The_Prince_of_Egypt_.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Author
James Sanford

 If you could be a fly on the wall at Disney these days, you'd probably
overhear more than a few conversations about that cursed Dreamworks and
their lousy "Antz" movie. It's bad enough that "Antz" has become the
highest-grossing non-Disney animated feature ever, but on top of that it's
stolen a considerable amount of the thunder from "A Bug's Life," the latest
collaboration between Disney and the cutting-edge computer-animation studio
Pixar, which produced the enormously successful "Toy Story" in 1995.
 What made "Toy Story" click with grown-up audiences was its hipness, both
in its humor and in its casting of such diverse talents as Tom Hanks, Tim
Allen and Don Rickles as the primary voices. Kids who had no clue who
Rickles was or why their parents were laughing at some of the in-jokes
appreciated the movie for its rambunctious action and lovable characters.
And certainly everyone was wowed by the movie's brilliant graphics.
 Indeed, "Toy Story" was a tough act to follow, and while "A Bug's Life" is
never less than pleasant and full of luscious Cinemascope visuals, coming on
the heels of "Antz" it can't help but suffer in comparison; voices like
"Bug's" Dave Foley, Phyllis Diller and Denis Leary can't hold a candle to
the talents of Woody Allen, Christopher Walken and Gene Hackman in "Antz."
Though most adults who've seen the Dreamworks picture will feel a bit of
deja vu sitting through this one, "Life" is simpler and less witty than
"Antz," which should make it more attractive to very young viewers.
 Like "Toy Story," "A Bug's Life" has been directed by John Lasseter, who
keeps the pace sprightly in the hopes of concealing an extremely wispy
story. Ant Island is annually raided by greedy grasshoppers led by the
bullying Hopper (given a distinctively nasty voice by Kevin Spacey), who
insists the ants slave away for months gathering food for these unwanted
guests. Ambitious Fleck (Foley) volunteers to seek out some ant-friendly
"warrior bugs" who'll send Hopper and friends scrurrying, but what he
believes is a gang of wandering mercenaries turns out to be nothing more
than the unemployed performers from a failed flea circus; they go home with
Fleck under the mistaken assumption they've been hired to do a show.
 Since this is a Disney picture you need not worry that it all ends in a
squishy bug massacre, although in all frankness "A Bug's Life" often seems
to cry out for a little more irreverence, a dash more danger. The memorable
villain in "Toy Story" was a psychotic kid named Sid who liked to mutilate
dolls and action figures; he gave the story a black-comic edge. In contrast,
Hopper and his crew are one-dimensional baddies who don't provide much
genuine menace or excitement.
 Nor is the amiable Fleck a particularly colorful hero in the tradition of
Buzz Lightyear or Woody. The best-written characters here are the macho
ladybug Francis (Leary), a pretentious stick-bug with the haughty tone of
David Hyde Pierce, and a pair of mumbling, hyperactive pill-bugs named Tuck
and Roll who take their love of performing to extremes. Should you brave the
holiday crowds to see the film this weekend, don't head up the aisles when
the end credits begin to roll, or you'll miss some extremely funny
mock-outtakes; they're well-worth sticking around for.
James Sanford

Author
James Sanford

 If you could be a fly on the wall at Disney these days, you'd probably
overhear more than a few conversations about that cursed Dreamworks and
their lousy "Antz" movie. It's bad enough that "Antz" has become the
highest-grossing non-Disney animated feature ever, but on top of that it's
stolen a considerable amount of the thunder from "A Bug's Life," the latest
collaboration between Disney and the cutting-edge computer-animation studio
Pixar, who produced the enormously successful "Toy Story" in 1995.
 What made "Toy Story" click with grown-up audiences was its hipness, both
in its humor and in its casting of such diverse talents as Tom Hanks, Tim
Allen and Don Rickles as the primary voices. Kids who had no clue who
Rickles was or why their parents were laughing at some of the in-jokes
appreciated the movie for its rambunctious action and lovable characters.
And certainly everyone was wowed by the movie's brilliant graphics.
 Indeed, "Toy Story" was a tough act to follow, and while "A Bug's Life" is
never less than pleasant and full of luscious Cinemascope visuals, coming on
the heels of "Antz" it can't help but suffer in comparison; voices like
"Bug's" Dave Foley, Phyllis Diller and Denis Leary can't hold a candle to
the talents of Woody Allen, Christopher Walken and Gene Hackman in "Antz."
Though most adults who've seen the Dreamworks picture will feel a bit of
deja vu sitting through this one, "Life" is simpler and less witty than
"Antz," which should make it more attractive to very young viewers.
 Like "Toy Story," "A Bug's Life" has been directed by John Lasseter, who
keeps the pace sprightly in the hopes of concealing an extremely wispy
story. Ant Island is annually raided by greedy grasshoppers led by the
bullying Hopper (given a distinctively nasty voice by Kevin Spacey), who
insists the ants slave away for months gathering food for these unwanted
guests. Ambitious Fleck (Foley) volunteers to seek out some ant-friendly
"warrior bugs" who'll send Hopper and friends scrurrying, but what he
believes is a gang of wandering mercenaries turns out to be nothing more
than the unemployed performers from a failed flea circus; they go home with
Fleck under the mistaken assumption they've been hired to do a show.
 Since this is a Disney picture you need not worry that it all ends in a
squishy bug massacre, although in all frankness "A Bug's Life" often seems
to cry out for a little more irreverence, a dash more danger. The memorable
villain in "Toy Story" was a psychotic kid named Sid who liked to mutilate
dolls and action figures; he gave the story a black-comic edge. In contrast,
Hopper and his crew are one-dimensional baddies who don't provide much
genuine menace or excitement.
 Nor is the amiable Fleck a particularly colorful hero in the tradition of
Buzz Lightyear or Woody. The best-written characters here are the macho
ladybug Francis (Leary), a pretentious stick-bug with the haughty tone of
David Hyde Pierce, and a pair of mumbling, hyperactive pill-bugs named Tuck
and Roll who take their love of performing to extremes. Should you brave the
holiday crowds to see the film this weekend, don't head up the aisles when
the end credits begin to roll, or you'll miss some extremely funny
mock-outtakes; they're well-worth sticking around for.
James Sanford

Author
Arnold Kim
It seems that these days a lot of films are dependent on visuals and
filmmaking technology to "ooh" and "aah" the audience enough to occupy
them for two hours.  Story is often a mere second to visual effects in
movies like "Godzilla" or "Armageddon".  What a refreshment it is,
then, to see a film like "A Bug's Life" where visuals are used to aid
and add to the story rather than take its place.  That is one of the
reasons why I found "A Bug's Life" to be one of the more enjoyable
films I've seen this year.
The story of "A Bug's Life" is probably one of its greatest
assets. The tale of a worker ant named Flik (Dave Foley) and his
attempt to save his colony from the bullyish grasshoppers led by
Hopper (Kevin Spacey) by recruiting insects who turn out to be circus
rejects is absolutely charming and unique.  I've never seen this
"Seven Samurai-ish" told the way "A Bug's Life" tells it, partly
because it couldn't have been done before.  Much of the plot,
especially in the second half, came as a pleasant surprise.  Just when
you think it might be over, a new twist is added to keep you in your
seats.
The story also allows for some excellent characters and character
development as well.  Flik, one of my favorites in the film, grows
from a naive, optimistic ant to an ant who stands up for what he
believes in and can be taken seriously by the end.  The members of the
circus group is probably one of the most eclectic and lovable bunch of
riffraff I've seen in film in a while.  They range from Slim (David
Hyde Pierce), the sticklike thespian wannabe to Francis (Denis Leary),
the unladylike male ladybug with an attitude.  All the different and
unique personalities of the circus crew add quite a bit of color to
the cast.  Their development as a whole, finally finding a place and
an audience that accepts them, should be noted as well.  The littlest
ant, Dot, is absolutely adorable and grows from being a runt with low
self esteem to a confident leader of sorts and princess.  And of
course, the entire colony of ants go from being the bullied to the
ones who take charge and revolt towards the end.  (Oh, and for this
film you really want to stay till the very end, as you'll catch some
amusing "outtakes" from the film.)
Largely responsible for the characters is the wonderful voice cast
behind them.  Dave Foley is perfectly optimistic and full of hope and
charm as Flik, while Kevin Spacey is quite menacing as the villainous
Hopper.  Julia Louis-Dreyfus seems to somewhat reprise her "Elaine"
role on "Seinfeld" fairly effectively as Princess Atta, Flik's love
interest of sorts and next in line to head the colony.  Denis Leary is
perfectly cast as the sarcasm and attitude-laden Francis.  Overall, a
solid performance by the voice cast.
In addition, a solid performance by the animators is put into this
story as well.  An extremely engaging film visually, it seems to use
the most vibrant color palettes that are possible, with bright greens,
deep blues, and solid reds, and everything in between.  Also
remarkable is the incredible detail in the animation, not glossing
over any single nook or cranny.  It is both of these aspects of the
animation that come together to form the film's top artistic
achievement- a beautiful orange-red bird, the fearsome predator that
all the insects fear, even the grasshoppers.  The stunningly lifelike
nature of that figure had me doing double takes.
Of course, this film has drawn a bit of attention as a result of the
similarities between it and another computer animated insect film, the
recently released "Antz".  However, it is at that point that the
similarities between the films stop.  While Antz is an adult oriented
anti-socialist Woody Allen story about the importance of the
individual, "A Bug's Life" is a fable for all ages about believing in
yourself.  Between the two of them, "A Bug's Life" is the superior
film, with a better and more cohesive story that isn't quite so dark.
The characters are more colorful likable in "Bugs", especially in the
two leads.  However, the voice actors may have fared a bit better in
"Antz", as I found Woody Allen, Sly Stallone, and co.  perfectly
suited to their roles.  However, "Antz" also loses out in the visual
department, choosing to be drably realistic with the excessive use of
browns over the use of more varied and lively colors.  "Antz" also
seems to be a bit confused in its audience, as it tries to be an
"adult" film while also using humor that would appeal to the younger
audiences.  "A Bug's Life" clearly lacks that problem.
Three years ago, the same team, Pixar and Disney, brought to theaters
the first completely computer animated movie, "Toy Story", and that
film set the standard for films of its genre with its wonderful
characters and story.  In 1998, Pixar and Disney keep up to those
standards with the release of "A Bug's Life", one of the more
endearing films of the year.  My score, out of 10: 8

Author
David Wilcock
Starring the voices of Dave Foley and Kevin Spacey
Directed By John Lasseter and Andrew Stanton
Running Time: 1 hour 36 minutes.
After the huge success of Toy Story (1995), animation studio Pixar could
probably get away with an animated bouncing cupboard for 96 minutes and
still make a fortune. Fortunately, they've produced a film that almost meets
the quality of the aforementioned toy caper. Dave Foley voices Flik, an
everyday ant who happens to lose all the food picked for the grasshoppers,
led by Hopper (Spacey.) When Hopper demands that the ants pick double the
amount of food for them before the rainy season starts, Flik concocts a plan
to bring back bigger warrior bugs to help defeat the grasshoppers when they
return. However, Flik brings back circus bugs instead of warriors, and the
colony have to think quickly before the grasshoppers return.
Obvious comparisons can be made to Dreamworks Antz here: computer graphics,
insects, the small ant trying to defeat a much bigger enemy, dealing with
being the 'little guy' etc, although to be fair, A Bugs Life was developed
first.  However, this being a Disney film, Flik is not a neurotic New Yorker
who's best friend happens to be Rambo. But still, comparisons will be made.
And in all fairness, A Bugs Life is the better movie, offering more fast
paced action, and a story and characters appealing to both children and
adults, unlike Antz, which wasn't sure where it was going. The easiest way
to watch this movie if you've seen Antz, then, is to remember this a
completely different type of movie.
A Bugs Life is funny, vibrant looking and appealing to all ages. While the
story is slim, and serves as nothing but a thin wire to string together a
series of impressive set pieces, their is plenty of entertainment offered
here. The computer graphics are fantastically realised, and look light years
beyond Toy Story, thanks to the three years advancement in computer
technology. All the characters are well realised and look great, the
backgrounds are nicely detailed, and some of the special effects are very
good. The best thing, however, is that after 10 minutes of being wowed, you
soon forget about the great graphics, and just get on with enjoying the
movie, unlike Antz, that always seemed to remind you were watching an
computer graphic instead of really enjoying the characters and story.
Talking of characters, the ones featured in A Bugs Life are great and very
likeable. Flik is a good hero with a heart of gold, Julia Louis-Dreyfuss is
fine as Princess Atta, and the circus troupe are bubbling with personality,
featuring voices from David Hyde Pierce and Madeline Khan amongst others.
But Kevin Spacey has the most fun as the evil Hopper, although at some
points I thought he might start babbling about Keyser Soze or produce Fliks
girlfriends head in a box.  But that's the effect Spacey has on me. And
thankfully, unlike Antz, A Bugs Life is not hampered by one poor performance
(unlike Sharon Stones 'effort' in Antz.)
The set pieces are exciting and inventive: theirs an exciting chase from a
bird and the 'Flaming Death' sequence in the circus has to be seen to be
believed. Some scenes could be too intense for the very young: a few
children starting bursting into tears every time Hopper came onto the
screen. Perhaps Spacey is a little too intense for the young ones.
There are some faults with the film, however. The script and story is weak,
and never reaches the standard set by the delightful Toy Story. The moral of
the story is drummed in shamelessly on the audience. The cast is also
missing a truly strong leading man: while Dave Foley is fine, he hasn't got
the same presence as Tom Hanks or Tim Allen. And just as things were going
great, the film chucks in a Randy Newman song at the end. Dang. But other
than that, A Bugs Life is truly great, if not ground breaking, entertainment
that can be enjoyed by everyone.
And don't even think about leaving the cinema until you've seen the
'outtakes' from the movie during the credits. Pure Pixar genius.

Author
David N. Butterworth
        From its opening frames of a fallen leaf settling on a pool of
water, it's clear that "A Bug's Life" is no ordinary kiddie cartoon.  The
attention to detail in this scene is extraordinary and, fortunately for the
viewer, that level of detail is maintained throughout the entire
production.  Not just in terms of the animation which--from Pixar, the
studio that previously brought us "Toy Story"--is nothing less than
amazing, but in terms of the writing, the characterizations, the music--in
fact, the whole kit and caboodle.  "A Bug's Life," no more a kid's film
than "Toy Story" was a kid's film, has it all: a clever story (a misfit ant
tries to save his colony from despotic grasshoppers by rounding up some
"bad bugs" but accidentally recruits a bunch of inept circus performers
instead); strong characters voiced by skilled performers (Kevin Spacey is
perfect as Hopper, the evil grasshopper leader, Julia Louis-Dreyfus is
Princess Atta, and Dave Foley (TV's "NewsRadio") plays the hapless Flik); a
rousing musical score by Randy Newman; a wry, irreverent, and often-times
hilarious script by John Lasseter and Andrew Stanton that caters to
grown-ups as much as it does children; and unsurpassed computer animation.
In fact, there is so much to take in on a first viewing that "A Bug's Life"
is the kind of film that benefits from its home video release, with the
opportunity to rewind and replay favorite bits (no doubt including the
end-credit "bloopers").  "A Bug's Life" also features the vocal talents of
Phyllis Diller, Denis Leary, Bonnie Hunt, Roddy McDowall, John Ratzenberger
("Cheers"), "Fraser"'s David Hyde Pierce, and the late, great Madeline
Kahn, to name a few.  Highly recommended.
Got beef?  Visit "La Movie Boeuf"
online at http://members.dca.net/dnb

Author
Bob Bloom
 Seeing A Bug's Life, to paraphrase the great Yogi Berra, won't be déjŕ vu
all over again.
 Sure, like Antz, it's a computer-animated feature about bugs. But that is
where the similarity ends.
 For while Antz was a story about striving to be an individual in a society
built on conformity, A Bug's Life is a story about learning self-reliance,
self-confidence and self-worth.
 This production from Pixar, the same people who brought you the enjoyable
Toy Story, is a '90s adaptation of the old Aesop fable about the
grasshopper and the ants.
 In this case, the grasshopper isn't lazy, he's a big, mean bully who heads
a gang of good-for-nothing hoppers who force a colony of ants to work all
summer to gather food for them.
 Eventually one ant, a dreamer named Flik, rebels, and hits upon the idea
of getting bigger bugs to protect the colony from the snarly grasshoppers.
Of course Flik, who is also somewhat of a bungler, hires a company of
circus bugs whom he mistakes for warrior bugs.
 However, everything works out fine. Flik redeems himself, the ants learn
self-respect, the circus bugs learn self-worth and the grasshoppers get
their just desserts.
 Whereas Antz offered so many easily recognizable voices - Sylvester
Stallone, Gene Hackman, Danny Glover and, principally, Woody Allen - A
Bug's Life works as more of an ensemble piece. As good and as witty as Antz
was, at times it felt like an animated Woody Allen movie.
 No such problem with A Bug's Life. Featuring the vocal talents of, among
others,  Dave Foley (TV's NewsRadio), Oscar-winner Kevin Spacey, Frasier's
David Hyde Pierce and, most charmingly, original Lost in Space icon
Jonathan Harris, the audience is freer to concentrate more on the story
than play the "who's voice is that?" guessing game.
 The computer-generated animation is superb, bringing the bugs' world to
life. The colors are vivid, the characters are distinctive.
 Adding to the pleasure is a wonderful Randy Newman score, one of this
solid composer's best.
 A Bug's Life is witty, warm and charming - perfect holiday fare for the
entire family. Just because you've seen Antz, don't pass up A Bug's Life.
After seeing it, you may decide insects aren't so ikky after all.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
Matt Williams
The season's second computer-animated ant tale (following Antz) has
finally hit the theaters.  It lacks some of the earlier film's
sophisticated humor, but more than makes up for it with its rich
animation and endearing characters.
The ant colony on Ant Island has problems.  Every year, the ants must
toil to collect enough food to appease a gang of bad grasshoppers, led
by the menacing Hopper (Kevin Spacey), in addition to enough food to
support the colony.  One inventive ant, Flik (Dave Foley), has a
creative food-gathering idea...which unfortunately backfires, leaving
the colony to face some rather angry grasshoppers.
Flik is sent away to find some help:  warrior bugs the colony can hire
to fight off the grasshoppers.  Unfortunately for the colony, the
error-prone Flik brings back a band of misfit circus bugs (who are under
the impression they've been hired to put on a show).
Among the helpers are a trio of clowns:  the a male ladybug Francis
(Denis Leary), walking stick Slim (David Hyde Pierce), and corpulent
German caterpillar Heimlich (Joe Ranft).  There are a pair of Hungarian
pillbug acrobats, Tuck and Roll (Michael McShane), the quick-spinning
black widow Rosie (Bonnie Hunt), and her tame beetle Dim (Brad
Garrett).  Rounding out the troupe are the praying mantis magician Manny
(Jonathan Harris), and his moth sidekick Gypsy (Madeline Kahn).
The animation quality of A Bug's Life is simply spectacular.  The
animators at Pixar have broken new ground with the realism of the
surroundings.  The plants, twigs, and surrounding vegetation is
impressively realistic.  The bugs aren't as impressive (most look like
they're made of cloth or vinyl), but are still expressively animated.
But, as good as the animation is, it's the characters here that stand
out once again.  As with Pixar's earlier film, Toy Story, the vocal
talent have been perfectly matched with the characters they play. Unlike
Antz, whose characters were overshadowed by the big name voice actors,
the characters in A Bug's Life come first.
The humor of A Bug's Life is both subtle and simple.  The in-jokes that
peppered Antz aren't to be found here...instead we're assaulted with the
humor present in a minutiae of details.  There are lots of little
things, such as the variety of bugs and buildings in the bug "city",
which require multiple viewings to catch them all.  Not much of the
humor here will sail over the heads of children...but adults will still
find plenty to grin about.
A Bug's Life may not be as groundbreaking as Toy Story, but it is nearly
as entertaining.  There's a little something for everyone here, and the
film is a blast to watch.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 650 reviews, and information on nearly 700 upcoming
releases

Author
Ryan Davis
        It's rather strange too have two computer animated talking ant movies
come out in a single year, but that is what Disney and Pixar Animation;s
latest film represents.  While A Bugs Life isn't nearly as deep as it's
predecessor, Dreamwork's Antz, it is just as funny.
        A Bug's Life centers, appropriately, around the life of an ant, named
Flik. Flik, cutely voiced by Newsradio's David Foley, hates sticking too
tradition and attempts too find new ways of harvesting food and other task.
When one of his inventions causes the offering too be completely lost, the
leaders of the Colony send him out on a mission too get him out of the way.
The offering is food that a vile group of grasshoppers force the ants
too harvest for them. The leader of the grasshoppers is Hopper, who is
fiendishly voiced by Oscar winner Kevin Spacey.  When the offering is lost
Hopper is very upset and he vows to return shortly too retrieve double the
amount of food. When the leaders of the ant colony send Flik out on his
mission, they never dream he will be successful, they just hope they can get
him out of the way so they can harvest the extra food.
Flik's mission is too hire some warrior bugs too fight off the
grasshoppers when they return. Instead Flik accidentally hires circus
performing bugs, who he mistakenly assumes are warriors. When he returns with
the `warriors', the town is ecstatic until they find out the truth about their
heroes.
A Bug's Life has animation that is simply stunning. The sheer
uniqueness of the day to day bug life is very imaginative. Together with the
great voice acting, this film is the perfect holiday family film. Its main
weakness is that it couldn't beat Antz to the theaters, making it seem like
stale material.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Edward Johnson-Ott
A Bug's Life (1998)
Voices of Dave Foley (Flik), Kevin Spacey (Hopper), Julia Louis-Dreyfus 
(Princess Atta), Hayden Panettiere (Dot), Phyllis Diller (Queen), Richard 
Kind (Molt), David Hyde Pierce (Slim), Joe Ranft (Heimlich), Denis Leary 
(Francis), Jonathan Harris (Manny), Madeline Kahn (Gypsy), Bonnie Hunt 
(Rosie), Michael McShane (Tuck and Roll), John Ratzenberger (P.T. Flea), 
Brad Garrett (Dim), Roddy McDowall (Mr. Soil), Edie McClurg (Dr. Flora), 
Alex Rocco (Thorny), David Ossman (Cornelius). A Buena Vista release of a 
Walt Disney Pictures presentation of a Pixar Animation Studios film. 
Produced by Darla K. Anderson, Kevin Reher. Screenplay by Andrew Stanton, 
Donald McEnery, Bob Shaw, original story by John Lasseter, Stanton, Joe 
Ranft. Directed by John Lasseter. Co-director, Andrew Stanton. 
94 minutes.
Rated G, 4.5 stars (out of five stars)
Review by Ed Johnson-Ott, NUVO Newsweekly
www.nuvo-online.com
Archive reviews at http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Edward+Johnson-ott
To receive reviews by e-mail at no charge, send subscription requests to 
pbbp24a@prodigy.com
When you see "The End" appear onscreen at the conclusion of "A Bug's Life,
" stay in your seat, because the show isn't over quite yet. The 
filmmakers have added a very clever little treat to the closing credits. 
The rollicking "A Bug's Life" is that kind of movie; so bright, clever 
and eager to please that it does everything but walk you out to your car. 
The computer-animated feature, from the makers of "Toy Story," deftly 
combines comedy, action and razzle-dazzle visuals to produce 94 minutes 
of pure fun.
Flik ("NewsRadio's" Dave Foley, in a spirited performance) is an ant with 
a vision. Eschewing the conformity of the colony, he works on various 
inventions, even as his colleagues roll their eyes at his fanciful 
notions. They're far more concerned with collecting food for the seasonal 
payoff to the grasshoppers; thugs who threaten violence if the ants fail 
to present a sufficient "offering." When Flik accidentally knocks over 
the bounty, invader boss Hopper (Kevin Spacey) delivers a blistering 
edict: if the ants don't collect a double-offering, the grasshoppers will 
wipe out the entire colony. 
Anxious to atone, Flik sets out, in "Seven Samurai" fashion, to gather a 
group of warrior insects to protect the community. He finds what appears 
to be a formidable assemblage of bugs and convinces them to accompany him 
home. Unfortunately, there's been a major miscommunication: the 
"warriors" are in fact a hapless band of circus insects who believe they 
have been hired to put on a show. When the truth comes out, things look 
disastrous for the colony, but wait... Flik has another plan!
"A Bug's Life" earns bonus points for its knock-out supporting characters.
 While the early portion of the film is charming and visually stunning, 
things really don't kick into high gear until the wonderfully eccentric 
members of P.T. Flea's Circus make their appearance. The ants are a sweet,
 but bland, bunch, with only Flik, the Queen (Phyllis Diller), Princess 
Atta (Julia Louis-Dreyfus), and young Dot (Hayden Panettiere) really 
displaying any individual sparks. Even they pale in comparison with the 
motley band of circus insects. The group includes a glamorous spider 
(Bonnie Hunt), Hungarian acrobat bugs Tuck and Roll (Michael McShane), a 
grumpy, misunderstood ladybug (Denis Leary) and prickly walking-stick 
insect Slim (a hilarious David Hyde-Pierce). 
Best of all is Manny, an aging, narcissistic praying mantis with regal 
pretensions, played to perfection by Jonathan Harris. When Harris, the 
villainous Dr. Smith from the old "Lost In Space" TV series, was offered 
a cameo in this year's big-screen adaptation of the show, he turned it 
down, sniffing "I don't do bit parts." At the time, I dismissed his words 
as mere prattling from a egocentric has-been. Who knew that the old ham 
had a gig this good up his sleeve?
Without minimizing the pleasures of the similarly-themed "Antz," "A Bug's 
Life" is a much more satisfying film. The production mixes radiant colors,
 a score that echoes epic westerns, and extraordinary imagination in 
creating its miniature landscapes. A visit to an insect city is 
wonderfully realized, with discarded food containers from the human world 
serving as buildings (and, in marked contrast to "Antz," there is nary a 
product placement in sight). Following a riotous circus performance, we 
get a tour of Bugville, complete with a beggar insect sitting on the 
sidewalk with a sign reading "Kid pulled off wings."
The visuals from the computer graphic wizards at Pixar are nothing less 
than breathtaking. A scene depicting Flik taking flight, parasailing on a 
single sprig of a dandelion blossom, is both lyrical and stunning. The 
detail work in the shot shows just how far computer graphics have come in 
the three short years since "Toy Story."
Of course, an adventure film can't succeed without a good villain, and 
Kevin Spacey does terrific work as Hopper, malevolent leader of the 
menacing grasshoppers, playing the character like a swaggering biker from 
"The Wild Ones." Listen closely as the grasshoppers prepare to take off 
and you'll notice that the audio effect boys incorporate the sounds of 
motorcycles revving up into the background noise. Nice touch.
"A Bug's Life" isn't perfect. The secondary ants are unnecessarily bland 
and some of the action scenes are too boisterous for their own good, but 
these are small quibbles. Warm, funny and thrilling, "A Bug's Life" 
represents a powerful stride for computer animated films, as well as yet 
another triumph for the alliance between Disney and Pixar Studios. Get 
ready for one of the best films of the year and don't forget to stay for 
the closing credits.  
Incidentally, "A Bug's Life" is preceded by "Geri's Game," a delightful 
Pixar comic short about an elderly gent's tricks during a chess game in 
the park. Sunny, ingenious and very funny, the feature showcases the best 
computer rendering of the human form to date.

Author
John Carroll
A Bug's Life
Featuring the voices of Dave Foley, Kevin Spacey, Julia Louis-Dreyfus, David
Hyde Pierce and Denis Leary.
Rated G, 96 minutes long
A very cute and intelligent comedy that outshines its graphics, unlike most
Hollywood films.
   Disney has a way with animated features, otherwise known as cartoons.  Sure,
when we were young we loved cartoons.  "Inspector Gadget," "Teenage Mutant
Ninja Turtles" being two prime examples.  But, as we grow older, we lose touch
with these cartoons.  But, Disney still keeps everyone coming back for more. 
Whether it be the starry eyed children or the frantic parents, a majority of
audiences leave Disney animated films with a positive mind.  In Disney's latest
feature, they turn to the folks at Pixar who brought us the dazzling Toy
Story.  Although A Bug's Life is not as good as its lofty
predecessor, it still provides a unique and entertaining experience.
   To get the familiarities out of the way, the voice casting is yet again
excellent.  Dave Foley, Kevin Spacey and especially Julia Louis-Dreyfus stand
out.  Their voice acting is superb, displaying all of the right emotions and
features.  Plus, Disney still gets some features of each actor/actress into the
looks of their characters.  I have seen this done by Disney for years, and yet
it still amazes me every time.  
   Pixar has done it again.  Despite the tremendous success of Toy
Story, Pixar still needed to come out and show the world it was not a flash
in the pan.  And they did a great job of it.  Overall, the film is not better
then Toy Story, although I doubted it would be.  But, the graphics are
better, and that was the job of Pixar.  In Toy Story, the animations
were groundbreaking.  But, they could have used improvement.  The one major
flaw was that a majority of the backgrounds were still.  However, A Bug's
Life called for lush and moving visuals due to the outside environment. 
Pixar delivered in a big way.  The lush graphics were tremendous with even
little details like grass blowing in the wind.  Simple details like this added
to the beauty of this film.
   The story is pretty basic, with no complexity.  Remember that this is still
a child's film and it needs to be reared for a child to view.  Disney has a way
with these films.  It is basically another David versus Goliath, dumbed down
for a child.  However, Disney is able to make it entertaining.  I know I gushed
on about the graphics, but I could do even more about the plot.  It has cute
humor and wonderful voice acting.  Despite being a children's film, it can be
viewed- and enjoyed- by anyone.  Which is why Disney is the reigning king of
animation.
   You rarely- and I mean rarely- find an animated film over an hour and a
half.  Which runs true with A Bug's Life.  But, that is usually what
makes the film enjoyable.  You can only take so much cuteness and
predictability in one film, no matter whom the film is geared towards.  That
also runs true in A Bug's Life.  The film, despite being short, still
runs its course too long.  The last twenty minutes are predictable, unless you
actually think Disney is going to kill off the main character in a G rated
film.  It drags on, but fortunately, ends with a perk and, fortunately, will
not leave a sour taste in your mouth.
   In conclusion, A Bug's Life is yet another critcal- and box office-
hit for Disney.  A Bug's Life is the perfect example of why Disney is
and always will be the king of animation.  And the help from Pixar certainly
did not hurt it.
Three And A Half Stars out of Four Stars
The Movie Page- http://jump.to/moviepage
Reviews, Previews, News and So Much More!

Author
Mark O'Hara
The State of Movie-going in Late 1998:  A Review of "A Bug's Life" and 
the Theater Showing It
November 26 - Thanksgiving Day.  On a visit to my in-laws', we drive out 
to the Showcase Cinemas, a ten-plex in the wilds of western Cincinnati.  
In the lobby the ticket counter seems to be closed, but I'm told to go 
to the one clear on the other side of the lobby.  It's a big place, with 
mammoth hype displays for A Bug's Life and the Rugrats movie, arcade 
games and ripoff fish-for-a-dinky prize games.  There's even a "Customer 
Service" counter that doubles as an outlet for movie merchandise, 
trinkets and polyester caps and twenty-dollar t-shirts.  
We're here for the 2:10 show, and I'm thinking good: bargain matinee 
prices, when I see the sign for $5 each.  That's OK, it's a family 
outing, my wife and I and our two kids, the first day of a four-day 
weekend from school.
We opt not to visit the array of refreshment counters:  this is a short 
film and, besides, we must save our appetites for my mother-in-law's 80 
pound turkey.  So the wallet does not take another hit for popcorn, or 
worse, 6-dollar-a-pound candy from plexiglass bins mounted on the wall.  
The carpet that covers the acreage of lobby and corridors leading to the 
auditoriums is gaudy, stuff you would never want in your house, even in 
the 1970's.  Outside each screen there's an electronic message board 
with abbreviated titles:  Enemy of State, Pig in City, Bugs Life (not 
only the syntax ruined, but the punctuation shot as well).  Ushers with 
tiny brooms and dustpans hang around the doorways and call to each 
other, occasionally eyeing the patrons suspiciously.  In our theater we 
are pleased to find the newer generation of chairs, ones that rock and 
hold your cup and pad your back and seat.  We sit on the end of a 
staggered row, so my daughter cannot be blocked by any tall, hat-wearing 
man.  As the lights dim we can see only the light-embedded plastic 
stripping that lines the aisles.
Then the previews, at least five of them, the last one the trailer for 
Star Wars: The Phantom Menace, the one my son has been longing to see.  
(After this last, Billy and his mother both get up as if to leave, the 
best part of their viewing over!)  Oh, and before the film starts, we 
are treated to that most rare aperitif, a cartoon!  It's Pixar's "Geri's 
Game," an award-winning animated short about an old man playing chess, 
against himself, on a table in an otherwise deserted park.  It's a 
delightful and sweet story, uncomplicated but thick with imagination, 
the kind of story Chekov or O. Henry would have loved to watch.
A Bug's Life is an entertaining film with a decent story and astounding 
computer-generated animation.  This is the best animation yet of this 
sort - the facial features of the ants and their rival grasshoppers 
possess the elasticity of real faces, and the expressions and body 
movements mimic actual motion without a hint of choppiness or other 
animated fraud.  It's quite an accomplishment for Pixar and all the 
women and men who worked on it.
Down to the slightest swaying of the trees, the animation is the real 
star of this show.  Everything is fun to look at, and I imagine one 
could pay to see A Bug's Life many times before taking in a good deal of 
the panorama of action and detail in every shot.  The colors are 
artfully chosen (even though it's unclear to me why the ants' bodies are 
bluish gray);  they are tones that occur in nature, with a few bright 
bugs and a bird thrown in for vividness.  Even though I saw Toy Story 
twice at the cinema and countless times on video, I am still getting 
used to viewing this type of animation:  I feel like turning to my kids 
and saying, "In my day we were lucky to have color in our cartoons, and 
your grandpa was lucky to have sound!"  In short, the film gives us a 
visual banquet of images, and I wouldn't be averse to returning for more 
helpings.
John Lasseter and Andrew Stanton are the directors, and they have done a 
fine job with perspectives and pace.  Lasseter and Don McEnery wrote the 
screenplay, which includes generous amounts of humor.  What's cool is 
that you can pick and choose among the humorous moments, according to 
your age.  There are takes on all the bug jokes you can think of, 
there's plenty of slapstick (literally!), and there are even a few 
cerebral pokes, such as the shtick involved with German accents (the 
caterpillar Heimlich) and with a queen ant assisted by Phyllis Diller's 
entire routine - a "Fang"-like old guy, a small dog-like aphid, and 
Diller's precious voice and laugh.  
The plot is successful but not as strong as other aspects.  We see the 
independent thinking Flik (voice of Dave Foley), an ant who has broken 
away from the ranks and invented a device to make harvesting easier.  
Although he is sharp and well-intentioned, Flik is also dense enough to 
repeatedly endanger the colony.  He is known to the royal family, and 
quickly falls in love with the queen's daughter Atta (voice of Julia 
Louis-Dreyfus).  When Flik accidentally ruins the food the ants have 
gathered for the mean grasshoppers, the colony is faced with gathering 
twice as much food, or facing the wrath of the larger insects as soon as 
the last leaf falls.  When autumn comes we are set up for the showdown, 
and it is an engaging one to watch.  
If you saw even a trailer for DreamWorks' Antz, do the plot elements of 
A Bug's Life seem nearly identical?  I have purposely forgotten many of 
the details surrounding the genesis of Antz, the premise perhaps coming 
along with an executive from Disney to the newer studio.  But Disney has 
a right to be upset at the derivative nature of the film that was begun 
later but released earlier.  It is difficult to say which is the better 
film.  I have already declared Pixar's animation superior.  As far as 
target audiences, A Bug's Life is more appropriate for children.  Not 
that Antz doesn't work for kids - it's just that in many ways it is a 
vehicle for Woody Allen, who does the voice of an neurotic ant who bucks 
the system, falls in love with the princess, and saves the colony.  Antz 
has a greater number of jokes that Mom and Dad would enjoy.  
My call is that Antz owns the edge for voices.  Gene Hackman, the 
inimitable Christopher Walken, Sylvester Stallone, Allen - these actors 
lend their character voices that are quirky, unique and memorable.  
Outstanding talents in A Bug's Life include Diller, David Hyde Pierce as 
Slim the walking stick, and John Ratzenberger as the circus-owning flea.  
Other actors do a very adequate job, but fail to go over-the-top in a 
way that makes you chuckle just to remember the funny dimension to a 
voice itself.  For instance, why didn't Lasseter have Louis-Dreyfus to 
an Elaine-ism, crying, "Get out!" and pushing Flik backwards?  Where are 
Andy Devine, June Foray and Sterling Holloway when you need them?
An aside:  you must stay for the closing credits.  Randy Newman sings 
one of his funky songs (why didn't you do more with lyrics, Randy?);  
and there are belly laugh-inducing outtakes that are well worth being 
last to leave the theater.
My children claim not to like one film better than the other.  I would 
as soon sit through Antz a second time.  But for pure visual enjoyment, 
A Bug's Life is beautiful.  I recommend you find a reasonably priced 
theater, smuggle in Reese's Cups and Twizzlers, and share an afternoon 
with the kids in your life.
Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.com


Author
Steve Kong
"Is it better than Antz?" is an obvious question that will come to mind
with the release of A Bug's Life. For me the answer is easy.
Unlike Antz, which was released just a few months ago, A Bug's Life is
aimed at a larger audience - though, especially aimed at kids. A Bug's Life
has less of Antz's social-political issues and replaces them with cuteness.
Antz was a movie about an ant who was a rebel in the colony; the same is
true with A Bug's Life. That's where the similarities end.
Flik (Dave Foley of "News Radio") is a rebel in the ant colony. He has many
brilliant ideas that are cast aside by the colony - including a machine
that would help ease the harvest. The harvest is a grueling ordeal for the
colony because they have to do it twice a year. Once to feed the invading
grasshoppers led by Hopper (Kevin Spacey) and another time to feed the
colony. This year Flik accidentally knocks over the pile of grain for the
grasshoppers and all is lost. Hopper arrives and gives the Queen (Phyllis
Diller) one more chance to get the harvest done. Princess Atta (Julia
Louis-Dreyfus) and a council decide to send Flik off under the pretenses of
finding warrior bugs to help battle off the returning grasshoppers.
What Flik finds is a rag-tag group of circus performers who he mistakes as
warrior bugs . These performers include: a stick-like bug, Slim (David Hyde
Pierce of "Frasier"); an overly large caterpiller of sorts, Heimlich (Joe
Ramft); a black widow spider, Rosie (Bonnie Hunt); and my favourite of them
all, a lady bug named Francis (Dennis Leary). Together these circus
performers band together with the ant colony and plan to fend off the
returning grasshoppers.
The story for A Bug's Life is simple, as it should be, to keep kids'
attention. There are many jokes that appeal to the kids, but there are also
jokes that appeal to adults taking their children to see the film. Pixar
has put out a film that will entertain all ages.
This is Pixar's second venture into making a full length computer animated
feature film. Their first was the mega-hit Toy Story. A Bug's Life has one
thing missing that Toy Story, and all other Disney films, have. The missing
element is songs during the film. For A Bug's Life it was a good choice;
the flow of the story was never interrupted by singing characters. It does
feel funny to see an animated Disney film without songs, but it's also a
refreshing change.
All the voice performers were excellent. I loved Kevin Spacey as Hopper the
most. Hopper has four arms and with the animation used to express the
personality of Hopper, he is one of the best animated character's I've seen
in a long while. Spacey has enough resonance in his voice to make Hopper
scary, but not too scary. Kudos to Spacey for a wonderful performance.
Dave Foley plays Flik and he does it with flair. Unlike the soft-spoken and
self-deprecating Woody Allen as Z in Antz, Foley is alive with the
character Flik. Flik is a character that requires a naďve and young
sounding voice and Foley provides just that.
The voice that was hilarious and will be overlooked is that of Richard Kind
("Spin City") who plays Molt, Hopper's goofy brother. Kind, who is
extremely funny in "Spin City," brings the same type of goofiness to his
character and with the brilliance of the animators at Pixar, Molt is a
grasshopper-spitting-image of Kind.
There were two semi-non-talking characters, Tuck and Roll, that are just
laugh-out-loud funny. They are the "roly-poly"  bugs and their mere
presence onscreen was enough to make me laugh.
The musical score by Randy Newman (Toy Story) fits the movie like a glove.
The score is jazzy and contemporary and goes hand in hand with the action.
As for the computer animation, Pixar has one-upped Pacific Data Images (the
people who made Antz). Antz was a film for adults and because of this the
film looked somewhat bland with all the colors taken from the real world.
This meant that there was a lot of the color brown in the film and there
wasn't really anything eye-catching about that. In A Bug's Life, directors
John Lasseter and Andrew Stanton fill the screen with bright vivid colors.
>From the sky blue of the ants to the bright red of Francis, A Bug's Life
screams with color. The one thing that that Antz had over A Bug's Life was
the sheer volume of ants rendered for film. In A Bug's Life, there are
scenes with many ants onscreen, but in Antz there are scenes with the
entire colony onscreen - and this sheer volume is overwhelming. But,
overall, A Bug's Life wins in the visual department.
A Bug's Life is the winner in the battle of the animated ants. I gave Antz
a Don't Miss nod and I'm going to give A Bug's Life a Don't Miss nod also -
I loved both films, although they are different. Whereas Antz is more deep
and exploratory look into society, A Bug's Life is quirky and hilarious. I
just enjoyed A Bug's Life more with its large audience appeal, offbeat
humor, and gorgeous look. This film is destined to be a Disney classic.
Don't Miss A Bug's Life on the big screen. And don't leave the theatre when
the credits start to roll. If you do, you'll miss out on the hilarious
bloopers reel.
 recipe for a hard boiled review:  one egg, two cups water, a pot,
 a helluva attitude, and a guy who loves the cinema.
 i'm your hard boiled movie guide.

Author
John Smyth
A review from the  Stockholm Film Review
http://www.fortunecity.com/lavendar/heat/435/
Worker ant Flik (voiced by Dave Foley) has a streak of individuality 
that constantly gets him into trouble. He invents things, to the 
bemusement of the rest of the ant colony, and he lands himself (and the 
colony) in big trouble when one of his inventions, an automatic 
harvester of grass seeds, causes the destruction of a food pile, the 
collection of which had occupied the whole colony for the summer. The 
problem for the colony is that the pile of food had been the annual 
offering to a group of bullying grasshoppers, who will destroy the 
colony if they do not get their food. When the grasshoppers, led by the 
cruel Hopper (Kevin Spacey) discovers the lack of food, he demands a 
double supply of food to be gathered before the end of the summer.
The colony is led by the ant Queen (Phylis Diller) who has given most of 
her responsibilities to her neurotic daughter Princess Atta (Julia 
Louis-Dreyfus). While Atta and her staff debate Flik's punishment, he 
suggests that he will travel from the colony (which is on an island) to 
find a bunch of warrior insects who will free them from Hopper's 
tyranny. The colony are glad to be rid of him and don't give him any 
chance of success. On his journey, Flik encounters a down-trodden (flea) 
circus of various insects and mistakes them for a bunch of fierce 
soldiers he and brings them back to the colony. The troupe think that 
they have been hired to give a performance. 
John Lasseter and Andrew Stanton set a very high standard for 
computer-generated animation with Toy Story (1995), which evoked classic 
Disney animation values, with breathtaking animation, exciting story and 
a sharp and witty script which worked on two levels; amusing and 
entertaining kids and grown-ups equally. This time, the release of Antz 
(with a broadly similar backdrop and story) has added an extra 
competitive edge. And while both movies feature with a plucky individual 
ant, they are really quite different.
A Bug's Life is a far lighter movie in tone than Antz, and it is easy to 
see how the movie follows the traditional Disney formula. The animation 
is bright and colourful, and the humour is broad and wholesome, aimed 
squarely at the kiddies. Most of the characters are lovable (apart from 
Hopper) , and differ in appearance from each other (important for the 
cuddly toy spin-off market). Much of the humour is derived from the 
silly voices, antics and inept circus acts of the circus troupe - one of 
the most enjoyable scenes of the film is when the circus troupe try 
unsuccessfully to entertain a bunch of bored and unappreciative 
fruitflies. 
Funnily enough, it is the fact that this is unashamedly a children's 
movie that points up the main weakness of the film. Like Toy Story, a 
number of celebrities appear (courtesy of their famous voices). However, 
the series that feature these actors, such as Frazier (David Hyde 
Pierce), Seinfeld (Julia Louis-Dreyfus) and Spin City (Richard Kind) are 
unlikely to mean much to the average eight or nine year old. Moreover, 
their personas in the film are pretty much the same as those for which 
they are better known on TV. Therefore Hyde Pierce is a haughty stick 
insect (Slim), Louis-Dreyfus is a neurotic whiner and Kind (as a 
grasshopper called Molt) is a big goofy but well-meaning sidekick to 
Hopper. The problem is, they don't seem half as funny in the film, as 
they do in their familiar TV surroundings. Louis-Dreyfus is particulary 
grating. This is due, in no small part, to the script. It is rather 
bland, and only Kevin Spacey gets lines worthy of his menacing character 
(but the bad guy always gets the best lines in movies).
Don't get me wrong - this is a fine entertaining movie for kids, which 
is exactly what it was intended to be. But the animation is not as 
well-detailed or spectacular as Antz, and as a follow-up to Toy Story, 
it certainly doesn't have the same impact. There were scenes in Antz 
that I felt simply could not have been made as well using traditional 
animation, whereas A Bug's Life, in it's structure and visual effects, 
looks as if it could have been made twenty years ago. But maybe that is 
no bad thing either. 
It is also a rather cloying movie, with the moral of the story well and 
truly rammed home. However, before you, as a viewer, go home after the 
show, be sure to watch the end credits(after the theme song has played). 
It is the wittiest part of the movie.


Author
Matt Prigge
Directors: John Lasseter and Andrew Stanton
Writers: Don McEnery, Bob Shaw, and Andrew Stanton (story by John
Lasseter, Bob Shaw, and Andrew Stanton)
Starring: Dave Foley, Kevin Spacey, Julia Louis-Dreyfus, Hayden
Panettiere, Phyllis Diller, Richard Kind, David Hyde-Pierce, Joe Ranft,
Denis Leary, Jonathan Harris, Madeline Kahn, Bonnie Hunt, Michael
McShane, John Ratzenberger, Brad Garret, Roddy McDowell, Edie McClurg,
Alex Rocco
"A Bug's Life" may not be "Toy Story," but it's more close than "Antz"
was.  I really liked "Antz," basically because, yes, it is clever and
witty and intelligent (and it has the temerity to take a chance and put
Woody Allen in the lead, perhaps the year's most inspired casting), but
there was, in fact, something missing from it, and I'm the first to
admit that.  Maybe it's that it never totally lets go and takes off into
real innocent fun - it's too obsessed with its Orwellian message to
become totally engaging, and if it weren't for Woody Allen, it would
have been just a really clever good-not-great flick.
"A Bug's Life" has a similar premise, and it also has Disney to insure
that it's G-rated and not totally over kids' heads like "Antz" was (not
a bad thing, believe me), but what it also has is a tone that's
completely innocent even when it's also remaining perpetually clever.
"Antz" is still the more witty film, and I love it for it, and "A Bug's
Life" is more for general consumption, but it's also more entertaining.
It broadens its horizons, and when it really moves from the ant colony,
it really shows us a whole new world we've never seen before, and it's
take on the evolution of bugs is a lot better than the one in "Antz."
It's also light AND clever.
The visuals are, instead of earth tones, bright worldly colors, and
still gives the amazing visual technology of "Antz" at least a worthy
contender.  The characters are also nicely realized - though
watered-down for broad consumption, they still carry more wit than the
contemporary Disney animated films.  The lead character, Flik (voiced by
Dave Foley), is nothing more than a slightly-less neurotic Z from
"Antz," but Foley makes him nearly as engaging as Allen made Z.  Instead
of Gene Hackman playing the villain, we get the much more menacing Kevin
Spacey as the lead grasshopper, the nicely-titled Hopper.  And for the
romantic lead, we don't get spacey Sharon Stone, but intelligent and
hard-to-get Julia-Louis Dreyfuss, who doesn't even come around until the
very final frames.
Not that the plot's really any better than the one in "Antz" - it's
basically yet another redux of "The Seven Samurai," with an ant colony
under the control of giant grasshoppers forcing them to produce a
product for them or else.  When Flik, a bone fide inventor, creates a
time-conserving apparatus that accidentally destroys the season's
donation, he puts them all in risk, and is sent away so that he won't
screw anything up with the pretense that he is searching for help to
fight the grasshoppers.  He runs into a group of "warrirors" who are,
unbeknownst to him, a group of carnival bugs, and they agree to help
under similar false pretenses.  These bugs are an equally wonderful
assortment to anything in "Toy Story": foppish walking stick Slim (David
Hyde-Pierce), German caterpillar Heimlich (Joe Ranft), quick-tempered
and insecure male ladybug Francis (Denis Leary), pretentious praying
mantis Manny (Jonathan Harris), his assistant butterfly Hypsy (Madeliene
Kahn), spider Rosie (Bonnie Hunt), and two fleas, Tuck and Roll (Michael
McShane), who speak in undiscernable jibberish.
The writers lightly touch on each bug's place in bug society and the
malleability thereof while making a wisecracks at everything they can,
and blowing the audience away with wild visual treats.  Grasshoppers
jumping in unison seems like a menacing earthquake.  A small bird
becomes an ominous mortal threat, whose usual mild-mannered squeal is a
scream of death.  The bug city is a modern-day metropolis, complete with
fireflies temping as traffic lights and a fly sitting on the curb,
holding out a cup, with a sign lying next to him that says "Kid tore off
wings."  And a rainstorm is like a giant flood, with each drop acting
like a small bomb dropped at millions of miles per hour.
Around this, the Pixar animators stage several large set pieces, like a
resuce mission halfway through that is as wild and entertaining as
anything this year, and a wonderfully exciting action piece at the end,
a chase scene at night through the labyrinthine branches of a small
thicket.  Meanwhile, each character gets the spotlight to be completely
idisyncratic and interesting, something "Antz" couldn't do, and by the
end, over the end credits, "A Bug's Life" pulls it's final punch, out
clever-ing "Antz" with a series of incessantly hilarious faux-bloopers
that come just at the right time, when those who leave immeadiately
after the final frame of a film have left, and you can brag that you
were one of the elite who stayed and got the full money's worth of
entertainment.
Still, it's no "Toy Story."  That film, maybe above any animated film
I've ever seen, encompassed almost true perfection in story, character,
and wit.  It proved that it didn't need to brag about it's cutting edge
technology to really soar (it's the least visually striking of the three
computer animated films thus far, but is still the most satisfying), and
created a perfect world of idiosyncratic delights and innocent fun.  Yet
"A Bug's Life," as well as "Antz," are still amazing films, and prove
without doubt, that if you're gonna make a computer animated film, send
it to the guys who created these three flicks, evne if they're not
working under the same roof.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
David Sunga
Written and Directed by: John Lasseter and Andrew Stanton
Starring: 
Voices of Dave Foley, Kevin Spacey, Hayden Panettiere, Julia
Louis-Dreyfus, Phyllis Diller, David Hyde Pierce, Roddy McDowall,
Jonathan Harris, Richard Kind
Ingredients: Ants and grasshoppers in human situations.
Synopsis:
A gang of big mean grasshoppers is extorting protection money from a
cowering colony of little ants. One day an innovative ant named Flik
(Dave Foley) goes on a quest to find bugs who might be willing to save
the colony from the bad guys. Coming upon recently fired flea circus
performers, Flik mistakenly believes they are altruistic commandos.
Opinion:
A BUG'S LIFE is sure to please both parents and children. First, take
your basic western (terrorized town, mysterious strangers ride in) and
then replace all violence with cartoon humor. Then change all the
townspeople to cute, kid-friendly Disney-style CGI insects. Add an
underdog hero, a hint of romance and a supporting character who's an
impetuous child (or in this case an impetuous young bug), and you have
yourself a hit movie.
It's amazing how computer generated imagery keeps evolving and getting
better. At the rate things are going, soon virtual characters will be
used just as often as real life actors and actresses, and the whole film
industry will go digital. Imagine, if technology keeps increasing, then
in the next evolution, all we'll need to do is use sensor clay to model
a performer's unique face and expressions, and all the action and
effects can be done by computer generation (intelligent software)
instead of live acting and stunts. If and when advanced computers become
commonplace it would reduce the cost of film-making by millions, since
only scripts, modeling, and intelligent software would be needed. 
Getting back to A BUG's LIFE, it's always fun to see if you can
recognize the voices in animated features. In A BUG'S LIFE you'll hear
echoes of LOST IN SPACE, PLANET OF THE APES, FRAZIER, SPIN CITY,
SEINFELD, and LA CONFIDENTIAL as well as the voice of the grand dame of
comedy, Phyllis Diller. Bring the family; you'll love it. 
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
Director:  John Lasseter, Andrew Stanton
Cast:  Dave Foley, Kevin Spacey, Julia Louis-Dreyfuss, David Hyde
Pierce, Madeline Kahn, Denis Leary
Screenplay:  Andrew Stanton, Donald McEnery, Bob Shaw
Producers: Darla K. Anderson, Kevin Reher
Runtime:   95 min.
US Distribution:  Disney/Buena Vista
Rated G
Once again, the battle is DreamWorks versus Disney:  earlier this year,
the mammoth companies fought to the death with their end-of-the-world
asteroid flicks, Deep Impact and Armageddon.  Here we are now, just a
few months later, and they're at it again with dueling bug movies, Antz
and A Bug's Life.  What I find so astonishing is that both pairs of
movies are so inherently similar in both story and execution.  I mean,
come on -- what were the chances of two studios both deciding to bring
out computer-animated films about bugs?   
As was the case with the meteor movies, Disney has come out on top: 
though Antz is a likable movie, A Bug's Life is far superior.  In fact,
this movie made me realize what was wrong with Antz:  I became immersed
in the world of A Bug's Life, while Antz just made me scrutinize
everything.  But it's not really fair to base an entire review on a
comparison.  A Bug's Life is a remarkable film in its own right, and
deserves to be seen apart from any other computer-animated film about
bugs.  In fact, it's one of the best films this year:  it's smart,
subtle, and funny, but it's also perfect family entertainment and
relentlessly entertaining.  I haven't had such a good time at the movies
in months.
It tells the story of an ant named Flick (voice by Dave Foley); he's a
nice guy, but he's also a troublemaker.  The ants spend all season
putting together the Offering, a big pile of food that they provide for
the grasshoppers.  Just before the grasshoppers come, Flick accidentally
knocks over the Offering, and ruins everything for the entire colony: 
the grasshopper's leader, Hopper (Kevin Spacey), is enraged, and tells
them that the ants need twice the food by the end of summer, or they're
all dead.  
Flick, feeling responsible for this, sets off to look for help -- he
realizes that the only way to be rid of the grasshoppers is to fight
them.  He heads to the city (the city being a house a few miles away),
where he finds a colorful bunch of circus bugs:  a ladybug (Denis Leary,
who is spectacular), a black widow (Bonnie Hunt), a caterpillar (Joe
Ranft), a butterfly (Madeline Kahn), a rhinoceros beetle (Michael
McShane), and a stick (David Hyde-Pierce, also giving a hilarious
performance).   Flick doesn't know they're actors, and they don't know
that Flick needs them to kill a bunch of grasshoppers, so they return to
the colony with Flick and find themselves in an unusual position.
The most obvious element of A Bug's Life is the quality of animation. 
Created by Pixar, the same people who brought us Toy Story, A Bug's Life
has some of the most amazing visuals I've ever seen.  The bugs seem to
inhabit a three-dimensional space, and occasionally there will be a shot
that is indistinguishable from live action.  This is a lush, colorful
world, full of life and imagination:  the way the animators insert the
things all of us see in our daily lives (matches, bottlecaps, tin cans,
etc.) and make them active objects in the bugs' world is innovative. 
The film is also mercilessly exciting, particularly in a superbly-staged
scene involving our heroes' escape from a bird (a little bird never
seemed so huge and threatening).  
But the makers of A Bug's Life know where the importance lies:  story
and characters.  Flick, with solid voice work from Foley, is a great guy
to lead the story.  But the real treat comes with the circus bugs;
they're such a likable group of characters -- the standouts are the
stick (Hyde-Pierce is so good), Francis the ladybug, and the big fat
caterpillar.  All of these bugs have more than a token personality,
which makes the suspenseful scenes work because we care about the bugs,
and it also keeps the tear-jerking scenes from seeming obligatory.  
In my review of Antz, I said that the film is a clever cop-out because
it presents a bunch of little humans reacting to an ant-like existence. 
In concept, A Bug's Life is basically the same movie, except that I was
never given enough time to find things that I didn't like about it. 
With such strong work in both animation and script, A Bug's Life is
nothing but a joy to sit through.  It really is too bad that it had to
come out so close to that other bug movie, but A Bug's Life is so good
that I'm sure it will find its audience.  After a slew of endlessly
violent and cynical movies, it's downright refreshing to sit through an
innocent picture like this and laugh without feeling guilty.  

Author
Steve Bailey
Picking on Pixar's A Bug's Life, I feel like a bullying kid refracting
the sun through a magnifying glass onto an anthill. As with Pixar's
initial computer-animated feature, Toy Story, the animation is seamless,
the voice performances are flawless, and Randy Newman's score
complements the story perfectly. And yet the movie isn't the eye-popping
surprise that Toy Story was. This story of an oppressed colony of ants
is far more (you should pardon the expression) down to earth.
The story's main ant, a ne'er-do-well named Flik (voice of Dave Foley)
helps his colony thwart a bullying group of grasshoppers led by the evil
Hopper (Kevin Spacey). Flik finds his helpmates in a low-talent circus
troupe that gets roped into helping the ants through some
miscommunication on Flik's part.
That's about all there is to the story. Most of the movie's fun comes
from the sly voicework (best is "Frasier's" persnickety David Hyde
Pierce) and some low-key, throwaway jokes. Toy Story had much of the
same appeal, yet is primary storyline was rich and imaginative--it made
you look at the world of kids' toys from a fresh perspective.
Ant colonies notwithstanding, the Bug's Life story is very routine. We
know perfectly well that the hero will bungle everything he tries until
the story calls for him to come through. Some might carp that the movie
seems familiar only because Antz beat this movie to the same territory.
Yet it shares the same character problem as Antz: Why should we care
about a bunch of ants with borrowed personalities? Antz was a standard
Woody Allen comedy with insects instead of New Yorkers; A Bug's Life has
the standard Disney "repressed hero rising to save the day" formula.
The movie is far more enjoyable than the in-jokey Antz, yet A Bug's
Life
lacks the sense of wonder that the first Pixar feature inspired. One
giveaway is the latter movie's lightning-fast pace, so fast that some of
the jokes and exposition are unclear. A Bug's Life is so intent on
outdoing its predecessor, it's afraid of stopping for a moment lest the
kiddies get bored.
Submitted by: Steven Bailey
http://pages.hotbot.com/movies/skad13
Steven Bailey, a movie reviewer for The Beaches Leader newspaper in
Jacksonville Beach, Florida, has movie reviews posted in The Internet
Movie Database at:
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Steven+Bailey

Author
Chuck Dowling
Cast: Dave Foley, Kevin Spacey, Julia Louis-Dreyfus, Phyllis Diller,
Richard Kind, David Hyde Pierce, Denis Leary,
Madeline Kahn, Bonnie Hunt, John Ratzenberger, Roddy McDowall, Edie
McClurg, Alex Rocco, David L. Lander
Written by: John Lassiter, Andrew Stanton, Joe Ranft, Don McEnery and
Bob Shaw
Directed by: John Lassiter and Andrew Stanton
Running Time: 95 minutes
A Bug's Life is the second of 1998's cartoon bug movies, this one from
Disney and Pixar (who made 1995's Toy Story).  It's 180 degrees
different from the year's previous bug film, Dreamworks' Antz.  Where
Antz was more adult in it's tone and more realistic in it's appearance,
A Bug's Life is strictly for the kids.  It's Disney... what did you
expect?
A Bug's Life is about a colony of ants who are terrorized by a group of
grasshoppers, led by the oh-so-cleverly named Hopper (voice of Kevin
Spacey).  Flik (voice of Dave Foley) is an accident prone misfit in the
ant colony who is sent off to find "tough bugs" to help the ants fight
the evil grasshoppers.  He stumbles across a group of bugs in an "insect
bar" who he believes are the answer to his problems, but as it turns out
they are just a group of circus performing bugs.  Flik leads these bugs
back to his colony where comic misadventures occur, as you'd expect.  I
never thought I'd see anyone remake Three Amigos... but Disney has done
it.
The DVD release of A Bug's Life contains both the original widescreen
2.35:1 version of the film, and "a specially
rendered full-screen version which bypassed the usual film-to-video
transfer by going direct from the digital source
to DVD master".  Those of you who care about such technical details
should understand what I just said (and those
of you that don't won't care).  Both sets of "bloopers" from the film's
end credits are also on the disc.
The computer animation is simply fantastic in A Bug's Life.  Yes granted
the bugs have been "Disney-ed up" a great
deal, as the ants are cute blue creatures with more human-like features
than insect ones.  The colors are bright and
vibrant, and the picture is crystal clear.  A visual delight, if you
will.
Also included on the disc is the Pixar short film "Geri's Game," which
won an Oscar.  Other than that there are no
extras whatsoever... certainly nothing to justify the DVD's $35 retail
cost.  The Signature Selection release of
Antz on DVD absolutely destroys this disc in terms of extras.  Fans of
special editions on DVD (myself being one)
deserve more.
Kids should enjoy this one much more than Antz, but parents could go for
either one.  To me, A Bug's Life was
equally as entertaining as Antz... it's rarely laugh out loud funny but
it's never boring either.  It's nice to look at,
and the cast and their voice acting is excellent.  A pleasant way to
spend an hour and a half.  [G]
The Jacksonville Film Journal -- Film Reviews by Chuck Dowling
URL:http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Email:chuckd21@leading.net
Š 1999 of The Jacksonville Film Journal.  No reviews may be reprinted
without permission.

Author
Marty Mapes
**** (out of 4) There are several reasons that, of the two bug movies
this year, I was rooting for ANTZ. Casting Woody Allen in a cartoon was
a stroke of genius, and it showed that the cartoon would not pander to
kids at the expense of entertainment for adults. Also, ANTZ was put out
by DreamWorks, which is not associated with Disney. It's nice to see
someone give The Mouse a run for His money.
But as much as I liked ANTZ, I have to admit that A BUG'S LIFE is
better. It is not just clever, it is imaginative. There are some
genuinely inventive scenes that only an ant could have dreamt up. The
people at Pixar must have worked hard at having so much fun.
The film introduces us to a certain colony where the grasshoppers are
running a protection racket. If the ants fail to feed them, the
grasshoppers will do violence. So the ants gather twice the food they
need, half going to the grasshoppers.
One ant, Flik (Dave Foley), spends his time inventing instead of
gathering. While showing his picking machine to little Dot, the
invention goes haywire and spills the piled grasshopper food into the
pond. When the hoppers show up, they are steaming mad and they increase
their demands and their threats.
The royal court has seen Flik mess things up before, so when he proposes
to leave the colony in search of aid, they gladly accept. Any plan that
involves him leaving is okay with them.
Flik makes it to the strange and cruel city peopled by hustlers and
beggars (including one vet who had his wings pulled off by some kid 
and people say BABE 2 was dark!). In a seamy tin can Flik encounters a
mismatched group of bugs who appear to be just the toughs he was looking
for. He asks for their help and they agree.
The mercenaries are actually a Fellini-esque troupe of starving
performers, but Flik thinks they are fighters. The actors think Flik is
going to pay them to perform, not fight grasshoppers. Eventually things
get straightened out, but by then, there is no time. The colony will
have to make do with what it has.
Necessity is the mother of invention. Screenwriters John Lasseter and
Andrew Stanton saw the necessity from the ants' point of view, and not
from their own. The problem was how to beat the grasshoppers, not how to
finish the script. I was amazed that the bugs' invention was nothing I
had seen before. The solution to their problem (forgive me for not
giving it away) was truly original, and not recycled from dozens of
other children's screenplays. 
Other refreshing examples of the screenwriters' (and the bugs')
innovation made me chuckle at the creative energy that went into making
this film. There was a flute-like instrument, played by several bugs at
once, and a second-grade art project - a mural depicting the grisly
victory of the ants. There was even a second-grade skit about the ants
versus the hoppers. Each of these bumps in the story was a reminder of
how important, and how rare, good writing is.
And speaking of writing, I should add that the characters in A BUG'S
LIFE are much better developed than I had feared. When the previews
showed an food-obsessed German caterpillar and a macho man ladybug, the
one-dimensional warning lights went off. But in fact, these characters
were given a little room to spread. Yes, the bugs are caricatures, but
they are introduced and developed individually.
In addition to the writing, the look of the film is truly outstanding. I
was at first disappointed, after having seen ANTZ, that the creatures in
A BUG'S LIFE appear to be made of plastic or clay, instead of something
more subtle or naturalistic. But on closer inspection, you can see that
older ants have wrinkles and pockmarks in their smooth clay surfaces.
You can also see some uncanny depth in the irises of the bugs' eyes. So
even though the look is more cartoony than in Antz, it wasn't any
simpler or cheaper. 
And when the "camera" moves, the swirling, changing perspective moves
with it. There seems to be some trick involved, but I can't put my
finger on it. Perhaps it's the photographic equivalent of a lens made at
tiny proportions. In any case, the handful of dizzying shots where the
camera moves are great.
There are lots of tangential comments I could make (see sidebar at
http://net.indra.com/~mmapes/bug_ad99.htm), but instead I'll leave you
with just this one. In this age of selling out and bottom lines, and
after the eyeball-rolling gratuitous picnic scene in ANTZ, A BUG'S LIFE
contained no product placement.
Enjoy! And don't miss the "outtakes" during the credits.
Check out more current movie reviews at http://www.indra.com/~mmapes/

Author
Joy Wyse
Disney Studios' latest full-length animation film is delightful.   It
tells the story of a colony of ants that work and slave to provide food
for the dreaded grasshoppers that descend upon them each year and take
their harvest.  Then, after the grasshoppers have left, the ants can
gather the remaining food for themselves.  Unfortunately, as the
grasshoppers arrive, their food is accidentally destroyed by Flick, a
well-meaning but accident-prone ant.    
Flik ventures off the `island' to look for other bugs who can help the
ants defend themselves against the `hoppers' who have promised to return
for their allotment. 
He goes to the Big City where he finds a group of circus bugs, from a
Flea Circus, who agree to go with him thinking that it is a booking to
entertain the ants.  The theatrical troupe is almost as inept as Flik, but
somehow they manage to pull it all together.
When I was a child, there was a Disney comic book that featured the lives
of the Bug family.  This movie reminds me of it.  They use the discards of
human beings to furnish their homes.  An animal cracker cookie box becomes
the circus wagon.  It's fun to watch for those treasures in the background.
There is humor for everyone.  There are jokes aimed at children, and
others aimed at the adults, but none of them are improper for the kids. 
It was wonderful to hear the children laughing out loud and then, to hear
adults catching a clever double entendre.
Identifying the voices is a game unto itself.  Some belong to old,
familiar actors, others to total unknowns, and some in between.  Most of
us had to watch to see who they were. 
Some of the cleverest footage comes at the end of the film as those
credits roll by.  There are some very enjoyable `out takes', even more so
when you realize that there's no such thing as an animated `out take'.
I do want to see this again, probably with my grandchildren.  I give it a
solid B.

Author
Homer Yen
If you loved the rich animation and the fresh look of 1995's Toy
Story, you'll find just as much to enjoy here with Pixar's newly
computer-animated release.  Indeed, there is a tremendous eye for
detail, an undeniable richness, and even some terrifically animated
action sequences that will make you wonder how did they do that.  But
is a visual feast enough to satiate our appetite for a fun night out? 
For me, it left a bland taste in my mouth.  
Like ANTZ, another recent film about small critters, the focus here is
on Flik (voiced by David Foley), who is one of the smartest ants of
the colony but is prone to accidents.  For example, he creates a
machine which allows for increased harvests.  Food is needed not only
for the survival of the colony, but an additional offering must be
collected to appease tyrannical grasshoppers, led by Hopper (voiced by
Kevin Spacey).  But when Flik accidentally destroys the offering, it
infuriates Hopper who threatens their destruction.  To try to help,
Flik embarks on a quest to find some tough warrior bugs to come to
their aid.  Flik does find some volunteers (a praying mantis, a black
widow, a caterpillar and others).  However, Flik mistakes them to be
warriors when in fact their mobility and acts of bravery are only
because they are runaways from a circus.  With the colony's survival
at stake, the accident-prone ant and a bunch of circus rejects must
come up with a plan to rid themselves of Hopper and his gang.
There certainly is no lack of creativity here.  A rainstorm looks like
the ants are being water bombed.  Dandelion pods are used to transport
Flik afar as he floats across considerable distances.  The circus bugs
are all very colorful and appealing.  I especially liked Heimlich, the
plump caterpillar, whose voice was a funny mix of soprano and Nazi.  A
particularly nice treat comes at the end when they show animated
outtakes, where insects miss their cues or flub their lines,
satirizing mistakes often made by humans.  
I commend this movie for it's visual appeal and it's ability to
captivate kids.   The animation is superb.  Witness the sequence where
the band of bugs is trying to escape from a hungry bird or a circus
act involving matches and fly paper, and you'll agree.   If I had
children, this would be on my list of must-see movies.  Yet, for this
alternative rock listening, sports car driving, entertainment seeking
guy, I would probably tell my friends to see ANTZ instead.   Why? 
Because that movie plays better for adults attending by themselves. 
It had an entertaining villain and some terrific sequences that was
more than delightful.  "A Bug's Life" is clearly more family-oriented
fare.   


Author
Walter Frith
Pixar animation and Walt Disney Pictures presents 'A Bug's Life'.  The
film is a rousing pleasure to watch, to listen to and to think about
after it's done.  There isn't much to think about in a philosophical
sense but the brilliant attention to detail using the most advanced and
state of the art special effects and computer techniques available have
you guessing just exactly how it was all done.
Similar to 'Antz', also released recently, 'A Bug's Life' details the
antics of an ant colony.  The main character, voiced by Dave Foley is
named Flick and he's the nerdy little foul up whom you would never
expect to be a hero.  Other prominent characters that celebrities lend
their voices to for the production are the Princess (Julia
Louis-Dreyfuss), her mother the Queen (Phyllis Diller) and their
relationship with the good guys (other insects) and the bad guys, a
swarm of grasshoppers led by Hopper (Kevin Spacey).  A minor character,
Mr. Soil, is voiced by Roddy McDowell, a classic actor making his last
contribution to motion pictures as he died earlier this year from
cancer.
After a major foul-up by Flick, the colony loses all food collected for
the grasshoppers, (after all, grasshoppers ARE above ants in the food
chain), Hopper orders the ants to begin again and says that his army
will destroy the ants if they come back at the end of the rainy season
and there isn't any food.  After a trial, Flick is banned from the
colony and finds himself on his own where he befriends a group of other
insects connected to a flea circus.  Prominent among the characters are
a butterfly (Madeline Kahn), a walking stick bug (David Hyde-Pierce), a
ladybug (Denis Leary) and a black widow spider (Bonnie Hunt).  Flick
recruits them in a comical way to return with him to the colony and
stand up to Hopper and the others when they return to bully the ants for
food.
I give much credit is given to Pixar and Disney for making the
potentially hideous insects adorable and cute for kids to laugh at and
become wide-eyed.  One of the most hideous creatures in nature is the
spider but it's drawn so well in this movie, that you can't take your
eyes off the screen for it or any other optical candy intended for
adults as much as it is for kids.
'A Bug's Life' is directed by John Lasseter ('Toy Story') and Andrew
Stanton and the screenplay is by Andrew Stanton, Donald McEnery and Bob
Shaw.  Cleverly used in the film, and it should be in all films of a
cartoonish nature, are the ingeniously used clichés thrown in such as a
bug being attracted to a bright light, how they hang around food
containers that become trash etc, etc.  Especially nice is the film's
running time which actually exceeds 90 minutes and gives the audience
its money worth and isn't 70 or 80 minutes in length.  I guess that
explains why they used a lot of t.v. actors.  Their scale of pay
wouldn't cost as much as a big name such as Tom Hanks, whose character
voice of Woody in 'Toy Story' probably commanded a high salary so more
money is available for a longer running time in this production.  'A
Bug's Life' is perfect for the attention span of children and the
satisfying appetite of adults.  A charming romp all the way which don't
require being written about at great lengths.  Just enough to highly
recommend it.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://www.cgocable.net/~wfrith/movies.htm
