Title
Review for Kikujiro no natsu (1999)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Steve Rhodes
Takeshi Kitano, famous for his Dirty Harry style parts in Japanese crime
dramas such as FIREWORKS, tries a change of pace in the corny comedy
KIKUJIRO, in which he stars, directs, writes and edits.  (His
traditionally violent character, however, seems just below the surface.
Although he spends most of the story acting like a corked volcano, he
does explode once, beating an old man to a pulp in order to teach him a
lesson.)
Like a B-movie for kids, the comedy never got a laugh from this critic,
but it was certainly cheesy enough for my audience, filled with high
school students.  They laughed loudly, especially at its shamelessly
slapstick concluding segment.
Essentially a road picture, KIKUJIRO is divided into chapters introduced
by cutesy, moving postcards with titles such as "Mister Played with Me."
The story concerns a sad and lonely, latchkey 9-year-old, Masao (Yusuke
Sekiguchi), who lives with his working grandmother.  She tells him that
his father is dead and his mother lives far away.  Masao, who rarely
smiles or talks, wants to find his mother.  His older friend, Kikujiro
Takeda (Takeshi Kitano), decides to take him to locate his mother.  They
hitch a series of rides, most of which end up dumping them along the
highway in the middle of nowhere.
Along the way, Kikujiro mugs constantly, trying to get a laugh out of
the boy and us.  In order to stop a car to catch a ride, Kikujiro makes
like a blind man who just failed a suicide attempt by overdosing on
caffeine.  As he bounces into objects, and they into him, he finally
gets a car to stop.  When he forgets that he can't see -- one of the
film's many recycled jokes -- the truck driver leaves them stranded.
Continuing in the replay of old comedy routines, Kikujiro tries without
success to juggle three oranges.  Guess what?  He can keep two going.
Funny, huh?
The one complete satisfying part of the production is Jô Hisaishi's
music.  Playfully happy, it suggests a more light-hearted and better
movie than KIKUJIRO.
The movie's most troubling scene concerns an incidence of pedophilia.
An old man in a dark park lures Masao into the bushes in order to have
oral sex with him.  As the man kneels in front of Masao, pulling down
his underwear, Kikujiro saves the little boy.  The entire episode, even
if the movie tries to make it humorous, has no business being there.  I
found this scene sickening and in bad taste.  In contrast, the rest of
the film had the taste of leftover food, badly in need of some fresh
seasoning,
KIKUJIRO runs 1:56.  The film is in Japanese with English subtitles.  It
is rated PG-13 for a threatening incident and would be acceptable for
older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Ross Anthony
The film opens gently, introducing us to young Masao on the first day of his
summer vacation. Other kids go out of town with their parents, but Masao is
being raised by his working grandmother, so he has no one to play with. Sad
and lonely, one day he sets out to visit the mother he's never known and who
resides off in some distant city making money to support him.
A sympathetic neighbor-lady catching him on his way out assigns her
do-nothing thug boyfriend (Kikujiro) to escort Masao on his travel. This
entire set up is assembled nicely, capturing our interest and, of course,
teasing us with the tasty premise of a small innocent boy, old beer-bellied
thug pairing.
Kikujiro is fantastic. Expressing half of all his emotions though a single
eye twitch-like blink staring blankly off of a rough, stone chiseled face. A
rose on a grave. His stocky body and dispassionate demeanor make no attempts
to hide a cave-cold rock-hardened heart. I love this character.
Wallet thickened with his girlfriend's funds, Kikujiro drags the poor boy to
the racetrack. Though well shot this sequence lasts too long. In fact, that
sentence sums the lead weights that drag this potentially buoyant production
from high recommendations. By way of example ... Kikujiro walks across the
sandy beach to a waiting Masao in one touching scene, but for an audience to
watch a lead character walk 50 feet through the sand on a 100 foot wide
shot - it's just asking too much.
Since the film is essentially a road trip (lots of hitchhiking), the gentle
pace is inherent and previously established. These long drawn out shots try
our patience, while several good sequences would be strengthened with just a
few more beats cut from them. In the end, these delays dilute our
sympathies.
One other note, a nudist occurrence appears nearer to the end (of the film).
Americans may find this a bit troubling and even obscene, but if memory
serves me, Japanese still enjoy communal bathing, in fact, an invite of a
guest to bath with the family or children is really a warm extension of
friendship. It is from this perspective, the character's (Baldy's) nudism
ought be interpreted. (This is not to be confused with the sick old man's
behavior in the park, earlier in the film.)
All in all, though too slow and too long for its own good, "Kikujiro" gives
us a juicy character so rough to like that his description must have been
written on sandpaper. Kikujiro stares at us with his one eye blinking, we
should hate him, we want to hate him, but instead he endears us even more
than a small child searching for his mother. That's acting and direction
with depth, with grit, with boldness. Kikujiro is played by his
writer/director Kitano.
Kikujiro. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring Beat Takeshi (Kitano), Yusuke Sekiguchi, Kayoko Kishimoto, Yuko
Daike, Kazuko Yoshiyuiki, Beat Kiyoshi, Great Gidayu, Rakkyo Ide.
Written and Directed by Takeshi Kitano.
Produced by Masayuki Mori, Takio Yoshida a Sony Classics Release .
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Sony Pictures Classics
 Director: Takeshi Kitano
 Writer:  Takeshi Kitano
 Cast: Great Bidayu, Fumie Hosokawa, Rakkyo Ide, Makoto
Inamiya, Kayoko Kishimoto, Takeshi Kitano, Akaji Maro,
Hisahiko Murasawa, Yusuke Sekiguchi, Daigaku Sekine, Yoji
Tanaka, Kazuko Yoshiyuki
   One of the cruelest assignments a teacher can give is to
ask the kids to write a composition, "What I did on my
summer vacation."  Many children, for lack of money or
imagination may have a dull summer indeed only to envy and
resent those who have been to camp or who have traveled. 
Many do not have parents who care enough to provide fun
for their youngsters.  This is the fate that seems to await 9-
year-old Masao (Yusuke Sekiguchi), a boy who is
understandably gloomy when on the last day of school his
best friend tells him that he will spend the summer with his
dad at the seashore.  With no one his own age to play with,
little Masao seems fated to spend the summer mostly alone,
his meals left out for him  by his grandmother (Kazuko
Yoshiyuki) who must spend the days working at her food stall
in a Tokyo neighborhood.
   The most unusual thing about "Kikujiro" is that the film is
made by Takeshi Kitano, known for ultra-violent cinema such
as his recent "Hani-Bi" ("Fireworks"). We can almost suspect
that Kitano made this one on a bet that he couldn't produce a
comic and sometimes poignant road-and-buddy film focussing
on the friendship between two people as unlike as a
breakfast of pickles and sushi is to a wake-up meal of bacon
and eggs.  Kitano is famed as not only a filmmaker but as a
actor who got his start as a stand-up comic and novelist,
using the acting name of "Beat" Takeshi.  His sense of
vaudevillian possibilities is ever present as he plays the role
of the title character, Kikujiro Takeda, known simply as
"Mister" to the boy he befriends and for whom he creates
great joy.
   The film, which was seen last year at the Cannes and
Toronto festivals, is almost wholly fluff, whimsy of the most
delicate kind, featuring some of Kitano's experimentation with
imagery and color which comes at us at surprising times
during the story's almost two-hour length.  In this work, the
nine-year-old Masao, who has no father and whose mother
seems to have left him to "go to work" elsewhere, decides to
spend part of his summer searching for her.  He is given just
a little money, so a friend of his grandmother asks her
husband, Kikujiro (Takeshi Kitano), to act as big brother and
lead him in the search.  Kikujiro is a loud, vulgar, classless
person who tempts the fates more than once in the impolite
ways he talks to people. He has the makings of the yakuza
types made famous by Kitano's previous movies.  But as the
unlikely half of this couple (the boy is shy an frequently faces
the ground without smiling), he introduces the lad to the best
summer of his life while changing quite a bit in the process
himself.
   As a road movie, this one has the usual format: hit the
road, meet weird people, run into dangerous and comic
situations, and come back home wiser and happier people. 
During their travels, Kikujiro shows his nasty self by cheating
the boy out of his money, losing most of it on the bike races,
then trusting to his wiles to hitch rides to Masao's mother's
place of residence.  In one Felliniesque situation, Kikujiro
pretends to be blind while the kid tries to con a ride.  In yet
another he flattens the tire of a passing car hoping to get a
lift as the driver stops to make repairs, only to face the
disastrous result of the car's careening off the highway into a
ditch.  Spending some time at a hotel, Kikujiro pretends to be
able to swim and winds up near drowning.  The most unusual
adventure occurs when the two meet up with a pair of tough-
looking bikers who turn out to be kind and gentle people,
willing to go out of their way to entertain Masao by dressing
up as various characters, including an alien from outer space,
a skeleton, and even an octopus.  We wonder how Kikujiro
gets out of the story in one piece considering the offensive
habit of addressing people as "baldy" and "fatso" and the like,
but his gruff manner provides most of the chuckles of this
entertaining film.
   The boldest imagery occurs as Kitano films a brief
nightmare, filmed with a deep red hue, featuring a dancing
man who at one point had tried to sexually abuse the boy. 
Kitano's own paintings appear in the movie and in one cameo
we see the other half of the filmmakers comic team at a bus
stop at which the travelers were forced to take shelter for
several hours during a rainstorm.  Masao's ultimate meeting
with his mother is an especially poignant one, but the movie
never veers into excessive sentimentality, the musical
soundtrack regularly upbeat.  "Kikujiro" is the sort of movie
that will have you leave the theater with the smile but is too
whimsical and lacking in serious texture to garner awards or
wildly enthusiastic responses.
Rated R.  Running time: 116 minutes.  (C) 2000 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Jon Popick
Former Japanese game-show host Takeshi `Beat' Kitano wrote, directed and
stars in this flawless follow-up to his critically acclaimed Fireworks
(Hana Bi).  Fans of Kitano's previous work may be surprised that there
are no bloody shoot-outs between cops and Yakuza gang members in this
film - Kikujiro is a surprisingly touching yet achingly hysterical story
about a kid that spends his summer vacation searching for his mother
with the help of a two-bit hoodlum.
Masao (Yusuke Sekiguchi, in his screen debut) is a nine-year-old boy
that lives with his grandmother (Kazuko Yoshiyuki, Fireworks) but longs
to see the mother that he has never known (he is told that she is busy
working in another city and that his father is dead).  Armed only with
an address and a photograph, Masao plans to make the journey on his own,
but ends up being escorted by his neighbor, the lazy, cantankerous
Kikujiro Takeda (brilliantly played by Kitano) after his no-nonsense
wife (Kayoko Kishimoto) orders him to accompany the boy.
What unfolds is basically a road movie where the two characters learn
that they really have more in common than they thought.  At one point,
they even buy matching Hawaiian shirts, so you can think of Kikujiro as
a cross between Planes, Trains & Automobiles and Twins.  Kikujiro stars
out hating the youngster, making Masao stand outside a restaurant while
he eats comfortably inside.  Then he blows all of Masao's money at the
track, causing the rest of the journey to be a little `bare-boned.'
There's a bit of a surprise when the two weary travelers finally arrive
at their destination, and Kikujiro spends the rest of the film trying to
salvage Masao's school break.  To say that this is accomplished via two
bikers and several comedic skits (complete with makeup and costumes)
probably wouldn't make much sense, so I'm not even going to get into
that here.  I will say that Kikujiro has a lot of funny and insulting
lines that he gets to hurl at just about everybody in sight. `Joker,'
`Baldy,' `Brat,' and `Smart Aleck,' are among his favorites, while the
memorable line, `Dummy, you're no genius,' may have lost something
during the translation into English.
Kikujiro is told mainly though flashbacks using Masao's `How I Spent My
Summer Vacation' school project to title the different segments of the
film (with uproarious names like `Mister is Crazy,' `It Didn't Work
Out,' and `Mister Fell Down Stairs').  The film effortlessly floats
between slapstick and heart-tugging drama, and if this project was about
the Holocaust and had Miramax's publicity juggernaut behind it, Kitano
would probably be a Benigni-esque triple Oscar nominee next spring.
2:02  for cartoon-like violence and some mild adult language

Author
Dennis Schwartz
KIKUJIRO (KIKUJIRO NO NATSU) (The Summer of KIKUJIRO) 
(director/writer/editor: Beat Takeshi Kitano; cinematographer: Katsumi
Yanagishima; editor: Yoshinori Ota; cast: Beat Takeshi (Kikujiro), Yusuke
Sekiguchi (Masao), Kayoko Kishimoto (Kikujiro's wife), Yuko Daike (Masao's
mother), Kazuko Yoshiyuiki (Masao's grandmother), Great Gidayu (Fatso), Rakkyo
Ide (Baldy), Nezumi Mamura (Traveling Man), Akaji Maro (The pervert); Runtime:
122; Sony Pictures Classics; 1999-Japan) 
Japanese auteur, Beat Takeshi Kitano (Sonatine/Hana-Bi), one of the more
provocative living directors, continues to make unusual films that are difficult
to categorize. This one veers away from his usual violent ones and is a more
conventional bittersweet road comedy film, but it is also a very strange film,
with many odd slapstick touches to it and many experimental shots of weird
images and uncalled for dream sequences. Kitano said in an interview it was
inspired by "The Wizard of Oz," but he wanted to make this mainstreet type of
film into his personal signature film.  He plays the lead character Kikujiro, a
seedy, low-level ex-yakuza who is gruff, sentimental, bumbling, and profane. The
movie seems to be about outsiders confronting the middle-class. It divides its
sections like a child's photo album, as each episode is about how he spent his
summer. It has titles like: "The Octopus Man." 
Lounging around the Tokyo streets with his outspoken wife (Kishimoto), Kikujiro
spots a gloomy, round-faced 9-year-old, Masao (Sekiguchi), coming home from the
last day of school before the summer vacation. His wife knows the grandmother
(Yoshiyuiki ) he lives with, and tells him his mother doesn't live with him and
there's no father. The next day they spot the kid again, who is bored because
all his friends went to the beach for their summer vacation and there's no one
around the city to play with. There's also no more school activities like soccer
practice. The kid has a little money, his mother's address in the country
village of Toyohashi and a photo of the mother he never met, and has decided to
visit her by himself. Kikujiro's wife, probably to get rid of her loafer husband
for awhile, decides to send him along with the boy as an adult protector, for
which she gives him some money. 
Kikujiro calls the kid a brat and starts the trek with a gambling trip to the
cycle races instead of to the beach as promised, where the undependable
loudmouth blows the money and blames the kid for giving him the wrong numbers.
While getting drunk in a bar, the kid waits outside in the street but is lured
to the park across the street by a pedophile (Maro). Kikujiro rescues the kid in
time, takes the pervert's money and warns the kid not to go off with strangers,
which has to be laughable advice since he's a stranger to the kid. The kid
doesn't even know his name or anything about him, as he calls him Mister. 
When they take a taxi, the driver irritates Mister because he stops to take a
leak with the meter running, this gives him the excuse to steal the cab. They
get it only so far when Mister must have hit the wrong gears on the stick shift,
because there's smoke coming out of the hood. They abandon the taxi and end up
in a hotel that is far too ritzy for them, but has a pool. There is a madcap
comedy scene of Mister not knowing how to swim and nearly drowning. 
Mister decides to hitchhike, and in his impatience to get a quick ride tries
sundry tricks, which don't work, such as putting tacks on the road and acting
like a blind man. The film takes on the flavor of a cornball road movie as he
runs into two decent bikers he names Baldy (Ide) and Fatso (Gidayu), a traveler
with no destination who thinks of himself as a poet (Mamura), and while all this
is taking place Mister starts warming up to the kid as he gets everyone to play
familiar child games with Masao. All the adults perform for the kid and try to
cheer him up. The film feels very sentimental, but scenes change moods with the
drop of hat and it's not that easy to predict what comes next even though it
looks in many ways like one of those familiar road pics about a mismatched
innocent kid and an adult who's rough on the exterior but really cares inside. 
In the end I don't know exactly what this deliberately paced film, which seems
too long at two hours, is trying to say or what it accomplishes (which is not a
negative comment, but rather reflects that the director succeeded in making his
own kind of film). They both see the kid's mother with another man and with a
boy about his age and they never approach her (Mister reacts the same way when
he sees his mother in a nursing home). The kid only develops a dubious
relationship with a man who is so stuck on himself he lets no one else in; and,
the two main characters don't really know too much more about the other than
they did in the beginning of their journey. They part at the end of the journey
in the same Tokyo neighborhood where they met and it is doubtful if they will
ever meet again. The only thing that made sense to me in a positive way, was
that they were both outsiders and the filmmaker is saying it will be tough for
someone to make it in Japanese society unless they are disciplined and pursue
from an early age what they want. The kid at this early age will have to
reconcile that granny will raise him, and that her advice is to study hard in
school never sounded more conventional but nevertheless seemed to be sound
advice. What the kid learned from Mister, is that there's a wrong way and right
way to do things. The kid had one of those unforgettable summer vacations that
put a little fun into his sad life. 
I wasn't won over by this film, it doesn't seem like the type of film Kitano
should be making, but it has a strange quality about it that somehow appeals to
me because there's an edginess to it around its carefully manicured
sentimentality. It also seemed to have its heart in the right place, as Kitano
has said his own father was an inspiration for the way he played the title
character. His father was a housepainter and a heavy gambler, and died when he
was a youngster. There was a grimness to this film that its physical humor
couldn't hide. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ 

Author
Ross Anthony
The film opens gently, introducing us to young Masao on the first day of his
summer vacation. Other kids go out of town with their parents, but Masao is
being raised by his working grandmother, so he has no one to play with. Sad
and lonely, one day he sets out to visit the mother he's never known and who
resides off in some distant city making money to support him.
A sympathetic neighbor-lady catching him on his way out assigns her
do-nothing thug boyfriend (Kikujiro) to escort Masao on his travel. This
entire set up is assembled nicely, capturing our interest and, of course,
teasing us with the tasty premise of a small innocent boy, old beer-bellied
thug pairing.
Kikujiro is fantastic. Expressing half of all his emotions though a single
eye twitch-like blink staring blankly off of a rough, stone chiseled face. A
rose on a grave. His stocky body and dispassionate demeanor make no attempts
to hide a cave-cold rock-hardened heart. I love this character.
Wallet thickened with his girlfriend's funds, Kikujiro drags the poor boy to
the racetrack. Though well shot this sequence lasts too long. In fact, that
sentence sums the lead weights that drag this potentially buoyant production
from high recommendations. By way of example ... Kikujiro walks across the
sandy beach to a waiting Masao in one touching scene, but for an audience to
watch a lead character walk 50 feet through the sand on a 100 foot wide
shot - it's just asking too much.
Since the film is essentially a road trip (lots of hitchhiking), the gentle
pace is inherent and previously established. These long drawn out shots try
our patience, while several good sequences would be strengthened with just a
few more beats cut from them. In the end, these delays dilute our
sympathies.
One other note, a nudist occurrence appears nearer to the end (of the film).
Americans may find this a bit troubling and even obscene, but if memory
serves me, Japanese still enjoy communal bathing, in fact, an invite of a
guest to bath with the family or children is really a warm extension of
friendship. It is from this perspective, the character's (Baldy's) nudism
ought be interpreted. (This is not to be confused with the sick old man's
behavior in the park, earlier in the film.)
All in all, though too slow and too long for its own good, "Kikujiro" gives
us a juicy character so rough to like that his description must have been
written on sandpaper. Kikujiro stares at us with his one eye blinking, we
should hate him, we want to hate him, but instead he endears us even more
than a small child searching for his mother. That's acting and direction
with depth, with grit, with boldness. Kikujiro is played by his
writer/director Kitano.
Kikujiro. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring Beat Takeshi (Kitano), Yusuke Sekiguchi, Kayoko Kishimoto, Yuko
Daike, Kazuko Yoshiyuiki, Beat Kiyoshi, Great Gidayu, Rakkyo Ide.
Written and Directed by Takeshi Kitano.
Produced by Masayuki Mori, Takio Yoshida a Sony Classics Release .
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Edwin Jahiel
KIKUJIRO (Kikujro no natsu) (Japan, 1999) ***. Directed, written, 
edited by Takeshi Kitano. Photography, Katsumi Yanagishima. Art 
editor, Norihiro Isoda. Music, Joe Hisaishi. Cast: Beat Takeshi 
(Kikujiro), Yusuke Sekiguchi (Masao), et al.  In Japanese, with 
subtitles. A Sony release. 116 minutes. PG-13.
Takeshi Kitano (b. 1947) is now probably the best-known media person 
in Japan. He started out in a comedy-club stand-up duo "The Two 
Beats" which went on to television. "Beat Takeshi," became one of the 
names Kitano uses as an actor. He then became a TV superstar ( to 
this day he appears in 8 programs a week),  a movie actor and a 
director-writer-editor as well as a literary person and a cartoonist 
and painter,  Some of his art work can be seen in "Kikujiro."  The 
Kitano cult in Japan  roughly approximates the American enthusiasm 
for Quentin Tarantino, with whom Kitano superficially shares violence 
and cool. But Kitano consciously changes styles.  He prefaces the 
notes on "Kikujiro" with this statement::
"After 'Hana-Bi' ['Fireworks'] I couldn't help feeling that my films 
were being stereotyped: 'gangster, violence, life and death.' It 
becomes difficult for me to identify with them.  So I decided to try 
and make a film no one would expect from me. To tell the truth, the 
story of this film belongs to a genre which is outside my specialty. 
But I decided to make this film because it would be a challenge for 
me to cope with this ordinary story and try to make it my very own 
through my direction, and I tried lots of experiments with imagery. I 
think it ended up being a very strange film with my trademark all 
over it. I hope to continue upsetting people's expectations in a 
positive way."
The genre Kitano refers to is the old one about a kid bonding with an 
adult. The many reviewers of "Kikujiro" have mentioned a plethora of 
titles. although no one seems to remember one of the best, the French 
"The Two of Us." The reviews have been overall middling to negative, 
which is unfair.
Summer holidays finds Tokyo schoolboy Masao at loose ends, bereft of 
pals and things to do. He is also bereft of a mother. She's stepped 
out of his life long ago, left him with his grandma, a working woman, 
yet regularly sends money for the kid. Masao is nine, a bit fat by 
Japanese standards, a bit short by American standards, a bit moody 
and pretty quiet by any standards. He decides to go and visit his 
mother.
 From this point on the spectator must forget about realism, 
verissimilitude and logic. Grandma has a friend whose middle-aged 
husband Kikujiro is a fellow who strikes rough poses, is gruff, 
insulting and aggressive, but probably has a heart of deeply hidden 
gold. The wife orders him to accompany the kid's peregrinations, so 
that we get a sort of road movie with semi-picaresque sides.
The film is, depending on your reactions, slow, leisurely, with an 
oriental tempo (whatever that is), sweet, full of chutzpah (amply 
provided by Kikujiro), improbable, absurd but nice, absurd and 
irritating, charming but predictable, charming and full of surprises, 
unreal, surreal, silly, dull, quietly exciting and inventive, and so 
on...
I will not get into details, descriptions or even an outline. My own 
reaction to the movie is most positive. I like its quiet surprises, a 
great deal of subtly humorous inventions, a few cliches and many 
anti-cliches, the rough but not objectionable edges, sparse dialogue, 
and its originality disguised as deja vu. The main annoyance is not 
the story but a simple, very nice jazz-like music score (piano and 
strings) by the director's pal and collaborator. This gets repeated 
so incredibly often that with all due respect to the most talented 
Kitano, you wonder about his musical ear. Otherwise, this movie is 
one that I enjoyed at the 1999 Cannes Festival and which I just saw 
again with undiminished pleasure.
